A SERMON PREACHED ON THE Fast Day, NOVEMBER the xiiith. 1678. Being appointed
for Fasting and Prayer.

BY BENJAMIN CAMFIELD, Rector of Aylston near Leicester.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Henry Brom at the Gun, at the West End of
St Paul's. MDCLXXVIII.

Imprimatur,

Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

A SERMON ON PSALM xviii. v. 2. (but in the last Translation v. 3.)
I will call on the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be safe from
mine Enemies.
IT is not long, since we were Assembled, on the fifth of this Month, to Bless
and Praise God for his wonderful Mercies to this Kingdom in the seasonable
Discovery and Defeating of our Romish Enemies most wicked and accursed
Powder Plot; which had it taken effect, all had been Entombed on a sudden in
one common Ruin.

And now, upon notice publicly given, That the same kind of Agents are at work
again, in another way, to Destroy both His Sacred Majesty, and with Him our
Liberties and Religion; we are, by the warrant of Authority, met together here
this day, to call upon that God, who alone is able to protect and save us, and
whose undeserved goodness we have had so much experience of hitherto, that he
would be pleased graciously to continue, yet to defend both our King and
Country, and bring to light, still more and more, all secret machinations
against his Majesty and the whole Kingdom.

To which purpose therefore I could not think of any thing more pertinent and
agreeable, both to Direct us in our present Duty, and Encourage us to the same,
than the words I have read from the Royal Psalmist,

I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be safe
from mine Enemies.

This Psalm was a Public Form of Devotion Composed, and appointed by King
David for the solemn seasons set apart to Commemorate his manifold Deliverances
and Victories; for all the days, wherein God had delivered him; as the Chaldee
Paraphrast has it. And it has the Honor to be twice Registered in Holy Writ,
with very little variation in the words of it. For you may read it in the 22d
Chap. of the 2d Book of Samuel, as well as here in the Book of Psalms.

From whence we may plainly collect, That, however some of This Generation
quarrel and except against set Forms of Divine Worship and Service, to cast
dirt upon the established Religion, and make way for Newfangled Devices of
their own, rather than Godly Edifying in Love and Unity; yet it was not so in
the Church of God from the Beginning; but both a public Form was wont to be
prescribed, and upon like occasions one and the same Form was without scruple
made use of. And that by the Counsel and Countenance of no meaner a Person than
King David himself, who is recommended to us as an eminent Servant of God, both
in his private and Regal Capacity, Acts 13.22.
a man after Gods own heart, as he himself has testified of him.

So much we have sufficiently intimated in the very Title of this Psalm, which
was inscribed to the chief Musician or Prefect of Music, the Master of the
Choire, to be sung upon public Solemnities. -- To the chief Musician. A Psalm
of David the servant of the Lord, who spoke unto the Lord the words of this
Song, in the Day that the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his Enemies,
and from the hand of Saul. And he said, See Dr. H. in loc.
Viz. as follows; that is, A Public Form of Worship, or Religious
Acknowledgment indicted by David that eminent Servant of the Lord, in
Commemoration of those many Preservations and Victories which God had
vouchsafed him, and his now quiet settlement in the Kingdom of Israel and
Judah, by the interposure of the Divine Providence in subduing the Philistines,
Syrians, Moabites and Ammonites, that rose up against him; in quieting the
Rebellion of Absalom, his son Absalom, (soon after which it is recorded, 2 Samuel
22.) but especially in rescuing him out of the malicious bloody hands of Saul.
This he composed, and committed to the chief Musician, as a suitable service
for those solemn Days, wherein there should be occasion to commemorate his
Deliverances and Victories. And to that purpose it continues registered in the
Book of Psalms, among many other, as a Pattern and Example unto all
Posterities; and a Justification, as I said, beyond all contradiction, both of
the lawfulness and expediencie of Public Forms of Devotion, and the use or
Repetition of the same Forms upon like occasion.

I shall not now go about to unravel the Contexture of the whole Psalm, because
I would not divert your attention from that plenty of good and proper
Meditations, which the Text alone suggests unto us. Wherein we have these two
principal parts:

1. David's holy Resolution or Practice: I will call on the Lord, who is worthy
to be praised. And,

2. The Motive he had thereunto from the assured success of it; So shall I be
(saved or) safe from mine enemies.

Of which therefore now by God's help, I shall treat in order, as they lie.

And First of the Psalmist's holy Resolution or Practice; I will call on the
Lord, who is worthy to be praised. Wherein we may consider, yet more
distinctly, these three Particulars.

1. The Person whose Example we have before our eyes, together with the
Circumstances of his Condition, [I] King David, the Servant of the Lord,
preserved and delivered by him from many potent Enemies already, and yet not
without the Fear and prospect of others succeeding afresh, and growing up in
the room of them.

2. The Act or Practice it self resolved upon, Calling upon the Lord; which, as
I shall take occasion to show you, was all along his most Religious Custom, as
well as Resolution in like Cases for the Future. And then,

3. The special Character here annexed unto the Object of his Invocation,
Worship and Devotion; The Lord who is worthy to be praised. I will call on the
Lord, who is worthy to be praised.

First, The Person here spoken of; the [I] in the Text. That is David, a pious
and Religious King, styled in the Title of the Psalm, The Servant of the Lord,
as I told you.

Religion, we see, is not a vile or mean Performance; is not a thing below the
Highest and most eminent Monarchs of the World; no disparagement at all unto
their Greatness, but that which is indeed the chiefest Ornament in their Diadem
and Crown of Glory. They have the same Essential Dependence upon God with other
men, and He the same Right and Title of Sovereignty and Dominion over Them,
being King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Nay, They have an Obligation above
others to serve and Honor God Almighty; not only as his Reasonable Creatures
and Dependents like unto others, but as his peculiar Ministers and Servants, in
their Sacred Office as Kings, exalted and upheld by him in that their Dignity.

Again, Their Necessity as well as place engages them hereunto: for they are
surrounded with those Dangers and Troubles, which none but God alone, the
Supreme Potentate, can preserve or deliver them in and from. No sooner have
they escaped one Plot and Contrivance of mischief, but another Snare is laying
for them. The Hydra of Treason and Rebellion has many Heads; and when one is
cut off, another perks up in its stead.

Such was David's Condition. And we need not to look further than This Psalm
for an ample proof of it. Here we read of the sorrows of Death and Hell
compassing him: Verses 4, 5.
The snares of Death preventing him: The Floods of ungodly men making him
afraid. The Sons of Belial, men impatient of the Yoke of Government and
Restraint, coming like a mighty Torrent upon him: Verse 16.
Many waters threatening to overflow and drown him; Blood-thirsty, powerful and
malicious Enemies, such as hated him, Verse 17.
and were too strong for him, Verse 39.
rising up against him. And those not only of Foreign Nations but amongst his
own People. Verse 43.
The strivings of the people; nor only making open Insurrections, but
endeavoring private Assassinations by men of violence; Verse 48.
and those too secret and unknown; Dissembling and False-hearted Subjects,
Verse 44.
such as yielded feigned Obedience, such as lied unto him in all their fair
professions, and dissembled with him, as the old Translation has it. Verse 6.
No wonder therefore that we find him in his Distress, and in a Day of
Calamity; and as it were in Prison and Confinement, Verse 18, 19.
in great straits; sometimes in a state of War, and at other times in great
Perils.

Such is the condition of all Kings, especially of Pious and Religious Kings.
For the King is the head of Order, and the very life and soul of Laws, both
Civil and Sacred. So many Enemies therefore as there are abroad, to a State or
Kingdom, their level is chiefly, neither at small or great, but at the Head and
Soul of all the rest. The Devil and his Agents are all Adversaries to Order,
and Quiet, and Peace, with Piety and Virtue; and therefore must necessarily
impugn and strike at the grand Conservator of all these. And then, in his own
Dominions, if we reckon up, how many there always be, that are in ill
Circumstances themselves, and have their hopes only in a Change, in fishing, as
we say, in troubled Waters; in disturbing all, that they may scramble for
somewhat; How many Ambitious of Rule and Power themselves, that would fain be
uppermost: How many envious at all above them, who therefore are ready to pull
them down or undermine them: How many thirsting for Liberty, unbounded Liberty,
to do whatsoever is good in their own Eyes: How many crossed in their undue
Desires and Lusts, by the severity of good and wholesome Laws: How many whose
Faith and Allegiance is easily corrupted by the popular insinuations and
pretenses of wheedling Demagogues, or to be bought and sold with Bribes and
Pensions: How very few of Courage and Honesty enough to stick by a Prince in
his low Condition: How many Powers, and Policies, and Devices he has
continually to watch over, and to struggle with: How many he must of necessity
trust and employ, whom he has but little or slender assurance of: If we
consider, I say, but these, and the like obvious Circumstances, we cannot but
see the manifold Troubles, and Miseries, and Calamities, that every Prince,
every good and Religious Prince especially, is beset withal. As David, we read,
was.

But the greatest comfort is, He has a Refuge and Sanctuary near at hand,
notwithstanding all this, to betake himself unto; namely that of the Text. I
will call upon the Lord. This we find upon all occasions was our Royal
Psalmists stay and security. When He knew not what to do, nor whither to betake
himself, his Eyes were still unto God. God, Psalm. 46.
says he, is our refuge and strength: a very present help in Trouble.
Therefore will we not fear, etc.

Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
Thus at Ziklag; 1 Samuel 30.6.
David, says the text, was greatly distressed: for the people spoke of stoning
of him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his Sons,
and for his Daughters: (and when any thing goes amiss, or succeeds ill in
Government, the blame and complaints usually fix and center on the chief
Governor) but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. He becalmed
himself, as we read elsewhere, with such like expostulations as These. Psalm. 42.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
thou in God, Psalm. 43.
for I shall yet praise him, who is the Health of my countenance and my God.
Observe therefore, by how many different Names and Attributes of security he
calls God in the Verse before our Text, on purpose, as it were, to declare,
That he was All in All in his account: My Strength, says he, and my Rock,
Psalm. 18.1.
and my Fortress, and my Deliverer: my Buckler, and the Horn of my Salvation,
(that is, according to the Hebrew Idiom, wherein Horn is used for Power and
Plenty, my most Powerful and All-sufficient Savior) and my High-Tower. In
weakness, my Strength; against the Storm and Billows of Adversity, and that
Ocean of Calamity, which beats at any time upon me, my Rock impregnable;
against all manner of Violence or Assaults, my Fortress or Bul-work, my Shield
and Buckler invulnerable; whatever Hosts or Armies invade me, my High-Tower and
Castle; at all Times and in all Cases a most mighty and abundant Savior and
Deliverer. They are excellent words of the Prophet Habakkuk, Hab. 3.17, 18, 19.
which I the rather mention, because the later part of them is taken out of
this Psalm. Psalm. 18.32, 33.
Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be in the Vines;
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no meat; the
Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in the Stalls:
(that is, all visible help and relief shall fail) Yet will I rejoice in the
Lord: I will joy in the God of my Salvation. The Lord God is my strength, and
he will make my feet like Hinds feet, and He will make me to walk on my
High Places -- There can be no possible want of provisions to this High-Tower
or Garrison.

We see, by the way, what an utter Enemy the professed Atheist is to all
public Governments, and the best security of Kings and Princes (...) -- (...).
D. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 143.2. and 10.
, who by denying God and Providence takes away this most Comfortable Refuge and
Sanctuary, which amidst all Perils and Dangers they are to betake themselves
unto. It is the Character of such profane ones, That they call not upon God
themselves: Psalm. 14.
and that is not all the mischief of it, but thy seek to deprive others also of
this blessed Privilege; Psalm. 53.
whilst they say, either, There is no God, or that He sees not, hears not,
regards not his Supplicants. It is therefore the undoubted concernment of every
State to suppress and banish Atheism, with all the Fautors of it.

But hitherto of the first particular the Person whose good Example we have
here before our eyes, That Religious and pious King David; who was always
sensible of his Obligations to God, and how impossible it was for himself or
any other Prince, to be safe and secure without the aids of Heaven.

In the Second place we are to consider further of him in Conjunction with the
Holy Practice here resolved upon. I will call on the Lord.

Calling upon God is a Phrase sometimes put in Scripture for all Religion, as
it is usual there for some signal act to stand for and expreress all the rest
of the kind. But here we are to understand it in its most proper importance,
viz. an Invocation by Prayer and Supplication unto God, whereby he betakes
himself to the Divine Protection, begging Safety and Deliverance from him. And
the words are rendered by Interpreters in several Tenses.

As to the Time past, Invocabam; Piscator.
I did call on the Lord, so was I saved from mine Enemies. And Thus we have it
afterward, Verse. 6. In my Distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my
God; He heard my voice out of his holy Temple, and my cry came before him, even
into his ears. The effects of which audience are magnificently set forth in the
following Verses. See Verse 7. to verse. 16. and Dr. H. Par.
How he expressed the Wrath of an All-powerful God, able to make the World to
Tremble, nay to burn and consume it, interposing his hand as signally, as if he
had descended in a black thick Cloud with a mighty wind, and the appearance of
Angels in shining Garments, with tempestuous showers of Hail and Fire; with
Thundrings and Lightnings, as with Arrows and fiery Darts, and finally with the
same Notoriety of his Presence, as when the waters of the Sea were driven back
by a strong East Wind, and the Deep turned into dry ground for the passage of
his People Israel.

Others read it in the present Tense: Jun. and Trem. Vatabl.
Invoco, or Invocare soleo: I do call upon the Lord; This is my constant
Practice and Custom. I call upon the Lord -- so am I safe from mine Enemies.
See the 142d Psalm. The Prayer of David when he was in the Cave. When he poured
out his Complaint before God, and showed him his trouble, How a Snare was
privily laid for him in the way wherein he walked, and he had none that he
could trust to for Refuge, none that regarded or cared for him; His Soul in
Prison, and his Persecutors about him, stronger than he. But he betakes himself
to This his wonted Practice, verse. 5, etc. I cried unto Thee, O Lord; I said,
Thou art my portion in the land of the living. Attend unto my cry, for I am
brought very low; deliver me from my Persecutors, for they are stronger than I;
bring my Soul out of Prison, that I may praise thy Name.

Others again read it, as we do, LXXII. Vulg. Lat.
both in our Old and New Translation, in the Future Tense. Invocabo, I will
call on the Lord. And thus, what was his Religious Practice and Custom in times
past and at present, becomes also his pious and holy Resolution for the Time to
come; as we find it frequently elsewhere repeated by him. Psalm. 55. Having
spoken of the Hellish Plots of some, that had been his Intimates and Familiars,
from which he hardly saw any humane possibility of escaping; I mourn in my
complaint, says he, because of the voice of the enemy, because of the
oppression of the wicked. The enemy cries so, and the ungodly comes on so
fast; for they are minded to do me some mischief: so maliciously are they set
against me. My heart is disquieted within me, and the Fear of Death is fallen
upon me. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror has
overwhelmed me; and I said, O that I had wings like a Dove! for then would I
flee away, and be at rest: Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the
Wilderness; I would hasten my escape from the Fiery storm and Tempest. Destroy,
O Lord, and divide their tongues, for I have seen violence and strife in the
City. Day and Night they go about it, upon the walls thereof; mischief also and
sorrow are in the midst of it. Wickedness is in the midst thereof; deceit and
guile depart not from her streets. For it was not an Enemy that reproached me;
(an open professed, and known Enemy) then I could have born it; neither was it
he that hated me, that did magnify himself against me; then I would have hid
my self from him. But it was Thou, a man mine Equal, (a Man according to my
rank, as the Margin reads it) my Guide and mine Acquaintance: We took sweet
Counsel together, and walked to the House of God in company. You see, what a
copious and pathetical description he gives of his imminent Danger and
Troubles. See now his Resolution under all This; the Sanctuary he betakes
himself unto, verse. 16, etc. As for me, I will call upon God, and the Lord
shall save me. Evening and Morning and at Noon will I pray and cry aloud, and
he shall hear my voice. He has delivered my Soul in peace from the Battle
that was against me; for there were many with me: [He reckoned upon God alone
as a mighty and strong Host, and from his former experience he concludes for
the Future] Yea even God, that endures for ever (the same God still) shall
hear me, and bring them down, even to the Pit of Destruction. Again, Psalm. 86.
Bow down thine ear, O Lord, (says he) hear me, for I am poor and needy.
Preserve my Soul, for I am Holy, (thine Anointed, one whom thou favourest, as
the Margin has it) O thou my God, save thy servant that trusts in thee. Be
merciful unto me, O Lord, for I cry unto thee daily (or, all the day); Rejoice
the Soul of thy servant; for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. This, we
see, was his devout Practice. Then, for his Resolution so to continue, verse. 7.
In the Day of my Trouble I will call upon thee, for thou will answer me. I will
turn you but to one place more, Psalm. 116. which begins with an hearty
Profession of his Affections to God from the sense of his Mercies and
Deliverances; (as this 18th Psalm does,) I love the Lord, because he has heard
my voice and my supplication; because he has inclined his ear unto me, (which
supposes his former practice of This Religious duty) Therefore will I call
upon him as long as I live, (in my days, says the Margin, viz. all the days of
my trouble, distress, and calamity more especially.) And so he goes on to
fortify his Resolution by a further Commemoration of his former practice This
way, and the blessed success of it. The sorrows of Death compassed me, and the
pains of Hell gat hold upon me, (as we have it also in the 18th Psalm,) I found
trouble and sorrow; then called I upon the Name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech
thee, deliver my Soul. Gracious is the Lord and righteous; yea our God is
merciful. The Lord preserves the simple, (the plain, honest, upright man, who
relieth on him, when he is void of counsel to help himself) I was brought low,
and He helped me.

There is nothing certainly more proper in a Time of Affliction, Calamity and
Trouble, than this Religious practice of Calling upon the Lord. Jam. 5.13.
Is any among you afflicted? says St. James, let him pray. Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me (says God himself) in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me. Such therefore was the message of King Hezekiah
unto Isaiah the Prophet. 2 King. 19.3, 4.
This is a day of trouble and rebuke and blasphemy, wherefore lift up thy
Prayer for the Remnant that is left.

Even Nature at such a time of extremity prompts us to this piece of Religion.
The Atheistical Poet acknowledges it to be the common Practice of Mankind; --
Multoque in rebus acerbis
Acrius advertunt animos ad Relligionem. Lucret. l. 3.

Men in their Pains and Adversities are very apt to cry out, Lord help us! This
the Prophet notes in a people that were otherwise forgetful of God. Lord, Isa.
26.16, 17.
in trouble have they visited thee; they have poured out a Prayer when thy
Chastening was upon them. Like as a woman with Child, that draws near the
time of her deliverance, and cries out in her pangs, so have we been in thy
sight, O Lord. You have many Instances together in Psalm. 107. how men cry unto
God in their troubles, and he delivers and saves them out of their
Distresses; particularly of them who go down to the Sea in Ships; when the
stormy wind arises, and they are at their wits ends, Verse. 27, 28. Then they
cry unto the Lord in their trouble. Hence we have a common Proverb, Qui nescit
orare, discat navigare: He that knows not to Pray, let him go to Sea; where the
sight of so many Dangers, ready to swallow up and devour him, is supposed to be
sufficient to teach him This Lesson. Unless he have contracted an unnatural
Hardness, and senslesness both of God and Death, the Fears of Shipwreck will
awaken him to Prayer. The Mariners, Jonah 1.5.
we read, in the storm, cried every man to his God, and the Ship-master comes
to Jonah, and says unto him, Verse 6.
What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will
think upon us, that we perish not. And we find them all afterward,
importunately at their Prayers. They cried unto the Lord and said, Verse 14.
we beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee. The Disciples in a Tempest awaken
our Blessed Savior, saying, Lord, Matthew. 8.
save us, we perish.

This, I say, is the natural and constant Practice of All that have any regard
to themselves or sense of a Deity, that have not sinned themselves into a
blockish stupidity, past feeling, in the time of imminent Troubles and Dangers
and Calamities, to call upon God. And this is urged by Salvian as a strong
Conviction against the Denyers of God Almighty's Providence. Lib. 1. p. 17.
[ Cur ad coelum quotidie manus tendimus? etc.] Why stretch we our hands daily
toward Heaven? Why seek we the Mercy of God by our repeated Prayers? Why do we
run to Temples and Churches? Why do we supplicate on our knees before Altars?
[Nulla enim nobis est ratio precandi, si spes tollitur impetrandi.] We have no
reason at all to pray, if we have no hope left us of speeding by it. And the
Heathen Seneca, before him, managed this argument against the Epicureans, who
allowed of such kind of insignificant Deities, who neither heard nor regarded
the Prayers of their Supplicants. [Nec in hunc furorem omnes mortales
consensissent alloquendi surda numina and inefficaces Deos.] De Benef. l. 4. c.
4.
It is no ways likely or credible, says he, that all mortals should consent
together in such a point of Madness as this is, continually to call upon Deaf
Gods, and such as can Do nothing for them.

Nevertheless, it must be granted, that all who call upon God, do not speed in
their Requests; because, as St. James has it, Jam. 4.3.
they ask amiss. Ye ask and receive not, says he, because ye ask amiss. And
therefore it will be requisite, before I leave this subject, to show you
briefly what are the qualifications of such a Calling upon God, as we may be
assured of the Good effects of.

These Qualifications now are reducible unto Three heads.

The First, concerning the Object of our Invocation, whom we are to call upon.
That must be the Lord, and the Lord only.

Secondly, As to the Person Praying; He must be Righteous, at least in the
Evangelical sense, that is, a True Penitent.

Thirdly, As to the Prayer or Invocation it self, That must be with Humility
and Reverence; with Faith; with Sincerity; with Forvency; with Charity; with
Perseverance; with a due Submission to the Divine Will; tendered up to God in
the Name of Christ; and attended with Endeavors agreeable to our Prayers.

I shall little more than touch upon the particulars, they are so many; (and I
would not prevent my self in what else remains:) But yet it is plainly
necessary, that I say somewhat of them, because without attendance unto These
things, our Prayers will certainly prove ineffectual, and vain Oblations. And
as good, you know, not at all, as to no purpose.

First then, The Object of our Invocation must be the Lord Jehovah, the True
and Living God, and none besides him. I will call on the Lord. Prayer is a
piece of Divine worship peculiar unto God, and which we cannot without peril of
Idolatry give unto any other. And therefore it is one of the Arguments, used by
the Ancient Fathers as well as Modern Divines, to prove the Deity of our
Blessed Savior; because we are taught to Call upon his Name. So we read of St.
Stephen, Act. 5.59.
They stoned Stephen calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Soul!
Saying, Lord Jesus, he called upon God. That is, owned his Deity. And this is
the Paraphrase, whereby Christians were at first known. They that called on
this Name. Act. 9.14-21. 1 Cor. 1.2.
All that in every place call on the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. (Carmen
Christo, quasi Deo, dicere secum invicem. As Pliny reports of them.) L. 10.
Ep. 97.
Whatsoever we Religiously call upon, we either find or make a God to our
selves, by that very invocation.

The Lord then is He, whom we are to direct our Prayers unto; the Living God,
and not Dead Idols; the Lord of all, and not any of his Creatures, not the best
of them, Saints or Angels.

As for Idols, you may remember what Elijah said to Baal's Priests, 1 King.
18.24.
Call ye on the Name of your Gods, and I will call on the Name of the Lord.
Verse 26.
Accordingly, they called on the Name of Baal, we read, from morning even until
noon, saying, O Baal hear, or answer us. But there was no voice, neither any
that answered. And Elijah mocks them upon it. Verse 20.
Cry aloud, for he is a God, he is talking (or meditateth, that is, in a deep
study) or be is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleeps
and must be awaked. Their Idols, Psalm. 115.
says the Psalmist of the Heathen, are Silver and Gold, the work of men's
bands. They have mouths, Psalm. 135.
but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; ears, but they hear not,
etc. They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusts in
them. O Israel trust thou in the Lord; He is their Help and their Shield, etc.
q. d. Aid and Defense is to be had from Him and from him only.

We must renounce all Confidence and Dependence upon any other thing
whatsoever. Psalm. 20.7, 8.
Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses; but we will remember the Name of
the Lord our God. They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand
upright. Prove. 18.10.
The Name of the Lord is a strong-Tower; the Righteous runs into it, and is
safe.

God is offended, when we seek other Refuges: Hos. 7.10, 11.
The Pride of Israel, says the Prophet, testifies to his Face, and they do
not return to the Lord their God, nor seek Him for all this. Ephraim also is
like a silly Dove without heart; They call to Egypt; They go to Assyria, etc.
Jer. 17.5, 6, 7, 8.
Thus says the the Lord, Cursed be the man, that trusts in man, and makes
flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. For he shall be like
the Heath in the Desert, etc. Blessed be the man, who trusts in the Lord, and
whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be as a Tree planted by the Waters, etc.
It is the Character of the Ungodly; Lo, Psalm. 52.8.
This is the man, that took not God for his Strength, but trusted unto the
multitude of his Riches See Psalm. 62.8, 9, 10.
.

Neither may we call upon Saints or Angels to help us, Rev. 19.10. -- 22.9.
for they are all God's Creatures and Servants as well as we; they refuse this
Worship at our hands, and bid us give it unto God only, whom they together with
us adore. I may here use the words of Eliphaz (which yet some of the Romish
Church have been so absurd, Chamier Panstrat. Vol. 2. l. 2. c. 2.
as to quote for the invocation of Angels) Call now, Job 5.1.
if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of the Saints will thou
turn?

Secondly, As to the person invocating, he must be Righteous, at least in the
Gospel acceptance, that is, a sincere and hearty Penitent. For God hears not
Sinners, John 9.31.
viz. Such as continue in a course of Sin. Prove. 15.8-29.
The Prayer or Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to him. Unto the
wicked says God, Psalm. 50.
What have thou to do to take my Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to
be reformed? Prove. 1.28, etc. 28.9.
To such he threatens; They shall call upon me, but I will not answer. He that
turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, his Prayer shall be an abomination.
To such he says again, Isa. 1.15, etc.
When ye spread forth your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you: Yea, when ye
make many Prayers, I will not hear. Your Hands are full of Blood. Wash you,
make you clean: put away the evil of your doings from before mine Eyes: cease
to do Evil, learn to do Well: seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Come now, and let us reason together, says
the Lord. That is, upon these terms, and no other, Verse. 19, 20.
we may meet as Friends. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good
of the Land; but, if ye refuse and Rebel, ye shall be devoured with the Sword,
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Seek the Lord, Chapter 55.6, 7.
while he may be found: call ye upon him, while he is near; but to that end,
let the Wicked forsake his way, and the Unrighteous man his thoughts, Chapter 58.^.
etc. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer: Thou shall cry, and he
shall say, Here I am. If thou take from the midst of thee the Yoke, Verse 6.
etc. the bands of Wickedness before spoken of. Jam. 5.16.
It Is the Prayer of a Righteous man that avails. This our Psalmist was very
sensible of; Therefore, says he, I will wash mine hands in Innocence, so will
I compass thine Altar, O Lord. Psalm. 26.6.
The Eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, -- 34.15.
and his Ears are open to their Prayers. -- 66.18.
If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me. And in this very
Psalm, Psalm. 18.20, etc.
The Lord rewarded me according to my Righteousness, according to the cleanness
of my hands has he recompensed me: For I have kept the ways of the Lord; and
have not wickedly departed from my God; (or not departed from my God, as the
wicked does) for all his judgments are before me, and I did not put his
Statutes from me. I was also upright before him, and kept my self from mine
Iniquity. (Eschewed mine own wickedness.) Therefore has the Lord recompensed
me according to my Righteousness, according to the cleanness of my Hands in his
Eyesight.

And yet this Psalm was most probably indicted (if we keep to the series of the
History, See Dr. H. in Loc.
where it is first recorded, 2 Samuel 22.) after the Commission of those great
Sins of Adultery with Uriah's Wife, making him Drunk, contriving his Death, and
Living for some considerable time, before Nathan came to him from God under
this guilt. These many expressions therefore of his Universal Uprightness must
be Interpreted and Understood, as the Scripture elsewhere speaks, with the
exception of that matter of Uriah, 1 Kings 15.5. David did that which was right
in the Eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded
him, all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.
And we are farther to remember, That, for that too, he had Repented before the
Composure of this Psalm. And Repentance, when sincere, restores to God's Favor
and Acceptance, as if we were Innocent.

Thirdly, For the Prayer or Invocation it self, that must be the Exercise of
all sorts of Graces, and not the Labor of our Lips only. But, Isa. 29.13.
more especially, this Holy Incense must have these following perfumes in it.

(1) It must be with Humility and Reverence. With Humility, in a deep sense of
our Unworthiness and Distance from God, as Creatures, but much more as Sinners.
No one loves a proud Beggar. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.
Such God is said to look on afar off: But he gives Grace, shows Favor to
the Humble. Psalm. 9.12. -- 10.17. ^b 22.29.
He hears the desire of the Humble, and will not forget their Cry, but will
save them.

And then there must be a Reverence to That Majesty which we approach unto.
That is a Due, we know, to all our Betters. [See Malachi 1.8.] Let us therefore
have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, Hebr. 12.28.
with reverence and godly fear.

(2) With Faith. Heb. 11.6.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God; for he that comes unto God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him. So St. James directs. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, Jam.
1.5, 6.
who gives to all men liberally; but let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering:
where yet Faith seems to import rather a steadfast adhering to the Christian
Profession, See Dr. H. in loc.
than a General Belief of God's Being, Attributes, or Promises.

(3) With Sincerity. Not out of feigned lips, Psalm. 17.1.
or Lips of Deceit; but in Truth. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon
him, 145.18.
to all that call upon him in Truth, or Faithfully. And this is that which the
Prophet Isaiah expresses by calling on God with all the heart. Then shall ye
call upon me, Isa. 29.12.
and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall
seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. And St.
Paul styles it, Calling on the Lord out of a pure (that is, 2 Timothy 2.22.
an honest and upright) heart.

(4) With Zeal and Fervencie. For it is good always, Gal. 4.18.
says the Apostle, to be zealously affected in a good matter: But he that asks
coldly, teaches another to deny his Requests. We can never think or hope, that
God will attend to those cold and drousie Prayers, which we hardly attend unto,
or mind our selves in the utterance of them. It Is the fervent Prayer of a
righteous man that avails much. Our Blessed Savior speaks a Parable, to
learn us the Force of Importunity, both with God and Man, St. Luke 18. We are
to pray as those that are in good earnest, and sensible of the Great Concerns
we call upon him about; and therefore to excite and stir up all the Powers of
our Souls thereunto, that we be not among Those, of whom the Prophet complains,
There is none that calls upon thy Name, Isa. 64.7.
that stirs up himself to take hold on Thee.

(5) With Charity; for without This we are nothing, 1 Cor. 13.1, 3.
and nothing profits us. But Blessed are the merciful, Matthew. 5.
for they shall obtain mercy. With the merciful Thou will show thy self
merciful, says our Psalmist. Psalm. 18.25.
But he shall have Judgment without mercy, Jam. 2.13.
who has showed no mercy; With the same measure we mete to others, God will
measure to us again. And therefore he says, Give and it shall be given to you.
Luke 6.38.
Forgive and it shall be forgiven. But if ye forgive not, neither will your
Heavenly Father forgive you. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar; go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy Brother, etc. Prove. 21.13.
Whosoever stops his ears at the Cry of the Poor, he also shall cry himself,
and shall not be heard.

(6) We must continue our Importunity with Perseverance, without Fainting and
growing weary; not contenting our selves with having once petitioned, Psalm.
25.5.37.7.86.3, etc. 123.2.
but following on our Suit, and waiting patiently still upon God from day to
day, until he have Mercy upon us. To this purpose our Blessed Savior spoke a
Parable, That men ought always to pray, Luke 18.
and not to faint.

And yet, (7) We must pray with a due Submission of our selves unto God's Will
and Wisdom, not confining him to any particular ways or methods of our own
devising. Permittes ipsis expendere Numinibus, Quid
Conveniet nobis rebusque sit utile nostris.
Remarkable was the Resignation of King David's Spirit unto God Almighty's
pleasure. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.
he will bring me again, -- but if he Thus say, I have no delight in Thee;
behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. It Is the Petition
our Blessed Savior has taught us, Thy will be done; and such was his own
Example to us: Father, if it be possible let This Cup pass from me.
Nevertheless not what I will, (not as I will) but Thy will be done. We must own
that God is Righteous in whatsoever befalls us, and be ready to apologize for
his Providence. It Is of his Mercy alone that we are not consumed, and our only
Hope is, That his Compassions fail not.

(8) We must be sure that we tender up our Requests unto God in the prevailing
Name of Jesus Christ, his Beloved Son, our Great and only High Priest, Mediator
and Advocate; by whom we have received the Atonement, and who ever lives to
make intercession. Dan. 9.17, 18.
Not for our Righteousness, says the Prophet Daniel, but for the Lord's sake;
[Propter Christum, as Castalio there notes,] so we are taught to conclude all
our Prayers. The Direction and Encouragement comes from our Blessed Savior
himself: Joh. 14.13, 14.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that I will do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it. -- Do
all therefore in the Name of Jesus Christ, Col. 3.17.
says the Apostle, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

Lastly, Our Prayers must be followed with suitable Endeavors. We must not
only Ask, but seek and knock too; that is, enquire after the most probable and
likely Means, and be diligent and industrious to remove the Impediments in our
way; Mr. Hooker's Sermon. in the end of Bishop Sandersons life.
as a Reverend Person ingeniously Glosseth on Those words. We must be like the
Good Pilot, that has his hand to the Helm, as well as his Eye to Heaven. We
must not be lazy and idle Petitioners; like the Countryman in the Fable, that
contented himself barely with crying out to Hercules to help him out of the
mire. Remarkable is That of Nehemiah: Nehem. 4.9.
Nevertheless we made a Prayer unto our God, says he, and set a Watch against
them, (the Enemies) day and night because of them. It Is an excellent Rule of
Hierocles: [(...),] In Pythag.
What we endeavor, let us pray for; and what we pray for, let us also
endeavor. There must be all along, says he, [(...),] an union of Prayer and
Endeavor; we must neither be for [(...),] an Atheistical and Godless or
graceless Endeavor, nor [(...),] an Idle and inoperative Prayer.

Now having said thus much of the General Qualifications, which must accompany
our Calling upon God, to render it successeful: Let me yet annex Two more, that
are very proper to our public Devotion: And so our Prayers will still be the
more prevalent, if attended (1.) With Fasting. And, (2) With Unanimity.


First, Fasting is to be added unto Prayer, both as a Means to render us more
attentive and fervent in the same, and as a Testimony of our Humiliation before
God in the Confession of our Sins, and judging our selves- unworthy to be any
longer sustained in Life by God, chastening and afflicting our Souls in his
presence, by voluntary Penance, for our manifold Transgressions and Excesses.
There are some Devils not to be cast out, Mat. 17.21.
but by Prayer and Fasting, as our Blessed Savior acquaints us. And we may
well reckon the Devil of cruel Treachery and Perfidiousness in that number.
This has been the constant way of the Church of God in all great Exigencies,
by Fasting together with Prayer to call upon God, as you may read in Ezra,
Nehemiah, Esther, Isaiah, Daniel, etc. Turn ye to me, Joel 2.
says the Lord by his Prophet Joel, with all your heart, and with Fasting, and
with Weeping, and with Mourning; and rent your Heart and not your Garment,
[that is, not your Garment only. Let there not be only the external signs of
Humiliation and Mourning, but the Thing signified by them; both Sign and Thing
signified together;] who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a
Blessing behind him? [This, to be sure, is the likeliest way of speeding:] He
adds therefore, Blow the Trumpet in Sion, sanctify a Fast, call a solemn
Assembly; Gather the People, sanctify the Congregation, assemble the Elders:
Gather the Children, and those that suck the Breasts: Let the Bridegroom go
forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet: Let the Priests the
Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say,
Spare thy people, O Lord. Where we find, That the Fast must be general, when we
call upon God for a General Blessing; and all that are concerned in the Effect,
should be also in the Means to it. And whatever some vain people judge of the
needlesness or Indifference of Fasting, God takes it extremely ill, if any
under public Calamities comply not with this Prescription. In that day, says
the Prophet, Isa. 22.12, 13, 14.
did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning, and to baldness,
and to girding with Sackcloth; and Behold Joy and Gladness, slaying Oxen and
killing Sheep, eating Flesh and drinking Wine. -- And it was revealed in mine
ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely This iniquity shall not be purged from you,
till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts.

Secondly, We are to call upon God with Consent and Unanimity, that we may be
as joint Supplicants, besieging Heaven, as it were, with an holy Violence in
our united Importunities for Mercy. So the Prophet Zephaniah has it, Zeph. 3.9.
That they may call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent,
or with one shoulder. And thus we read of the Primitive Christians; Act. 2.1.
They were all [(...),] with one accord in one place. And, when St. Peter was
in Prison, Chapter 12.5.12.
Prayer was made without ceasing (or instant and earnest Prayer was made) of
the Church unto God for him. -- Many were gathered together Praying. To such
Assemblies now, as These, that Promise of our Blessed Savior reaches with
Advantage: Mat. 18.19, 20.
I say unto you, that, if Two of you shall agree on Earth touching any thing
that they shall ask, -- For, where Two or Three are gathered together in my
Name, there am I in the midst of them. Much more then, where there are many
Two's and Three's, a whole Nation at the same time upon their knees together
(if other requisits are not wanting) may they be sure of obtaining that thing,
which they ask in particular, or somewhat better in the room of it.

This is the advantage of public and common Prayers, ((...), Ignatius) calling
upon God in and with his Church, that he would send both King and People help
from his Sanctuary, and strengthen them out of Sion. Psalm. 20.


And thus much now for the second point, the Duty or Practice here resolved
upon, calling upon the Lord, with those several qualifications which will
render it most effectual and successful.

It remains in the Third place, that I add a few words also of the special
Character annexed unto the object of our Psalmists invocation, Who is worthy to
be praised. I will call on the Lord who is worthy to be praised.

The word is capable of a double rendering, Who is worthy to be praised, or whom
I praise. And accordingly Expositors render it differently; but both ways to a
purpose very fit to be observed diligently by us [lxxii. (...) in 2 Samuel 22.
but here, (...), and the Lat. accordingly, Invocabo Dominum laudabilem vel
laudatum: and laudans invocabo.]

(1) I will call on the Lord, who is (Omni laud dignissimus) worthy of all
Praise; the most lovely Object of Veneration. And so it trains us up to the
highest thoughts of that Adorable Object we call upon. Worthy to be praised, is
the Sum and Abstract of all his Perfections together; and therefore prompts us
to Approach unto him with Good and Valuable Thoughts of him: not as a cruel
Tyrant, delighting in his Creatures Miseries and Torments: not as an hard
Master, withholding from his Servants, more than is meet; but a most Gracious
Lord, as willing as he is able to Help and Relieve us; a most Indulgent Father,
as far above all Earthly Parents in Wisdom, Power, goodness and readiness to
hear, and supply his Childrens wants, as Heaven is above Earth.

And here I might observe to you farther, that it is the Holy Prudence of Pious
Men, frequently exemplified in Sacred Writ, to call upon God under such
Appellations, Titles, or Attributes as are most agreeable to the matter of their
present Petition, and fittest to Animate and Encourage their Hopes of receiving
from him. So does the Psalmist here in effect, I will call on the Lord, who is
worthy to be praised, viz. as for his Power and Wisdom and Goodness at all
times, so for his abundant Mercy, which I have already had a frequent
experience of, etc.

(2) I will call upon him, whom I also praise, tendering up my Thanksgivings for
mercies already bestowed, while I offer up afresh Petitions for renewed favors
from him; and thus gathering encouragement, from what I have already received,
to continue my Dependence cheerfully upon him, and Faith in him for the future.
There is a great consent of Interpreters this way. I will praise the Lord and
call upon him. So the Arabic. In a Song or Hymn I pour out Prayers. So the
Chaldee. See Dr. H. and Vicars Decapl. in Loc.
I will call upon him with Praises. So R. Sol. Praising him with Prayers. So
Apollinarius. i. e. joining of Praises and Requests, Doxologies and Letanies
together. When I shall have praised him first for his past Benefits, I will
then call upon him for those yet to come. So a Latin M. S. Having celebrated
the Lord with these Encomium's, (viz. of the precedent Verse) I will now call
upon him. So Clarius. Invocabo laudatum. I will call upon him being praised,
that is, in a Poetical Phrase, Dr. H.
I will first praise him, and then call upon him. He signifies hereby, as Mr.
Calvin Notes, [preces suas laudibus mistas fore] That his Prayers shall be
mingled with Praises and Thanksgivings, according to that of the 116 Psalm, I
will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord, Verse. 13.
And again, Offer the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and call on the Name of the
Lord, Verse. 17. So is the Apostolical Direction. Phil. 4.6.
In every thing by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let your
requests be made known to God. We are at the same time to testify both our
Gratitude and Dependence; and Thankfulness for what we have received, is one
effectual way of obtaining what we want. I will therefore call on the Lord with
a grateful acknowledgment of his former Goodness, gathering encouragement from
thence still to continue my Petitions unto him, who has already so well
deserved of me. The Mercies he has vouchsafed me hitherto are not only so many
Essaies of his power and readiness to relieve me, Dr. H. Par.
but also so many Pawns and Pledges for the future; and therefore to my Songs
of Praise I cheerfully add my most Humble and Earnest Requests: And, thus
doing, never fail of a Gracious return from him.

Which leads us to the second part of the Text, namely, the Psalmist's motive
to his Resolution and Practice from the assured good success of it. So shall I
be safe from mine Enemies. And this I shall little more than gloss upon.

Be mine Enemies never so Potent and Formidable; for Multitude, never so many;
an Host of Devils and Sons of Belial; for Power, never so strong; for Malice,
never so spiteful and cruel; for Policy, never so cunning; in their Assaults,
never so violent; in their Confederacies, never so combined; in their Plots,
never so secret: I shall, nevertheless, be saved from them all, and remain
secure by the Divine interposure on my behalf. Dwelling in the secret place of
the most High, Psalm. 91.
I shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. There shall no Evil befall me,
neither shall any Plague come nigh my Dwelling: for he shall give his Angels
charge over me, to keep me in all my ways. He will Answer me, whenever I
call; will be with me in Trouble; will Deliver and Honor me; with long life
will he satisfy me, and show me his Salvation.

All Salvation is of the Lord, and he has a peculiar regard in his saving
Providence unto Kings. Psalm. 144.10.
It is He that gives Salvation unto Kings, that delivers David his Servant
from the hurtful Sword. And the like Acknowledgment we have in the close of
this 18th Psalm. Great Deliverance gives he to his King, and shows Mercy to
his Anointed, to David and to his seed for ever. [Even the succession of
Anointed ones, the whole race of Kings throughout all generations.] St. Chrysostom.
Liturg.
They are (...) preserved by him, by whom they Reign. But yet God expects to be
sought unto by them too; that they own and acknowledge their need of his Help,
and put themselves into a capacity of receiving it, in the most becoming
posture, from him. That therefore is the Ground of the Psalmists Resolution, I
will call on the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be safe from
mine Enemies.

And, that we may all, in a proportion, gather the like encouragement unto this
Duty of calling upon God in our Distresses and Troubles, we are to remember,
that he is styled in general, Psalm. 65.
The hearer of Prayers, unto whom all Flesh therefore is to come; that he has
bid us Ask, Seek, Knock, with promise that he who asks shall receive; and he
that seeks shall find, and to him that knocks it shall be opened: That He
has assured, If we who are Evil know how to give good Gifts to our Children,
much more will He, our Heavenly Father, give Good things to them that ask him.

Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall he saved; says the Prophet
Joel, Joel 2.32. Act. 2.21. Romans 10.13.
and it is thrice quoted for Confirmation in the New Testament. And the promise
refers to as black and dismal Times, as we can well imagine, viz. such as
attended the Siege of Jerusalem by the Romans. When there were the dreadful
Appearances of Blood and Fire, and Pillars of Smoke, the Sun turned into
Darkness, and the Moon into Blood; even the great and terrible Day of the Lord
come upon them. Nevertheless, in these circumstances, the promise is left.
Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be Delivered.

And for our farther Confirmation as to the public invocation of God, with the
Congregations of his Saints in his Holy Temple, we may cast our Eyes on the
several passages of King Solomon's Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple, the
House of Prayer which God himself testified his Acceptance of. Hearken then, 1
Kings 8.
says he, unto the Supplication of thy Servant, and of thy people Israel, when
they shall pray toward this place, and Hear thou in Heaven, and Forgive and
Do, that all the People of the Earth may know thy Name to fear thee, as do thy
People Israel, etc. We under the New Testament, to be sure, are nothing short
of them in real Privileges; nay, God has reserved some better thing for us.
For, though we have not their Temple, yet we have their God as near unto us in
all that we call upon him for; we have the Holy Spirit, whereby we cry Abba
Father, making intercession within us; and we have a most powerful Advocate at
God's right hand, Jesus Christ the righteous, by whom we may come with
Confidence to the Throne of Grace, Hebr. 4.16.
that we may obtain Mercy and find Grace, [(...),] for our most seasonable
Relief in the time of need.

And now I have, with what brevity I could, run over the Text: It remains, that
I apply it also briefly to the occasion of our present Assembly; which I shall
best do by giving you first a short Account of Those sad and troublesome
Circumstances, we are involved in; and then exhorting and encouraging of you
together with my self, to practice according to this good example set before us.

But First, it will be requisite for us to see and take notice of our Danger.
An execrable Plot is by God's Gracious Providence discovered and brought to
light (whereof the King himself has given notice to the Parliament, and the
Parliament upon such witness as they had before them, have agreed to declare
their Belief of it.) An execrable Plot, I say, to take away his Majesty's Life,
subvert the Government we live under, and that Protestant Religion which we
profess; And This Plot long in laying, and by the Complication of many
Interests designed at last to be brought to its Effect, through the Combination
both of Foreign Powers and Domestic Treachery. A Plot, wherein we have the
Venom and poison of all former Plots in their Quintessence put together, and
which, in its execution, was like to have been attended with a General
Massacre. A Plot, wherein our Adversaries said, They shall not know, neither
see, Nehem. 4.
till we come in the midst among them, and slay them. And indeed they had found
us altogether naked. We had been left without all manner of Protection and
Defense, All Commissions expiring with the Kings Life; and the chief places of
Trust and Importance both in Church and State predisposed of to our sworn
Enemies. A Plot, the Discovery of which they sought to have prevented or
discountenanced at its first appearance, by the horrid Murder of an Eminent
Patriot employed in the search after it. The Persons concerned are all Romish
Agents, Priests and Jesuits, and others of that Communion, abetted with
Foreign Powers, as I said, who are Enemies both to our State and Religion.
These our Enemies are extremely formidable in their Number, their Malice, their
Cruelty, their Confederacy in Mischief against us, so linked together, that it
will be hard to make a full Discovery of them. Such they are as stand accused
for having had an hand in most of those public and Tragical Calamities we
have, ever since their defeated Powder Plot, groaned under. And, That which is
most execrable, they act all in the Name of God, under a color and pretense of
Religion, and by virtue of the Principles of that Romish Faith, which baptizeth
Rebellion, Faction, Sedition, Parricide and Murder by an holy Name and Title.
They look on us all as a Body or pack of Heretics, unfit to live, with whom no
Faith or Fealty at all is to be kept, and whom it is but an Act of Penance,
nay, of Merit, to sacrifice upon every Occasion, with the utmost hazard, for
the promotion of what they miscall the Catholic Cause. This is the sum of
our Case; and, the greatest mischief is, we yet see not into the bottom of this
Damnable Contrivance against us; only are left to ghess, if a little Fire is
able to kindle a mighty Conflagration, how dismal and amazing Flames so many
Incendiaries at work are likely to produce, if not timely found out and
prevented. Psalm. 64.
They encourage themselves in an evil matter; They commune of laying Snares
privily; They say, Who shall see? They search out iniquities; The inward
thought of every one of them and the heart is deep.

Now let us in the next place, I beseech you, take notice, what great reason we
have to bless God Almighty, and to praise his Name, that This, so Hellish a
Plot, is so far discovered already, instead of being made known to us only by
the fatal Execution of it. The God, we This day call upon, is Worthy to be
praised, and to be for ever praised by us, that he has hitherto prevented, and
brought to light This Diabolical Wickedness in so many Tracks and Footsteps of
it. That He has Thus far protected and preserved our most Gracious King and
all his Loyal Subjects, in the freedom and profession of the True Protestant
Religion, against them that, from the Youth up of our Reformation, have
troubled us. The Wisdom and Goodness of Divine Providence is particularly to be
adored by us, that what they meant and designed for a Terror to all, and so to
quash the Discovery of This Cursed Plot, (the Murder I mean of his Majesty's
Justice employed about Examinations,) has been turned by God into the hopeful
means of awakening others to enquire into it, and thereby to make known their
most impious and detestable Villainies.

We are to praise God further, that he has put it into the Heart of our
Gracious Sovereign, upon this occasion, to summon us all together jointly to
Call upon God, who alone can save us, for his Blessing upon these sinful and
miserable Kingdoms; and to furnish us with so excellent a Form of Confessions,
Doxologies, Lessons and Prayers for the present purpose. That he has inclined
his Heart, in This Juncture, to give all the assurance that can be had from a
Religious Prince to a Loyal People, of his Majesty's Care and Zeal for the
Protestant Interest, and the Security of it, not only during his own desired
and happy Reign, but under all that shall hereafter succeed him to the World's
end.

And now it remains, that we stir up and encourage our selves and one another
to Call upon God for the Time to come, both for his merciful Protection of our
Gracious Sovereign, and in him of all his Loyal Subjects; and for his Direction
and Blessing in order to the farther Discovery and defeating of all these
cursed Projects: To seek unto God, Job 5.
and commit our Cause unto him, who does great things and unsearchable,
mavelous things without number; who sets upon high those that be low, that
they who mourn, may be exalted to safety.

We have good Warrant and Example set before us, as you have heard, in Holy
Scripture for our Imitation. Such as That of David in the Text; and that of
Nehemiah read in the First Lesson for this Morning Service.

And we have the awakening Motive of our great Perils and Dangers to spur us on
to follow these excellent Presidents. We have not only our own personal
Interest lying wholly at stake, but That of our Families, nay, That of our
Children's Children, and Posterities in all Ages yet to come; That, I should
have said in the First place, of the Glory of God in the Continuance of the
profession of True Religion among us, to urge us hereunto.

Let us therefore be excited, I beseech you, with one consent to put our
Shoulders to the work, with all Humility and Reverence, Fervency and
Earnestness, Faith and Importunity to call upon God in the Name of his dear
Son, that we perish not; to call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised;
who has already done so great things for us, (wherein we rejoice, and for
which we praise him:) That he would yet continue to be Merciful and Gracious
unto us and to our Land: That He would shelter our most Religious and Gracious
King Charles under the wings of his Good Providence, and by the Guard of his
Angels, from the bloody hands of Ishmael, Jer. 41.
from the Sons of Violence, from the Approach of all manner of Evil: That he
would manifest and bring to light the hidden works of Darkness, that They and
Their Religion, and who are Abetters of them may be brought unto open shame and
infamy: That He (who is never at a loss for ways and methods of bringing his
counsel to pass, and can make the most despised and contemptible means
effectual to humble the proud and mighty) would in This time of our need,
perplexity and trouble stand up and appear for our Rescue and Deliverance: That
He would disappoint the Devices of the Crafty, Job 5.
so that their hands may not be able to perform their enterprise: That he would
take the wise in their own Craftiness, and carry the Counsel of the froward
headlong: Psalm. 64.
That he would shoot at them with his arrows, and make their own Tongue to fall
upon themselves; so that all who see them, may fear, and declare the work of
God, wisely considering of his doing: That he would cause them to be ensnared
in those very Traps they have laid for others, and make them either the
Executioners of their own Ruin, as he did the Seditious and Rebellious
Absalom, or bring them to the Gibbets, 2 Samuel 18.
designed by them for the Innocent, as he did the powerful and revengefull
Haman: That, Esther 7.
as of his preventing Grace and Goodness he has mercifully begun to Discover
and make them to Fall, so he would vouchsafe to perfect This work of Mercy to
us, in their hearty Conversion and Repentance, if it may be, or in their utter
Confusion.

And, that we may succeed in these our Prayers unto God, let us, I beseech you,
Humble our selves deeply and sincerely in his presence for all our former Sins,
whereby we have provoked him to Anger and Displeasure against us. Let us turn
unto him with Fasting, and Weeping and Supplication, turning from all our
Transgressions, which we this Day make Confession of; in particular our
monstrous Ingratitude unto God Almighty for all the Miracles of his Mercy and
Goodness toward us: our ill Returns and Requitals of all his signal Benefits
from time to time conferred upon us.

Unless we are thus truly Penitent for our Sins past, and reconciled to Gods
Favor, we are not fit Mediators for our selves or others in this Trouble and
Distress. Nay, instead of Atoning God Almighty, and procuring Mercy from him,
we partake with the Enemy in bringing down his Curse upon us, and the Society
whereof we are Members. They are therefore Rebels and Traitors, so far, to
their King and Country, who refuse this Day to Humble themselves under God's
mighty Hand, and so to turn unto him, and to seek his Face; or, who allow
themselves in the Practice of that Wickedness, whereby they may farther provoke
Heaven against us; or who, Ahaz-like, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
In the time of this Distress Trespass yet more against the Lord.

But if we Confess and Forsake our Sins, we are in the certain way to obtain
Mercy; Mercy for our selves, and Mercy for the Land of our Nativity; Mercy for
this present Generation, and Mercy for that which is to follow. We may then be
admitted to call upon God with grounded hopes of his grace and favor toward
us. We have then Encouragement to depend upon Him and expect a Blessing from
Him, as the success of this Days performance. For all things are naked and open
to his All-seeing Eye, and none can dig so deep as to hide their Counsels from
him: and his Hand can reach them too, wheresoever they are; his Power is
infinite. He is never to seek for ways and means to blast and defeat the most
Malicious, and Politic, and Secret, and Combined Machinations of any in order
to our Destruction. Nay, we may confidently rely upon his Word of Promise for
it, that He will Hear and Answer us, and so we shall be safe from all our
Enemies.

Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant, for Christ his sake, etc. Amen.

THE END.

