THE KING OF DENMARKS RESOLVTION CONCERNING CHARLES KING OF GREAT BRITAIN

Wherein is Declared His Determination for the setting forth of a fleet toward
England, wherein the Lord Digbie, M. Piercy, and Secretary Windebank are
present, being now ready to lance forth.

Read in the audience of both Houses of Parliament. June 29.

With the Copy of a Letter which was read in the Dutch Church on Sunday last,
being the 3. of July, concerning the Escape which the Queen would have made
from Holland to York, unknown to the States, and the Parliaments, Resolution
concerning the L. Strange.

Ordered that this be Printed and published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

July 5. Printed for J. TOMPSON, and A. COE, 1642.

News from Denmark.
GReat are the Distractions of England, and many are the Miseries which are
like to ensue and befall this Kingdom; unless a sudden Alteration of Unity
and Peace be knitted betwixt the Head and the Body, for want of which, this
Kingdom is like to suffer, and will be become a scorn to foreign Nations.

The Kings Majesty has declared, that unless the Parliament will give him
Justice against Sir John Hotham, and diverse others which have not obeyed His
special Command, He will lose His Own, Life in Defense thereof.

O what a sad and lamentable Ditty is this to sound in the Ears of the poor
subject, That His Majesty is intended and fully Resolved to take Arms against
His Parliament, whose vigilancie and care has always bin very great, both for
the defense and safeguard of His Majesty's Royal person, and the Peace and
Liberty of the poor Subject, not having the least thought of taking His
Majesty's Honor and Dignity from him, but to establish and enact it far
greater then any of his Predecessors ever had.

But his Majesty being incensed against them by the Evil Counsel which are
now lurking about his Royal Court, has set down his full Resolution and
intention to set up his Standard near N^w castle, vowing to have Justice
against those which did oppose His Sacred Majesty, keeping him forth by
violence from entering into his own Town, which His Majesty took to be a great
Affront against His Royal Person, and a great Disgrace throughout the World to
His Royal progeny. Wherefore he having set down his Resolution against the
said Parties, that Justice shall immediately proceed against them, which if it
be denved, His Majesty has vowed He will take them by force, or else lose his
own life therein, being resolved to adventure His Royal Person in such an
Honorable Enterprise.

Moreover, His Majesty sent about 1000 men into Newcastle, the information and
Report whereof were related to the High Court of Parliament, it is thought that
His Majesty is Resolved to set up His Standard there, if any such occasion be.

Nevertheless, his Majesty does Declare, that if the Parliament will revoke
their former Orders concerning all Leavies, and the disposing of the Militia,
and give His Majesty Justice against those that detain his town and Fort from
him, he is content to lay down his Arms.

It has bin a long while reported, that the Danes has bin diverse times
coming to Assist His Majesty, yet it has proved false and contrary; But now
it proves too true.

For it is credibly reported, that the King of Denmark having received
intelligence from His Majesty's Court at York, the Differences betwixt His
Majesty and the Parliament, and that the King were Resolved by force of Arms to
take Justice against Sir John Hotham, and the rest of those which would not
obey His special Command, the King of Denmark taking it into consideration,
making His Counsel acquainted with it, thinking that it would be an
ungrateful part of Him not to assist His Majesty with what Forces he could
conveniently raise, He referred it to His Counsel, and after some Debate, they
concluded that there should be a fleet forthwith Rigged and prepared to be
sent with all speed toward the Coast of England, but to what end is not yet
known.

The which Tidings upon the 1. of July were brought to the Honorable Court of
Parliament, where it was reported and read in the Audience of both Houses,
informing that there was a great Fleet of Ships which lay at Dunkirk ready
prepared to lance forth with Men and Ammunition, and all other things belonging
to War, which are intended to come for England, and that the Lord Digbie. M.
Piercie. Secretary Windebanke, and others that are Delinquents are coming with
them, but what their Designs are is not yet known, God grant that they may all
turn for the best.

The Copy of a Letter which was read in the Dutch Church on Sunday last, being
the 3. of July, 1642.
ON Sunday last, being the 3. of July, there was a Letter read in the Dutch
Church, which came from the States in^ that the Queen had provided diverse ships
for to transport her Majesty and the rest of her Followers to York, they being
all in readiness, tarrying only for wind; all which were unknown to the
States: but they hearing of it, sent immediately a Commission and Command for
the stopping of her Journey, Declaring, that if Her Majesty would be pleased to
be transported toward London, they would to the utmost of their power aid and
assist her, but for her Journey toward York they would not give their Consents.

It is ordered, that the Lord Strange be required to deliver that part of the
Magazine of the County of Lancaster into the hands of the Deputy Lieutenonts.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parl.
FINIS.

