Reasons against Popery IN A LETTER FROM Mr. WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH, To his
Friend Mr. LEWGER, Persuading him to Return to his Mother, The CHURCH of
ENGLAND.

From the Corrupt CHURCH of ROME.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet, at the Sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane,
near Fleet Street. A. D. 1673.

Reasons against Popery, in a Letter from Mr. William Chillingworth to his
friend Mr. Lewger, etc.
Good Mr. Lewger,
THough I am resolved not to be much afflicted at that which is not in my power
to Help; yet I cannot deny but the loss of a Friend goes very near to my heart,
and by this name of a Friend, I did presume, till of late, that I might have
called you; because though perhaps for want of power and opportunity I have done
you no good office, yet I have always been willing and ready to do you the best
Service I could, and therefore I cannot but admire at your affected strangeness
which in your last Letter to me you seem to take upon you; renouncing in a
manner all Relation to me, and tacitly Excommunicating me from all Interest in
you. The Superscription of your Letter is to Mr. William Chillingworth, and the
Subscription John Lewger, as if you either disdained, or made a Conscience of
stiling me your Friend, or your self mine. If this proceed from passion and
weakness pray mend it; if from reason pray show it: If you think me one of
those to whom St. John forbids you to say (God save you) then you are to think
and prove me one of those Deceivers, which deny Christ Jesus to be come in the
flesh: If you think me an Heretic, and therefore to be avoided, you must prove
me to be (...), condemned by mine own judgment, which I know I am not, and
therefore think you cannot. If you say I do not hear the Church, and therefore
am to be esteemed an Heathen or Publican, you are to prove then that by the
Church is meant the Church of Rome, and yet when you have done so, I hope
Christians are not forbidden to show humanity and civility even to Pagans?

For God's sake Mr. Lewger free your self from this blind Zeal, at least for a
little space, and consider with reason and moderation, what strange Crime you
can charge me with that should deserve this strange usage, especially from you:
Is it a Crime with all my understanding to endeavor to find your Religion
true, and to make my self a believer of it, and not to be able to do so? Is it
a crim^ to employ all my reason upon the Justification of the Infallibility of
the Roman-Church; and to find it impossible e to be justified? I will call God
to witness, who knows my heart better than you do, that I have evened the Scale
of my Judgment, as much as possibly I could, and have not willingly allowed one
grain of worldly motives on either side, but have weighed the reasons for your
Religion, and against it, with such indifference, as if there were nothing in
the world but God and my self; and is it my fault that the Scale goes down
which has the most weight in it? that the Building falls that has a false
foundation? Have you such power over your understanding, that you can believe
what you please, though you see no Reason? Or that you can suspend your belief,
when you see Reason? If you have, I pray for old Friendship's sake, teach me
this trick, and until I have learned it, I pray blame me not for going the
ordinary way, I mean for believing, or not believing as I see reason. If you
can convince me of wilful opposition against the known Truth; of negligence in
seeking it, of unwillingness to find it, of preferring temporal respects before
it, or of any other fault which is in my power to amend, that is indeed a
fault, if I mend it not; be as angry with me as you please; but to impute to me
involuntary Errors, or that I do not see that which I would see, but cannot; or
that I will not profess that which I do not believe; certainly this is a far
more unreasonable error, then any you can justly charge me with; for let me
tell you, the imputing Socinianisme to me (whosoever was the Author of it) was
a wicked and groundless Slander. Perhaps you will say (for this is the usual
Song of that side) Pride is a voluntary fault, and with this I am justly
chargeable, for forsaking the Guide that God has appointed me to follow: but
what if I forsook it, because I thought I had reason to fear it was one of
those blind Guides, which whosoever blindly follows, is threatened by our
Savior, that both he and his Guide shall fall into the Ditch? then I hope you
will grant it was not Pride, but Conscience, that moved me to do so; for as it
is wise humility to obey those whom God has set over me, so is it sinful
credulity to follow every man, or every Church, that without warrant will take
upon them to guide me: show then some good and evident title which your Church
of Rome has to this Office; produce but one reason for it, which upon trial
will not finally be resolved and vanished into incertainty, and if I yield not
unto it, say, if you please, I am as proud as Lucifer.

In the mean time give me leave to think it strange, and not far from a
Prodigy, that this Doctrine of the Roman Churches being the Guide of Faith (if
it be true Doctrine) should either not be known to the Evangelists, or if it
were known to them, yet being Wise and Good Men, they should either be so
envious of the Churches Happiness, or so forgetful of the Work they took in
hand, which was to write the Whole Gospel of Christ, as that not so much as one
of them should mention so much as once this so necessary part of the Gospel,
without the belief whereof there is no Salvation, and with the belief whereof,
unless men be snatched away by sudden death, there is hardly any damnation. It
is evident they do all of them with one consent speak very plainly of many
things of no importance in comparison hereof, and is it credible or indeed
possible that with one consent or rather conspiracy, they should be so deeply
silent concerning this Unum Necessarium? You may believe it if you can, for my
part I cannot, unless I see demonstration for it: And if you say they send us
to the Church, and consequently to the Church of Rome, this is to suppose that
which can never be proved, that the Church of Rome is the only Church, and
without this supposal upon the Division of the Church, I am as far to seek for
a Guide of my Faith as ever.

As for Example: In that Great Division of the Church when the whole World
wondered, said St. Ierom, that it was become Arrian, when Liberius Pope of Rome
(as St. Athanasius, St. Ierom, and St. Hilary testify, subscribed their
Heresy, and joined in communion with them: or in the Division betwixt the
Greek and Roman Church, about the Procession of the Holy Ghost, when either
side was the Church to it self, and each part Schismatical and Heretical to the
other: what direction could I then, an ignorant man, have found from the Text
of Scripture, Unless he hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen or
a Publican: Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it.

Again, Give me leave to wonder that neither S. Paul writing to the Romans,
should so much as intimate this their privilege of Infallibility, but rather
on the contrary put them in fear in the 11 Chapter, that they, as well as the
Jews, were in danger of falling away!

That St. Peter, the pretended Bishop of Rome, writing two Catholic Epistles,
mentioning his departure, should not once acquaint the Christians whom he
writes to, what Guide they were to follow after he was taken from them!

That the Writers of the New Testament should so frequently warn men of
Heretics, false Christ's, false Prophets, and not once arm them against them,
with letting them know this only sure means of avoiding their danger!

That so great a part of the New Testament should be employed about Antichrist,
and so little, and indeed none at all, about the Vicar of Christ, and the Guide
of the Faithful!

That our Savior should leave this only means for the Ending of Controversies,
and yet speak so obscurely and ambiguously of it, that now our Judge is the
greatest Controversy, and the greatest hindrance of ending of them!

That there should be better evidence in the Scripture to justify the King to
this Office, who disclaims it, than the Pope, who pretends to it!

That St. Peter should never exercise over the Apostles any one Act of
Jurisdiction, not they ever give him any one Title of Authority over them!

That if the Apostles did know that St. Peter was made Head of them, when our
Savior said, Thou art Peter, they should still contend who should be the
First, and that our Savior should never tell them that St. Peter was the man!

That St. Paul should say he was nothing inferior to the very chief Apostles!

That the Catechumeni in the Primitive Church should never be taught this
Foundation of their Faith, that the Church of Rome was the Guide of their Faith!

That the Fathers, Tertullian, St. Ierom and Optatus, when they flew highest in
recommendation of the Roman Church, should attribute no more unto her than to
all Apostolical Churches!

That in the Controversy about Easter, the Bishops and Churches of Asia should
be so ill Catechized as not to know this Principle of Christian Religion, The
necessity of Conformity of Doctrine with the Church of Rome!

That they should never be pressed with any such Conformity in all things, but
only with the particular Tradition of the Western Churches in that point!

That Irenaeus and many other Bishops notwithstanding, Ad hanc Ecclesiam
necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, should not yet think that a necessary
Doctrine, nor a sufficient ground of Excommunication, which the Church of Rome
thought to be so!

That St. Cyprian and the Bishops of Afric should be so ill-instructed in
their Faith, as not to know this Foundation of it!

That they likewise were never urged with any such necessity of Conformity with
the Church of Rome, nor ever charged with Heresy or Error for denying of it!

That when Liberius joined in Communion with the Arrians, and subscribed their
Heresy, the Arrians then should not be the Church, and the Guide of the Faith.

That never any Heretics for five Ages after Christ were pressed with this
Argument of the Infallibility of the present Church of Rome, or charged with
the denial of it as a distinct Heresy, so that AEneas Sylvius should have
cause to say, Ante tempora Concilii Niceni quisque sive vivebat, and parvus
respectus habebatur ad Ecclesiam Romanam!

That the Ecclesiastical Story of these times, mentions no Act of Authority of
the Church of Rome over other Churches; as if there should be a Monarchy, and
the King for some Ages together should exercise no Act of Jurisdiction in it!

That to supply this defect, the Decretal Epistles should be so impudently
forged, which in a manner speak nothing else but Reges and Monarchas, I mean
the Popes making Laws to exercise Authority over all other Churches!

That the Affrican Churches in Saint Austin's time should be ignorant that the
Pope was Head of the Church, and Judge of Appeals Iure Divino, and that there
was a necessity of Conformity with the Church in this and all other points of
Doctrine!

Nay that the Popes themselves should be so ignorant of the ground of this
their Authority, as to pretend to it, not upon Scripture or Universal
Tradition; but upon an imaginary pretended Non-such-Canon of the Council of
Nice.

That Vincentius Lirinensis seeking for a Guide of his Faith and a Preservation
from Heresy, should be ignorant of this so ready an one, the Infallibility of
the Church of Rome!

All these things, and many more, are very strange to me, if the Infallibility
of the Roman Church be indeed, and were always by Christians acknowledged the
Foundation of our Faith: and therefore I beseech you pardon me, if I chose mine
upon one that is much firmer and safer, and lies open to none of these
Objections, which is Scripture and Universal Tradition.

And if one that is of this Faith may have leave so to do, I will subscribe
with hand and heart,

Your very Loving and True Friend, W. Chillingworth.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and sold by Robert Pawlet, at the Bible
in Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street.
EPiscopacy not prejudicial to Regal Power, Written by the special Command of
the late King: By Robert Sanderson late Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

The Gentleman's Calling, Written by the Author of The Whole Duty of Man.

The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety; Or an Impartial Survey of the
Ruins of Christian Religion, undermined by Uncristian Practice: By the Author
of the Whole Duty of Man.

A Scholastical History of the Canon of the Holy Scripture; Or the certain and
Indubitate Books thereof as they are received in the Church of England: By Dr.
Gosin, Lord Bishop of Durham.

Golden Remains of the ever Memorable Mr. John Hales of Eton-College, with
Additions from the Authors own hand.

Divine Breathings, or a Pious Soul thirsting after Christ, in an hundred
excellent Meditations.

Hugo Grotius de Rebus Belgicis, Or the Annals and History of the Low Country
Wars, in English, wherein is manifested, that the United Netherlands are
indebted for the glory of their Conquests to the Valor of the English.

A Treatise of the English Particles; showing much of the variety of their
significations and uses in English; and how to render them into Latin,
according to the propriety and elegancy of that Language; with a Praxis upon
the same: By William Walker, B. D. Schoolmaster of Grantham.

The Royal Grammar, commonly called Lillies Grammar explained, opening the
meaning of the Rules with great plainness to the understanding of Children of
the meanest capacity, with choice observations on the same from the best
Authors: By W. Walker, B. D. Author of the Treatise of English Particles.

A Catalogue of the names of all the Parliaments or reputed Parliaments, from
the year 1640.

A Narrative of some Passages in or relating to the Long Parliament, by a
Person of Honor.

Sober Inspections into the Long Parliament: By James Howel Esquire.

Dr. Sprackling against the Chemists.

Nemesius's Nature of Man, in English: By G. Withers Gent. Inconveniences of
Toleration.

A Letter about Comprehension.

A Rationale on the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England: By Anth.
Sparrow, Lord Bishop of Exon.

The Bishop of Exons Caution to his Diocese against false doctrines: delivered
in a Sermon at his Primary Visitation.

A Thanksgiving Sermon Preached before the King, by I. Dolben, D. D. Dean of
Westminster, and Clerk of the Closet.

Bishop Brownrigs Sermon on the Gunpowder Treason.

A Letter to a person of Quality concerning the Fines received by the Church at
its Restoration, wherein by the Instance of one of the pichest Cathedrals, a
fair guess may be made at the receipts and disbursements of all the rest.

A Narrative of the Burning of London 1666. with an account of the Losses, and
a most remarkable Parallel between it and MOSCO, both as to the Plague and Fire.

Lluellyns three Sermons on the Kings Murder.

A Collection of the Rules and Orders now used in Chancery.

A Charge given by the most Eminent and Learned Sir Francis Bacon, at a
Sessions for the Verge, declaring the Jurisdiction thereof, and the offenses
therein inquirable, as well by the Common Law, as by the several Statutes.

Mr. Whites learned Tract of the Laws of England.

Graphic^, Or the Use of the Pen and Pensil in Designing, Drawing and Painting:
By Sir William Sanderson, Knight.

Hypocrates Aphorisms in English.

The Communicant instructed for worthy Receiving the Lords Supper: By Tho.
Trot, of Barkston near Grantham.

Petavius's History of the World.

Military and Maritine Discipline.

All sorts of LAW BOOKS.

FINIS.

