Christian Valor ENCOURAGED: OR THE Turk's Downfall: And, Probably, (Out of many
PROPHECIES) By WHOM.

Turca cadat, Gallus Lunaria Cornua rumpat,
Ac Orientalem (Divina dote) Coronam
Constantinopoli (Sacratus rite) resumat.
Down Turk! May Great French Lewis break thy Horn;
And let Constantine's Crown his Head adorn.
LONDON, Printed by John Leake; and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, 1684.

THE Turks Downfall: And probably (out of many Prophecies) by Whom.
EVery Historian knows the Pretensions of the French to the Empire: And as to
the Low Countries, there was a Book Printed in the Savoy 1667. Translated out
of French; whose Title was, A Dialogue concerning the Rights of Her most
Christian Majesty. To which I shall only add, That at that very Time when
Robert Earl of Flanders died sans Issue, whereby the said Earldom, according to
Tenure, fell into the French King's Hands; he by Consent of the Lords of the
Country, was put into Peaceable Possession thereof. But if this King had no
Title, yet some think he does not amiss, to make himself some Amends for the
Surprizal of Navarre. And if Navarre, his Grand-Father's Native Kingdom, and
Paternal Inheritance, were restored, and Flanders then suffered to be quiet, it
would be well for the Kings and People of those Countries. King David made
choice of Pestilence, rather than War.

Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi.
When Kings self-willed Designs pursue,
The Unhappy Vassals must it rue.
As to the Pretensions to the Empire: The Designs and Actions succeeding, and
pursuant to them, have made a great Noise and Stir: But the Raising the Siege
of Vienna, evidently shows, That God, per quem Reges regunt, Prove. 8.16. has
Established it where it is. And if in the Time of Charles the Simple, the
Francones and Saxones were distasted with the French, and chose an Emperor of
their own Blood, (Henricus Auceps) certainly the German Nation, after so long
an Establishment, will be very loath to change their accustomed and usual
Succession.

Romanum Imperium Germana corona tenebit;
Transferri Gallis non voluere Dii.
The Roman Rule with Germans shall remain;
The Gods deny the French it to attain.
We read in Holy Writ, of a Time and Season when Kings go out to Battle. This
Great Louis goes not to War upon such Customary Account: His Inclination to
Arms is Sidereal and Natural. Chaucer, in his Tale of the Wife of Bath, says, I
followed ay mine Inclination,
By virtue of my Constellation.


If then he must be doing, (for so it is) What Happiness would redound to
Europe, if he turned his Inclination, Endeavor and Arms against the Turk? No
Prince fitter or abler to cope with him, than he.

Pieter van den Broeck, in his Voyages and Travels, compares the King of Spain,
and the Great Turk together: Says he; In macht zyn dese Malcanderen seer
gelyck. In Power these Two are very much alike. But as the Roman Empire,
(according to the Prophecy of the Druids) Transalpinis Gentibus portenditur, is
transferred to the Transalpine Nations; so the Potentia Hispanica, Pyreneos
transivit Montes, and Gallis transfertur; the Spanish Greatness is got over the
Pyrenean Hills, and resides in the French Tents.

But to return: He has in this kind the Precedent of his Predecessors; Philip
the First, Lewis the Seventh, that went to the Holy Land in Person against the
Saracens and Turks; Philip the Second, Lewis the Ninth.

I have mentioned before, this Great King has asserted his Title to Flanders:
He may be pleased then to remember, That Baldwin Earl of Flanders, (his
Predecessor as to that Province) was Anno 1194. chosen Emperor of
Constantinople; and that Charles the Eighth had that Title conferred upon him by
Pope Alexander the Sixth. An Empire certainly easier to be attained, than that
of Germany; being so strongly guarded with so many Princely Satellites, for
Interest sake. On the contrary, the Other must stand per se, having so many
Enemies round about, (the Curse and Maledictions of so many oppressed Vassals);
and no Christian Prince, though lying remote, but would contribute Men and
Money to so Universal a Good, were it set on foot.

If this Empire be not attainable in Toto; yet certainly in Part, and some
goodly Limbs thereof, it is attainable and atchievable.

1. There is Cyprus; a wonderful Ancient Kingdom, even as old as the
Destruction of Troy; and was in the French Hands Two hundred thirty and odd
Years: An Island commodious for Shipping. See Heylin; and Favine, in his
Theater of Honor, speaking of the House of Lusignan, and the Military Order of
the Sword in that Island. 2. Crete or Candy; a brave Island, and also
commodious for Shipping: which was in the Power of the Emperor Baldwin
aforesaid, who gave it to Boniface of Montferrat: It has one Haven, called
Suda, capable of One thousand Ships. This Great Prince, being Master of This,
or Cyprus, (being so Potent in Shipping as he is of late become) What might he
not be able to do in the Levant, (having already Marseilles and Thoulon, famous
Retraicts for a Navy) against the Barbarous Turks? Heylin tells us, The
Florentine Duke, with a Fleet of Six Sail, overaw'd the Turk in the
Mediterranean. 3. There is also Morea, or Peloponnesus; Six hundred Miles in
compass: The most pleasant Country of all Greece, abounding in all things
necessary for the Life of Man, and in such also as do serve for Delicacy and
Content; adorned with many goodly Plains, swelled with Fruitful Hills; well
stored with Ports and Havens, on all Sides thereof: A Place easy to be
fortified into the Quality and Circumstances of an Island, by Immuring the
Isthmus, being but Six Miles in length, done by the Venetians in Fifteen Days.
Historians tell us, That Demetrius King of Macedon, Julius Caesar, and Caligula
attempted to cut through the Isthmus, and make it a perfect Island: By none
more eagerly pursued, than by the Emperor Nero; who took Spade in hand, to
hearten on his Soldiers: Yet, at last, the Soldiers being frighted with the
Blood which abundantly broke forth, with the Groans and Roarings which they
continually heard, and with the Spirits and Furies always in their Sights,
persuaded the Emperor to desist. Who knows, but that Great Lewis, that has not
long since cut a Navigable River quite through his Famous Kingdom, a Mari usque
ad Mare, from Sea to Sea, may be the Man that shall effect what Heaven denied
to the forenamed Princes? Faxit Deus. 4. Mount Athos in Greece, standing in a
Peninsula: The Isthmus of which being once cut through by Xerxes, (but since
closed again) gives a Probability of what I mention, as to Morea. The Hill many
Miles in Circuit; Three Days Journey long, as says Heylin. 5. The foresaid
Morea, and also Achaia, have been in the Hands of Princes of the House of
France: So also Athens, as we find it confirmed to us by Saint Marthe's
Genealogick History of France, page 1162, 1167, etc. Memento, and Encouragement
enough, to stir up this Great Prince of whom we speak, to set this treated-of
Design afoot, from such just Pretensions. 6. I will not speak of Armenia, held
as a Kingdom Two hundred ninety and six Years; and by the fore-recited House of
Lusignan, Five Descents: And lies near to Cyprus. See Favine.
If any object, The French Monarch came off but somewhat flatly, in his Design
upon Sicily: I confess it. When most Unchristianly he broke the Tenth
Commandment, by Coveting and unjustly entering upon his Brother and Neighbor's
Propriety; what could any Man expect else? He that perhaps has said, I will
give him the Heathenish Turks for his Inheritance, Psalm. 2.8. I am sure, never
commanded him to disturb the Catholic King in Sicily; in whose, and his
Predecessor's Hands, it has been Two hundred and fifty Years: And the French
having no Pretensions, but (first) from an unjust Donation of Urban the Fourth,
and (secondly) a pettish wayward, inconstant Bequeathment of Joan Queen of
Naples; who had first settled it upon the House of Arragon, whose Descendants
now enjoy it at this Day.

The Frenth have always been the Grand Undertakers against the Saracens and
Turks, in the Holy Land, as I have said before: And Theophilus Garenciers, in
his Comment upon Nostredamus, p. 391. says, The Turks themselves have a
Prophecy from among themselves, their Monarchy shall be subverted by a King of
France.

Bartholomeus Georgenitz recites a Turkish Prophecy concerning the taking of
Constantinople; which is styled, Rubrum Pomum, the Red Apple: And it hints,
That Post duodecimum Annum, after the Twelfth Year shall appear the Sword of
the Christians, which shall every where put the Turk to Flight.

My Author observes, The Exposition made by the said Bartholomeus, (who wrote
of the Original and Manners of the said Turks) fell not out well: For, says he,
It Is not only Twelve Years, but an Hundred Years, since their Winning of the
said Constantinople.

Now, for my part, my Opinion is: It is not meant of Twelve simple or singular
Years, but of Twelve certain Numbers of Years; as Twenty Years is a complete
Number in a Man's Age, (Aetas Perfectionis) when the Corporal Strength, and
Mental Intellect come to a Perfection. Now Twelve times Twenty is Two hundred
and forty. Constantinople was taken One thousand four hundred fifty and two;
take that from One thousand six hundred eighty and four, and there remains Two
hundred thirty and two; which wants Eight Years of Two hundred and forty.
Suppose then Great Louis should now set Hand to Sword; probably, in so many
Years, he might do the Work; Turcam quaqua versum in fugam agere, (as the
Prophecy has it): Having first beat him out of the Pourlieus beforementioned,
at the end of the said Term, he might become Master of the Red Apple, possessed
Sixty Years by Baldwin, and his Successors. Notredamus says; Dans le Danube and
le Rhin, viendra Boire
Le Grand Chameau, ne sen repentira
Trembler le Rhone, and plus fort ceux de Loire
Et pres des Alps le Coq le Ruinera.
Danubius and Rhine shall Drink afford
To the Grand Camel, who shall them aboard:
The Rhone and Loire great Terror shall annoy;
But near the Alps the Cock shall him destroy.


Danubius, and the Rhine, Two eminent and principal Rivers, are put for the
Country where they run, viz. Germany; so the Rhone and Loire for France: A
figurative manner of Speech, common among Poets. I could give several
Instances; but let one (out of Martial) suffice, Lib. 10. Ep. 26. to Varus,
that Eminent Roman Commander; Spargere non licuit frigentia fletibus ora,
Pinguia, nec maestis addere Thura Rogis;
Sed datur aeterno victurum carmine Nomen;
Nunquid and hoc fallax Nile negare potes?
Thus Translated by Weaver.
We could not dew with Tears thy dying Face,
Nor thy sad Funeral Flames with Odors grace:
Yet in my Verse Eternized thou shall be;
Of That false Egypt cannot cozen Thee.
[Martial has it Nilus; Weaver, Egypt.]


The Great Turk is meant by the Great Camel; an Animal abounding in his
Dominions, and which he makes great use of in his Armies for Carriage. We read
of Three hundred of them, that swam over the Danubius, (at the late Seige of
Vienna) to the Christians.

By the Cock is meant the French King, Gallus in Latin. Here is a plain
Prediction; The French King is the Prince ordained by God, for the Destruction
of the Turk.

The same Author has Another.
Dans Foix enter, Roy cerulee Turban,
Et Regnera moins evolu Saturn,
Roy Turban Blanc Bizance coeur ban,
Sol, Mars, Mercury prez la Hurne.
I will give you Garenciere's Exposition, page 391. as follows. Though I am not
of his Mind, in Translating Moins evolu Saturn, viz. less than an Age; that
is, One hundred Years. Now, Saturn runs his Course in Thirty Years, or
there-about: But let us hear him.

Foix is a Country of France near Gascony; where (the Author says) a King, with
a Blue Turban, shall come, and shall Govern less than an Age; that is, One
hundred Years: After which, another King shall come with a White Turban, and
shall Conquer Bizance; that is, Constantinople.

The Blue or Green Turban is attributed to the Great Turk; and the White one to
the King of France. Thus Garencieres.

For my part, I should think Foix should be Foy Fides, the Land of Christendom:
For what the Great Turk should do in the little Country of Foix, I cannot
imagine: But he has held a Part of Hungary many Years, etc. Or, it may be, by
Foix he means France, (Pars pro Toto); for an Eminent Country it was. Heylin
does tell us, The Earls of it lived in a Condition equal to most Kings in
Christendom; That at one Time there were Four Queens of the Family; and, That
the latter Kings of Navarre, and present Kings of France descend from it. Be it
as it will, still the Rex Gallus must be the Cock of the Game, that must do the
Work.

If Notredamus be but as effectual in these Fore-tellings, as he was in the
Firing of London, and another Tragical Effect, Horresco ruminans, omitto
lubens, they will assuredly come to pass. You shall hear his Stanza.

Le Sang du Just, a Londres fera fault,
Brulez par foudre de vint trois le Six:
La Dame Antique cheorra de place haute,
De mesme Sect plusieurs seront Occis.
Thus Translated:

LONDON gets Guilt by Blood of one most Just;
In Sixty-six by Lightning is combust.
The Ancient Lady tumble shall full low,
And many of her Sect be slain, all Woe!
By the Ancient Lady is meant the Cathedral of St. Paul; and the many other
subordinate Parochial Churches, destroyed, are those of her Sect; her
Dominellae or Ancille, her Handmaids.

The Prophecies of Joachim say thus. The Turk shall be destroyed by Three
Nations: By the French, Propter bonos Equites, for their excellent Cavalry; by
the English, Propter bonos Marinarios, for their excellent Seamen; and by the
Venetians, Propter bonum Consilium, for their prudent Counsels. This Prophecy
is worthy of Remark; and still the French in the Van.

The Venetians very lately, Speremus influente, favente Deo, with their
Confederates, have begun to dare the Turk. No doubt, they proceeded upon good
Ground and Advisement: And they made good Preparations. But where is the French
Cavalry, and the English Mariners, to make up Joachim's Ternary?

I heard an honest Divine say, when the French made the great Inrodes into
Belgia; That certainly, this was the Man should, in a due Time, ruin the Turk:
But he was first to do wonderful things elsewhere, to give Proof of his
Conduct, Management and Success.

Vna dies Lotharos, Burgundos Hebdomas una,
Vna domat Batavos Luna; quid Annus aget?
Loraine a Day, Burgoigne a Week does gain,
Holland a Month; what may a Year obtain?
And that, if he did not in time endeavor such a Thing, (being a Great Second
Cyrus, see Isa. 45. Ver. 1, 2, 3.) he must expect ill Success, if not something
worse.

I know a certain Person (curious in Astrology, that, notwithstanding all these
wonderful Acts already gloriously performed, fears exceedingly, he will make an
End, though not so violent and bloody as Great Cyrus the First; yet lugubrous
and untimely enough.

For my part, I cannot (like the Cloak Party) furiously decry Astrology, being
a singular and innocent Science, befitting any Man of Parts above the Vulgar:
But I love to join Divinity with it. And therefore, I firmly believe, that as
the Sun and Moon (those great Lights) stood still in favor of worthy Joshua, (
Chap. 10.) and that the First of these went Ten Degrees backward, for a Sign to
Hezekiah, (2 King. 20.11. Isa. 38.8.) that all Malevolent Influences are
averted from this Great French Prince, for the Good of Christendom, and
Downfall of the Turk.

Ad Christianissimum Regem.
Baldwini solium, Caroli Titulumque memento:
Haec moveant animum Rex Lodovice tuum:
Christicolas placidae mandato Isa. 45.1, 2, 3.
Cyre quieti,
In Turcam validas vertito, Magne, manus.
Let Baldwin's Throne, and Charles his Title heat;
Thy Thoughts, by aim at These, become more Great
Great Cyrus, daign to give the Christians Ease,
And let thy Force the Turks alone debrize.
I have already mentioned, the French Monarch is become Potent in Shipping: But
he is not King of the English Mariners; which must make up the Ternary,
according to Joachim.

Strange Revolutions have happened in England, since the Year 1678. That
Generous Maximus Marinus, (mentioned in Day-Fatality, page 7.) once Great
Admiral of Arragon, and till the Year 1673. Lord High Admiral of England, is
now again, at length, Re-invested in all his Honors; and that, in spite of
that Crew, mentioned by Introductio ad Latinam Blasoniam, page 165. with
strange Prophetic Reflection.

He, I say, is Restored, influenced by a Divine Power and Favor, and the
Benevolent Rays of Fraternal Love; the Love of the Greatest Sea-Prince in the
World, Charles le Bon, and le Grand; One born for the Good of Christendom, to
make Amends for his Miraculous Restorement.

Pray God incline the Heart of the Great French Cyrus, the Heart of the Great
Charles of Great Britain; and then the French Cavalry, and the English
Mariners, (influenced by the Auspicious Genius and Success of Prince Maximus
Marinus, his Royal Highness) will be assistant to the Venetian Counsels and
Undertakings, already upon the Wheels.

To satisfy the Curious, I have added Geornitz Prophecy verbatim, as I find it
in Latin, Translated out of Persian:

Imperator noster veniet. Ethnici Principis Regnum capiet, Rubrum quoque pomum
capiet, and in suam potestatem rediget: Quod si septimum usque Annum
Christianorum gladius non insurrexerit; usque ad duodecimum Annum eis
dominabitur, domos aedificabit, Vineas plantabit, Hortos sepibus muniet,
liberos procreabit, and post duodecimum Annum, apparebit Christianorum gladius,
qui Turcam quaquaversum in fugam aget. Our Emperor shall come. He shall get the
Kingdom of the Gentiles Prince: Also, he shall take the Red Apple, and shall
bring it under his Subjection: And if the Sword of the Christians shall not
rise after the Seventh Year, he shall have Dominion over them unto the Twelfth
Year. He shall build Houses, plant Vineyards: Shall hedge about his Orchards,
shall get Children. And after the Twelfth Year, shall appear the Sword of the
Christians, which shall put the Turk to Flight every where.

It is to be noted, That the Sword of the Christians is principally understood
of the French; because he is commonly styled, the Most Christian King.

To Conclude, and shut up All: It is confessed, that in all Ages have been
Prophecies of Future Events; yet many times so obscure, as not to be
understood, or if understood, not to be believed. But truly, what is here
produced seems obvious to every Man's Understanding: And as to the
Qualification and Possibility of the Person, nothing can be objected; and who,
besides Him, can lay Claim to such Pretensions and Encouragements? Prove. 21.1.
God rules the Heart of Kings. Let all Christendom pray, That God would incline
the Heart of the Most Christian King, to so Pious an Enterprise.

Rex Lodovice tuam subito quam suscipe Spartam;
Debellare Scythas operum mihi creed tuorum.
Good Lewis, with all speed, begin thy Work;
Thy Work it is to subjugate the Turk.
FINIS.
-- Qui quondam Fata Dierum,
Signaque Cygnorum; scripsit hunc atque Libellum.

