Imprimatur

Liber hic (cui Titulus, A Theological Discourse of Angels, etc,)

Geo. Hooper R.D.D. Gilb. Arch. Cant. a sacris domesticis.
Sept. 30. 1677.
A Theological Discourse OF ANGELS, AND THEIR MINISTRIES. WHEREIN Their
EXISTENCE, NATURE, NUMBER, ORDER and OFFICES, are modestly treated of: With the
Character of those, for whose benefit especially they are Commissioned, and
such Practical Inferences deduced, as are most proper to the Premises. Also an
Appendix containing some Reflections upon Mr. Webster's Displaying supposed
Witchcraft.

By Benjamin Camfield, Rector of Aylston near Leicester.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for Hen. Brom, at the Gun, in S. Paul's Churchyard,
1678.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY Noble LORD and PATRON, John, Earl of Rutland, etc.
As also, To the RIGHT HONORABLE, John, Lord Roos, His Majesty's Lord
Lieutenant for the County of Leicester.
MAY it please your Honors to pardon the presumption only of this Address, and
I shall not offer at any Apology, either for the publishing or the dedication
of the ensuing Treatise; remembering the just and smart reprehension, which M.
Cato gave upon occasion to A. Albinus, for choosing rather to deprecate a fault
than to be without it: For who, ^. Gellius Noct. At. l. 11. c. 8.
says he, compelled you to commit that, which you should ask forgiveness of
before the doing it? -- There is not any thing of surprizal force, or
necessity, in a matter of so deliberate and premeditated a choice: and
therefore no excuse sufficient to palliate the transgre^sion.

The Subject here insisted on is neither trite in our Language, nor
unprofitable; and but too suitable to that Atheistical and degenerate Age we
live in, wherein the general disbelief of Spirits (Divine and Humane, Angelical
and Diabolical) may well be thought the (...), and (...), the ground and
introduction of all that irreligion and profaneness, which naturally enough
follows upon it. It Is a design, evidently comporting with the subtilty and
malice of our grand Adversary, to promote and countenance this Infidelity in
all the parts and branches of it, that he may pass himself unsuspected, whilst
he thus at once destroys the Object of our Worship and Adoration, roots up the
very Capacity of Virtue and Piety within us, quashes all the hopes and fears of
a World to come, and takes away the Ministers, which Providence has ordered
and commissioned for our present discipline, security, and comfort. Nor is the
success of these his most pernicious endeavors small and inconsiderable. Men
immersed in Body, and depraved with vicious Customs and the debaucheries of
sensual appetite and lust, are easily tempted; first to undervalue themselves,
and that excellent Being, the breath of God, which lodges in them; and t^ence
begin to doubt of or deny a Deity, and laugh at the Tales of Immaterial
Substances, as the Romantic and vain supporters of a fond and groundless awe
and superstition in the World. So they will do, it is like enough, at what is
said in the following Pages of Angels in particular. But then it may be worth
the while to observe, (for the caution and safety of all, at least, whose
vitals are not yet tainted with the infection) not only, how boldly they
contradict the many plain and repeated declarations of sacred Scripture, which
Christians certainly should reverence; but how unreasonably cross they appear
to the strongest current of Traditionary Belief among the best of Men.

Next, for the Method and way of handling what I have undertaken: It is not, I
confess, curious and affected, and yet not altogether careless, but such, as
the Text prefixed most fairly suggests; and may competently serve, I hope, both
to the satisfaction and ease, the edification and delight of unpr^judiced
Readers; and that the rather; because I have endeavored to represent every
thing according to its proper evidence, of certainty or probability only,
neither vainly dogmatizing in matters unrevealed, nor sceptically slighting of
any intimations given us by divine Revelation.

And now, for the Dedication: I cannot say the Book it self needs any other
Guardians than the Angels contained in it, however the Author may; and, as
there are none better qualified for his Protection than your Lordships, so
there is none to whom he could more cheerfully apply for shelter: But in this
his design, I am sure, is honest and dis-interested, being only to testify his
bounden Gratitude to your Honors, (under whose Patronage and good
encouragement this Treatise was conceived and finished, and he has lived for
fifteen years) and then to satisfy an innocent Ambition of publicly
subscribing himself.

Your Lordship's ever-obliged Chaplain, and most humble Servant, B. Camfield.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
FOr such, in course, I presume thou art; I had once thought to have passed
thee by, without this accustomed formality of a Salutation, the whole Discourse
being designed entirely for thy use and pleasure, and the matter wholly in
thine own power, whether thou will be at the little cost of purchasing and
labor of perusing it: And generally methinks the Epistle to the Reader
somewhat resembles that Trumpet-Officer before a Show or Playhouse, whose part
it is to Tole in Passengers, by relating to them, what wonderful Rarities are
to be seen within. Now I have not the vanity of commending mine own Wares, nor
yet the ambition of getting some popular Name, in Verse or Prose, to do it for
me, nor indeed any such conceit of the performance, as to be much troubled, if
thou shall think but meanly of it. All that I aim at therefore in this short
Preface to thee, is, to remove a prejudice from the Su^ject it self here
treated of. A generation of men there is, who would have all the talk and
enquiry about Angels and Spirits to pass for Old-wives stories, or at best the
waking-dreams of persons idly disposed; and those who have been taught to
believe otherwise in the main, are yet apt enough to look upon them as a nice
or barren speculation. Now, what pity and shame is it, when the holy Scriptures
have told us so much and plainly concerning this excellent sort of Creatures,
and the good turns we receive continually from their Attendance and Ministry,
and the admirable virtues we have to copy out in their Example; and we
Christians profess to expect the happiness of being made like unto them, and
blessed hereafter in their Society; we should yet continue so profane, and
skeptical, and indifferent in our belief, esteem, thoughts, and speeches about
them? I have said enough, I hope, in the following pages somewhat to abate, or
cure this distemper, in those that are capable of it; however, to prevent the
contagion from such, who are yet sound and free. And whether I may have
gratified or displeased thee and others in the attempt, I know not; but shall
have satisfaction sufficient, from the conscience of honest endeavou^s in the
case, to content and to please my self: And so I bid thee heartily, farewell.
Only here at parting, since it comes into my mind, I leave thee, at all
adventures, an old Verse to construe and chew upon. Carpere vel noli nostra,
vel ede tua.


A Table of the chief Contents.
THe Introduction and Partition. Page 1 Ch* 1. Of Angels in General. 3. Sect.
1. That there are such real Subsistences. 4. Sect. 2. That for excellency they
are above us. 6. Chapter 2. Of the Nature of Angels. 11. Sect. 1. Spirits. 12.
Sect. 2. Created. 22. Sect. 3. Intellectual and Free, Powerful, Agile, and
Immortal. 27. Chapter 3. Of their Number and Distinction. 35. Sect. 1. Of their
Multitude. Ibid. Sect. 2. Of their Order. 39. Chapter 4. Of the Offices of Angels.
49. Sect. 1. Their Ministry unto God. 50. Sect. 2. Their Ministry unto Christ.
61. Sect. 3. Their Ministry to the whole World, especially of Mankind. 66.
Sect. 4. Their Ministry to the Faithful. 78. Sect. 5. An Objection touching the
superfluousness of their Ministry removed. 100. Chapter 5. The Character of the
Persons, for whose good especially they are Commissioned. 104. Sect. 1. Heirs
of Salvation. 105. Sect. 2. A farther account of the same, and therein of
things necessary to Salvation. 109. Chapter 6. Practical Inferences from the whole.
118. Sect. 1. The Christians Privilege and Comfort. Ibid. Sect. 2. The
Christians Dignity, not to be despised. 123. Sect. 3. Why no more mischief done
in the Worl^; and why so much permitted notwithstanding the presidence of
Angels. 126. Sect. 4. No disparagement to any to Minister unto, and serve
others. 131. Sect. 5. Angels to be revered, but not adored. 135. Sect. 6 God in
and for them to be admired and glorified. 144. Sect. 7. Why and how the
Minist^y of Angels is to be obliged by us. 150. The Conclusion with Prayers.
163.
The Contents of the Appendix.
FOr the Reader's ease and benefit I have pointed to the chief Contents already
in the Margin, as so many rests and pauses for his thoughts, as here I present
him with a view of them together.

The Occasion and Scope of these Reflections. Page 169. The denial of Spirits a
step to Atheism asserted and justified against Master W. 171. Dangerous
Positions of Master W. against the Idea of a Spirit, and of God. 173.
Self-study and Reflection the right and ready method to the notion of Spirits.
176. Master W's Contradictions both about Body and Spirit. 177. The Humane Soul
excluded by him from his disquisition about Angels for three pretended Reasons.
178. This method of procedure unreasonable. 179. Master W. confounds
Imagination and Intellect, which elsewhere he knew well to distinguish. 180.
Master W. asserts the Incorporeity of the Humane Soul. 181. An examination of
his three Reasons for excepting the humane Soul from this enquiry. 183. Of his
First Reason. Ibid. A short Comment upon Genes. 2.7. concerning Man's Original.
184. Of his Second Reason. 186. An Explication and Vindication of Eccles. 3.18
-- 21. from Atheistical and profane Epicureans. 187. Of his Third Reason. 194.
Master W's Speculations about the Corporeity of Angels and how he blunders in
the stating of this enquiry. 195. The Critical point of the present
Controversy. 196. God a most simple and absolute Spirit, but yet not the only
Spirit. 197. Angels are not such Spirits in perfection as God i^, and yet truly
Spirits. 198. Mr. W. asserts Devils more spiritual than he allows other Angels.
199. His mighty Arguments against the Incorporeity of Angels examined and found
weak. 200. Rules and Laws of Bodies ineptly applied unto Spirits. 202. The
difficulty of explaining the manner of Things must not make us deny, what is
otherwise evident. 203. Some Texts of holy Scripture considered and vindicated
from Master W's Exceptions. 206. Saint Mark, 12.24. 207. 1 Cor. 15.44. 208.
Psalm. 104.4. Ibid. His clear Reasons against the Scholastic Interpretation of
this last Text proved defective. 211.
OF ANGELS AND THEIR Ministries.
Hebrews 1.14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for
them who shall be heirs of Salvation?


The Introduction and Partition of the ^nsuing Discourse.
THE chief scope and design of the Apostle in this Chapter, is to declare the
exaltation and preference of Christ Jesus above the Angels. To which purpose,
(not to lead you through the whole contexture) in the Verse immediately
before-going, he thus argues, Ver. 13*
But to which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit thou at my right hand,
until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool? So God had said expressly to this his
beloved Son, Psalm. 100.1 thereby to intimate that peculiar state of Royal
Majesty and Honor, whereto he had advanced him. But he never said the like to
any of the Angels; no not to the most excellent among them all: They are not
therefore Lords, like him, but Servants under him, for the good of his
Disciples. So much the Interrogation of the Text imports, with emphasis,
leaving the matter to be decided by the Reader's judgment, and making an Appeal
to every one upon it, as in a case known and granted.

Are they not all [that is, undoubtedly all the Angels are] ministering Spirits,
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?

Abstracting then from the coherence of the words, we will observe, for the
more orderly and profitable consideration of them, these six points.

First, The Persons spoken of [ they] the Angels, in the precedent Verse, as to
their Name [ Angels] and the certainty of their existence, [ Are they not?]

Secondly, Their Nature, [ Spirits.]

Thirdly, Their number and multitude, [ all] and therein their order and
distinction.

Fourthly, Their Function and Office, [ ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister.]

Fifthly, The Character of such, for whose good and benefit this their Ministry
is chiefly intended, [ for them who shall be heirs of salvation.] And,

Lastly, By way of Application, those practical Inferences, which are most
proper and pertinent to be made from the whole.

In which severals now that we may proceed with due success, I do here, in
compliance with the well-grounded piety of the Ancients, prefix the Prayer of a
Learned Divine in his Proem to Cases of Conscience about this very subject.

Lead us, O Lord our God, into the right way, Baldwin. in Proaem. l. 3. de cas.
consc.
we beseech thee, and direct our goings by thy good Angels; but command the
evil ones to be, as far as is possible, removed from us: Amen.

CHAP. I. Of Angels in the General.
I Begin with the Persons here spoken of. Angel is a Greek word made English,
and it signifies a Legate, Ambassador or Messenger employed upon another's
Errand. So of the Disciples of John the Baptist, whom he sent to enquire of
Jesus, whether he was indeed the Christ, it is said, [(...)] When the Angels,
or Messengers, of John were departed. Luke 7.24.
-- But the word is more restrainedly taken, both in holy Scripture, and our
common way of speaking, for a peculiar and divine sort of Messengers, certain
celestial Spirits made and commissioned and employed by and under God.
Concerning whom, all that I shall offer under this head, will be,

1. That there are such real Subsistences; and, 2. That they are of a Rank and
Degree above us; a more excellent sort of Beings than Men are.
SECT. 1. That there are such real Subsistences.
1. That there is such a Species of Beings, that there are such [(...),] real
and external Subsistences, and that they are not [ ^mia rationis] Notions only,
Creatures of our brain, Chimera's of our fancy, or impressions made upon the
imagination, or mere Dreams and Appearances, or Vis^o^s, or a Noise in the air,
as Hobbs P^^s. part 4. c. 25. Art. 9. Ie^^athan* c. 34. Tract. Theol. Pol. c.
4. p. 73.
some have represent^d; nor yet only certain Divine in^luences and
inspirations, or certain a^fections and dispositions in Men, V^rtues or Vices,
as H. Nic^olas, cited by Dr. More, Mist. of Godli^ess. B. 6. c. 17. s. 4. Vide
por^^^ Episcop. Instit Th^ol. l. 4. c. 2. Et Zanch. de Operib. Dei, part 1. l.
2. c. 2. E^ P. Ra^^ Comment. de F^de. l. 1. c. 6.
others have conceived; but true, personal and p^rmanent Subsistences, that
have of themselves a real, p^rfect, and actual Being.

The Sadduc^es say [(...)] that th^re is no R^surr^ction, neither Angel n^r
Spirit, Act. 23.8. They believed that there was a God, Grot. in loc.
(says Grotius) but nothing else besides, which was not perceptible by their
bodily S^nses. They looked not on Angels as really subsisting, nor on the Soul
of man as continuing after its separation from the body, and consequently
denied a Re^urrection. But the following words (as he w^ll observes) seem to
intimate their opinion of Angel and Spirit, Id. ibid.
as one and the same thing: The Pharisees confess both: [(...)] not making
three distinct particulars of the before-named, but two only; which is also
favored by the verse immediately succeeding [(...)] If a Spirit or ^n Angel
have spoken to him. -- Where those two words are equivalent.

It seems very strange now to conceive, That the Sadd^^^es should say, There
were no Angels or Spirits, whom all agree to have owned the five Books of
Moses, wherein are many evident Reports on Record of their Appearances and
Operations; and more wonder still, Antiq. lib 13. c. 18 cited by Dr. Templer in
his Idea Theol. Lev^ath. p. 135.
if what Josephus is said to relate, be true of them, that they received
[(...)] all the Scriptures of the old Testament, and rejected only [(...)]
unwritten Traditions. -- And therefore the Learned and Judicious suppose, that
their meaning was, not to deny, [ Angelos esse] that there had been and were
Angels, so called; Cameron in loc.
but only, [ Spiritus esse immortales, and per se subsistentes] that they were
immortal and self-subsistent Spirits, looking upon them but as certain
apparitions ^or a time, and such as vanished away, when their Embassy or
Message was dispatched.

And yet the whole Story of the Bible is a sufficient confutation of this vain
conceit also, which tells us those things of their Nature, Multitude, Order,
Ministries, Rewards and Punishments; from whence we must needs conclude them to
have a real, personal and permanent Subsistence. I will not go about to mention
the particulars here, because they will be plentiful enough in the following
parts of this Treatise. It shall suffice therefore to set it down, as a Point [
de Fide] clearly delivered in the Holy Scriptures, from whence we have all our
certain and distinct knowledge about the Angels, that there are undoubtedly
such Beings.

Maximus Tyrius enquires of those, who doubted of Socrates his Demon, Di^s*
xxvi.
whether ever they had read Homer speaking of the same thing under other Names,
as Minerva, Juno, Apollo, Eris, and suchlike, (...), as he calls them; not
that they were such, as described by the Poet, but that those Names imported
certain (...), assisting of excellent Persons both sleeping and waking: And
then he concludes his conviction thus; Ibid.
If once thou think that there are no such Beings, take notice that thou
must proclaim war against Homer, and renounce Oracles, and Prophecies, and
disbelieve credible Reports, and declare against Dreams (with their
Interpretations) And at last bid Adi^u to Socrates.

I may with greater Authority ask our Modern Sadduce^s, Whether ever they have
read the Book of God, and therein observed the many and various passages
concerning Angels set down at large? and seriously admonish them to beware in
time, how they oppose or dispute against Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles: In like manner as our B. Savior said to their Ancestors, Ye do err,
S. Matthew. 22.29. S. Ma^k^ 12.24.
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God: Or as S. Mark has it, Do ye
not therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the power of God?

SECT. II. That they are for Excellency above us.
I add (2.) That they are of a rank and degree above Men. Man is the Top of the
visible Creation, Psalm. 8.6.
To whom God has given Dominion over the works of his hands, as the Psalmist
witnesses. And therefore our B. Savior puts the Question, as to other
Creatures, S. Matthew. 6.26.
Are ye not much better than they? po^nting to the Fowls of the Air: And the
Apostle S. Paul, having mentioned a Law providing for ^ea^ts, comm^nts thus
upon it; 1. Cor. 9.9, 10.
Does God take care for Oxen? or, says he it altogether for our sakes? -- And
before them Job's Friends; Bildad, not without indignation, Job 18.^.
Wheref^re are we accounted as the Beasts? And Elihu positively, God our Maker
teach^th us more than the Beasts of the Earth, Chap. 35.10, 11.
and makes us wiser than the Fowls of the Heaven. With all whom agrees well
that of Ovid, Meta^orphos. l. 1.
Sanctius his animal, ment^sque capacius altae d^erat adhuc, and quod dominari
in caetera possit. Factus homo est. -- That also of Iuvenal, -- separat haec
nos (i. e Ratio) a grege mutorum, atque ideo venerabile soli sorti^^ ^ngemum,
divinorumque capaces, etc. Sat. 15. Man is no fort^^^nous, careless and
uncontriv'd piece of work, hundled up in haste, as Seneca has it; De Benef. l.
6. c. 25.
but such as Nature has none greater to glory of among her rarest and most
exquisite draughts. Cicero also to a like purpose: Animal hoc, providum, sagax,
multiplex, acutum, memor, plenum rationis and consilii, quem vocamus Hominem,
praecl^ra quadam condition generatum a summo Deo, etc. Lib. 1. de Legib. In
Pythag. Carm.
Hierocles places him between Heaven and Earth, as participant of both Lives,
the lowest of Superior, but the first of all Inferior Beings; and by the
possession of Virtue or Vice becoming by turns [(...)] a God, or a Beast. He
has indeed his Body in common with the Beasts; but his Soul and Reason with
the Gods, Dissert* lib. 1. cap. 3.
as Epictetus tells us. -- This briefly of Man's Excellency.

But yet no disparagement to him, the Angels are his betters. Psalm. 8.5.
Thou have made him a little lower than the Angels, says the Psalmist: which
our Apostle applies even to Christ too, Hebr. 2.7.9.
wi^h reference to that Mortal Nature of ours which he assumed. We may
therefore note our B. Savior's climax, when he speaks of the uncertainty of
the time of future Judgment: S. Matthew. 24.36.
But of that day and hour knows no Man, no not the Angels of Heaven. --
Where, if Angels were not supposed beyond Man, it had been ^lat and dull to
have added, -- no not the Angels of Heaven. And as they excel us thus in
knowledge, 2 S. Pet. 2.11.
so also in power and might. Whereas Angels, says St. Peter, which are greater
in power and mig^t. --

When the H. Scripture would set sorth the excellency of Manna, wherewith God
fed the Israelites in the Wilderness, above our Daily-bread, it calls it, Ps.
78.25.
Angels's Food: and St. Paul adds the Tongue of Angels, as a gradation beyond
that of Men; 1 Co^inth. 13.1.
Though I speak, says he, with the Tongues of Men and of Angels. And, to
express the beautiful and amazing luster of St. Stephen's countenance, when he
had spoke like an Oracle, it is said of him, ^^ts 6.15.
They s^w his face, as it had been the face of an Angel.

Hence it is, that the Name Angel is given as an honorable bearing to those,
whom God has taken up to the greatest Dignity among Men. Thus it is
communicated to the Chief Priest under the Law: Malac^. 2.7.
The Priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth: for he is the Messenger [or Angel] of the Lord of Hosts. And to the
Prophets: Judges 2.
The Angel [or Messenger] of the Lord that came up from Gilgal to Bochim is
supposed to have been some extraordinary Prophet. Haggai is called The Lord's
Messenger [or Angel] delivering the Lord's Message to the People. H^gga^ 1.13.
And Malachi, which signifies an Angel, is that Prophet's Name, whose Writings
conclude the Old Testament. Some indeed have thought the Author of that Book to
have been an Angel, and not a Man: But the Hebrew Rabbi's tell us, It was Ezra
the Priest and Scribe. Munster. in Malac^. ^.1.
Whence I^nathan the Chaldee turns the beginning of that Prophencie after this
manner: [ Onus ^^rbi Domini super Israel in manu Malachi, cujus nomen vocatur
Ezra Scriba.] The Burden of the Word of the Lord upon Israel in the hand of
Malachi, whose Name is called Ezra the Scribe. The LXX. read it [(...)] In the
hand of his Angel.

Again, it is given to John the Baptist, who was Greater than all the Prophets,
that went before him, the immediate Prodromus and Harbinger of our B. Savior:
Behold I will send my Messenger, Malach* 3.1.
and he shall prepare the way before thee. Which we have in S. Mark; S. Mark.
1.2.
Behold I send [(...)] my Angel before thy face. -- Nay, it is given to Christ
himself, Whose shooe-latchets he was not worthy to unloose. (...), as the Greek
reads that of the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 9.6. Verse: The Angel of God's presence,
Chapter 63.9. and, The Angel of the Covenant, as the Prophet Malachi styles him,
Chapter 3.1. (and the very Name (...), i. e. Gospel, has some relation hereunto)
concerning whom the Fathers, as well as many later Divines, interpret sundry
passages of Angelical Appearances in the Old Testament, as Precursorie types,
Just. Martyr Dial. cum Trypho^e passim. Novatian. de Trin. c. 26, and 27.
Athanas. contra Arrianos Orat 4. Chamier. Panstrat. Tom. 2. l. 20. c. 2. etc.
and Pledges of his future Epiphanie and Incarnation; [which I take occasion
here to advertise, once for all, because I shall hereafter wave the notice of
it.]

S. Paul uses it as an hyperbolical commendation of that transport of
affection, wherewith the Galatians at first entertained him: Gal. 4.14.
Ye received me as an Angel of God -- and our B. Savi^ur from Heaven bestows it
as a Title of Pre^minence upon the Chief Governors settled in the Christian
Church upon Earth, Rev. 2. and Chapter 3.
in his Epistles directed to respective Heads of the seven famed Churches of
Asia: to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus -- To the Angel of the Church in
Smyrna -- To the Angel of the Church in Pergamus, etc. Touching which I refer
the Reader to Dr. Hammond's learned Dissertations of Episcopacie, Diss. de
Episc. c. 4.4, and 5. and Vi^dic. S. 1, 2, etc.
and his Vindication of the same. -- Yea, it is a style beyond that of Apostle
or King, than which we know none greater among Men. Though we or an Angel from
Heaven preach any Gospel -- says St. Paul, Gal. 1.8. mentioning an Angel from
Heaven as the more exalted and eminent. And the Woman of Tekoah doubts not thus
to commend King David: 2 Samuel 14.17, 20.
My Lord the King, says she, is even as an Angel of God. And again, My Lord is
wise according to the wisdom of an Angel, to know all things that are in the
Earth.

To end this Argument, this is the Description of our future state of Glory and
Happiness, S. Matthew. 22.30. S. Mark. 20.26.
far beyond any in the present Life, that we shall be then (...)] as the Angels
of God in Heaven, and [(...)] like or equal to the Angels. In Pythag. Carm.
Hi^rocles uses the same word, with others that answer and agree to it,
[(...)] and Tertullian mentions [ Animam in Regno Dei reformatam and
Angelisicatam] an Angelisied state. De Resurr. ^. 26.
Now since our Ex^ellency, our highest and most perfect ^state is but to be as
the Angels, Ser. 1. of the Na^i^^ty.
they must needs be granted ^ar above us here, as Bishop Andrews well infers.
Nay, let me add one thing yet farther. Ps 8.5. -- 89.7.8.97.7.
The H. Scripture sometimes calls them C^ds, [Elohim] as Origin also notes: And
so Aristotle, and other Philosophers have also styled them; Contra C^^sum l. 5.
p. 233. Suarez. Metaph. Disp. ^5. S^ct. 1. D. August de Civi^. D^^ l. 12. c. 26.
meaning yet [ Minores and a summo Deo factos deos] l^sser and made-Gods, as
Plato speaks; or as Hesiod calls the He^o^s* (...).
[(...), S^mid^os] Demy-gods; or, as Se^^^^, [Inferioris notae] and from Ovid,
(de Plebe Deos) Petty and Under-gods, Epist. 1 11.
over whom the Supreme Deity is King: or (Populares Deos) as An^isthenes cited
by Lactantius, Lact. Iust^punc; l. 1. c. 5.
Popular and Plebeian Gods. -- Plutarch entitles a Discourse of his De Daemonio
Socratis; but Apuleius on the same Argument De Deo Socratis, whom he calls also
his Amicum Numen. Plato de^ines a Demon or Angel to be ((...)) a middle sort
of Being between God and Man; and Max. Tyrius to the same purpose ((...). --
(...), etc.) a Substance more excellent than Man, Diss. 26* 27.
but inferior unto God.

We have therefor abundant proof and conviction, That the Angels are a sort of
Beings transcendent unto us Men, the b^st of Men, and that in their best
condition upon Earth. Indeed the Apostle's way of arguing in this Epistle to
the Hebrews is a sufficient demonstration of as much: for he gives the proo^ of
Christ's Deity and exaltation next to God the Father by his being above the
Angels, chapter 1. and then expresses his great condescension to us mortals, in
that passing by the Angels, he took on him the seed of Abraham, and tasted
death for every man, chapter 2.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of Angels.
PRoceed we now, secondly, to enquire into their Nature; as they are here
called ((...)) Spirits: For this, as S. Augustine notes, Enarrat^ in Ps. 103.
is the name of their Nature, as the word Angel more properly relates to their
Office; even as Man, says he, is a name of the Nature, Soldier or Praetor of
Office. Hebr. 1.7.
And to this purpose we have it ver. 7. before the Text; Of the Angels, he
says, Ps. 104.4. J. Lipsius Physiol. stoic. l. 1. Diss. 20.
who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire. (...), an
immaterial Fire, as one of the Greek Writers phraseth it. God himself is the
one and only uncreated, and the Angels are created Spirits. Substantiae
spirituales, Apol. c. ^2.
as Tertullian also calls them, whatever he thought of their incorporeity.

Here brie^ly we must examine what a Spirit is, and then, what kind of Spirits
Angels are.

SECT. I. Spirits.
Not to search into the different significations of the word [ Spirit], as it
is sometimes taken, we mean by it here, according to the most proper and known
acceptance and use of it (which is the best rule of speech) An incorporeal or
bodyless Being, endued with understanding, will, and active power.

And whatever incompossibility, jargon or nonsense some haughty scorners have
talked of, in the Notion of an immaterial or incorpor^al substance, (as if the
words flatly contradicted and destroyed each other, Leviathan. c. 12. and 46.
Hum. Not. c. 11. Art. 4.
and were such as, however men put together, they could never have the
conception of any thing answerable to them) those, who have inured their minds
to a more sober thoughtfulness, and skill the difference between intellect and
imagination, find it as clear and distinct, and no whit more intricate,
perplexed, or difficult, than that which the ablest Philosophers can give us of
a Body: The immediate Attributes or intrinsic Properties of the one being as
plainly and easily intelligible, as of the other; and naked Essences we have no
knowledge of. Essence or Being is the common Term, under which all things are
represented to our minds, and we distinguish them only by their proper and
peculiar adjuncts or attributes, and from thence divide them into their
respective Classes, of Substances and Accidents, Dr. M^r^ of the immortality of
the Soul. l. 1.
[ entia per se and per aliud] material and immaterial, corporeal or
incorporeal, [ res extensa and res cogitans] or whatever else it is that others
choose to describe them by, for I list not here to enter upon that Controversy.
Contra Haeret. inter Eranistem and Orthodoxum. Dialog. 2.
Theodoret in his Dialogues has enough to serve my turn. Q. What are the
properties of the Soul or Spirit? A. To be endued with Reason, simple,
immortal, invisible. Q. What is proper to the Body? A. To be compounded,
visible, mortal.

Spirit stands opposed to Body: We read, when the Disciples were affrighted, S.
Luke 24.39.
supposing they had seen a Spirit, Jesus said unto them, Behold my hands and my
feet, that it is I my self; handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and
bones, as ye see me have. In the same Phrase as Homer speaks of the Souls of
the dead, Vide Grot. in loc.
-- (...). And to a like purpose the Platonist: The Natures of Demons are not
flesh, nor bone, nor blood, Max. Tyr. Dissert. XXVII.
nor any thing else that is corruptible and capable of dissolution or
liquefaction.

It is remarkably explained in the Nazaren's Gospel, Dr. Templer. Ide^ Th.
L^viat. p. 137. Dr. H. in loc.
cited by Ignatius and Eusebius [(...)] a bodyless Demon, or Spirit without a
body. And accordingly Dr. Hammond here paraphraseth it, [ Ye doubt or suspect
me to be a Spirit without a body: It is very I, body and soul together.

But lest any should here object, that in some Manuscripts the word is (...),
[which also we find elsewhere, S. Matthew. 14.26. and S. Mark 6.49.] a spectrum
or apparition, [though, I conceive, that supposes our Doctrine of Spirits]
they may please to note farther, how the Apostle S. Paul contra-distinguisheth
these two, [ Flesh and Blood] on the one side, Ephesians. 6.12.
and [ Spirits] on the other: For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, says
he, but against spiritual wickednesses, or wicked Spirits, as the Syriac there
has it.

A Spirit is a Being which we cannot touch with our hands, or see with our
eyes, as we do Bodies; which is not the object of our external senses, nor can
be pointed at with the finger, or pictured out to us in its proper nature,
there being nothing like it in the whole visible world of Bodies, and nothing
so near of kin to give us any sensible resemblance of it, as the wind, or
animal Spirits are, whose force and power we feel, but yet cannot behold either
of them. Whence probably [ anima and animus] were derived from the old Greek
[(...) and (...)]

But the most positive, best and easiest conception we can frame of a Spirit,
is certainly by reflecting upon our own Souls. 1 Cor. 2.11.
For the Soul of man is also a Spirit. The Spirit of man within him, opposed to
his body of Flesh. Gal. 5.17* 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Vid. Lact. de Opific. Dei, c. 20.
and Cic. in ^omnio Scipion.
And they are strangely out, who take the measures of man by his outward
appearance and Carcass only.

Solomon speaks of man's dissolution, with reference also to his original.
Eccles. 12.7.
Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was, and the spirit shall
return unto God that gave it. Agreeable to which are those excellent Verses of
Ph^cylides, (...) Inter minores Poetas.

(...)
(...).
i.e. Our Spirit is the Gift and Image of God. For we have our Body out of the
Earth, and as to that part all of us being dissolved into the same, become dust
again; but then Heaven receives our Spirit again, which came from thence. The
words of Lucretius do fitly enough express as much, provided only that we
construe them in a Diviner sense, than he intended; Cedit item retro, de terra
quod fuit ante, Lib. 2. de Not. Rerum.

In terras; and, quod missum est ex aetheris oris,
Id rursum coeli rellatum Templa receptant.
When our B. Savior had cried out on the Cross, Father, into thy hands I
commend my Spirit, S. Luke 24.46.
He gave up the Ghost, says the Text, that is ( emisit Spiritum) he sent forth
his Spirit: (and Ghost is the most proper word for a separated or departed
Spirit.) Accordingly we read of the Spirits of just men made perfect. H^br.
12.23.


Now the Spirit or Soul within us is the principle of all our thoughts and
knowledge, of all our will and choice, of all our Life and motion. These then
are the proper attributes of a Spirit, Understanding, Will, and Vital motion;
or selfactivity, and power of moving other things. And this notion we shall
find applicable both to God and Angels.

When we speak of God, we must think of nothing material ((...)) neither
dimensions, Max. Tyt. Diss. 1.
nor, color, nor figure, nor any other bodily passion. We may indeed define
him [(...), etc.] the most conspicuous Beauty, Id. ibid.
but not a beautiful Body. S. Ioh. 4.24.
He is a Spirit; (and the Spirit of Man his imperfect image.) And by so
affirming we not only exclude him from the number of visible, sensible and
Corporeal Beings, whose Understanding and Knowledge is infinite, who wills and
nills, chooses and refuses according to that infinite Understanding and
Knowledge, Balbus apud Ciceronem de Not. deor. lib. 2.
who has Life in himself, and acts according to his will and choice; a Being
of most sovereign wisdom, goodness and power. Such is the Idea of the most
excellent Spirit. Thus Anaxagoras defined him ( Infinitam mentem quae per
scipsam moveatur; Lactant. Instit. l. 1. c. 5.
) and thus he is, described by Cicero, (Men's soluta and libera, segregata ab
omni concretione mortali, omnia sentiens and movens.)

In like manner Angels are Spirits, that is, living and understanding Beings,
Vid. Auth. Quest. and Resp ad Oribod. apud Just. Martyr. p. 203.
capable in a more eminent way and manner than our Souls are, (by reason of
their bodily cloggs and impediments) of Knowledge, Will and Action.

The Soul separated from the Body is the clearest representation we can have of
a Spirit or Angel. Whence Bellarmin says very well, that an Angel is (Anima
perfecta) a perfect or complete Soul; L. de Ascens. mentis ad Deum.
and the Soul is (Angelus imperfectus) an imperfect and incomplete Angel. Only
the Soul of Man perhaps has that intrinsic habitude and inclination unto Body,
which the Angels have not. The Soul, says Dr. More, considered as invested
immediately with that tenuious matter which is her inward vehicle, Immortal. of
the Soul. l. 2. c. 17. S. 4, and 8.
has very little more difference from the aerial Genii ( or Angels) than a Man
in prison from one that is free; or a sword in the scabbard, from one out of
it; or a Man that is clothed, from one that is naked. A Soul is but a Genius in
the Body, and a Genius a Soul out of the Body.

Thales, Pythagoras, Plato, Plutarch. de placit. l. 1. c. 8. (...).
and the Stoics call these Beings [(...)] souly Substances, (if I may so
speak) and the Peripatetick School generally [ Formas abstractas and separatas]
so that we may pertinently enough style them [(...)] the most sacred Choire of
bodiless Souls or Ghosts. S. Chrysostom I am sure frequently names them [(...)]
bodiless Powers.

Hereunto well agrees the distribution which Apuleius gives us of Demons or
Genii; viz. such as were sometime in an humane body, and such as were always
free from the bonds of Bodies. [And so Plutarch, De defect. Ora^.
in the person of Ammonius the Philosopher, makes two sorts of them, Souls
separated from Bodies, or such as never dwelt in Bodies at all.]

Of the former sort he makes, De Deo Socratis.
1. The Soul of man, [ etiam nunc in corpore situs] even now in the body.
Whence some conceived, (...) dici, quorum demon bonus, i.e. animus virtute
perfectus est. [And so M. Antoninus often calls the Soul (...), and sometimes
(...), l. 2. s. 13. l. 5. s. 27. etc. and so others also speak, (...), h.e.
(...). Suidas ex innominato. Ibid.
] 2. The humane Soul [ emeritis stipendiis vitae corpore suo abjurans]
dismissed and parted from its Body by death, whom the ancient Latins, as he
says, called Lemures, Lares, Larras and Manes. [To which purpose also Max.
Tyrius tells us, (...). And again, (...) (...). Diss. XXVII. The Soul laying
down, or putting off its Body, becomes forthwith of a Man a Demon. And such as
these also, as Plutarch notes, they called Heroes: (...). De placit.]

Ibid.
But then for the latter sort he adds. There is yet a more excellent and noble
kind of Demons, than these two specified, [ qui semper a corporis compedibus
and nexibus liberi] which were always exempt from the fetters and ties of
Body; and of this sort and number, says he, Plato supposes every man to have
a select witness and keeper. And these he desines to be [ Genere animalia,
ingenio rationabilia, animo passiva, corpore aerea, tempore aeterna. A
Definition I shall not stay to examine; De civit. Dei l. 8. c. 16.
Saint Augustine suf^iciently exagitates and quarrels with it, and especially
for ascribing to them those passions which arise in us from folly or misery, B.
Fulg^nt. ad Thrasymund. l. 3. de passione Domini p. 553. and iterum p. 555.
with whom Fulgentius consents in the same particular.

But I have offered enough to explain the notion of a Spirit [and so of Angels]
from a reflection upon our own Souls; which was the thing I aimed at.

They pass, it is true, sometimes in Scripture by the name of men: Thr^e men
appeared to Abraham, Genesis 18. So at our blessed Savior's Sepulcher, Behold two
men in shining Garments, Saint Luke 24. Ovid has it of Jupiter himself; Et
deus humana lustro sub imagine terras.

And Homer (whom Apuleius in his Apology calls, omnis vetustatis certissimum
Authorem) relates of these lesser Gods. Odyss. (...).
(...)
(...),
(...).
That is, That in the habit of diverse Pilgrims they perambulate Towns and
Cities, and take inspection of the good and evil doings of men. Which calls to
my mind that of the Apostle; Hebr. 13.2. Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares.

But this was only, say some, because they assumed the likeness of men. In
specie virorum apparebant. And so the Devil, says Drusius, Drusius in Genesis 18,
is called Samuel, whose form he appeared in: and he quotes it for one of Saint
Augustine's Canons: [ Specie's rerum appellantur de nominibus ipsarum rerum.]
The appearances of things are called by the names of things themselves. And
whereas we read of the Angels eating, Genesis 19.3. the Jerusalem Thargum has it
[ and videbantur ac si ederent ac biberent,] And they seemed or appeared, P.
Fagius in Genesis 19.
as if they eat and drank. And so the Angel said to Tobit's Son and Daughter,
Tobit 12.19.
All these days I did appear to you, but I did neither eat nor drink, but you
did see a Vision. [ Sed ita vobis videbatur,] as the Latin renders it. De Civ.
Dei, l. 13. c. 22,
Saint Augustine indeed glosseth on it: Not that he imposed on the eyes of
Tobias and others, but that he did not eat in the same manner as they did, or
thought him to eat, to wit, out of a necessity of receiving nourishment or
bodily refreshment.

But Theodoret, having proved the verity of our blessed Savior's Body from his
feeding on Butter and Honey, his Mother's Milk and other meat and drink
agreeable thereunto, starts this Objection of Abraham's Guests, the Angels, and
answers it to this effect. If any one shall out of folly urge the nourishment
that was in Abraham's Tent, let him know that he speaks foolishly: For those
things seemed to be done; but were consumed in another manner, which he best
knows, Divin. Decret. Epit. c. quod Dominus susceperit corpus.
that consumed them. But if any one should also foolishly grant, that the
incorporeal nature was partaker of these Kates, yet he can never find hunger or
thirst there. -- I need not explain the contents of this censure.

It Is undeniable, that we find many things in Sacred Writ spoken of Angels,
which border upon Body. But then, we must know, it was the property of the Jews
Language, as a learned Man observes, Mr. Mede ^. 1. Disc. 7.
(indeed of all other) to give denomination to things unseen from analogical
and borrowed expressions of things visible* And here we may remember the saying
of Saint Augustine concerning them; De civit. Dei, l. 9.^.5.
[ Locutiones humanae etiam in eos usurpantur propter quandam operum
similitudinem, non propter affectionum infirmitatem.] They are sometimes clad
in the dress of our passions (as God himself is) to show forth a likeness of
working, but not of infirmity. As also the admonition of Saint Chrysostom, Hom.
4. de Dei natura.
that when we hear of the Seraphim and Cherubim turning away their Eyes, and
covering their Faces with their Wings -- we should not think that they have
Eyes and Faces; for this, says he, is the Figure of Bodies; but that the
Prophet does hereby signify to us their knowledge and virtue.

But after all, whether these Spirits, the Angels, may not yet for a time
really assume a Body, and make use of it; or whether they have not also some
corporeal Vehicles of their own, wherein they reside, of a more refined nature
and substance than any elementary matter we converse with, (such as Epicurus
calls his quasi corpus) I shall not dispute; so it be granted me, that they
themselves differ from them, as the Soul from it is Body, or the Inhabitant from
the House he lodges in. The supposition, I confess, of Vehicles does most
facilitate the account of their determinate locality, motion, and appearances,
and converse, yea, and the corporeal punishment expressly allotted in holy
Scripture to some of their number in the infernal flames.

And it cannot be denied, but that several of the Fathers have reputed them
after a manner corporeal: but then, it was chiefly [ comparative] in respect of
God, who is the most simple and absolute Spirit.

Invisibilia illa, quaecunque sunt, habent apud Deum and suum corpus and suam
formam, Tertul. adversus Praxeam s. 7. (...) -- (...), Damascen. Comparatione
Dei corpora sunt, nostri spiritus, Gregor. 1. Tom. 1. moral. in Job l. 2. c. 2.
quam distinctionem secutus est Beda, and alii. (...), Greg. Nazianz. (...),
sermon. 2. Vide Zanch. de operib. Dei, part 1. l. 2. c. 3. and Otho-Casman.
Angelograph. part 1. c. 3.

And to this opinion the second Nicene Council, under Constantine and Irene,
inclines, Vide Carranzae summam VII. Genesis Nicen. Council*
allowing God only to be perfectly incorporeal, but none of the creatures so ex
toto, though the Angels are there confessed to be not so grossly clothed, as we,
[ verum tenui corpore praeditos, and aereo ^ive igneo] and their chief reason
is, [ quod taliter circumscribuntur, sicut anima quae carne clauditur, whereas
God is infinite and unbounded.] But yet many of that Council consented not thus
much, as Carranza notes, being of the belief [ Angelos omnino esse incorporeos]
whom they of the Lateran Council seem to have followed. And so the Jewish
Rabbis conceived of them too, Ai^sw^rth on Genesis 1.1.
as Creatures that have form without matter or body.

Most certain it is, that they are a sort of Beings above humane Souls in their
greatest perfection; and yet we have sufficient evidence, that this lower rank
of Spirits within us are immaterial and incorporeal; [even from their known and
familiar operations, abstracting and self-reflecting thoughts; simple
apprehensions of notions Universal, Mathematical, Logical, Moral and remote
from sense; inferences and deductions from them compared and compounded in
propositions, syllogisms, etc. which I shall not here enlarge further upon.]
Lucretius himself, who asserts the Soul to be corporeal, is yet forced to
invent a fourth substance besides the wind, and heat, and air, which he cannot
find a name for, L. 3, de not. r^rum.
and therefore calls [ nominis expertem] and which is, as he says, [ anima
quasi animae] the Soul of the Soul. [As Aristotle was constrained to excogitate
a fifth essence, nomine vacantem, out of which the Soul was made, distinct from
the four Elements. Cicero 1. Tuscul.]

In a word, needs must the Angels (even considered with their Vehicl^s,
whatever they are) be of another nature from those bodily ^ubstances we are
acquainted with, when we read of a Legion of them together in one man; S. Mark
^.15.
and a Legion, as Hesychius computes it, is 6666.

SECT. II. Created.
That they were created by God, is evident from that place of the Apostle to
the Colossians; Col. 1.^6.
By him were all things created that are in Heaven and in Earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers; all
things were created by him, and for him: Theodore^. divin. decret. epit. de
Angelis.
where (as Theodoret well notes) passing over things visible, he more
distinctly and particularly mentions the Orders of Things invisible, whether
they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers. -- And to a like
purpose Theophylact. Theophylact. in loc. Psalm. 148.5, 6.


And from that of the Psalmist, who, when he had called upon the Angels by name
to praise God, as well as the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and Heavens, adds this
reason concerning them all in common, De Civit. Dei l. 11. c. 9.
(as Saint Augustine rightly observes) For he commanded, and they were created;
he has also established them for ever.

So also Justin Martyr in expos. Fidei de recta confess. p. 372, 373. [Who also
observes, that, when the Apostle had mentioned, Romans 8.38. Angels,
Principalities, Powers, etc. he adds, to make up the list complete, [(...)] nor
any other creature, thereby sufficiently intimating the Creation of all these,
id. p. 375.

And accordingly (as Theodoret further adds) we have them named first in the
Benedicite, or song of the three Children, among the Works of the Lord, which
are to bless, praise him, and magnify him for ever. -- From hence also they
are called Sons of God in holy Scripture; Job 1.6.2.1.3^.4. In Pytha^. Carm.
Diss. 1.
agreeably to which Hierocles styles the Heroes, (...), and Max. Tyrius gives
this as a Law or Maxim, universally acknowledged throughout all the World, That
there is one God the King and Father of all, and that the many Gods are the
Children and Offspring of this one God.

Hebr. 12.9.
Therefore is he named by the Apostle the Father of Spirits, viz. in a more
peculiar manner than of other Beings, they partaking most of his Image and
likeness. So Jupiter too among the Heathen Poets is often paraphrased by --
(...). -- Divum Pater atque hominum Rex, Sator Deorum. And the Angels in
Apollo's Oracle own themselves derived from him: Lactant. instit. l. 1. c. 7.
-- (...).

This their production by God is the foundation of their natural, necessary,
and perpetual subjection to him, dependence on him, and being employed by, and
under him: with reference to which also some apply that of Saint Paul to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.17. Dr. Ham, in Loc.
[(...)] King of the AEon's, or Angels. And, if so, we may expound Hebr. 1.2.
too [(...),] by whom also he made the AEons. [But I am rather of Theodoret's
mind, Dvin. Decret. Epit. de AEonibus.
that the word does not import so much [ aliquam subsistentem substantiam] any
distinct sort of Beings, as [ distantiam quae tempus significat] Time or Age;
and it is used in Scripture comprehensively for [ quicquid in saeculis unquam
extitit] the whole world: Hebr. 11.3. [ omnia quae facta sunt in tempore] as
Primasius has it, Vide Dr^sium in Hebr. 1.2.
[all things that were made in time.] To be sure that famous style of [ Dominus
Deus exercituum,] Lord God of Sabbath, or of Hosts, has a more special
reference unto these Beings, than to the Hebrew trained Bands, Tract. Theol.
Pol. c. 17. p. 280.
as a late Author applies it.

But now, at what time they were made, is somewhat dubious and uncertain. That
it was within the six days, is concluded, I think, generally, because in them,
as the Scripture says, God finished all his works, and after rested upon the
seventh, creating no new Species of Beings. Certain it is also, Tatian. orat.
contra Graecos.
that it was before the making of Man (and some conceive before the visible
Creation too) the Apostasy of a great part of them preceding Man's fall in
Paradise, which they contrived. Others place it upon the First days Creation,
when the highest Heavens are supposed to have been made with the Primogenial
Light, and with them these heavenly Inhabitants and Children of Light; and this
is conjectured the rather from that of Job, where the Morning Stars are said to
have Sang together, Job 3^.4.7.
and the Sons of God to have shouted for joy, at the laying of the foundations
of the Earth: which cannot be understood of the fixed Stars in the Firmament,
for they were created, after the Foundations of the Earth were laid, upon the
fourth day; but of the Angels, who are called, as was said before, the Sons of
God, and resembled here to Morning Stars for their brightness and glory, in
such a metaphorical or borrowed sense, as Christ is also called the bright
morning Star. Rev. 22.16.
The LXX indeed varies a little from our Reading; but then for the [ Sons of
God] puts expressly the word [ Angels] (...). when the Stars were made, all my
Angels praised me with a loud voice; which the Latin follows; and therefore
Saint Augustine infers upon it, [ jam ergo erant Angeli, De Civit. Dei l. 11. c.
19.
quando facta sunt sidera] That the Angels were certainly in being before them.

God most probably, first made these Spirits and then bodily Beings, and then
after united both together in Man, who is a complex of Spirit and Body, Council.
Lateran. 1. de Fide Catholica
according to that of the Lateran Council; [ Deum ab initio temporis utramque
ex nihilo condidisse creaturam, Angelicam and mundanam, and deinde humanam
quasi communem ex Spiritu and corpore constantem:] wherewith agrees the saying
of Damascen, Vid^ Lips. Physiol. Stoic. l. 1. Diss* 20.
That being not content with the contemplation of himself alone, he made the
Angels, the World, and Men to participate of his goodness and bounty; and it
was but meet (as he argues out of Greg. Nazianz.) that the intellectual
substance should first be created, and then the sensible.

To which I will only annex that excellent passage of Seneca, quoted by
Lactantius out of his Exhortations. Lactant. instit. l. 1. ^. 5.
[ Deus cum prima fundamenta molis pulcherrimae jaceret, ut omnia sub ducibus
suis irent, quamvis ipse per totum se corpus intenderat, tamen ministros Regni
sui Deos genuit:] When God laid the first Foundation of this most beautiful
Fabrique (the World) that all things might go under their respective Guides,
although he were everywhere himself present, yet he made the Gods [ i. e.
Angels] as Ministers of his Kingdom.

Moses, it is confessed, in the History of the Creation, takes not express
notice of them by name. Only they are thought by some included in Fiat Lux,
Genesis 1.3. Let there be Light. So Saint Augustine, who refers the Division too
made there between the Light and Darkness, De Civit. Dei l. 11. c. 19.
Exodus 4. to the difference between the holy and impure Angels, that is,
Angels of Light and Darkness: But by others rather in that of Chapter 2.1. Thus the
heavens and the Earth were finished and all the hosts of them. And in like
manner the Psalmist has it, Ps. 33.6.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth. Now the Angels are elsewhere styled, The host of Heaven, 1
Kings 22.19. or Heavenly host, Dr. Pearson on the Creed p. 53
Saint Luke 2.13. and the Rabbis call the upper Heavens, The World of Angels,
the World of Souls, and the Spiritual World.

SECT. III. Intellectual and Free, Powerful, Agile, and Immortal.
Now what kind of Spirits the Angels are, I will show farther in these four
particulars. I. That they are intellectual Spirits, endued with understanding
and Free Will, and of a vast knowledge. II. Of great power and might. III. Of
extraordinary speed and agility. IV. Immortal and such as cannot Die.


Of each of which succinctly.

First, That they are intellectual Spirits, [call'd (...) and (...) by Plato
and Plotinus, (...) by Psellus, Zanch, de oper. Dei, part* 1. l. 2. c. 1* Lips.
Physiol. stoic* l. 1. Diss. 18.
and (...) by others, and therefore also styled intelligentiae] endued with
Understanding and Free Will, being the offspring, of God, as has been said
already, and after his Divine Image in a more perfect manner and degree than we
Men are.

An undoubted proof and evidence of their Intellectual Being and Freedom of
Will, Damascen. de Orth. fide l. 2. c. 3*
or Choice together, we have in the Law given them by God. And that there was a
Law prescribed them is undeniable, in that we read of some of them, that
sinned, and by so doing, 2 S. Pet. 2.4. S. J^de 6.
fell from their first estate, and place of happiness; (of which I may have
occasion possibly to speak further afterward.) Now sin is evermore [(...),]
the transgression of a Law, and, where there is no Law, there c^^ be no
transgression. And God is said, not to have spared the Angels that sinned. Both
sin and punishment therefore suppose them Intellectual and Free-Agents: none,
but such, can take cognizance of a Law; and none but such deserve a severe
punishment, Apol. 1. p. 45.
as Justin Martyr tells us, giving an account of the most righteous doom both
of Men and Angels, from the liberty of Will wherewith God has furnished them.
Again, they are God's Messengers and Ministers, by whom he gave his Laws to the
Israelites of old, and revealed many things to his Prophets, [as shall be
declared in another place] which argues them sufficiently to be, as they are
termed, Intelligences, that is, understanding and spontaneous Beings.

And certain it is, Their intellectuals are much beyond the most improved of
humane kind. 'According to the degree of immateriality, D. Tho. part. 1. Q. 14.
Art. 1.
say the Schools, is the degree of knowledge. They have both a more excellent
quickness and subtlety of natural understanding, and a greater improvement made
of it. This seems intimated in the first Temptation. Ainsworth in loc.
Genesis 3.5. Ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil.] The Chaldee there says,
[as Princes,] and Ionathan's Paraphrase [as Angels.] -- And our blessed
Savior, as I before suggested, plainly supposes a greater measure of
knowledge in them, than in Men, when he says, Of that time knows no man, no,
not the Angels -- Saint Matthew. 24.36. -- And [ according to the wisdom of an
Angel] is a Standard of the highest elevation, 2 Samuel 14.20.

The Ancients called them (...), i.e. from their knowledge. Hierocles in
Pythag. Carm. Lactant. instit. l. 2. c. 15. D. Aust. de Civ. Dei, l. 9. c. 22.
Hence the Author of Hesiod's Allegories calls Aristotle (...), h. e. maximae
sapientiae virum, and Plutarch in his Book (...), calls Plato by the same name,
whom others styled Divine; quasi quendam Philosophorum Deum, Cicero 2. de not.
Deorum. And Homer is by many called (...), [ propter admirabilem scilicet
multarum rerum cognitionem.] And Proclus will have the word (...) to be used in
diverse respects; 1. God alone, says he, is [ ipsa essentia (...),] h. e. omnia
sciens and omnibus prospiciens. Whom Plato likewise calls (...). 2. Angels are
so [ comparatione,] because they do proxime ad Dei scientiam accedere, idque
natura sua. And then, 3. The Soul of Man is so [ habitu] by virtue of its
acquisitions, Zanch. de oper. Dei, p. 1. l. 2. c. 1.

Their faculties and capacities are abler and larger than ours. Revel. 4.6.
They are [ undique oculati] full of eyes, before and behind. They are more
privy than we to the Almighty's Councels, Standing in his presence and
beholding of his face. And then their time for observation and experience has
been much longer, even from the first of the Creation, which must needs make a
vast addition to the treasure of their knowledge, always growing and increasing.
For with the ancient is wisdom, Job 12.12
and in length of days is understanding.

And yet their knowledge is not infinite and boundless, but limited and
confined. Some things are hidden from them, as the Day of future judgment. Some
things are proper and peculiar to God only to know, as the secrets of men's
hearts, and those future contingents which depend upon the free will and
determination of reasonable creatures. The Angels, we presume, have a deep and
searching (...), or skill of guessing beyond the ablest Sons of Art, (that are
most versed in Natures Secrets, and the History of the World) and so can
readily foretell such things as necessarily depend upon certain natural causes,
though to us unknown, and make shrewd conjectures of other matters. But the
certain foreknowledge and prediction of things to come, which are purely
voluntary and contingent, must be reserved to God himself, who sometimes makes
his appeal thereunto, as that which is not communicable to any other besides:
Isa. 41.23.
show the things that are to come hereafter, says he, that we may know that ye
are Gods. Whereto agree (...) notable saying of Pacuvius, Nam si qui, quae
eventura, praevideant,
A. Gell* Noct. At. l. 14. c. 1.
Equiparent Iovi.


As to the distinct manner of Angelical knowledge, natural or revealed, [ per
suam essentiam, per species vel imagines a Deo inditas -- nec ratiocinando, ut
nos, sed magis simplici intuitu;] or the way of communication which they have,
either among themselves or unto mortals; their tongues and language, [whether
it be only voluntatis actu and imperio, as in God to will is to effect, and our
inward operations and bodily motions much depend on the nutus, inclination and
determination of the will,] it is somewhat beyond our present dull apprehension,
who dwell in clay, and therefore the inquiry after it fit to be respited, [
donec Elias venerit, as the Jews speak, or] to the other World. Wisd. 9.16
Hardly do we guess aright at things that are upon Earth, (as the Wiseman
observes) and with labor do we find the things before us; but things that are
in Heaven, who has searched out? De Oper. Dei part. 1. l. 3. c. 5 and 6.
And, as Zanchie says, none but fools will be bold and peremptory in defining
this matter, Quid enim opus, ut haec atque hujusmodi, affirmentur, vel
negentur, vel definiantur cum discrimine, quando sine discrimine nesciuntur? ut
D. August. optime, Enchirid. c. 59.

Secondly, The Power and Might of these Spirits is great and considerable.
Spirit is a word that connotes Power, as Flesh does Weakness. So it is said of
the Egyptians, Isa. 31.3*
They are Men and not God, and their Horses Flesh and not Spirit. And the
Angels are said, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. Revel. ^.2 Ps. 103.26. 2 S. Pet* 2.11.
not only to be [ mighty] and [ strong;] but to [ excel in strength] or to be
[ mighty in strength] and by Saint Peter, as I showed before, described with
this attribute of preference unto men, [(...)] a being greater in might and
power.] Hence are they called [God's Host.] When the Angels of God met Jacob,
he said, This is God's host, and he called the name of that place Mahanajim,
Genesis 32.1, 2.
i. e. Two Hosts or Camps; for the word is of the dual number, as P. Fagius
notes: and some of the Jews, he tells us, Vide Munster. and P. Fag. in loc.
refer it to Jacob's Host or Company that he had with him, and this Host of
God, which met him there; but others of them to two Hosts of Angels there
meeting together, the one that guarded him out of Mesopotamia, and the other
came out of Chanaan to receive him as their charge upon his return; it being a
common opinion among them, that certain Angels are deputed to every Province or
Region, of which more, (...), hereafter. Whatever there be in this Comment,
there is no doubt, says Saint Augustine, but the Hosts, which Jacob saw,
Quaest. super Genes.
were a multitude of Angels, called in Scripture the heavenly Militia or Host
of Heaven. And they are indeed a puissant and mighty Host, resembled elsewhere
to Horses and Chariots of Fire, 2 King. 2.11. -- and c. 6.17. You may guess at
their strength a little by their exploits on Record, One of them slew all the
firstborn in Egypt both of Men and Cattle in a night. Exodus 12*23.29.
One of them in another night destroyed all Sennacherib's formidable Army to
the number of an hundred fourscore and five thousand. 2 Kings 19* 35. Dan. 3.
One of them restrained the flames of that raging fire into which the three
Confessors were cast, so that it touched not so much as their garments, though
it devoured their Executioners. One of them stopped the mouths of the hungry and
ravenous Lions from seizing upon Daniel in their Den. Chapter 6.
One of them smote off Saint Peter's Fetters, and caused, not only the
Prison-door, Act. 12.
but the Iron-gate of the City to open to him. -- Not to give any further
instances, Sermon. 2. de Pasch.
It was a saying of Luther's, [ unus Angelus potentior est quam totus mundus]
One Angel is of greater power than the whole world beside. But yet all their
power is subjected unto God, and nothing, if compared with his Omnipotence.
They can do nothing but what he pleases; [ nec est in Angelis quidquam nisi
parendi necessitas] and therefore in the same place, Lactant. Instit. l. 2. c.
17.
where they are acknowledged by the Psalmist to excel in strength, they are
said also to do his commandments harkening unto the voice of his word.

III. Their agility, speed and swiftness is extraordinary, moving like
lightning from one end of Heaven to the other; compared therefore to a flame of
fire, P^* 104.4.
which also penetrates the hardest Bodies. Hence are they represented to us [
alati] with wings to fly, Isa. 6.2. [In the same sense as Wings are attributed
to the Wind by the Psalmist, V. 3. Fulminis ocyor alis. (...), l. 1.
and by Poets to the Thunderbolt.] And so the Heathens feigned Mercury [(...),
as Hesiod calls him, the nimble Angel or Messenger of the Gods] to be winged.

This their quickness and agility in motion proceeds from their spiritual
nature, which is not subject to weariness, heaviness, or fainting, with the
like infirmities, which necessarily attend Bodies; nor obstructed and hindered
by external impediments in the way, as Bodies are; and so they need not such a
space of time, neither to pass in, as Bodies do. And, besides this, it is much
helped forward in the good Angels by their promptitude and readiness,
propensity and zeal to dispatch the errand and Ministry, upon which they are
sent and employed. It Is not here [ Timor,] but -- [ Amor addidit alas.]

Lastly, that I be not tedious, They are Immortal and such as cannot Die.
(...), l. 1*
(...), or the Immortal, is used absolutely by Hesiod for their name; and
(...), The immortals of Jupiter. [In like sort as we use [Mortals] for [Men]:
So Homer (...), to which also he adds an Epithet of the same importance --
(...).] This follows too from their being Spirits, and so not having within
themselves a principle of corruption, nor being liable to destruction from
other created Power: For nothing is so immortal as not to be annihilable by
God, and destroyed by that power, which at first produced it. As to him
therefore all things are mortal; and in this sense he only and no other has
immortality, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 6.16. For he only is absolutely
immutable, and has [ omnimodam necessitatem essendi, as the Schools speak] an
every-way necessary Existence; and all other Beings have an essential
dependence upon him, and so a possibility of ceasing to be with respect to his
Will; nay I may add a necessity of not-being, when he pleases. Hence possibly
the Angels are called by Max. Ty^ius [(...)] Immortals of the second Rate;
Dissert. xxvi.
and Damascen puts it into his Definition of Angelic Nature, [(...)] receiving
by Grace a natural Immortality.] It being a known maxim of his, [(...),]
whatever was made is also mutable.] -- And with this interpretation it may be,
we may somewhat qualify that of Tatianus concerning the Soul of Man, Orat.
contra G^^ecos.
[(...),] That it is of it self mortal, but yet in a capa^ility of not dying:
The rather because he accuses Aristotle, Ibid.
[ quod (...),] for rejecting or impeaching the immortality of the Soul.
Dialog. 3.
But this by the way. -- Theodoret decides the matter well: God, says he, is
properly immortal, for he is so essentially and independently; but Angels and
the Souls of Men hold of him, and must conse^uently own their immortality as
his gift.

But yet ^arther; Spirits, as I said, have not that principle of corruption
within themselves, which Elementary Bodies have, nor are they liable to a
pernicious and destructive violence from Creatures without, as our Life is
sometimes from the meanest and most inconsiderable. Fear not them that kill the
Body, S Luk^ 12.4.
says our blessed Savior, and after that have no more, which they can do; are
at their ne plus ultra. The Soul or Spirit is [(...)] quite out of their reach:
kill that they cannot, but only manumit, and set it free. And, that the Angels
are such Spirits, as cannot Die, is sufficiently intimated, when this is made
the demonstration of our immortality, who shall be raised hereafter, [and
consequently our not eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage then,
which are the appendag^s of this mortal decaying, and perishing state on Earth.
S. Luke 20.34.35, 36.
] The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage; but they, which
shall be accounted worthy to attain that world and the resurrection from the
dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage, neither can they die any more;
For they are equal unto the Angels. And therefore the Apostle Saint Paul calls
the Body too, that is raised up in incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.44.
(...), a spiritual Body.

But thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the Nature of Angelical Spirits,
so far as we understand it, Vid. P. Rami praelect. in somn. scipionis, p. 574.
De Orthod. Fide ut ante cit.
who skill but little exactly and distinctly of our selves, whereby we conclude
of them; and therefore, may add safely and modestly, [without the danger of
Skepticism in the Case,] as Damascen does in the close of his Description of
these Beings, (...),] That God alone, who made them, knows comprehensively the
kind and limits of their Being.

CHAP. III. Of their Number and Distinction.
THirdly, We pass on next to their Number and Multitude, and under that Head to
treat somewhat of their Distinction and Order. For the Apostle refers to all of
them, [(...),] Are they not all --

SECT. I. Of their Multitude.
The Angels are many. Consider them, Vid. Po^phyr* de Abstin. l* 2. s. 37*
as they are divided now into two sorts, Good and Evil, the Angels that stand,
and the Angels that fell, you will find very many, a great number, under both
Heads.

The Scripture of the O^d Testament is somewhat silent in relating to us the
manner of the fall of Angels; though it evidently enough suppose it, and refer
to it. But in the New we have more express and frequent mention thereof. Our
blessed Savior speaks of the Devil as a murderer from the beginning, S. I^h^
8.44.
who abode not in the truth, a Liar and the Father o^ Lies. 1 Ep. 3.8.
Saint John also says, The De^il sins from the beginning. [And the wo^d
Devil includes all the Apostate Spirits, who are sometimes called plurally
Devils, Saint James 2.19. and sometimes more distinctly* The Devil and his
Angels.] Saint Peter puts their sin and punishment together: 2 S. Pet. 2.4.
If God spared not the An^els that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and
delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto Judgment. S. Jude 6.
-- And in like mann^r Saint Jude; The Angels, which k^pt not their first
estate, but left their own habitation, (...) has res^rved in chains under
darkn^ss unto the judgment of the great day. -- All without question innocent
and holy at the first, being made by a good and holy God; but some of them in
the abuse of their liberty, or free will, prevaricating and rebelling against
their Maker and Sovereign, were thereupon cast down from the Regions of Light
above, and left under an irreversible sentence of condemnation. But these
Devils were not such by Nature or Creation, Divin. Decret. Epit. de Diab. and
Daemonibus. Vide Lips. Physiol. Stoic. l. 1. Diss. 20. O^hocasm. Angelogr. p.
2. c. 1. Divin. Decret. Epit. de Ang^lis.
as the Manichees and Priscillianists taught of old, but by a voluntary
degeneracy. Theodoret conceives it sufficiently demonstrated from the goodness
of their Maker, and the righteousness of their Judge. How, says he, could he be
called good, were he the creator of vice? or, how just and righteous, should he
punish a nature, which could do no good, and were engaged by him in a necessity
of sin?

Many things are said by the Fathers of their Fall, or Sins in particular, as
Pride and Envy, etc. nay, and by some of them, lust, applying to that purpose
Genesis 6.2. But Theodoret, whom I just now quoted, censures that opinion for a
piece of gross ignorance and dotage.

I will not digress further into this speculation: from hence now is the
distinction of good and evil Angels; and there is an Host of each, Michael and
his Angels, and The Dragon, that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, and
his Angels, Rev. 12.7.9.

The one sort are called, signanter, The Angels. S. Matt. 4.11. Act. 5.19. S.
Matt. 25.31. and 24.36. 2 Cor. 11.14. 1 Timothy 5.21. S. Luke 8.2 9.42. 2 S. Pet.
2.4. S. Matthew. 25.41. Eph^s. 6.
Angels of God. Holy Angels. Angels of Heaven. (From their proper (...), Seat
and Habitation) and in the same sense* Angels of Light. The elect or choice
Angels. -- The other (...), Evil Angels. Wicked and unclean Spirits. The Angels
that sinned. The Devil and his Angels. The Rulers of the darkness of this
World, etc. Of whom I shall say little more, but that their number is supposed
great and formidable, by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.12, and we read of a Legion of
them in one Man, (as has been intimated before also) Saint Mark 5.15. and our
Savior insinuates diverse sorts among them, when he says, This kind of Devils
goes not out, but by fasting and prayer, Saint Matthew. 17.21.

But our comfort is, that the good Angels exceed them, most probably, in
number. [This Eustachius collects from, Metaphys. p. 4. Q. 4. Part 1. Q. 63.
Art. 9.
Revel. 12.4. where the Dragon is said to draw with him, The third part of the
Stars of Heaven; and Aquinas from 2 Kings 6.16. which he expounds de bonis and
malis Angelis. They that be with us are more than they that be with them.] To
be sure, in wisdom and strength; for [(...), Aristot.
] Wickedness does naturally debase, impair and weaken the powers and faculties;
and as the good have the increases of divine grace, so the evil are in chains
and bonds; Dan. 12. Revel. 12. Tobit. 8.3. Revel. 20.1, 2.
and we never read of a conflict between them, but the good come off
conquerours. Our blessed Savior mentions more than twelve legions, [that is,
by computation 79992. S. Matthew. ^6.53.
] Think thou, says he, I cannot pray to my Father, and he shall presently
give me more than twelve legions of Angels. Whereas we read but of one legion
of the evil ones together.] The Chariots of God (says the Psalmist) are twenty
thousand, even thousands of Angels, Ps. 78.17. The Margin has it, even many
thousands of Angels. And in the Prophet Daniel we have mention of [ myriades
myriadum] Thousand thousands ministering to God, and ten thousand times ten
thousands before him, chapter 7.10. And so again in the Revelations: Many Angels
about the Throne, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands. A certain and definite number for a vast but
uncertain. Our Apostle to the Hebrews therefore speaks of them more
indefinitely, as not to be counted up. An innumerable company of Angels, chapter
12.12. So we translate and English; but the Greek is only [(...),] Myriads of
Angels; in like manner as we do elsewhere, [(...),] an innumerable multitude,
Saint Luke 12.1. They are, as has been said, God's Host; I^b 25.3.
and Bildad asks the question, Is there any number of his Armies? We may sooner
reckon up the Stars in the Firmament, than number out those Morning-Stars.

Orpheus it seems, counted upon three hundred sixty and five, [as many as there
are days in the year.] Hesiod three Myriads, ^Eps. (...). l. 1.
(...),
(...).


Lactant. instit. l. 1. c. 7. Max. Tyr. Diss. 1
But, as Lactantius replies upon the one, so Max. Tyrius upon the other, they
are more than so, they are innumerable.

Pythagoras taught, That all the Air was full of them; and the like Apuleius
delivers out of Plato, De Deo Socratis. And Suarez thinks, Metaph. Disp. 35. s.
1.
that Aristotle referred to these Beings, when he commend^d that of Thales,
[omnia esse Deorum plena,] That all places abound with Gods.

Some of the Fathers, D. Aug. and Hieron. Vide Zanch. de Operib. part. 1. l. ^.
c. 13.
from the Parable Saint Luke 15. have reckoned their number compared with
Mankind, as ninety-nine to one.

But Part. 1. Q. 50. Art. 3.
Aquinas concludes, That these Immaterial Substances do incomparably exceed all
the Material in their Multitude.

SECT. II. Of their Order.
Now in this vast multitude there must needs be a settled Order, which is the
Cement of all Society, and that alone, which distinguishes it from a confused
heap. And so the holy Scriptures sufficiently declare; though, what that Order
is in particular, we are left to seek, and must not be over-peremptory in
determining beyond what is written.

The very fallen Angels retain yet some Order among them, without which the
Kingdom of Darkness it self could never stand, Saint Matthew. 12.26. There is, as
has been said, The Devil and his Angels. The Dragon and his Angels. Lacta^t.
Instit. l. 2. c. 15. Vid. D. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 11. c. 15. and Zanch. de
Operi^. Dei, part. 1. l. 2. c. ^.
Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, ver. 24. Some chief Devil whom Trismegist
styles, (...), called elsewhere Satan, and the Prince of the Power of the Air*
Ephesians. 2.2. and thought to be that Lucifer, spoken of by the Prophet, Isa.
14.12. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the Morning! Which,
however it be understood there of the King of Babylon, may yet be judged to
compare his sudden and miserable fall to that of the Ringleader among the
Apostate-Angels; whereat our blessed* Savior is conceived to have glanced too,
when he said, Saint Luke 10.18. I beheld Satan falling from Heaven like
Lightning. Agreeably to this exposition also August. Steuchus, Id. l. 4. c. 2.
Bishop of Eugubium, writes, that those evil Spirits were called by Empedocles
[(...),] and Rhodiginus thinks that Pythagoras meant the same, when he taught,
[ animam factis alis e coelo labi.]

We cannot doubt then but there is Order much more among the good Angels. They
are, to be sure, [ acies ordinata] a well-ordered Host. We read expressly of an
Archangel, 1 These. 4.16. that is, [ Angelorum princeps] a Chief or Leading
Angel; and of Michael the Archangel by name, Saint Jude 9. Michael and his
Angels, Revel. 12.7. And this Michael is said elsewhere to be [ u^us e
principibus primis,] Dan. 10.13. One of the Chief Princes; which intimates
plainly that there were others of them besides; [ seven in number, says
Clemens Alexandrin. S^rom. 6.
which is also favored, not only by Tobit 12.15. but Zech. 4.10. and Revel. c.
1.4. -- 4.5. -- 5.6.] This Michael, it may be, General of the Host, bearing in
his name a Proclamation of Divine Glory and Majesty; for so it is interpreted,
[who as God!] -- And then we read also of Gabriel, the mighty Gabriel [a strong
man of God] as his name imports. He was sent to Daniel to make him understand
the Vision, Dan. 8.16. -- 9.21. And after to Zacharias, to whom he said, I am
Gabriel that stand in the presence of God, Saint Luke 1.19. And then a
Commissioned Ambassador to the blessed^Virgin, ver. 26, 27.

These two are the only names upon Record in the Canonical-Books, [ Michael and
Gabriel.]

But four others we have in the Apochrypha, which is one of the best Registers
next of Jewish Belief and Traditions.

Raphael [ i. e. Physic of God] a divine and heavenly Physician, Zanch. de
Oper. Dei part. 1. l. 3. c. 1.
sent to heal Tobit and his Daughter in Law, and to bind Asmodeus the evil
Spirit, Tob. 3.17. -- 12.14. who says of himself, I am Raphael, one of the
seven H. Angels. --

Vriel, [ i. e. Light of God] sent unto Esdras, to declare and manifest his
ignorance in God's Judgments, 2 Esdras 4.1.

Ieremiel, [ i. e. Mercy of God] called an Archangel, 2 Esdras 4.36. And

Salathiel or Sealthiel, [ i. e. asked of God] styled the Captain of the
People, 2 Esdras 5.16.

These are supposed to have been names of particular Angels of some special
note and eminence among the rest; and the Hebrew Doctors have many more of
them, as I may take occasion, possibly, to touch hereafter.

Two other words yet there are in Sacred-Writ, which seem to denote certain
Orders among them, [ Cherubim and Seraphim.]

Cherubim] that is, Angels of Knowledge, as Saint Hierom interprets the word.
Comment. in Ezech. 28. Zanch. de Oper. Dei part. 1. l. 2. c. 1. P. Fagius in
Genesis 3.24.
But others from Cherub, a Figure or Image; others from the Letter Chi, a note
of Similitude, and a Chaldee word, which signifies [ puerum and juvenem] a
Youth; and so they were usually represented in the shape of a Young Man with
Wings: of a Man, to show them to be intellectual creatures; of a young Man, to
express their vigor and strength; and with Wings added, to declare their
agility, and dispatch. -- These we read, were placed at the East of the Garden
of Eden with a flaming-Sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the
Tree of Life, Genesis 3.24. And their Figures were appointed over the Mercy-Seat
in the Tabernacle and Temple, and on the Doors and Walls, Exodus 25. 1 King. 6.
and we meet with them again in the Prophet Ezechiel c. 10.

Seraphim, that is, Angels of Zeal, [ Angeli forma ignea, says Grot.]
described, Each of them with six wings, and crying one to another, holy, holy,
holy, Isa. 6.2. Their name is from an Hebrew Root, which signifies to [burn]
and so they were called, possibly, from their touching the Prophets Lips with a
burning-Coal taken from the Altar, ver. 6. or else, more generally, from their
ardent-zeal and flame in the executing of God's will and serving of him;
according to that of the Psalmist, Who makes his Ministers a flame of Fire,
Ps. 104.4. cited by our Apostle, Heb. 1.7.

In the New Testament we may observe, how upon our blessed Savior's Birth, The
Angel of the Lord [probably, the Angel Gabriel, who was sent before to
Zacharias and the Virgin] proclaims the joyful news, and suddenly, says the
Text, there was with that Angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God,
-- Saint Luke 2.10, 13. singing their Christ-Mass Carole together, and
following of him as their praecentor and chief of the Choire.

The Apostle Saint Paul to the Colossians mentions the Angels under four
distinct Appellatives, c. 1.16.

(...).
Thrones,] which are royal Seats for Kings and Monarchs in their magnificence
and glory.

(...).
Dominions,] or Lordships.

Principalities,] connoting special and peculiar Jurisdiction.

(...).
Powers,] such as have right to execute Authority by God's appointment, and not
his bare permission only.

To which we may add,

Mighty,] out of his Epistle to the Romans, (...).
c. 8.38. and Ephesians. c. 1.20, 21. and the first Epistle of Saint Peter c. 3.22.

The Abstract all along (as is usual among the Orientals) for the Concrete;
that is, Kings, Rulers, Princes, Potentates, Mighty ones. And some of the
Learned conjecture, Cameron. in Col. 1.16.
that the Apostle alludes to several degrees of power and authority observable
among men in the world, thereby to adumbrate the distinction of Angels into
Superior and Inferior: Thrones] for Supreme Monarchs; Dominions] for lesser
Kings; Principalities] for the Governors of Provinces and Cities; Powers and
Mights] for lower Magistrates and their Officers. Saint Hierom conceives, that
the Apostle had these several Names either from the Traditions of the Jews, or
his own mystical interpretation of certain parcels of the Old Testament
History. Arbitror [Apostolum] aut de Traditionibus Hebraeorum ea, quae secreta
sunt, in medium protulisse; aut certe quae juxta historiam scripta sunt, cum
intelligeret legem esse spiritualem, sensisse sublimius, and quod de Regibus
atque Principibus, Ducibus quoque, Tribunis, and Centurionibus in Numeris and
in Regnorum libris refertur, imaginem aliorum Principum Regumque cognovisse,
quod sc. in coelestibus sint Potestates atque virtutes and caetera
Ministeriorum vocabula, Hier. in Ephesians. 1.

Now from these Names and Words found in Scripture, some have ventured to
determine and marshal the Celestial Hierarchy of Angels into their several and
distinct Orders. Whence we have in the Schools nine Orders of Angels, D. The.
part. 1. Q. 108. Art. ^.
said to be taken from Dionysius the Areopagite Saint Paul's Scholar. Thus the
Hierarchy is divided into three parts, an Uppermost, a Middle, a Lowest, and in
each of these are placed three ranks or Choires of Angels: as, In the uppermost
Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones.

In the middle, Dominions, Mights, Powers.

In the lowest, Principalities, Archangels, Angels.



And this is spoken as boldly, as if the Author of the Fancy had been in good
earnest wrapped up with Saint Paul into the third Heaven, and there seen the
Scheme of their Divine Economy. Only that holy Apostle tells us, he heard
there [(...),] unutterable words, 2 Cor. 12.4. and seems to have warned us
sufficiently against all such Gnostic's, or Pretenders unto extraordinary
knowledge, to whom he has given this Character of Vanity, [(...),] intruding
into those things which they have not seen, Coloss. 2.18. -- And, certainly, if
he had minded to intimate so many distinct Orders, he could easily have put the
nine Names together, as well as this his famed Disciple; or, if several names
were sufficient to denote their Orders, he could have added more to the number,
e. gr. an Order of Fighters, See Z^nch. ^e Oper. Dei part. 1. l. 2. c. 14.
the heavenly host, Saint Luke 2. an Order of Watchers, out of Daniel; a Chorus
of Morning-Stars, out of Job; and another of the Sons of God, etc.

Baronius quotes Ignatius for an asserter of this same Hierarchy in Ep. ad
Trallenses: Exercit. in Ep. ad Trall. ^. 8.
But Vedelius contends against him strongly, that the whole period, referred
to, is interpolated and supposititious. However neither the words, nor the
order of enumeration agree with Dionysius's, and there are two fresh ones among
them [(...).]

L. Vallae in his Comment upon Revel. 4.8. very angerly expostulates with the
Latins for omitting nine times Holy in their Versions, L. Valla in Apoc. 4.3.
which all the Greeks, says he, have in that place; as losing by this defect
of theirs the mystery of ter trinum, which is, as he adds, the number of the
Orders of Angels.

But Revius answers him well enough, In Vall. ibid.
That this was the Dream of a counterfeit Dionysius; and that all the Greek
Copies have not nine times Holy there, neither, but most of them thrice only,
as we read it.

However, to make even with this celebrated number, (instead of a more serious
and direct opposition) it may not be amiss here to remember, that some have
ranged the Devils into nine Orders too.

In the first, as they tell us, Zanch. de Oper. Dei part. 1. l. 4. c. 17.
OthoCasm. A^gelogr.. part. 2. c. 26. Balduin. de Cas. Consc. l. 3. c. 2. qui
citat. e Theatro Diabol. p. 1.
are [ Pseudothei] False-Gods, who corrupt Religion, the Prince of whom they
call Beelzebub.

In the second are [ Spiritus mendaces] lying Spirits, one of whom deceived the
Prophets in the days of Ahab, 1 Kings 22. whose Prince is named Python,
according to what we read of a Spirit of Python, Act. 16.16. which we English
Spirit of Divination.

In the third are [ vasa iniquitatis] Vessels of Iniquity, from whom proceed
all the Flagitious wickednesses, that are any-where committed in the World,
whose Prince is called Belial.

In the fourth are [ Spiritus ultores] Revenging Spirits, that stir up strifes
among Men, and urge them unto private Revenge, whose Prince is Asmod^us, Tobit
3.

In the fifth are [ Daemones praestigiatores] Conjuring and Juggling Devils, the
Patrons of Witches and Inchanters, who by such kind of Magical Practices do
hurt to Men, the Prince of whom is called Satan.

In the sixth are [ AEreae potestates] the Powers of the Air, who, by God's
permission, raise Storms and Tempests, whose Prince they call Meris or Metiris,
[I know not whence, nor why.]

In the seventh are [ Furiae] the Furies, which torment the minds of Men after
Sin committed, and work diverse confusions in the World, whose Prince is said to
be Abaddon or Apollyon, which name we have Revel. 9.

In the eight are [ Criminatores] the Accusers, who lie in wait against the
Fame and honor of Good-men, whose Prince is Diabolus, or Astaroth. And

In the ninth are [ Tentatores] the Tempters, those evil Spirits that seduce by
subtlety, whom they cannot oppress by violence, whose Prince they call Mammon.

Which Distribution I allege not to avouch for it, but only as an instance of
the same curiosity, that produced the former, a restless and unsatisfied itch
of Knowledge, which searches into all depths, and spares neither Heaven nor
Hell in its presumption; as if the Motto were, Flectere si nequeo superos
Acheronta movebo.


Of like Vanity and Rashness are the Jewish Cabalists guilty.

Maimo^id. in Misnae Tract. 1. c. 2. s. 7.
Rabbi Moses, the Son of Maimon, assigns ten Degrees of Angels, from so many
Words which he picks up here and there concerning them. In the first, Animalia
Sanctitatis.] In the second, Rotae.] In the third, Ereellim.] In the fourth,
Casmallim.] In the fifth, Seraphim.] In the sixth, Maleacim.] In the seventh,
Elohim.] In the eight, Filii Elohim.] In the ninth, Cherubim.] In the tenth,
Ischim, sive viri.] The first, second, and fourth, (as I. Cappellus observes
are taken from Ezech. 1. but Casm^llim is unfitly put for a peculiar Order when
it is the name rather of some Color. I. Cappell. in Hebr. 1.14.
The fifth, from Isa. 6. The third, from Isa. 33.7. but absurdly; for though
the Etymon of the Word agree well enough, [ q. d. (...), a Beholder of God] yet
the Prophet attributes Tears and Mourning to them, and points unto the
Ambassadors sent from Hezekiah to Rabshakeh. The sixth is the Hebrew for
Angels. The seventh from Psalm. 8.5. The eight, from Job 1. The ninth, from Genesis
3. The last from thence, that in the Apparitions of Angels, the Scripture often
says, the Man said so and so. But how improperly (as he farther adds) are
those appellations [ Elohim, filii Elohim, Maleacim,] that is, Gods, the Sons
of Gods, Angels, which are common Elogiums agreeing to every one of them, put
to describe certain Orders?

Others of the Jewish-Masters are content to refer to three Degrees only.

The first, Vide Episcop. Instit. Theol. l. 4.
they call [ intelligentias a materia separatas] Intelligences wholly separate
from matter that never appeared but in Prophetic Vision* and so were never seen
but heard only, yet always stand about the Throne of God.

The second, they call [ Angelos Ministerii] Angels of Ministry, made to
govern the World and Minister unto good Men, dwelling above the Orbs, and so
called the Host of Heaven, but for their Ministry-sake assuming sometimes of
visible Forms, and so appearing and seen.

The third, they call [ Spiritus sublunares] Sublunary Spirits, the
Executioners of Divine Wrath and Justice, Angels of Destruction and Death; whom
also they make to be Male and Female, to Eat and Drink, and Gender, and Die,
and succeed each other, as Men do.

Zanch. de Oper. Dei part. 1. l. 2. c. 14. Otho-Casm. Angelogr. part. 2. c. 8.
Q. 1.
[This is much like the Heathens distinction of their Genii into Supercoelestes,
Coelestes, Subcoelestes, which I forbear to prosecute any farther, than the
bare naming of it.]

Hereunto, lastly, we may refer the D. Tho. Part. 1. Q. 112. Art, 2 and 3.
Schoolmens distinction of Angels into Assisting and Ministering, as they
deliver and explain it; making the latter to be only those of the lowest Order,
even as the Jewish Rabbis did their Angels of Ministry, and Sublunary Spirits.
Against both of whom the Text apparently decides the Case, Are they not all
ministering Spirits? As shall be afterward farther declared.

To end this enquiry, though there is for certain a most excellent Order among
the Angels, and there are, probably, different Ranks and Degrees of them, yet,
what they are in particular, is no where revealed for our satisfaction; and
some of those Denominations, which are relied upon in Sacred Writ as to this
matter, may as well denote distinct Properties and perfections of each
individual Angel, or certain temporary Offices and Employments only, as point
unto the settled and established Order among them all. The Prophet Ezechiel,
speaking of four of them, describes them every one alike. They four, says he,
had the face of a man, and the face of a lion on the right-side; (...)
and they four had the face of an ox on the left side, they four also had the
face of an eagle, Revel. 1.10. The like to which we have again, Revel. 4.7.
where the design seems to be to represent them, in way of Hieroglyphick,
Prudent as Men; Courageous as Lions; Laborious and Industrious as Oxen; and
Swift as Eagles.

But it very well becomes us willingly to be ignorant of what our Heavenly
Father has not thought good to make known unto us. And therefore I shall
[(...),] forbear to search farther into what is hidden and concealed; closing
this Chapter with the remarkable instance of Saint Augustin's exemplary modesty
in the present Argument, Ench^rid. c. 58.
(as I did the foregoing with Damascen's,) What those several words mean, says
he, whereby the Apostle seems to comprize the universal society of Angels,
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, etc. and how they differ, let them tell who
are able; if they can but prove what they affirm. I for my part confess my
ignorance.

CHAP. IV. Of the Offices of Angels.
THe fourth Point concerns the Function, or Office of the Angels, whereunto God
has appointed and commissioned them. And as to that the holy Scriptures will
more fully resolve us, designing, as appears, to promote our duty and comfort,
more than to satisfy a speculative curiosity.

Are they not all [(...),] Liturgy, or ministering Spirits, [(...),] sent forth
to Minister? says the Text. Mentes funt Ministerio destinatae] Erasm. par. in
Loc.


They are all Liturgic Spirts.] The word has relation to public and honorable
Employment. So Princes and Magistrates are called, (...), Romans 13.6. And Christ
himself, as our great High Priest, (...), Heb. 8.2. And Saint Paul, the Apostle
of the Gentiles, (...), Romans 15.16. -- But then to this General we have another
word added in the Greek, which our English distinguishes not at all from it,
[(...),] and it denotes a particular service under the former; [(...), 2 Cor.
9.12.] Like to that of the Deacons in the Christian Church, who served Tables,
and provided for the necessities of the Poor and Needy. And to this special
Deaconry and Service in the World, they are [(...),] solemnly sent forth and
Commissioned, as Legates and Officers from above. Thus the learned Doctor
Hammond interprets the seven Spirits, See hi^ Par. and Annotat.
Revel. 1.4. and 4.5. The Angels which attend and wait upon God, and are as, in
the Sanhedrim the Officers waiting on the Head of the Sanhedrim to go on all
their Messages, or as in the Church, the Deacons to attend the commands of the
Governor of the Church, and to perform them.

Now, that we may take in the whole course of the Angels Employ and
Ministration, we will consider of it distinctly, 1. With reference unto God
himself. 2. To Christ, God-Man. 3. To the whole World, especially of Mankind;
and 4. To the faithful Servants of God and Christ, called in the Text, the
Heirs of Salvation.


Sect. I. Their Ministry unto God.
First, I say, they are Ministering Spirits unto God Almighty, [ Damascen puts
this into the definition of an Angel, (...) -- (...),] and that in a threefold
capacity.

1. They are the constant Attendants of his glorious Court and Presence,
waiting upon, and following of him, wheresoever he goes. So a chief among them
said to Zacharias, I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of the Lord, Saint
Luke 1.19. And, I saw the Lord sitting in his Throne, (says Micaiah the
Prophet) and all the Host of Heaven standing by him, on his right hand and on
his left, 1 Kings 22.19. that is, The Great King on his Throne, and his Guard
or Retinue of Angels round about him.

And in this, as some conceive, the special manner of the Divine Appearance, or
Presence, in some places more than in others, consists, [whereas otherwise God
is Omni-present, and everywhere alike, as Arnobius says,] viz. in this his
Train and Attendance: So that the Lord of Hosts is there said to be peculiarly
present, where his Court is, that is, See Mr. Mede on Eccles 5.1.
where the holy Angels keep their Station and Rendezvous. Hence Jacob, having
seen a Ladder reaching from Heaven to Earth, and the Angels of God ascending
and descending upon it, says, Genesis 28.16, 17. Surely the Lord is in this
place, and I knew it not; how dreadful is this place? It is no other, but the
House of God, even the Gate of Heaven: That is, Heavens Guild Hall, Court or
Palace; (as our learned Mede has it) for the Gate was wont to be the
Judgment-Hall, and place, where Kings and Senators used to sit, attended by
their Guard and Ministers. Thus, in the Prophecy of Daniel, the Ancient of Days
is represented coming to Judgment, Dan. 7.10. Thousand thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. And in the same
style, (of the same appearance too) Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied, as
Saint Jude Records it, ver. 14. Behold the Lord comes with his holy Myriads or
ten thousands. [For so it ought to be rendered, according to the Greek, (...),
and not, as we have it, with ten thousands by his Saints, unless by Saints we
mean these holy ones, as sometimes they are called, Dan. 4.13, 17.] A like
expression of the Divine Presence we find in that of Moses, Deuter. 33.2. The
Lord came from Sinai unto them, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined
forth from Mount-Paran; he came with ten thousands of Saints, or holy ones,
[or, with his holy Myriads, with his holy ten thousands, as it should rather be
translated,] from his right hand went a fiery Law for them. Whereunto the
Psalmist also relates, Ps. 68.17. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even
thousands of Angels; the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place.
From whence we read in the New Testament of the Law given by Angels there. [
Who have received the Law by the disposition of Angels, Act. 7.53. Ordained by
Angels in the hands of a Mediator, meaning Moses, Gal. 3.19. The word spoken by
Angels, Heb. 2.2.] Howbeit, in the Old Testament Story itself, we meet with no
such thing in terms, but only, that the Lord descended upon the Mount in a
fiery and smoking Cloud, with Thunders and Lightnings, and the voice of a
Trumpet, Exodus 19 -- The expression therefore seems to proceed upon this
supposition, that the special Presence of the Divine Majesty, or his Glory, as
the Scripture calls it, wheresoever it is said to be, consists in the encamping
of his Sacred Retinue, the holy Angels. And accordingly we read in the Gospel,
that Christ shall come at last, [ in the glory of his Father,] that is, [ with
an host of Angels,] as the Holy Ghost himself seems to expound it, The Son of
Man shall come in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels, Saint Matthew.
16.27. Saint Mark 8.38.

Thus Heaven, we know, is the place of God's most glorious Residence, that
being the (...), or habitation of Angels, Saint Jude 6. ver. who therefore are
called the host of heaven, and said, always to behold the face of God ther^.
And accordingly we are taught to pray, Our Father which art in Heaven! The
Prophet Isaiah before had set the example, Chapter 63.15. Look down from heaven,
and behold from the habitation of thine holiness and thy glory, that is, where
thy Throne is surrounded with Myriads of holy and glorious Angels.

And thus was God present of old in his Temple, and the places, where his name
was recorded upon Earth. So in the Vision of Isaiah 6.1. I saw the Lord sitting
upon a Throne high and lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple. [The LXX
have it, the house was filled with his glory.] Most probably, the Seraphim or
Angels, as there it follows, ver. 3. And this seems to be implied in that of
the Psalmist, Before the Gods I will sing praise unto thee; I will worshp
toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy Name, Ps. 138.1, 2. For, that the
Angels are called Gods, I noted before* and the Greek here reads it [(...),]
before the Angels, and the vulgar Latin accordingly, [ in conspectu Angelorum,]
in the view or presence of the Angels. Agreeably whereto we may also interpret
that place of Solomon, cautioning against rash vows in the House of God,
Eccles. 5.4, 5, 6. When thou vowest a vow, defer not to pay it; suffer not thy
mouth to cause they flesh to sin, neither say thou before the Angel, it was an
error, that is, let not such a foolish excuse come from thee in the House of
God before the holy Angels [taking the word collectively, as we do Man, Turk,
Spaniard, etc. or as the singular number is sometimes put for the plural.
Vatablus in Ps. 34. See Exodus chapter 25. chapter 36. chapter 37. 1 Kings 6.
] And for this cause, most probably, the Curtains of the Tabernacle were filled
with Pictures of Cherubims, and the Walls of Solomon's Temple within with
carved Cherubims, and the Ark of the Testimony over-spred and covered with two
mighty Cherubims, having their Faces looking toward it, and the Mercy-Seat,
with their Wings stretched forth on high, called the Cherubims of Glory, Hebr.
9.5. that is, of the Divine Presence. Whence that known compellation of
Almighty God, O Lord God of Israel which dwell between the Cherubims! 2
Kings 19.15. we have it again, Ps. 80.1. Thou that dwell between the
Cherubims shine forth! and in Hez^k^ah's Prayer, Isa. 37.16. O Lord of Hosts*
God of Israel, that dwell between the Cherubims* And again it is said, Ps.
91.1. The Lord reigns, he sits between the Cherubims, viz. as on his Royal
Throne. Agrippa in his Oration to the Jews, in Josephus, joins the Holy Place
and the Holy Angels as nearly related each to other, Gro^. in 1 Cor. 11* 1^.
[(...).] And this opinion still continues with that People, that in their
places of worship, where God has promised his especial Presence, the blessed
Angels frequent their Assemblies, and praise and laud God together with them in
their Synagogues. So much is acknowledged in the Form of Prayer used by the
Jews of Portugal, and cited by Master Mede, (from whom I borrow this notion,
and the substantial management of it) O Lord our God, the Angels, that supernal
company, gathered together with thy people Israel here below, do Crown thee
with Praises; and all together do thrice redouble and cry, that spoken of by
the Pro^het, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts; the whole Earth is full of
thy Glory.

And thus certainly we may con^lude, in like manner, that God is still present
in the Churches of Christians. Some such thing Saint Paul supposes, 1 Cor. 11.
where treating of a comely and decent carriage to be observed in
Church Assemblies, and in particular of the woman's being covered and veiled
there, [(...), as Saint Chrysostom. words it, Hom. 26. in ^ Cor.
] he in^orceth it from this Argument, the supposed presence of Angels there,
ver. 10. (...),] Because of the Angels. If thou despisest man, says Saint
Chrysostom. on the place, yet reverence the Angels. And to a like purpose,
Theophylact. Debet, inquit* superioribus de causis mulier supra caput velamen
gestare, i. e. servitutis insigne; and si nulla alia ratione, Angelorum tamen
pudore ducta, ne in illorum conspectu impudica appareat. Theoph. in loc.

And, thus, unto Principalities and Powers in heavenly places is made known by
the Church of manifold wisdom of God, as the Apostle writes to the Ephesians c.
3.10. [upon which Text Saint Chrysostom. excellently. See, Hom. 4. de incompr. Dei
not.
what an honor is done to humane nature, in that with us, and by us, the
Powers above come to know the secrets of our King and Savior.] And they are
represented by Saint Peter, as earnestly looking into the Mysteries of the
Gospel, preached and commemorated in our Assemblies, 1 Pet. 1.12. Which things,
says he, the Angels desire to look into, [(...),] stooping down, as with their
Faces of old toward the Propitiatory or Mercy-Seat.

Thus, Saint Chrysostom conceived, most undoubtedly, of Christian Oratories,
reproving the irreverent behavior of his Auditors upon occasion in such words
as these. -- The Church is no Barbers, or Apothecarys Shop, etc. but the place
of Angels, Hom. 36. in 1 Cor.
the place of Archangels, the Palace of God, Heaven it self. Hom. 4. de
incompr. Dei not.
-- And again, Think near whom thou stand, and with whom thou art about to
invocate God, namely, with Cherubim and Seraphim and all the Powers of Heaven.
Consider but, what companions thou have; and it will suffice to persuade thee
unto sobriety, when thou remembrest, that thou, who art compounded of flesh and
blood, art yet admitted with the incorporeal powers to celebrate the common
Lord of all. Let none therefore communicate carelessly in the holy and mystical
hymns, Let none at that time intermingle worldly thoughts, but remove and
banish all earthly cogitations, and translate himself wholly into Heaven, as
standing near the Throne of Glory, and on the Wing, with Cherubims. So let him
offer the all holy hymn to the God of Glory and Majesty. --

And to add but one quotation more, instead of many, speaking against those who
laughed at Church, Hom. 15. in Ep. ad. Hebr.
-- When thou go into a King's Palace, says he, thou composest thy self to
all comeliness; in thy habit, in thy look, in thy gate and every thing else.
But here is indeed the Palace of a King, and the like attendance to that in
Heaven; and do thou fleer and laugh? I know well enough, thou see it not.
But hear thou me, and know, that Angels are everywhere present, but chiefly in
the house of God; they attend upon their King, and all is there filled with
those incorporeal Powers.

II. These Ministering Spirits do not only stand before God as his Attendants,
but worship and adore him, as his Servants, pay their homage and
acknowledgments to him continually, lauding and glorifying of him. We have a
short account of their Liturgy, or sacred Office of Divine Service, from the
Prophet, Isa. 6.3. One cried unto another [hic ad hunc] and said, holy, holy,
holy is the Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is fill'^ with his glory. Whereto
well agrees the Vision of Ignatius, as Socrates reports it, Soc. l. 6. c. 8.
from whence he is said to have recommended the custom of Alternate-singing to
the Church at Antioch, (...).] They have, it seems, their mutual Antiphon's and
Responsals, how much soever some among us except against and find fault with
them. They divide themselves into Choires, and answer each to other in their
devout Anthems. Medit. c. 25. L. de com. essent. Patr. Fill. and Spi. sancti.
Saint Augustine calls them [ hymnidicos Angelorum choros.] And Athanasius puts
[ hymnis dicendis aptum] into his description of an Angel. And this is,
certainly, their most delightful and continual employment, Angelorum
ministerium est Dei laudatio and hymnorum decantatio. Theodoret. Divin. Decret.
Epit. They rest not day and night, saying, holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come, Revel. 4.8. This is their constant devotion
and service; whereto yet, no doubt but, upon particular occasions they make
some fresh additions.

Thus, at the laying of the Foundations of the Earth, or the Creation of the
Stars, they Chaunted forth the Makers Praise, Job 38. And the like we may
conceive, when there is Joy in heaven among them at the conversion of a sinner,
Saint Luke 15.10. When one of their number had published the blessed news of
our Savior's birth, we find, that suddenly there was with the Angel a
multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying, glory be to God in
the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men, Saint Luke 2. And
another parcel yet of their occasional service, Saint John gives us, Revel.
7.11, 12. All the Angels, says he, stood round about the Throne -- and fell
before the Throne on their faces and worshipped, saying, Amen, blessing and
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might be unto
God for ever and ever, Amen. Where we observe also a decent reverence and
uniformity both of gesture and expression, [for our instruction doubtless] in
their worship. And their Liturgy, we see, is wholly, in a manner, composed of
Lauds and Praises, Doxologies and Thanksgivings, which therefore should waken
us to an holy emulation of them in the same, our blessed Lord and Savior
having taught us to pray, daily, that Gods will may be done [by us] on earth,
as it is [by them] in heaven. [Tibi omnes superni cives and cuncti B. Spirituum
ordines gloriam and honorem suppliciter adorantes concinunt sine fine: Laudant
te, Domine, illi superni cives magnifice and honorabiliter.] D. Aug. Med. c. 33.

Well therefore has our Church taken in certain parcels of their holy Offices
into her public Service. So in the [ Te Deum. To thee all Angels cry aloud: the
Heavens, and all the Powers therein.

To thee Cherubim and Seraphim continually do cry, holy, holy, holy, Lord God
of Sabbath: heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory.



So at the holy Communion, a little before the Consecration and Receiving of
the Sacred Elements, -- Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the
company of Heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising
thee, and saying, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts; Heaven and Earth are
full of thy Glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord most high! -- And again, after we
have participated of the Heavenly Food, there follows that Angelic Hymn, Glory
be to God on high, and on earth peace, good will toward men! we praise thee,
we bless thee, etc.

The Psalmist, that Sweet-Singer of Israel, we find, calls upon the Angels to
bless and praise God, yet not in the least to reflect upon their backwardness,
or impute a negligence and forgetfulness to them; but as one delighted himself
in that celestial employment, and desirous to set them forth as excellent
examples of it, and provoke them to a supply of those higher measures of
devotion, which he could not reach unto. Bless the Lord ye Angels of his, that
excel in strength. Bless ye the Lord all his Hosts, ye Ministers of his that do
his pleasure! Ps. 103.20, 21. And again, Praise ye the Lord from the Heavens;
praise him in the heights. Praise ye him all his Angels! praise ye him all his
Hosts! Psalm. 148.1, 2.

III. These Ministering Spirits wait upon God, as his ready Messengers to
receive his commands, observe his orders, go upon his errands and embassies,
and fulfill all his will; thus to serve and obey him, in whatsoever he shall
send or employ them about. Non solum autem hymnos decantant, sed divinae etiam
oeconomiae ministrant, Theodoret. Divin. Decret. Epit. So we have it in that
place of the Psalmist, just now recited, Ye Angels of his that do his
commandments, harkening unto the voice of his word! and ye Ministers of his,
that do his pleasure! who are always at his beck. No sooner does he signify or
enjoin any thing, but they are presently on the Wing, swiftly flying. In
Jacob's Vision therefore we have a Ladder reaching up to Heaven, with Angels
ascending and descending on it, that is, in continual motion. -- quorum unum
solumque officium est servire nutibus Dei, nec omnino quidquam, nisi jussi^
ejus, facere; -- apparitores magni Regis, Lactant. Instit. l. 2. c. 17.

Sometimes they are dispatched to declare and make known the mind of God; as
the Law was delivered by Angels on Mount Sinai; and several Messages of
Glad-tidings we read of by and from them in holy Scripture, as to Abraham,
Daniel, Zacharias, the blessed-Virgin, Saint John and others, of which more
afterward.

Sometimes again they are sent to execute God's Judgments, and pour out the
Vials of his Wrath, Revel. 15.6, 7. as on the wicked Sodomites, Genesis 19. on the
Firstborn in Egypt, Exodus 12. on the Assyrian Host, 2 Kings 19. on the People
of Israel, 2 Samuel 24.15, 16.

But oftener as the Ministers of good things, to work deliverance, and bring
supplies extraordinary to his Servants and Worshippers, as I shall take
occasion hereafter more particularly to specify; and therefore forbear to add
any thing of it farther in this place, unless it be the testimony of Hesiod to
this truth. (...),
(...). l. 1.
(...).


But, O that we could learn of those blessed Spirits, and might be awakened to
imitate and follow them in these steps of their Ministry unto God! That we may
delight, as they do, in the presence of God, and the places of his Worship and
Service!

That we may be as zealous, and devout, orderly, and unanimous, diligent, and
unwearied in the glorifying of God, and praising of his Name!

And that we may add unto all our religious acknowledgments a readiness of
obedience too, like unto theirs, to hearken unto the voice of his word, and do
his will and commandments!

SECT. II. Their Ministry unto Christ.
Secondly, They are Ministering Spirits unto Christ, the Son of God made Man,
whence they are said to ascend and descend upon the Son of Man, Saint John
1.51. And this they do by divine appointment, When he brings in the
first-begotten into the world, he says, and let all the Angels of God worship
him, Heb. 1.6. according to that of the Psalmist, worship him all ye Gods!

Here now I might entertain you with a prolix discourse, to show how all along
the holy Angels have waited upon Christ and Ministered to him. But I will only
touch upon the particulars; most of which the devout Gerhard has summarily
laid together.

[ Angelus ejus conceptionem nunciat, D. I Gerhard Med. xxvi.
-- nativitatem manifestat, -- in AEgyptum fugere mandat; -- Angeli serviunt ei
in deserto, -- ministrant ei in toto praedicationis ministerio; -- Angelus ei
adest in mortis agone, -- apparet in ipsius Resurrectione; -- Angeli praesto
sunt in Ascensione, -- aderunt in futura ad judicium reversione.]

1. To signalize his Advent an Angel foretells his immediate Forerunner, John
the Baptist, unto Zacharias, Saint Luke ^.13. -- and then, his Conception to
the Virgin Mary, ver. 30.31. resolving her doubts, how this should be, ver. 35.
and, after that, assuring Joseph, her espoused Husband, that, what was
conceived in her Womb, was of the Holy Ghost, Saint Mat. 1.20.

2. At his Birth, as has been some-where already intimated, an Angel is the
Herald to proclaim the good news of it to the Shepherds in the Field, and
directs them to the place where he lay; and immediately, upon that, a whole
host of Angels sing together in consort with him, glorifying and lauding God,
Saint Luke 2.10. etc. No sooner was he born into the World, but he was looked
upon with admiration by the Angels, adored and worshipped by those knowing and
blessed Spirits, how contemptible soever his appearance was in the eyes of Men.
Upon which account, probably, the Apostle adds it as a considerable link to his
Golden-chain, when he describes the great and acknowledge'd Mystery of
Godliness; God, says he, was manifest in the flesh, justified in (or by) the
spirit, seen of Angels, -- 1 Timothy 3.16.

3. Then during his Life upon Earth,

An Angel watches over him, while yet in his Infancy, to prevent the danger he
was in from Herod's malice, seeking to kill him; and to that purpose appears to
Joseph in a dream, and warns him to take the young child and his mother, and
flee into Egypt, till he should bring him word, Saint Mat. 2.13, 14. as he did
sometime after, appearing again in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, and saying,
Arise and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel;
for they are dead, which sought the young child's life, ver. 19, 20. And yet
again, after that, warning him to turn aside into the parts of Galilee, ver. 22.

At his fasting forty days and forty nights in the Wilderness, conflicting
thereupon with the Tempter, the Angels minister to him in his need, and
congratulate his Triumphs. He was there in the Wilderness, says Saint Mark,
forty days tempted of Satan, and was with the wild Beasts, and the Angels
ministered to him, chapter 1.13. providing, it is like, for his safety, as well as
support, all the while there. But we have it in Saint Matthew at the end of his
three Temptations, Then the Devil leaves him, and behold, Angels came and
ministered unto him, Fr. Spa^bem. Dub. Evangel.
chapter 4.11. [ ne deesse viderentur Angeli, cui Angelorum custodiam and
ministeria insidiose impegerat tentator. -- spectatores tantum conflictus,
socii triumphi.]

At his bitter Agony in the Garden, when he had resigned up himself perfectly
to his Father's Will and disposal, as to the sufferings he was to undergo,
There appeared an Angel unto him from Heaven strengthening of him, Saint Luke
22.43. And, if need were, himself tells us, that he could but ask his Father,
and he would send him more than twelve Legions of Angels, Saint Matthew. 26.53.

4. After his Death,

An Angel opens his Grave and removes his Tombstone; Behold, says the Text,
there was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from Heaven,
and came, and rolled back the Stone from the door, and sat upon it: his
countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow, and for fear of
him the keepers did shake and become as dead men, Saint Matthew. 28.2, 3, 4.

The Angel also declares and witnesses his Resurrection; for so it follows,
ver. 5, 6, 7. And the Angel answered, and said unto the women; fear not ye, for
I know, that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here, for he is
risen, as he said; come, see the place where the Lord lay, and go quickly and
tell his Disciples, that he is risen from the dead. And, behold, he goes
before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him. Lo, I have told you before. --
Saint Luke speaks of two Angels, chapter 24.4, 5, 6, 7. It came to pass, says he,
as the women were much perplexed, behold two men stood by them in
shining-garments, and as they were afraid and bowing down their faces to the
earth, they said unto them, why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not
here, but he is risen. Remember how he spoke unto you, while he was yet in
Galilee, saying, the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men,
and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

5. At his Ascension into Heaven, the Angels are his Attendants, confirm the
Truth to the Beholders, and Preach thereupon a second coming of his, in like
manner, from thence, Act. 1.10, 11. While they looked steadfastly into Heaven,
as he went up, behold two men stood by them in white apparel, which also said,
ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus, which
is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, in like manner, as ye have
seen him go up into heaven. -- So Just. Martyr expounds that in Ps. 24.
Attollite portas principes vestras -- (...), etc. Dial. cum Tryphone, p. 255.
He needed not the Angels help indeed to transport him thither, to remove
impediments, and bear him up in their Arms, as Saint Cyprian speaks, but a
multitude of them came about him to applaud him as Victor, De Ascens. Domini.
and sing together in Jubilee, modulating a new Song, and filling the Heavens
with their agreeing harmony.

6. Then, after his glorious Exaltation at the right hand of God on high, and
being made Head over all things to the Church, Angels, and Authorities, and
Pow^rs subjected to him, and all things put under his feet, [Ephes. 1.20, 21,
22. 1 Pet. 3.22.] We find,

They wait upon and glorify him in Heaven; I b^h^ld, says Saint John, and
heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, -- saying with a loud
voice, Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing, Revel. 5.11, 12.

Upon occasion they reveal his Mind and Will from thence; The Revelation of
Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his Servants things, which
must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his Angel unto his
servant John, Revel. 1.1. And again, in the close of that Book it is added, I
Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the Churches,
chapter 22.16.

At his commandment they fight against his, and his Churches enemies; Michael
and his Angels against the Dragon and his Angels, chapter 12.7.

Lastly, at his glorious coming in the end of all, they are again to attend his
Person, proclaim his Approach* awaken the Dead to the general Resurrection,
separate the Good from the Bad at the final Judgment, and execute the decretory
Sentence, then given forth and pronounced by the Judge, [(...), I. M^rtyr Apol.
2. p. 87.] He shall come in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels, Saint
Mark 8.38. He shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians.
1.7. He shall descend with a shout, with the voice of the A^ch-angels, and with
the Trump of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Trumpe^ shall sound, and the Dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed, 1 Cor. 15.52. The Angels are the
Reapers -- to gather the Tares out of Christ's Kingdom, to sever the wicked
from among the just, and cast them i^to the Furnace of Fire, where shall be
wailing and gnashing of T^eth, Saint Matthew. 13.3^. etc.

Thus, from first to last, from our blessed Savior's appearing in the Flesh to
his glorious coming, a^ the ^inal Judge of quick and dead, the Angels, we se^,
are his Mini^tring Spirits.

SECT. III. Their Ministry to the whole world, especially of Mankind.
Thirdly, we are next to consider of them as Ministering Spirits, in reference
to the whole world, especially of Mankind.

The Peripatetic Philosophers assigned them an office of moving the Celestial
Orbs. But that hypothesis of the heavenly motions is since disputed; and
(bating the uncertainty of it) we may, as probably, determine, that God, who
has furnished the nature of all things else with necessaries, has also
imprinted in those superior Bodies the intrinsic principles and causes of their
own motion, without the help of such assisting intelligences. Some of the
Hebrew Doctors (as Zanchius reports from Trithemius, Zanch. de Oper. Dei par.
1. l. 3. c. 1.
Agrippa, and others) have given to every Planet its Angel, to every Sign in
the Zodiac its Angel; to every Wind its Angel; and to every Element its Angel.
Thus they have named,

1. For the seven Planets.] To Saturn Zapkiel, to Jupiter Zadkiel, to Mars
Camuel, to Sol Raphael, to Venus Haniel, to Mercurius Michael, to Luna Gabriel,
which they affirm to be the seven Spirits, that always stand in the presence of
God, and under whom the government of Heaven and Earth is disposed. [ Saturno
Cassielem, Iovi Zakielem, Marti Samuelem, Veneri Anaelem, Mercurio Raphaelem,
Lunae Gabrielem, Pet. Rami prael^ct. in somn. Scip. p. 528.]

2. For the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.] To Aries Malchedael, to Taurus
Asmodel, to Gemini Ambriel, to Cancer Muriel, to Leo Verchiel, to Virgo
Hamaliel, to Libra Zuriel, to Scorpio Barchiel, to Sagittarius Adnachiel, to
Capricornus Haniel, to Aquarius Gambiel, to Pisces Barchiel.

3. for the four Winds and four quarters of the World.] To the East Michael,
See Rev^l. 7.1.
to the West Raphael, to the North Gabriel, to the South Nariel. -- And

4. For the four Elements.] To Fire Seraph, to Air Cherub, to Water Tharsis, to
Earth Ariel.

But these are unaccountable imaginations of Men, overcurious, and bold beyond
their understanding. Not to reflect upon all the particulars, or the difference
of names among Writers. Haniel is here entrusted both with Venus and Capricorn,
Michael with Mercury and the East, Raphael with Sol and the West, Gabriel with
Luna and the North, contrary to another of the Jewish Traditions, mentioned by
P. Fagius, P. Fag. in Genes. 18.2.
That every Angel has his particular charge and business, nor are there more
than one at the same time committed to any of them. Therefore, say they, were
there three Angels sent to Abraham, the first to tell him he should have a Son
by Sarah, the second to rescue Lot out of Sodom, and the third to overthrow
Sodom and the neighboring Cities.

It is not indeed improbable, but that the Angels have some share, as the
Ministers of God Almightie's Providence, in ordering of the World; that they
are, not only a most considerable Species of Beings, and ornamental part of the
Universe themselves, but Instruments also of the Divine Polity in the
Government of it; or, that God does in his ordinary dispensation of affairs [
gubernare inferiora per superiora, Suarez Metaph. Disp. 35. s. 3. and s. 6.
and corporali^ per spiri^ualia, as the Schools speak] manage things inferior
by the superior, and bodily by spiritual.

Zanch. de Oper. Dei part. 1. l. 2.
Psellus calls them therefore (...) [ quod mundum agant, regantque] Rulers of
the World; [and the Apostle speaks of the evil Spirits, that, by Gods
permission only, usurp over the ignorant and vicious, in a word that is near of
kin to that, (...), Ephesians. 6.12.] -- Seneca calls them, as I noted before Chapter
11. sect. 11.
out of Lactantius, [Ministros Regni Dei,] Ministers of God's Kingdom, and
intimates it as the Divine contrivance at the making of the World, [ ut omnia
sub ducibus suis irent,] that every thing should have a Guide allotted it.

In Timao. Vide Rhodigini Lect. Antiq. l. 2. c. 10.
Plato in like manner was of opinion, that God has set Demons over the whole
World as Leaders of the Flocks, to govern all Mankind, according to the
distributions assigned them. Origin grants, that we have not the benefit of the
Fruits of the Earth, Orig. contra Celsum l. 8. p. 398.
or Rivers of Water, and the like conveniences without the presidence of these
invisible Husbandmen, and Stewards; -- and he adds, a little after, that the
Angels are of a truth the Lieutenants, and Officers, and Soldiers, and
curators of God.

Vide Suarez, ut ante, and Lips. Phys. sto. l. 1. Diss. 20.
Damascen says, that, as they are placed by the Supreme Maker of all, they
have the custody of certain parts of the Earth, look to Nations and Countries,
order our affairs, and bring us help upon occasion. Saint Augustine, that every
visible thing has an invisible or angelical power set over it. And Ruf^inus,
that certain Celestial Powers have the Regency o^ Mortals from the beginning.

A mighty tendency there is in traditionary belief this way; and from hence,
possibly, they may be called, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, and
Mights in holy Scripture, as has been already in part suggested.

But it seems yet with greater evidence concludable from the Book of Dani^l,
that God has appoint^d Regent-Angels, as Presidents over the respective
Nations and Provinces of the Earth. For we read there of the [ Prince of the
Kingdom of Persia,] and of the [ Prince of ^raecia,] and of [ Michael, one of
the chief Princes, that took care of Iudaea,] Dan. 10.13, 20, 21. [ Princeps
Synagogae,] the Prince of the Synagogue, or Church of Israel, [Michael your
Prince. The great Prince that stands for the Children of thy People, Vatab.
in Dan. c. 10. etc. 12.
] chapter 12.1. -- Vatablus is peremptory hereupon, that [ Singulae Regiones habent
Praesides Angelos,] every Region has its President Angel; and Mr. Calvin in
his Institutions asserts it from hence, with a note of assurance, Certe cum
Daniel Angelum Persarum and Graecorum Angelum inducit, significat certos
Angelos Regnis ac Provinciis quasi Praesides destinari, l. 1. c. 14.. 7. Saint
Hi^rom says, In Ezech. 28.
[ traditae sunt Angelis ad regendum Provinciae quasi judicibus ab imperatore,]
that particular Provinces are delivered over by God to Angels governance, as is
wont to be done by Emperors to their Judges. And, (to forbear other
Testimonies) Grotius tells us, Grot. in S. Matt. c. 18.1^.
that both the Jews and ancient Christians, with great consent, collected as
much out of the Book of Daniel, and that Clemens of Alexandria puts it beyond
all controversy.

Ainsworth in Deuteronomy. 32.8.
The Jews supposed there were LXX Angels, Rulers of the LXX Nations, into which
the World was divided, Genesis 10. and accordingly the Greek translates that in
the Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.8. He set the bounds of the People [(...),]
according to the number of the Angels of God. Divin. Decret. Epitom. Hom. 60.
in S. Matt. 18.
Which Text Th^odoret adds, with the proofs out of Daniel, to declare [
nonnullos quidem ex Angelis praeesse gentibus,] and Saint Chrysostom also
alleges it.

The Romans for certain had a Temple dedicated to the public Genius, the
Genius Pop. Romans and it was the Inscription of some of Adrian's Coins, L.
Gyrald. Syntagm. 15.
GENESIS P. R. and their Prince was supposed to have one extraordinary, whence
they swore commonly per Genium Principis; Suet. in Calig.
and Suetonius tells us, that Caligula punished many, [ quod per cjus Genium
pejeraverant.]

In like manner, the Current of Authority is very strong, that every man [at
l^ast every pious and good man] has his Tutelar or Guardian Angel, D. The.
part. 1. Q. 13. Art. ^.
his Angel-keeper attending him.

The Scriptures indeed, commonly alleged for this, do not of themselves
necessarily enforce it; yet, if taken and expounded, as generally they are, by
the Fathers, according to the common belief of the Jewish Nation, yea and the
Tradition of the Gentiles too, which was from thence, most probably, derived,
do very much favor it.

Dub. E^a^gel. LX^I.
Spanhemius is positive and severe in condemning this opinion, as [1. (...). 2.
(...). 3. (...),] un-scriptural, anti-scriptural, unreasonable. Za^ch. de Oper.
Dei part 1. l. 3. c* 15.
But the learned Zanchie is quite of another mind. The common and constant
consent of the Fathers, says he, has much of weight and authority with me,
unless the holy Scriptures do manifestly teach the contrary; and they all seem
to have be^n of this judgment, which I l^ok upon as the more probable; Ibid.
-- The whole Church has always thought thus. -- It was, says he ^arther, and
is the received opinion of the, Hebrews, that ^very ^aithfull person has his
certain Angel assigned him; and it may be con^irm'd from hence, th^^ the
Doctrine about A^gels propagated among the Gentil^s did ^low from the Iew^, as
Justin and Eusebius test^^i^, however many things were corrupted in the
relating. Id. l. 2. c. 1.
N^w it was the received opinion among all Nations, that all men, so soon as
co^ceived, have their Angels appointed them, whence also they were called Genii.

I will instance only in some f^w Authorities, first of the Fathers, and
secondly of Pagan-Writers.

[(...) -- ] Just. Mar^yr, Qu. and Resp. p. 410.

[ Aliquibus (Ang^lis) uniuscujusque hominis cr^ditam esse curam, ne cos
laederent and perniciem cis asserrent scelerati and ex^crati Daemones.]
Theodoret. Divin. Decret* Epit. c. de Angelis.

[(...) -- (...).] Basil. l. 3. contra Eunomium.

De Plato^e test^tur Apul^ius -- Plato autumat singulis hominibus in vita
agenda testes and cuslodes singulos additos, qui, nemini conspicui, semper
adsint arbitri omnium, etc.] De Deo Socratis.

[(...). -- (...).] Max. Tyrius, Diss. xxvi.

[(...).] Arrian. Epist. Diss. l. 1. c. 14.

(...)
(...). Menander.
Vel ut alii.
(...)
(...).
[ Quod a^tem ab Hebraeis demanarunt, quae apud ^entiles propagata sunt de
Angelis, uti e Zanchio paulo ante diximus, confirmant magis quae sequuntur.
(...); Numenius. Vide Ludov. Viv. in Aug. l. 8. de Civ. Dei c. 11. Quis
Poetarum, quis Sophistarum, qui non omnino de Prophetarum font potaverit?
Tertul. Apol. c. 47. (...); Quod apud vos studium non a Barbaris traxit
originem? Tatiani Orat. contra Graecos.]

Jacob when he blesses Ioseph's two Sons, makes this Prayer for them: The
Angel, which redeemed me from all ^vil, bless the Lads! Genesis 48.1^. where he
manifestly points at an Angel; that had all along taken the care of himself;
[whoe^er he were] but then he assigns him over, if I may so speak, to both his
Grandchildren, to Ephraim and Manasseh together. -- Our blessed Savior
affirms of his Disciples, that they have their Angels, by way of propriety.
Saint Matthew. 18.10. [from whence Saint Chrysostom thinks it evident, that the
Saints, if not all others, have their Angels, (...), Hom. 60. in S. Matthew.] But
yet he determines not peremptorily one particular Angel to each of them. -- The
Church in Mary's house say, when Saint Peter knocked at door, whom they
supposed at that time fast in Prison, It is his Angel, Act. 12.15. and this, as
Zanchie notes, De Oper. Dei part. 1. l. 3. c. 15.
[ juxta receptam in populo Dei sententiam:] and Origin infers from thence,
that the other Apostles had in like manner their Angels. Similiter ergo
intelligitur esse and alius alterius Apostoli Angelus, sicut est Petri, and
singulorum per ordinem. In Numeros Hom. 1.

This seems to argue an opinion of particular Guardian-Angels in the speakers,
but yet amounts not to a conviction of the truth of that opinion. Which is also
rendered somewhat the more dubious, because there is not an exact agreement
about the time, when this Angel enters upon his supposed charge.

Some say at the Nativity, according to that of Saint Hierom, [magna dignitas
animarum, In S. Matt. 18.
ut unaquaeque habeat ab ortu nativitatis in custodiam sui Angelum deputatum,
L. Med. c. 12.
] with whom agrees Saint Augustine, [Maximum aestimo and illud fuisse
beneficium, quod Angelum pacis ab ortu nativitatis ad finem usque meum mihi ad
custodiendum me dedisti.]

Others upon Baptism; Tract. 5. in S. Matt. cit. a Balduino de cas. consc. l. 3.
and so Origin is thought to believe, and teach, [ Singulis pueris, statim post
acceptum Baptismum, certum assignari Angelum.]

Others, not only before Baptism, but, before the Birth too, even at the
instant, when the Soul is first infused; whence Tertullian ascribes all those
good offices unto Angels, as the Ministers of Divine Power, which the
Superstition of Rome Heathen divided among several feigned Goddesses; as
Alemonia so called from nourishing the foetus in the Womb; Nona and Decima,
from the months of Note for Childbearing; Partula, from the governing of the
Birth; and Lucina, from the bringing of it into Light: Omnem hominis in utero
serendi, struendi, fingendi paraturam aliqua utique potestas, divinae
voluntatis ministra, modulatur -- Nos officia divina Angelos dicimus.] De
anima, c. 37.

The Pythagoreans conceived, That every man has both a good and a bad Angel
attending him; (which Mahomet has adopted into his Religion.) And that was
also the saying of Empedocles, Dr. More Antidot. against Atheism. l. 3. c. 14.
Alexand. ab Alexandr^ Genial. Dier. l. 6. c. 4. Hom. 12. in S. Luke Epist. 3.
Al^x. ab Alex. ubi supr^.
[ binos Genios ab ipso natali di^ cuiqu^ mortali Deorum munere datos, bonum,
scil. and malum*] which Origin seems not at all to mislike. [ Vnicuique duo
assistunt Angeli, alter justitiae, alter iniquitatis.] -- The Stoics, as Seneca
tells us, ascribed to every one [ Genium and junonem,] which, though Lipsius
interpret [ Genium nempe viris, Iunonem faeminis,] others understand after
another fashion; [ Iunonem and Genium suum singulis dederunt, quasi praesides
and oppugnatores.]

Again, the Egyptians taught, that every Man has three Angels; one to govern
his immortal Soul, Zanch. de Oper. Dei part. 1. l. 3. c. 15. Baldui^. de cas.
consc. l. 3. c. 1. Otho-Casm. Angelogr. p. 2. c. 7. Q. 1.
which was called [ Sacer Demon,] a second from the disposition of the
Heavens, called his [ Genius] and a third with reference to his Vocation or
Employment, styled therefore [ Spiritus Professionis.]

By all which it appears, how uncertainly, and at random we guess at these
matters.

The holy Scriptures speak, not only of one, but a multitude of Devils we are
in danger of, and to watch and war against, Ephesians. 6. And, in like manner, not
only of one, but a multitude of Angels employed by God for our aid and relief.
He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, -- Ps. 91. And are they not
all ministering Spirits? says the Text. Yea, and where it is said, The Angel of
the Lord encampeth -- Ps. 34. We are to construe it Angels; See Ai^s. worth in
Ps 34. and Ps. 8.
for he speaks of an Host, and often by the Hebrews one is put for a multitude,
the singular for the plural. See before Sect. 1. of this Ch*
[Thus the Inhabitant, for the Inhabitants, 2 Samuel 5.6. with 1. Chr. 11.4.
Frog, for Frogs, Psalm. 78.45. Tree, for Trees, Quail for Quails, Ps. 105.33. --
40. Ship, for Ships, 1 Kings 10.22. with 2 Chronicles. 9.21. the Fowl, for Fowls,
Ps. 8.9. Spear, for Spears, 2 Kings 11.10. with 2 Chronicles. 23.9.]

We find in sacred Writ sometimes one and the same Angel bringing Messages to
diverse persons, Gabriel, for instance, sent to Daniel, to Zacharias, Dan. 9. S.
Luke 1.
and to the blessed Virgin; and one and the same Angel taking care for, and
effecting the deliverance of sundry persons at once; Acts. 5s 19, 20.
opening the Prison-Dores and bringing forth the Apostles thence, etc.

Sometimes again we have many Angels jointly, a whole Host of them, protecting
and defending one single person. So The Mountain was full of Horses and
Chariots of Fire round about Elisha, 2 Kings 6.17. And Angels [in the plural
number] rejoice over one penitent, Saint Luke 15. And take the charge of
Lazarus his Soul at his decease, chapter 16.22.

From whence yet I dare not conclude, (as some have done) that it is
contradictory to holy Scripture, to assert some one Angel ordinarily attending
every good man; for that may well enough consist with the allowing of an
extraordinary supply of more, when God pleases; and with this qualification
that opnion is usually delivered, [ Vnicuique electo ordinary certum
propriumque Angelum -- extra ordinem vero plure^.]

Now, though all men may be supposed to have an interest in the custody of
Angels [ quatenus viatores, D. Tho. part. 1. Q. 113. Art. 4. and ^*
as the Schools speak] as travelers here in the way to happiness, so that none
shall be able ^ereafter to plead with God Almighty, and allege that they
sinned, Te^a in Ep. ad. Hebr.
[ ex defect^ hujus adjutorii,] for want of this help, where it was necessary;
yet it is most certain from the Scriptures, that good and pious men, sincere
and upright Christians, have a more special and effectual share in their
Ministry.

The words of the learned Grotius in this argument are remarkable enough, Grot.
in S. Matt. 18.10.
I think, to deserve a translation here. It is evident, says he, that the
Angels are Ministers of Divine Providence, and from thence credible, that the
Offices of Angels are distinguished according to the degrees of that
Providence. Now besides the universal Providence over all there is a common
providence, whereby God upholds and guides the civil Societies of Men, which we
call Republics. And, that each of these have their Angels, is with great
consent both of Jews and Christians collected out of Daniel; [as has been said
before.] But, as God orders the Affairs of Kingdoms with reference to the State
of the Universe, so, for the most part, the concerns of single persons with
reference to the State of Kingdoms. But, then, says he further, those, who by
a true Faith consecrate themselves to God, are exempted from the common lot,
and looked upon as God's peculiars, whom as he sustains with a special
providence, so he seems to assign Guardian-Angels unto, to direct their steps
and succeed their endeavors. -- [Agreeably whereto the Apostle ^alls the
living God, the Savior of all men, specially of those that believe, 1 Timothy
4.10. And advises elsewhere, that, in imitation of him* As we have
opportunity, we do good unto all men, especially unto them of the household of
Faith, Gal. 6.10.]

Waving all conjectures and probabilities, two points there are most obvious
and undeniable in the Text.

1. That the Angels have a Charge and Commission given them to take care of the
faithful Servants of God, and Disciples of his Son. They are [(...),] Sent
forth to minister for them that shall be heirs of Salvation. And hence they are
called their Angels, by Christ himself, as was said before. The Angel of the
Lord, says the Psalmist, encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them, Ps. 34.7. And, again, he shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their
hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone, Psalm. 91.11, 12. Where it is
spoken of such, as set their love upon God, make him their refuge, and know his
name; that is, worship and serve him, Ver. 9, 10, 14. -- Sanctus sacer Angelus
astat. D. I. Gerhard Med. xxvi.


And then,

2. That none of all the Angels are exc^^^^ from this Ministry; however the
Schools (...) some Hebrew Doctors have presumed to confine it to the lower
ranks and Orders only, as I have touched before: Are they not all ministering
Spirits, sent forth to Minister (viz. upon occasion, as God sees fit and good)
for those who shall be heirs of Salvation? Saint Cyril notes it of the
Seraphim, (who are supposed the very Supreme Power of the highest Hierarchy)
that one of them was sent to Isaiah the Prophet chapter 6. and he confirms it from
this of our Apostle to the Hebrews, that they are all administratorii Spiritus,
in the declaring of which he adds, The same yoke, Vide apud Tenam in Ep. ad.
Heb.
if one may so speak, is upon all these holy Spirits; and they are all at their
Masters beck, none of them thinking this service too mean, and unworthy, but
este^ming it their honor and praise so to be employed.

SECT. IV. Their Ministry to the Faithful.
I proceed therefore, Fourthly, to show more particularly the Ministry of the
Angels unto the Faithful, and the good turns or Offices, which they perform for
them in pursuit of this their Trust and Commission.

Menander calls them [(...),] the the Moderators of Life; Seneca [paedagogos,]
our Tutors or Schoolmasters; Vide Lips. Phys. Stoic. l. 1. Diss. 19.
Hesiod [(...),] the Guardians or Keepers of Mortals; Epicte^us, [(...),] our
Curatours, and such as neither slumber nor can be deceived; Zeno, (...),] the
Overseers of humane Affairs; which words are all significative of the benefits
received from and by them.

But, for method-sake, I will refer the chief instances of their Ministry unto
these three heads.

Zanch. de Oper. Dei par. 1. l. 3. c. 14. B^lduin. Cas. Consc. l. 3. c. 1. I.
I. (...). In order to our instruction and admonition. II. (...). In order to
our defense and preservation. III. (...). In order to our comfort, help,
deliverance and supply.
First, It is part of the Angels Ministry, upon occasion, to declare the Mind
and Will of God, and bring Messages from him for our instruction and
admonition. Vide Ce^^^is Tabulam.
In Cebes his Table the Genius is represented like an old man, with a Paper in
the one hand, and with the other pointing, as it were, at something, and
commanding those that enter into Life, what to do, and what way to walk in.

The Lord appeared unto Abraham in the Plains of Mamre, and certified him and
his Wife by his Angels, that they should have a Son in their old age, Genesis 18.
And after to Lot, giving him notice of the destruction of Sodom, and warning
him and his to sly out speedily from thence, chapter 19 And the Law is said to
have been given the Jews by the disposition of Angels; as I showed Sect 1. of
this Chapter
before, the word spoken by Angels. An Angel meets Balaam the Prophet (though
otherwise of no very good character) in a perverse way, and charges him to
speak no more than God should reveal, Numb. 22. Daniel had his Visions from an
Angel, and the Angel Gabriel was sent forth to inform him and give him skill
and understanding, Dan. 8.16. -- 9.22.23. chapter 10. and 11. So throughout the
Prophecy of Zechary, we read that an Angel talked and commun'd with him, and
showed him this and that, and said to him thus and thus, Zech. 1.9, 14, 19. --
2.3, 4. etc.

And, then in the New Testament, an Angel brings the welcome Message of a Son,
who should be the forerunner of a Messiah, to Zacharias the Priest, Saint Luke
1.13. -- and, after that, to the blessed Virgin, of her conception of that
Messiah, etc. ver. 30, 31. and, after that, proclaims the good tidings of his
Birth to the Shepherds in the Field, Saint Luke 2. -- An Angel appears thrice
to Joseph, (as has been said upon Sect. 11* of this Chapter
another occasion) first to satisfy him about the taking to him Mary his
espoused Wife; afterward to warn him to fly with the young Child and his
Mother into Egypt; and then to call him again into the Land of Israel, Saint
Matthew. 1.20, 21. -- 2.13, 20, 22. The Angels also (as I have Ibid.
shown) preach Christ's Resurrection to those that sought him in his Sepulcher,
Saint Luke 24. and testify from heaven the verity of his Ascension thither,
and his second coming thence, Acts 1. -- An Angel signifies the Revelations of
Christ to John the Divine, Revel. 1.1. -- 22.16. etc.

This way of God's communicating his Mind and Will, occasionally, to Men by
Angels, seems pointed at in that of Elihu, Job 33.14, 15, 16, 17. and was
commonly acknowledged among the Jews; whence that speech of theirs concerning
Saint Paul, We find no evil in this man, but, if a Spirit or Angel have spoken
to him, let us not fight against God.

But their doctrinal Ministry is not, ordinarily, now to be expected by us. God
has thought good to substitute other Legates for the publishing of his Mind and
Will to Men. Malachi has it of the Legal Priesthood, The Priests lips should
keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth; for he is the
Messenger [or Angel] of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7. And God, says our
Apostle, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past to the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son;
[viz. in our nature] a person far transcendent to the Angels, Hebr. 1.1, 2. And
this beloved Son of his, God inc^rnate, That great Prophet, whom all are
obliged to hearken unto, (Acts 3.22, 23.) has sent his apostles, after him,
enabling of them to continue and propagate a succession of Ministers, after
them too, faithful men, who shall teach others, unto the end of the World. He
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come into the unity of the
Faith and Knowledge of the Son of God, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. 2 Timothy 2.2.

These visible Ministers of Christ now we are to look upon and receive as
Angels. Saint Paul speaks it to the praise of the Galatians, that they once so
received him, Gal. 4.14. and so the Bishops of the Asian Churches are called by
Christ himself, as has been Chapter 1. Sect. 11.
before suggested, Revel. 2 and 3 ch's. To such as these it is, that the holy
Angels themselves direct men under the Gospel. -- An Angel calls Philip toward
the South to meet the Eunuch, and preach Jesus to him, Acts 8. An Angel
certifies Cornelius, that his Prayers and Alms were come up for a memorial
before God; but bids him send to Ioppa for Simon Peter there, who should tell
him what he ought to do; and the Angel satisfies Peter too in a Vision, as to
his going to him, Acts 10. An Angel also invites Saint Paul to preach the
Gospel in Macedonia, chapter 16. -- So forward are these celestial Spirits in
promoting the knowledge of those blessed Mysteries, which themselves with
admiration look down into; and to testify unto us, that it belongs not to them
to usurp the Ministerial Office in the Church of Christ, but to preserve and
countenance it in the hands of such, as our Lord and Savior has appointed
thereunto.

It is indeed an high honor which God imparts unto Men, to confer this
Angelical-Office and employment on them; but then it is also a gracious
condescension to humane weakness, that he is pleased so to treat with us, and
speak to us by these in our own Flesh. For we could not bear the glorious
splendour of Divinity it self in this our mortal state, nor the apparitions of
Angels, neither, without much of terror and consternation. When the Law was
given by their Ministry, the people stood amazed, and said unto Moses, Speak
thou with us and we will hear, but let not God speak with us, lest we die,
Exodus 20.19. And, when an Angel came to the Wife of Manoah, Sampson's Mother,
she says to her Husband concerning him, A man of God came unto me, and his
countenance was like the countenance of an Angel of God, very terrible, Judge.
13.6. And of Daniel we read, that upon such an appearance, his strength failed
him, and he stood trembling, Dan. 10.8, 11. and the like of others. In so much
that the Angels do usually begin their Message with the removal of that fear,
which possesses those to whom they speak. So to Daniel, Fear not Dani^l, Chapter
10.2. So to Zacharias, Fear not Zacharias, Saint Luke 1.13. So to the blessed
Virgin, Fear not Mary, Ver. 30. So to the Shepherds, Fear not, for behold I
bring you good tidings, Chapter 2.10. So to the good women at our Saviors Grave,
Fear not ye, for I know, that ye seek Jesus which was crucified, Saint Matthew.
28.5. -- It is therefore, as I have insinuated, a condescension to our state of
infirmity, that God has chosen to send and speak to us, ordinarily, by
Ambassadors of our own make and kind, mortal-men, like our s^lves, Men that
die, and are not suffered to continue by reason of death, as the Apostle
phraseth it, Hebr. 7.8, 23.

Saint Paul yet gives another account of this dispensation: We have this
Treasure, says he, in earthen-vessels, that the exc^llency of the power may be
of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. God declares and magnifies his Power in
destroying the Devils Kingdom by the Ministry of weak and frail Men.

To which may be added farther, that hereby also he makes the greater proof of
our Faith and Obedience, whilst we submit to them that watch for our Souls,
and pay them all due reverence, as God's Ministers and Christ's Vicars,
observing them, amidst their weakness and infirmities, as Christ himself;
according to that known Maxim, [ Apostolus cujusque ut quisqu^] translated by
our Savior to this purpose, He that hears you hears me, and he that
d^spiseth you despises me, Saint Luke 10.16.

And, then again, by this means has God provided for the safety of his Church,
De Oper. Dei par. 1. l. 3. c. 14.
as Zanchy notes, That f^lse and wick^d Doctrines might not be obtruded on her
for true and holy by evil Angels, transforming themselves into Ang^ls of Light;
or a wide door opened unto deceitful Enthusiasms and Revelations, contrary to
the Gospel delive^'d by Christ and his Apostles. It pleased him, says he, to
make the Angels Ministers of the Law in Mount Sinai, and, under the
New Testament, that they should send men to be taught and instructed by the
Apostles, that we might be assured, that they never propound any doctrine
opposite to the Prophetical and Apostolical; and therefore, if there be any
such in the World, that it is not from the Angels of God, but from the Devil
and A^tichrist.

We are not it is true, to limit the Almighty, but that he may still employ the
holy Angels upon certain Messages, Admonitions, and Instructions, as he
pleases; and likely enough it is, that many useful notices are communicated
from them. [ Arts praeeunt, aut docent, and quaedam humano ingenio nunquam
eruenda ostendunt, Lipsius Phys. Stoic. l. 1 Diss. 19. Vsus etiam Musicae
omnisque disciplinae, medicinae, artis gymnasticae, and si quae sit his
similis, nobis subministrant, Porphyr. deabstin. l. 2. s. 38. Quod and Plato
intellexisse videtur, cum Philosophiam, (...), appellarit. Quo spectat etiam
Ciceronis illud, Philosophi^ quid est aliud, nisi, ut Plato ait, Donum, ut Ego,
inventum Deorum? Tuscul. l. 1. and M. Antonini, (...) -- l. 1. s. 17.]

But the way of Salvation is already prescribed to us, and settled by a sure
word of Prophecy in the holy Scriptures, which we are to give heed unto, as an
unerring Rule and Guide: So that we must not look for, or hearken unto any
other Gospel. Saint Paul as to this is clear and positive; Though we or an
Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed: as we said before, so say I now again,
if any one preach any other Gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him
be accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. which we are the more carefully to mind, because
there may be sometimes Diabolical delusions pretending to be Angelical and
Divine Revelations, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. and we are warned, Not to believe
every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God, because many
false-Prophets are gone abroad in the World, 1. Ep. of S. John 4.1. We read of
a Spirit that said in Ahab's time, I will go forth and be a lying Spirit in the
mouth of all his Prophets, 1 Kings 22.21, 22. Nor was this peculiar unto that
season only; for the holy Ghost speaks expressly, as Saint Paul tells us, That
in the later times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing
Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.

This then we are to conclude upon for our security against all dangerous
Impostures, that a good Angel, an Angel of Light, can never come unto us upon
any errand contrary to the revealed Word and Will of God by Jesus Christ, whom
they all adore and worship. This is the Chart or Paper they bear always in
their hand, that I may allude to what was said of the description made in Cebes
Table, at the b^ginning. The Law was given by their Ministry, and the Gospel
published with their acclamations. And, what the Prophet Isaiah has said
against those, who consult the Devil and his Instruments, is worthy also of our
remembrance. Chap. 8.9, 10. When they shall say unto you seek unto them that
have Familiar Spirits, and unto Wizzards, that peep and that mutter; [or that
cant] should not a People seek unto their God? [as if he had said, how
incongruous and absurd is it to forsake the Oracles of God, and enquire of the
Devils?] To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this
Word [whatever New Light they may possibly pretend unto] it is because there is
no Light in them.

Secondly, It is a particular charge given to the The Angel of the Lord [(...),
castrametatur circum] encampeth round about them that fear him, Ps. 34. And
There shall no evil befall thee; for he shall give his Angels charge over thee,
[(...)] to keep thee in all thy ways, [(...)] they shall bear thee up in their
hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone, Ps. 91.10, 11, 12.

With this therefore Abraham encourages his Servant, when he sent him to seek
a Wife for his Son Isaac, The Lord God of Heaven shall send his Angel before
thee, Genesis 24.7. Which he, when he comes to tell his Story, thus repeats, He
said unto me, the Lord, before whom I walk, will send hi^ Angel with thee, and
prosper thy way, v. 40. And, when Jacob returned to his Father's House from the
service of Laban, the Angels of God met him in the way, of whom he said, Th^^
is God's Host, Genesis 32.1, 2. [of which Chapter 2. Sect. 3.
before] and he had good experience of their prot^ction. This was the support
which God gave unto Moses in his conduct of the People of Israel, Exodus 23.20,
etc. Behold I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring
thee into the place, which I have pr^pared. Beware of him, and ob^y his voice:
provoke him not, for he will ^ot pardon your transgressions; for my Name is in
him. But if thou shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak, then I
will be an Enemy unto they Enemies, and an Adversary unto thy Adversaries; for
mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the
Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the Hivites, and the
Jebusites, and I will cut them off. -- And again he renews the same
encouragement, chapter 33.2. I will send an Angel before thee, and I will drive out
the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite,
and the Jebusite. When a formidable Army of Syrians had surrounded Dothan,
where Elisha was, to apprehend him, so that his Servant was at his wits end
upon it, Elisha thus comforts him, Fear not, for they that be with us, are more
than they that be with them, 2 Kings 6.14, 15. whereby he meant the Host of
Angels that pitched about him; for so it follows, v. 16, 17. And Elisha prayed
and said, Lord, I pray thee open h^^ Eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened
the Eyes of the young Man, and he saw, and behold* the Mountain was full of
Horses and Chariots of Fire round about Elisha. Him therefore they pr^serv^d in
this strait and danger, smiting of the Syrians with blindness, as we may read
more at large.

This is supposed to be that Hedge, the Devil complains of, which God made
about Job, and about his House, and about all that he had on every side, chapter 1.
v. 10. And accordingly some expound that place of the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 5.5.
Vide Tenam in Ep. ad Hebr. and Othoca^m. Angelogr. part 2. c. 7. v. 6.
I will take away the Hedge of my Vineyard, and it shall be eaten up; and break
down the Wall thereof* and it shall be trodden down. [Sepes and maceria
custodia Angelica] as the ordinary gloss has it, This Hedge and Wall is the
Guard, or Custody, of Angels. And so we may conceive too That Promise of God's
being a Wall of Fire round about Jerusalem, Zec. 2.4. according to what we
read, even now, of the Mountain full of Horses and Chariots of Fire round about
Elisha. And, agreeably to this, we are informed, that, immediately before the
D^struction of Jerusalem, Josephus de Bello Judaico* l. 2. c. 12.
were heard the Voices of Angels in the Temple, saying, Let us hence.

Many good Men, undoubtedly, have owed their safety and preservation from
impendent evils and ruin to the peculiar warning of Angels. So our blessed
Savior, as I have noted Sect. 2.
before, was kept from the malice of Herod, and his Emissaries, by the Angel
warning Joseph in a Dream, S. Mat. 2. Some memorable passages of this nature I
will here insert out of History.

The first I take from Melanchton, in his comment upon Daniel, where he tells
this Story of Grynaeus, a Learned and Religious Divine. Melanchton, comment. in
Dan. c. 10.
This Grynaeus at the meeting at Spire, Anno 1529. came to Melanchton from the
University of Heidelberge, and, having heard Faber Bishop of Vienna defending
some gross errors in a Sermon by him preached there, went to him privately and
expostulated with him a while about them. Faber politickly dissembles his
dislike, pr^tends himself desirous of farther discourse with him, and that he
would return to him on the Morrow to that purpose, appointing him then to meet
him, and begging his excuse for the present haste, as having some urgent
business with the King. Grynaeus, in the interim, thinks him in good ^arnest,
whereas the Snare was now a-laying for his Life, goes back to Melanchton in
this persuasion, and was just set down to Supper, and telling part of what had
passed, when Melanchton was suddenly called by a certain Voice from Table to
his Study, where one, he knew not, in the appearance of a Grave old Man, spoke
to him and told him, there would be Officers presently at hand, sent forth by
the King at the instigation of Fab^r, for the arrest and imprisonment of
Grynaeus, commanding him therefore to go immediately from the City, and make no
delays, and so took his leave. Upon this Melanchton forthwith goes back to the
Company, bids them to rise, and declares what was said to him. Whereupon they
convey Grynaeus to the Rhine, staying at the Banks but till they saw him safe
over on the other side; and, returning back to his Lodgings, found that the
Officers had been there indeed to search for him. This Relation Melanchton
avers himself for certain, and appeals to the Testimony of many good Men then
alive to avouch it, concluding of it devoutly to this effect. Bless we God,
that he adds his Angels for our Keepers; Id. Ibid.
and let us upon that account perform the Offices of our Vocation with the more
quiet and unconcerned Spirits.

A second I contract out of Dr. H. Mo^e, who gives us this at large out of
Bodinus.

Antidote against Atheism. l. 3. chapter 13.
An Holy and Pious Man, as it should seem, and Acquaintance of Bodinus's, freely
told him, how he had a certain Spirit that did perpetually accompany him, which
he was first aware of in the 37. Year of his Age, but conceived that the said
Spirit had been present with him all his Lifetime, as he gathered from certain
Monitory Dreams and Visions, whereby he was forewarned as well of several
dangers, as vices. That this Spirit discovered himself to him after he had for
a whole Year together prayed to God to send a good Angel to be the Guide and
Governor of his Life and Actions. That every day he would knock at the Door
about three or four a-Clock in the Morning to rouse him up, and a Voice would
come, while he was asleep, saying, [ Who gets first up to pray?] That by some
sensible sign he did ever advertise him of things, as by striking his right
Ear, if he did any thing amiss; if otherwise, his left: and if any body came to
circumvent him, that his right Ear was struck; but his left, if a good Man, and
to good ends, accosted him. If he was about to eat or drink any thing that
would hurt him, or intended or purposed with himself to do any thing that would
prove ill, that he was inhibited by a sign; and if he delayed to follow his
business, that he was quickened by a sign given him. When he began to praise God
in Psalms, and to declare his marvelous Acts, that he was presently raised and
strengthened with a spiritual and supernatural Power. That he was often
admonished to give Alms, and that the more charity he bestowed, the more
prosperous he was. And that on a time, when his Enemies sought after his Life,
and knew that he was to go by Water, that his Father in a Dream brought two
Horses to him, the one White, the other Bay; and that therefore he bid his
Servant hire him two Horses, and, though he told him nothing of the colors,
that yet he brought him a White-one and a Bay-one. That in all difficulties,
Journeys, and what other Enterprises soever he used to ask Counsel of God; and
that one Night, when he had begged his Blessing, while he slept he saw a
Vision, wherein his Father seemed to bless him. At another time, when he was in
very great danger, and was newly gone to Bed, he said, that the Spirit would
not let him alone, till he had raised him again; wherefore he watched and
prayed all that Night, and the day after he escaped the hands of his
Persecutors in a wonderful manner; which being done, in his next sleep he heard
a Voice saving, Now sing, Qui sedet in latibulo Altissime.

A third I find in a late Discourse of Moses Amyraldus, Of divine Dreams, p.
120, etc.
who tells it from Cameron a Divine of Name and Eminence in the Reformed
Churches, that he had from the Mouth of Monsieur Calignon, Chancellor of Navar,
this notable passage which befell him in Bearn. Being in a certain Town of that
Country, one Night as he was asleep he heard a Voice, which called him by his
Name, Calignon; whereupon awaking, and hearing no more of it, he fell to sleep
again. And alittle after he heard the same Voice calling him in the same
manner, which made a greater Impression upon him than before: so that now,
being awakened, he called to his Wife lying by him, and told her what had
happened; and both of them for a time lay awake, expecting whether they might
hear the Voice again, and whether it would say any thing more to them. At last
the Voice awakened him a third time, calling him, as before, by Name, and
advising him by all means to retire speedily out of that Town with his Family;
for that within a few days the Plague would rage horribly there. To which the
Chancellor added, that it was very well he followed the Direction given him,
for as much as soon after the Plague indeed began in the Town, and destroyed a
great Number of the People. -- And this, says Amyraldus, was certainly an
Angel, that spoke to him, and by the favorable and benign Providence ofGod
drew him out of that danger, which otherwise had been unavoidable. Ibid.


Thus much in effect Apuleius tells us of Socrates his Demon, out of Plato,
that, Apul. de deo Socratis.
if there were danger at any time in his Enterprises and Undertakings, he heard
a Voice from Heaven admonishing him to use Caution, and either forbear awhile,
or steer another Course. And Balbus in Cicero thus expounds Homer's allowing to
the principal Heroes Certos Deos, discriminum and periculorum comites, de Not.
deorum, l. 2.

Thirdly, It is part of the Angels Ministry to the The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him^punc; [(...)] and delivers them, Ps.
34. Instances of this sort we may have many.

The Angel of the Lord found Hagar by the Fountain of Water in the Wilderness*
in the way to Shur, and said, Hagar, Sarah's Maid, whence came thou, and
whither will thou go? And she said, I fl^e from the Face of my M^stress Sarai.
And the Ang^l of the Lord said unto her, return unto thy Mistr^ss, and submit
thy self under her hands. And the Angel of the Lord said unto her, [farther] I
will mul^iply thy Seed exceedingly that it shall not be numbered ^or Multitude,
-- b^hold thou art with Child, and shall be^r a Son, and shall ^all h^s N^me
^shmael, [that is, God shall hear] because ^he Lord has heard thy affl^ction,
Genesis 16.7, 8, etc. And ag^^n, when she and that Son of hers were cast forth,
and wandered in the Wilderness of Beersheba, and the Water was spent in the
Bottle, and she cas^ the Child under the Shrubs, and went and sat down
over against him a good way off, that she might not see his death, and lift up
her voice, and wept, God, says the Text, heard the voice of the Lad, and the
Angel of the Lord called to Hagar out of Heaven, and said unto her, what aileth
thee Hagar? Fear not, for God has heard the voice of the Lad, where he is;
Arise, lift up the Lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make of him a
great Nation. And God opened her eyes, and she saw a Well of Water, and she
went and filled the Bottle with the Water, and gave the Lad to drink, Genesis
21.15, etc.

Elijah, in like manner, threatened by Iezebel, ^led to Beersheba, where he left
his Servant, and going a day's journey himself in the Wilderness ^at down in
great discontent under a Juniper-Tree, desirous rather to die than live: And,
says the Text, as he lay and slept under the Iuniper-Tree, behold, an Angel
touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat, and he looked, and, behold,
there was a Cake baked on the Coals, and a Cruise of Water at his Head. And he
did eat, and drink, and laid him down again. And the Angel of the Lord came
again the second time, and said unto him, Arise and eat because the journey is
too great for thee. And he arose and did eat, and drink, and went in the
strength of that Meat forty day's and forty nights unto Horeb the Mount of
God, 1. Kings 19.5, etc. This Meat brought to Elijah we may call [ Angels
food,] as, possibly, the Israelites Mannah from Heaven was so called, not only
for the excellency of it, as has been ^ Chapter 1. ^ect. 2.
before suggested, but because procured and brought down by the Ministry of
Angels. And the same Elijah, afterward, was encouraged by an Angel to go along
with Ahaziah the third Captain, and not to be afraid of him [having before, by
the aid of Angelical Ministry, most probably, destroyed the first and second
Captains with their Fifties, sent to apprehend him, with Fire from Heaven; in
so much as this third also terrified with their examples, fell on his knees,
beseeching him to spare his life; whereupon the Angel says, Go down with him
and be not afraid of him,] 2 Kings 1.

When the Prophet Isaiah, upon the Vision, Chapter 6. cried out, Woe is me! for I am
unclean, because I am a man of unclean lips, and dwell in the midst of a people
of unclean lips; There flew, says the Text, one of the Seraphims unto him,
having a live-coal in his hand, which he had taken with the Tongs from off the
Altar, and he laid it upon his Mouth, and said, Lo this has touched thy Lips,
and thine iniquity is taken away and thy sin purged, Verse. 5, 6, 7.

Our blessed Lord and Savior himself had the Angels Ministering unto him, and
strengthening of him, in and after his Temptations, and bitter Agony, as has
been shown Sect. 2^. of this C^.
already in its proper place.

Saint Paul having related the great danger, that he and his company were in at
Sea, adds remarkably, There stood by me this night an Angel of God, whose I am
and whom I serve, saying, fear not, Paul, thou must be brought before Caesar,
and, lo, God has given thee all them that sail with thee, Acts 27.23, 24.

The Angels at Sodom pulled Lot into the house, and struck those that assaulted
him with blindness, Genesis 19.10, 11. and after that, they warn him in time to
bring his Kindred and Goods out of that wicked place, which God had sent them
to destroy, Ver. 13. And, not content with a naked warning, when the morning
arose, they hasten him again, saying, Arise, take thy Wife and thy two
Daughters, which are here, lest thou be consumed in the punishment of the City,
Ver. 15, etc. And, while he lingered, says the Text, the men laid ^old upon his
hand, and upon the hand of his Wife, and upon the hand of his two Daughters,
the Lord being merciful unto him, and set him without the City. -- Nor do they
leave them quietly there, so long as there was apparent danger, but, When they
had brought them abroad, they add, esc^pe for thy life, look not behind thee,
neither stay thou in all the Plain, ^scape to the Mountain, lest thou be
consum^d. --

We read of an Angel in the Book of Revelations, crying to the four Angels
there, to whom it was given to hurt the Earth and Sea, saying, Hurt not till we
have sealed the Servants of our God in the foreheads, Revel. 7.2, 3.

King Hezekiah in a great strait and distress, begirt with the Assyrians, whose
Power and multitude he was no-ways able to resist, prays to God, and he sends
his Angel to work a sudden and wonderful deliverance for him, destroying in one
night (as has been touched Chapter 2. sect. 3.
before) an hundred fourscore and five thousand of the insulting Enemy, 2 Kings
19.

And such another story we have of the great deliverance of Maccabeus, and the
Jews, by an Angel [or helper from Heav'n] in the Apochrypha, 2 Maccab. 11.6, 8,
9, 10, 11. with his prayer at another time for the like aid, encouraged by this
example of Hezekiah, Chapter 15.22, 23, 24.

The three famous Confessors, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego (whose proper
names were Hananiah, Michael, and Azariah, Dan. 1.) when cast into a Fiery
Furnace, heated seven times hotter than ordinary, were yet strangely preserved
from all harm, and indemnified amidst the raging Flames by an Angel of God, who
appeared there with them, so that that most furious and devouring Element had
no power upon their Bodies, nor was an hair of their Head singed, neither were
their Coats changed, nor did the smell of the Fire pass upon them, though it
was so fierce and scorching that it consumed the men, who cast them in, Dan. 3.

And when Daniel, another of the Confessors of those times, (as they are
reckoned up, Chapter 1. called there, The four Children, to whom God gave great
knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom) when he, I say, was cast into
the Lions Den, on purpose to be devoured, an Angel of God there restrains the
wild appetite of those greedy beasts of prey, and after a most unwonted manner
preserves him in the very Jaws of Death, Dan. 6. My God, says he, has sent
his Angel, and has shut the Lions mouths that they have not hurt me, for as
much as before him innocence was found in me, and also before thee, O King,
have I done no hurt, Ver. 22. And these four are the persons plainly referred
to in the Apostle's Martyrology, Hebr. 11.33, 34. Who, are said, through faith
to have stopped the mouths of Lions, and quenched the violence of Fire, viz. God
by his Angels, as has been said* rescuing and delivering them.

When the Apostles were, by the procurement of the High Priest, put in the
Common-Prison, the Angel of the Lord by night opened the Prison-doors, and
brought them forth, and animated them to speak openly to the People in the
Temple, Acts 5.18, etc.

And Saint Peter, after that, imprisoned by Herod, and delivered over for
security to four Quaternions of Soldiers to be kept, was thence,
notwithstanding all their care, set at liberty by an Angel loosing of his
Chains, causing the Iron-gates of the City to open to him, and conducting of
him through the Streets thereof, in such a manner as he thought himself but in
a Dream for a great while, till he came at last to acknowledge, Now I know of a
surety that the Lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand
of Herod, and from all the expectation of the People of the Jews, Acts 12.4,
etc.

Thus the Angels, we see, are the Commissioned Instruments of extraordinary
Escapes, Preservations and Deliverances.

Sometimes too they are sent, as Physicians, to cure and heal, in case of Hurt,
Sickness, or Disease. Hence we read of the Pool of Bethesda, where lay a great
multitude of impotent Folk, Blind, half-wither'd, waiting for the moving of the
Water, For an Angel, says the Text, went down at a certain season, [which
Heinsius tells us out of Cyril was, Exercit. Sacr. in Nonnum. ^. 20.
yearly, at Pentecost] into the Pool and troubled the Water; and whosoever then
first after the troubling of the Water stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever
Disease he had, Saint John 5.3, 4.

To this head we may refer, perhaps, those choice Receipts, which M. Antoninus
acknowledges himself a Debtor for to the Gods [(...), L. 1. s. 17.
(...) -- ]

And in the Book of Tobit we are told of the Angel Raphael [whose name, as I
have said elsewhere, signifies a Divine Physitian] sent to heal old Tobit of
his blindness, and Sarah the Daughter of Raguel, his daughter-in-Law, of her
reproached barrenness, To scale away the whiteness of Tobit 's eyes, and to
give Sarah the daughter of Raguel for a wife to Tobias the son of Tobit, and to
bind Asmodeus the evil Spirit, that had killed her seven former husbands before
they had lain with her, Tobit 3. And the good old man was so ready in his
belief of this Divinity, concerning the help and protection of God's Angels
vouchsafed to his Servants upon occasion, that he cheers and comforts his
troubled and discontented Wife, upon his Son's journey from her, with it: Take
no care, says he, he shall return in safety, and thine eyes shall see him; for
the good Angel will keep him company, and his journey shall be prosperous, and
he shall return safe, Chapter 5.20, 21.

Hitherto I have given sundry apposite instances, as I conceive, of the
Ministry of Angels to pious and good men, throughout their life, instructing,
defending, comforting, helping and delivering them. And, we may be sure, their
aid and assistance is then most ready at hand, when they have most need of it.

At the Agony of Death therefore they may look for strength and support from
them, even as they ministered to our Lord and Savior in his as has been more
than once suggested Sect. 2* of this Chapter and before in this Section. Angelin.
Gazaeus Angelo custodi.
already. That is a time certainly, wherein their help cannot but be very
acceptable, all other visible help then failing, and the Devil plying of his
assaults because he knows his time is short; [which gave occasion to Gazaeus to
insert this intercalare Distichon in a Poem of his to his Angel-keeper, Angele
mi, bone dux animae, bone mentis Achates,
Quo sine non possum vivere, nolo mori.]
In death, as Gerhard speaks, D. I. Ge^hard. Med: Sacr.
we fear especially the craft of our Adversary, that Serpent, who does [
insidiari calcaneo,] ply at the heel. The heel, says he, is the extreme part
of the Body; an th extreme term of Life is Death. In that agony of death
therefore the custody of Angels is chiefly necessary, to keep us from the fiery
darts of the Devil, and convey the Soul, when it leaves the Body, into the
heav^^ly P^^adise.

De anima c. 52.
Tertu^^^^^ stile^ them [(...)] the C^^lers forth of (...) and ^uch a^ (...)
them [(...) ^uram diversorii] (...) p^^paration (...) those M^nsions they are
(...) to agreeably ^o which we ^ave ^omew^^^^ (...) among the Platonists, [
Vide (...), de Deo Socratis. Plato docuit, ^bi v^^a edit^ (...) est, cundem
illum Genium raptare illic^, and (...) velu^ custodiam suam ad ju^^^ium, etc.]
And then, after the separat^on of Body and Soul asunder, they are careful and
diligent in their attendance to Lodge the departed Spirit safely in its Rest and
Happines^. Such a privilege belongs, unquestionably, even to the poorest and
meanest of God's Servants. For so it is recorded of Lazarus, for our
encouragement, The Beggar died, and was carried by Angels into Abraham' s
bosom, Saint Luke 10.22. that is, by them he was translated into the place of
his refreshment in the Kingdom of God, with that Father of the Faithful. And
such probably was Elias his Fiery Chariot and Horses, wherein he mounted to
Heaven, 2 Kings 2.11.

They rejoice at the return and conversion of Sinners unto God, as has been
said before from Saint Luke 15.7, 10. and their joy is increased by the
receiving of them at last into their own number in the Regions of Bliss and
Happiness, as those, [ per quos ruinae suae scissuras restaurari expectant,
Soliloq. ^. 27.
says Saint Augustin] by whom they expect the Rents among themselves by the
fall of so many to be made up again and restored.

Thus the Angels are, all along, and everywhere, ministering Spirits to the
Elect, to keep off evil from them, and to supply them with all the good they
stand in need of, and God sees fitting for them; watching all opportunities ^or
the preservation, health and safety, both of their Bodies and Souls, goods and
good names; guarding them from the invasion of evil and hurt^ul Spirits* making
an ^edg about them and all that they have, Vid. Max. Tyrium Diss. xxvi.
working ^^^ir p^osperity and su^cess in matters o^ importance, relating to the
most considerable turns of their lives, assisting them in their Vocations,
providing for their escape and deliverance in dan^er^ extraordinary, healing of
their Sicknesses (...), com^orting and relieving of them in (...) of the
greatest perplexity and trouble, never leaving them destitute in any condition;
encouraging and strengthening of them at their death, yea and after death too
waiting upon them, till they have brought them safely to those Regions of
Felicity, where no hazard or danger can farther reach them.

These, says Saint Augustine, Solil. c. 27.
are the Guardian-keepers upon the Walls of the N^w Jerusalem, and the
Mountains that encompass her about, watching and observing the vigils of the
night over her Flock, that the old Serpent, our Adversary the Devil, may not as
a Lion snatch our Souls, whilst there is none to deliver. They are sent to
minister for them, who shall be heirs of Salvation, to free them from their
En^mies, and keep them in all their ways, to comfort them also, and admonish
them, and offer up their Prayers to God. For they love these their
fellow-Citizens, and therefore with great care and a vigilant industry are
present with them, at all times, and in all places, ready to come in for their
relief, and provide for their necessities, and solicit to and fro, as ac^^ve
Messengers between them and Heaven. They assist ^^em in their labors, protect
them in their rest, hearten them in their Fights, and crown them upon their
Victories.

SECT. V. An Objection, touching the superfluousness of Angelic-Ministry,
removed.
Now, lest any should object or say within their hearts, That this Ministry of
the good and holy Angels is altogether needless and superfluous, since God
himself is Omnipresent and Omnipotent, everywhere at hand, and of Power
unquestionably sufficient to do all that for us, which we ^an desire, and much
more than we can look for or receive from them; I will offer a few things here
for the extirpating of this prejudice.

Far be it from any Christian to think or imagine such a necessity of the
Angels interposure, as those Heathens did, who, confining of their Gods to the
upper Regions, and looking on it as a diminution and disturbance of their ease
and happiness, to concern themselves with the vast variety of affairs in the
sublunary World, found out this expedient of certain middle natures, as Agents
and Messengers for dispatch between them and Mortals. [ Inter terricolas
coelicol^sque vectores, hinc precum, inde donorum, qui ul^^^ citroque portant
hinc petitiones, inde suppetias, ceu quidam utriusque interpretes, and
salutigeri. Apul^ius de D^o Socr. (...). Plato in Symposio.]

The knowledge we have of God's ubiquity and in^inite perfection forbids to
surmise thus of him, as if he were pent and cooped up any-where, or as if any
thing could be concealed at any time, or in any place, from his notice; or, as
if the ef^ecting any thing were ^ trouble, disturbance, or burden to him, who
created the Universe with a word speaking. Ignoratio rerum aliena naturae
Deorum est, and sustinendi muneris propter imbecillitatem difficultas m^^ime
cadit in majestatem Deorum. Balbus apud Ciceronem, de Not. Deorum l. ^. But
then the same knowledge forbids us also once to opine or imagine that any of
his Constitutions and Appointments are in vain. We are not, it is true,
competent Judges of his Works, so as to give the full and adequate reason or
account of them; but yet both may and ought to conclude from his own
Excellencies, that in the greatest and exactest wisdom, [ mensura, numero, and
pondere, Wisd. 11.] he has contrived and made them all.

We cannot possibly tell the need or usefulness of sundry sorts of Beings;
nevertheless it is not for us hastily to pronounce, that they might therefore
be spared, and serve not to any worthy purpose. M. Antoninus, I remember,
speaking of such things as are apt to offend and trouble us, [as Thorns and
Briars, etc.] bids to decline them, L. 8. s. 50.
if we can, for our own safety; but not to start that bold and idle question of
curiosity, [(...);] Why were these things at all in the world? This were the
way, as he adds, for us to be laughed at by those that understand Nature better
than we do; in like manner as he would deserve from an Artificer, who should
come into his Shop, or Workhouse, and blame thi^ and that Tool or Contrivance
for superfluous and unnecessary, which the Master well enough knew the design
and use of. That profound reverence we owe unto God, L. 7. s. 4. L. 11. s. 6.
(as he instructs us elsewhere) to pronounce, even in things not only beyond
our reach, but contrary to our wills and inclinations, [(...)] This has a good
and sufficient Reason, though we ken it not; nay, and to conclude that he would
have contrived otherwise, L. ^ 2. s. 5.
[(...)] if the matter required it, or it were not best as it is. This I
premise in the general, to silence all importunate and presumptuous Enquiries
into the Reason and Account of God ^^mighty's Works and Providence. It should
su^^^ce at any time for us to be assured, that things are so and so; though we
are not able to reach the Quare or Quomodo, the Grounds or Ends of them. As
Justin Martyr said well about the Mysteries of our Faith; [(...)] It is a
convi^tion of manifest unbelief to start the Question [ How? Expos. ^id de ^ect
^ confess. p. 38^.
] of God.

But the case before us admits of a fair and equal satisfaction, T^eod^r^^.
Dial. 1. See D^ut. 2^* 29 and (...). 3.21.1^ 24.
unto all such as are disposed to entertain it; provided they have but a
competent share of the Good Father's modesty, neither to pry into what is
hidden, nor wilfully to overlook what is revealed.

The on^y reason we know of God's making the World, and the several sorts of
Beings in it, was his own (...) or good pleasure, [ Who works all things
according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11.] to produce Creatures
that might be capable of the free communications of his Divine Goodness, and
reflecting back the acknowledgment thereof to himself. But having once put all
together in the most excellent order, connection, and subserviency each to
other, and established the Laws of their mutual dependence, and operations by
his Fiat, or Decree, he now governs and manageth all things according to those
Laws and Rules, unless some great and considerable motive of wi^dom or goodness
draw him to suspend ^ while, or exceed them by Miracle. Though he b^
everywhere in the Universe, and all the powers and perfections of that hold of
him; yet he is a Being himself really distinct from it; and where he has
settled and appointed the means to any End or Purpose, we must not sit still,
and look for his immediate interposure, but in that way and method only which
he has chosen and established. I, says he in the Prophet, will hear the
Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and
the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Iezreel, Hos. 2.21, 22.

God, it is confessed, can do all things by himself. He can keep us alive
without our natural food, for man lives not by bread alone, but by every word
proceeding out of his mouth; but yet it is not his pleasure, ordinarily, so to
do; nor may we, without sin and smarting for our folly, presume to tempt him by
the neglect or slighting of those daily Provisions, which he has placed within
our reach. In like sort he can govern the World and the Societies of men in it,
without the help and superintendency of Earthly Rulers; yet we are well
assured, they are all ordained by him, and we out of conscience to that
Ordinance of his, to apply our selves to, and act under them. Romans 13.

Such is the beautiful Eutaxie of the World, as I have touched elsewhere, that
all ^^^gs are framed with a due respect each to other, [(...), as the LXX read,
Eccles. 7.14.] and inferior Beings are generally governed by their Superiors,
though all of them under God; who as he pleased at first voluntarily to make
This scale, and gradation of Beings, [(...)] Invisible, and [(...)] Visible,
and then Man a complex as it were of both together, [(...)] so he now wisely
orders the Things made by their just and proper Laws and Measures, and after
the most excellent way and manner for their ministry and service each to other.
Si a primis inchoatisque naturis ad ultimas perfectasque volumus procedere, ad
Deorum naturam perveniamus necesse est. Balbus in Cicerone de Not. Deorum, l. 2.

Vid. Za^^. de Oper. Dei, part 1. l. 3. c. 14. and 16.
Of the Angelical Economy in particular, I will offer but these two things.

1. That it tends extremely to our consolation, and the assuring of us touching
the love, regard, and care of God to and for us, when he has not only
vouchsafed the lower World for our use and accommodation, but appointed so
noble a Rank of Creatures also for our service and attendance. And,

2. It tends also to produce and increase a mighty friendship and
correspondence between us and these blessed Spirits; while their love to us is
heightened and improved by the continual exercise of it in all the acts of
kindness and goodwill they now do for us; and our gratitude back again toward
them, excited by the reflections which we make upon their officiousness; and by
this means we are certainly on both sides prepared for the great happiness of
an eternal society hereafter each with other mutually in Heaven, when we s^^^l
come to meet together there, and know them better, as they do us.

CHAP. V. The Character of the persons, for whose good especially the Angels
are commissioned.
HAving treated so largely of the Angels Ministry, I will add a few words in
the next place, of that Character which our Apostle here gives the Persons for
whose good, benefit and advantage especially God has commissioned them, For
them, says he, that shall be Heirs of salvation. [(...)] for them who shall
hereafter inherit salvation.

SECT. I. Heirs of Salvation.
Salvation is the Scripture-word for Happiness and Glory; a freedom and
immunity from all Evil, attended with the fruition of whatever Good we are
capable of, and that unto Eternity. Eternal Salvation, Heb. 5.9. Salvation,
with eternal glory, 2 Timothy 2.10. which is at other times called Eternal life,
The Kingdom of God, and that Blessing, which is the sum both of all God's
Promises to us, and all our desires and longings. Whence we have these ensuing
Phrases remarkably answering that of the Text: [(...)] To inherit eternal life,
S. Matthew. 19.29. S. Mark 10.17. S. Luke 10.25. -- 18.18. [(...)] To inherit the
Kingdom of God, S. Matthew. 25.34. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. -- 15.50. Gal. 5.21. [(...)]
To Inherit the Promises, Heb. 6.12, 17. [(...)] To inherit the Blessing, 1 S.
Pet. 3.9. Heb. 12.17. -- And that we may know no good thing is here wanting,
[(...)] To inherit all things, Rev. 21.7. all things together, all in one, viz.
in God, the comprehensive Quintessence of all perfections.

But yet, there is somewhat peculiar in this Phrase of the Text, [(...)] To
inherit Salvation; that is, the great Blessing of the Gospel, with reference
whereto Christ is called, The Savior of the World, and the Gospel it self,
accordingly, The knowledge of Salvation, S. Luke 1.77. The word of Salvation,
Acts 13.26. The way of Salvation, Act. 16.17. The Gospel of Salvation, Ephesians.
1.13. The Grace of God which brings Salvation; or, The saving Grace of God,
Titus 2.11. So great Salvation, Heb. 2.3.

The word has a primary reference to that Evil and Misery we are delivered
from. And so indeed we are most capable of a sensible estimate of the ^uture
state of Blessedness, by reflecting upon those miseries of all sorts which here
we stand exposed to; That wrath of God whereto our sins have made us liable.
Whence we read of Salvation from Sin, S. Matthew. 1.21. and Salvation from Wrath,
1 Thessalonians. 1.10. -- 5.9. But then, it connotes als^ the fullness of joy and
happiness, which is consequent hereunto, when God shall wipe away all tear^,
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor pain; but
perfect health, and case, and tranquillity, even all things des^rable, Rev.
21.4, 7.

Two points, especially, it imminds us of;

I. That lost and undone condition, which sin has involved us in: For Christ
came to seek and save [(...)] that which was lost, S. Matthew. 18.11. The cry of
those in the Ship, ready to sink, well fits our case, Lord save us, we perish!
S. Matthew. 8.25. We are all sinners, and therefore miserable; Lord save us from
our sins! We are by nature children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. Lord save us from thy
wrath! from the Day of thy wrath! from the wrath to come! Show us thy mercy, O
Lord, and ^rant us thy salvation! Psalm. 85.7.

II. The way of our escape, freedom, and deliverance by the mediation of the
Son of God in our nature, The Savior, which is Christ the Lord, S. Luke 2.11.
By whom we have received the atonement, Romans 5.11. Neither is there Salvation
in any other; for there is no other name under Heaven, given among men, whereby
we must be saved, Acts 4.12. Other foundation can no man lay, [1 Cor. 3.11.] to
build the grounded hopes of Salvation on. Through him alone we have the
assurance of it. This is the Record [which we must bide by] that God has given
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son, 1 S. John 5.11. He is the way,
the truth, and the life, S. John 14.6. [ Vera illa via, quae ducit ad vitam
aeternam] He is the appointed Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. and by him we are
admitted to a share in the Inheritance.

Here therefore we learn how Blessedness becomes our (...), i. e. our Portion
or Inheritance. It was no question, the ancient Patrimony which Almighty God at
first designed for all his Offspring, but yet upon the reasonable condition of
their silial duty and obedience to himself. Sin and disobedience entering in
provoked the heavenly Father to disinherit, and lay his curse upon them instead
o^ the Blessing. Man was made and placed in Paradise, 'till Rebellion drove him
out thence; and, upon that were set at the East of the Garden of Eden,
Cherubims and a flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the
Tree of life, Genesis 3.24. And yet notwithstanding, such is Gods paternal grace
and indulgence, that there is a Land of promise still set before us; there is a
way made for our re-entrance into Paradise, the Garden of Eden, and the Tree of
Life there; yea and a Conduct back, even by Angels too, thither. It Is true, if
we find happiness now, it must be Salvation: yet, That Salvation may become our
Inheritance, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
according to his abun^ant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the ^^ad, to an inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you, who are
kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in
the last time, -- 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5.

God, upon the score of Christ's performances in our nature, is reconcilable
to Mankind, and actually reconciled unto all, that by him return home to
himself. He is ready to forgive and accept us in that his well-beloved, for his
sake to admit us again as children of his special grace and favor, and heirs
of Glory. As many as received him, says Saint John, to them gave he power
[right or priviledge] to become the Sons of God, even to them that beli^ve in
his Name, Saint John 1.14. And this love and condescension of his ought
deservedly to be admired by us, Behold, says the same Apostle, what manner of
love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of
God! 1 Epistle 3.1. Such Sons to whom he purposes and bequeaths the inheritance
of Salvation! For if children, says Saint Paul, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and
Ioint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham 's
seed, and heirs according unto promise, Gal. 3.29. All things are yours, and ye
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. You are Heirs according to
the hope of eternal life, Titus 3.7. Heirs together of the Grace of Life, 1
Pet. 3.7. Heirs of the Kingdom, which God has promised to them that love him,
Saint James 2.5.

SECT. II. A farther account of the same; and therein of things necessary to
Salvation.
From hence then we are sufficiently resolved, who they are that shall inherit
Salvation; viz. all upright-hearted, Vid. Erasm. par. in loc*
sincere and honest Christians; all the genuine Disciples of Christ, that
pursue and make good the Vow of their Baptism, whereby they were solemnly
entered into his Body the Church, and so made members of Christ, children of
God, and inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven; provided only, that they are
faithful to that sacred Stipulation, Pact and Covenant, which they are engaged
in, to fulfill it.

For, as Ignatius tells, Ignat. Ep. ad Magnes. Salv. de Gubern. Dei.
we must not only be called Christians, but be what we are called, if we would
be happy: and a name without the importance of it will profit nothing, as
Salvian speaks.

This is a matter of the greatest weight and moment for us all to consider well
of, and pause a while upon.

For ever happy they, who are the Heirs of Salvation! But it will be an
addition to our misery, [ ^anta de spe decidere,] if we deceive our selves with
fond and vain conceits of a right and title to that blessed inheritance, while
our names are legible in the black Catalogue of those, who are expressly
excluded ^hence. Here therefore our recourse must be to the Word of God, the
holy Scriptures, Which are able to make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
wherein we have the promises of Eternal Life, and the way to it* Saint John
5.39. with a clear and satisfactory account of the [(...),] things that
accompany Salvation, that contain Salvation in them, and by which we may
certainly lay hold on Salvation, Hebr. 6.9.

I will point briefly at some of the most obvious Texts, that treat of thi^
matter, and leave them to such further consideration, as they d^serve; which I
do, the rather, for Antidote against the poiso^ous insinua^^^^ o^ profane and
licentious persons, Tract. Theol. pol. c. 14. p. 235.
who number ^p the fund^mentals out of their own Brain. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, says Saint Paul, for it is the power of God unto Salvation
to every one that believes* Romans 1.16. God so loved the World, says our
blessed Savior, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life; for God sent not his Son
into the World to condemn the World, but that the World through him should be
saved. He that believes on him, is not condemned, but he, that believes not,
is condemned already, because he has not believed in the n^me of the only
begotten Son of God: And this is the condemnation, that Light is come into the
World, and men loved Darkness rather than Light, because their deeds were evil,
Saint John 3.16, etc.

There is, we see, in the first place, an evident necessity of the Christian
Faith in all to whom it is propounded. (...) admits us among Christ's
Disciples, an^ ^^^^out it we cannot be saved.

And this Faith must not only be in the heart, neither, but there must be also
an outward prosession and owning of it, For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, says the Apostle, and with the mouth confession is made unto
Salvation, Romans 10.10. And whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my Words,
says Christ himself, in this adulterous and sinful generation [wherein it may
be to the hazard of his ^ife, and all he has, possibly, to ow^ and confess
them] of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory
of his Father, with the holy Angels, Saint Mark. 8.38. that is, he will for
ever disown and renounce him. So we have it in Saint Matthew, Whosoever will
confess me before men, him will I also confess before my Father, which is in
Heaven; but whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father, which is Heaven, Chapter 10.32, 33. From whence the Apostle tells us, if we
deny him he also will deny us, 2 Timothy 2.12. [See farther, Hebr. 3.6, 14. Hebr.
10.25, 26, etc. Saint Luke 14.25. to 34 ver.] The Primitive Christians well
understood the necessity of this open profession of their Religion, whatever
sufferings it brought upon them. Witness that of Tertullian, [Nec fas est ulli
de sua religione mentiri. Ex eo enim quod aliud a se coli dicit quam colit,
negat quod colit, and culturam and honorem in alterum transfert, and
tranferendo jam non colit, quod negavit. Dicimus, and palam dicimus, and, vobis
torquentibus, lacerati and cruenti vociferamur, Deum colimus per Christum,
Apol. c. 21.] The noble Army of Martyrs and Confessors, then, counted it an
happiness to be reproached for the Name of Christ; and were so far from being
ashamed of suffering, as Christians, that they glorified God on this behalf,
according to that of Saint Peter 1 Ep. 4.14, 16. and in the midst of all
torture they cried out with courage and constancy [ Christianus sum. See E^s^b.
Eccles. Hist. l* 5. c. 1.
]

But Ecebolius of Constantinople is infamous in Story for his mutability and
compliance, who, whilst Constantius was a Catholic, professed himself so too,
but with him after turned Arian, and in Iulian's days was au Idolater, but
under Iovian again tacked about to the Catholic side.

Let them seriously ponder upon this, who indulge a liberty of renouncing
Chri^^ianity and denying Christ, Leviath. c. 42. Tract. Theol. Pol. c. 5. p.
90. c. 16. p. 258, 259 c. 19. p. 308, 309.
in case the higher Powers on Earth shall so require them; who call all the
Externals of our Religion Ceremonies, that have not any thing of holiness in
them, nor relate at all to the happiness of individual Christians, nay, which
they are bound to abstain from, in case they live where the Christian Religion
is interdicted them. -- Sure I am, we have not so learned of Christ and his
Apostles; and such stuff as this needs only a bare rehearsal to render it,
together with its Authors, abominable.

Now if we once believe the Gospel of our Savior, and confess that Faith,
which we have received from him, we shall from thence see a necessity also upon
us, in order to our salvation, to repent sincerely of all our sins, to amend
our ways, and to live in a conscionable and constant obedience to all Christ's
Commands, Positive as well as Moral, and, among the later too, such as concern
God as well as our Neighbor and our selves. For this is plainly the Doctrine
which he taught.

Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, S. Mat. 4.17. Unless ye repent,
ye shall all perish, S. Luke 13.3, 5. God now commands all men everywhere to
repent, Acts 17.30. And this Repentance must not be in show and appearance
only, but in truth and reality, such as brings forth fruits meet for
repentance, that is, reformation and amendment of heart and life, S. Luke 3.8.
such as S. Paul calls Repentance unto Salvation not to be repented of, or not
repented of again, 2 Cor. 7.10. [(...)] such as we stick firm and steadfast to,
not returning with the Dog to our vomit, or with the Sow, that washed, to
wallowing in the Mire.

Then farther ^or the necessity of new obedience; Not every one, that says
unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does
the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Many will say unto me in that day,
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out
Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful works? and then will I profess unto
them, I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity, Saint Matthew.
7.21, etc. And, in the close of the same Chapter, He that hears Christ's
sayings and does them not, but yet hopes for happiness by and from him, is
resembled to a foolish builder, erecting a mighty Structure without a good and
sure foundation. -- Why call ye me Lord, Lord, says he convincingly, and do
not the things which I say? Saint Luk^ 6.46. He became the Author of Salvation,
says the Apostle, unto all them that obey him, Hebr. 5.9. And to none but
such. As for others, Saint Peter speaks with amazement and horror, What shall
the end be of them, who ob^y not the Gospel of God! 1 Ep. 4.17. How dreadful
and astonishing! if we would know more plainly [what,] Saint Paul declares it;
When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with ^verlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power;
when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them
that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. [Them that believe] that is, who obey the
Gospel, Whom he has chosen to Salvation through sanctification of the Spirit,
and beli^f of the Truth, Chapter 2.13. to an inheritance among them that are
sanctified, Acts 20.32. or, to the riches of the glory of his inheritance in
the Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. The inheritance he will give to these holy ones, and
to them only; For without holiness no man shall see God's face, Hebr. 12.14.

And for the universality of that obedience, which is required of us, suchlike
Texts as these are plain, Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and
unto God the things which are Gods, Saint Matthew. 22.21. These things ought ye
to have done, and not to leave the other undone, Chapter 23.23. whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, [allow himself in the
transgression of any particular command,] he is guilty of all, Saint James 2.10.

These now are the declared Heirs of Salvation, who heartily believe in Christ,
boldly confess that Faith, unseignedly repent of their Sins, and live
conscientiously in universal obedience to all our Savior's Laws and
Institutions, so as to exclude the contempt of any one of them. [ Believe on
the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thine house [viz. on the like
terms and conditions] So Saint Peter resolves the Jailor, propounding that
question, What must I do to be saved? Acts 16.39. Repent and be baptized every
one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of Sins. So he
resolves others, in the like question, Acts 2.37, 38. and to the same demand in
effect, Good Master, what must I do to inherit eternal life? Our blessed
Savior answers; Thou know the commands, What is written in the Law? How
read thou? Do this and thou shall live, Saint Matthew. 19. Saint Luke 10.]

These are the Faithful Disciples of Christ, his Little-Flock, to whom he
says, Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you
the Kingdom, Saint Luke 12.31. As if he had said, let not the thoughts of your
own unworthiness discourage you; for this blessed Inheritance is settled on you
by your heavenly Father's good pleasure, and by virtue of his Promise and
Covenant; you have [ certum, Vid. G^ot. in Heb. 1.4.
mansurumque jus] a certain and abiding title, such as that of Inheritances
among the Jews. But then, observe carefully, it belongs only to such as you
are, the Sheep that hear my voice, and obediently follow me, the Shepherd and
Bishop of your Souls. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may
have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the
City, the heavenly Jerusalem, Revel. 22.14.

Let us fear, after all this, lest any of us come short, Hebr. 4.1. lest we be
found among those, that are excluded, and shut out thence. And, to that end, it
may be of some use to peruse attentively the Scripture-Catalogues, that look
this way. -- I will but nakedly recite some of them.

Without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. So it follows immediately
after the place even now quoted, Rev. 22.15.

Know ye not, says Saint Paul to the Corinthians, (as in a case notorious and
evident) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, [pathici] nor
abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards,
nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And such were
some of you, but ye are washed, -- 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.

Then to the Galatians, The works of the flesh are manifest, says he, which
are these, Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, Heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and suchlike, of the which I tell
you before, as I have told you also in time past, that they which do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.

Again, to the Ephesians, This ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean
person, nor covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words, for
because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of
Disobedience, Ephesians. 5.5, 6.

Once more, to the Philippians: Many walk of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you, even weeping, that they are Enemies of the Cross of Christ, [such
as will deny Christ crucified rather than suffer for him] whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who
mind earthly things, Phil. 3.18, 19.

Now let us every one make a due reflection upon our selves, impartially
examining and judging of our selves, according to these Rules, that we be not
hereafter judged and condemned by God.

But I return at length, from this digression (the profitableness whereof may
yet plead sufficiently for it) unto that which is principally designed in the
Text, the Reference, I mean, which the Ministry of Angels has unto those
persons, whose character and description we have been looking into. They are
sent forth to minister [(...)] with a peculiar respect unto them.

They have not only the blessed Inheritance of Salvation secured to them in the
end, but here in the way too the holy Angels have a special charge over them,
as the Protectors of their minority, till they come to it.

Nor must we imagine this confined to that time and age only, wherein our
Savior and his Apostles lived, but to be continued in like manner to all
future Generations of sincere Christians successively. So much the original
imports and intimates, [(...)] For those that shall be, in all times and ages
yet to come, the heirs of Salvation.

I understand not, I confess, the force of their reasoning, who would from
hence infer and argue the absolute and unconditional assurance of Salvation to
any select number, of the absolute certainty of their perseverance in a
salvable state, who are once entered into it. No such thing can be concluded
from the word [(...)] here made use of, but rather the contrary, if there be
any thing in that distinction of Futurities, which some have suggested out of
Aristotle, Dr. Hen. More Immort. of the Soul. L. 2. c. 3. s. 13.
into [(...)] a thing that is likely to be, but yet has a possibility of being
otherwise, and [(...)] a thing most certainly to come to pass. -- Now there is
no question at all, but that the Inheritance of Salvation spoken of, is a
[(...)] a thing that shall certainly be the Lot of all sincere and persevering
Christians; but then those, who are at present, it may be, sincere Christians,
are only [(...)] such as are likely to inherit it, and only certain so to do,
upon the supposition, that they are found at death in that state, there being
in the meanwhile a possibility left of their miscarriage, if they take not
good heed to hold on, and persevere unto the end. The righteous shall assuredly
inherit eternal life; but yet the righteous man [ de praesenti] may possibly
cease to be such, afterward, turning from his righteousness, and then the
Prophet tells us, all that he has done shall not be mentioned, Ezekiel. 18.24. --
But this by the way.

CHAP. VI. Practical Inferences from the whole.
IT remains in the last place, That I add by way of Application of the
foregoing Discourse concerning Angels and their Ministry, those practical
Inferences which shall appear most proper thereunto.

SECT. I. The Christians great privilege and Comfort.
First then, Let Christians from hence take notice of their great privilege,
so as to bless God heartily for it, and comfort and encourage themselves, from
it to work out their own salvation resolutely, amidst all the oppositions and
discouragements, whatever they are, which they meet with.

It is the commendation of our blessed Savior's wonderful love to us, that,
passing by the Angels, he took hold of man, an inferior sort of Creatures; nay
and exalted our humane nature into a most intimate conjunction with his Deity,
See Bish. Andrews Sermon. 1. on ^he Nativity.
so that the Angels now take it both for their duty and happiness to adore him
clothed with that nature, and, for his sake, employ themselves in attendance
and ministries about us. And the Psalmist represents this as comfort sufficient
against the snare of the Fowler, and the noisome pestil^nce; the terror by
night, and the arrow that flies by day; the plague that walks in darkness,
and the destruction that wastes at Noonday; [that is, all the assaults of Men
and Devils, that seek to do us mischief, sleeping or waking, by night or day,
as some understand the words, and all manner and kinds of evils, secret or
open; ab incursu nequam spirituum, qui noctu vigilant and Daemonii meridiani,
J. Pricaeus in Ps. 91. Nec homines n^c Daemones noc^re possunt; intelliguntur
autem Daemones per pavorem noctis and pestem grassantem in meridic, Munster.
ibid.] even this, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, to keep thee
in all thy ways, Psalm. 91. -- And, when he had elsewhere mentioned the
encamping of this Heavenly Host about them that fear God, Ps. 34. he adds
immediately upon it, O taste and see, that the Lord is good! [even from this
instance of his goodness] blessed is the man that trusts in him. O fear the
Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him. -- If need be,
the Angels shall come and minister unto them, so that they shall have meat from
Heaven, even Angels food.

It well becomes us to take some time particularly to consider of the manifold
Benefits we reap from the holy Angels, that we may admire and praise God, with
devout S. Bernard, Lord, D. Bern. in Ps. 91.
what is man, that thou thus think on him! Thou sendest to him thine only
begotten Son. Thou sendest into him thy holy Spirit. Thou promisest him the
light of thy countenance: And that nothing in the heavenly Regions might be
unimployed in solicitude for him; thou sendest forth also those blessed
Spirits [the Angels] to minister to us. -- And again, with S. Augustine,
Soliloq. c. 27.
who having spent some Meditations upon this subject, thus piously concludes
them. When I remember these things, O Lord, I confess before thee, and praise
thee for thy great benefits, wherewith thou have honored us. Thou have given
us all things under Heaven, and yet countedst that but small provision, unless
thou had also given us the things above, even those Angels of thine, as
Ministering Spirits unto us. What is man that thou make such reckoning of him!
-- And, Med. xxvi.
with religious Gerhard, let us engage ourselves a while in the contemplation,
how immense the Divine Grace and Favor is toward us in this particular; The
heavenly Father, says he, sends his own Son to deliver us. The Son of God
incarnate is sent to save us. The holy Spirit is sent to sanctify us. The
Angels are sent to protect us. [Much to the same effect, as I noted before out
of Saint Bernard.] Thus the whole heavenly Court does, in a manner, serve us,
and hand down it is benefits to us. So that I no longer wonder, that all
inferior creatures were made for man, when the Angels themselves, who are far
more worthy, deny us not their Ministries.

Deservedly therefore has our Church appointed one Festival in the year, for a
solemn commemoration of the holy Angels from whom we receive so great
advantages, instructing of us then to recognize the admirable wisdom and
goodness of God in ordaining of their services, and by Prayer unto him to seek
the blessing of their ministration, as the excellent Collect for that day
L^ssons us.

Collect f^r Saint Micha^l and all Angels.
[ O everlasting God, who have ordained and constituted the Services of Angels
and Men in a wonderful order, mercifully grant, that, as thy holy Angels always
do thee service in Heaven, so by thy appointment they may succor and defend us
on earth, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.]

But to render both the motives of our thanksgiving unto God, and the
encouragements we ought to gather to our selves from their attendance and
ministry, the stronger and more effectual, we shall do well to consider in our
minds distinctly the many endearing qualifications of these our Guardians and
Helpers; such as their knowledge and wisdom, their power and strength, their
number and multitude, their unanimity and order, their care and watchfulness,
their speed and agility, their fidelity and zeal in the discharge of their
trust and commission, most of which points I have enlarged upon before, and
therefore shall here again but slightly touch upon them.

Their knowledge and wisdom, as has been said, is beyond the most improved
intellectuals of any upon Earth. They have their advantage in the excellency of
their faculties, and their freedom from such bodies, as we dwell in, [which
press and weigh down the mind that museth upon many things. Tertul. de anima,
c. 52. 1 Cor. 13.12.
[ Wisd. 9.15.] and darken our understandings, so that we look on things as
through an obscure Perspective:] And then, farther yet, in their long-continued
observation and experience from the beginning of the Creation, and their nearer
approaches to, and frequenter communications from the Divine Majesty.

Then, for their Power and Might, they [ excel in strength] and are resembled
not only to an [ Host, or Army,] but to [ Horses and Chariots of Fire.] -- Both
for skill and ability they surpass the evil Spirits, who are infatuated in some
degree, and enfeebled by their wickedness.

Then, for their Number and Multitude, that exceeds our Arithmetic, as do
the Stars in the Firmament.

And this vast number of knowing and powerful Beings is yet the more
considerable, if we add the thoughts of their unanimity and order. They are all
of a mind, and have no contests or disorders among themselves, which are often
the undo^ng of Armies otherwise very formidable. They are resolved about their
proper Ministries, and both know and keep their rank and station, harkening all
of them with one consent to the voice of God's Word.

Add we next their Watchfulness. They are not like unto us Mortals, subject
unto heaviness, weariness, drowsiness, sleepiness, and surprise. They are full
of eyes, and rest not day nor night from employment. The darkness is all one to
them with the Light. And in the Prophecy of Daniel they are called Vigiles, or
Watchers, Chapter 4.13. because, as Saint Hierom speaks on the place, [ semper
vigilant, and ad Dei imperium sunt parati] they always watch, and are ready at
the Almighty's beck and command. They neither slumber nor sleep, and so give
not the enemy opportunity of advantage, nor lose not any themselves for making
good their service.

And, then, such is their make and nature, that no external impediments retard
or hinder their motion; but for speed and agility they fly, as it were, with
wings, very swiftly, and pass to and fro, like Lightning.

And, then lastly, these knowing, powerful, numberless, unanimous, orderly,
watchful, and nimble Spirits are both faithful and zealous in the charge
committed to them. Not the least spot of neglect, unfaithfulness, backwardness,
or indifferency to be fast'ned on them. They do always behold the Face of God
to receive his pleasure, and they are as ready to do it. They are called Holy
ones, Dan. 4.13, 17. and represented as clothed with pure and white linen,
Revel* 15.6 without blemish. And their zeal puts life and vigor into all their
service, with reference to which they are a flame of fire, burning with the
greatest ardors of affection to God's glory, and the good of his Church and
Servants.

Now, having such a Guard as this about us, we are inexcusably guilty of
ingratitude, if we observe not our heavenly Father's love and care toward us,
so as to bless his name for this provision among his many others mercies; or of
neglect, if we open not our eyes to see, that there are always more with and
for us, than those that can be against us; so as to gather from hence heart and
spirit in the cheerful and undaunted prosecution of our Christian Duty in all
the paths we are to tread in order to our Salvation. Being therefore compassed
with so great a cloud of witnesses, [and mighty helpers] we are to lay aside
every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and to run with
patience the Race set before us, Hebr. 12.1 and having so great encouragement
and strong consolation, we are not at any time to be weary of well-doing, or
frightened from it, but to be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, [1 Cor. 15. ult.] as it becomes persons of such hopes for
hereafter, [ the Heirs of Salvation] and such security in the interim,
[attended with the holy Angels.]

SECT. II. The Christian's Dignity not to be despised.
Secondly, Let us all take notice from hence of the Dignity of Christians; and
thereupon take heed, lest at any time we despise, or injure them.

Be they never so mean, low, or disregarded in the world, they are all the Sons
and Daughters of the great King of Heaven and Earth, and born to a fair
Inheritance, a transcendently rich and glorious Kingdom; and in the mean while,
however we may look upon them as destitute and forsaken, they have an invisible
Guard about them, upon occasion to minister for their supply, defense and
vindication. Such honor have all the Saints. And here we may well cry out, O
how plentiful is thy goodness, O Lord, which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee, and which thou have prepared for them that put their trust in thee,
even before the Sons of Men, Ps. 31.21.

It concerns us then to beware, that we despise not any of those, whom God has
so highly honored; and that we wrong not any of those, for whose aid and
relief he has made so ample a provision.

S. James reproving the strange partiality among the Jewish Christians in
judicature, having respect to some for their Gay-Clothes, and contemning others
for their poverty, thus expostulates the case with them, chapter 2.5, 6. Hearken,
my Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and
Heirs of that Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him? But ye
have despised the poor. -- So different are the judgments of God and corrupt
men. God has so far honored these his Servants, as to declare them Heirs of a
blessed and most glorious Kingdom; but ye, says the Apostle, have despised
them, [(...)] dishonored, vili^ied, set them at naught; nay abused, oppressed,
and trampled on them, as it there ^ollows, Do not rich men oppress you? etc. --
We ought indeed to honor all men, 1 Pet. 2.17. even because they are men,
bearing the signatures of the Di^ine Image; and He that despises his Neighbor
sins, Prove. 14.21. But the Brotherhood of Christians is to be esteemed at an
higher rate, as having the Image of God doubly stamped on them, being his
Children both by Nature and Grace; and whatever habit they go in, whatever
condition be their Lot here, the Heirs apparent of Salvation.

Nor have they all in hopes and Reversion, but somewhat in hand too, that is
very considerable: This in particular among other Prerogatives and Privileges,
that the glorious Angels, a sort of Creatures far above us, are made by God's
appointment their Ministers and Servants. And upon this account too our blessed
Savior bids us to take heed how we offend or despise them. Whosoever shall offend
one of these little ones, that believe in me, says he, it were better for him
that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the Sea, S. Matthew. 18.6. The offense here spoken of relates chiefly to
the turning them aside out of, or causing them to stumble and fall in the ways
of Salvation. But then he adds farther, v. 10. Take heed that ye despise not,
[(...)] see that ye contemn not, one of these little ones; for I say unto you,
that in Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
Heaven. This, we see, is plainly and evidently asserted by our blessed Saviors
Authority, and not spoken according to the prejudices and conceits of the
people only, Tract. Theol. Pol. c. 2. p. 42.
as some absurdly affirm. For I say unto you,] He designs, most certainly, to
teach and instruct, and requires our firm assent to the truth of whatever
Doctrine is so prefaced by him. The Reason here therefore is no less divine
than the Admonition -- Those then that believe in Christ, however small and
little they are in the estimation of the world, and their own too, are not so
in God's, nor is his love and care little toward them. Say not then, such an
one is a Carpenter, such an one a Tailor, such an one a Husbandman, such an one
unlearned, etc. They are S. Chrysostom's words, St. Chrysostom. in Loc.
[ ab Angelis, quibus commissi sunt, viles, fecit venerabiles] God has of mean
made them venerable [(...)] from the Angels whom they are committed to. Vide
majestatem hominis pii, qui etsi pauperrinus est, nec unum externum servum
habet, tamen serviunt ei multa millia Angelorum. Brentius in S. Matthew. 18. Hom.
1. They have their Angels assigned them, and those Angels of theirs have a
great interest in Heaven with their Father, whom they attend upon, to receive
his commands concerning them, and execute them with all speed and fidelity.
They are ready to enter their Complaints against all that affront and abuse
their Charge here on earth, at his Tribunal, and at his beck of their defense,
and the avenging of their righteous quarrels.

SECT. III. An Account from hence, why no more mischief done in the World: And
by the way, why so much too, notwithstanding their presidence.
Thirdly, We may from hence take some account, why, notwithstanding all the
power and malice of Devils, and wicked men employed by and under them, yet no
more mischief is done in the world.

The Devils are many, as has been said, and their power and malice very
formidable, [(...)* S. Matthew. 12. (...)* chapter 13.] There is the Great Dragon and
his Angels, having great wrath, Rev. 12. They are vowed Adversaries to our
happiness, and go about like roaring Lions, seeking to devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.
Saint Paul warns us of a terrible host of them, Principalities, Powers, the
Rulers of the Darkness of this World, and Spiritual wickednesses (or wicked
Spirits) in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. that is, The Prince of the power of the
Air, and all his Militia, the spirit that works in the children of
disobedience, Chapter 2.2. -- And, as the Devils are thus many, malicious, and
powerful, so also crafty and watchful to accomplish their designs of mischief.
I fear, says the Apostle, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve, so
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which is in Christ, 2 Cor.
11.3. and afterward, he speaks of Satan transforming himself into an Angel of
Light, and his Ministers fals-Apostles, deceitful workers, etc. Ver. 14.
Elsewhere, lest Satan should get an advantage of us; for we are not ignorant of
his devices, Chapter 2.11. (...), his machinations or contrivances. Elsewhere,
again, The wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.11. (...), his methods of deceit.

How many ways he assaulted Job, and brought mischief upon his Cattle and
Goods, his House and Children, and lastly his own Body; -- and what miserable
vexations and tortures those, that have been possessed with evil Spirits, have
labored under; and what a vast power they sometimes exercise both over the
outward and inward senses of men; the holy Scripture, and other approved
Histories, do plentifully attest.

And then, if we add the great numbers of evil instruments, slaves and vassals,
[Devils incarnate] which these wicked subtle and malicious Spirits have at
their service, in league and combination with them; how many there are that
have no fear of God before their eyes to restrain them, but make their own
wills and humors the only Law of Justice; how many Infidels and Heretic's,
that are professed enemies to the Church of Christ, who rage furiously and take
counsel together against the Lord and against his anointed; how many of those
ungodly ones, who have no ^aithfulness in their mouth, and whose inward parts
are very wickedness, who for their own lust persecute the poor, and imagine
crafty wiliness against them, lying in wait secretly, and saying in their
heart, Tush, God has forgotten, he sees not, or, he cares not for it; how
many of those, that have bent their Bow, and make ready their Arrow^ within the
Quiver, that they may privily shoot at them, who are true of heart; how many of
those, who are full of cursing and bitterness, and whose feet are swift to shed
blood, who are greedy of the prey, and spread their Nets cunningly to destroy
the innocent; whose delight is in lies, and who plot and contrive wickedness
upon their Beds continually; how many of these, and of the like malignancy
(whereof we have frequent complaints throughout the Book of Psalms:) If, I say,
we consider our selves encompassed thus with a numerous Host of evil Spirits,
and their hellish Agents and Instruments, we may begin to wonder, that the
Earth we live in is any tolerable habitation; or be ready to say with Elisha's
Servant, when the Enemies Army with Chariots and Horses surrounded the City, [
Actum est de nobis, periimus, Alas my Master! how shall we do? 2 Kings 6.15.
only God be thanked, the answer is ready at hand for us too, which the Prophet
then gave him, Ver. 16, 17. [ plures sunt, qui stant a part^ nostra, quam qui
sunt pro illis,] Fear not, for they that be with us are more than they that be
with them: referring to the heavenly Legions. -- We have Michael and his Angels
against the Dragon and his Angels, the good against the evil, more in number,
wiser for understanding, greater in power, more vigilant, courageous, zealous,
and successful. -- Magna quidem est adversarii nostri Diaboli potentia; sed
erigit nos Angelorum custodia, etc. D. I. Gerhard, Med. xxvi.

When God asked of Satan, that had been walking his rounds, and compassing the
Earth to and fro, whether he had considered of his servant Job, upright and
good Job, he readily replies, as to him, upon it, Have thou not made an hedge
about him, and about his house, and about all he has on every side? Job. 1.10.
which Hedge is conceived by Expositors to be the Guard of Angels, as has been
said Ch* 4. Sect. 4.
before. And Satan can do nothing against Job, or other good men, so long as
this Hedge remains, the Angels of God encamping round about them, and taking
charge of them to keep and defend them.

But then, if it be so, may some say, Vid. Br^nt. in S. Mat. 18. homil. 1.
how comes it to pass, that even those who fear God and shall inherit
Salvation, do yet often fall into diverse sufferings, and calamities,
afflictions and troubles, as well as others, or sometimes more than others?

To this I answer briefly, in two particulars*

I. Sometimes they offend and provoke God to make a breach or gap in this Hedge,
and to say as he did to his Vineyard, I will take away the Hedge and Wall
thereof, Isay 5. They sometimes foolishly leave God's ways, and wander in
bypath, which have no assurance of the Angelical custody and Protection. The
Devil, Vid Span* hem. Dub. Evangel* LXI*
when he quotes that of the Psalmist in his temptations to our blessed Savior,
He shall give his Angels charge over thee -- craftily omits that clause of
importance, in all thy ways; Munster in Ps. 91.
that is, [ Si modo ambules in rectitudine viarum Domini, and non tents Deum,]
if thou keep a direct course in those paths, which he has chalked out for
thee to walk in, and do not tempt him by the forsaking of them. If we
wittingly run upon precipices and throw our selves into dangers, we have none
to blame, but our selves, for what we suffer by so doing. [ Qualis via haec de
pinnaculo Templi mittere se deorsum? Non est via haec, sed ruina. Et, si via
tua est, non illius,] as Saint Bernard speaks upon occasion of the Devil's
suggestion to our blessed Savior, upon this motive to cast himself down from
the Temple, on the presumption of the Angels attendance. What an odd way is
this to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple? This is no way of
safety, but of ruin; or, if it be any way, it is the Devils and none of Gods.
-- When we forsake God's way, no wonder if his Guard fail us.

II. At other times God himself thinks it fit and meet to try his servants
Faith, Patience, and Submission, and other Graces, [as is evident in the case
of Job, before-mentioned] to difference and distinguish this World from the
other, that their affections may be weaned from this, and fixed upon the other;
and, in order both to their greater spiritual good here, and the increase to
their eternal reward hereafter, the promoting and furtherance of their
Salvation (for these I say, and the like purposes of wisdom and kindness
together) to deal unto them a larger share of afflictions and sufferings than
unto others. And thus, as the Apostle speaks, He chastens them out of love, and
for their profit, that they may be partakers of his holiness; which, however
grievous it seems for the present, afterward yields them the peaceable fruit
of righteousness, Hebr. 12. In these circumstances, now, the real sting of
outward Evils is taken away, and the nature of them changed, and altered. They
are not to their hurt and prejudice that lie under them, but to their greater
benefit and advantage; such therefore as an indulgent Father chooses for them,
and such as their Guardian-Angels consequently cannot but approve of. -- But I
will not enlarge on this argument.

M. Antoninus, that generous heathen, L. 6. Sect. 10.
said well, Who would desire to live in a World destitute of God and
providence, where all were left to chance, and we to meet everywhere with so
many enemies and dangers?

But when we remember, what a comfortable provision God has made for our
security and welfare, we are sufficiently satisfied against the fears and
anxieties, which must otherwise continually haunt and posses us, and should
therefore, with that excellent Emperor, not only pay a tribute of veneration
to, Ibid*
but fix and settle our minds in a steady and composed confidence upon him, the
Governor of the World and all things in it.

Sect. IV. No disparagement for any to minister unto and serve others.
Fourthly, Since the Angels are all Ministring-Spirits, sent forth to minister
for them that shall be heirs of Salvation, let none think it a disparagement,
but rather an exaltation, an employment truly Divine and Angelical, to Serve
and Minister unto others for their good, and in order to their Salvation.

Those blessed and glorious Spirits, of a more noble kind and order than we
are, however it might seem to their diminution and debasement, do not yet
disdain to minister unto us, but embrace this Charge and Command of God with
all cheerfulness and delight. And therefore we certainly, who cannot but admire
and commend their goodness and condescension, should learn to emulate and be
followers of the same. We should be ambitious of the like honor, to become
helpful and serviceable unto others, especially in order to their Salvation,
which is the greatest good they can design for themselves, or we assist them in
prosecution of. Such a Ministry as this we should rejoice in, though it appear
somewhat to our own hindrance, and the obscuring of our Name and Reputation in
the world. Whosoever will be great among you, says Christ to his Disciples,
let him be your Minister, and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be
your Servant, even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a Ransom for many, S. Matthew. 20.26, 27, 28.

This is the commendation S. Paul gives of the highest Powers upon Earth, He is
the Minister of God to thee for good, [to thee who do good:] and again, the
Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans
13.4. And again, Gods Ministers attending continually upon this very thing,
AElian. l. 2. c. 20.
v. 6. Whence Antigonus called a Kingdom truly (...), splendidam servitutem] a
noble and glorious servitude; and it was wont to be spoken solemnly to the
Prince of the Exiles in Babylon, Grot. in S. Matthew. 20.25.
that he should not swell or lift up himself with pride, [ officium ipsi, non
potestatem injungi, and ab eo die incipiendum ipsi servire omnibus] That Duty,
rather than Power, was committed to him, and from that day forward he was to
become a Servant of all. According to the Greek Verse, (...) The Master is the
chief Servant of the Family, (...). Epict. Diss. L. 3. c. 26.

It was the glory of the Apostles of Christ so to be esteemed, how contemptibly
soever some now think and speak of their heavenly and Angelical calling. The
Prophet foretells it as an honor, Ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord;
men shall call you the Ministers of our God, Isa. 61.6. And Let a man account
of us, says one of them, as the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. adding of
himself in particular to the Corinthians, I seek not yours but you, and I will
very gladly spend and be spent for your Souls, though the more abundantly I
love you, the less I be loved, 2 Ep. 12.14, 15. And he commends Timothy and
Epaphroditus by a like Character to the Philippians, willing them to hold such
in reputation, Phil. 2.19, 20, 25, 29.

The Angels are all Ministering Spirits, as has been showed, and it is a real
Dignity and Advancement for us to participate their office, as we may do, every
one more or less, by being helpful what we can to others. So that what S. Paul
injoin^d to be said unto Archippus, should in its measure and proportion, sound
in all our Ears, Take heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the
Lord, that thou fulfill it, Col. 4.17 -- The Glory which we expect and look for
in the life to come, is described by this (as has been said too elsewhere)
that we shall be (...), Like unto the Angels; Chapter 1. Sect. 2.
and now if this have any thing endearing in it, it cannot, certainly, but
highly r^commend their work and subserviency to us here.

But what I have said of Ministering unto others, even the meanest, holds with
advantage as to that other part of the Angels Ministry, which is toward God
Almighty. They do with the greatest joy stand in his presence, and worship and
adore him, as I have Chapter 4. Sect. 1.
showed at large. They are all unanimous and uniform, and orderly, and zealous,
and constant in their sacred Liturgy, which is made up chiefly of lauds and
praises, Doxologies and Thanks-givings. The Queen of Sheba admired and
proclaimed the happiness of Solomon's Attendants, 1 Kings 10.8. Happy are thy
men, happy are these thy Servants, which stand continually before thee and hear
thy wisdom! But how much more deservedly may we celebrate the honor and
happiness of these heavenly Courtiers, that do always behold the Face of the
most glorious and incomprehensible Majesty of God himself? And then it cannot
but behove us to testify, that we unfeignedly esteem their honor and
happiness, by desiring and endeavoring, so far as we are capable, to partake
of the same; breathing out of holy flames, with the Psalmist, How amiable are
thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! my Soul longs, yea even faints for the
Courts of the Lord; my Heart and my Flesh cries out for the living God. When
shall I come, and appear before God? Blessed are they that dwell in thy house!
They will be still praising he. A Day in thy Courts is better than a thousand.
-- Psalm. 84. It should be our great delight, as often as we can, with Angels
and Archangels and all the Host of Heaven, to laud and magnify the glorious
name of God in our Christian Assemblies, as we are admirably instructed and
trained up to do by the Service and Liturgy of our Church, which, I had almost
said, none can be offended at, who are upon deliberate and mature thoughts
thoroughly reconciled to the Angelical.

SECT. V. Angels to be reverenced, but not adored.
Fifthly, Since the Angels are thus Ministering Spirits, sent forth by God to
minister unto us, and for our good and happiness; let us express an awful sense
of their attendance, and show them all due regard and reverence.

It was I confess, a speech of generous honesty, which A. Gellius commends from
Peregrinus the Philosopher, whom he heard at Athens, Noct. Attic. l. 12. c. 11.
L. 4, and 10. Reipub.
[ Virum quidem sapientem non peccaturum etiamsi peccasse eum Dii atque homines
ignoraturi forent.] That a wise man would not sin, though the Gods and men
should never know it, because he forbears not out of the fear of punishment and
infamy, so much as from a sense and love of duty and goodness it self. [So the
Poet describes his Golden Age; -- Quae vindice nullo,
Sponte sua sine lege fidem rectumque colebat:
Paena metusque aberant, etc.
1. Metaph.

But this is an Idea of such perfection, as this state of ours on Earth affords
very few, if any, instances of. It is rare to find any, who are got to this
high improvement; the greatest part need other motives and restraints; yea, and
our very make and constitution is fitted to them. The thoughts of secrecy and
hopes of impunity tempt most men to transgress. To such therefore the same
Philosopher thought good to propound this consideration, out of Sophocles and
ot^ers, (...) V^^^ (...) Ep. 11. and Ep. 25
That tim^ wi^^ (...) and (...). -- And i^ ^as (...) a^v^ce to L^cil^^^, (...)
we ^pan^ good M^n (...)* and (...) all (...): as (...)* (...) he had learned
himself from (...)* w^ose precept t^erefore ^e a^^edge^^ for it. A gre^^ ^word
of Men's s^n^ and m^scar^iages, says he* (...) ta^en away, if (...) if a (...)
they are (...). And (...) do w^^^ to have in mind (...) Au^^^rity may render
(...) Ha^^y that man* as he (...), w^^ referres (...) only his (...), but his
(...)! Happy he was (...) learn's so to re^ere another, as u^^n every
remembrance of him to com^ese and (...) Such a man will quickly ^ecome
^^nerabl^. (...) therefore, says he, a Cato* or, if he seem too ri^^s and
severe, ch^se a Lae^^^s to t^y self, one whose life as well as (...) is most
approvea^le* and, having his very Soul and countenance before thee, represents
(...) to thy self at all times as a Guardian and Example. -- But we need not so
much this wholesome cou^^el* neither, if we call but to mind those many invisible
witnesses, which are for certain continually about us, Vid. Ze^sp^o^^.
Memorabil. l. 4. Gr^eco. Lat. p. 802, and 803. Isocr. ad D^mon. Cic. ad Attic.
l. 12. Ep. 27. Se^. Ep. 43.
and the heathen Moralists too have sometimes taken notice of.

There is, first, a Spirit within us, which registers all our Actions in order
unto judgment, and from whose observance we can conceal nothing. Never
therefore do a base act with hopes of secrecy, says Isocrates, for though thou
keep it from others, thou must needs be privy to it thy self. My conscience,
says Cicero, is more to me than the words of all besides. And What booteht it,
says Seneca, for none to know, when thou thy self knows? O wretched Soul, if
once thou despisest this Witness! T^^^e (...) a sacred Spirit within (...) is
the observer ^f (...) good and ev^^. Agreea^ly w^ereto says Saint Be^^^rd
excellently, Wheresoever I go, D. Ber^. Med. c. 13.
my (...) is with (...) it (...) I (...) or evil. (...) is (...) is a (...),
w^ile I love, and will (...) it as (...) I am ^ead (...).

Secondly, there is the great God, our Creator, Go^ernou^, and Judge, always
with us, Before w^^se all-^eeing eye (...) ^^ings are naked and (...) [ c^jus
(...), (...) l. ^. c. ^7.
] as H^^^d a^^o acknow^edgeth. (...).

This, says Ep^^^erus, (...) l. ^. c. 14.
is among our first rudiments, That there is a God* and that ^is providence
(...) over all (...) that neither our doings nor (...) can be c^^cealed from
^im. -- So live with men, says Seneca* ^s under God's eye. S^^. Ep. 10. Id.
Ep. 83. Ex Ci^erone, Lac^a^s. in^it l. c. 24.
Nothing is ^idden from him; he is present to our very Souls and thoughts. Let
us always (...)* ^aith Cicero* (...) those (...) we must give an account, and
consider, that we are every (...), not in some T^e^er of the World seen of Men,
but beheld from above by him who will be both Judge and Witness. And therefore,
as Boer^ius has it, If men would not dissemble, Booth. de consol. l. 5.
they are under a great necessary of honesty, as acting before the eyes of the
All-seeing Judge. Our very inwards should be such, says M. Anto^^^us, L. 11.
sect. 13.
that the Gods may see us virtuous. And this is that we meet so often with in
holy Writ, to walk [(...),] before ^od, and righteous before God,etc. -- These
two Rules, I have now spoken of, Epist. Diff. l. 2^. c. 13.
the Stoic excellently puts together, Choose, says he, to please thy self, and
choose to approve thy self unto God.

But then, thirdly, (to say nothing of those many malignant Spirits that watch
an occasion of doing us mischief, to accuse, tempt and ruin us) there are also
the holy Angels about us, whom God commissions for our defense and welfare. And
that is the point, which here I am to recommend; that we show an awful respect
and due regard to these invisible Spectators. Know ye, Diss. l. 1. c. 14.
O men, says Epictetus, that every one of you is committed to a certain
diligent and excellent keeper and observer; such is every man's Genius or
Demon appointed by God. When therefore you shall have shut the doors, and made
all dark about you, remember that you never say, you are alone, for indeed you
are not. But God is within, and your Genius (or Demon) is within. And they
have no need of light to see your doings by. Ap. de Deo Socratis.
And Apuleius, having discoursed the Doctrine of Guardian-Angels out of Plato,
concludes it in this manner, All you who have heard me expound this divine
sentence of his, so form and compose your minds, to the devising and doing of
all things, as those that know, th^re is nothing at all within or without,
secret and hidden from those Observers, etc.

D. Ber^. in Ps. 91. Sermon. 13.
Thus Saint Bernard lessons us, Since the Angels are present in all thy ways,
see that thou walk warily show a reverence to thy Angel in every Inn, in every
Nook and Corner. And do not thou presume to commit that in his presence, which
thou durst not v^nture on in mine. -- Again, says he, This word [He has given
his Angels charge over thee] O how great a rev^rence should it produce! Id.
Sermon. 10.^
how great devotion! how great assurance! in regard of the presence of Angels,
awe and reverence; for their goodwill, devotion [with thanksgiving;] and upon
the account of their safeguard, confidence and assurance! And again, Id. Sermon.
22.
-- Let us show our selves grateful to so worthy and excellent Guardians. Let
us love them, as much as we can, and as far as we ought. --

The holy Scriptures in like manner point us out to the presence and attendance
of Angels, as a singular motive unto watchfulness and circumspection in our
behavior. Behold (says God to Moses and his People the Jews) I s^nd an Angel
before thee, to keep the way, etc. Exodus 23.20, 21. [ Cave a facie ejus, i. e.
ne coram ^o aliquid iniquum designs, as Vatab.] Beware of him [that thou do
nothing unrighteous in his view] and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he
will not pardon your transgressions; for my name is in him. -- And, when the
Preacher cautions against rash Vows, he adds, Eccles. 5.6. Neith^r say thou
before the Angel that it was an error, or ignorance. The Greek has it Say thou
not [(...)] before the presence, or face, of God. Jacob so called the place,
where the Angel appear^d to him and wrestled with him, Peniel, that is, the
face of God, Genesis 32.30. And God himself said of the Angel, that attended the
Israelites, as we read even now, My name is in him, that is, my Authority. He
acts as in the person of God. And agreeably the Hebrew Rabbis style the Angels
[ Oculos De^] The eyes of God; Grot. in S. Matthew. 18.10.
and so the holy Scripture is thought to call them too, Zech. 4.10. Revel. 5.6.
Say not then before the Angel, Id. in Eccles. 5.6.
that oversees thy actions, and will not bear with them* if they are evil and
provoking, so and so. Excuse not thy fault as small and inconsiderable. Adstat
Angelus vindex, there stands an Angel by to observe, and punish. We are made a
spectacle to the World, to Angels, and to Men, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 4.9. We
do, as it were, Act upon an open Stage or Theater, surrounded with many
Spectators, a great circle of Witnesses, Angels as well as Men, and therefore
should endeavor to act and manage our part well, [See Hebr. 12.1.] And for
this cause he exhorts women to such a decent habit in the Congregation as
becomes their state and condition, Vid. Eras. par.
(...), 1 Cor. 11.10. because, says he, of the Angels, who are presumed to
frequent the Christian Churches, as before they did the Temple and Synagogues
among the Jews, as has been Chapter 4. Sect. 1.
elsewhere declared. Therefore all things should be done with a special
reverence and decorum there. And indeed, proportionably, everywhere besides. I
charge thee, says the same Apostle unto Timothy, before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things, 1 Timothy 5.21. As
if he had said there is not only the Omnipotent God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
whom he has ordained Judge of all, to take notice of thee; but there are also
many other Witnesses, the holy and elect Angels to testify at last for or
against thee, when he shall come in the Glory of his Father, and that Retinue
of his, to judge the quick and dead. They walk with us, Soliloq. c. 27.
says Saint Agustin, in all our ways, they enter in and go out with us,
attentively considering how piously and honestly we converse in the midst of an
evil Nation, and with what study and desire we seek the Kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, and with what fear and trembling we serve him and
rejoice before him, etc.

We are then to express an awful sense of, and regard unto the presence of
those our daily Inspectors and Attendants, with all the grateful respect we are
able to show them.

But yet we must take heed, that we give them not any of that Adoration, Divine
Worship and Honor, which is peculiar unto God, remembering, how it is written,
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Saint
Matthew. 4.10. He that sacrifices unto any God, save unto the Lord only, he
shall be utterly destroyed, Exodus 22.20. Nec bonis igitur, nec malis Diis
sacrificari voluit, qui hoc cum tanta comminatione praecepit, D. Aug. de ^ivit.
Dei, l. 19. c. 21.

Theophylact tells us upon the Text, that our Apostle seems in those words to
reprove those, Theoph. in Hebr. 1.14.
that ascribe too much to Angels, making mention of them as obliged to like
services with us, and so differenced from us, but as Creatures are from one
another. -- Nay, which is more, we find here, that they are appointed to
Minister unto us. Orat. contra Graecos.
And that Reason Tatianus thought good against the worship of the Sun and Moon,
(...); Why should we fall down in a religious obedience to those that serve us?

This would certainly be offensive to those righteous Spirits themselves,
instead of being acceptable. When Manoah, Sampson's Father, would have offered
a Kid in Sacrifice to the Angel, that appeared unto him, he not only declares
it, but gives this wholesome advice upon it, Judges 13.15, 16 If thou will offer
a burnt-offering, thou must offer i^ unto the Lord. Intimating, that he could
not sacrifice to any other without the guilt and peril of Idolatry. And when
Saint John in a Transport, fell at the Angels foot to worship him, he would by
no means admit of it, but says unto him, See thou do it not; I am thy
Fellow Servants, and of thy brethren, that have the Testimony of Jesus, worship
God, Revel. 19.10. And again, when he offered the like a second time, he
persists also to answer him the same manner, See thou do it not, for ^ am thy
Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them, which keep the
sayings of this Book, worship God, Chapter 22.9.

The words of Saint Paul, in his Epistle to the Colossians, do cut off all
temptations to, and excuses of this fond Excess. Let no man beguile you of your
reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those
things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up with his fleshly mind, Col.
2.18. [(...), etc.] that is, as a Reverend Person paraphraseth it; See Dr. H.
Par. and Annot. in Loc.
Let no man please himself and condemn you in point of worshipping of Angels,
as if there were some special humility in so doing, undertaking to scarch into
those things which he knows nothing of, having no other ground for his
Doctrine, but his own carnal fancy.

De Haeres. ad Quodvult Deum. De Civit. Dei, l. 10. c. 7. Id. c. 16.
Such Heretics as these S. Augustine calls [ Angelicos] and he frequently
reflects upon their perverse practice. The Angels, says he, are not willing
that we should sacrifice unto them, but unto him, whose Sacrifice they
acknowledge themselves together with us to be, -- And what is Invocation but
Sacrifice, as the Scripture calls it? The Sacrifice of praise. -- And again,
They are not good, but evil Angels and Devils, that desire men to Sacrifice
unto them. Contra Faustum, Man. l. 20. c. 21.
-- And again, The Saints themselves, both men and Angels, will not admit that
to be exhibited unto them, which they know to be due unto God alone. This
appeared in Paul and Barnabas; This appeared in the Angels also, as we read in
the Revelations. -- And again, We honor the Angels, but with love, not with
service; Id. de vera Rel. c. 55. Contra Max. Arrian. Epis. l. 1.
nor do we build Temples to them; for they are not willing to be honored by
us. -- Once more, If we should rear a Temple of wood and stone to any holy
Angel, be he never so excellent, should we not be anathematized by the Truth of
Christ, and from the Church of God, for exhibiting of that service to a
Creature, which is due only unto God?

Lact. Instit. l. 2. c. 17.
Lactantius tells us in like manner, that the good and holy Angels will not
have any Divine honor given them, whose honor is in God; but those that
revolted from the service of God, being enemies unto and prevaricators from the
Truth, endeavor to appropriate the Name and Worship of Gods to themselves.

Hear we also Origin, Those, says he, Orig. contra Cel^. l. 5. p. 233.
whom from their work we call Angels, we find because of their partaking the
Divine Nature to be called Gods, even in the holy Scriptures. Yet, not so, as
to enjoin us to worship, in the room of God, those that minister unto us and
bring us the things of God. For all prayer and supplication, and intercession,
and thanksgiving is to be sent up to him, who is God over all, by that
High Priest, who is above all Angels, the living word and very God. And again,
Id. l. 8. p. 416.
We speak well of them and count them happy, as being ordained by God for the
good and benefit of mankind. But we do not distribute the honor due to God
unto them: For this is neither the will of God, nor of those who are thus
ordained by him.

Let me add farther, That this worshipping of Angels was condemned in the
Council of Laodicea, Council. Laod. Can. 35.
[ Anno 365.] the 35. Canon whereof runs in these words, That Christians ought
not to leave the Church of God, and go and invocate Angels, and make
conventicles, which things are forbidden. If any one therefore be found
indulging to this secret Idolatry, let him be Anathema, Vid. Carranzae summam
Council. Laod. Can. 35. Theodor. col. 2.18. cited by Dr. Stillingfleet, Idol. of
the Chapter of Rome. c. ^. sect. 11. p. 1^5.
because he has left our Lord Jesus Christ, and come over to Idolatry.

In the version of which Canon Carranza lamentably mistakes, or prevaricates,
by reading of [ Angulos] instead of [ Angelos] i. e. [ Corners] for [ Angels]
so wide a difference may the change of one letter make. Of which I will say no
more but the old Proverb, Veritas non quaerit Angulos. Theodoret says, They
were the Jews who persuaded men to worship Angels, because the Law was
delivered by Angels, which practice continued a long time in Phrygia and
Pisidia; and that therefore the Syno^ ^f Laodicea forbad the praying unto
Angels, etc.

If any desire to see farther into this Mystery, I refer him to the learned
Discourses of Mr. Mede upon the Apostasy of the last Times, and Doctrine of
Demons.

Zanch. de oper. Dei. part 1. ^. 3. c. 22.
I will end with the words of Zanchy, If we may not invocate, says he, those
that hear and see us, and take care of us, how then dead men? So that they are
convinced of most manifest Idolatry who worship Saints departed and Angels, and
dedicate and consecrate Temples to them. And it is to ^very little purpose for
such as do thus to boast that they cannot err in things that relate to Faith
and Religion.

SECT. VI. God in and for them to be admired and glorified.
Sixthly, It will not be amiss, if we take the hint from the Angels double
admonition to Saint John, mentioned in the last Section, [ Worship thou God] to
turn our thoughts a while from these excellent Creatures, and, upon the
occasion of their perfections, to raise up our minds to observe, admire and
adore their Maker.

This is a Tribute we ought to pay unto him from all his works; O lord, our
Governor, says the Psalmist, Ps. 8. ult.
how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth! 19.1.
And again, The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handiwork. And again, 145.10.
All thy works praise thee, and thy Saints bless thee. The glory of him that
made them is conspicuous in them all, and they praise him, [ objective] by
suggesting matter to all intelligent or reasonable Beholders, of acknowledging
and blessing him thereupon. The invisible things of God, says the Apostle,
from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood [or
considered] by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so
that they are left without excuse, Romans 1.19, etc. Even they who having thus
far the manifestation of Gods being, and means of knowing him, glorified him
not as God, neither were thankful, but gave away his glory to the meaner sort
of his Works. And, Surely, says the Author of the Book of Wisdom, chapter 13.1,
etc. vain are all men by nature, who are ignorant of God, and could not out of
the good things that are seen, know him that is; neither by considering the
works did they acknowledge the Work-master; but deemed either Fire, or Wind, or
the swift Air, or the Circle of the Stars, or the violent Water, or the Light
of Heaven to be the God^ which govern the World; with whose Beauty if they
being delighted took them to be Gods, let them know how much better the Lord of
them is; for the first Author of Beauty has created them. But if they were
astonished at their power and virtue, let them understand by them, how much
mightier he is that made them. For by the Greatness and Beauty of the
Creatures, proportionably the Maker of them is seen. Diss. ^. 1. c. 16.
-- If we are well in our wits, says Epictetus admirably, what else should we
do both public^ly and privately, but celebrate, praise, and give thanks unto
the Deity? For, even while we are digging and ploughing, and ^ating, this Hymn
is to be sung unto God, Great is God who has given us these Instruments to
cultivate the Earth! Great is God who has given us hand^ to labor with! Great
is God who has given us the power of swallowing, and a Stomach to receive and
digest our food, who causes us by this means to grow up imperceptibly, and
makes us breath when we sleep! Thus we are to sing to his praise in all things.
But a most Divine Hymn is due for this, that he has given us the understanding
of things, with capacity and reas^n to make use of them. -- And then a little
after he adds, Ibid.
If I were a Nightingal, I should do what belongs to the Nightingal; if a Swan,
what belongs to such a Bird; but now I am a reasonable Creature, it behooves me
to praise God. This is my work and business. And this I do, nor will I quit
this Station as long as I am able, but exhort others also to join in the same
Song with me. Like that of the Psalmist, Praise ye the Lord, praise the Lord, O
my Soul! while I live I will praise the Lord. I will sing praises to my God,
while I have any being, Psalm. 146.1, 2. For this end certainly did God make the
world, and sent man at last into it, to display his own goodness, and produce
objects capable of the continual communications thereof; and that we might be
surrounded with variety of particulars, by piece-meals to take notice of and
honor him, whom we cannot at once and altogether conceive aright of. [ Natura
homines humo excitatos celsos and erectos constituit, ut Deorum cognitionem,
coelum intuentes, capere possint: sunt enim ex terra homines, non ut incola and
habitatores, sed quasi spectatores superarum rerum atque coelestium, quarum
spectaculum ad nullum aliud genus animantium pertinet, ut Balbus ^pud Ciceronem
2. de Not. Deorum. -- Quod and Ovidius pulchre docet. 1. Met. Pronaque cum
spectent animalia caetera terram, Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Iussit and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.]

But now, whereas other Creatures are his Works, and so retain some impressions
of their Author, the Angels are his most lively Images, that nearest of all
resemble him, and therefore we who ought, as has been said, to glorify him in
and for all his works, are the more unpardonable, if we observe or admire him
not in these, which make the nearest approach unto his Divinity, and read unto
us the clearest notions of his Excellencies and Perfections. Bellarmine has
entitled the best of his Writings (being most satisfactory to himself, and
useful to others) [ De Ascensione mentis ad Deum per scalas rerum creatarum]
that is, Of the Mind's ascent to God by the Ladder of the Creatures [A Jacob's
Ladder] and the ninth step he takes [ ex consideratione Angelorum] from the
contemplation of Angels: [These indeed are everywhere ascending and descending
in that Ladder.] -- Well may we cry out, O Lord, our Lord, Ps. 8.1.
how excellent is thy name in all the Earth! Thou have set thy Glory above the
Heavens. There are the greatest expressions of it, viz. in this glorious Host
of Heaven. He tells the number of [these] Stars, and calls them all by
their name* Great is our Lord, and of great power; his understanding is
infinite, Ps. 147.5, 6. Thus the Levites taught the Children of Israel to
glorify God, Stand up, and bless the Lord your God for ever and ever; and
blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.
Thou, even thou, art Lord alone: Thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens
with all their Hosts, the Earth and all things that are therein, Nehem. 9.5, 6.
And the Prophet Isaiah, in like manner, calls upon them, Lift up your Eyes on
high, and behold, who has created these things, that brings out their Host
by number. He calls them all by their names by the greatness of his might:
for that he is strong in power, not one fails, Isa. 40.26.

In the spiritual nature, knowledge, power, goodness, holiness, immortality, and
glory of Angels, we have competent relief toward the improving our Meditations
about that infinite and eternal, all-knowing, all-mighty, and transcendently
holy and glorious Spirit, who is the Father of them. And it is obvious for
every one to infer; If these Beings are so excellent above us, as has been
declared, then how much more perfect and complete is that God, who made them
and all things else? Before whom the whole World is but As a little grain of
the balance, yea as the drop of the morning-dew, that falls upon the Earth,
as the Wiseman speaks, Wisd. 11.22. [and to a like purpose the Prophet Isa.
40.15. -- ] Of whom therefore I cannot speak more fitly, than in the excellent
words of Novatian, Inter opera Te^tul.
the Roman Presbyter, in his Catholic Book of the Trinity. The mind is too
little to think, and all ^loquence justly dumb in the uttering of his Majesty.
For he is greater than our mind; and it cannot be conceived, how great he is.
Whatever we think or speak is far below him. We may indeed in some sort with
silence muse upon him, but cannot sufficiently explain him* For, whatsoever we
say, shows rather some creature or excellency of his, than himself. What can
we speak or think worthily enough of him, who is beyond all our speech and
sense? Unless perhaps by this one way we ^nderstand in our mind, so far as we
are able, what ^od is, if we conceive, he is that which for excellency and
greatness can never be understood fully by us, or enter into our thoughts to
comprehend. For, as the bodily ey-sight is weakened by poring on the Sun, so
that we cannot fixedly behold his bright Orb, overcome with the luster of his
radiant beams; so the more intense our mind is in viewing God, the more darkened
it becomes in its thoughts about him. For what can one say worthily of him, who
is more sublime and hi^h than all sublimity and height, more profound than all
profundity more lucid, bright and splendid than all light, brightness and
splendour; more strong and powerful, than all strength and power, more beautiful
than all beauty, truer than all truth, greater than all Majesty or greatness,
richer than all riches, wiser and more prudent than all wisdom and prudence,
juster than all justice, better than all good^ess, and more merciful than all
mercy? For all sorts of virtues must of necessity be less than the God and
Parent of all virtues; and (in a word) it may be truly said, he is that, which
nothing can be compared unto, above and beyond all we can say of him. (...).
Max. Tyr. Diss. 1.

The knowing Angels, who better understand his perfections, than we Mortals do,
yet Cover their faces with their wings before him, Isa. 6. Nempe sicut homines
solemn con^ra tueri non audent, ita Angeli Deum, Grot in Loc.] as not able to
look upon the brightness of his Majesty, and for an expression of their
reverence toward him* and, if any upon Earth presume to make more bold with
him, it is wholly from their ignorance; [ In velata facie reverentiam tantae
Majestatis cogit^, Fov^rius.] For, as Saint Chrysostom speaks, Hom. 4 de
incompr. Dei not.
upon this very occasion, (having mentioned the admiration and reverence of the
Angels toward God, by reason of their more excellent wisdom) (...) The
extension and increase of knowledge will advance proportionably our fear and
reverence.

To conclude this Inference, learn we from hence, to admire, and fear, See
Zanch. de oper. Dei, part. 1. l. 3. c. 14.
and love God exceedingly. To admire him, whose Creatures are so admirable, and
whom the most knowing of his Creatures do most admire. To fear him* who has
such powerful Hosts at his command^ and to love him, who is yet so good, as to
make all things, even Angels themselves, to serve us.

SECT. VII. Why, and how the Ministry of Angels is to be obliged by us.
In the last place, let us do, what we can, to oblige and secure the Ministry
of Angels to our selves, which is, as has been declared, so many ways and upon
so many accounts beneficial. And here I need not offer any thing new by way of
motive or inducement, when it is our apparent Interest so to do, that we may
have the comfort of this reflection, among others, in cases of the greatest
trouble and adversity, and the most perplexing difficulties, that at any time
befall us.

Now this we shall best effect, if we make sure to our selves the character of
those persons, who have the promise from God of such a blessing; that is, If we
are found in the number of them, that truly fear God, for The Angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them, Ps. 34. In the
fear of the Lord is strong confidence, and his children shall have a place of
refuge, Prove. 14.26. -- If we set our chiefest love upon God, put ou^ trust in
him, know and own his name; for of them, that do so, it is said, Ps. 91. He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. -- If we
approve our selves sincere and faithful Christians, honest and obedient
Disciples of our blessed Lord and Savior; for, as the Text tells us, They are
sent forth to Minister for them who shall inherit Salvation. Thus in the
general.

But, then, there are some more particular directions to be given, worthy of
our most careful observance, namely, such as these that follow.

First, pray we to God, from whom comes down every good and perfect gift, for
this among other benefits. They are all at his beck, sent forth and employed at
his will and pleasure; and therefore it is but fitting, that we own him in the
favor, and make our humble requests to him for it. The success of Prayer in
this matter was observable in the instance I have before recommended out of
Bodinus. This was part of Jacob's Benediction upon Ioseph's Sons, Chapter 4^ Sect.
4.
even his Prayer to God for them, 'The Angel, which redeemed me from all evil,
bless the Lads, Genesis 48.15, 16. For so I construe it, as [ votum Deo] and not [
invocatio Angeli.] And Judas Maccab^us, we read, besought the Lord, that he
would send 'a good Angel to deliver Israel, 2 Macc. 11.6. And again, in another
distress, He said in his Prayer after this manner, O Lord, thou did send
thine Angel in the time of Hezekias King of Judea, and did slay in the Host
of Sennacherib, an hundred fourscore and five thousand. Wherefore now also, O
Lord of Heaven, send a good Angel before us for a fear and a dread unto them,
and through the might of thine Arm let those be stricken with terror, that come
against thy holy People to blaspheme, Chapter 15.22, etc. It Is part of the Psamists
Imprecation against his and the Churches Enemies, Let them be as Chafe before
the Wind, and let the Angel of the Lord chase or scatter them. Let their way be
dark and slippery, and let the Angel of the Lord persecute them, Ps. 35.5, 6.
And this is part of the Jews Form of Prayer still in their Euchology, ^ud.
Cappellus in Hebr. 1.14.
[ Command, O Lord, thine Angels, who are placed over humane affairs, that they
be ready for my aid, to help, save, and deliver me.]

Secondly, keep we our selves diligently within the Pale and Communion of the
Christian Church, the society of those, who are the declared Heirs of
Salvation, [ The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved,] Acts
2.47. For to such, as has been shown, they are parti^ularly sent as Guardians
and Protectors. [ Vbi non est D^i gratia, ibi nee locum habet Angelorum
custodia,] The custody of Angels, says Luther, has no place, where the Grace
of God is not; In cap. 2. Heb. D. I. Ger^ard^. Med. Sacr.
and G^rhard to a like purpose, [ Reconciliandus prius es Deo per fidem, si
Angelum vis habere custod^m,] Thou must first be reconciled to God by Faith, if
thou would have an Angel of his for thy Guardian.

The Form of Excommunication is called remarkably, 'A delivering over unto
Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. The Devil claims a peculiar power over those,
who are rightfully cast out of the Church of Christ, and so barred and deprived
of the succor and assistance of good Angels. This is notoriously apparent,
says Doctor H. More, Mystery of Godliness, l. 4. c. 6.
in some of the forlorn and giddy-headed Sects of these times, among whom, I
dare say, a man may find out a greater number of true Demoniacks than Christ
and his Apostles are said to cure. For to what more rationally, than to the
possession of these deceiving Spirits, can be attributed those wild ecstasies
they are in? etc.

We must be careful then, by holding fast the form of sound words, the Faith
once delivered to the Saints, and avoiding of all wicked Schism from, and
disobedience to the Church of Christ, to secure our selves from being exposed
to the Tyranny of evil Spirits.

Thirdly, Let us continue honestly and industriously within the compass and
bounds of our lawful Vocations respectively. [ Angelis suis mandavit de te]
ambulante scilicet in tua vocatione and timente Deum, Brentius in Heb. 1.14.]
It Is an useful Rule delivered from S. Hierom [Semper boni aliquid operis
facito, ut Diabolus te semper inveniat occupatum.] Be always doing some good
work, or other, that the Devil may find thee still employed, and not at leisure
for his motions. -- We are studiously to avoid those curious and unwarrantable
Arts and Practices, whereby we may tempt and invite evil Spirits to our
company; Act. 19.19.
and having betaken our selves to innocent and lawful Callings, to keep close
unto them. The Egyptians, as I have before intimated, assigned an Angel to
every man in his respective Calling, whom they styled the Spirit of his
Profession. The good Angels, to be sure, are all for order, and have no
kindness for those that are (...), disorderly and unruly ones, who will not
keep their place and rank; (...) (in the words of M. Antoninus) Deserters of
the Station and work assigned them, L. 10. Sect. 25. L. 11. Sect. 9.
and fugitives from their particular charge and duty; such as the evil Angels
are, on the contrary, described, Who forsook their first Estate, and left their
proper Habitation, S. Jude v. 6. And ever since they are all for confusion and
every evil work (which follows upon that) with those Children of Disobedience,
who are busy bodies in other men's matters, but neglect their own Offices and
Duties.

Undoubtedly, whenever any leave their proper Callings and Ministries, they
go out of those ways wherein the holy Angels have a special charge over them.

Fourthly, we must with courage and vigilance resist the Devil and all his
wicked instruments, between whom and the good Angels there is Antipathy, and a
continual fight and contest. It Is said of our blessed Savior, upon his defeat
of the Evil One, and vanquishing of his Temptations, S. Matthew. 4.11. Then the
Devil leaves him, and, behold, Angels came and ministered unto him. Whereby is
shown, Cit. in Cat. D. Ibo.
as S. Hilary notes, That the Ministeries of Angels, and good Offices of the
heavenly Powers will not be wanting to us if we overcome the Devil and trample
upon him. -- That we may secure their delightful abode with us, we must not
gratify, or hold league and amity with, their and our professed Enemies; but,
as the holy Scripture directs us, Ephesians. 6.1 Pet. 5.8, 9. S. James 4.7.
Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: be sober and vigilant,
and putting on the whole Armor of God for our help and safeguard, stand it
out against the Devil, and resist him steadfastly, that he may f^ye from us. --
And [ Diabolo s^cede^ti succedunt Angeli] his flight will be an invitation and
encouragement to the holy and good Angels to resort to us, Spanhem. D^b. Evang.
and dwell wit^ us.

Resist we the Devil more especially, when he tempts us by Allurements or
Threatenings to revolt and apostatize from our Religion, and that Oath of
fidelity whereby we were devoted unto God at Baptism. The four resolute
Confessors (whom I have mentioned elsewhere out of Dan. chapter 3. and chapter 6.)
found the blessed Angels then most ready at hand for their wonderful
deliverance, when they generously exposed their lives and fortunes, rather than
they would deny their God, withold his Worship from him, or give it to any
other. And so did the Apostles of Christ too, when they freely hazarded all of
this world, rather than to desist from the preaching of the Gospel committed to
them, Acts 5. and Acts 12.

Fifthly, We are to shun and avoid, with all the circumspection we are able,
whatsoever we know to be offensive and grievous to them. Such to be sure is all
wilful transgression and disobedience, for which God threatens to remove this
Fence from about us. They are at hand unto Believers, says S. Basil, if we
drive them not away by our wicked doings. In Ps. 33.
-- For as smoke chaseth away Bees, and a noisome smell the Doves, so do our
filthy practices our Guardian Angels from us.

We do not only by base and sinful actions wound our own Spirits, and grieve
the holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. but offend these good Spirits too, that wish
us well and attend us. S. Augustine writes excellently to this purpose, Solil.
c. 27.
in his Soliloquies: The Angels love, says he to God, those whom thou love,
and keep those whom thou keep, but forsake those whom thou forsakest, and do
not love the works of iniquity, because thou hate them. As often as we do
well, the Angels rejoice and the Devils are troubled* but when we depart from
the ways of goodness, we make the Devil to rejoice, and defraud thy Angels of
their gladness; for there is joy among them over one sinner that repents, but
with the Devil over a righteous man that forsakes repentance. Grant therefore,
O Father, grant, that they may always joy concerning us, by our continuing good
and righteous, that both thou may evermore be praised by them, in and For
us, and we may be brought with them into thy one Sheepfold, there to confess
together jointly unto thy holy name, O thou Cr^ator of men and Angels.

Sixthly, that I may draw toward an end, we shall certainly oblige and secure
their attendance and ministry by doing of those things, wherewith they are most
pleased and delighted, the exercise I mean of such Virtues and Graces
especially, whereby we most of all resemble and imitate them, [ per bonae
voluntatis similitudinem] as S. Augustine speaks, De Civ. Dei. l. 8. c. 25.
by a likeness of good and holy temper and disposition: For nothing conciliates
Friendship more than similitude of manners.

The main Reason, as I conceive, says a Reverend Author, Antidote against
Atheism. l. 3. c. 13. Ibid.
why the Examples of the consociation of good Spirits are so scarce in History,
is, because so very few men are heartily and sincerely good. -- And again, The
safest Magic is the sincere consecrating a man's Soul to God, and the aspiring
to nothing but so profound a pitch of humility, as not to be conscious to our
selves of being at all touched with the praise and applause of men, and to such
a free and universal sense of Charity, as to be delighted with the welfare of
another, as much as our own. -- And he observes it particularly concerning that
person whose story we had before out of Bodinus; Ibid.
That he was not only frequent in Prayer, but used to spend some hours in
Meditation and reading of the Scriptures, -- And once among the rest, while he
was busy in his Enquiries about the matters of Religion, that he light on a
passage in Philo-Iudaeus his Book d^ Sacrificiis, where he writes, that a good
and holy man can offer no greater, nor more acceptable Sacrifice to God than
the oblation of himself; and therefore following Philo's counsel, That he
offered his Soul to God. And that after-that, amongst many other Divine Dreams
and Visions, he once in his sleep seemed to hear the Voice of God saying to
him, I will save thy Soul, I am he that before appeared unto thee.

It is noted of Socrates among the Heathens, so famed for his Demon that
conversed with him upon all occasions, that he was a person most remarkable for
righteousness and innocence, purity and goodness, sobriety and exactness in the
Government of himself, piety toward God, and holiness among men; and therefore
upon that account that it was no wonder he should enjoy so great a Privilege,
while those Celestial Spirits shun the habitation of wicked and polluted
Souls. For the exemplifying whereof I refer the Reader to the Quotations here
annexed, whereby he may perceive himself, upon the like terms, a Candidate for
the like Benefits.

[ Hic quem dico prorsus custos, singularis praefectus, domesticus specula^or,
proprius curator, intimus cognitor, assiduus observator, individu^s arbiter,
inseparabilis Testis, malorum improbator, bonorum probator, si rite advertatur,
sedulo cognoscatur, religiose colatur, ita ut a Socrate Iustitia and innocentia
cultus est, in rebus incertis prospector, dubiis praemonitor, periculosis
tutator, egenis opitulator, qui tibi queat tum insomniis, tum signis, tum etiam
fortasse coram, cum usus postulat, mala averruncare, bona prosperare, humilia
sublimare, nutantia fulcire, obscura clarare, secunda regere, adversa
corrigere. -- Apuleius de Deo Socratis.]

[(...) (...). Max. Tyrius Diss. XXVI. eodem de argumento. (...). id. ibid.]

And now let me close all with a serious recommendation of some of those
particular Excellencies, wherein we are to endeavor an imitation of the
Angels, in order to the more effectual securing and obliging of their Ministry
to our selves. The principal of them I shall comprize under the ensuing heads.
viz.

I. A ready, cheerful, and sincere obedience unto all Gods commands.] For so we
have found them described by the Psalmist, Ye Angels of his that excel in
strength, that do his Commandments, harkening unto the voice of his word: Ye
Ministers of his that do his pleasure, Psalm. 103. who are upon the wing, as
has been said more than once already, at every beck or intimation from him. --
And now, in order unto this, we must certainly study the knowledge of Gods will
that we may obey it, as they do, harkening to the voice of his word; that word
of his which is written for our learning and instruction in the holy
Scriptures. The good Angels are Angels of light, and love to keep them company
who walk in the light: They are no friends to blind Obedience, but for a
reasonable service. The Devil, on the other side, is the Prince of Darkness,
and labors what he can to keep men in the mist and darkness of ignorance,
error, and delusion. The good Angels promote to their uttermost the knowledge
of the Gospel of Christ. We read of one of them, in the Revelations, Flying in
the midst of He^ven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to every Nation,
chapter 14.6, 7. And of another of them calling S. Paul into Macedonia to further
this work, Acts 16. But the Devil, by all the means and ways he is able,
endeavors to obstruct and hinder it: We would have come unto you, even I Paul,
once and again, (says he to the Thessalonians) but Satan hindered us, 1 Epist.
2.18. And, where the Word is preached, he does what he can, either to put it
out of the hearers memories, or to prejudice them against the belief and love
it: When they have hea^d, says our blessed Savior, Satan comes immediately,
and takes away the Word, that was sown in their hearts, Saint Mark 4.15. And,
The God of this World, says the Apostle, has blinded the minds of them, which
believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image
of God, should shine into them, 2 Cor. 4.4.

II. An assiduous, constant and orderly devotion.] Of their example herein I
have spoken sufficiently, Chapter 4. Sect. 1. by the copying out whereof we shall
invite them to us. [ Si verbi and praecum gaudes exercitio, Angelorum quoque
gaudere poteris patrocinio,] says the devout Gerhard, D. I. Gerhardi Med. Sacr.
If thou delight in the Word of God and Prayer, thou shall be gratified with
the Angels Patronage. While I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin
and the sin of my People Israel, says the Prophet Daniel, and presenting my
supplication before the Lord my God for the holy Mountain of my God; yea, while
I was speaking in Prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the Vision at the
beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the
evening Oblation, Dan. 9.20, 21. And of Cornelius it is recorded, that being a
devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, and gave much Alms to
the People, and prayed to God always, [ viz. upon every season and opportunity]
He saw in a Vision, about the ninth hour of the day, when he was praying, an
Angel of God that said unto him, thy Prayers and thine Alms are come up for a
memorial before God, Acts 10.2, 3, 4, 30. And we read, in the Revel^tions, of
'Angels with Golden Vials full of Odours, (or Incense) which are the Prayers of
the Saints, Revel. 5.8. -- 8.4. Learned Mr. Mede will needs have Revel. 8.4.
understood of Christ alone, as our only High Priest in Heaven, Apost. of lat.
Times, par. 1. c. 7. which I know not how to reconcile unto Chapter 5.8. where it
is plainly enough spoken of the four living Creatures [the Angels before
described, Chapter 3.] and the 24 Elders in conjunction [ having every one of them
Harps and Golden Vials full of Odours or Incense, which are the Prayers of the
Saints] unless it be said, that these all deliver their Golden-Vials of Incense
to that other singular Angel, Chapter 8.4. that he should offer it with the Prayers
of all the Saints upon the Golden-Altar before the Throne.]

These, it seems, they delight upon occasion to present unto God, adding their
own, probably, together with them, according to the pattern of the Angel in
Zechary, Chapter 1.12. O Lord of Hosts* how long will thou not have mercy on
Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah! -- They are careful Messengers between
God and us, says both Saint Bernard and Saint Augustine [though, to be sure,
they never meant it in the Heathen-Notion] faithfully to bear our groans to
him, and devoutly to bring back the tidings of his Grace and favor unto us. [
Solliciti discurrunt medii inter nos and Deum, nostros gemitus fidelissime ad
eum portantes, ipsiusque gratiam devotissime ad nos reportantes, D. Bern. Med.
c. 6. cujusmodi etiam apud D. Augustine. solil. c. 27.

But then, with our Confessions and Petitions, we must not forget to
intermingle those Doxologies, Lauds and Praises, I have elsewhere spoken of,
which are their continual employment. We must be sure to join with them in
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, making melody in our hearts to the
Lord, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5. Nothing is more acceptable to these
Celestial-Spirits; nothing can tie them and us together more strictly, than our
union and communion with them in the same beloved Service and Ministry, making
our selves a Temple for God's praise, which he may vouchsafe to dwell in,
bringing these his Attendants along with him; and conversing delightfully, as
they do, with heavenly and divine objects. [ Nihil magis supernis civibus
spectare libet. -- O quam faelix esses^ si spiritualibus oculis intueri possis,
quomodo praeveniunt principes, conjuncti psallentibus in medio juvencularum
Tympanistriarum! Videres proculdubio, qua cura quove trip^dio intersunt
cantantibus, assistunt orantibus, adsunt meditantibus, D. Bern. ubi antea: quo
spectat and Ephremi illud, Habitante in Deo anima, Angeli festinant honorare
eam utpote, Templum Dei effectam.]

III. A profound humility and ready condescension unto all for their good.]
This is most conspicuous throughout the whole Ministry of the blessed and
glorious Angels unto us; and we find them ever most forward in their errands
and embassies to the meek and humble, such lowly ones, as God himself has a
special regard unto, Isa. 66.2. The humble Virgin, the humble Shepherds, etc.
Whereas [ procul absunt a superbis, qui nemini inserviunt -- ] as Saint Cyril
speaks, In Isa. 6.
they are far from the proud and haughty, who use the services of others
imperiously enough, but disdain themselves to serve others. Pride is the noted
^in of Devils, and draws us into their Snare, and estranges the good Angels
from us. -- The tears of ^enitent Sinners are the Wine of Angels, Med. Sacr.
as Gerhard has it; They are humble and lowly themselves, and pride and
scornfulness is perfectly hated by them. They are not ashamed to serve Christ's
little ones. Why then is Dust and Ashes proud, when those ^eav'nly Spirits so
much abase themselves?

IV. An unspotted purity and chastity.]

Id. ibid.
They are all holy and undefiled, clothed continually with clean and white
linen, the robes of righteousness; and their joy is in those that keep their
garments clean and unspotted with their flesh, that maintain an holy, pure,
chaste, and uncorrupted life and conversation, holy and pure thoughts, and
words, and practices. As on the contrary, the Devil is known by the name of an
unclean and impure spirit, Saint Luke 11.24. and takes up his habitation upon
choice among the Swine, Saint Matthew. 8.31.

V. And lastly, a fervent love and peace, and concord, as much as lies in us,
one with and toward another.] For thus it is among the holy Angels.
Oth^-Casma^. Angelogr. par. 2. c. 7. Q. 3.
And to this some refer that of Bildad [qui facit concordiam in sublimibus] Job
25.2. He makes peace in his high places; And again, that of God unto Job. chapter
38.37. which the vulgar Latin reads [ conc^^tum coeli quis dormire faciet?] Who
can lay asleep the harmony of Heaven. -- And nothing, doubtless, is more
grateful to them than to see the like among us below. Behold, how good, and how
pl^asant a thing it is (to them as well as our selves) for brethren to dwell
together in unity! Ps. 133. Ep. 75.
This, says Saint Cyprian, brings the greatest pleasure, not only to faithful
men and those that know virtue, but unto the Celestial Spirits also, whom the
Scripture represents as rejoicing over one Sinner that r^pent^th (and so
returns to the bond of unity) which could not, says he, be verified of the
Angels, that have their conversation in Heaven, were they not some way united
also unto us; who rejoice in our union, and on the contrary are troubled, when
they see us divided and at variance. -- There is not any temper, that gratifies
and invites the envious and mischievous one, the Devil, more than malice and
ill will, strife and contention. By our undue heats and inordinate wrath we
give place unto him. He is known by his foaming rage, and cloven-foot. -- And,
on the other side, there is nothing more acceptable, as I said, to the good
Angels, than brotherly love and unity, peace and agreement, whereby we conform
our selves to their charity, and participate in a degree their blissful and
serene state of amity and friendship, which is indeed a very Heaven upon Earth.

The Conclusion.
If therefore we are followers of this angelical obedience, devotion, humility,
purity, Vide Orig. contra celsum l. 8. p. 399, 400.
love and peace, we need not doubt, but they will delight in our converse as
agreeable, and look upon us as their kindred and familiars, and consequently
take pleasure in ministering unto us here upon earth, until at last they bring
us in safety, and with triumph, out of an uncertain and evil World, Vide D.
Ber^. Med. c. 6.
into those blessed Regions of unmixed and durable joy and happiness, where we
shall be added to their Choire, and sing perpetual Halelujah's with them, in
Notes far above our present reach, unto the glory of God Almighty, both their
and our most Sovereign Lord and Gracious Benefactor. Which he of his infinite
mercy grant for Christ his sake: To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be
given by us, for the hopes of this and all other Blessings, all Honor Praise
and Adoration, now and for ever. Amen.

D. I Ger^ard. Med. Sacr.
O clementissime Deus, qui per sanctos Angelos deducis nos per hujus vitae
Eremum, da, ut per eosdem deducamur ad caeleste regnum. Amen.

Collect for the Second Sunday after Trinity.
O Lord, who never failest to help and govern them whom thou do bring up in
thy steadfast fear and love; [to whom peculiarly thou have promised the guard of
thy holy Angels to encamp about them] keep us, we beseech thee, under the
protection of thy good providence, and [that we may be qualified for it] make
us to have a p^rpetual fear and love of thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Collect for the fourth Sunday after Epiphany.
O God who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers, that
by reason of the frailty of our nature we cannot [keep our selves, or] always
stand upright; Grant us such strength and protection [from the assistance of
thy holy Spirit, and the Ministry of thy holy Angels] as may support us in all
dangers, and carry us [safe] through all temptations, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Collect for the sixth Sunday after Epiphany.
O God, whose blessed Son was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil, and make us the Sons of God and Heirs of Eternal Life; Grant us, we
beseech thee, that, having this hope, we may purify our selves, even as he is
pure; that when he shall appear again with great power and glory [attended with
those holy Angels, which now by thy appointment Minister unto us upon Earth] we
may be made like [not only unto them, but] unto him in his eternal and glorious
Kingdom, where with thee, O Father, and thee, O holy Ghost, he lives and
reigns ever one God world without end. Amen.

Blessed God, whose Throne is encircled with Myriads of glorious Spirits, that
vail their Faces with their Wings, as not being able to behold the brightness
of thy Majesty, and delight in their attendance upon those Ministries,
whereunto thou have appointed them; we thy most unworthy Creatures in all
humility prostrate our selves at thy Footstool, desirous with that holy Choire
of Angels and Archangels, and all the Host of Heaven, to laud and magnify thy
great and glorious Name in and for all thy Works; and beseeching thee, to give
us grace, to do thy will on Earth as it is done in Heaven; and so to follow the
exemplary obedience, devotion, condescension, purity, and charity of thy sacred
Angels, as to oblige their constant Ministry to our necessities here, and be
advanced hereafter to a more intimate and happy society with them in the life
to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING SOME REFLECTIONS UPON Mr. WEBSTER'S Displaying of
Supposed WITCHCRAFT, WHEREIN He handles the EXISTENCE and NATURE of ANGELS and
SPIRITS.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Brom, at the Gun, at the Westend of S. Paul's Church,
1678.

Reflections on Mr. Webster's Discourses against the Incorporeity of Angels or
Spirits.
WHile the foregoing Treatise of Angels was under the Press, The occasion and
scope of the ensuing Reflections.
there came to my hands a learned and laborious Volume of Mr. John Webster,
Practitioner in Physic, called, The Displaying of supposed Witchcraft, wherein
also he discourses of the Existence and Nature of Angels and Spirits. Upon the
perusal of which I have noted some things, which I conceive it pertinent for me
to reflect here a little upon.

I shall not presume to censure any thing of the main design and scope of this
industrious Author, in the prosecution of which he has indeed heaped together
many rare and excellent Observations, worthy to be considered of for the
improving Knowledge, and rendering all men cautious, how they pronounce of such
abstruse Subjects.

Much less shall I espouse any man's particular Hypothesis and Quarrel; or
attempt the Defense of those eminently worthy Persons, whom he has singled out
for his Antagonists, the Reverend and Learned Divines, Dr. Casaubon, Mr.
Glanvil, Dr. H. More, who are better able and more concerned to speak for
themselves. Only I wish for his own sake, that he had treated them with more
respective terms, than those of Scurrilous, Impudent, Witch-mongers, -- which
he so freely bestows; as also that aspersion, which he casts upon the Pious and
profoundly Learned Dr. Hammond, [That he is ^lmost eve^y-w^ere guil^y of vain
Tra^itio^^l Fancies. Page 51.
]

These a^^ Ep^th^^es which, howe^er they might be pardoned in a Practitioner of
Physic, who^ Age and ^nfirmities may ^a^e (...) froward and wa^pish, are not
so agreeable to his other Character, as a Presbyter of this Church, (ordained
long since by the Right Reverend Dr. Tho. Morton Bishop of Durham) and C^rate
of Kildwick about the Year 1634, as himself acquaints us, Page 275.
Page 277.
though he wholly baulk his Spiritual Titles in the Frou^ of his Book, as one
that glories rather in another Function.

I do heartily both approve and commend his Piety in acquie^cing, as he
professes, in the determinations of holy Scripture, and fully accord with him
in what he lays down for the Rule of proceeding in these Controversies.

[ The Word of God, says he, is the most proper medium, Chap. 4. p. 49, 50.
with sound Reason, to judge of the power of Spirits and Devils by. -- And
again, That the Sc^iptures and sound Reason are the only true and proper Medium
to decide these Controversies by, is most undeniably apparent, because God is a
Spirit, and the invisible God, and therefore best knows the nature and power of
the spiritual and invisible world, and, being the God of truth, can and does
inform us. -- Nay he is the Father of Spirits, and therefore truly knows, and
can and does teach us their Na^ures, Offices and Operations. -- And again, The
Scriptures and found Reason are the most fit Medium to determin^ these things
by.]

Particularly he speaks of the Human^ Soul, Angels, and Devils.

1. The Word of God, says he, Pa. 44, 45.
does particul^rly teach us the state and condition of Souls after death, that
they shall be like the Angels in Heaven, and all other things necessary to move
and draw us ^o beli^ve the immortal existence of Souls. --

2. Has not God in the holy Scriptures amply and plainly laid down the state
of the other world, Ibid.
in describing to us such a numerous Company of Seraphims and Cherubims, Angels
and Archangels, with their several Ord^rs, Offices, Ministries, and
Employments? --

3. The Scriptures do fully and abundantly inform us of the Devil's spiritual
and invisible power, Page 47.
and against the same declare unto us the whole Armo^r of God, with which we
ou^ht to be furnished, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 6.

Now that which I purpose to observe and examine, is chiefly this, how
consistent our Author is to himself; and how well he has acquitted him,
according to these Rules and Measures, in his Discourses of Angels and Spirits.
And that so far only, as I apprehend my self concerned by some things which I
have asserted and declared in the precedent Treatise.

I have suggested in the Epistle Dedicatory, The Denial of Spirits a step to
Atheism.
that the general dis-belief of Spirits may well be thought an Introduction to
all manner of Irreligion and Profaneness; which brings me in part under that
condemnation, wherein he involves both Dr. Casaubon and Mr. Glanvil; The one
for saying, [ One prime foundation of Atheism, Chap. 3. p. 37.
as by many ancient and late is observed, being the not belief of Spiritual
Beings -- ] The other for affirming, [ Those that will not bluntly say, there
is no God; content themselv^s for a fair step and introduction, to deny there
are Spirits. -- ] In opposition to whom he asserts, that the denying of the
Existence of Spirits does not infer the denying of the Being of God; P. 38, 39.
because God might be without them; and God was before them; and the Sadducees
believed a God, allowing of the Books of Moses, etc. as he discourses more at
large.

Now this formal arguing of his, as I conceive, is weak and trifling. For (to
say nothing, that such Ethical propositions, as these should not be scanned
over-rigidly, but construed sometimes, cum grano salis, as holding (...),)
However ther^ might be a God, though there were neither Angels nor Devils in
rerum natura, yet those that deny in general the being of Spirits, do therein
implicitly impugn the being of God, who is a Spirit, whether themselves know
and consider it, or no.

And, as some have justified the Truth of that Royal Maxim, [No Bishop, No
King] against them who would prove, (in like manner as this Author pleads) that
there is no necessary and immediate connection of the terms, Bishop and King; or
no essential dependence of King upon Bishop; because nevertheless they, that
have opposed Bishops in the Church, have been generally also against a King in
the State; and the same Antimonarchical principle inclines them to oppose both;
so may we answer here; and it is to be observed, among our modern Atheists and
Sadducees especially, that their antipathy and aversation, as to the notion and
being of Spirits universally, has carried them on (and naturally does so) to
the dethroning of God, the Supreme Spirit, and Father of Spirits.

Ibid.
And although, as he farther says, God had been God, though he had not been
Creator; or there might be a God, though there were no Creation. -- [Such a God
as Epicurus and his Followers, a^ vitandam invidiam, acknowledg] yet should not
I question to tax that person with real Atheism, who denies a God under that
notion, as the (...), the first cause of all things, the Maker and Governor of
the World; especially, since the Apostle has taught us, R^m. 11 20.
that The invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead, so that they [even the Heathen] are without excuse.

Those persons certainly (suppose we never so charitably, as Salvian says of
the Arrians, that they may bono animo errare) contribute very much toward the
countenancing and support of Atheism among men, who banish the belief of
Incorporeal Beings out of the World as mere jargon, and a thing, which no man
whatever he talks, can possibly understand.

And though I am far enough from insinuating this Author to be such an one;
since he openly professes his belief of God, the humane Soul, Angels and
Devils, and of all the holy Scripture which declares these things to our
faith; and because there are some, who by the goodness of their nature, and
prevalence of some better principles, may not be effectually and in practice,
what otherwise certain evil tenets would incline them to be: Many are too dull
and stupid to understand or consider of the fatal and pernicious consequences
of their own Opinions; and others are too virtuously qualified, to be
influenced by them; Dangerou^ Positions of Mr. W. against the Idea of a Spirit,
and of God. P. 198.
Yet it may not be amiss for him seriously to reflect and weigh within himself,
what a bad use others at least may make of such assertions of his, as these are
that follow.

There is no common notion, says he, of a spiritual and immaterial Being in
all or any man. -- And again confidently,

Ib^d.
We assert, that our faculties, or cognitive Powers (how far soever some would
magnify and extol them) have not the power of understanding Beings, that are
simply and absolutely immaterial and incorporeal. -- And again,

Thos^* that pretend Angels are merely incorporeal, must needs err, P. ^07.
and put force upon their own faculties, which cannot conceive a thing, that is
not continuate and corporeal.

Now if no man have, or can have, the notion of a spiritual and immaterial
Being; if our cognitive powers cannot understand it; if our faculties cannot
conceive of it; what, I pray, will become of the Being of God in the World, as
a Spirit, and the Father of Spirits? How ready is every one to discard, what he
cannot frame a notion of, what he cannot possibly conceive or understand? Nay,
how should his mind ever entertain, or assent to it? And we must needs infer,
upon this supposal, that he who professes, God is a Spirit, as our Author
does, makes of him only [ nomen inane] a bare and empty name, gives him an
insignificant attribute, and believes and speaks, he knows not what.

But then farther our Author excepts against the Idea of God in particular.

God in his own nature being infinite and incomprehensible, P. 201.
there can be no true and adequate notion of him. -- And again,

Ibid.
-- Much more must the being of God, which is infinite and incomprehensible,
which are attributes incommunicable, be utterly inconceivable to any of our
faculties.

Let him go now and dispute the case with the Apostle Saint Paul, Romans 1.20,
21, etc. That which may be known of God is manifest in them, [even the
Gentiles] for God h^th showed unto them, [(...).] And this (...), which he
says to be (...)* is no other than the (...), The invisible things of God,
(...)
which I mentioned before, even his eternal po^er and Godhead; And these too
are so far said to be manifested to them, as to leave them without excuse or
apology; For not glorifying him as God, [even the invisible God] but changing
the glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to ^orruptible man,
etc. -- i. e. a corporeal Image. Which, if I mistake not, sufficiently includes
incorporeity among the rest in the Idea to be had of him, -- And here I call to
mind two notable sayings of the Fathers, worthy to be written in Letters of
Gold. The one of Saint Cyprian, of the Vanity of Idols, Haec est summa delicti,
noll^ agnoscore, quem ignorare non possis. The other of Lactantius, who is a
strenuous Asserter of Religion's being the chief property and distinction of
man from the Beasts; Quam sibi veniam sperare possunt impietatis suae, qui non
agnoscunt cultum ejus, quem prorsus ignorari ab homine fas non est?

This Gentleman should do well to consider better, that it is one thing, to
conceive, that there is such a Being, whose perfections we cannot fathom; and
another, fully and adequately to comprehend him; one thing to conceive truly,
and another to understand adequately; for there is somewhat incomprehensible to
us in the nature and essence of all things else, as well as God's, and we may
everywhere almost write Mystery, and (...)! and (...).

It is the commendation, I think, of the Idea or Notion of God in our Souls, if
it be such for perfection, as, had it not been implanted within us, we could
scarce collect our selves from any thing without.

But, whatever there be in that, I would gladly know, if this All-perfect,
Infinite and Incomprehensible Being, In c. 21. Epict. Enchirid.
[(...), as Simplicius well styles him] is utterly unconceivable to any of our
faculties, how he or any other comes to believe and assert the Divine Nature to
be thus Infinite and Incomprehensible in all Perfections; or, how there can be
an obligation upon others to believe and profess, what is utterly
unconceiveable.

And now I pass on to what he discourses of the Nature of Angels.

I have endeavored in the Treatise of Angels, to give as plain, Self-Study and
reflection the right and ready Me^hod to the Notion of Spirits.
familiar and useful a description* as I could, of the notion of Spirits, from
a serious reflection made upon our own Soul or Spirit, Chapter 2. Sect. 1. and
represented them by such attributes, as I conceive most proper and
characteristical. The Delphick Oracle (...), which sends us to study our
selves, directs us certainly to the readiest course of natural, as well as
Moral Philosophy; and the genuine knowledge of the little World of Man is the
best preparative for the understanding of the greater, and him, that made both*

Our Author grants, that All substances are known by their properties and
Modifications. P. 199.
If then we can find out any such properties or attributes, as are no ways
agreeable unto matter, we have sufficiently the notion of a Spirit, that is, an
immaterial or incorporeal Being. And such we may be satisfied of by inspection
made into our selves. -- Were there no other but those two powers, we may every
one be conscious of; a power, I mean, of reflecting upon our own thoughts, and
a power of moving and determining our own wills, as well as bodies; this (...),
if I may so speak, and (...), or, (...), (^he root and foundation of all
morality) is altogether incompetent unto Matter. For where is there any thing
of Matter, that can possibly reflect upon its individual self, or freely move
it self? Those who own nothing in the World but Body, must banish Conscience
and subscribe to Fatal necessity, etc. It is confessed, when we have sum'd up
all, that we know but very little of any thing; and may have Sense enough of
our own Imperfection and Ignorance to keep us humble: Yet, since we know so
little, we had not need to make that little less; and it is sufficient, I should
think, that we know as much (or rather more) of Spirit, as we do of Body. And
of Body our Author himself tells us, over and over; The Intrinsic Nature of
Body as such is utterly unknown to us. -- It Is Internal Nature, P. 203*
quatenus Corpus, is utterly unknown -- and again -- We know not the Intrinsic
Nature of Body: -- And yet but a little before he had said, P. 200*
-- We must with all the whole company of the learned assign Extension to be
the True and Genuine Character, or Characteristical Property, as he elsewhere
phraseth it, of Body. -- And, if this be yielded, what should reasonably be
desired more, when himself confesses, that All Substances are known by their
properties and modifications? as I even now observed.

I will not stay to dispute the point farther, or to examine, whether that
wonderful Body, as he calls it, P. 203^ 204.
Image or Idolum in a Mirror or Looking-Glass, be as really a Body as any in
the Universe, as he affirms. Let him admire and play, as he please, with his
own Shadow. Master W 's co^tradictio^s both about Body and Spirit.


But this I observe, that Contradictions seem frequently to lie in his Head
together, (if we may guess at what was there, by that which drops from his Pen)
as if he were really (...), partaker of two distinct and contrary Souls, [in
another Sense than St. James uses the word, which we English double-minded, De
anima Brutorum c. 7.
chapter 1.8. or Dr. Willis physically defends the thing]. For my part I am no ways
able to reconcile his.

Thus we find him thwarting of himself, both about Body and Spirits.

As to Body, besides what I have already noted, he tells us,

P. 205.
-- Penetration of Bodies is simply unintelligible and impossible to conceive
-- as certainly it is. And yet we have him afterward very favorable and
yielding to his most admired Helmont's Penetration of Dimensions -- The
Arguments, P. 255, 256, etc.
says he, that he brings to prove Penetration of Dimensions to be in Nature,
or something equivalent thereunto, seem to be strong and convincing. -- There
may, it seems, be convincing* Arguments with him for what is simply
unintelligible and impossible to conceive, or equivalent thereunto.

But then, as to Spirits, which is the subject I am chiefly concerned about, I
fix ^specially upon his tenth Chapter, and shall make the charge of
Contradictions abundantly good, as I pass along in the examining of certain
Periods of it, compared with what he there, or elsewhere, offer^th dispersedly
in his Book.

The humane Soul excluded by him from this disquisition about Angels for three
pretended reasons. P. 202.
In the handling this point, says he, of the corpor^ity or incorporeity of
Angels, we do here, once for all, exclude and except forth of our discourse and
arguments the humane and rational Soul, as not at all to be comprised in these
limits. And that especially for these reasons. 1. Because the humane Soul had a
peculiar kind of Creation, differing from the Creation of other things, as
appear^th in the words of the Text, Genesis 2.7. And the Lord God formed man of
the Dust of the Ground, and breathed into him the Breath of Life, and Man
became a living Soul. Upon which the Note of Tremellius and Junius is, Anima
vero hominis spiritale quiddam est and Divinum. That note of theirs he gives
more at large, P. 314.
Chapter 16. Vt clarius appareat discrimen inter animam hominis and reliquo^um
animantium: horum enim animae ex eadem materia provenerunt, unde corpora
habebant; illius vero anima spiritale quiddam and divinum. 2. Because I find
Solomon, the wisest of men, making this question, Who knows the Spirit of
Man, that goes upward; and the Spirit of the Beast, that goes downward to the
Earth? Eccles. 3.21. 3. Because it is safer to believe the nature of the Soul
to be according to the Analogy of Faith, and the concurrent opinion of the
Learned, than to sift such a deep question by our weak understanding and reason.

Now it is, to my apprehension, This method of procedure unreasonable.
extr^mely unreasonable, that in the entrance of this enquiry the Soul of Man
should be exempted from it; and seems like the odd practice of cunning men at
Law, who secure such as are like to give in a casting evidence against their
Cause. For it is manifest enough, that Angels are a sort of Beings superior
unto the humane Soul, as I have shown in the foregoing Treatise, Chapter 1. Sect. 2.

If then it be apparent and undeniable, (as I shall make good anon from this
Author's concessions) that the Soul of Man is truly incorporeal; the conviction
and evidence from hence, as to Angels, will be as great as can be desired; to
which purpose I have also reasoned, Chapter 2. Sect. 1.

And, if it be certainly true, that we can conceive such a spiritual Being, as
the humane Soul is granted by him to be; it will then be utterly false, that an
immaterial Being is utterly unconceiveable by us, as he asserts.

I have quoted this saying from him already, but shall take occasion once more
to repete it, together with the proof, such as it is, which he tenders for it.

Those that pretend, says he, that Angels are merely incorporeal, p. 207.
must needs ^rr, and put force upon their own faculties, which cannot conceive
a thing, that is not continuate and corporeal.

Now this conclusion or inference of his he grounds upon a School-Maxime, as he
tells us, thus,

p. 206.
Imaginatio non transcendit continuum. And this, says he, if we perpend it
seriously, is a most certain and transcendent truth, for when we come to
cogitate and conceive of a thing, we cannot apprehend it otherwise, than as
continuate and corporeal.

Master W. confounds Imagination and In^ellect, which elsewhere he kn^w well to
distinguish. p. 20^.
In which discourse he grossly confounds Imagination and Intellect together, as
if they were one and the same thing; and we could not cogitate, apprehend and
conceive that at all, which we cannot imagine or draw a Picture of in our
fancy. An assertion, which argues somewhat of a stupefied understanding. He
himself has elsewhere better distinguished, It is one thing, says he, truly
to understand, and another thing to imagine or fancy. And he had learned as
much, as he tells us, had he but seriously perpended it here, from the learned
Doctor Willis, De anima B^utorum, in these words which he cites with
commendation out of him.

p. 317. Ibid.
-- Intellect and Imagination are not wont to agree in many things. -- ] And
again, In man there is a double cognitive power, to wit, the Intellect and
Imagination. So there is a double appetite, the Will proceeding from the
Intellect, which is the Page or Servant of the rational Soul, and the sensitive
appetite, which cohereing to the Imagination is said to be the Hands, or
Procuratrix, of the corporeal Soul.

Imagination then is a sensitive and corporeal faculty, and therefore no
wonder, if it cannot transcendere continuum; but Understanding or Intellect a
rational and incorporeal power, and therefore able to conceive and apprehend
things like itself. The Objects as well as Acts, of the one and other, are
vastly different. Though the near and intimate union of our Souls to these
Bodies of Earth wherein they dwell, makes it difficult for us to abstract our
thoughts altogether from sensible and corporeal Images -- In quo nihil est
difficilius, De Not. Deorum, l. 2.
quam a consuctudine oculorum aciem mentis abducere, as Balbus in Cic^ro has
it. Yet, difficult though it be, it is not impossible, but the daily experience
of contemplative minds. Every faculty is concerned in its proper object, and to
be employed about it: The Eye for seeing, the Ear for hearing; the Palate for
tasting, etc. So among the external senses. And so in like manner it is with
the internal powers: The Fancy is for imagining, and the Intellect for
abstract thinking or conceiving, even what we cannot imagine; Metaphysical,
Logical, Moral Universal Verities, rations very and falsi, boni and mali, God
and Divine things, -- etc. We may as well taste Light and Colors, and see
Sounds, as imagine a Spirit; but yet for all that we may think and conceive of
it. I will dismiss this with the words of Max. Tyrius, Dissert. 1.
(...).

And now I will show, as I promised, Master W. asserts the Incorporeity of the
humane Soul.
that our Author had some notion of an incorporeal Being, because he plainly
and often asserts the reasonable or humane Soul to be such.

The Rational and immortal Soul he owns expressly to be a Spirit, quoting that
of our blessed Savior for it, P. 314.
Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. -- An incorporeal substance, and
therefore immortal, says he out of Gassendus. And so he expounds that Text of
Saint Paul, p. 315.
1 These. 5.23. which makes the whole of man to consist in Spirit, p. 316.
Soul and Body. The Spirit, that is, says he, the rati^nal mind. And he well
approves of Doctor Willis his arguments and proofs ^or two distinct Souls in
man, p. 317.
The one sensitive and corporeal, and the other rati^nal and incorpor^al.

p. 318.
Nay, says he, The Soul by the ^nanimous consent of all men is a spiritual and
pure, immaterial and incorporeal substance. And,

Ibid.
It is manifest by divine Authority, that the Spirit, that is, the rational
immortal and incorporeal Soul, does return to God, and exist eternally. -- And
again,

p. 320.
It is most evident, that there are not only three essential and distinct parts
in man, as the gross Body consisting of Earth and Water, which at Death returns
to Earth again* the sensitive and corporeal Soul or ^stral Spirit, (as he calls
it) consisting of Fire and Air, that at death wandreth in the Air, or near the
Body; and the im^ortal and incorporeal Soul, that immediat^ly retur^s to God,
that gave it; But also, that after death they all three exist s^parately; the
Soul in immortality, and the Body in the Earth, though soon consuming, and the
Astral Spirit wandering in the Air, and without doubt does make these strange
Apparitions and Bleedings. --

We have then here a notion, a manifest and most evident notion, and that, as
he says, by the universal consent of all Men, as well as Divine Authority, of
a spiritual and pure, immaterial and incorporeal substance, and that existing
sep^^at^ly and by it self in immortality, which is the thing he said our
faculties cannot conceive of.

And this, I suppose, whatever is pretended, was the principal inducement to
his excepting so sollicitously the humane and rational Soul from his intended
discourse of the corporeity of Angels.

But we will view his three Reasons, A^ Examina^ion of ^is th^ee Reasons for
exceptidg the humane Soul from this enquiry. Of his first Reason.
alleged for this Exception, more distinctly, as they lie in order.

First, says he, because the humane Soul had a peculiar kind of Creation
differing from the Creation of other things, as appears in the words of the
Text, Genesis 2.7. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into him the breath of Life, and Man became a living So^l* Upon which
the Note of Tremellius and Iunius is, Anima vero hominis spiritale quiddam est
and divinum. Or more at large, as he cites it, p. 314. Thus in English, That
the difference between Man and o^h^r Animals might appear more clearly: for the
Souls of these came out of the same matter, from whence they had their Bodies,
but his Soul was a certain Spiri^u^l and Divine thing.

Now it is evident, upon first sight, that Tremellius and Iunius here [for I
take his word for the Quotation, not meeting with it in their Notes o^ the
place] did not intend to lay down any difference between the creation of the
Soul of Man, and of Angels, [which alone would serve his purpose] but of Man
and other Animals only, produced out of matter. And therefore this could not be
a reason for excepting the humane Soul from the dispute of Angels.

But yet it may be worth the while to stay a little upon the Text referred to,
for our better acquaintance with our selves, and so a greater preparedness for
the conception of material and immortal substances.

[A short Comment upon Genesis 2.7. concerning Man's Original.]
The Lord God, says the Text, formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his Nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living Soul. --
His Body made of Earth, but his Soul the Breath of God. -- Divinae particula
Aurae.

Horat.
We must not understand it grossly; for so Breath is not attributable unto God,
who is a simple and perfect Spirit; but, (...), as a figurative expression of
God's communicating unto Man that inward Principle, whereby he lives and acts,
not only in common with, but in a degree above other Animals. Vatablus
therefore renders it by [ injecerat, sive immiserat] He put or conveyed into
his body a vital Spirit. And so Iunius and Tremellius, in their Notes upon the
place tell us, [ humanitus dictum, pro eo, quod ex virtute sui aeterni
spiritus, etc.] It is spoken after the manner of men; and the meaning is this,
that by virtue of his Eternal Spirit, without any Elementary matter, he
inspired a Vital Soul (which is by nature a simple form) into that Elementary
Body, that it might use as an Instrument. And Man became a living Soul] that
is, say they, [quum virtute Dei fuit anima corpori adunata in unitatem
personae, etc.] 'when by the power of God the Soul was thus united to the body
in one person, the Earthy Statue became endued with life, and was reckoned a
principal species of Animals. -- To a like purpose says Clarius, The Souls of
other living Creatures were [de materia eductae] brought forth of matter. Genesis
1.20, 21. Let the waters bring forth the moving Creature, that has life, and
let the Earth bring forth the living Creature after his kind. But the Soul of
Man was [for is inspirata] from God immediately. And thus much Job also
acknowledges; The Spirit of God, says he, has made me, and the breath of the
Almighty has given me life, -- Chapter 33.4.

The Learned P. Fagius takes notice of three things in the Text of Moses, which
do conclude the Immortality of the Soul of Man.

I. Insufflatio illa Dei.] This Inspiration from God spoken of: For he that
breaths into another, contributes unto him [aliquid de suo] somewhat of his
own: And therefore, says he, when our B. Savior would communicate his Spirit
to his Disciples, he did it with Insufflation, breathing on them, thereby to
signify, se Divinum and de suo quiddam illis contribuere.

II. The Original word Nischmath, which we render Breath, or Spirit, derived
from (...) Heaven, imports somewhat Divine and Celestial.

III. The word Hajim added to it, sounds plurally [spiraculum vitarum] the
breath of lives. [Non simpliciter vitam, sed longaevam significat] a long and
continuing life; or, as some will have it, being of the dual number,
[praesentis and futuri saeculi vitam] the life of this and the other world: Or,
if I may add a farther conjecture, both the rational and sensitive life.

What is here declared by Moses of Man's Origination, was notably emblem'd out
in the Fable of Prometheus, which is by interpretation Providence: where the
Body is said to have been [ e molli luto] of soft and yielding Clay. [And such
we must suppose the dust of the Earth in Genesis, Earth tempered and prepared
with moisture, e pulvere sub. jam macerato ac temperato imbre qui deciderat. q.
d. ex massa quadam terrae madefacta, as Vatablus has it] but the Soul [ ignis
de Caelo] a fire or spark taken from Heaven.

And agreeable to this first Production of Man is the description which Solomon
gives us of his dissolution, Eccles. 12.7. [whereof I have spoken in the
foregoing Treatise, comparing it with Phocylides and Lucretius, Chapter 11.. 1.]
from whence we learn, says Drusius, how far this wiseman was from their
Heresy, who think that the Soul of man is mortal, and does una cum corpore
interire, perish with the body. A Note I shall have occasion to make farther
use of by and by. And Elihu in the Book of Job phraseth man's dissolution much
like Solomon, If he [i. e. God] gather unto himself his spirit and breath, all
flesh shall perish togeth^r, and man shall turn again to his dust. -- But
enough of this digression.

I proceed to our Author's second Reason: (2) says he, Of his second Reason.
because I find Solomon, the wisest man, making this Question, Who knows the
spirit of man that goes upward, and the spirit of the beast that goes
downward to the Earth? Eccles. 3.21.]

How well now does this second Reason hit and accord with the first! There he
told us, from Iunius and Tremellius, the plain distinction between the spirit
of man, and the souls of other Animals, as a more Divine Being; and here he
starts forthwith upon it a skeptical doubt or question out of Ecclesiastes,
that seems plainly to confound both together: And he sets it off too with the
commendation of Solomon's Eximious Wisdom; as if he had given us in it the
inward sense of his own wisely-searching mind. We had need of good assurance of
our Authors right belief in this matter, to construe his meaning in this
al^edgment.

It were seasonable here to immind him of his own saying in another case. P.
105.
[ It is a very froward and perverse way of arguing, to make one place of
Scripture to clash with another.] And to bring into his memory one of his Rules
for the interpretation of H. Scripture. P. 137.
[ That there be a due comparing of the Antec^dents and Consequents in the
Context; that the purpose, scope, theme, arguments, disposition and method may
be perfectly and maturely considered; otherwise by the slighting or omitting
any one of these parti^ular points, the whole place may be mistaken, and an
error easily fallen into.] Turpe est doctori. --

According to this good Rule therefore I will endeavor an Explication of this
Text of Solomon's, which the Friends of Atheism, Epicu^ism, and Profaneness are
fond enough of, and our Author, it seems, leaves them to chew the Cud upon. The
entire period runs thus:

[ I said in my heart, concerning the state of the sons of men, that God might
manifest them, An Explication and Vindication of Eccles. 3.18-21. from the
Atheistical and Profane.
and that they might see that they themselves are beasts: For that which
befalls the sons of men, befalls the beasts; even one thing befalls them.
As the one dies, so dies the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a
man has no pre-eminence above a beast, for all is vanity. All go unto one
place: All are of-the dust, and all turn to dust again. Who knows the spirit
of man that goes upward, and the spirit of the beast that goes downward to
the Earth? -- ]

These words now, at the reading of them, may be thought by some to herd Man
absolutely, as a Fellow-commoner, among the Beasts. But if we duly consider
them, together with the Context, and the several constructions which they admit
of otherwise, we shall be able to satisfy our selves and others to the
contrary.

The wise Solomon, in the Verses immediately precedent to this discourse,
rationally infers a future Judgment of God from the irregularities and
disorders apparent in Humane Judicatories. Verse. 16, 17. I saw under the Sun
the place of Judgment, that wickedness was there; and the place of
Righteousness, that iniquity was there. I said in my heart, God shall judge the
righteous and the wicked: For there is a time there for every purpose, and for
every work. Now what can be more directly cross and destructive to this Pious
Inference of a Judgment to come, which shall rectify and set straight the
enormities of Ear^hly Tribunals, than an Opinion, that Men are as the Beasts,
and so are not accountable for what they do, or end their accounts with this
present life; and therefore need not at all trouble themselves with the
forethoughts and fears, because they are not in a capacity of being called to a
future reckoning: What I say can be more contradictory to his Religious scope
and purpose than this? -- Some other sense then we must of necessity fix upon.

Iunius and Tremellius (whom I the rather mention for our Author's sake) tell
us, that the Wise Man having before expressed a true account and judgment upon
those oppressions, confusions and disorders which he had observed under the
Sun, does here subjoyn [ judicium ex sensu carnis profectum] another-guise
sentence or opinion arising from Carnal Sense: And this whole period, say they,
is [ Narratio carnalis disceptationis ac judicii] a Declaration of Carnal
Reason only in the case. -- Thus therefore they read the words [ Dixeramego cum
animo meo secundum rationem humanam -- ] I said with my heart, according to
humane reasoning thus and thus. -- And then of the 21 Verse. particularly they
add, [ Ironica confutatio, qua utitur caro adversus piam doctrinam de
differentia inter animas, and eventu ex morte] It is an Ironical or
Mockconfutaton, which the Flesh uses against the pious Doctrine of the
difference between Souls, and that which follows upon death. q. d. I hear I
know not what whispered of the substance of Man's Soul, that it is heavenly,
and that it goes to Heaven at death: And on the other side, that the soul of
beasts is a certain Earthy faculty, so adhering unto body, that i^ cannot be
separated without it is own destruction. But who, I wonder, has seen the one or
other, either or both of these? It is a more certain course therefore to pass a
judgment of both from those common facts and events which are before our eyes.
-- Thus far they.

And this also is the persuasion of Munster, that these things are here spoken
[ secundum stultam opinionem pecuinorum hominum] according to the foolish
opinion of brutish men, who conceit that the whole Man does perish by death,
as other Animals, and therefore repute it the chiefest happiness to increase
themselves in all voluptuousness, while they live, seeking their portion in
this life only: To which purpose also it follows immediately, by way of
inference, Verse. 22. Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better, than
that a man should rejoice in his own works, for that is his portion; for who
shall bring him to see what shall be after him?

As the Apostle reasons in behalf of a future state -- 1 Cor. 15.30, 32. Why
stand we in jeopardy every hour? etc. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
die. -- The right Epicurean reasoning here in Ecclesiastes, Ede, bibe, lude,
post mortem nulla voluptas. -- But S. Paul adds a peculiar Caution against it,
as dangerous kind of talk, whatever wisdom some think in it, Verse. 33. Be not
deceived, says he, evil communications corrupt good manners.

The Learned Grotius too gives us in effect a like gloss upon this period. [
Contra illam cogitationem de judicio futuri aevi, de qua S^rmo praecessit, alia
mihi cogitatio suborta est, etc.] Against that meditation of judgment in the
world to come, of which the words before made mention, another thought rose in
my mind, that God does permit men thus to live together, [ferino more] in the
manner of beasts, thereby the better to declare and show, that men are as the
beasts. And to this thought in his mind, says Grotius, he adds it is Arguments.
-- But then on the 21 Verse. he paraphraseth thus; Who knows the spirit of man
that goes upward?] whether it abide and remain as a thing Celestial? And the
spirit of the beast that goes downward to the Earth?] whether it perish as the
body that i^ laid under ground? -- And his Note upon it is, That Man by his
mere Natural Reason [sola nativa ratione] has no evident certainty about this
matter; and the doubts, says he, of Socrates, Tully, and Seneca, show as much.
-- They had not, I confess, the complete assurance vouchsafed us by the help of
a Diviner Revelation, which has brought Life and Immortality to light: But yet
we find in them, even in their state of darkness, such strength of Reason and
Argument sometimes urged, that might well lay the Foundation of a greater
confidence than at other times they discovered. And Simplicius, as I remember,
acquaints us, that Socrates spent the time immediately before his death [the
season of greatest Tryal] in discoursing strenuously of the Immortality of the
Soul, and recommending a Philosophical preparation for another life.

Vatablus lets us understand, that some read the Words thus.[ AEstimavi autem
in animo meo conditionem hominum, etc.] I have weighed in my mind the condition
of Men, how God made them most excellent, and yet they may seem, or one would
think that saw them, that they are Beasts to themselves, in their own Judgment,
as the Beasts; q. d. so great Ignorance nevertheless does rule in Men's Hearts
that they seem not to differ from the Beasts.

That therefore of the Psalmist is by some accommodated to this place, Man
being in Honor without understanding becomes like the Beasts that perish. Now
therefore, though he was made to be Immortal, he is excused no more from Death,
than other Creatures. Drusius. -- And so possibly, when the Wiseman says, Who
knows the Spirit of Man, that goes upward, etc. By Spirit here may be meant
[(...), aura vitalis, aer spirabilis,] the Vital Breath, in which sense we say
[ Spiritum accipere and reddere.] And this Spirit or Breath may be said to go
[upward or downward] according to the different positure of the Body of Man and
Beast, the one with his countenance erect, the other inclined to the Earth.
Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera terram, Ovid. M^t.

Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri, etc.


But if we take Spirit here for the Soul it self, we may render [ Quis novit?]
with Drusius, by [ pauci noverunt] or, with Clarius, [Quam rarus est, qui
interim id novit?] How few know the difference between the Spirit of Man and
that of the Beast? As, when the same Wiseman says elsewhere, A virtuous woman
who can find? his meaning is not, that such an one is not at all to be found,
but [ rara est inventu] she is hard to be found; as the good and wise have been
in all ages -- rari nantes in gurgite vasto. So here, [ tantum sciunt
sapientes, and qui ab ill^s didicerunt,] 'none but the wise and such as have
learned of them ken the difference. Or rather thus, [ Quis novit?] Scilicet
eventis communibus? nam inde discerni nequit spiritus hominis a spiritu
bestiarum.] Who that looks only upon common events; who, that keeps only to the
visible effects, ordinarily taken notice of at the death of either, can
understand the difference? --

And yet notwithstanding all this a wide difference there is. When Man's breath
goes forth and he gives up the Ghost, his Soul or Spirit does undeniably
return unto God that gave it; as this Wiseman plainly asserts afterward* Chapter
12.7. to God to be judged, [(...), Heb. 9.27.] And such a judgment he had
spoken of immediately before this period, Ver. 17. which could not possibly be,
if Man died, as the Beasts, and his Soul perished with his Body.

So that by the help of our Author's wholesome rule, comparing the words of
Solomon with their Antecedents and Consequents, we may be able to vindicate
this wisest of men from an imputation of siding with sensual Fools and Epicures
in the matter before us. And the Rule prescribed has this real commendation,
that it has long since been given. Qui non advertit quod supra and infra est
in sacris libris, pervertit verba Dei viventis.

To conclude this subject. It is lively represented to us in the second Chapter
of the Book of Wisdom as the speech of the wicked and unwise. -- The ungodly
said, reasoning with themselves, [ as we have found it in Solomon] but not
aright. Our life is short and tedious, and in the death of man there is no
remedy. -- For we are born at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter as
though we had never been: For the breath in our Nostrils is a smoke, and a
little spark in the moving of our heart, which being extinguished, our body
shall be turned into ashes, and our spirit shall vanish as the soft air. --
Come on therefore, let us enjoy the good things that are present -- [These are
our only portion] Let us oppress the poor righteous man* -- Let our strength be
the Law of Justice, etc. Such things they did imagine, and were deceived, for
their own wickedness has blinded them, Verse. 21. -- And then in the next
Chapter he speaks excellently of the happiness of good and godly men. The souls
of the righteous are in the hand of God; [Father, into thy hands I commend my
spirit] and there shall no torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they
seemed to die, and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us
to be utter destruction: But they are in peace; for though they be punished in
the sight of men, yet is their hope full of Immortality.

I have taken all this pains to show, that the wisest of men was not of the
same opinion with these unwise and ungodly ones, but that he did act, or rather
say their part only, and sub aliena persona loqui, without any design to assert
or confirm what he most fully confutes.

And now I see not from hence any show of Reason, why our Author should except
the Rational Soul or Spirit from his enquiry into the Nature of Angels.

I pass on therefore to his third Reason, and will be briefer in all that
remains, lest my discourse swell beyond the bounds I intended it.

3. Says he, because it is safer to believe the Nature of the Soul to be
according to the Analogy of Faith, and the concurrent opinion of the Learned,
Of his third Reason.
than to sift such a deep Question by our weak understanding and reason.

I hope he is not of the opinion of Atheo-Pol. that Theology and Reason have
two distinct and separate Kingdoms, Theol. Polit. c. 14. and 15.
between which there is no commerce or affinity; viz. Reason, the Kingdom of
Truth, and Sapience; Theology, of Piety and Obedience only; and accordingly,
that our Faith requires not vera, sed pia dogmata. -- But I rather constre this
as an expression of his tenderness and modesty only.

And yet, as deep a Q^estion as this is, he tells us elsewhere, The unanimous
consent of all men (which is more than the concurrent opinion of the Learned)
has agreed it, p. 318.
as I showed before; whatever become of Solomon's Who knows? in the precedent
Reason.

And we find him not so over-shy, as here he would seem, of si^ting some
Questions of as deep Philosophy to the full as this; such as that, toward the
close of his Book, of the Astral Spirit, and the Efficacy of Charms by Astral
Influences, etc.

But is it in good earnest, a deeper enquiry to look into the nature of our own
spirit, which we are most privy to, [ For who knows the things of a man, but
the spirit of man which is in him?] than to search into the Nature of Angelical
Spirits without us? Is not that Candle of the Lord, our weak Understanding and
Reason, more like to discover somewhat within doors, than to administer any
steady light abroad, where the stronger winds of uncertainty and opposition
puff and blow about it?

Or lastly, Is there not as much of the Analogy of Faith, and the concurrent
opinion of the Learned about the Angels, as about the Humane Soul?

I conclude therefore from the Premises, that there was no reason at all why he
should thus, once for all, exclude and except forth the Humane and Rational
Soul, as not to be comprised in the same limits with Angelical Spirits, unless
this only, that it was like to prove unserviceable to his Cause, nay an
irreconcilable Enemy to it.

And so I come at length more directly to reflect upon what he discourses of
the Nature of Angels; Mr. W 's Speculations about the Corporeity of Angels, and
how he blunders in the stati^g of this Enquir^.
which yet I should not at all have concerned my self with, were not his
Arguments levelled against their Incorporeity, as a thing utterly
inconceiveable, which we can in no wise understand: or, if they proved no more
but this, that Angels have certain Vehicles or Bodies joined to them, as the
Humane Soul has, though of a more noble and refined sort; to which purpose
I'have also granted somewhat in the precedent Treatife, Chapter 11.. 1.

But he seems to me confused in his own understanding about them, and therefore
he shuffles, or blunders, in the stating of this Question; making it all one to
prove, that Angels are Corporeal, and that they have Bodies or Vehicles joined
to them; whereas there is an apparent difference between these two, and the one
may securely enough be granted, as by many it is, where the other is yet
denied. Take his own words.

As much, says he, as we contend for, p. 2^7*
is granted by Dr. More, in these words; [For I look upon Angels to be as truly
a Compound Being, consisting of Soul and Body, as that of Men and Brutes -- ]
And therefore, says he, they must needs have an Internum and Externum, Ibid*
as the Learned and Christian Philosopher Doctor Fludd does affirm, in these
words: Certum est igitu^ inesse ipsis (sc. Angelis) aliud quod agit, aliud
autem quod patitur; nec vero illud, secundum quod agunt, aliud quam actus esse
poterit, qui forma dicitur; neque ^tiam illud, secundum quod patiuntur, est
quicquam praeter potentiam, haec autem materia appellatur.

So much the less reason still, say I, to exclude the Humane Soul from this
Enquiry: But if this were all, he needed not to have taken so much pains about
it, being done to his hands; or he might have spared at least those arguments,
which prove somewhat more, if they prove any thing. He might have kept those
Arrows by him, which are shot besides and beyond this Mark.

Ibid.
[ These Arguments do sufficiently and evidently prove, that Angels are either
Corporeal, or have Bodies united to them, which is all one to our purpose,
whether way soever it be taken.] And again,

p. 21^*
[ We have sufficiently proved, says he, that they are corporeal, that is, that
they have Bodies naturally united to them; and so have an Internum, or moving
power, and an Externum, or a part moved.

To me therefore he seems to hide himself only, and darken the business by
those terms of simply and absolutely incorporeal, which are so usual with him,
and the only retreat he has, upon occasion, to betake himself unto.

The Critical point of ^he present Controversy.
To be short, that which I search after, is the Internum in Angels, or pars
movens, or actus, or forma, illud quod agit, in Dr. Flud's Philosophy, or the
spiritual part of these compound Beings, or whatever Name he please to call it
by, what that is: And if we can once find out that, as we have already the
Humane Soul, incorporeal and capable of self-subsisting, what will become of
that which he affirms so dogmatically, that our Faculties cannot conceive of an
incorporeal Being? --

But now let us see the scuffle, and how demonstratively he lays about him.

1. Says he, we lay it down for a most certain and granted truth, p. 202.
that God simply and absolutely is only a most simple Spirit, in whom there is
no corporeity, nor composition at all: And, what other things soever, are
called or accounted Spirits, are but so in a relative and respective
consideration, and not in a simple and absolute acceptance. And this is the
unanimous tenent of Fathers, Schoolmen, and all other Orthodox Divines,
agreeing with the plain and clear words of Scripture, as, John 4.24.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and
truth. And again, Now the Lord is that Spirit. 2 Cor. 3.17.
--

That God is a Spirit, (whatever some dispute) is, I grant, affirmed in holy
Scripture; and, that he is the most simple and excellent Spirit, God a most
simple and absolut^ spirit, bu^ yet not the only Spirit.
I as readily believe. But it is nowhere in our Bible said, that God is the
only Spirit; or that there are no other Spirits, but God. In the very same
verse, which asserts God to be a Spirit, we also are allowed a Spirit too, to
serve and worship him in. And, if we once take the liberty to turn all other
Spirits, so called, into Bodies; I doubt the Incorporeity of the Godhead will
be hardly defensible by it self: Because, though he be never so plainly and
clearly named a Spirit in sacred Writ, yet, for all that, according to our
Author's reasoning, he may be really corporeal, since other Beings, that are
also styled Spirits there, are avouched so to be.

But in truth a corporeal Deity, is a dull and strange idea of that omniperfect
Being; and the very next step unto downright Atheism, or the denial of him.
For then he should be divisible, as our Author rightly notes, p. 207.
which he is not, nor can be, etc.

(...) -- Nonnus in S. John 4.
Well, it is generally agreed among us, that God is a Spirit, a true Spirit, and
the most perfect Spirit, and so absolutely of himself, necessarily-existent,
increate, and independent; and most simply and purely such, without all manner
of composition, so much as that Metaphysical one of Actus and Potentia, Za^ch.
de oper. Dei par. 1. l. 2. c. 4.
allowed by the Schools to Angels, being immutable.

It follows then from hence, [ Si Deus est animus -- ] that we are able to
conceive and frame a Notion of a most simple and pure Spirit, wherein there is
no corporeity: For, otherwise, (as I have before mentioned) we affirm of God,
we know not what; and that, which, for ought we understand, might be as well
denied, as affirmed of him. But then, that there are no created and dependent
Spirits properly so called, no incorporeal Beings in the Universe besides in a
simple acceptance, but only so accounted in a relative and respective
consideration, has no evidence at all from hence.

p. 202.
2. Therefore, says he, we shall lay down this following proposition, that
Angels, being created Substances, are not simply and absolutely incorporeal;
but if they be by any called or accounted Spirits, can but be in a Relative and
respective sense, but that really and truly they are corporeal. And this we
shall labor to make good, not only by showing the absurdities of that Opinion
of their being simply spiritual, Angels ar^ ^ot such Spirits in perfection as
God is, and yet truly Spirits.
but by laying open the Unintelligibility of that Opinion --

That Angels are not, cannot be such Spirits in perfection as God is, every one
will grant: But are they not therefore truly Spirits? Does not Holy Scripture
plainly and clearly call them Spirits, as well as it does God? Are they not all
ministering Spirits? Is not Angel and Spirit equivalent there? as I have noted
in the foregoing Treatise, Chapter 1. Sect. 1. -- Or dare he presume to limit the
Almighty? And say of the omnipotent God, to whom all things are possible, that
he cannot create a truly incorporeal, as well as a corporeal substance? Is the
one more unintelligible to us, than the other? Are all created substances
therefore of necessity corporeal? -- How is God then the Father of Spirits? How
is the Soul of Man [a created substance for certain, inspired by God] yet a
pure, immaterial, and incorporeal Spirit, as has been plentifully
acknowledged? Nay, what will become of the internum and actus of Angels too? --

He himself, how consonantly to his own arguings I cannot tell, Master W.
asser^s Devils more spiritual than he allows other Angels. p. 47, 48, 49. Ibid*
does elsewhere seem to assert the Devils or Evil Angels to be wholly or
merely spiritual, in opposition to corporeal. The Scriptures, says he, do
fully and abundantly inform us of the Devil's spiritual and invisible power. --

It is a spiritual, not a carnal, corporeal, or bodily armor, because the
warfare is not against Flesh and Blood, but against spiritual wickedness in
high places. Against spiritual Enemies, not against corporeal and carnal ones.
For as the Enemies are, and the Warfare, so are the Armor and Weapons. --
'Satan and his spiritual Army. Ibid.
'No other kind of assaults but merely spiritual.

Must not these Enemies now spoken of, the Devils, be concluded merely
spiritual, if they are as their Assaults? Or, if our spiritual Weapons of
Truth, and Faith, and Hope, etc. are suitable to their nature? Or, will he at
last change these into Bodies too? --

And if the Evil Angels are merely spiritual, why should the Good here be
corporeal? The only reason, I think, of his inconstancy is zeal and eagerness
to serve his present Hypothesis. There he was to oppose the tenet of a
corporeal league with the Devil, etc. Here he is to defend that All created
substances are corporeal. -- But really he is concerned, as much as any man, to
solve or confute his own Arguments.

I will only touch upon the principal of them, wherein his greatest strength
and confidence lies, and suggest Responsions, (if I may borrow that word so
frequent in his Book) as I pass along.

His mighty ^rguments against ^he incorporeity of Angels ex^mined. p. 207.
If the Angelical nature, says he, were simply and absolutely spiritual and
incorporeal, then they would be of the same essential Identity with God, which
is simply impossible. For the Angels were not created forth of any part of
God's Essence; for then he should be divisible, which he is not nor can be, his
Essence being Simplicity, Unity, and Identity it self; and therefore the Angels
must of necessity be of an Essence of Alterity, and different from the Essence
of God. --

This is such a piece of sublime Gibberish, as might tempt one to return back
the Epithet, which he bestows upon Suarius, p. 205.
(as he calls him) 'The great Weaver of fruitless Cobwebs. --

At this rate of arguing, like a Metaphysical Mountebank, he might prove every
creature, as well as Angels, to be God, and of the same essential Identity with
God; because every creature partakes of some real excellency or other
communicated from God; and all excellencies, as well as Incorporeity, [ unum,
verum, bonum,] are of and in God; and all that is in God, is God. -- The Soul
of Man, doubtless, was breathed in by God, and in a peculiar manner after the
Image of ^od, according to the holy Scriptures; and the Spirits of Just men
made perfect are partakers of a Divine Nature; and Angels there too are the
Sons of God, who is, as has been often remembered, the Father of Spirits. But
will any one therefore be so mad as to say, These have God's Essential
Identity, as he phraseth it, or no alterity to distinguish them from the
Essence of God? Do not uncreate and created, infinite and finite, independent
and dependent, etc. set these Spirits and the Father of them far enough
asunder? or is eternal and necessary existence and Essential Attribute of the
Idea of Spirit? --

This then is too weak and sandy a Foundation to support that Fabric which he
builds upon it, that [ If men will trust their own cogitations and faculties
rightly disposed, and not vitiated, p. 207.
then they must believe that Angels are corporeal, and not merely and simply
spirits, for absolutely nothing is so but God only.]

Again, says he, If Angels be simply incorporeal, p. 208.
then they can cause no Physical or local motion at all; because nothing can be
moved but by Contact, and that must be immediate or vertual Contact; for the
Maxim is certain, Quicquid agit, agit vel mediatione suppositi, as when one's
hand does immediately touch a thing, and so move it, vel mediatione virtutis,
as when a man with a Rod or Line does draw a thing forth of water. Both of
these do require a corporeal Contact. -- But what is absolutely incorporeal
has no superficies, etc.

And this is an argument he seems to triumph in, as a Mathematician in his
(...): Therefore is he pleased so much to repeat it: For so he had said before;

[ If the Devil be considered as an incorporeal Nature, simply and absolutely;
p. 147.
then it will follow, low, that he cannot act upon any corporeal matter;
because an incorporeal substance can make no contact upon a body, unless it
were it self corporeal. For quicquid agit, agit per contactum, vel mediatum,
vel immediatum; but both these are caused by the touch of one body upon
another. -- But that which is merely incorporeal, can perform neither.] And
again;

[ I take it, says he, to be one of the most firm Maxims that ever the Schools
had, p. 148.
that immateriale non agit in materiale, nisi eminenter, ut Deus.] Which al^o
he cites again in another place. p. 198.


Now the Leading Mistake in all this Philophizing, R^les and Laws of Bodi^s
ineptly applied to Spirits. Lucret.
is the inept applying of the Rules and Laws, proper and peculiar unto Bodies,
unto Spirits also. Tangere enim and tangi, nisi corpus, nulla potest res.

As before we observed his confounding of Imagination and Intellect. -- And
indeed he seems to allow of no mental notions or apprehensions, which do not
first strike upon the senses. And this is that which makes him place the Idea
of spirits or incorporeal beings among the unintelligibles. p. 203.
[ The substance of a created Spirit, conceived as immaterial and incorporeal,
must of necessity be utterly inconceiveable to any of our faculties:] Elegant!
conceived as immaterial and incorporeal, and yet at the same time utterly
inconceiveable. -- But passing that, hear we his reason: [ Because it has no
effects, Ibid*
operations, or modifications, that can or do operate upon our senses] This is
gratis dictum. But the general importance of it relies upon another
School-Maxim, which I wonder that h^ forgets to quote to us. [ Nihil est in
intellectu, quod non prius fuerat in sensu.] And I could furnish him with more
to this purpose. --

But now, what will become of the poor humane soul among the rest of its
fraternity of Spirits, which is, as he has told us, by the unanimous consent
of all men, as well as Divine Authority, a spiritual and pure, p. 318.
immaterial and incorporeal, and to be sure created substance? How come men to
an unanimous consent in a notion utterly unintelligible and unconceiveable? --
Nay, what will become of all the spiritual and invisible World? p. 50.
--

Well, but the great difficulty remains: How can an immaterial act upon or move
a material? The diffic^lty of ^xplaining, the manner of things, must no^ make
us deny wha^ is otherwise evident.
This certainly is Nodus vindice dignus. But what if there be no Oedipus to
unriddle it to us? What if neither we, nor any body else can sufficiently
explain it? It is no more than that ignorance we must be contented with in
other matters of occult Philosophy, where we subscribe often to the thing,
though we cannot declare the manner of it.

Our Author himself, in other cases, trains us up to this degree of modesty and
humility: [ The ultimate sphere of Natures activity and ability, says he, is
not perfectly known. p. 267.
] [And as it is thus in general, says he, Ibid.
so in many particulars: We are ignorant of many Natural Agents that do work at
a great distance, and very remotely, both to help and to hurt; the
Weapon-salve, the Sympathetick-powder, the curing of Diseases by Mumial
applications, by Amulets, Appensions, and Transplantation, which all have been,
and commonly are ascribed unto Satan, when they are truly wrought, says he, by
Natural Operation.]

But he cannot satisfy himself, or others, I presume, by what contact, mediate
or immediate, of suppositum or virtus, all these are performed. -- Or by what
influence of the Stars, quibus nota sunt omnia, p. 338.340.
quae in natura existunt; [as he tells us out of Paracelsus and his Mystical
Authors, for whose vain traditional fancies he has a profound Veneration,
whatever he has for Doctor Hammond's] or, under what right and favorable
Constellations, Words, Charms, Images, and Characters do receive their energy
and virtue. p. 339.
-- Or, how certain Celestial Virtues and actions are sown into Gems, from
whence they afterward spring up no otherwise than seed, which does fall from a
Tree, and does regerminate. Though here, I confess, he has some advantage from
a speculation of Phantasms. Quid te fatigas haec minuta scrutando?
Augelini Gazaei pia Hilaria.
Pernice penna fretus, Icari more,
Scrutare potius digna mentis alatae.


One great means, says he elsewhere, of advancing those Tenants [of
Witchcraft, p. 268.
etc.] has been men's supine negligence in not searching into, and
experimenting the power of Natural Agents, but resting satisfied in the sleepy
notions of General Rules, and Speculative Philosophy, by which means a general
prejudice has been created against the most occult operations of Nature, and
Natural Magic. --

And may we not here retort this supine negligence upon himself, in not
observing the common experience, which he and every one else has of the
incorporeal spirit within him, actuating and moving of the body, whilst he
industriously opposes this common experience by sleepy notions of General
Rules, and Speculative Philosophy, concerning Body, ill adapted unto Spirits,
and their way of operation? It is enough, that we have this Domestic Argument
of our own experience in the case to oppose to all his subtle arguings: As to a
Sceptick, disputing against the possibility of motion, it were a sufficient and
silencing confutation, to move from him, and turn away.

Let him resolve us, how God who is a Spirit, the most simple and pure Spirit,
acts upon matter; how the Spirit of God moved upon the waters, etc. for the
word Eminenter is not intelligible enough to our faculty to be Englished.

But because this is too hard a Task, let him resolve us, how the immaterial
and incorporeal Soul of Man moves upon the body, or it is corporeal and animal
Spirits; or by what Gluten, or Vinculum, and contact of superficies it is
united to it is body; or how the body, vice versa, works upon and affects the
immaterial Soul, which yet, as to the (...), or quod sit, are matters of common
sense, and universal experience. -- Nam corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravat una. Horat.



Let him resolve us, how the Internum or moving part of Angels acts upon the
Externum, or part moved, -- and we shall soon be able to return him a
satisfactory answer to this curious question, How an immaterial can operate
upon, and move a material?

But, in the mean while, it is unreasonable to disclaim a certain Truth,
because we cannot give account of the Quomodo, or manner of it.

And this is also abundant Answer to another of his puissant Arguments.

[ If Angels, says he, be absolutely incorporeal, p. 208
then they cannot be contained, or circumscribed in place, and consequently can
perform no operation in Physical things.]

Contained and circumscribed in place are corporeal phantasmes, and so is place
it self, as he describes it, proper unto bodies. But let him tell us, how the
incorporeal spirit of man is in it is body, and that so as to perform undeniably
Physical operations there, and we shall soon inform him of the Vbi of Angels,
and their definitive being in it.

Let us see briefly, whether he has better success from Scripture than from
Reason, and I have done.

Some Texts of H. Scripture considered and vindicated from Mr. W's Exceptions.
p. 214.
[ The Scripture, says he, informs us, that in, or at the Resurrection, the
bodies of men shall be as the Angels that are in Heaven: Sicut Angeli, Mark
12.25. Now this Analogy, Comparison or Assimilation would be altogether false,
if Angels had no bodies at all, but were merely incorporeal. Then it would
follow, that bodies after the Resurrection were made pure Spirits, and so
ceased to be bodies; which is false, according to the Doctrine of S. Paul, who
shows us plainly, that after the Resurrection they are changed in qualities
into (...), spiritual bodies. -- 1 Cor. 15.44. -- From whence we conclude, that
Angels have bodies, and that they are pure spiritual ones.]

I will not dispute against the matter of his conclusion, viz. that Angels have
bodies, and that those bodies are pure and refined, such as he calls spiritual
ones: For my concern is only to defend, that they are nevertheless incorporeal
Beings, as the Humane Soul is, though united to a grosser body.

But yet I must add a word or two of his Scripture-premises.

And first here is violence offered to the Text of our B. Savior, Of St. Mark
12.24.
by foisting in the word Bodies to it; for the Text is only thus, [(...)] When
they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage,
but are as the Angels which are in Heaven. -- And it is known well enough to be
our Saviors Answer to the Question propounded concerning the Woman which had
had seven Husbands, In the Resurrection, whose Wife shall she be of the seven?

Elsewhere, I remember, our Author puts in Souls instead of his Bodies here. [
The Word of God does particularly teach us the state and condition of Souls
after death, p. 44
that they shall be like the Angels in Heaven.]

But whatever Truth there may be in either Proposition apart, and by it self,
the H. Text, I am sure, mentions neither Bodies nor Souls: And if it did, we
must not stretch Similitudes to make them argumentative beyond the thing they
are brought for. They run not, we say, on all four.

It is enough that our B. Savior there resolves us, that we [whether in Body,
or Soul, or both] shall at the Resurrection be like unto the Angels in Heaven
in Immortality, and an estrangement from the sensual inclinations and
entertainments of this present imperfect state, such as Marrying, and giving in
Marriage. --

And we may be like the Angels in many perfections, as we are said to be like
to God himself, though they should have no Bodies; so that, even upon that
supposal, this Analogy, Comparison or Assimilation (as he speaks) would not be
altogether false; nor would it follow, that Bodies after the Resurrection are
made pure Spirits, and cease to be Bodies, as he infers.

Secondly, for Saint Paul's (...), or, spiritual Bodies. Of 1 Cor. 15.44.
] Though upon the supposition, that Angels have Bodies, which for my part I
gainsay not, it may be an ingenious translation, [ Such Bodies as Spirits or
Angels have;] yet it is sufficient to the purpose of the Apostle there, that
our Bodies are participant of the spiritual perfection of immortality. Or, put
on immortality, Ver. 53. (...)] quod ad tempus vivit dum anima adest. Anima est
vox hujus vitae -- (...)] habens in se vice animae Spiritum immutabilem, etc.]
Grot. in Loc. [See Chapter 3. Sect. 3. of the foregoing Treatise.] And so he
cannot conclude from hence, that Angels have Bodies.

That I be not over-tedious, I will end all with some few Reflections upon that
noted Text of the Psalmist, Of Psalm. 104.4. p. 211.
Who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flaming Fire, Psalm 104.4.
From whence, says our Author, the persons of the other opinion, such as
Aquinas and the rest of the Scholastic Rabble, would positively conclude, that
they are spirits and absolutely incorporeal; but fail of their purpose for
these clear Reasons. --

His clear Reasons I shall examine anon, when we have first viewed the Text it
self.

I can scarce pass over that Rude and Detracting Term of Scholastic Rabble. He
should have been obliged, I think to a greater sweetness and civility to those,
whom he owes so much to, and of whom he has borrowed the chief ornaments of
his Book, as to this Subject; those dear Maxim's I mean, which he relies so
much upon, [ Imagina^io non transcendit continuum. Quicquid agit, agit vel
mediatione suppositi vel virtutis; per contactum immediatum aut mediatum.
Immateriale non agit in materiale, nisi eminent^r ut Deus.] And, not to immind
him of his own essential Identity, and Alteri^y, he can easily match their most
Bombast and Barbarous Terms among his Occult and Magical Sophies.

But to the matter before us.

It is confessed that the original word sometim^s signifies Winds as well as
Spirits; and the Hebrew Doctors so read it Vatablus in Loc.
. Ventos Angelos suos] non ex accidente spirant, sed sunt Dei nuncii. Ignem
ardentem] fulgura. So R. David Vica^s Decapla in Ps.
. And Munst^r translates it, Facit fl^tus nuncios suos, and ignem flagrantem
ministros suos, q. d. Violent and sudden Winds to execute his commands, and
Fire performs his pleasure: fulfilling his word, Ps. 148.8. And this is a great
Truth.

But the holy Ghost in Hebr. 1.7. as Master Ainsworth well notes, shows it to
be spoken by the Psalmist of Angels properly, who are named ministering Spirits,
Ver. 14. And our Physician allows, P. 211.
[ The Author of the Epistle to Hebrews must needs be taken for the best
Expositor of the words.]

Yet among those, that conceive them of Angels, properly so called, there is
some difference.

Some refer them to the respective Vehicles of Angels, either AEreal, (for Wind
is but Air in motion) or Ethereal and Ign^ous. Thus Grotius, [Sunt enim
Angelorum alii Acrei, alii Ignei. Angelis corpora sed subtilissima non
Pythagorae tantum and Platonis Schola sensit, sed and Judaei veteres, and
veteres Christiani.] And to the same effect Doctor Hammond paraphraseth, [ Who,
though he be able to do all things by himself to administer the whole World, as
he first created it, by a word, by saying, and it was done; yet is he pleased
to make use of the Ministry of Angels, who some of them in subtle Bodies of
Air, others of Fire, come down and execute his Commands here upon Earth.] And
in his Annotations he tell us, [ As Angels and Ministers are but several names
of the same Divine Creatures, so (...) and Fire are but expressions of the
several appearances of them, sometimes in Airy, sometimes in Flaming Clouds, --
] And hence I suppose, B^za in his Marginal Notes to Hebr. 1.7. puts Cherub
with Ps. 18.11. and S^raph with Isa. 6.2. -- Iunius and Tremell^us interpret
it, [ Angelis utitur nunciis, administrisque voluntatis and judiciorum suorum,
adco commode ut ventis and igne uti solet.] He uses Angels for Messengers and
Ministers of his Will and Judgments, as readily, as he is wont to do Winds and
Fire. --

And to this same effect our Author chooses to sense it, 12.
[ As the Winds, which is but a strong motion in the Air, and the shining of
flaming Fire, are two of the most agile, and operative Agents, that are known
to us in nature; so the Angels and Christ's Ministers are strong, quick, an^
most nimble, and powerful in performing their Offices and Administrations.]

For my part, I see not any considerable inconvenience in these Expositions,
unless where men will dogmatize with this Author, and say the words cannot
otherwise be rationally understood. -- And the nature of Angels may be yet
incorporeal for all these vehicles assigned them; or notwithstanding the
comparison of their operations to those most powerful and subtle Agents among
Bodies, Wind and Flame. Our God, who is a Spirit, most simple and absolute, is
also said to be a consuming fire, Hebr. 12.29.

Who makes his Angels Spirits] i. e. says Master Ainsworth, spiritual
substances. So differing from Christ, who is no made or created Spirit, but the
Maker of all things. -- And his Ministers a flaming fire,] i. e. effectual in
their Administrations. Whence the Angels have appeared like Horses and Chariots
of Fire. --

And Saint Augustine, who was none of the Scholastic Rabble, finds here both
Nature and Office of these Celestial Creatures. [ Quaeris nomen ejus Naturae?
Spiritus est. Quaeris Officium? Angelus est. Ex eo quod est, Spiritus est. Ex
eo quod agit, Angelus. Enuarat. in Ps.] See Chapter 11. Sect. 1. of the foregoing
Treatise. The word (...); says Doctor ^ouge, [whose judgment possibly may bear
some sway with him, as he tells us, Master Baxter's does, p. 29^. p. 175. p.
183. p. 46.
with other Reformed and Orthodoxal Divines, such as tread not in the steps of
Arminius, True Sons of the Doctrine of Church of England] intimates two things.

1. Creation. Dr. G. in Hebr. 1.7. Sect. 81.
So God is said to have rested from all his Works, which he had made, Genesis 2.2.
And to have made Heaven and Earth, Revel. 14.7. is meant created.

2. Ordination or disposing things to this or that use. -- And in both senses
is this phrase. [He maketh] here used. He makes them Spirits, that is, he
creates them spiritual substances. He makes them a flame of Fire, that is, he
orders and disposes them to be as a flame of Fire in doing his Will.]

Now let us hear our Author's clear Reasons against this later way of
interpretation.

1. Says he, His clear Reasons against the Scholastic interpretation of Ps.
104.4. short and defectiv^. p. 211.
The Text there cannot be rationally understood of their Creation, or of their
creaturely Nature, but of their Offices and Administrations, because the word
used there is not (...) to create or form forth of nothing, but (...), fecit,
that is by ordering them in their Offices and Administrations. And again the
word (...) does not always, or of necessity, signify an incorporeal thing, but
that which is a Body, as the Winds, etc.

With all becoming deference to his skill in the Hebrew Lan^uage [whereof and
Greek, p. 106.
he has been a 'Teacher in his younger years, as he acquaints us] the word
(...), fecit, is sometimes us^d for Creation, as I noted even now out of Doctor
Gouge: and Maker of all things, in our Creed, is as much as Creator: And
therefore so also it may be taken by us here. Divin. Decret. Epit. de Angelis.
And so Theodoret, none of the Sc^olastick Rabble neither, understands it,
alleging this for a proof of the Angels creation. And so the Arabic version
reads it, Qui creavit.

And thoug^ the other word (...) does not always and of necessity signify an
incorporeal thing, it is enough to decline the force of this Reason of his, that
sometimes it does signify such, and possibly may do so. And the Arabic, if
Vicars in his Decapla have rightly noted, is absque corpore.

But the Author of the Epistle to the Hebr^ws, (as he adds) must needs be taken
for the best Expositor of these words, P. 211.
who does quote them only for this purpose, to prove that Christ in Dignity and
Office is far above the Angels, who are all ordered to serve and obey him, and
are by their Offices all but Ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for
them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation. By which it is manifest, that this place
is to be understood of their Ministrations and Offices, and not of their nature
and substances.

I readily consent with him, that the Author to the Hebrews is certainly the
best Expositor; But then I positively deny, that he quotes them only to show
Christ's superiority in Office above the Angels. For his design there is to
manifest our blessed Savior to be superior to them in Nature as well as
Office; as God above these Creatures, who are the best of Creatures, as well as
Lord above these Ministers. But to the Son, he says, thy Throne, O God, -- as
it follows immediately, Ver. 8. by way of opposition to what is here said of
Angels. -- And so it is far enough from being manifest, as he avers, that this
place is not to be understood as inclusive of the nature and substance of
Angels, their Creaturely nature, but of their Ministration and Offices only.

He yet adds,

2. They can no more be merely and literally said to be Spirits, P. 212.
understanding Spirit to intend an absolute incorporeal substance, than his
Ministers can be literally understood to be a flaming Fire. They must either be
both literally true, which is absolutely absurd; or else this word must have a
metaphorical interpretation, as they (he means I suppose, the other words) may
and must have. --

Now I find nothing in this clear reason, but clear confidence, which asserts
boldly, but proves nothing, and may therefore be answered by as bare a denial,
or saying, that there is no must in the case, but the words may still be
otherwise understood.

For why may not one word or sentence in the same period be literally true, and
the other metaphorical; and so accordingly intended?

Or, what, if we should transpose the Subjects and Predicates, as some do? Who
makes Spirits his Angels, and flaming Fire his Ministers. Then both may be
literally true without the least impeaching of Angels Incorporeity.

Or, what, if we should affirm both were literally true, only with this
different respect, the former to the internum of Angels, the later to their
^xternum, the former to their intrinsic nature, the later to their subtle
Vehicles?

Or, what, if we should render it, by a kind of (...), Who makes his
Ministering Angels Spirits, clothed with aetherial Bodies. Or, Who makes
Spirits clothed with flame-like Vehicles, his Ministering Angels.

I mention these things, only by way of instance, to declare, that there are
diverse ways of escaping his clear Reasons in this matter without any absolute
absurdity.

And now I leave it to the Christian Readers judgment to choose his
interpretation of these words, and pronounce of the whole Controversy, as he
sees cause. (...).

FINIS.

