A Choice COLLECTION OF Wonderful Miracles, Ghosts and Visions.
Crookhorn January 1. 1681: The following account of an extraordinary Cure of
the Kings Evil is sent from Crookhorn in the County of Somerset, attested by
Henry Clark Minister of the said Parish, Captain James Bale, Captain Richard
Shirlock, John Stacky Clerk, William Pike, Samuel Daubeny, George Strong, John
Greenway, Robert Chislet.
WE whose Names are underwritten, do certify the Truth of a Miraculous Cure
of a Girl of this Town about 20 years of Age by Name Elizabeth Parcer, a poor
widows Daughter, who had languished under the sad afflicting Distemper of the
Kings Evil, termed the Joint Evil, (being said to be the worst Evil,) for about
10 or 11 years time; She had in her right hand four running sores, (viz.) one
on the inside, and three on the back of her hand; and two more in the same arm,
one in her hand^ wrist, the other above her Elbow. She had betwixt her Arm-pit
and Breast^ a Bunch, which the Doctors said ^ed those 6 several sores; The said
Distemper was likewise on her left Eye, insomuch that she was almost blind; Her
Mother despairing of her sight, and not being able to send her to London, to be
touched by the King, being miserably poor, and having many small Children; and
this Girl not being able to wo^k; Her Mother (desirous to have her Daughter
cured,) went to the Surgeons for help, who tampered with it for a time, but
could do no good, went likewise 10 or 11 miles to a seventh Son, but all in
vain; no visible hopes of a Cure remained, and nothing was expected but a Grave

But now, in this Girls extremity, God, the great Phisician, dictates unto her
(thus, languishing in her miserable, hopeless conditon,) what course to take,
and what to do for a Cure; which was to go and touch the Duke of Monmouth;
which the Girl told her Mother, that if she could but touch the Duke, she
should be well; Her Mother reproved her for her foolish conceit; But the Girl
did often persuade her Mother that she might go to Lackington to the D. (who
then lay at Mr. Spekes;) For certainly (said she,) I should be well if I could
but touch him. Her Mother slighted the pressing Requests of her Daughter; And
the more her Mother slighted it, and reproved her, the more earnest was the
Girl for it; In few days after, the Girl having notice that Sir Jo. Sidenham
intended to treat the D. at White Lodge in Henton Park; to which place, this
Girl, with many of her Neighbors went to the said Park; she being there
timely, waited the Dukes coming. First, she observed the Person of the D. to
have knowledge of him, as he was passing by; she pressed in amongst the crowd,
and caught him by the hand, his Glove being on; and she had a Glove likewise to
cover her very sores; She not being herewith satisfied with this first attempt
of touching his Glove only; but her mind was, she must touch some part of his
naked flesh; She waiting his coming forth, intended a second attempt: The poor
Girl, thus between Hope and Fear, waited his Motion; and on a sudden was news
brought of the D's coming, which she (to be prepared) rent off her Glove that
was clung to the sores, in such haste, that she tore her Glove, and brought
away not only the Sores, but the skin. The Dukes Glove, (as Providence ordered
it,) the upper part hung down, so that his wrist was bare; she pressed on, and
caught him by the bare Hand with her running Hand; saying, God bless Your
Greatness; and the D. said, God bless You. The Girl was not a little
transported with her good success, came and told her friends that now she
should be well; She came home to her Mother with great Joy, and told her she
had been touched by the Dukes bare Hand, and that she should now be well. Her
Mother hearing what she had done, reproved her very sharply for her boldness,
and asked her how she durst do any such thing? and threatened to beat her for it;
She cried out, O Mother, I shall be well again, and be cured of my Sores; And
as God Almighty (the great Physician) would have it, (to the admiration of all
that know or hear of it;) her six running Sores in her Hand and Arm, in four or
five days were dried up; the Bunch in her Breast was dissolved in 8 or 10 days,
of which now is no sign; Her Eye that was given for lost, is now perfectly
well, and the Girl in good health; the Marks of her several Sores are yet
visible in her Hand and Arm; all which has been discovered to Us both by
Mother, Daughter, and Neighbors that know her.

Whoever doubts the Truth of this Relation, may be satisfied thereof by the
sight of the Original under the Hands of the Persons abovenamed at the
Amsterdam Coffer House in St. Bartholomew Lane, London.

A True Account of a Wonderful Cure of the King's Evil, performed by Mrs. F --
Sister to his Grace the Duke of MONMOUTH.
THE Extraordinary Cure of the King's Evil, lately performed by his Grace the D.
of M. in his Western Progress, has (no doubt) alarmed many People, and opened
the eyes of the most Unbelieving, to see Heaven by this Miracle proclaim his
Legitimacy, and God Almighty declare for the Black Box. Neither has there been
wanting a second Testimony to this Illustrious D's Family, in a Cure both as
strange and as true as the former; that so according to the Apostle, Out of the
mouth of Two or Three Witnesses; every word might be established. Mrs. F.
Sister to this most Excellent Prince, formerly a Roman Catholic, but since (by
the convincing Arguments, and exemplary Piety of her Husband Mr F. Master of
the Requests,) brought over to his Religion, I mean the true sincere Protestant
Faith, has been as remarkable in a wonderful Cure of the same malignant
Distemper, as the D. her Brother; The truth of which whole matter of Fact, We
whose Names are underwritten engage our selves to be responsible for. Now the
matter of Fact was thus; One Jonathan Trott was born of poor, but virtuous
Parents; his Father was dead but his Mother that survived, by the Blessing of
God accompanying her honest Endeavors, had got together a sum of Money very
considerable to the Trade she drove, her chief Vocation being selling of
Apples, Pears, Oranges, and other Fruit, not far from Covent Garden Church
Door; the Intervals of which Calling she still employed in being very busy
with her Needle in footing Stockins, mending Breeches, and such like honest
Labors. But her greatest affliction was, the sad sad spectacle of the poor
wretch her only Son and Heir, (the aforementioned Jonathan Trott, who had for
many years, been sore afflicted with a continual Running of a most noysom
Matter in his Neck, and many other parts of his Body, accompanied often with so
great Tumors and Swelling about his Throat, as almost choked him. Upon this
Son of hers, (now about the Age of 19.) she had spent the greatest part of her
Livelihood, to pitiful, Quacking, Ignorant Physicians such as her Purse could
best procure, and such as kill the poor at the most easy and conscionable
Rates* These her Doctors could never rightly inform her what was her Sons true
Distemper; till at last she her self (suspecting it was the Kings Evil,) had
the Advice of some able Physicians, as Dr. Lower, Dr. Minshel, etc. who all
agreed that it was the Kings Evil, and that he was in very great danger, unless
he were very speedily touched. This happned to be when His Majesty was last at
Windsor, whither she (good woman) was designing her Journey with her Son; But
the night before she resolved on her Progress, she dreamt that she heard a
Voice that commanded her Son to be Touched by Mrs. F. The poor woman you may
imagine, was infinitely surpised at this Command, never having so much as
heard of such a Woman as Mrs. F. in her Life; But she was much more astonished
when her Son came to her, and told her that he was resolved not to take his
Journey to Windsor, for that he had heard a Voice that Night three times
successively, [which by the Description he gave of it, was the very same that
his Mother had heard, and commanded the same thing,] telling him, that one
Touch of Mrs. F. would make him whole. Upon this the poor Woman acquainted
several of her Neighbors with the unusual Circumstances of her Dream, so
exactly concurring with her Sons; and by them was informed that there was such
a Lady, Sister to His Grace the D. of M. whom they therefore all concluded to
be the Person intended in the Dream, by reason of her near Relation to His
Grace, and the Crown. The Youth Jonathan hearing this, was extreme glad, and
showed violent signs of it, in urging and pressing his Mother as vigorously as
ever he could, to procure her leave; who at first was very unwilling to let him
go upon this Adventure. He still insisted upon one Argument which even in
affliction made the poor Woman smile, That [having heard of the D. of M's Cure,
which was known long before it was Published,] He did not know why Mrs. F.
might not receive from her Mother the Curing of the Ills of Young Men by a
Touch of her Naked Flesh, as well as the D. her Brother had from his Father the
Curing of Young Women by a Touch of His. However, his Mother having checked him
for this saying, was resolved to send him: Accordingly he went to Mrs.
Fanshaw's House near St. James's, and having desired admission, as soon as ever
Mrs. F. appeared, he falls down upon his Knees before her, begging Pardon for
boldness, the occasion whereof he told her in the Relation which he made of all
that had happened to his Mother and Himself: Then grasping her hands with all
the Violence and Passion imaginable, kissed them a thousand times, and directed
them (for the Lady was not so Uncharitable as to deny it upon any such good
account,) to his Neck, and his Throat, and all the other parts of his Body
wherein he was afflicted; which she vouchsafed to stroke, wishing withal, that
it might do him as much good as he believed it would. This done, she left him,
and the Youth went home v^ry well satisfied with the Hopes of his being very
speedily Cured, as accordingly it succeeded; For within Three or Four Days
time, his Running ceased; And in a Weeks time, the Swelling in his Throat was
not only abated, but Perfectly and Entirely Cured; And Mrs. F. by many of this
Persons Neighbors and Acquaintance, (and most of the Apple-women about these
Parts,) is to this day called Princess F.

Now it is well known, That this Gift of Healing was first imparted to King
Edward the Confessor, a Good King, though a Popish Saint, to Descend upon his
Legitimate Successors; And if none of them ever Exercised it before They came
to the Crown till now, we must either say; that They had it, but forbore the
Use of it; Or else we must admire the Excellency of the Advantages that
Protestant Princes, and Princesses have above those formerly that were Papists;
Since Protestants, though Two or Three Removes from the Crown, can do as much
with a Touch, as Edward the Confessor, when He was not only a King but a Saint.
And now who is there that can Question the Legitimacy of our most Excellent
Prince J. D. of M. when this Remarkable Witness that Heaven has given Him and
his Sister of Curing the Kings Evil, pleads so loudly in his behalf?

There is but One Other Natural Argument to prove the Legitimacy of this
Prince, and his being the True and Right Successor; And that is the Instinct by
which Lions are taught to Reverence, and to do them Homage; without ever
hurt-them; And This too I am told His Grace does design to show the World in
his own behalf; For it is Credibly Reported, that on Saturday next the D. of M.
designs to be shut up with one of the Greatest Lions in the Tower of London;
There to be seen, to the great Satisfaction of all that behold how Secure He
must needs be of his Legitimacy, that dares put it to so Dangerous a Trial; Sir
Th. Ar. and J. H. Esquire have proffered their Service to attend in the next empty
Den, in Quality of Bed-chamber-men to his Grace; and the Earl of S. Earl of E.
Lord G. and several other Noble Peers, have engaged to Accompany Him to the
Place of Trial. For my part, I wish for the Day, not at all Doubting, but to
see Old CHARLES, the Kings Lion, give him his Blessing, by laying his Imperial
Paw upon his Head, in which all Lions have we know by Nature stamped the Image
of a Crown. This I will answer for the Lion; That if he do not Declare a True
Successor, yet He will show another sort of Royalty, and Remove one of the
worst sorts of the Kings Evil.

The Persons above mentioned for Witnesses of this Extraordinary Cure, are We
whose Names are subscribed.

Br. Lord Gerard, Sir Gilb. Gerard, Col. Langley, Th. Vernon Esquire Mr. Row, Mrs.
Needham.


Advertisement.
HIS Grace to perform this Famous Trial of Skill, with great M^gnificence and
Solemnity, ordered that his Militia, the Porters, Tinkers, and Chimney-Sweepers
and Broom-men of London, together with the Squires of the Body, commonly called
the Black-guard, should be ready with the afor^said Attendants to wait upon his
Person to the place of Execution, followed with several Pageants and artificial
Devices, curiously representing the Famous Adventures of ancient Heroes,
particularly, Don ^^^xot's storming the Windmill for an Enchanted Castle. But
before these extrardinary preparations could be completed, the malicious
Papists have spitefully po^sin'd all the Lions in the Tower, except the Dukes;
whereupon his Grace is advised by his own Privy Council the Rabble, not to
venture on that Lion, but rather try the good nature of the Leopard, who they
say was certainly begot by a Lion, as his Grace by a K* and therefore cannot
but favor such pretenders to Royalty, in hopes himself may at last become K.
of the Beasts.

A True and perfect Relation of a Strange and Wonderful Apparition which
appeared to Elizabeth FREEMAN, at Bishops-Hatfield in Hartfordshire, Jan. 27.
1681/0. Commanding her to declare a Message to His Majesty. As it was taken
before Sir Joseph Jordan Knt, and Richard Lee Dr. of Divinity, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.
She gives an Account.

I. THat on Monday Night, being Jan. 24th. she sitting by her Mothers fireside
between 5 and Six of the Clock in the Evening, with a Child in her Lap,-she
heard a Voice behind her, which mildly said, Sweetheart: Whereupon she turned
her Face back, saw an appearance of a Woman, as she conceived, all in White,
covered with a white Vail, so that she saw no Face, but a very white Hand was
laid on the back of her Chair, and said to her, The 15th. day of May it is
appointed for the ROYAL BLOOD to be Poisoned; and further said, Be not afraid,
for I am sent to tell thee: And so vanished.

II. That on Tuesday, Jan. the 25th. between the hours of Five and Six at
Night, she going to her Mothers house, coming within five or six Pole of her
door, the same Apparition appeared to her again in White, and veiled as before,
and said Do you remember what I said? And she answered, Yes. And she further
said In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, What art thou? And
immediately it appeared in a very Glorious Shape, and with a more harsh Voice
said, Tell King Charles from me, and bid Him not remove His Parliament, and
stand to his Council; and said Do as I bid you. To which she answered, Yes, and
so vanished.

III. That on Jan. the 26th. between the said hours of five and six in the
Evening, she sitting by the fire, and her Mother sitting by her, the same
Apparition came again to her, whereat she could not speak; and her Mother
preceiving her to be troubled, and fixing her eyes, said, Daughter, See thou
any thing? And she, not able to speak* Nodded with her Head and Hand; whereat
her Mother said, Shall I go out? And thereupon she being enabled to speak, the
Apparition Nodded to her, she said, Yes; whereat her Mother going out, the
Apparition said, Do your Message. And she answered, I will, so soon as God
shall Enable me; And it said, Be not afraid, and so vanished: And then she
cried, Mother, Mother; and then her Mother, and some other Friends, came in.

IV. The said Apparition appeared to the said Maid on Thursday in the Evening,
between the aforesaid hours of five and six she being at a Neighbors House but
said nothing to her.

This was taken from the Maids own mouth, by me Rich. Wilkinson, Schoolmaster
in the said Town of Hatfield.

A True Relation of a strange Apparition which appeared to the Lady Gr.
Commanding her to deliver a Message to His Grace the D. of M.
After the Powerful Rhetoric of that Noble Peer of the Realm (the Earl of E.
at his delivery of the Petition of 15 more as Noble Peers as Himself) had
failed of its design*d Success; what could we hope for, or expect that would
prevail upon His Majesty to alter his Resolution of Convening his Parliament at
Oxford? Surely no Humane Person would be thought forcible enough, and an
Heavenly must be employed, if the Business cannot be done by the Earl of E.
Accordingly we have heard of a True and Perfect Relation from Bishops Hatfield,
(attested by one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary (Dr. Lee,) so Famous
for his Constancy to the Church of England,) of a strange and wonderful
Apparition which appeared to one Young Mrs. Freeman: And her Message (...) to
his Sacred Majesty, is well enough known, not only by a single Printed Paper of
the whole matter of Fact; But also, (that no Person should have Impudence to
doubt the Truth of it,) by Ben. Harris himself in his Protestant Intelligence;
There we are told how the Maiden of One and Thirty, sitting with her Child in
her Lap by the Fire, saw an Appearance of a woman (as she conceived) covered
with a white Veil, so that she saw no Face, but a very white Hand was laid on
the back of her Chair, and said unto her, etc. Which, though it be very
wonderful, yet his Speech of the White Hand is equaled (if not excelled in
strangeness,) by an Apparition which appeared to the Lady Gr. (supposed to be
the same that was seen at Hatfield;) Of which I shall give you a True and
Perfect Relation, according to her own Deposition before Justice Warc. Sir W.W.
Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Charleton, who stamped with his wooden Leg, and swore Damn
him, he believed it.

Her Ladyship gives an Account.

I. THat on Saturday January 29. 1680. being alone in her Closet about the hour
of Nine at night, she heard a Voice behind her, which mildly said Sweet Heart;
At which she was not at first at all frightened, supposing it to have bin an
Apparition which (she says) has often of late appeared to her (in the absence
of her Lord,) in the shape of a bright Star, and Blue Garter, but without
Hurting, or so much as Frightning her; But she was strangley amazed, when
turning about, she beheld an Appearance very different from what she expected;
It was a Spirit all in White, so Veiled from Top to Toe, that nothing appeared
to her but one side of a Cheek, where the Veil was put by; and this side of the
Cheek said thus unto her: The 15th. day of may is appointed for the Royal Blood
to be Poisoned; And further said, Be not afraid, for I am sent to tell thee,
that James D. of M. has none of It in him; Seeming by this addition to have
filled up the Sentence that it had left Imperfect to the Maid of Hatfield; and
so vanished.

I. That on Sunday, Jan. 30. between the Hours of 7 and 8, it again appeared to
her in the same manner; and said, Do You Remember what I said? And she
answered, Yes, Then the Spirit said, Do you believe it? And she answered, Yes*
Then the Apparition said; And have You told him? And she answered, No, Then
immediately it appeared in a more terrible shape, and with a more harsh Voice,
said; Tell it James D. of M. from me, and bid him not go to Wapping; And then
it vanished through the Keyhole.

III. That on Jan. 21. (being the day kept in Remembrance of the late Kings
Martyrdom) about the hour of 3. in the Afternoon, it again appeared, and asked
her, Have You fasted to day* And she answered, No. The Spirit said, It Is well;
and so vanished.

IV. That on Feb. 1. about the hour of 11. at night, it appeared again, and
said to her; Tell James D. of M. But she interrupted the Spirit, and said, He
is here, Don't You see him? Tell him your self? We are alone. The Spirit
thought it Uncivil to be Interrupted, and took Pett, and vanished.

V. That on Feb. 2. about 2. of the Clock Afternoon, she heard the same Spirit,
but supposed that its being affronted the last time, occasioned its not
appearing again; But it talked invisibly to her a great while, making several
Stops and Pauses; and then beginning again very incoherently: The words (it is
said her Ladyship says) she writ down, which are these (viz.) Bid James D. of M
go to the Tower, and venture the Lions, old Charles will not now hurt him. Tell
him he has discovered the weakness of his Party in Petitioning with but 15.
after him. He has more Followers I am sure, and as good company attend him to
Hedg-lane from a City-club, or a Treat at Wapping. Bid all the Lords You known
have a care of Petitioning, unless they are disobliged Persons. Tell my Lord
St. his Wife keeps her Bed. Bid Sh. have a care of his Spiggot; far if He is
Tapt all the Plot will run out. The Blazing star will again appear the 21th. of
March. Destruction is near, if Settlement does not come. And if we have not
Peace, we shall be in danger of war. I am the Hatfield Spirit, and return to
haunting the House of my Landlord the ^ (...) Sal. This said, it vanished, and
was never heard of more.

FINIS.
Tom Ross's Ghost to his Pupil the D. of M.
SHame of my Life, Disturber of my Tomb,
Base as thy Mothers Prostituted Womb;
Huffing to Cowards, fawning to the Brave,
To Knaves a Fool, to credulous Fools a Knave,
The King's Betraye^, and the Peoples Slave.
Like SAMVEL at the Necromantick Call,
I rise to tell Thee, God has left thee, SAVL?
I strive in vain thy Infected Blood to cure,
Streams will run muddy where the Spring's Impure.
In all Your meritorious Life we see
Old TAAFFS invincible Sobriety.
Places of Master of the Horse, and Spy,
You (like Tom Howard) did at once supply:
From SYDNEY'S Blood Your Loyalty did spring;
You show us all your Fathers but the KING,
From whose too tender and too bounteous arms,
(Unhappy He who such a Viper Warms;
As Dutiful a Subject, as a Son,)
To Your true Parents the whole Town you run.
Read if you can, how the old Apostate fell,
Outdo his Pride, and Merit more than Hell:
Both He and You were gloriously bright,
The first and Purest of the Sons of Light:
But when like Him you offr'd at the Crown
Like Him, your angry Father kicked You down.
The Oxford Alderman 's Speech to his Grace the D. of M. at his Entrance into
that City about Sept. 1680:
STout Hanibal, before He came to Age,
Perpetual Wars with Rome was forced to wage!
YOU lead Us to such Wars; O Happy We!
Great Prince! YOU are a Soldier good as He:
Though some will say, (to give the Devil his due,)
HE was as good a Protestant as YOU.
YOU to that Whore of Whores, the Whore of Rome,
Devoted from Your own fair Mothers Womb;
Though in the Schools of Jesuits true bred,
YOU scorned to learn of Them to Write or Read:
A Protestant! (the more to be Admired,)
That never were Instructed, but Inspired.)
So unconcerned from Popery You pass,
No Use of Understanding i^ the Case.
True Interest (that all other things o'repowers),
And Generous Indignation made YOU Ours:
Even so in Spain to Mass come Trading Jews,
Cast Drabs turn Quakers but to spite the Stews.
But Fears and Jealousies of YOU We scorn,
That are so True a Son of Honor Born;
And since have made both Gog and Magog Bleed,
Act but the Demagogue, You Will do the Deed:
You Will Damn and Ram proud Antichrist to Hell;
But force Him first to work One Miracle.
He that with Four hard Words, and One Grave Nod,
Turns an Insipid Wafer into God;
Were YOU a Dough-bak'd Duke, with less ado,
To Prince of Wales might Transubstantiate YOU.
Do YOU but Say It, We'll Swear that You are so,
And rather Kiss Your Hand, than Kiss his Toe:
Resolved, Resolved, It must not be gain said;
Faith We Will Believe Your Mother was a Maid.
Why should You think Ambition any Crime?
We Will make You Duke of Venice in good time:
Or, if YOU scruple to Vsurp the Crown;
Having once Raised US, YOU may then sit down.
YOU, or Your Friends shall have the foremost Place;
Perhaps We'll join Sir Armstrong with Your Grace:
Whether YOU Reign, or HE, it is all One,
Great Alexander's Dear Hephestion.
But When YOU come to Reap these G^odly Fruits,
Sweet Sir, Remember These Our Humble Suits.
First, Let these Lordly Bishops go to Pot;
It Is plain their Lordships all are in the PLOT,
They hold none lawful Heirs, but lawfully begot,
Our Commonwealth's a Castle in the Air,
If We Pray for KING in Common Prayer.
These Paltry Scholars, blast Them with (...) breath;
Or They Will Rhyme Your Grace and Us to Death.
Then O Brave We! then Hei for our good Town!
Then up go WE when Wit and Sense go down.
The GHOST of the Late PARLIAMENT, to the New one to Meet at Oxford.
FRom Deepest Dungeon of Eternal Night,
The S^a^s of Horror, Sorrow, Pains and Spite,
I have been sent to tell Your Tender Youth
A Seasonable and Important Truth!
I feel, (but Oh too late,) that no Disease,
Is like the Surfeit of Luxurious Ease;
And of all other, the most Tempting Things,
Are too much Wealth, and too Indulgent Kings.
None ever was Suparlatively Ill,
But by Degrees, Industry and Skill:
And some, whose Meaning has at first been fair,
Grow Knaves by Use, and Rebels by Despair.
My Time is past, and Yours will soon begin,
Keep your First Blossoms from the blast of Sin;
And by the Fate of my Tumultuous Ways,
Preserve Your selves, and bring Serener Days.
The Buisie subtle Serpents of the Law,
Did first my Mind from True Obedience draw;
While I did Limits to the KING Prescribe,
And took for Oracles tha^ Canting Tribe;
I changed True Freedom for the Name of Free,
And grew Seditious for Variety.
All that opposed me were to be accused,
And, by the Laws Illegal^y Abused.
The Robe was summoned M^^^^d in the Head,
In Legal Murder none so deeply read*
I brought him to the Bar, where once He stood*
Stained with the (yet Unexpiated) Blood
Of the Brave Strafford, when Three Kingdoms rung
With his Accumulative ^ackney Tongue*
Prisoners and Witnesses were waiting by,
These had been taught to Swear and Those to Die;
And to expect Their Arb^trary Fates.
Some for Ill Faces, some for Good Estates.
To Fright the People an^ Alarm the Town*
(...) and (...) Employed the Reverend Gown:
But while the Triple Mitre bore the Blame,
The Kings Three Crowns were all their Aim.
I seemed, (and did but seem) to fear the Guards,
And took for mine the (...) and the (...).
Anti-monarcick Heretics of State,
Immoral Atheists, Rich and Reprobate.
But above all, I got a little Guide,
Who every Foard of Villainy had Tried;
None knew so well the Old Pernicious way,
To Ruin Subjects, and make KINGS Obey;
And my small Je^u at a Furious Rate,
Was driving Eighty back to Forty Eight.
This the KING knew, and was Resolved to bear;
But I mistook his Patience for his Fear.
All that This Happy Island could afford,
Was Sacrificed to my Voluptuous Board.
In His whole Paradise One only Tree
He had Excepted by a strict Decree;
A Sacred Tree which Royal-Fruit did bear,
Yet It in Pieces I Conspired to Tear;
Beware my Child! Divinity is there.
This so Out-did all I had done before,
I could Attempt, and He endure no more.
My Un prepared and Un-repenting Breath,
Was snatched away by the swift Hand of Death;
And I (with all my Sins about me) hurled,
To th'utter Darkness of the Lower World:
A Dreadful Place where You too soon shall see,
If You believe Seducers more than Me.
FINIS.
A Canto upon the Miraculous Cure of the King's Evil, performed by His Grace the
D. of M.
AS Popish Farriers use t'imploy,
In their own Trade the good St. Loy,
The Saint to whom they have Recourse,
As to Heavens Master of the Horse:
To Him They loudly cry for Mercy,
On Ragged Colts that have the Farcy;
For Hackneys Ga^^'d to Him They Pray,
And Drink dead Drunk upon his Day.
So to his Grace of Monm. Trots,
A Filly Fool that had the Bots;
For still she knew, (and it was no News,)
He keeps the Mares though not the Mews.
But had you seen the Skittish Jade,
You would have thought her Drunk or Mad;
For at first dash His Hand she Seized,
Much was the the Ambitious Hero pleased.
So sweetly did Don Quixot Grin;
When the Maid Marrian of the Inn,
He thought was some Enchanted Queen.
Asked his Dead-doing-Hand to Kiss;
But what white Devil Danced in This?
Some Fly, some Rat, or Great Old Pus,
Or Spirit Mephostophilus;
Or Pug, that Paracelsus wore
In the Pomel of his Sword before;
Or Healing Virtue, that as Rare-is,
Is sent His Grace by's Aunt of Fayries,
Who aids him thus in Hugger mugger,
So did Doll Common, Abel Drugger.
Some Sweaty Devil in his Palm,
Transfuses Brine instead of Balm;
And Brine You know is good for the Itch,
In any mangy Dog or Bitch:
Long in his Fist the Leprous Drab,
Paddles and Pores familiar Scab.
The witch her Dam had set her Fancy
Agog upon this Chyromancy;
To view each Line the Hag Importunes,
And thus Young Gypsy reads his Fortunes.
The men of Westminster shall pass,
High Votes in Honor of your Grace;
No Prayers for fear of the Black Rod,
They Will Vote (I fear,) No King, No God.
Great stickling there shall be for Two,
Pillory'd Benjamin and You.
What will You give me this next Spring,
If then You are not Crowned a King
By Oats before we reap next Crop,
Oats in a Tub will Preach You up.
So Sybil ended her vile Guessing,
And each to other gave their Blessing.
But O the Green-sick Girls may boast,
This Duke has Cured Them to his Cost;
Though now he cuts his Capers high,
He may with Falstaff one day cry,
(When Age has set him in the Stocks,)
A Pox on my Gout, a Gout on my Pox.
Yet that Fat Knight with all his Guts,
That were not then so sweet as Nuts,
Tho often He boldly sought and winkt,
Led Harry Monmouth by Instinct;
Reveres a Buckram Prince of Wales,
His Great Heart quops, his Courage qua^ls.
The Lion Rampant is too wise,
To touch a Prince, though in Disguise:
Much less a Prince, so Kind and Civil,
To Touch a Kingdom for King's Evil.
He means to make it (for its Health,)
A Common Whore, a Commonwealth.
The stroaker Graitrix was a sot,
And all his Feat-Tricks are forgot;
But Duke Trinculo, and Tom Dory,
Will be a Famous Quack in Story.
Let every Scabby City Cuckoo,
Fly into Your Hedge-lane to look You.
If Seven Sons do Things so Rare,
In You Seven-fathers have a share.
Show us some more of these fine Mocks,
Show your Black Art, show your Black Box.
It Is thought you have there some pure Receipt.
Great Mountebank of our sick State.
Your Zany, who this Cure reveals,
Tells us in March your Highness heals.
LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Harris, and Sold by Langley Curtis in Goatham
Court, 1681.


