A SERIOUS EXAMINATION OF THE Independent's Catechism: AND THEREIN, Of the
Chief Principles of Nonconformity to, and Separation from, The CHURCH of
ENGLAND.

By BENJAMIN CAMFIELD, Rector of Whitwell in Derbyshire.

In two parts; The first General, the second more Particular.

Transfigurat se Satanas velut Angelum lucis, and de Scripturis saepe divinis
laqueum fidelibus parat. Ergo non te capiat haereticus, quia potest de
Scripturis aliqua exempla proferre. Utitur and Diabolus testimoniis
Scripturarum non ut doceat, sed ut fallat a S. Ambros. De secunda tentatione
Christi. LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne, for the Author: And are to be sold by
Henry Eversden, at his Shop under the Crown Tavern in West-Smith-field. 1668.

IMPRIMATUR,

Tho. Tomkyrs, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Domino Domino GILBERTO
Divina Providentia Archi. Ep. Cant. a Sac. Dom.
Ex Aed. Lambethanis Junii 12. 1668.
TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THe ensuing Treatise designs not so much the gratifying of the Learned, as the
satisfaction of the more ignorant, and misinformed; and the motive to this
public exposing of it unto view, is, a necessity rather of the Times, than of
the Thing it self. The very same truths have been frequently suggested by
eminent Defenders of the English Church, the most Reverend Whitgift, Hooker,
Andrews, Morton, Hammond, Sanderson, and others. But so long as old mistakes
and errors have the confidence to creep abroad into the World daily, in some or
other new Disguise, it is but charity to endeavor the removal of that
stumbling-stone, and rock of offense, which may be otherwise cast in the way of
the unskilful. The Book examined, is the sink indeed of all Nonconforming, and
Separating Principles from the Protestant Religion established in these
Kingdoms, under the modest Name of [A brief Instruction in the Worship of God,
and discipline of the Churches of the New Testament, by way of Question and
Answer, with an Explication, and Confirmation of those Answers. Printed 1667.
So in the Title page, and then contractedly in the head of the following pages.
[A short Catechism, with an Explication upon the same.]
] The Author I neither know, nor list to enquire after, but am content to leave
his character to thy discretion, upon the impartial perusal of that which
follows; wherein I have demonstrated him, First, False in his fundamental
Principle, that runs through all the rest; Secondly, False unto it: and so in
the first part undermined his general foundation; and in the second, cast down
the chief of his superstructures. -- If thou art a friend to the Holy
Scripture, it will offend thee, I am confident, to see it so much abused, under
a pretense of cleaving most exactly to it; if to the Reformed Interest, to find
it so disgraced, by opening a gap unto all confusions. But not to trouble thee
with a tedious preface, I crave no more belief at thy hands, than evidence
shall extort from thy Understanding; only, I beseech thee, to read without
prejudice, and consider what thou read; and, That God, the Father of Lights,
would guide us all into, and confirm us in the Truth, is the hearty Prayer of

Thy Well-wishing Friend and Servant B. C.

THE Independent's Catechism EXAMINED. In two Parts. Part I.
CHAP. I.
Error in first and foundation-Principles, most dangerous. The Catechist's
grand mistake noted. The Method of this first part, in order to the full
conviction thereof. The Protestant Doctrine of the perfection of H. Scripture,
as a rule and guide, restrained to matters of Divine belief and practice
necessary unto Salvation.

OF all Errors, none so pernicious, as those, which corrupt the first and
foundation-principles of our Discourse; for these communicate a leaven of
Falsehood unto all the consequences from thence inferred; and such is that,
which may be observed to run through the Catechism now examined, a principle
which comprizeth the whole mystery of Nonconformity and Separation in it is
bowels; viz.

That nothing must be done, o^ admitted of by us, in or about Religion, God's
worship and service, which himself has not commanded in the Holy Scriptures.
That whatsoever is not found instituted and comm^nded in the lord of God,
cannot be of Faith, and therefore the practice or allowance of it is upon that
account sinful. That the Word of God condem^eth not only what is done against
the warrant thereof, but that also which is done besides, or without it.

Now, to give this matter it is full consideration, I determine, by God's h^lp,
to speak distinctly unto these five particulars.

First, The common belief of Protestant Divines in this argument.

Secondly, The corruption and abuse of the Protestant Belief, by the Doctrine
of the Nonconforming Brethren.

Thirdly, The words, wherein our Catechist has declared his opinion.

Fourthly, The manifest falsehood of the Assertion. And,

Lastly, The genuine explication of those texts of Scripture, which are
pretended to countenance it.

As to the first of these; That which is owned among Protestants in common, is
This;

That the Holy Scriptures are the only, and sufficient guide and rule, in all
matters of necessary belief and observance in order unto salvation; able to
make us wise unto salvation; and therefore, Whosoever does either derogate from
this their perfection, or add any thing unto them, as necessary to be believed
or done in order unto Salvation, are certainly guilty of most presumptuous, and
unaccountable profaneness: and, This we justly tax the Church of Rome withal,
for enjoining of unwritten traditions, and Papal determinations, to be received
with an equal reverence unto the Holy Scriptures. But then it is not their
meaning, by virtue of this Declaration, to condemn all opinions, as false, and
actions, as unlawful, which the Holy Scripture prescribes not; or to extend
the perfection of Holy Scripture so far as the punctual determination of the
circumstantials of Divine worship. The perfection of God's Word is judged by
them with relation unto that special end whereto it is designed; viz. the
instruction of men in all things necessary unto salvation; the knowledge
whereof they could not otherwise attain unto, than by Divine revelation; for it
was not aimed to destroy, or extinguish the light of nature, but to help,
advance, and perfect it. It is not therefore any of God's purpose, in the Holy
Scriptures, to comprize all things which men may know, believe, or practice, as
if natural reason and discretion were no longer to continue it is guidance; or
to determine all rituals and circumstances appertaining to the external
ordering of Divine worship, so as to have nothing for Ecclesiastical laws to be
employed about. That, which they teach of the Scriptures sufficiency, is ever
restrained to matters of necessary belief and duties of necessary observance in
order unto salvation; and never enlarged to all things that may be believed or
done by us in the general, or to particular circumstances, which have respect
unto the good order, decency, and external regulation of Divine worship.

CHAP. II.
The Puritan disguises of this Protestant principle: 1st. That nothing at all
is to be done by us, without Scripture-Warrant: The absurdity of that,
declared. 2dly. That nothing is to be done, or admitted of, in or about
Religion, or the worship of God, at least without the warrant, 1st. of some
general precepts; or 2dly. examples in the written Word. Those additional
explications manifested to be impertinent, and retorted.

NOw let us see how this Protestant Doctrine has been disguised, mis-shaped,
and perverted by the separating Brethren.

At first, they misrepresented it in these general terms;

See Hooker Eccles. Pol. Book 2. and 3.
That the Scripture is in such sort the rule of humane actions, that simply,
Whatever we do and are not by it directed thereunto, the same is sin. To which
purpose they construed that of St. Paul, Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is "not of
faith, is sin. And indeed, if that place be to the purpose, it speaks
universally, and relates to humane and civil, as well as religious actions. But
of this Saying, afterward. See Chap. 7.


The Scriptures, as these men taught at first, must direct in all things, even
so far as the taking up of a rush or straw. But the opinion, in this extent of
it, has but few defenders. -- The Scripture plainly refers, in certain
cases, to a guide within man, the law of nature, written even in the Gentiles
hearts, Romans 2. And appeals more than once to our reasonable faculties: Yea,
and why, even of your salves, Luke 12.57.
judge ye not what is right? It leaves many things undetermined and
indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden, for men's choice and prudence to
take place; in reference unto which, St. Paul says, All things are lawful
form, 1 Cor. 10.23.
but all things are not expedient, etc. The Scripture makes use of many
arguments from natural reason, which it urges as motives unto duty, besides
the divine authority and revelation, which yet were only to be pressed, if that
alone did legitimate our actions. And this fancy once entertained, would prove
the torture of conscience, and disturbance of the world. The wrack of
conscience it must needs be; when for every particular of diet and clothing,
and the great variety of occurrences in life, it is obliged to seek out a
Scripture-warrant. And the disturber of the world, it would as certainly be:
for, admit this strange position, and it shall not be with Parents, Masters,
and Governors, as with the Centurion in the Gospel, who said to those under
him, Go, and they went; Do this, and they did it; but their Children, Servants,
and Subjects, will stand still, till their errand be warranted unto them by the
Scriptures; nay, we must have no Art or Trade professed, which, with the rules
of them, are not deducible from the Text of Scripture.

This device therefore failing, the proposition has been since new-molded, and
limited to this effect;

That nothing may be done and allowed in or about religion, the worship and
service of God, which is not warranted by some precept or example of Holy Writ.
"That the Scripture alone is to be our rule, not only in all the necessaries
and essentials of Faith and Worship, (as is granted by all Protestants) but in
the very circumstantials and rituals thereunto belonging; so that whatsoever is
not there prescribed, is upon that account sinful and unlawful. Hence their
usual speech is, Where is this, and the other rite, gesture, garb, etc.
commanded in Scripture? If no where commanded, it is not to be embraced; it is
an unwarrantable addition to God's word, a piece of superstition, will worship,
etc. Nothing is to be allowed of in God's Worship, but what is by himself
prescribed and commanded; at the least,

It must be either, First, Commanded in the general; or, Secondly, There must
be some example for it in the Word of God. For these two explications, some of
the wiser heads have made, if possible to salve all difficulties, to stop all
holes, and render the thing tolerably defensible.

But those their Explications are more mischievous to their cause, than they
may be aware of. For,

First, as to their general rules and commands; such as, doing all to God's
Glory, all to Edidification, doing to others as we would be done by, etc. These
are not commands of any determinate particular, but proh^bitions of every thing
contrary to those laws and rules, and approbations only of particulars that are
not contrary, but agreeable unto them. As when it was said to the daughters of
Zelophehad from God, Numb. 36.6.
Let them marry to whom they think meet, only to the family of the tribe of
their fathers shall they marry. They were not here absolutely commanded to
marry, much less to marry any particular man; only thus far limited; If they
did marry, he must be one of the tribe of their fathers, and in this tribe they
might please themselves. So when the Apostle says, Let all things be done
decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40.
he enjoyneth nothing in particular, but forbids, in the general, whatsoever
particulars are not according unto this qualification, leaving a liberty for
any of those specials, that may equally plead thereto. The like I might say of
others. And indeed these general rules they talk of, are not any commands for
religious worship only, but refer to our whole life, and are nothing else but
maxims of natural prudence and religious equity, Canons of the law written in
all men's hearts, which the reason of man approves of, but occasionally and
incidentally mentioned in Scripture, of force for the ordering men's actions,
before those Scriptures were in being; and such as would have so remained, had
they not been written. Such is St. Paul's heap of Vniversals; Philip. 4.8.
Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
(grave or venerable) whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any virtue, if there be any praise, think of these things. The Word of God (as
has been already intimated) presupposes, allows of, and establishes the
light of natural reason, and all sound collections and inferences made by
Reason from its self. Thus therefore it may pass for a great truth, That we may
not do any thing, which the Word of God does not either command, or, in the
general, allow of; but this Grant will be neither to their gain, nor to our
loss.

But then, secondly, As for that other addition of Examples in Scripture, unto
Commands; ^p. Sanderson Praf. to Sermon.
I find it well argued against them.

The adding of Examples unto Commands, in such manner, as in their assertion is
done, either signifies nothing, or overthrows all the rest; for that example
which is by them supposed sufficient for our warrantie, was it self either
warranted by some command, or former example, or it was not; If it were, then
the adding of it clearly signifies nothing, inasmuch as that warrant we have
by it proceeds not from it, but from that precedent command or example which
warranted it; but if it were not, then was it done merely upon the dictates of
prudence and reason; and then, if we be sufficiently warranted by that example
(as is by them supposed) to act after it, we are also sufficiently warranted to
act upon the mere dictates of prudence and reason, without the necessity of any
other, either command or former example for so doing. -But then, besides this,
Examples are of a very different and tickle nature; sometimes they are barely
related in Scripture, and neither commended nor dispraised; sometimes they are
praised, and yet so occasional, or extraordinary, that we may not presume to
imitate them; and if we would imitate them, the suiting of all circumstances of
our case to theirs (without which they are not our examples) is full of
difficulty; and when all is done, Examples are no farther a Law to us, than
they are conformed to some law or rule of God's, themselves. In short, Examples
are either of moral and necessary actions, and then they call for our
imitation, by virtue of that law, which they required before of others; or of
circumstantial and mutable actions, which others might have done, or left
undon, and then that cannot be necessary unto us in its self, which was not
necessary unto them in the same case.

But, after all, would the brethren of the separation stand to these their own
explications of Scripture-prescriptions by general rules, or examples, and rest
in what is so warranted and grounded; we might quickly hope for an end of
controversy with them, as having both these on our side against them. But these
are peculiar privileges and reservs for themselves to fly unto upon occasion,
and not to be granted unto us; for when we offer to justify our Church-rites
and observances by general precepts, rules, and permissions of Holy Scripture,
and many special examples there upon record, this will not serve our turn, but
they call for express texts from us for the enjoining of them.

They conclude themselves from examples, -- So and so it must necessarily be;
but we may not conclude from them, -- So and so it may be lawfully. Thus far in
the general.

CHAP. III.
The Catechist's opinion, as to this point, set down at large in his own words,
from above twenty places of his Book; and then summed up together, to be viewed
at once.

LEt the Catechist now speak his own opinion in his own words.

Page 8. [The ways and means of the worship of God are made known unto us in
and by the written Word only, which contains a full and perfect revelation of
the will of God, as to his whole worship, and all the concernments of it.]

Page 9. 10. [to the end that we might expect instruction from the written
Word alone, in his Worship, and act therein accordingly, he sends us, and
directs us thereto, expressly for that purpose, and not once intimates in the
least any other way or means of instruction to the end. He frequently affirms,
that it is sufficient, able, and perfect to guide us therein. He has commanded
us not to make any addition thereunto, and peculiarly interdicted us the use of
any such things as are of the institution or appointment of men.]

[Pag. 22. The Lord Christ is the absolute Lord over his own house, and He has
given out the Laws whereby he will have it guided and ruled, whilst it is in
this world.]

[Pag. 26. If we observe any thing in God's worship, but what he has
appointed, we cannot submit our souls and consciences to his authority therein.]

[Pag, 27. This is the first thing that Faith regards in Divine Worship; it
rests not in any thing, closes not with any thing but what it discerns that
God has commanded, and therein it eyes his authority as He has required it.]

[Pag. 28. Christ is to be considered in all our obedience, as the great, and
only Lawgiver of his Church.]

[Pag. 34. The outward manner of observance is to be kept entire, according to
the primitive institution of Christ, not admitting of any corruptions in it to
avoid the greatest trouble.]

[Pag. 35. 36. He is the Head and King of the Church, the next immediate and
special Lawgiver of it, appointing unto it all his ordinances, and its whole
worship, as it becomes him who is Lord of the house.]

[Pag. 42.43. The thing principally to be attended to in the manner of the
celebration of the Worship of God, and observation of the institutions and
ordinances of the Gospel, is, That we observe, and do all whatsoever the Lord
Christ has commanded us to observe in the way that he has prescribed, and
that we add nothing unto, or in the observation of them, that is of man's
invention or appointment.]

[Pag. 46. 47, 48. Whatsoever belongs unto to the Worship of God, in the way or
manner, whereby any of the Ordinances of Christ is to be performed, comes also
under the command of Christ, which is duly to be attended to, and observed.
Indeed, whatever is of this nature appointed by Christ, it does therefore
belong to the worship of God, and what is not so appointed, neither does, nor
can be any part thereof. Of this nature are the celebration of all other
Ordinances, with Prayer; for every thing is sanctified by the word of God, and
Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. Of some of them indispensably in the Assemblies of the
Church, 1 cor. 10.16, 17. -- 11.20, 24, 25, 33. with care in the observation of
the general rules of Love, Modesty, Condescension, and Prudence, doing all
things decently and in order, 1 Cor. 11.33. -- 14.40. Gestures in some sacred
actions, Matt. 26.20, 26. John 13.23. all which the Church is diligently to
enquire into, as things that belong to the Pattern of the House of God, the
goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, the forms thereof, and the
ordinances thereof, promised to be showed unto it, Ezekiel. 43.11. To attend
carefully to their observation, is its duty, being left at liberty to all other
circumstances, which no authority of man can give any real relation to the
Worship of God unto.]

[Pag. 48. The persuasion of some, that the Lord has not prescribed all things
wherein his worship is concerned, seems to proceed from a negligence in
enquiring after what he has so prescribed.]

[Pag. 49. A principal part of the duty of the Church in this matter, is, to
take care that nothing be admitted or practiced in the worship of God, or as
belonging thereunto, which is not instituted and appointed by the Lord Christ.]

[In its care, faithfulness, and watchfulness herein, consists the principal
part of its Loyalty unto the Lord Jesus, as the Head, King, and Lawgiver of
his Church, and, which to stir us up unto, He has left so many severe
interdictions, and prohibitions in his Word, against all additions to his
commands, upon any pretense whatever.]

[Pag. 54. 55. All such inventions (he speaks expressly of Religious Rites,
appointed by the Church to farther Devotion, Decency, and Order) are in
themselves needless, and, because forbidden, unlawful to be observed.]

[Pag. 62. Although they are not in particular, and expressly in the Scripture
forbidden, for it was A simple expression, as to omniscient omnipotency.
Morally impossible might have passed.
simply impossible, that all instances wherein the wit of man might exercise
its invention in such things, should be reckoned up, and condemned, yet they
fall directly under those severe prohibitions, which God has recorded to
secure his worship from all such additions unto it, of what sort soever.]

[Pag. 62. 63. Yea, the main design of the second Precept, is, to forbid all
making unto our selves any such things in the worship of God, to add unto what
he has appointed; whereof an instance is given, in that of making, and
worshipping of Images, the most common way that the sons of men were then prone
to transgress by, against the institutions of God.]

Page 64. And there is yet further evidence contributed unto this intention of
the Command, from those places where such evils and corruptions as were
particularly forbidden in the worship of God, are condemned; not on the special
account of their being so forbidden, but on that more general, of being
introduced without any warrant from Gods Institutions and Commands, Jer. 7.31.
19, 5.]

Page 64. 65. The Papists say indeed, that all additions corrupting the Worship
of God, are forbidden: but such as further, adorn, and preserve it, are not so;
which implies a contradiction: for, whereas every addition is principally a
corruption, because it is an addition, under which notion it is forbidden, (and
that in the worship of God, which is forbidden, is a corruption of it) there
can be no such preserving, and adorning addition, unless we will allow a
preserving, and adorning corruption. Neither is it of more force which is
pleaded by them, That the additions which they make, belong not unto the
substance of the Worship of God, but unto the circumstances of it; for every
circumstance observed religiously, or to be observed in the worship of God, is
the substance of it; as were all those ceremonious observances of the Law,
which had the same respect in the prohibitions of adding, with the most weighty
things whatsoever.]

[Pag 78. God is jealous of our discharge of our Duty in this matter,
accounting our neglect of his worship, or profanation of it, by inventions and
additions of our own, to be spiritual disloyalty, whoredom, and adultery, which
his Soul abhors, for which he will cast off any Church or people, and that
for ever.]

[ Ibid. which repudiated condition is the state of many Churches in the World;
however they please, and boast themselves in their meretricious ornaments and
practices.]

Page 79. 80. God has given many signal Instances of his severity against
persons, who, by ignorance, neglect, or regardlesness, have miscarried, in not
observing exactly his Will and Appointment, in, and about his Worship; Nadab
and Abihu; Korah, Dathan, etc.]

[Pag. 82. That by Fornication and Whoredom in the Church, the adulterating of
the Worship of God, and the admission of false, self-invented worship, in the
room thereof, whereof God is jealous, is intended, the Scripture every where
declares.]

[Pag. 87. Our Lord Jesus Christ being King and Head of his Church, the Lord
over the house of God; nothing is to be done therein but with respect to his
authority.]

[Pag. 88. 89. In all things that are done, or to be done, with respect to the
worship of God in the Church, the authority of Christ is always principally to
be considered; and every thing to be observed as commanded by him, without
which consideration, it has no place in the worship of God.]

[Pag. 88. The suitableness of any thing to right reason, or the light of
nature, is no ground for a Church-observation of it, unless it be also
appointed and commanded in special by Jesus Christ.]

[Pag. 54. To a real Evangelical institution of Worship, it is required, that it
be a command of Christ, manifested by his Word on Example, proposed to our
imitation.]

[Pag. 135. To a question concerning lawfulness, he answers, Neither of these
has either Warrant, or President in Scripture.] And again,

[Pag. 139. It has no Warrant in the Scripture, no Law nor Institution of
Christ, or his Apostles, no Example to give it countenance.]

All which put together, amounts to thus much;

That all the concernments of God's Worship are prescribed in Scripture; from
whence alone we are to receive instruction about them, being thereby
interdicted the use of any thing appointed by man; That nothing must be there
admitted, but what Faith sees God to have commanded, or Christ to have
instituted; no, not in the outward manner of observance; That Christ has given
out his Laws for the ordering of all things in the Church, and nothing is to be
added unto, or in, or about his Institutions. That if any affirm, Christ has
not prescribed all things, wherein his Worship is concerned ( viz. his outward
worship, and the manner of it) he proclaims his own negligence in enquiring
thereinto. That all Rites appointed by the Church, to further Devotion,
Decency, and Order, are not only needless, but unlawful to be used, because
forbidden; though not particularly and expressly, yet falling under those severe
prohibitions, which God has recorded to secure His Worship from all such
additions to it, of what sort soever. Yea, the second Command is mainly
designed and intended against them. That all additions are therefore
corruptions, because additions; and no circumstance so inconsiderable in this
case, as not to become of the substance of God's Worship, when appointed to be
observed in it. That the admission of these inventions of men, in God's
service, is Spiritual disloyalty, adultery, and whoredom, which God is most
jealous of, and his Soul abhors, and for which, He will cast off any Church
or People for ever; and, This repudiated, divorced condition, many Churches are
at present in, however they please themselves in their Whorish ornaments and
practices. That if they do, either by Ignorance, neglect, or Carelessness
miscarry in this their Duty, of not practicing any thing, in, or about Gods
Worship, which Christ has not appointed; they are to expect those signal
instances of severity, to be made good upon themselves, which God declared
against Nadab and Abihu, Corah, Dathan, etc. and the Whore of Babylon in the
Revelations. Nor have they any way left to excuse themselves; for it is not any
such low Principle, as Right Reason, or the Light of Nature, which will serve
the turn for a Church-observance; no, not in circumstantials, for the outward
manner of performing Worship unto God; but there must be a command, and
appointment in special from Christ, manifested by his Word or Example, a
Scripture-warrant or President. -- And now, I think, he has plainly enough
delivered his mind.

CHAP. IV.
The falsehood of his general opinion demonstrated from the practice of all
Churches. First, Of the Jewish Church; wherein the Instances are, The rites
used by them in swearing, putting the hand under the thigh, or lifting it up to
Heaven. Jacob's Pillar and Vow. The Gileadites Altar on the other side Jordan.
The Heap and Pillar between Laban and Jacob, at their covenant. Joshua's great
Stone set up at Sechem. Solomon's new Altar. The Stone of Bethshemesh. Samuel's
Altar at Ramah. David's pious resolution for building the Temple. Determinate
hours of Prayer, thrice a Day; the Third, the Sixth, the Ninth hour. The
erecting Oratories and Synagogues for God's service and worship, and several
things observable in them. Set Festivals, for which there was no Divine
Precept. The days of Purim. Solomon's seven days for the dedication of the
Altar. Hezekiah's seven days added to the Passover. The Feast of Dedication
in Winter. Stated Fasts voluntarily undertaken, or enjoined. The fast of the
fourth, fifth, seventh, and tenth month, in Zechary. Weekly Fasts of the
Pharisees, and John the Baptist's Disciples, no where reproved otherwise than
for the hypocrisy of some observers of them, Anna's commendation for
worshipping God with such Fasts. The custom of the religious Jews, fasting
every day till Morning Prayer, and on their Sabbaths and Festivals, till noon.
The rites used at the Passe-over, and other Festivals; at Circumcision,
Marriage, and Burial.

I Am, in the next place, to demonstrate the falseness of this general
Principle, so much relied upon, That nothing may be admitted, or done, in, or
about, the Worship of God, for the external regulation of it, as to Solemnity,
Devotion, Order, and Decency, which is not commanded and instituted in the Word
of God. Now,

This I shall sufficiently perform, by evidencing in particulars, That God
never had, nor has such a Church in the World, as has kept close to this
observance; but the contrary has been practiced in the Churches both of the
Old and New Testament, without any blame: and therefore, as it is, so it of
right may be practiced in the Churches of Christ, to the end of the world. It
being a point of most insolent madness (as St. Austin sometime said) not to
think that rightly done, Insolentissimae insoniae est, existimare non recte
fieri quod ab universa Ecclesia fit. August. Ep. 118.
which is the practice of the universal Church; how much more then, to leave
all the Churches of Christ for this, in a repudiated condition? Now therefore
to the Instances themselves. And,

First, For the Jewish Church, we have these severals, offering themselves to
our consideration.

1. The rite of putting the hand under the thigh in swearing, Genesis
24.2.3.47.29.31.
first imposed by Abraham on his servant; and afterward prescribed by Jacob
unto Joseph, either in token of Subjection, or some mystical signification,
relating unto the promised Seed expected from Abraham's loins; or else, the
other more common Rite of lifting up the hand to Heaven, Genesis 14.22.
when they did swear, (in allusion whereto the Oaths of God himself, and the
Angels, Deuteronomy. 32 40. Dan. 12.7. Rev. 10.5.
are so in like manner described) a natural sign (without any Institution) of
appeal unto that God, who dwells in Heaven.

2. Jacob's voluntary erecting of a Stone, Genesis 28.18.19.20, 22.
whereon he slept, and had the Vision, for a pillar; and consecrating thereof,
by the pouring oil thereon, for an house of God, calling the place by the name
of Bethel. i. e. the House of God, and dedicating it to God by a Vow with the
tenth of all that God should give him. An act for which he had no Command, and
yet so acceptable unto God, that he afterward gives a Testimony of his liking
it. Genesis 31.13.
I am the God of Bethel (says he) where thou anointedst the Pillar, and where
thou vowedst a vow unto me. Add hereunto,

3. The Gileadites building an Altar on the other side Jordan, to testify
their joint faith, Joshua 22.10.27, 34.
and profession with their Brethren; calling of it ED, i. e. A witness that the
Lord is God.

Whereto may be annexed, Genesis 31.45.46, 47, 48, etc.
the heap and pillar reared between Jacob and Laban at their covenant, called
by the one Iegar-Sahaduthe in Syriac; by the other in Hebrew, Galeed; both
importing an heap of witness, Josh. 24.26, 27.
And Joshua's taking a great stone, and setting it up in Sechem, to be a
witness unto the people, lest they denied their God, after their covenant with
him there.

1 Kings. 8.64
4. Solomon's appointing of a new Altar, whereas God commanded but one; upon the
equitable reason only, that the Brazen Altar sufficed not for the
burnt-offerings. Whereto may be added, the Stone of Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6.14.
whereon they sacrificed; 1 Samuel 7.17.
and the Altar which Samuel built at his own house at Ramah; neither of them by
Divine Command or Institution.

1 Chronicles. 27.7, 8.2^.2, 3.29, 3.
5. David's pious resolution, and preparation, for building an House and Temple
unto God, upon the motives of his private zeal only, and without any precept
from God; for God did, upon some peculiar reasons, prohibit him the execution;
and yet, notwithstanding this pious resolution of his was commended, and
allowed of, not only by Nathan the Prophet, 2 Samuel 7.2, 3, 4.
upon the apparent evidence of the goodness of it, before the Word of God came
unto him about it; but also by God himself, saying unto David, whereas it was
in thine heart to build an house unto my name, 1 Kings 8.18, 19.
thou did well, that it was in thine heart; nevertheless thou shall not build
the house, etc. Yea, and it is after this pleaded before God, in prayer, as a
signal pledge of David's affection and piety toward God, Psalm 132.1, 2, 3, 4,
5.

6. The Customary observance of certain determinate hours of Prayer, thrice a
day. Thus David. Psalm. 55.17.
Evening and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall
hear my voice. Dan. 6.10.
Thus Daniel. He went into his house, and, his windows being open, in his
chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and
prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did before time. Thus the third,
the sixth, and the ninth hour, Acts 2.15.10, 9.3, 1.
were the times of prayer, at our B. Savior's coming, and observed also by his
Apostles.

7. The setting up of Synagogues and Oratories for the more convenient service
and worship of God, in their respective cities; which are also called, the
houses of God in their land, Psalm. 74.8.83.12.
though we read not of their Divine Institution; and the Jews wrote over the
doors of entrance, This is the Gate of the Lord; taken from Psalm 118.20. Such
an Oratory, or place of prayer, Act. 16.13, 16. (...). ubi ex recepto more erat
aut solebat esse. Proseucha. Heinsius. St. Luke 7.4; 5.
whereto the devout Jews assembled daily, we read of, by a river's side, where
God opened Lydia's heart, at St. Paul's preaching. And for the Building of a
Synagogue, the Centurion is recommended to our B. Savior, as a person
singularly well deserving of the Jewish Nation.

Now it is farther observable of their Synagogues; That they were built in High
places of their Cities, and higher than their own houses.

That out of reverence to them, none were suffered to make them Thorow-fares,
or to use them for common matters.

That in every Synagogue was an ark or chest, wherein they laid the book, in
resemblance of the Ark of the Covenant.

That, when they prayed, they turned their faces toward that Ark, as a
monitory sign of the Ark of God, and his dwelling between the Cherubims.

That they had appointed Officers, Chief Rulers, Scribes, and Ministers,
answering to the High Priest, Priests, and Porters in the Temple.

That men and women were distinguished in their ranks and seats in the Temple.
And,

That the Scriptures were read there, by certain Sections, Act. 15.21.
every Sabbath day.

These are points commonly acknowledged by the Jewish Antiquaries; and yet is
not the building of Synagogues, or the ordering of God's service in them, at
any time blamed by our Savior, S. Luk 4.16, 20.
or his Apostles; nay, we find them frequenting of them, and conforming to
them. It was our B. Savior's custom to go into the Synagogue every Sabbath
day; and there he stood up for to read, and there was delivered to him the
Book, which he afterward closed, and gave it again to the Minister, as, they
say, it was the manner of the Scribes, when they had read the Text. Totum
regimen Ecclesiarum Christi conformatu^ fuit and Synagogarum exemplar. Grot. In
Act. 11, 30.13, 1.
Nay, It is the judgment of the Learned, that our B. Savior and his Apostles,
in the Government of the Church, had a special eye to the pattern of the Jewish
Synagogues.

8. The observation of certain Festivals, for which they had no special
precept, or institution from God.

Such were the days of Purim, observed by some for three days, and appointed
to be observed two days yearly: in the 14. and 15. days of the Month Adar.
The Jews ordained, Hester 9.27.28, 29.
says the Text, and took upon them, and their seed, and upon all such as
joined themselves unto them, that it should not fail, that they would keep
those days, according to the writing, and according to the appointed time
every year, and that those days be remembered and kept throughout every
generation, every family, every province, and every city, etc. In which days
they read the History of Esther in their Synagogues.

Such were the seven days, 2 Chronicles. 7.9.
wherein Solomon, and all Israel with him, kept the dedication of the Altar.

Such the seven days also added by Hezekiah and the Princes, 2 Chronicles. 30.23,
27.
when they kept the passover fourteen days together, celebrated by the people
with gladness, and not without a token of Divine acceptance.

Such also the Feast of the Dedication, in the Book of Maccabees, after the
purging of the Temple (profaned by Antiochus) and the re-building of an Altar
in the room of that which he had violated. 1 Mac. 4.56, 59.
They kept the Dedication of the Altar eight days, and offered burnt-offerings
with gladness, and sacrificed the sacrifice of deliverance, and of praise.
Moreover, Judas and his brethren, with the whole congregation of Israel,
ordained, that the days of the dedication of the Altar should be kept in their
season, from year to year, by the space, of eight days, etc. Yea, 2 Ma^c. ^.1^.
and they wrote to the Jews at Egypt, that they also should keep it at the same
time, etc. This Feast the Jews call (...) and (...), i. e. The Feast of Light,
and burning of Candles, (not unlike the name Candlemas) an account whereof is
given by some, from the strange kindling of fire to consume their sacrifices;
by others, See 2 Mac. 10.3.
from the lighting up of many Candles at this Festival. Of this Feast of
Dedication in Winter, we read in the Gospel of St. John, S. John 10.22, 23.
and how that our B. Savior graced, and approved it, by his presence in the
Temple; as Divines are wont to argue his approbation of the marriage feast, S.
John 2.
by his presence at it.

9. Certain days and times of fasting voluntarily enjoined, or kept by them.
Of this sort were those mentioned by the Prophet Zecharie, Zech. 7.
instituted by the Jews in the time of their exile, for a remembrance of sad
Providence that had befallen them, the Fast of the fourth, fifth, seventh, and
tenth month, and continued by them after their return; as appears by their
Calendar, and the consentient testimonies of men well acquainted with their
practice. The Fast of the fourth month, in remembrance of the breaking down of
their Walls. Jer. 52.6.
The Fast of the fifth month, in remembrance of the burning of their Temple. v.
12.
The Fast of their seventh month, in remembrance of the murder of Gedaliah,
whom the King of Babylon had deputed their Governor. Jer. 41.2.
And, the Fast of the tenth month, in remembrance of the siege, 2 Kings 25.1.
and taking of their City. And I should wonder (says Grotius upon the Prophet
Zecharie) it should ever come to be disputed, Quod an populo liceat, disputati
hoc saeculo mirarer, nisi contradicendi libido omnia de certis incerta faceret.
Grot. in Zech. 3.3.
(whether or no such like Fasts might be appointed, and observed by a people,
without Divine command) but that the spirit and lust of contradiction, can make
of certain things uncertain.

Nor had they only these anniversarie Fasts, returning upon certain months
among them, but also weekly Fasts, in reference unto which it is said, the
Disciples of the Pharisees, S Mat. 9.14. (...). St. Luk 5.33. (...). S. Mark
2.18. St. Luke 18.12.
and of John, did fast much and often; used to fast. As to the Pharisees, that
strictest Sect of the Jews, they, we read, fasted twice a week, on the Monday
and Thursday of every week. And when it was demanded of our Savior, Why his
Disciples also did not fast, as the Disciples of John and the Pharisees, were
wont to do; he only excuses them for their Present state, but affirms of them,
that, after the departure of him the Bridegroom, They should fast in those
days, even so fast. S. Mark 2.25
And it is these settled fasts, voluntarily undertaken, that He speaks unto, in
his Sermon upon the Mount; St. Matt. 6.16, 1^.
and it is nothing but the Pharisaism and hypocrisy of this kind of Fast, that
He at any time decryes. When ye fast, says he, be not as the hypocrites; but
he supposes them nevertheless to fast; nay, he adds a reward to such Fasts for
substance, as the hypocrites observed, when sincerely performed. Thy Father
which sees thee to fast in secret, shall reward thee openly. Yea, these
ordinary fasts are reckoned by St. Luke part of the Divine Worship, which he
commends Anna for; of whom he says, That she departed not from the Temple, S.
Luke 2.37. (...)
serving (or worshipping) God in prayers and fastings night and day. His
meaning is not, that she dwelt, or continued always in the Temple; for in the
next Verse mention is made of her coming thither; but that she forsook it not
at the set times; that she constantly frequented the Temple at the hours of
prayer; and used in like manner a constant observation of fasting, and thereby
worshipped God; As it is said of the Apostles, after Christ's ascension, that,
8. Luke 24.53.
they were continually in the temple, praising, and blessing God. i. e. the
Temple at Jerusalem, was the place, not of their continual abode, but of their
constant, daily performance of their Devotions.

This then is Anna's commendation, That she constantly frequented the Temple,
and performed those acts of piety, prayer, and fasting, constantly at the
prescribed, and accustomed seasons of those duties; viz. fasting twice a week,
and observing the daily hours of Prayer. And if in this she is said to serve
and worship God, we need not fear dishonouring, or displeasing of Him by the
like observance. And now I may add farther, that it was usual with the
Religious Jews, to fast every day till the third hour; i. e. nine of the clock
in the morning, the hour of Prayer, and upon Sabbaths and Festivals unto the
sixth hour; i. e. twelve of the clock. As to the first of these, St. Peter's
apology at Pentecost, when they were charged with drunkenness, seems grounded
upon it; Act. 2.15. Grot. in loc.
These are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the
day, that is, the time of Matins, whereto, men indifferently pious, resorted
fasting. And as to the later, it is not improbable but the Heathens did
therefore so often upbraid the Jews with fasting on their Sabbaths; Hooker
Eccl. ^ol. l. 5.
and to this also some refer the Jews finding fault with our Lord's Disciples,
St. Matt. 12. Hebraeorum illa fuit a majoribus tradita, and usu recepta ac
tanquam lege probata consuetudo, ut non liceret diebus fostis culquam ante
sextam horam providere. Baron. tom. 1. Ann. 35. Number. 243.
for rubbing a few cars of corn to eat, as they walked on the Sabbath day,
which may seem rather a breach of their customarie fast till noon, than of the
rest from work and labor then required. But enough of this Head.

10. I should be tedious, if I enlarged this Catalogue, as I might, by adding
the Jewish rites at the Passover and other Festivals, at Circumcision,
Marriage, and Burials. I will therefore but touch upon them.

At the Passover they varied the first ceremony of Standing, Exodus 12.11. S.
Matt. 26.19, 20. S. John 13.5.
into the fashion of lying on beds; and then put off their shoos before lying
down, whereas at first it was required to eat it with their shoos on. They
added a thick sauce in memory of the clay and mortar in Egypt; and used red
wine, for a remembrance that Pharaoh shed the blood of their children. They had
special forms of blessing the bread and the cup, both here, and at other
Festivals: and they sung an Hymn, beginning at the 113. and reaching to the end
of the 118. Psalm. They had frequent washings, St. Mat. 15.
(as Calvin well observes) Christ did not simply reprove their washings, (for
then would he not have suffered, without reproof, the six water pots, S. Ioh.
2.) but their intention, and opinion of necessity and holiness about them.

At Circumcision, They left a void chair for Elias; The Witness held the Child
in his arms, etc.

As to their Marriages; the manner of their betrothing, by a piece of Money,
Writing, etc.

The Marriage it self in an Assembly of ten men, with blessings and praises to
God; the Marriage Feast seven days, etc.

And as to their Burials; washing the body of the deceased, embalming of it,
the form of their sepulchers, their inscriptions upon them, etc. These are
matters easily to be supplied by an overly Inspection into the Jewish
Antiquities. Now,

When we can see a Command and Institution from God, produced for these
severals, and not till then, we may conclude, That the Church of the Jews were
governed by this principle we have under our examination,

CHAP. V.
(2) Of the Church of the New Testament, in the time of Christ and his
Apostles, wherein the instances are; Christ's approbation of those rites and
usages among the Jews, which were not founded upon a Divine Command. His
Apology for, and commendation of, the two women that Anointed him; whereto is
added, the story of the good women at his Sepulcher, and of Joseph of
Arimathea. His frequenting the Synagogues, and demeaning himself according to
their Customs. His carriage at the Passover, and the institution of his own
Supper. The observance in the Church of Jewish customs and ordinances, a long
time after their conversion to Christianity. Certain things imposed on the
Gentiles, by way of compliance with the Jews, to avoid offense and division.
The Sabbath day kept with the first day of the week. The holy Kiss. The
Lovefeasts. St. Paul's injunctions in order to the decency of Divine worship,
that the man be uncovered, and the woman covered; with the concluding of that
matter of Ceremony, against the contentious, by the custom of the Churches.

ANd so, I pass on, secondly, to the Church of the New Testament; and that,

First, in the time of Christ and the Apostles; wherein we may observe these
instances;

1. Our B. Savior himself did approve of, and conform unto those rites and
practices among the Jews, which were not founded upon any Divine Precept.

A special evidence of this we have, in his apologizing for, and commending of
the affectionate deportment of two good women, toward himself, with their
cruses of oil, and sweet ointment, (such entertainment being usual with the
Jews, at their feasts, and related to by David's expressions, Psalm. 23.5.) --
The first story we have in the Pharisee's house, by a woman that had been a
sinner; St. Luke 7.37, 38. etc.
she brought a cruse of Ointment, and stood at his feet behind him, weeping,
and began to wash his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hair of her
head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with ointment. This was her
ceremonious observance, The Pharisee (whose name probably was Simon) takes
exceptions at Christ's enduring her approaches to him, being a sinner; but
Christ answers him first with a Parable, and then so applies it, as to make a
comment upon the several acts of the woman's love, whom upon that account he
assures of the pardon of her sins. Ver. 44.45, etc.
He turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, See thou this woman? I entered
into thine house, thou gave me no water for my feet, (a festival expression
of the most ordinary sort among them;) "but she has washed my feet with tears,
and wiped them with the hair of her head. Thou gave me no kiss; (the
familiar and customary way of salutation at first entrance;) but this woman,
since the time I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil
thou did not anoint (an usual ceremony at the Jewish feasts, as was before
intimated;) "but this woman has anointed my feet with ointment. Wherefore I
say unto thee, her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much, etc.

The other story is of Mary the sister of Lazarus, St. Matt. 26.6, 7, etc.
in the house of Simon the Leper at Bethanie. S. Mark 14.3. S. John 12.3.
She brings a cruse of very precious ointment to Christ, a little before his
death, and poured it on his head, as he sat, or lay, at meat. St. John adds,
that she anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair, and the
house was filled with the odor of the ointment. Whereupon the indignation of
some of the Disciples, the covetous traitor Judas by name, was moved, and
vented its self by this check and reproof. To what purpose is this waste? for
this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor. But Christ
immediately chides this impertinency, and declares a better resentment of
Marie's kindness. Why trouble ye the woman? for she has wrought a good work
upon me; for ye have the poor alvvayes with you, but me ye have not always;
for in that she has poured this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial,
(not that she designed that, but Christ converts her kindness into that
significancie, from the present time of it, and the aptness of the thing it
self) "Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the
whole world, there shall also this that this woman has done, be told for a
memorial of her. -- Mary certainly had no warrant for this out of the written
word, and yet our Savior owns it for a Good Work, and such a goodwork, as
should be preached all the world over for a memorial of her. -- Now unto
these, for the honor of the Sex, I might add those other devout women, 3 Mark
16.1, 2.
(whose praise is also in the Gospel) that having bought svveet spices, came
early to our Savior's Sepulcher, to anoint him: -- and, to bear them them
company, that honorable Counselor Joseph of Arimathea, Chapter 15.43.45.
who having craved the body of Jesus, brought fine linen, and took him down,
and vvrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulcher, which was hevven
out of a rock, etc.

I have before suggested our Savior's allowance of the Feast of Dedication, by
his presence in the Temple; and it were easy to declare, how, upon occasion,
he complied with the customary usages of the Jews, that had any usefulness in
them, though no where commanded, How he frequented the Synagogues, and
demeaned himself in them, I touched occasionally upon the mention of them. I
will only now point to his carriage at the Passover, and the institution of
his own Supper thereupon. The form of the Jews in their more solemn feasts, is
thus described to us by the Learned; P. Fagius in Deuteronomy. 8.10.
First of all, the Master of the Family sitting down with his guests, takes a
cup of wine in his right hand, and then begins thus to pray, Blessed be
Thou, O Lord our God, King of the world, who createst the fruit of the Vine!
Which said, he suppeth of the wine himself, and then gives it to be tasted of
by all at the Table. This prayer the Hebrews call Kiddusch; i. e.
Sanctification: and with this, Christ is thought to have begun his Supper, as
St. Luke describes it to us; S. Luke 22.17, 18.
Having taken the cup, he gave thanks, and said, Take it, and divide it among
your selves, for I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine,
until the Kingdom of God shall come. Then after the blessing of the cup, he
takes a loaf of bread, and holding it in both hands, consecrates it with these
words; Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, who bring bread out of the earth!
Which said, he eats a morsel himself, and distributes to all in like manner at
the table. This finished, they fall to their other cheer, and when they have
done, the Master of the Family, or chief person present, gives thanks after
this manner; Holding a cup of wine in both hands, he thus begins; Let us bless,
or, give thanks to him who has fed us of his own, and by whose goodness we
live. Which said, the Guests make answer, Blessed be He whose bread we eat, and
by whose goodness we live. This Grace the Hebrews call Bircath hamason, i. e.
blessing of the meat; and This now is the cup wherewith Christ, after Supper,
did commend the mystery of his blood to his Disciples. After this, He that
began, proceeds in a long Prayer; which ended, he says, with a loud voice,
holding the cup in his hand, as at first, Blessed be Thou, O Lord our God, King
of the world, who createst the fruit of the Vine; and so drinking of the wine,
he distributes it about unto the rest, and thus their feast both begins and
ends with the blessing of the cup. Which rite, our B. Savior in like manner
observed in his Holy Supper, as St. Luke relates it. Likewise also the cup
after Supper, saying, This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed
for you. -- I might pursue this matter, as to other circumstances also, but I
forbear.

2. Come we next to the Apostles of Christ, and the Church founded by them.

That which offers it self first to my thoughts here, is, The observance of
Jewish customs and ordinances, for a long time, even among those of them that
were converted to Christianity, when the real obligation of Moses Law could not
be pleaded. Insomuch, that when St. Paul, after much successful labor among
the Gentiles in his minstry, came to Jerusalem, James the Bishop of the place
(as is most probable) with the Elders there present, thus bespeaks him. Thou
see, Brother, Act. 21.20. to 27.
how many thousands of the Jews there are which believe, and they are all
zealous of the Law; and they are informed of thee, that thou teach all the
Jews that are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, that they ought not
to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs. What is it
therefore? the multitude must needs come together, for they will hear that thou
art come. Do therefore this that we say to thee. We have four men which have a
Vow on them; Them take, and purify thy self with them, and be at charges with
them, that they may shave their heads, (in token, it is like, of the vow
expired) and all may know, that those things whereof they were informed
concerning thee, are nothing, but that thou thy self also walk orderly, and
keep the Law. As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have written, and
concluded, that they observe no such thing, save only that they keep themselves
from things offered to Idols, and from blood, and from strangled, and from
fornication. Then Paul took the men, and the next day, purifying himself with
them, entered into the Temple, etc. -- The Christian Jews were permitted a
while to retain the Mosaical observances, though not really obligatory in the
force of a Law and Command, after the death of Messiah. And S. Paul himself,
upon certain motives, does at this time conform, for their satisfaction; Act.
16.3.
as he before circumcised Timothy, because of the Jews which were in those
quarters. And though this was not urged on the Gentiles practice upon the score
of their Christianity, who were never under the obligation of the Mosaical Law;
yet we find also certain things enjoined them too, by way of compliance with
the Jews, among whom they lived, and to avoid offense, which otherwise were not
imposed by a Divine Command, As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have
written, and concluded, etc. The speech referrs to that Solemn Decree before
passed, in that first Christian Council we read of, Acts 15. Act. 15.
where these matters are called necessary things, though not under any Divine
Command or Institution as to the Gentiles, v. 29.
abstaining from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from strangled;
from which, if you keep your selves, ye shall do well. Necessary, viz. for the
satis;faction of the Jews, and necessary too to be observed, Act. 16.4.
because then appointed and ordained so to be in that Council there assembled:
viz. so long as the ground and occasion should continue; for we find S. Paul
afterward granting liberty in certain cases, 1 Cor. 10.25, 27.
to partake, without scruple, of things offered unto Idols.

Evident it is (to name one particular more) that the first Christians (as that
custom continued long in the East) did use to assemble on the Sabbath day, as
well as the first day of the week; and therefore neither did they fast on the
Sabbath (our Saturdy) for the festivity of the day, (...). Ignat. ad Phil.
Sabbatum nunquam nisi in Fascha jejunandum. Tertull. de jejun.
except that only before Easter, as Ignatius and Tertullian tell us. Not that
they kept their Sabbath with a Jewish rigor, as to the Rest of it, but yet, as
a day separate for their Christian conventions. And there are of the Learned,
who refer that of S. James spoken in the Council^ at Jerusalem to the Christian
Assemblies, Act. 15.21.
where Moses is said to be read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day. But I
will not enlarge this matter farther.

A second instance may be, that holy kiss, or kiss of peace, observed in the
Christian Assemblies, and so frequently recommended to practice in the
Apostolical Epistles; Romans 16.16. 1 Cor. 16.20. 2 Cor. 13.12. 1 These. 5.26. 1
S. Pet. 1.14.
Salute one another with an holy kiss. Greet all the brethren with an holy
kiss. Greet ye one another with a kiss of Charity. It being the manner then to
part with benedictions, and mutual wishes of Charity, they expressed as much by
this significant Ceremony of salutation. Quae oration cum divortio sancti osculi
integra?

Osculum pacis, quod est signaculum orationis. Tertul. de orat.

(...).

Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Facile crediderim jam ab aetate Apostolorum coenae
administrationi conjunctum osculum fuisse. Calv. in 1 Cor. 16.20. Osculum
frequens ac pervulgatum benevolentiae symbolum fuisse apud Judaes passim ex
Scripturis liquet, apud Romanos minus forte usitatum, neque tamen insolens erat
-- in motem transiit apud veteres ut Christiani ance coenae communicationem se
mutuo oscularentur ad testandam eo signo amicitiam, deinde eleemosynas
conferrent, ut id quod repraesentaverant osculo re quoqua and effectu
comprobatent. -- Id. in Romans 16.16. prout citatur in expos. Ecclesiast.


Tertullian therefore calls it, the S^al of Prayer; and Justin Martyr
describing their Church-meetings, says, when we have made an end of Prayers,
we salute one another with a kiss. And Calvin himself thinks, it was used, at,
or before, the celebration of the Supper, from the age of the Apostles. Now
this was certainly a common token of Love and Benevolence, familiarly in use,
adopted into the service of Religion, and that without any special command from
God.

A Third instance may be given, in those Love Feasts, or feasts of Charity,
which were wont to accompany the holy Communion; in which Feasts, at the cost
and charge of the rich, there was entertainment for the poor also; and the
whole design was to signify and preserve Christian love. St. Jude St. Jude v.
12.
mentions these by their name; 2 Pet. 2.11. (...).
and St. Peter in like manner, points to the same, however mistaken, and
mis-translated in several Versions; both taxing the corrupt Gnostiques, as
spots and blemishes in their Feasts of Charity, when they feasted with them,
feeding without fear i. e. luxuriously. And the phrase of breaking bread in the
New Testament, is thought, by some learned men, to referr to this whole Feast,
and not only the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: and the Lord's Supper
mentioned by S. Paul, 2 Cor. 11.20.
is to be understood also for the whole feast, including both the Agape and the
Eucharist, being immediately joined together. And the whole design of the
Apostle there is to reprove the abuses crept into this Observance, so contrary
to the nature, and end of it. For whereas these Love Feasts were a degree of
imitation of that more fervent, and abundant charity in the first Christians,
whereby they had all things in common, Act. 2.
(for which yet they received no Divine Command) and the poor were no less
welcome to, and regarded at them, than the rich; among the Corinthians, they
began to degenerate quite into another thing, from the parties and factions
made among them. St. Paul therefore endeavors to rectify these abuses; which
afterward grew to such an height, as occasioned the total abrogation of these
Feasts themselves in the Church; the offerings then usually brought, being more
advantageously disposed into a common bank for the poor and distressed. --? But
that these Feasts were allowed of, as well as practiced, in the Apostles times,
cannot reasonably be disputed. And, it seems part of the Office whereto the
seven Deacons were first appointed, to make this provision, as well as to
relieve the poor otherwise, out of the stock of the Church, from the offerings
that were brought; nothing being more aptly understood by their serving
tables, Act. 6.2.
than providing for the poor this Table at the Feasts of Charity.

A Fourth instance may be given, from St. Paul's injunctions, in order to the
Decency of Divine Worship, for the man's being uncovered, and the woman
covered, in prayer and prophesying; and This too as a mystical sign of moral
duty, the man's superiority, and the woman's subjection. The place deserves to
be perused at large; 1 Cor. 11.3 to 16.
in the eleventh Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, from the
third Verse to the sixteenth Verse; but that would engage me into too long a
discourse. I will content my self therefore with the mention of the conclusion
only of that matter, which indeed alone may well supersede all other instances.

The Apostle having argued several ways the decency of those particular rites,
that which he gives in the last place, to silence all controversy about them,
is the custom of the Churches. V. 16.
But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
churches of God. He cuts off all farther disputation with these two axes (as a
learned man notes) Apostolic institution, Duabus securibus disputationes
amputat, Instituto Apostolico and consuetudine ecclesiarum. Quod per omnes
Ecclesias receptum est, disputando vel in controversiam vocare est (...). Grot.
in loc.
and the custom of the Churches; and intimates withal, that they deserve the
brand of contentious persons, who presume so far as to make a controversy or
dispute, of what is received by all the Churches.

If any will contend in matters circumstantial, and appertaining to the outward
order of Gods worship, (such as the Apostle was speaking of) here is their
right and proper answer laid down, wherein, if they rest not satisfied, they
are to be looked upon as contentious persons. And I may well add the words of a
most reverend person farther upon this very text, See Bishop Andrews excellent
Sermon on this Text. It Is Sermon. 13. of the Resurrection.
-- It was but early day then; yet had they their customs even then. At the
writing of this Epistle, it was not (at the most) thirty years from Christ's
ascension; If that were time enough to make a custom now, after these twenty
times thirty years, and hundreds to spare, shall it not be a custom now by much
better right? A custom is susceptible of more and less: the farther it goes,
the longer it runs, the more strength it gathers, the more gray hairs it
gets, the more a venerable it is; for indeed, the more a custom it is.

This was the Golden Rule, Ad quam forte Ecclesiam veneris ejus morem serva, si
cuiquam non vis esse scandalo nec quenquam tibi. Ego vero de hac sententia
etiam atque etiam cogitans ita semper habui tanquam coelesti oraculo
suscepetim. St. Aug. Ep. 118. ad Januar.
which St. Ambrose gave to St. Austin, To keep the custom of every Church he
came to (in such matters, for he instances in his own fasting on Saturday at
Rome, but not at Millain;) and St. Austin tells us, that as often as he thought
of this Rule, which he did often, he welcomed it no otherwise than as an
heavenly oracle.

Now certainly, that can be no Divine Principle, which quite overthrows this
Apostolic way of deciding all controversies about the points of ceremony, and
outward order in the Church, as that manifestly does, which is under present
consideration. But I am not yet at an end of my particular induction.

CHAP. VI.
(III) Of the Churches following the Apostles, downward to this day. (1) The
Primitive Church, wherein the instances are; The observation of the great
Festivals, in memory of Christ's Birth, Resurrection, etc. Standing at Prayer
on all Lords days, and every day between Easter and Whitsunday. Fasting on
Wednesday and Friday weekly, and constantly before Easter, The honorable and
frequent use of the Cross; receiving the Sacred Eucharist fasting. (2) The
Reformed Churches; Their general Tenent of the power of National Churches, to
make laws in things neither commanded nor forbidden by God. (3) The Independent
Congregations; wherein, the instances are; Singing David's Psalms, translated
by humane invention into rythm and meter, and that too bare-headed, w^ilst they
hear the Sermon with the hat on. Sprinkling Infants. Taking the Communion
sitting. Their particular forms of Church Covenant. And the Catechist's
Prudentials allowed of in Divine worship, with his way of evading the
obligation of some things granted by himself to have been commanded by Christ.
The mischievous consequences of this general principle of Nonconformity, and
Separation, reflected on.

I Will instance, Thirdly, in the times following the Apostles; the practice of
all Reformed Churches; yea, the Independent Congregations not excepted, and
this Catechist's declaration in especial.

1. For the Primitive Church following the Apostles, I will only mention these
Following;

The observation of the Great Festivals in remembrance of the Birth,
Resurrection, and Ascension of our B. Savior, and the descent of the Holy
Ghost.

The custom of Standing in Prayer, on all Lords days, and every day between
Easter and Whitsunday, in memory of Christ's resurrection.

Fasting upon Wednesday and Friday, (the days of our B. Savior's Apprehension
and Crucifixion) and constantly before Easter, the Lent-fast.

The frequent, and honorable use of the ceremony, or sign of the Cross. And,

The Reverend receiving of the Sacred Eucharist, fasting. These are instances
which cannot escape the notice of the Learned; and particular testimonies and
proofs from Ancient VVriters, are too many to be here produced. Let the English
Reader guess at the rest, from what he may find demonstrated at large, of the
Custom of observing Easter in the Church, by that admirable Prelate Bishop
Andrews, Sermon. 13. of the Resurrection, before recommended: and for Christmas,
by Dr. Hammond. Practical Catechism, p. 203. etc.

2. Next then for the practice of all Reformed Churches (for to mention the
Church of Rome, would, it is like, be thought a prejudice unto the cause) there
need be produced nothing more than this general Tenent owned by them all;

That every National Christian Church has power to make laws for her self, in
all such outward things as are not expressly either commanded, or forbidden by
the Word of God.

Which will be a matter of undoubted evidence to any that shall vouchsafe to
examine their respective Confessions. -- But if any desire particular instances,
he may find them collected to his hand, in that useful Treatise published some
few years since, by Mr. Durel, Minister of the French Church in the Savoy,
entitled, A view of the Government and public worship of God, in the Reformed
Churches beyond the Seas. I pass on,

Thirdly, To the Independent congregations, and our Catechist's concessions by
name. For the Independent practice, I observe,

Their singing of the Psalms of David, translated by humane invention, into
Rythm and Meter; and,

That too bare-headed, whereas they hear the Sermon with the hat on.

Sprinkling of Infants at Baptism, and receiving the H. Communion See Part. 2.
chap. 15.
sitting. And,

Their particular forms of Church Covenant.

It would be somewhat for the vindication of their Grand Principle, and the
satisfaction of the World, if they would declare plainly, where these things
are commanded, and instituted by Christ. And now for our Catechist himself, I
instance in,

1. His prudentials allowed of in Divine Worship. And,

2. His way of evading some things granted, by himself, to have been warranted
by Christ.

Take we his own words;

Catech. p. 45. [It is true, in the observation of positive institutions, we
may have regard unto Rules and Prescriptions of prudence, as to times, places,
and seasons, that by no inadvertency or miscarriage of ours, or advantage taken
by the adversaries of truth, the edification of the Church be hindered. So the
disciples met with the doors shut for fear of the Jews, John 20.19. and Paul
met with the Disciples in the night, in an upper chamber, for the celebration
of all the ordinances of the Church, Act. 20.7, 8.] Again,

[p. 61.62. Whatever is of circumstance in the manner of it is performance, (
viz. of Religious Worship) not capable of especial determination, as emerging,
or arising only occasionally upon the doing of that which is appointed, at this
or that time, in this or that place, and the like, is left unto the rule of
moral prudence, -- but the super-addition of ceremonies, necessarily belonging
neither to the institutions of worship, nor unto those circumstances, whose
disposal falls under the rule of moral prudence, neither does nor can add any
thing to the due order of Gospel Worship.]

Now the allowance of any thing (be it only time and place, and the like) is
the destruction and death of this general principle, That every thing relating
to Divine Worship, must have a command or institution in the Scripture, and
that nothing may be done in, or about Gods service, which is not so warranted.
But the truth is, Moral prudence, is a word of vast extent, and opens a door
wide enough for any thing pleaded for by the Church of England, to crowd in at.
For it were worth the knowing, Why prescribed Forms of Liturgy, and Habits, and
Gestures, nowhere determined in Scripture, fall not under the reach of Moral
prudence's Authority, as well as the circumstances of time and place; or why
public prudence may not be allowed to interpose in those things which a
private prudence may determine.

Now for his way of evading the obligation of some things granted to be of
Divine Institution;

[ Catech. p. 50, 51, 52. Mention is made in the Scriptures of sundry things
practiced by the Lord Christ and his Apostles, which, being then in common use
amongst men, were occasionally made by them Symbolical instructions in moral
duties. Such were, washing of feet by one another, the holy kiss, and the like;
But there being no more in them, but a sanctified use directed unto the present
civil customs and usages, the commands given concerning them, respect not the
outward actions, nor appointed any continuance of them, being particularly
suited unto the state of things, and persons in those Countries; as John 13.12,
13, 14, 15. After he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was
set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you? ye call me
Master, and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am; If I then your Lord and Master
have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet, for I have
given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you. It Is evident,
that it is the moral duty of brotherly love, in condescension, and mutual
helpfulness, to be expressed in all necessary offices, as occasion does
require, that is the thing which Jesus Christ enjoyneth here his Disciples, and
leads them to in his own example, in an office of love then in use in those
parts. The same is to be said of the holy Kiss, Romans 16.16. which was a
temporary occasional token of entire love, which may in answer thereunto be
expressed by any sober usage of salutation amongst men to the same purpose. But
the things themselves were not instituted for any continuance, nor do represent
any special grace of the new covenant, which is inseparable from every
institution of Gospel Worship. Common usages or practices therefore directed,
to be used in a due manner, and unto a proper end, where they are used, make
them not institutions of Worship.]

Well, we have here an acknovvledgment, not only of occasional rites, which he
before called, the circumstances of moral prudence; but of symbolical tokens of
moral duties, taken out of the civil customs, and usages of men, without a
Divine command, and these mentioned in Scripture, as practiced by christ and
his Apostles; and therefore certainly our imitation here is warrantable; nay,
one would judge (according to the principle we are upon) necessary; for if a
necessity be at other times argued, even for a gesture at the Sacrament,
because Christ is presumed by them to have used it, who may dare to vary in any
thing, where the example is more certainly determined, and the imitation
possible and easy; There especially, where he tells us, I have given you an
example, that ye should do as I have done to you? -- This way of evading the
obligation of these symbolical rites in religion, by saying they were
occasioned from the present civil customs and usages, will not serve the turn,
however, in the later instance of the holy kiss, because that very way of
salutation is as much a civil custom and usage now among us, as then; nor
indeed is it fitting they should allege an occasional institution for the
exemption of their obedience here, who will not allow the same plea to
others, in other matters; yea, who impose those things upon others, as
precepts, binding the conscience unto perpetuity, which were at first but
occasional, and so temporary institutions; I name particularly, 1. The office
of the seven Deacons to serve tables, See part 2. chap. 12.
vvhereto only they would now have all Deacons confined, and the Catechist
tells us, Cat. p. 16^.
If it be not so; we reject an office of Christ's appointment, and grow weary
of the observation of the institutions of the Gospel. And 2. The Sunday
collection, See part 2. chap. 12.
occasioned by the urgent necessities of the Christians in Judea, and appointed
by St. Paul upon that day weekly, to save the labor of gatherings, when he
came; converted by the catechist into a standing law, [It is ordained, p. 165.
that every first day, the members of the Church do contribute according as God
enables them, of their substance, for the supply of the poor, 1 Cor. 16.2.]
And, unto these instances may be superadded whatsoever else was practiced in
the primitive Church, under the state of persecution, and before Religion was
countenanced by Kings and Laws; wherein yet our exact conformity is as
zealously pressed, as if we continued still in the very same circumstances.
Lastly, Whereas it is affirmed to be inseparable from every institution of
Gospel Worship, to represent some grace of the New Covenant, which these
symbolical instructions do not; I would gladly be resolved, Whether brotherly
love and charity, be not some grace of the New Covenant? or, What special grace
of the New Covenant is represented, by singing one of the Gospel-institutions,
hereafter enumerated?

To draw now toward a conclusion of this argument, I have so long insisted on:
Let it be considered of, how, mischievous a consequence the entertainment of
this general principle must needs be, That nothing may be used, or allowed of,
in, or about Gospel Worship, which is not commanded, and instituted in the
Word of God.

There can be no observance of those general rules, That all things be done in
order and decency, and unto edification; if there be no such power lodged in
the Church, as to determine those outward ceremonies and circumstantials, which
are no where specified by God himself; for either none at all will be
determined, and so we shall be in danger of Atheism and profaneness; or every
one must determine and choose for himself, and so (there being as many minds
almost as men) we shall unavoidably run into endless Schisms and confusions. In
truth, the main question here is only this; Since God is to have an orderly and
decent service kept up in the world, whether private discretion and conscience,
or public authority, is fittest to be trusted with the management of it? and
then, In case that that the Governors of the Church, backed with the laws of
Christian Princes, shall interpose in these matters left by God undetermined;
whether, it be not a sin of unaccountable frowardness, and disobedience, to
refuse the doing that, when we are commanded by authority, which we might
every one choose to do our selves, though we were not so commanded? -- We are
not in this Kingdom to learn, what mischiefs and disorders may be reasonably
expected from a principle we have already seen, and experimented so dismal and
destructive consequences of. A short remembrance may here suffice from a
judicious observer; Bp Sanderson Praef. to his Sermons.
-- When this gap was once opened, [VVhat command have you in Scripture, or
what example for this or that?] Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt -- It was like the
opening of Pandora's box, or the Trojan horse, as if all had been let loose;
Swarms of Sectaries of all sorts, broke in, and as the Frogs and Locusts in
Egypt overspread the face of the land; nor so only, but (as it often happens)
these young striplings soon out-stript their leaders, and that upon their own
ground; for as these said to others, [What command, or example have you for
kneeling at the Communion, for wearing a Surplice, for Lord Bishops, for a
penned Liturgy, for keeping holy days, etc.] and there stopped; so these to
them, [Where are your Lay-Presbyters, your Classes, etc. to be found in
Scripture? Where your Steeple Houses, your National Churches, your Tithes and
mortuaries, your Infant-sprinklings, nay, your Meter-Psalms, your two
Sacraments, your observing a weekly Sabbath? for so far I find they are gone,
and how much farther I know not, already; and how much farther they will
hereafter, God alone knows; for, erranti nullus terminus, being thus far out
of their way, they may wander everlastingly. -- It may be then a kindness,
whatever they think of it, to stop, if possible, to turn them, and let them
see where they first mistook.

It is therefore the last office propounded in this general part of my
discourse, to take a view of those several places of Scripture used, shall I
say, or abused, by the Catechist to countenance this Leading-error, which I
have declared the falseness of. Unto that therefore I proceed.

CHAP. VII.
The common abuse of Holy Scripture, by the Writers of this way. An explication
of certain places of Scripture, brought in, to countenance the foregoing
Principle, or some appendant to it, under five heads. Such texts, (1) which
referr us to the Word of God, as our rule, and commend unto us the perfection
of it. (2) Which use the negative argument of Gods not commanding a thing, as a
reproof and condemnation. (3) Which forbid the adding to, or taking from the
Word of Gods (4) Which prohibit the worshipping of God by the commands of
men, and will worship. (5) Which require faith of us, in order to the pleasing
of God, and impute the guilt of sin to whatsoever is not of Faith.

AS there is nothing more usual, so nothing more detestable in the Writers of
this way, than horribly to wrest, and dally with God's holy oracles, and quote
the Scriptures lamely and perversely, M. Per^^ns says well upon the occasion of
the Devils temptations unto Christ, and alleging Scripture in them. -- Gods
Ministers must hereby be admonished, to be careful in alleging any text of
Scripture, that the same be fit and pertinent; for to wrest the same from the
proper meaning of the H. Ghost, to serve their own conceit, is the practice of
Satan. -- Which also may serve for a good advertisement to those that use to
heap up manifold allegations of Scriptures -- In this affected multiplicity,
the abuse of Scripture can hardly be escaped. Park. Combat betvveen Christ and
the Devil. Vol. 3. p. 393.
as the Devil did; and commit the vice, which they so often falsely challenge
others with, and for; namely, the adding unto, or detracting from, the Word of
God, saying, the Lord has spoken what he has not, or the Lord has not spoken
what he has. The plainest Scriptures are least of all minded, and obscurer
places gloss'd upon, to patronize their private doctrines, fancies, and
imaginations; yea, any faint allusion, or emblance, will serve for an express
warrant. The Garment spotted with the flesh has been quoted against the
Surplice. Bowing the knee to Baal, against kneeling at the Sacrament. The mark
of the beast, against the Cross, etc. The margins of their books are commonly
faced with a multitude of Scripture-quotations little or nothing really to the
purpose, but to make a fair show, and deceive the credulous and simple. And so
it is with our Catechist, who, to render the number of his quotations more
formidable to the eye, repeats the same oftentimes over again. Some difficulty
there will be in marshalling them into order, but I will take what care I can
to leave none out, that cast but the least look or glance this way. I shall
therefore examine them under the following Heads;

1. Those Scriptures which referr us to the Word of God, as our rule, and
commend unto us the perfection of it.

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me.

Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to
this word it is because there is no light in them.

Luke 16.19. (it should be I suppose verse. 29.31.) They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they be persuaded though one arose from the dead.

2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. -- That from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures,
which are able to make thee wise ^^to salvation, through faith which is in
Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

1 Pet. 1.19. (it should be 2 Ep.) -- We have also a more sure word of
prophecy, whereto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines
in a dark place.

Psalm. 19.7, 8.9. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. --
making wise the simple. --

Isa. 59.21. -- "My spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed,
nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth, and
for ever. --

This last is Gods covenant, to continue his Spirit in conjunction with his
words, throughout all ages, in his Church; And not to bestow a particular
reflection upon the rest, the genuine result of these Texts, is no more than
what all Protestants agree in, That we are obliged to attend with reverence
unto the H. Scripture, in whatsoever it speaks; That we are diligently to read
and peruse it to that purpose; and, That it is our only, and perfect rule, in
all the matters of faith and good life, necessary to our salvation; which is
the great end for which the Scripture was given unto us: That nothing is to be
received as an Article of Divine Faith, or Law, in it self, binding the
conscience, which is not according to the written Word, and from thence to be
derived. -- But then it cannot from hence be groundedly inferred, "That we must
have express warrant out of the Scripture for every thing which we either
believe or do, or in those circumstantials, which are not any where thereby
determined, farther than the prescribing of some general rules of piety and
prudence, whereby our Governors ought to determine them, and enjoining
obedience to all that are placed under them to their good orders agreeable
thereunto.

2. Those Scriptures which use the negative argument, of God's not commanding a
thing, as a reproof, and condemnation of it.

Jerem. 7.27. (it should be v. 21 22, and 23.) Thus says the Lord, Put your
burnt-offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh; ( i. e. Eat of those
offerings which were to be wholly consumed, no less than of other sacrifices.
Levit. 1.) "for I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day
that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or
sacrifices, but this commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice

H. Grot. in loc. and Annot. in L. 4. and Rel. Christ.
If that be true, which some ground upon this place, viz. That God issued forth
no command of sacrifices, till after their worshipping the Golden Calf; they
were warranted only by custom, arising from a voluntary devotion: then we have
gained so many fresh instances, to be added unto those before alleged against
this general principle now examined; but I will not lean any thing to that
supposition. It seems rather, that Sacrifices were before that required. The
Israelites begged liberty to go out to sacrifice, by Divine directions, and
Pharaoh gave it them; and God commanded the Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb,
Exodus 3.18. and 8.8. and 12, 13. The meaning then of God, by the Prophet here,
may be only this, That God preferred obedience before sacrifice, (as is
elsewhere declared, 1 Samuel 15.22.) and manifested as much, See Deuteronomy. 4.22, 23,
14.
when he gave the Law at Mount Sinai, requiring moral observances audibly from
them, without the mention of burnt-sacrifices, the prescriptions whereof Moses
afterward himself received; and so the negative has only a comparatiue force
in it; I spoke not, nor commanded concerning Burnt-offerings; i. e. not so
much, not in comparison with, Obey my voice; as it is both said, and explained,
in the Prophet Hosea, Hosea 6.6.
I desired mercy, and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more than
burnt-offerings. Thus, there are the more weighty, St. Matt. 23, 23.
and considerable things of God's Law, and those of a lesser size; the one such
as ought chiefly, and especially to be done, and yet the other too not to be
left undone.

-- Others gloss on the words, that God did not command sacrifice from them in
such a manner, and with such evil dispositions, as they brought it. And this is
certainly the meaning of that expostulation in the first of Isaiah, Isa. 1.12.
Who has required these things at your hands? from whence too some of our
Catechist's way have taught, That nothing is to be done, but what God
requires. Whereas it is evidently the design of that place, Not to disclaim
the Act spoken of, but the Actors, in their manner of performance; and the
emphasis lies not upon these things, which were plainly matters of Divine
appointment, but upon, your hands. Who has required these things at your
hands? even your hands that are full of blood, verse 15. The scope of the place
is not to disown the things themselves, the Worship given, but the corruption
of the worshippers, as it is elsewhere said, The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8.

Let us then see if the other places that belong to this head, have more in
them for our conviction.

Jer. 7.31. They have built the high places of Tophet, to burn their sons and
their daughters in the fire, which I commanded them not, neither came it into
my heart. And again.

Jer. 19.5. They have built the high places of Baal, to burn their sons with
fire for burnt-offerings unto Baal, which I commanded not, nor spoke it,
neither came it into my mind.

The meaning of these phrases here used, is questionless this [which I forbad
them]: for the matter spoken of, is an abomination expressly forbidden by God,
Levit. 18.21. And the same answer belongs to two other Texts.

Deuteronomy. 17.3. Where the Idolater is thus described; -- Who has gone and served
other Gods, and worshipped them, either the Sun, or Moon, or any of the host of
Heaven, which I have not commanded. i. e. manifestly which I have forbidden,
Exodus 20.4. So,

Levit. 10.1. It Is the accusation of Nadab and Abihu, that They offered strange
fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not. i. e. which he had forbidden
them; having commanded them to use the fire upon the Altar, which, to that very
purpose was to be kept burning, and not to be put out, Levit. 1.7, 8. -- 6.12,
13. -- 16.12. God therefore having appointed his own fire, the using of any
other in the room of it, could be no other than a violation of his appointment.
-- In all these places then, there is a figure of speech, which the
Rhetoricians call (...) a diminution, whereby the greater is expressed by the
less, and more is to be understood than is spoken. But what do all these
signify to the condemning of those ceremonies and circumstances which God has
neither forbidden, nor commanded, but left free to his Church, for to enjoin
particular persons to make use of?

3. Those Scriptures which forbid the adding unto, or taking from, the Word of
God.

Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add to the word which I command you, neither shall you
diminish ought from it; that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God,
which I command you.

Deuteronomy. 12.32. What thing soever I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not
add thereto, nor diminish from it.

Josh. 1.7. Be strong, and very courageous, that thou may observe to do
according to all the law which Moses my servant commanded thee; turn not from
it, to the right hand, or to the left, that thou may prosper, whithersoever
thou go. And to the same effect, Josh. 23.6, 8.

Prove. 30.6. Add thou not to his word, lest he reproove thee, and thou be found
a liar.

Revel. 22.18, 19. I testify unto every man that hears the words of the
Prophecy of this book; if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in this book; and if any man shall take
away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part
out of the book of life.

The Reader needs only to be called upon, to observe well, What it is to add
unto, or diminish from, God's Word. It is no other than This; to say, the Lord
has spoken what he has not spoken, or, the Lord has not spoken what he has
spoken. It is to give God the Lie, as Solomon intimates. -- Add thou not to his
Word, lest thou be found a liar. -- To take from Gods Word, is like clipping of
the King's coin. To add to it, is like setting the King's stamp on base metal;
both crimes of an heinous nature. Thus the false Prophets are taxed, for
prophesying lies in God's name, and prefacing, Thus says the Lord, to their
own dreams; and the deceit of their own hearts, Jer. 23.

Now, Lay the saddle on the right horse, Wherein do we add any thing to Gods
word, or take any thing from it? Wherein do we deny any thing which it affirms,
or affirm any thing, of it, True it is, concerning the word of God, whether it
be by misconstruction of the sense, or by falsification of the words, wittingly
to endeavor that any thing may seem Divine which is not, or any thing not
seem, which is, were plainly to abuse, and even to falsify Divine Evidence,
which injury offered but unto men, is most worthily counted heinous. Which
point I vvish they did well observe, with whom nothing is more familiar,
than to plead, in these causes, the Law of God, the Word of the Lord, who,
notvvithstanding, when they come to allege what Word and Law they mean,
quote continually Bye-speeches, in some historical narration or other, and urge
them, as if written in most exact form of Law. -- Hooker l. 3. Eccles Pol.
which it denies? Let all of the Catechist's persuasion enter seriously into
themselves, and examine impartially, Whether they are not more truly guilty of
this crying sin, when they boldly add, and hold forth their own sense, and
explication of Scripture, as the pure word of God; when they impose burdens on
the consciences of men, which God has not imposed; by making that unlawful to
practice for conscience sake toward God, which God has no where forbidden; or
that necessary, for conscience sake, to be performed, which God has not
required. It is hard to find more notorious imposers in this kind, than they
are. Witness those novel traditions of theirs added unto the Word of God.

Kneel not, when commanded by authority, but stand or sit; wear no linen
garment, cap, or tippet; no cassock and girdle, but a cloak, or coat, or
jerkin, like to other Tradesmen.

Use not the sign of the Cross, though it really import no more than the word
cross spoken does, that only affecting the eye, as the other does the ear, yet
use it not, for God will be offended with you, if you so do.

Teach not your children forms of Prayer, etc.

Let it be considered, if this be not adding abominably to the word of God, to
condemn any Church, much more, many Churches, as repudiated, or divorced from
God, Cat. p. 87.
for enjoining the practice of certain circumstances relating to the outward
worship of God, without any opinion of the necessity or Divine authority of the
things themselves enjoined; such circumstances, as if they were not enjoined,
every private Christian might, for himself, determine. To make this the mark of
the Beast, the character of the Whore, etc. Yea, Is it not adding to the word
of God, to referr all those Texts to the worship of God, which speak of his
word?

But now to evince, that these Texts, do not forbid all kinds of additions to
the word of God, otherwise, then as has been explained; and that therefore the
distinction of corrupting, and preserving additions, is not so Popish, but that
every good Protestant may safely admit it, and that it is utterly false, which
the Catechist asserts, That every addition, of what sort soever, is a
corruption, because an addition. I will mention briefly some lawful additions
that are not here forbidden, See Dr. Burges's answer to the reply made to Bp.
Morton's general defense. p. 136, etc.
lawful additions, I mean still, not as parts of the word of God, but as
preservatives of the text, or meaning, or observation of it. Such then are
additions,

1. Which preserve the text, as diverse readings, marginal notes, the Jewish
Massoreth.

2. Which preserve the sense, as interlineary glosses, marginal references,
commentaries. And,

3dly. Which preserve the observation of the Scripture, as the building, and
ordering Synagogues for the reading of it, the dividing it into certain
sections for every Sabbath, the ordination of holy Feasts and Fasts upon
occasion, etc.

These are additions, for the better keeping of God's word only, and so not
forbidden by these texts of Sacred Writ; which call us unto the custody and
observance of it, as it is delivered to us.

4. Those Scriptures which prohibit the worshipping of God by the commands of
men, and Will Worship.

Isa. 29.13. Their fear toward me, is taught by the precepts of men. Which is
again referred to by Christ.

Matt. 15.19. -- In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
commandments of men.

The thing charged in these words, is, The esteeming of those things which men
only have delivered, to be a real worshipping of God, i. e. the equalling of
mere humane ordinances with Divine commandments; yea, "the preferring of the
commands of men to those of God's. For, our B. Savior had before accused them,
for transgressing the command of God by their tradition, and making "the
command of God of none effect, by their tradition, ver. 3. and ver. 6. -- The
Prophet Isaiah speaks of Ordinances expressly contrary to God's commands,
staggering drunkenness, ver. 9. that is, probably, Idolatry; and it may be,
there was consequent to that, the making of certain humane inventions, in
themselves a necessary, and acceptable worship of God, and putting them in the
room of that worship that God had commanded. -- And our Savior applies it to
the Jews, who placed the worship of God in their own traditions, that is, they
reputed the inventions of men such things, as of, and for themselves, were
pleasing to God, and obliging to their conscience, and such as if left undone,
brought them no less under the guilt of sin, than the transgressing of Gods
command. They placed, I say, a worship of God, in their traditions, and made
God's commands void, and of none effect, by them, and give way unto them. They
thought that the very creatures of God would defile them, if eaten with
unwashen hands; yea, say some of their Rabbis, as much as lying with an
harlot. -- That this was our Savior's purpose, is plainly set down in the
Gospel of St. Mark, chap. 7.6, 7, 8, 9. St. Mark 7.6, 7, 8, 9.
-- Well has Isaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This
people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me; howbeit,
in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the traditions, (or
injunctions) of men; for, laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the
tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups, and many other such like
things ye do. And he said unto them; Full well ye reject the commandment of
God, that ye may keep your own tradition. -- As if he had said, Is not this
fair worship and serving of God, to reject his prime commands, of inward
purity, and moral righteousness, the most considerable parts of religion; and
act directly contrary to them, and satisfy, and content your selves with some
external performances, not at all commanded by God, but by your selves, or your
Rabbis.

Dr. Ham. pract. Cat. p. 203.
Teaching for Doctrines the injunctions, or traditions of men, is, The
affirming, that such and such things are the pleasure, command, or will of God,
which, to affirm, is the same crime, as for any subject to put the King's Broad
Seal to his own Deed. -- In a word, to pretend a tradition of the Jews, to be a
law of God's enacting, or to set it up against, or in lieu of any known Law of
God's, is the crime noted by that phrase, and nothing else, but what bears some
analogy with that.

But then, How can we be challenged as worshipping God in v^in, in those
usages, whereby, of themselves, we pretend not at all to worship him? or to
teach for doctrines the injunctions of men, who affirm them not to be of Divine
authority; nor yet use them to the supplanting any thing of God's appointment,
but only in subordination to, and for the decent, and orderly observance of his
institutions? By this therefore it appears also, how vainly we are challenged
with Will Worship. But let us see the place.

Coloss. 2.20, 21, 22, 23. Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ, from the
rudiments of the world; why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to
ordinances? (Touch not, taste not, handle not, which are to perish with the
using) after the commandments and doctrines of men: Which things indeed have a
show of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body, not
in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh.

It cannot escape our notice here, that the Apostle places the show of wisdom
in will worship, as in humility and austerity, and therefore designed to
reflect no more disgrace upon that word, than upon the other. And indeed, the
case is clear, that there were free-will-offerings among the Jews, which were
not the less, but the more acceptable, for being voluntary. And it has before
been proved, by an induction of many particulars, that there were sundry usages
appertaining to Religion, among them, which yet were not upon that account,
rejected by, or displeasing unto God. -- The genuine account of these words of
St. Paul, with some emendation of the translation, is well comprised by the
Reverend, and Learned Dr. Hammond, in this ensuing Paraphrase.

Dr. Ham. Paraphr.
[If therefore ye have received the Christian Faith, and, as ye ought to do,
made that use of the death of Christ, as to forsake all other doctrines and
practices, to receive his, and so to look upon the rites of the Jews, and the
Philosophy of the Gentiles as abolished, and out-dated, by reason of the
doctrine of Christianity; why do you (servilely) subject your selves to such
abstinencies, as either out of the Heathen, or Jewish practices, are brought in
among you (such are those of abstaining from marriages, (...).
and some sorts of meat, as utterly unlawful; which, though they might be
lawfully enough abstained from, as indifferent things, yet when they are
taught, and believed to be detestable things, and utterly unlawful, by that
abuse, tend to the bringing of all unnatural, (...).
and horrible villainies among you) why, I say, do you subject your selves to
such abstinencies, as precepts, and doctrines of men, contrary to that liberty
which Christ has purchased for us, and those doctrines of inward purity which
he has taught us: which observances are indeed set off with some specious fair
shows, as that they are voluntary services or free-will-offerings to God, that
there is great humility in them, (as in that of worshipping angels, ver. 18.);
"That they are a great austerity to, and punishing of the body; that they are
quite contrary to the placing any honor in the satisfying of the flesh, though
it be by conjugal enjoyments, but all these are but specious, not real
services, have nothing of true worship in them.]

Now, if the Reader desire a fuller satisfaction about this Paraphrase, he may
consult the excellent notes of that judicious author on that Chapter, too long
to be here inserted.

In short, Take we the word Will Worship, as it is commonly used to express
superstition by; he that will, to any purpose, fasten the charge upon us, must
declare and evidence, that we father some humane traditions and ordinances upon
God, or make them necessary to be observed as Divine, and in order unto
Salvation, which will be task enough.

5. Those Scriptures which require faith of us, in order to the pleasing of
God, and impute the guilt of sin to whatsoever is not of faith.

Hebr. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God.

Romans 14.23. -- For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Now, how palpably these texts are mis-applyed, to evince the necessity of such
a faith, as has for every action, and circumstance, some written word of God
to rest and rely upon, will abundantly appear by a transient view of them. For,

First, the faith required by the Author to the Hebrews, without which it is
impossible to please God, is described by him in the very same verse, -- For he
that comes unto God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. Two points undeniably of natural, and rational
belief, had, there been no Scripture written. And,

Secondly, It is evident by the context, that the Apostle to the Romans speaks
not of a faith related only to the word of God, but he means by faith any good
persuasion of the lawfulness of the act, whether by reason or
Scripture-perswasion, opposed to doubting. We need look no farther than the
same Chapter, for a confirmation of this. Romans 14.2.
At the 2. verse, One believes that he may eat all things, that is, he is
verily persuaded in his conscience, that he may as lawfully eat flesh as herbs,
any one kind of meat, as any other; he makes no doubt of it. Again, verse 14.
ver. 14.
I know, and am persuaded, that there is nothing unclean of it self; that is, I
steadfastly believe, it is a most certain, and undoubted truth. Again, verse. 22.
ver. 22.
Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God; that is, Art thou in thy
conscience persuaded, that thou may lawfully partake any of the good
creatures of God, let that persuasion suffice thee, for the approving of thine
own heart in the sight of God, but trouble not the Church, nor offend thy
weaker brother, by a needless, and unseasonable ostentation of that thy
knowledge. And then lastly, in this 23. verse, ver. 23.
He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith, that
is, he that is not fully persuaded in his own mind, that it is lawful for him
to eat some kinds of meats, (as namely, swines-flesh, and bloodings); and yet
is drawn, against his own judgment, to eat thereof, (because he sees others so
to do, or because he would be loath to undergo the taunts and jeers of
scorners, or out of any other poor respect) such a man is cast and condemned by
the judgment of his own heart, as a transgressour, because he adventureth to do
that, which he does not believe to be lawful. And then the Apostle (proceeding
ab hypothesi ad thesin) immediately reduces that particular case into a
general rule, in these words; For whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; Quod
dubitas, ne feceris. Cicero.
by the process of which his discourse, it appears, that by Faith, no other
thing is here meant, than such a persuasion of the mind and conscience, as we
have now declared, and that the true purport and intent of these words, is but
thus much in effect;

Whosoever shall enterprise the doing of any thing, See Bp. Sanderson's
excellent Sermon on this Text. page 82. 83. See also D^^ Iackson, l. 2. chapter 7.
which he verily believes to be unlawful, or, at least wise, is not reasonably
well persuaded of the lawfulness of it, (let the thing be otherwise, and in it
self what it can be, lawful, or unlawful, indifferent, or necessary,
convenient, or inconvenient, it mattereth not) to him it is a sin howsoever.

And yet farther, were it granted, that the faith required to legitimate our
actions, must necessarily have some place of Scripture to build it self upon;
it ought to be remembered, That this faith may derive its assurance from general
rules there laid down, as well as any particular commands; and there is hardly
a case in reference unto practice, which that of St. Paul to the Philippians
extends not unto, Phil. 4.8. Where yet he leaves the particulars as matters to
be approved and judged of by themselves, according to that capacity and
understanding, which, as men, God had endowed them with, and all that
exhortation of his, is plainly a reference to the chief rules of right reason,
to guide their choice and actions by.

CHAP. VIII.
Other Texts of Scripture examined, under seven heads more. viz. (6) Which
describe Christ's faithfulness compared with Moses, and point unto him as the
one, and only, and Lord of his house the Church. (7) Which command us to hear,
and obey Christ, under the greatest penalty. Wherein also Christ enjoins his
Disciples, to teach all his commandments, and wherein others are commanded, or
exhorted to obey them, or commended for examples of a diligent and exact
obedience. (8) which relate to the pattern given in the Mount to Moses, and the
other in Vision to Ezekiel. (9) Which point us to the spiritual worship
required by God under the Gospel. (10) The second commandment, said to forbid
us the making to our selves any thing in the worship of God, to add unto his
appointments. (11) Which are said to speak of the Apostasy of the Church
prophetically, under the name of fornication, and whoredom, and of the
innocence of those that keep themselves undefiled therewith. Lastly, Which are
alleged as instances of severity, against persons, who, by ignorance, neglect,
or regardlesness, have miscarried, in not observing exactly God's will and
appointment, in, and about, his worship. Particularly, Nadab and Abihu. Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram. The Sons of Ely. Uzzah, whom the Catechist says, against
the Scripture-Text, to have sinned, in putting the Ark into a Cart, when he
should have born it on his shoulders. Uzziah's offering incense. 1 Cor. 11.30.
Hebr. 10.25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

6. THose Scriptures which describe Christ's faithfulness, compared with Moses,
and point unto him, as the one Lawgiver, and Lord of his house.

Hebr. 3.5, 6. -- Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for
a testimony of those things which were to be spoken. But Christ, as a son, over
his own house, whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, etc.

The usual inference made from hence, is, that, as Moses did appoint the very
rituals appertaining unto Uod's worship among the Jews; so did Christ, in like
manner, prescribe unto his Church; otherwise, he is not faithful as Moses.

But here it is not considered, that there were several circumstances, not
determined by the law of Moses, and many particulars under that law, of Divine
acceptance, though of humane institution, as has been declared.

And then, secondly, the Apostle's compare between Christ and Moses, is woefully
misshapen. See Ho^ker Eccles. Pol. ^. 3. S. 11.
He that will see how faithful the one, or the other was, must compare the
things which they both did, unto the charge which God gave each of them; for
fidelity is the righteous execution of a charge received; -- faithful to him
that appointed him, ver. 2. The Apostle, in making comparison between our
Savior and Moses, attributes faithfulness unto both, and makes this
difference between them, Moses in, but Christ over the house of God: Moses in
that house, which was his, by charge and commission; though to govern it, yet
to govern it as a servant; but Christ, over his house, as being his own entire
possession. Our Lord and Savior does make protestation, I have given unto them
the words which thou gave me. 8. John 17.
Faithful then he was, and concealed not any part of his Father's will. But
what this revealed will of the Father is, we must not take from our own
conjectures, but by inspection into it, nor may we add thereunto, lest we be
found liars.

John 13.13. Ye call me Master, and Lord; and ye say well, for so I am.

Malach. 1.6. If I be a Master, where is my fear?

James 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy; Who art
thou that judge another?

These are matters universally acknowledged that Christ, being the Lord,
Master, and Lawgiver of his Church, ought to be feared, and reverenced, as
such, and to have all his laws and commands observed. There is no doubt moved
of this. But we are not satisfied, that all those are Christ's laws, which some
men would impose upon us under that title. Nor does the acknowledgment that
Christ is the one, and only supreme Lawgiver of the Church, the giver of laws
which bind the conscience in themselves, by which laws he will also judge them
to their eternal state; the only Lawgiver, able to save and to destroy, as St.
James describes him; this acknowledgment, I say, Vide Gr^t. de imper. Sum.
potest. cap. 4. S. 5. pulchre distinguentem de actionibus Christi, Terminalibus
and mediis.
does not hinder, but that there may be certain Lawgivers under Christ, and
commissioned by him, for the outward ordering of his worship, whose laws do
bind the conscience too, but not immediately; i. e. in, and of themselves, but
by virtue of Christ's law, that requires obedience for conscience sake, to the
authority ordained by him.

7. Those Scriptures, which command us to hear, and obey Christ, under the
greatest penalty.

Matt. 17.5. This is my beloved Son, hear ye him.

Act. 3.23. -- Every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed
from among the people.

Hebr. 12.25. See ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not, who
refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from him that speaks from heaven.

Now, there is no question moved, Whether Christ be not to be heard and obeyed
in what he speaks, but only, Whether he has, in this, or the other matter of
circumstance and order, particularly spoken any thing by way of determination;
for the resolution of which, recourse must be had to the records of what he
has spoken, and by them we must be judged. Under this head therefore, may be
also ranked,

Those Texts of Scripture, wherein Christ enjoynes his Disciples, to teach all
his commands, and wherein others are commanded, and exhorted to obey them, or
commended, as examples of a diligent observance of them.

Matt. 28.20. -- Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you. This is often urged by the Catechist. But the point of doubt is
nor, Whether the Apostles were bound to teach, and so did teach the observance
of all things by Christ commanded; but this only, Whether Christ did
particularly command all that his Church was to observe, in the very
circumstantials of his outward worship. The Scriptures then that call for
obedience unto God's commands, or commend that obedience, referr nothing to
this matter, till it be manifest, that we have such and such commands, whereto
our obedience is required. It will therefore suffice, barely to recite them.
The Scripture-commands for obedience.

Deuteronomy. 13.4. Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and obey his voice, and cleave unto him.

Deuteronomy. 30.2.8.20. Thou shall obey his voice, according to all that I command
thee this day, thou and thy children, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.

1 Chronicles. 16.13. (it should be, I suppose, 15. verse,) Be ye always mindful of
his covenant, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations.

John 14, 15, 21, 23. If ye love me, keep my commandments. He that has my
commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me. -- If any man love me,
he will keep words. --

Chap. 15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

Chap. 8.31. -- If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed.

1 Ep. John, 2.3, 4. Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments. --

Luke 9.26. -- Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall
the Son of man be ashamed. --

Commendable Examples of obedience. Exodus 24.3. Moses came and told the people
all the words, of the Lord, and all the judgments; and all the people answered
with one voice, and said, All the words which the Lord has said, will we do.

Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
judgments, and to hearken unto his voice.

Genesis 18.19. I know him (Abraham) that that he will command his children, and
his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice
and judgment. -- No question too but Abraham's children and servants were more
obedient to his commands, in the matters of God's worship and service, than
those of the separation are generally observed to be, who withdraw from
Family-devotion, etc. --

1 Cor. 11.23. I received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you. --
It was part of the Apostle's faithfulness to deliver that ordinance to the
church, which he had received as such, from the Lord; and whatsoever is
delivered to the Church, So again, in the Articles of Christian Faith, -- I
delivered that which I also received, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.
under that notion, as a Divine ordinance and institution, ought first to be so
received from the Lord. This Apostle's practice then, deserves imitation; and
in this especially, that he very carefully distinguishes his own counsels and
advice, from the Divine commands. -- I speak this by permission, and not of
commandment. -- Unto the married, I command, yet not I, but the Lord. -- But to
the rest speak I, not the Lord.-Concerning virgins, I have no commandment of
the Lord, yet I give my judgment, as one that have obtained mercy of the Lord
to be faithful. I suppose therefore, that this is good for the present
distress. -- She is happier, if she so abide, after my judgment. -- And this
Apostolical practice, is a sufficient evidence, that some things may be advised
and practiced in the Church, without the authority of any special command from
God.

8. Those Scripturcs, which relate to the pattern given in the Mount to Moses,
and the other to EZekiel.

Exodus 25.40. -- Look that thou make them after the Pattern, which was showed
thee in the Mount.

Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. Thou son of man, show the House to the house of Israel, that
they may be ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the pattern, and
if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the form of the House,
and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in
thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
laws thereof, and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form
thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.

One would guess, by these allegations, the Catechist and his Brethren were
far from being avovved enemies to setledforms of worship. -- But that these are
allusions only, which they are accustomed to cant with. --

The former Text relates to the Tabernacle, which God appointed Moses to make,
with the appurtenances thereof, Act. 7.44. The later is not so easily resolved
upon amongst Interpreters, what Temple it was to be referred unto.

Grot. in Ezekiel. cap. 40.2.
It seems most probable, that the Prophet EZekiel received the pattern of the
Temple, in a Vision, as it was when Nebuchodonosor destroyed it, and that to
this purpose, that the Jews might understand how great a glory of their Nation
they had forfeited by their sins; and that when God should restore them from
their captivity, they might have before them a Sampler to imitate, as far as
they were able. And if any object, that the description here made of it, does
not exactly square and agree with that of Solomon's; it is answered, That those
many Kings who came after Solomon, did, out of the great tributes and gifts
brought into the Temple, add much unto it, by the ornaments of it; yea, and
changed the use of some things about it. But I need not lay any stress upon
conjectures. When we have the privilege to be taken into the Mount with Moses,
and behold God's pattern, or receive a Vision of it with Ezekiel, we shall be
certainly obliged to conform unto it; but in the interim, that which is
obtruded upon us by some for it, we can entertain for no other than a dream of
men of strong imaginations.

9. Those Scriptures which point unto the spiritual worship required by God
under the Gospel.

See the explication of this text farther, in this book hereafter.
John 4.21, 23, 24. Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither
in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father; but the hour
comes; and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit,
and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth.

Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. Having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest,
by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has consecrated for
us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, and having an high priest over
the house of God; Let us draw near, with a true heart, in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water.

1 Cor. 14.20. Brethren, be not children in understanding.

2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. (where the Apostle compares the ministration of the
Spirit with the Law, and preferrs it as more glorious.) If the ministration of
death, written, and engraven instones, was glorious, so that the children of
Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his
countenance, which glory was to be done away; how shall not the ministration of
the Spirit be rather glorious? For, if the ministration of condemnation be
glory, much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory: for
even that which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of
the glory that excels; for if that which was done away, was glorious, much
more that which remains is glorious. The whole design of which place is to
prefer the glory of the everlasting Gospel, above that of the Legal
dispensation, which was to give way to it.

Catech p. 56.17, 58 59, 60.
Now these places are alleged by the Catechist, to prove, That the decency and
comeliness of Gospel Worship, does not in the least depend upon the observation
of any external rites or ceremonies.

But the mistake lies, in making that the only excellency, and requisite of
Gospel Worship, which is indeed it is principal and chiefest qualification.

The case, one would think were very plain. We are not our selves naked bodies,
nor yet ghosts or spirits; but spirit and body united together. The soul, and
spirit, is the most considerable and ruling part in us; and yet the body is a
part also, though subordinate. Our duty then, is readily chalked out by the
Apostle; 1 Cor. 6 10
-- Glorify God in your body and spirit, which are Gods; in body and spirit
together. Chiefly indeed, in, and with, our souls and spirits, which are chief
within us; but not with our souls only. It Is part of our reasonable service,
Romans 12.1.
to present our bodies also a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God. Yea,
whilst we live in Society, it is our greatest concernment, in reference unto
others, by our visible, and bodily, and external devotions, to declare a
reverent sense of God, and affection to his honor. We cannot glorify God
among men, but by the sensible expressions of our religion; and therefore God,
in the second Commandment, mentions these; and the ordering of these, is the
proper matter of humane cognizance and government, to busy it self about. In
the first place, we must have Grace in our hearts, that we may serve God
acceptably; but then it is but fitting that we discover that inward grace, by
the external acts of a becoming reverence also. Let us have grace, Hebr. 12.28,
29.
that we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear; for our God
is a consuming fire. St. Paul thought it fit, not only to provide, that the
Church at Corinth might serve God understandingly, and with the spirit, but
after this decent manner also, the man uncovered, 1 Cor. 11.
and the woman covered. Nor is it fitting, that the honor of God's public
worship, should, in this particular, be left to the uncertainties of every
clownish and fantastic humor.

10. It is said, to be the main design of the second commandment, Catech. p.
62, 63.
to forbid the making unto our selves any thing in the worship of God, to add
unto his appointments; whereof an instance is given, in that of making, and
worshipping Images. To this purpose, we are frequently referred unto,

Exodus 20.4, 5. Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven image, or any
likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath,
or that is in the Water under the earth; Thou shall not bow down thy self to
them, nor serve them, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, etc.

It may seem near akin to adding unto the Word of God, for any to presume to
turn the body of a precept into an instance only. The main design of the
commandment is plainly against Idolatry. God's jealousy therefore, is, in this
case, said to be moved, when we do as the wife that admits of another to her
husband's bed; when we forsake God, for the cleaving to any other thing, or
person, in his room; when we deny God the worship he requires, or give his
worship to another. -- Deuteronomy. 4.23, 24. -- Make not any graven image, nor the
likeness of any thing that I have forbidden thee; for the Lord thy God is a
consuming fire, even a jealous God.

For a close of this, I will desire the Catechist's friends, to peruse
impartially, an admirable Discourse of Bishop Andrews upon the occasion of this
Commandment, Bp Andr. Sermon on Act. 2.42.
against the Worshipping of imaginations.

11. Those Scriptures which are said to speak of the Apostasy of the Church
prophetically, Cat. p 81.82.
(set out under the name of fornication and whoredom,) and the innocence of
those that kept themselves undefiled therewith.

Revel. 14.4, 5. These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are
virgins: these are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; these
were redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and unto the
Lamb, and in their mouth was found no guile; for they are without fault before
the Throne of God.

Revel. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And there came one of the seven Angels, which had the
seven Vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither, I will show unto
thee the judgment of the great Whore, that sits upon many waters, with whom
the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabiters of the
earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication, So he carried me
away in the spirit, into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a
scarlet-colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads, and ten
horns And the woman was arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with
gold, and precious stone, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full of
abominations, and filthiness of her fornication; and upon her forehead was a
name written, Mystery, Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and
abominations of the earth; and I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. --

Rev. 18.4. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.

That nothing so properly answers to fornication and whoredom, in the sense of
Scripture, as Idolatry does, I have intimated under the last head, and might
here produce many Texts of sacred Writ, to that purpose. Levit. 17.7. They
shall no more offer their sacrifices unto Devils, after whom they have gone a
whoring. Psalm 106.35, 36, 37, 38, 39. They were mingled among the heathen, and
learned their works, and served their Idols. Thus went they a whoring with
their own inventions. Jer. 2.20, 27. "Upon every high hill, and under every
green tree, thou wandrest, playing the harlot, -- saying to a Stock, thou art
my father, and to a Stone, thou have brought me forth, etc. -- to omit other
places, the case is so familiar. Answerably now to this notion, there is
nothing bids so fair to the title of the Great Whore, in the Revelations, as
Rome-heathen, and nothing so like her fornication, as her Idolatries. I will
not now enlarge upon the special inducements unto this belief. It shall suffice
here, to transcribe a clear paraphrase upon the quotations mentioned, See Dr.
Ham. Notes on the places.
according to this supposal.

Revel. 14. ch: 4, 5, Revel. 14.4, 5.
ver. are a description of the primitive Christians purity, from the
uncleanness of the Gnostics; [These are, as virgins, not defiled with women,
they that have kept pure, from all the heretical Gnostick corruptions of
uncleanness, etc. and that hold out constant, against all the terrors of
persecution, and so were rescued from the sins of that wicked age, the pure
primitive Christians, those first fruits to God, and the Lamb, that never fell
off to any false, Idolatrous, or heretical practice, but served God blameless.]

Rev. 17.1, 2, 1, 4, 5.
Revel. 17.1. to 5. ver. contains the Vision of Rome-heathen [Another vision I
saw to the same purpose; one of those executioners of God's wrath, came unto
me, saying, I will show thee vengeance, that is ready to befall the Imperial
dignity of Rome, fitly entitled the Great whore (Great in it self; and who for
their impieties against God, their worshipping of many heathen gods, directly
own that title; as an harlot is she, that takes in many others, instead of the
one husband) sitting, i. e. ruling, over many waters; i. e. much people; having
many nations under her Dominion; from the power and authority whereof, many
other Kingdoms have been confirmed, and fortified in their Idolatrous courses,
and had their false worship propagated to them, the whole Roman Empire running
mad after her vile heathen practices. And in this vision, me-thoughts I was in
a desert, (fit to represent the desolation to be expressed in the Vision) and
there I saw what he had promised me, verse 1. a woman; i. e. that great whore
there mentioned, the Imperial power of Rome-heathen, seated on an Empire in a
scarlet robe, a great blasphemer against the true God, and a forwarder of
Idolatry; and he had seven heads; the City of Rome built on seven hills; and
ten horns, i. e. so many other Kings, that ruled over diverse countries, and
were confederate with the Roman Emperor. And this Roman power was in
prosperity, much sumptuousness was bestowed on their Idol-worship, and all
manner of abominable filthiness was committed therein; which being so srequent,
and ackowledged in their secreter devotions, are best described by the word
Mystery, (a word the Greeks used for their uncleanest meetings) and by Babylon,
which of old was famous for these, and so destroyed; and from hence came all
the Idolatry of the other cities, even from this Mother of Harlots, a great
persecutor of the Christians, etc.]

Rev. 18.40. ver. is a warning unto Christians, upon the destruction coming on
this great heathen City, to depart. [Another voice, Rev. 18.40.
me-thought, I heard, warning all Christians to come out of her; that is,
first, to abstain strictly from all communication with her sins, contrary to
what the looser sort of Christians then did: and secondly, to depart out of the
city; (as the Emperor Honorius, and Bishop Innocentius did, to Ravenna, at the
time of Alaricus's siege:) And thirdly, to flee to the Basilica, or Christian
Church, at the time of the plundering or destroying Rome, (as the Christians
did) as the only way of rescuing them from that destruction.]

Catech. p. 79. 80.
Lastly, Scripture instances of severity, alleged against persons, who, by
ignorance, neglect, or regardlesness, have miscarried, in not observing exactly
God's will and appointment, in, and about his Worship.

This was the case, says the Catechist,

1. "Of Nadab and Abih^ Levit. 10.1, 2.

Their fault was, Offering strange fire, which the Lord commanded not; i. e.
as we before, upon examination, found it, a breach of God's positive command,
who had limited them to the fire on the Altar, and the keeping of it there for
holy uses. -- Some of the Hebrews charge them farther, Munster. in loc.
with gross misdemeanour, in giving themselves to drink; etc. Upon which
occasion, they judge that Precept to have followed, ver. 8.9. The Lord spoke
unto Aaron, saying, Do not drink wine, nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons
with thee, when ye go into the Tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die. --

Secondly, Of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.3, 8, 9, 32, 35.

Their sin was this: Having seditiously engaged a considerable party of the
Princes of the Assembly, famous in the congregation, Number. 16.2, 3.
men of renown, (the chief Senators of note), Deuteronomy. 33. 4, 5. Moses King in
Jesurun.
They gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, (suppose
their King and High Priest) and said unto them, Ye take too much upon you,
seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among
them: Wherefore then lift you up your selves above the congregation of the
Lord? i. e. Why do you usurp and tyrannize over God's people? their just
rights, liberty, and privileges, who are as good and holy as your selves, and
as gifted for public ministry, as your selves? Hear we now Moses his reply,
and that will give us farther to understand their miscarriage. verse. 8, 9, 10,
11.
And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi, Seems it but a
small thing unto you, that the God of Israel has separated you from the
Congregation of Israel, to bring you near unto himself, to do the service of
the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the Congregation, to minister
unto them? And he has brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren, the sons
of Levi, with thee; and seek ye the Priesthood also? for which cause, both
thou, and all thy company are gathered together against the Lord: and what is
Aaron that ye murmur against him? that is, I have settled this order among you,
by God's authority, and he has called Aaron to the Priesthood, which you
Levites, instead of being thankful for, and contented with your lot of
Ministry, affect; and therefore this insurrection of yours to that end, is, by
way of evident interpretation, against the Lord. This especially for Korah:
Dathan and Abiram, besides their share in this guilt, are found moreover,
positive Contemners of Moses his command, and Revilers of his conduct and
government, occasioning all their sufferings; as if he had aimed at nothing but
the establishment of an absolute dominion to himself, ver. 12, 13, 14,
in their slavery. And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab,
which said, We will not come up. Is it a small thing, that thou have brought us
up out of a Land that flows with milk and honey, to kill us in the Wilderness,
except thou make thy self altogether a Prince over us? Moreover, thou have not
brought us into a Land that flows with milk and honey, or given us inheritance
of fields and Vineyards; Will thou put out the eyes of these men? We will not
come up. This is the true description of the sin of these men.

And we learn, by the way, That the sacred Ministry then, even in the lowest
order of it, was a state separated from the people, were their holiness or
gifts, otherwise never so considerable; and, That there were different degrees
of Ministry then appointed by God, whose will it was, that every one among them
should keep his place, and not the Levite to invade the Priesthood, also; yea,
and none of them, nor the whole Congregation of people with them, upon any
pretense to make a mutiny and insurrection against Moses and Aaron, the chief
Governors, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, by God, and under God, set over them.

This murmuring, usurpation, and rebellion, was the sin of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram. Their punishment now follows. Ver. 31, 32, 33.
-- The ground clave asunder, that was under them, and the earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that
appertained unto Korah, and all their goods. They, and all that appertained to
them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them, and they
perished from among the Congregation. -- And there came out a fire from the
Lord, Vet. 35. Ver. 41.
and consumed the 250 men that offered incense; viz. those presumptuous
invaders of the Priesthood. And yet, notwithstanding these miraculous judgments
from heaven, upon these factious, and seditious rebels, the people were so
leavened with their infecting principles, that the very next day, they
generally murmur against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ver. 41.
Ye have killed the people of the Lord. -- namely, these good men, Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, and the renowned Senators that stood up with them for our
privileges. And upon this, came the Plague, V. 49.
whereof dyed fourteen thousand, and seven hundred more of them. And now, let
the Brethren make their best advantage of this story; only, it may not be amiss
to immind them farther, St Jude, ver. 11.
that there is such a thing also mentioned in the New Testament, as Perishing
in the gainsaying of Kore.

Thirdly, Of the sons of Ely; "A sin not to be expiated with sacrifices and
burnt-offerings for ever. 1 Samuel 2.28, 29. -- Wherefore kick ye at my
sacrifice, and at mine offering, which I have commanded in my habitation, and
honor thy sons above me, to make your selves fat with the chiefest of all
the offerings of Israel my people? --

But if we look a little backward, we shall be farther satisfied, what was the
monstrous provocation of these sons of Eli. Ver. 22, 24.
They lay with the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation -- and made the Lord's people to transgress. --

Now, who, of any modesty, would presume to compare and equallize the admission
of certain humane praescriptions, for the ordering of God's external worship,
with such a villainy as this?

Fourthly of Vzza, in putting the Ark into a Cart, when he should have born it
upon his Shoulders, 1 Chronicles. 16.13.

He means, I suppose, chap. 13.7, 9, 10. where we have the account of Vzza's
miscarriage and judgment, There we read indeed of the Ark of God carried in a
new cart, out of the house of Aminadab, and Vzza and Ahio driving the cart. But
that which the Catechist fixes on, was none of Vzza's condemnation. The
words of the Text are express against him. 1 Chronicles. 13.9, 10.
And when they came to the threshing-floor of Chidon, Vzza put forth his hand,
to hold the Ark, for the oxen stumbled. And the anger of the Lord was kindled
against Vzza, and he smote him, because he put his hand to the Ark, and there
he dyed before God.

Here we have a taste of that reverence which persons of this way do bear to
the Holy Scripture, in their ex-tempore discourses of it. Is not this plainly
to alter, and add to the Holy word of God? -- The Catechist says, [ Vzza dyed
for putting the Ark into a Cart, when he should have born it upon his
shoulders.] The Text says, [ Vzza was smitten with "death, because he put his
hand to the Ark;] namely, to support, and hold it, when the oxen stumbled. And
the Margin referrs to Numb. 4.15. Numb. 4.15.
The sons of Kohath shall come to bear it (the Sanctuary), but they shall not
touch any holy thing, lest they die. Upon which place, Mr. Ainsworth notes,
Mr. Ainsworth on that place.
This judgment here threatened, was executed upon Vzza, a Levite, who, putting
his hand to the Ark of God, was therefore smitten of God, 1 Chronicles. 13.10. Let
them take more heed for the future, of quoting Scripture thus without book,
without first examining of it. It is highly incongruous for them, who pretend
so much to honor, and cleave in all things exactly to the written word, thus
to mis-represent, and abuse, as well as misapply it. Cat. p. 57.
So the Catechist elsewhere also does, when he invidiously compares the
affections excited by the decent rites, and usages of the Churches appointment,
to [ inflaming themselves with Idols, Isa. 57.5.] In which place the Prophet
speaks, either of those lusts which their Idolatries led them to; or those
venereous fires, which represented their going a whoring after Idols, slaying
the children in the valleys, and offering them unto them. But I proceed.

5. Of Vzziah the King, in offering incense contrary to God's institution, that
duty being appropriated unto the Priests of the posterity of Aaron, 2 Chronicles.
26.16.19.

A note here is needless, it being said, that he acted contrary to God's
institution. I will therefore only specify the words of the text, wherein
yet, there is some farther emphasis. -- But when he was strong, 4 Chron. 26.16,
17, 18, 19.
his heart was lifted up to his destruction; for he transgressed against the
Lord his God, and went into the Temple of the Lord, to burn incense upon the
Altar of incense. And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him
fourscore priests of the Lord, that were valiant men, and they withstood Uzziah
the King, and said unto him, It pertains not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn
incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests, the sons of Aaron, that are
consecrated to burn incense. Go out of the Sanctuary, for thou have trespassed,
neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God. Then Uzziah was wroth,
and had a censer in his hand to burn incense; and while he was wroth with the
Priests, the Leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the Priests, in the
house of the Lord, from beside the incense Altar. --

Fair warning to all that usurp the Priests office, and take that honor unto
themselves, not being first called, and consecrated thereunto.

6. As a token in the New Testament, of God's displeasure, in temporal
visitations, on such miscarriages in his Church, 1 Cor. 11.30. For this cause,
says the Apostle, many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. -- That
cause, if looked into, will appear no other than a perverting of the whole
design of the sacred Eucharist, with the feast of charity thereto adjoined; the
turning of it into a common meal, Not discerning the Lord's body; with many
factions, and uncharitable abuses.

7. The Catechist closes these instances, with an intimation of a more severe
punishment now substituted against such transgressions, in the room of that
which God so visibly inflicted under the Old Testament, Hebr. 10.25, 26, 27,
28, 29.

The words are these. -- Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves, as the
manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see
the day approaching. For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses law, dyed without mercy, under
two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be
thought worthy, who has trodd^n under foot the Son of God, and has counted
the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and
has done despite unto the Spirit of grace?

In this place, the Apostle speaks apparently of that heinous sin of wilful
Apostasy from Christianity, and the despiteful rejection of it, and therefore
it is certainly mis-applyed to any miscarriages of an inferior aggravation.

Thus now, I have, by God's help, reflected upon those Scripture-quotations,
which the Catechist has here and there dispersed, to invite, or frighten his
Reader, to an entertainment of his admired Principle, That nothing may be used,
or allowed of, in or about the worship of God, which is not commanded or
instituted in the written Word. And this concludes the first and general part
of my Discourse.

PART II.
CHAP. I.
The Catechist's confidence, with the boldness usual to men of his way,
remarqued. His sixfold enumeration of Gospel-institutions. The first of them
fixed upon, viz. The calling, gathering, and settling of Churches, with their
officers, as the seat, and subject of all other solemn instituted Worship.
Quaery, How settled Churches are the subject of all instituted worship, since
Preaching of the word goes before them; which the Catechist names for the
fourth Gospel Institution.

I Pass forward now, to the examination of some particulars; and He, certainly,
who so confidently asserts, That Christ has published all the Laws of his own
Discipline; and, That the persuasion of any, that he has not prescribed all
things wherein his worship is concerned, proceeds from their negligence in
enquiring, may well be expected to give the world a good, punctual, and clear
account of these matters. Only in the entrance into this task, it may not be
amiss to observe, how boldly the men of this way are accustomed to reflect upon
our B. Savior, on the supposition, that he has not ordered and appointed all
particulars, as they imagine. Thus formerly, in the book of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, it was averred, Nisi Reip. suae statum omnem constituerit*
magistratus ordinarit, singulorum munera potestatemque descripserit. quae
judiciorum, forique ratio habenda, quomodo elvium finienda lites; non solum
minus Ecclesiae Christianae providit quam Moses olim Iudaica, sed quam a
Lycurgo, Solonae, Numa civitatibus suis prospectum sit. Lib. de Eccles. Discipl.
That, unless Christ would show himself less faithful than Moses, and less
wise than Lycurgus, Solon, Numa, those Heathen Legislators, he must needs have
set down in holy Scripture, a certain complete, and unchangeable form of
Church-politie.

Well, But which are the principal institutions of the Gospel to be observed in
the worship of God?

Cat. p. 23. 14.
To this, the Catechist Answers:

(1) The calling, gathering, and settling of Churches, with their officers, as
the seat and subject of all other solemn instituted worship. (2) Prayer, with
Thanksgiving. (3) Singing of Psalms. (4) Preaching the word. (5) Administration
of the Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. (6) Discipline and
rule of the Church collected and settled; most of which have also sundry
particular duties relating to them, and subservient unto their due observation.
[(1) Matthew. 28.19, 20. Act. 2.41, 42. 1 Cor. 12, 28. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Matt. 18,
17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 4.17. -- 7.17. Act. 14.23. Titus 1.5. 1 Timoth. 3.15. (2) 1
Timoth. 2.1. Acts 6.4. Acts 13.2, 3. (3) Ephesians. 5.19. Coloss. 3.16. (4) 2 Timothy
4.2. Act. 2.42. 1 Cor. 14.3. Act. 6.2. Heb. 13.7. (5) Matt. 28.19. Matt. 26.26,
27. 1 Cor. 11.23. (6) Matt. 18.17, 18, 19. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Rev. 2.3.]

I will not dispute the number of these Gospel-institutions, here enumerated,
but take them in order, as they are reckoned up, applying. as I pass, the
General Rule, That nothing must be done in, or about, any of these institutions
of Gospel Worship, but what Christ has commanded; that others may see how well
the Catechist keeps to his rule. And then, adding, where the matter shall
require it, some truer accounts of the points discoursed on.

[First then, of the calling, gathering, and settling of Churches, with their
officers, as the seat and subject of all other solemn instituted worship.]

It may be, to ordinary heads, some difficulty to understand, How settled
Churches, with their officers, are the subject, and seat, of all other
instituted worship, since preaching of the Word, reckoned up by him, as the
fourth Gospel-institution, must be premised in order to the calling, gathering,
and settling of all Churches. But I will not insist upon this scruple.

We will consider what is offered us, 1. Of Churches. 2. Of Church Officers.
And, 1. Of Churches.



CHAP. II.
The Catechist's general doctrine of Churches, proposed. Proofs from the
Catholic Church, or the National Church of the Jews, impertinent to his
particular Churches. The Catechist's texts for Christ's institution and
appointment of such particular Churches, as the foundation-ordinance of
Gospel Worship, examined. St. Cyprian's comment upon those words, Where two or
three are gathered to-together in my name, I am with them. Particular Churches
acknowledged to have been intended, and approved by Christ, though not in the
Catechist's sense, nor by the cogency of his arguments. The proper difference
between the Jewish and Christian Church, stated.

Cat. p. 89.
[Q. "WHat is an instituted Church of the Gospel?

Answ. A society of persons called out of the world, or their natural worldly
state, by the administration of the word and spirit, unto the obedience of the
faith, or the knowledge and worship of God in Christ; joined together in an
holy band, or by special agreement, for the exercise of the Communion of
Saints, for the due observation of all the ordinances of the Gospel.]

p. 108.
[ Q. By what means do persons, so called, become a Church of Christ?

Answ. They are constituted a Church, and interested in the rights, power, and
privileges of a Gospel Church, by the will, promise, authority, and law, of
Jesus Christ, upon their own voluntary consent and engagement, to walk together
in the due subjection of their souls and consciences unto his authority, as
their King, Priest, and Prophet, and in an holy observation of all his
commands, ordinances, and appointments.]

Now in the explication of these Answers, the Catechist declares,

First, What Church he treats of; p. 90.
viz. Not the Catholic Church of Elect Believers, nor the universality of
Professors of the Gospel; but particular Churches, and these particular
Churches, p. 91.
as opposed unto a National Church.]

Those proofs then, which relate to the Catholic Church, which is the body of
Christ, are not to be reduced unto this matter. Such as Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21,
22. Ephesians. 4.16. insisted on by him, p. 115. and elsewhere. p. 115.


Those proofs also, which are fetched from analogy, as resemblance with the
National church of the Jews, are to this matter impertinent. Such as Exodus
24.3. Deuteronomy. 5.25. referred to p. 92. And again, with Josh. 24.18, 21, 22. p.
112. p. 92. 112.


Secondly, His next work is, to prove, and demonstrate, That such particular
Churches are themselves an ordinance of the New Testament, instituted, and
appointed by Christ. And his proofs are these;

p. 94.
First, They are appointed, and approved by Christ, Matt, 18.15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20. If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault,
between thee and him alone, etc. -- Then tell it the Church; but if he neglect
to hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as an heathen man, and a publican.
Verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven, etc. Again, I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth, as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them, of my Father
which is in Heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them.

That this could not be the Church of the Jews, p. 95.
he takes pains to prove, p. 95. A conceit, I should think, not very likely to
come into any one's head about it. And then concludes, That no Society, p. 97.
but that of a particular Church of the Gospel, could be here intended.

None, I presume, will deny, but that particular societies of Christians, were
intended, and are approved by Christ: the only question is, of such particular,
gathered, and covenanting-Churches, as the Catechist treats of; and the only
thing I here examine, is, the pertinencie of his proofs for such. And the truth
is, particular Churches are indeed here supposed by Christ, but not in this
place instituted and appointed. Approved and allowed here they are, but not
here appointed; but then, this cannot be here inferred convincingly, neither
from the word Church, which does most probably here denote, the Governors of
the Church only, the Church-representative, as we are wont to speak; the same
with those You that follow, those that have the power from God of binding and
loosing, v. 18. The Apostles and their Successors, the rules of the Christian
Assemblies; to whom alone this power is given by Christ, S. John 20.21, 22, 23,
verses. And for the last clause, -- Where two or three are gathered together in
my name, -- it may not be improper to add the words of St. Cyprian upon it,
against the Novatian Schismatics, who had it frequently in their mouths. --
Let them not, Nec se quidam vana interpretatione decipiant, quod dixetit
Dominus, Ubicunque fuerint duo aut tres -- Corruptores Evangelii atque
interpretes falsi extrema ponunt, and superiora praetereunt patris (partis,
nisi velit patris diaboli) memores, and partem subdole comprimentes. Ut ipsi ab
Ecclesia scissi sunt, ita capituli unius sententiam seindunt. Dominus enim, cum
discipulis suis unitatem suaderet and pacem, Dico, inquit, vobis quoniam si
duobus ex vobis convenerit in terra. -- Ostendens non multitudini sed
unanimitati deprecantium plurimum tribui. Si duobus, inquit, ex vobis --
unitatem prius posuit, concordiam pacis ante praemisit. ut conveniat nobis
fideliter and firmiter docuit. Quomodo autem potest ei cum aliquo convenire cui
cum corpore ipsius Ecclesiae and universa fraternitate non convenit? Quomodo
possunt duo aut tres in nomine Christi colligi, quos constat a Christo, and
abejus evangelio separari? Non enim nos ab illis, sed illi a nobis recesserunt.
Et cum haereses and schismata postmodum nata sint dum conventicula sibi diversa
constituunt veritatis caput atque originem reliquerunt. Dominus autem de
Ecclesia sua loquitur, and ad hos qui sunt in Ecclesia loquitur; ut, si ipsi
concordes fuerint, si secundum quod mandavit and monuit, duo aut tres licet,
collecti unanimiter oraverint, duo aut tres licet sint, impetrare possint, de
Dei Majestate quod postulant ubicunque furint Duo aut tres, -- cum simplicibus
scilicet, atque pacatis cum Deum timentibus and Dei praecepta servantibus, cum
his duobus vel tribus licet esse se dixit; quomodo and cum tribus pueris in
camino ignis fuit. -- Quando ergo dicit, Ubi fuerint duo aut tres; -- non
homines ab Ecclesia dividit, qui instituit and fecit Ecclesiam, sed exprobrans
discordiam pe^fidis and fidelibus pacem su^ voce commendans, ostendit magis
esse se cum duobus aut tribus unanimiter orantib^s quam cum dissidentibus
plurimis, plusque impetrari posse paucorum concordi prece, quam discordios^
oratione multorum. -- An secum esse Christum cum collecti fuerint opinantur,
qui extra Christi Ecclesiam colliguntur? Cyprian. de Unit. Ecclesiae. S. 10.11.
says he, deceive themselves, with a vain interpretation, because the Lord
has said, Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, I am with
them. These corrupters, and false interpreters of the Gospel, take the later
words, and pass over the former, being mindful of a part, and subtilely
concealing of a part. As they themselves are cut from the Church, so do they
cut the sentence of one Chapter; for our Lord, when he persuaded unity and
peace to his Disciples, I say unto you, says he, that if two of you shall
agree on earth, as touching any thing that ye shall ask, it shall be done for
you, of my Father which is in heaven; for where two or three are gathered
together in my name, I am with them; showing, That very much is given, not to
the multitude, but to the unanimity of those that pray. If two of you, says
he, shall agree on earth; he first placed unity; he before premised the
agreement of peace; he faithfully and firmly taught, that we should agree
together. But how can he agree with any one, who does not agree with the body
of the Church it self, and with the whole Brohood? How can two or three of
those be gathered together in the name of Christ, who are manifestly separated
from Christ and his Gospel? for we have not departed from them, but they from
us. And whereas heresies and schisms are since risen, whilst they make to
themselves diverse conventicles, they have left the head and original of truth.
But our Lord speaks of his Church, and speaks to those who are in that Church;
that if they shall agree together: if, according to what he has commanded and
admonished, although they be but two or three, they shall unanimously pray;
although they be but two or three, they shall obtain from God's Majesty, what
they ask. Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, I (says
he) am with them; viz, with such as are innocent and peaceable; with such as
fear God, and keep his Commandments; with these, be they but two or three, he
has promised his presence; as he was also with the three children in the fiery
furnace. -- When therefore he says, Wheresoever two or three are gathered
together in my name, I am with them; he divides not men from the Church, who
did instruct and make the Church, but, upbraiding the perfidious with their
discord, and by his voice, commending peace unto the faithful; he shows, that
he is more with two or three, praying unanimously, than with never so many,
that are in dissension; and that more may be obtained by the agreeing prayer of
a few, than by the disagreeing prayer of many. And he concludes, -- Do they
think that Christ is with them, when they are gathered together, who are
gathered together out of the Church of Christ? Thus St. Cyprian, to the
Separatists of his time.

Secondly, His next proof is thus expressed. Cat. p. ^7.
[These Churches, he ( i. e. Christ) calls his Candlesticks, Rev. 1.20. in
allusion unto the Candlesticks of the Temple, which, being an institution of
the Old Testament, does directly declare these Churches to be so under the New.
And this he speaks in reference unto those seven principal Churches of Asia,
every one of which was a Candlestick, or an institution of his own.

This certainly, is a very lame proof of Christ's institution of particular
Churches, in the Gospel. Wherein,

First, It is but presumed, that Christ names these seven Churches
Candlesticks, in allusion to those of the Temple, for he has no Scripture for
that; and, it is not improbable, but they may be so called, upon a more general
account, as containing in them those eminent burning and shining lights, here
called Angels, and Stars; or, as holding forth the light of the Gospel
eminently to the world. And,

2. It is weakly inferred, That, because those Candlesticks of the Temple were
God's institutions, therefore these Churches, upon the account of their
resemblance to them, must needs be so also; for Similitudes run not upon all
four; hold not in all particulars. And,

3. These very Churches hold a nearer resemblance unto national, or at least,
provincial Churches, than to those gathered congregations the Catechist speaks
of; for certain it is, that each of these had certain particular congregations
under them.

^at. p. 97. 98.
Thirdly, (he adds) in pursuit of this appointment of Christ, and by his
authority, the Apostles, so soon as any were converted unto the faith at
Jerusalem, although the old National Church State of the Jews was yet
continued, gathered them into a Church or Society, for celebration of the
Ordinances of the Gospel, Act. 2.41, 42. The Lord adding unto this church daily
such as should be saved, ver. 47. And this company is expressly called the
Church at Jerusalem, Act. 8.1. This Church thus called, and collected out of
the Church of the Jews, was the rule and pattern of disposing of all the
Disciples of Christ, into Church-societies, in obedience to his command
throughout the world. Act. 11.26, -- 14.23, 27.

What proof he has given of the appointment of Christ, for conscience to rely
upon, we have seen; yet we are satisfied (though by other guess- evidence than
he brings) that the Apostles did, by Christ's authority, unite the converted
Jews into a Church, or Christian society, and that distinct too, from the
National Church of the Jews, the Church of the Jews being a society of
believers in Christ, as to come; and therefore He being come, their
Church State, as such, must needs give way to the Christian; that is, to the
society of believers in Christ already come; and therefore it is not so well
said by him, that the old National Church State of the Jews yet continued; nor
can I thoroughly reconcile it to what he had more advisedly delivered some pages
before; p. 91.
[The National Church of the Jews, with all the ordinances of it, being
removed, and taken away, the Lord Christ has appointed particular Churches, or
united assemblies of believers.] -- This Church, Planted by the Apostles at
Jerusalem, was the first beginnings of the universal Christian Church, as I
shall afterward declare; and therefore others are said to be added unto this
Church. Many particulars were certainly added unto this Church, before the time
rereferr'd to; Act. 8 1. and so many, that we may well conclude, That Church of
Jerusalem contained several particular congregations under it; yea, all the
Churches afterward mentioned by the Catechist, from the Apostolic writings,
were but as united parts, and members of this Church; added to this Church And
therefore still this prime instance is not to the Catechist's purpose; but it
will be found the destruction of his way to entertain it as the rule and
pattern of disposing all Christ's disciples into Church-societies; of which
hereafter.

Cat. p. 98.99, 100, etc.
The proof of his particular Churches that follows, being derived from the
Apostles, after ordering of certain Churches, giving certain rules and
directions unto them, directing their principal writings to them, etc. needs
not any special reflection to be made upon it in this place.

CHAP. III.
The qualification of his Church Members, enquired into. His opinion, that none
be admitted members of particular Churches, but true believers, real Saints,
(persons regenerated, converted, vivified, illuminated, justified, adopted,
elected) declared. The danger of this opininion, intimated. The Catechist set
against himself, and posed with his own arguments about it. The Word of God,
not the only means of conversion. The solemn League and covenant, required by
the catechist, to the formal constitution of particular churches: The several
pretensions unto this, as Christ's institution, examined and rejected. The
consent required to all other societies, and pattern of the Jewish Church,
untruly, and impertinently urged. The chief reformations of the Jewish Church,
not by any voluntary covenants of the people, but the authority of the supreme
Rulers. 2 Cor. 8.5. abused and misapplyed, to the Macedonian's entrance into a
Church State. The way of the Church at Jerusalem, glanced at. The Baptismal
covenant renewed at Confirmation conformable thereunto, but will not serve the
Catechist's turn. The weakness of other proofs offered.

IN the next place therefore, we are to attend unto the explication given us,
of the nature of a particular Church or Churches: and that according to his own
division.

p. 104.
First, as to the subject matter of them, or the persons whereof such a Church
does, or ought to consist.

Secondly, The means whereby they are brought into a condition capable of such
an estate, or qualified for it. And,

Thirdly, The especial means whereby they are constituted a Church. For, of his
other Particular, the general ends of their calling, I shall move no dispute.

First then, we are to consider the description given us of Church Members, or
the persons whereof particular Churches consist.

p. 89.
Such in the Answer are [Persons called out of their natural worldly estate] and
in the explication, p. 90.
thus; [It is required of them, of whom a particular Church is constituted,
that they be true believers, seeing that, unless a man be born again, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, and so upon that account, they must be members
of the Church catholic. (i. e. of elect believers, as said before) as also,
that they make visible profession of faith and obedience unto Jesus Christ. p.
104 105.
] And again, [All men are by nature the children of wrath, and do belong to the
world, which is the Kingdom of Satan, and are under the power of darkness, as
the Scripture every where declares; in this state, men are not subjects of the
Kingdom of Christ, nor meet to become members of his Church. Out of this
condition, they cannot deliver themselves, but they are called out of it; This
calling is that which effectually delivers them from the Kingdom of Satan, and
translates them into the Kingdom of Christ. And this work, or effect, the
Scripture, on several accounts, variously expresses. Sometimes by
regeneration, or a new birth; sometimes by conversion, or turning to God;
sometimes by vivification, or quickening from the dead; sometimes by
illumination, or opening the eyes of the blind; all which are carried on by
sanctificaon in holiness, and attended with justification and adoption: -- and
all these concur to complete that effectual vocation, or calling that is
required to constitute persons members of the church. p. 106, 107.
-- This is signified by the typical holiness of the Church of old, into the
room whereof real holiness was to succeed under the New Testament. -- Our Lord
Jesus Christ has laid it down, as an everlasting rule, That, unless a man be
born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. requiring
regeneration, as an indispensible condition in a member of his Church, a
subject of his Kingdom. For his Temple is now to be built of living stones, 1
Pet. 2.5. Men spiritually, and savingly quickened from their death in sin, and,
by the Holy Ghost, whereof they are partakers, made a meet habitation for God,
which receiving vital supplies from Christ, it is head, increases in faith and
holiness, edifying it self in love, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. And, as the Apostles in
their writings do ascribe unto all the Churches, and the members of them, a
participation in this effectual vocation, affirming, that they are Saints,
called, sanctified, justified, and accepted with God in Christ, Romans 1.5, 6. 1
Cor. 1.2. 1 Cor. 4.5. Heb. 3.1. Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 2.5. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. 1 Cor.
6.11. So, many of the duties that are required of them in that relation and
condition, are such, as none can perform unto the glory of God, their own
benefit, and the edification of others, (the ends of all obedience) unless they
are partakers of this effectual calling, Cat. p. 107.
1 Cor. 10.16, 17. 1 cor. 12.12. Ephesians. 4.16. Add hereunto, that these Churches,
and the members of them, are not only commanded to separate themselves, as to
their worship of God, from the world, that is, men in their worldly state and
condition, but are also required, when any among them transgress against the
rules and laws of this holy calling above described, See more Cat. p. 210. in
the Answ. to Q. 47.
to cast them out of their society and communion. 1 Cor. 5.13.]

By all which, it plainly appears to be the Catechist's doctrine, That none may
be admitted as members of particular Churches, but true believers, real Saints,
effectually called. i. e. as he explains it, regenerated, converted, vivified,
illuminated, justified, and adopted ones; persons, savingly quickened from the
death in sin, and vitally united to Christ the Head; and That these Churches
are to be separate in their communions from all men in their worldly state and
condition.

A dangerous encouragement to all that are admitted into their Societies, to
presume themselves of God's elected ones; but a sure proof, if granted, That
true believers may fall aw^y from grace, and so perish; it being certain, that
some of the members of particular Churches have so done.

But, if this be so, I fear, we must be forced to un-church all the Churches of
Christ on earth, and go out of this world, that we may have no fellowship with
masked hypocrites.

I design not here a laborious confutation, intending a positive confirmation
of the truth to follow in the close; it shall suffice therefore, to note, That
the Catechist has forgotten his own distinction, between the Catholic Church
of God's elect, and particular Churches or societies of Christians, when he
thus makes the qualification of the former (whereof yet he warned us to take
notice, that he did not treat) as necessary unto the later; and I will only set
him against himself, it being the property of falsehood usually to confute it
self. His words are these;

[The members of the Catholic Church are not known to one another merely (he
should say, Cat. p. 90.91.
not at all) on the account of that faith and union with Christ, which makes
them so, whence the whole Society of them is, as such, invisible to the world
and themselves, visible only on the account of their profession.] Whence I thus
argue. None are admitted members of particular Churches, but as they are known;
now they are not known on the account of that faith and union with Christ, the
head, which bespeaks them true and sincere Christians, and of the number of
God's elect: Therefore they are not admitted members of particular Churches, on
that account. Again, None are admitted Church Members, so far as they are
invisible; but as to this qualification required, of true grace and conversion,
so they are. Again, Church Members are admitted only so far as they are
visible; but they are visible only on the account of their profession: That
only therefore is required to their admission. Hear we him speak once more,
where he treats of that covenant which formally constitutes a particular Church.

Cat. p. 111.
[In this obedience, says he, they do these two things, which alone, he ( i.
e. Christ) requires in any persons, for the obtaining of an interest in these
(Church-) privileges. First, they confess Him, his person, his authority, his
law, his grace. Secondly, they take upon themselves the observance of all his
commands.]

Now, from hence, I thus argue; If these two things, which alone are required
by Christ, to invest a person with an interest in Church Priviledges, may be
done without real grace, and true conversion; then real grace and true
conversion, are not a qualification indispensibly necessary to
Church Membership: But these two particulars (of confessing Christ, and
promising obedience) which (says the Catechist) alone Christ requires, etc.
may certainly be done without real grace and true conversion: Ergo. -- And now
I leave him to answer these his own arguments; his own arguments, I justly call
them, being so evidently deduced from his own words. This therefore for the
first particular, the subject matter of churches.

Nor will it be necessary, to insist much upon the second, which depends wholly
upon this first, as it is foundation. viz. The means whereby these persons are
brought into a condition capable of their Church State, or qualified for it.

These, both in the answer and explication, Cat. p. 19.107.
are said to be, The administration of the word and spirit of Christ.

The Word, it is true, is the ordinary means whereby it pleases God to convert,
and call home sinners to himself, but yet not the only means. It is not fit
that we limit the operations of the Holy Spirit, unto the word only; sometimes
a cross and affliction, may reduce the prodigal unto himself, and so to his
Father's house. Sometimes a parent's good example, and prudent education, works
indiscernably. And oftentimes, the special and particular account is not to be
given. i. S. John 3.
The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes. So is every one that is
born of the Spirit.

But I proceed rather, to the third, and last point to be observed; namely, the
especial means whereby these persons, so fitly qualified for Church Fellowship,
are made a Church; and that we have also set down, both in the Answers and in
the Explication. In the Answers [joyned together in an holy band, Cat. p. 89.
or by special agreement] [upon their own voluntary consent, p. 108.
and engagement to walk together -- ] In the Explication, thus; [being made
willing and ready in the day of his power, p. 111.
Psalm 110.3. they consent, choose, and agree to walk together, in the
observation of all his commands, and hereby do they become "a Church.] And,
that we may know what this voluntary consent is opposed unto, [how shall these
living stones become an house, p 114.115.
a temple? Can it be by occasional occurrences, civil cohabitation in political
precincts, usage, or custom of assembling for some parts of worship in any
place? These things will never frame them into an house or temple. This can be
no otherwise done, than by their own voluntary consent and disposition.] So
afterward, to this Question. [Wherein does the especial form of a particular
Church consist? p 220.
] The Answer is, [In the special consent and agreement of all the members of it
to walk together in the observation of the same ordinances numerically.] A text
of Scripture, by the way, would do well for that word numerically. And in the
Explication, p. 221.
[This cannot consist in any thing that is accidental, occasional, or
extrinsecal unto it, such as is cohabitation, (which yet the Church may have
respect unto for convenience, and farthering of it is edification) (Let us mark
that) nor in any civil, p. 222.
or political disposal of its members into civil societies, for civil ends,
which is extrinsecal to all its concernments, as a Church.]

The plain English is, These particular Churches are not Parish-Churches, or
societies of Christians of the same Neighborhood, but culled out here and
there, and embodyed together, by an holy league or covenant, to walk together
in the same ordinances.

Well now, It is but fitting that we have the proof of this from Christ's
institution. For we cannot easily forget what he has lesson'd us.

[Some men are apt to look on this authority of Christ, Cat. p. 86 87.
as that which has the least influence into what they do. If in any of his
Institutions, they find any thing that is suited or agreeable unto the light of
Nature, as Ecclesiastical societies, government of the Church, and the like,
they say, are; they suppose, and contend, that that is the ground on which they
are to be attended to, and so regulated accordingly.] And again, p. 88.
[the suitableness of any thing to right reason, or the light of nature, is no
ground for a church-observation of it, unless it be also appointed and
commanded in especial by Jesus Christ.] And [If we perform any thing in the
worship of God, on any other account, p. 85.
it is no part of our obedience unto him, and so we can neither expect his
grace to assist us, nor his promise to accept us therein, for that he has
annexed unto our doing and observing whatever he has commanded, and that
because he has commanded us.] Nothing therefore will satisfy our conscience
here, but Christ's authority, Christ's command of this mutual Church-league and
covenant, this holy band and agreement. What now does the Catechist offer us as
to this? He tells us, in the general; p. 117.
[Without this consent no society of any kind can exist: This is the form of
men's coalescencies into societies.]

Carnal man! Is this a motive for Church-observance? Shall the light of nature
and reason take up the room of Christ's authority and command? How strongly
inclined is man's nature, to bring in humane devices into the government of the
Church, and the worship of God? -- But the truth is, this light of nature is
very dimm, and this reason none of that we can call right reason. All Societies
depend not upon mutual consent, at least, this voluntary, and free consent.
There is a natural society in Families. And be the ground and foundation of
that civil society we live in, what it will, in its first beginnings; our
children are born under government, and the laws of that society, without
personal consent. Let him therefore mend his politics, that they tend not to
the infecting of religion. For, this Reasoning seems to lead directly to
Anabaptism, a step of perfection whereto, it seems, his principlet have not yet
advanced him. But, it is possible, at long run, he may also end there. However,
Cat. p. 117.
at present, he allows infants to be a proper subject of Baptism. Well then, by
Baptism they are admitted into the Church, and being so admitted, must needs be
looked upon as Church Members, and yet, confessedly made so, entered into that
society, without their voluntary consent. -- We are therefore to seek for
farther satisfaction about this Church Covenant, this joint, p. 115.
voluntrry consent, and form of coalescencie into Church-society. And I am
persuaded, our Catechist has done his best, for our information. Let us then
hear him farther.

[Thus did God take the children of Israel into a Church State of old. Cat. p.
112:
He proposed unto them the Church-obedience that he required of them, and they
voluntarily, and freely took upon themselves the performance of it, Exodus 24.3.
"And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and all the
judgments, and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words
which the Lord has said, will we do. So Deuteronomy. 5.7. And hereby they had their
solemn admission into their Church State and relation unto God. And the like
course they took, whenever there was need of renewing their engagements. Josh.
24.18, 21, 22. And the people said, We will serve the Lord, for he is our God.
And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against your selves, that ye
have chosen the Lord, to serve him, and they said, We are witnesses. This was
the covenant that was between God, and that people, which was solemnly renewed
so often as the Church was eminently reformed. Now, Cat. p. 113.
although the outward solemnity and ceremonies of this covenant were peculiar
unto that people, yet as to the substance and nature of it, in a sacred
consent, for the performance of all those duties toward God, and one another,
which the nature and edification of a Church do require, it belongs to every
Church, as such, even under the Gospel.] But here crowd in abundance of
Exceptions.

In the general, That the practice of a thing in the worship of God, under the
Old Testament, is not any better evidence for Christ's institution, than the
light of nature; and that we have only his bare word for it, that the outward
ceremonies and solemnities of this covenant, were peculiar to that people, and
the substance of it common also unto us.

And then particularly,

1. The words, Church State, and Church-obedience, are somewhat mysterious, as
applied to the Old Testament.

2. The children of Israel, however, were a national Church, and so no pattern
for particular Churches.

3. This was not the first time of their Church State, or Church-obedience, and
communion, when this covenant was made, Exodus 24. The Passover service, Exodus
12. may look very like a Church-act. And was not circumcision long before, a
seal of a Church State, into which they were admitted?

4. This covenant specified, was between God and the people, and not any
voluntary agreement of the people one with another. Nor is it true,

Lastly, That this covenant was solemnly renewed by the people's voluntary
consent, so often as the Church was eminently reformed. The chiefest
reformations on record in the Jewish Church, have been by their supreme rulers,
sometimes without the people's consent, and sometimes commanding and compelling
them to consent. 2 Chronicles. 15.8, 9, 10, 12, 13.
Thus Asa put away the abominable Idols out of all the cities of Judah and
Benjamin, etc. And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with
them, etc. -- And they entered into a Covenant, -- That, whosoever would not
seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great,
man or woman. -- Thus in Hezekiah's reformation; 2 Chronicles. 29.3, 4.5, 10.
He summons the Levites and Priests before him, and sets them about their
proper office, and tells them, it was in his heart to make a Covenant with the
Lord God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away. -- And thus Josiah
made a Covenant before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 14.31, 32.
to walk after the Lord, etc. -- And he caused all that were present in
Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. -- And still, according to the goodness,
or badness of the Prince, Reformation advanced or went backward among them.

Unless therefore, the Catcechist's New Testament proof be more pertinent and
express than the Old, his Church-league and covenant; this mutual agreement and
consent, must no longer be ranked among the institutions of Christ, but at the
best, a Prudential only of man's devising. However, the cause shall not want
for confidence.

[This is the way whereby believers, Cat. p. 113, 114.
or the Disciples of Christ, do enter into this state, the formal constituting
cause of any Church. This account does the Apostle give of the Churches of the
Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8.5. And this they did, not as we hoped, but first gave
their own selves to the Lord, and unto us, by the will of God. -- This
description does the Apostle give of the way whereby the Believers of Macedonia
were brought into Churches. It was by their own obedience to the will of God,
consenting, agreeing, and taking on themselves, the observation of all the
commands and institutions of Christ, according to the direction and guidance of
the Apostles. So did the Believers at Jerusalem, being converted by the Word,
and making profession of that conversion in their Baptism, they gave up
themselves to a steadfast continuance in the observation of all other ordinances
of the Gospel. Act. 2.41, 42.]

As to the first of these instances; It is manif^stly abused, to another
purpose than St. Paul meant it; for, he does not give there a description of
the way whereby the Believers of Macedonia were brought into Churches, but an
high commendation of the charity of those Churches. Not a description, I say,
of any Covenant or agreement, which did formally constitute them a Church; that
is obvious from the tenor of his discourse, which was, to give the Corinthians
notice of that excellent grace of Charity God had bestowed on the Churches of
Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.
verse. 1, And from that which follows, verse 6. his desire to perfect among
them at Corinth, the same grace (of Liberality) also; for he was not now
seeking to bring them into a Church State, they were already the Church of God
at Corinth, chapter 1. ver. 1. but to awaken their bowels of compassion to a free
contribution unto the distressed Saints at Jerusalem and in Judea. And this the
more powerfully to effect, he tells them of the great forwardness of the
Churches of Macedonia, who, says he, notwithstanding their great afflictions
and sufferings, and their poverty thereby, (See Act. 16.17. 1 These. 2.14.) were
yet so rich in liberality, as, of themselves, to prevent the Apostle's
importunity (to whom this work and care of looking after the supply of the poor
Saints, was committed by the rest at Jerusalem, Gal. 2.10.) Yea, to become
earnest suitors to the Apostle, to receive their benevolence, and trouble
himself with the distribution of it; yea, and (as it is thought by Learned
Interpreters) to offer some of their own number to go to Corinth; and that as a
motive to St. Paul to send Titus thither speedily, (as it follows, verse 6.)
"to promote the same good work among the Christians there. The sense then of
these words here relied upon, [And this they did not as we hoped, but first
gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us, by the will of God] is to
amplify their signal charity, reflecting upon what had been said before. As if
the Apostle had said, They did not only equal, but exceed our expectations;
What they gave us, was more than we could look for from their poverty, and the
cheerful, and ready manner of their giving, was beyond our thoughts or hopes;
they consecrated not only their goods, but themselves also, to this service,
God so moving their hearts, etc.

This, I conceive, is most evidently the true sense and scope of that place,
which has not the least glance toward their way of admission to a
Church State, as is by the Catechist pretended.

And then, for the believers at Jerusalem, Act. 2.41, 42. all we find, is this;
That, being upon their profession of Christianity baptized, they were, by that
means, added unto the Church, and being added, continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in Breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

Not the least syllable of any other Covenant than that of their Christianity,
entered into at their Baptism, and a tacit promise included in their very
admission into the Church, to submit themselves to all the orders and
observances thereof.

Now, if thus much would serve the turn, the Baptismal covenant included in the
very profession of Christianity, we require it solemnly at the entrance of
every member into the Church; the solemn uttering of it, with his own mouth, as
the Oath of Fidelity and Allegiance unto Christ, if he be of years of
discretion; or, however, the express owning of what was answered in his name,
when baptized an infant, at his Confirmation, when he comes to age and
knowledge. Thus much we require for his actual qualification for the
privileges of adult believers.

But this is not the sacred bond of special agreement pleaded for; this is not
the Catechist's joint voluntary consent, to the same Ordinances numerically; if
it be, let him abandon his canting words, and speak understandably, and we are
agreed. But there is reason enough to think somewhat else is aimed at.

The Independent Churc^es are made up of certain persons, culled here and there
out of the number of professed Christians, and combined into a select, and
separate communion from other Professors, by some more special league and
covenant; for which we may expect Scripture evidences, as soon as for their
gathered Churches themselves.

Yet one proof farther, the Catechist offers us; and we had not need overlook
any, since the rest are found so nothing to his purpose.

[Besides the Church, is an House, Cat. p. 114. 115.
a Temple, the House of God. 1 Timothy 3.15. The House of Christ, Heb. 3.6. The
Temple of God, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. Believers singly considered, are stones, living
stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. Now, how shall these living stones become to be an house, a
temple? Can it be by occasional occurrences, civil cohabitation in political
precincts, usage, or custom of assembling for some parts of worship in any
place? These things will never frame them into an House or Temple. This can be
no otherwise done, than by their own voluntary consent and disposition, Ephesians.
2.19, 20, 21, 22. Ye are fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household
of God, etc. chap. 4.6. From whom the whole body fitly joined together, etc.
From these, and sundry other places, it is manifest, That the way and means of
Believers coalition into a Church State, is their own obedience of Faith,
acting it self in a joint voluntary consent, to walk together in an holy
observation of the commands of Christ, whence the being and union of a
particular Church is given unto any convenient number of them by his law and
constitution.]

Now we have all; and his sundry other places, we may guess at, by those
alleged. In these, it is familiar with him to apply what is spoken of the
Catholic Church, which is the Household of God, and Body of Christ, to his
particular Churches. -- But I must confess my own ignorance, that I understand
not the cogency of this argument from these similitudes. The Church is an
House, a Temple, etc. Believers living stones, Therefore these must needs come
together into this beautiful form, by a mutual consent, etc. Or, Therefore
Church-communions may not be prudentially appointed, by determining certain
numbers of Christians, that dwell together in certain precincts, into orderly
societies, for the worship and service of God, and the due practice of other
offices of their Christianity. The Catechist should do well to remember, that
he has told us elsewhere, Ca^. p. 221, 222.
That the Church may have respect unto civil cohabitation for convenience and
edification; and to consider withal, that he has told us, p. 117.
This consent is the form of men's coalescencie into all societies; and then it
may prove dangerous to civil cohabitations, and political precincts themselves
too, upon the force of his way of arguing. -- But I will not examine this
matter farther, I shall rather endeavor to give some light to those that are
willing to be informed of that account which the Scripture gives us of the
Christian church, or Churches.

CHAP. IV.
A Scripture-account given of the Christian Church. Christ speaks of it as
afterward to be built. The power of planting, and building it, to whom, and
when given. The beginnings of this Church left by Christ. The story of its
first building by St. Peter, Act. 2. Baptism upon Profession, the door of
entrance. The practice after admission. The Christian-Church defined. Of
Churches, as many; and Church, as one. The necessary qualification of
Church Members. The visible Church, a communion of Professors wherein are good
and bad, Saints and Hypocrites are mixed together. The Minister's unworthiness
nulls not the efficacy of Divine Ordinances, The presence of evil members in
Church Communion, hurts not those who consent not to their sins and impieties.

THe word Church, in the New Testament, imports chiefly, the Society of
Christians; i. e. Believers in Christ already come. See Dr. Pearson on the
Creed. Artic. 9.
And it is (in St. Paul's language, Ephesians. 2.19, 20.) The household of God, built
upon the foundations of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief cornerstone. Our B. Savior speaks of the Church, in this sense to
his Apostle Peter, as a thing which was to be; a thing to be after builded,
Upon this Rock will I build my Church. St. Matt. 16. 18.
Upon the Rock, confessed by him, Jesus the Christ, the Son of the Living God,
principally; and yet instrumentally too, upon this Rock, St. Peter one of the
twelve foundations of the Church, (Revel. 21.14.) and, as we shall observe, in
the process of Scripture-story, the first builder of it.

The peculiar power of raising this Church, was given to the Apostles, after
our Savior's Resurrection, when he issued forth his Commission to them, St.
Matt. 28. 19, 20.
To go out in his name, and preach the Gospel among all Nations, and so make
Disciples, baptizing them in the name, (and into the acknowledgment) of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching them (so admitted) to observe all
things whatsoever he commanded. In our Creed therefore, the mention of the
Church follows the profession of Faith made in God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. All the members of this Church, are supposed to be baptized in the
Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and this Church is the
universal Society of them who believe in, and worship the Tri-une God, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Well, The Commission for planting this Church in the world, issued forth from
our Savior after his Resurrection, when he appointed them to preach
repentance, St. Luke 24.
and remission of sins, in his name, among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem,
to witness and testify the Articles of Christian faith, and to incorporate,
and embody, all that should believe, into one society, by Baptism; But he
commands them expressly to tarry in the city of Jerusalem, verse. 47, 48, 49.
till they were endued with power from on high, till they received the promised
gift of the Holy Ghost, to qualify them with extraordinary abilities for this
work committed to them, that the Spirit might accompany them in the world as
Christ's advocate.

Now all the remarkable Actions we read among the Apostles, after Christ's
ascension, till the pouring forth of the Spirit, was, only the choice of a
substitute among themselves, in the room of Judas, Act. 1.28.
that fell by his transgression, to complete their number; and accordingly, we
read, Matthias was chosen by lot, to take part of the Ministry and Apostleship
with them, and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles. ver. 15.
And the number of the names together there assembled, Apostles and Disciples,
left by Christ, were about an Not that these were all that were then believers,
(for we read of above 500 brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15.6. to whom Christ
appeared after his Resurrection) but all at that time assembled.
hundred and twenty.

This then was the beginning of the Christian Church, left by Christ; now the
first remarkable building, and increase of this Church, we have an account of,
Acts 2.

After that the Holy Ghost descended on them at Jerusalem, on the day of
Pentecost, according to Christ's promise, (whence the mention of the Church,
planted by the Apostles, fitly comes in our Creed, immediately after the
Article of the Holy G^ost); St. Peter, filled with the Spirit, stands up, and
preaches to the multitude, and is the means of converting 3000 souls,
according to the promise, -- Upon this Rock will I build my Church.

Now, This three thousand, added to the remnant left by Christ, upon St.
Peter's Sermon, are the first society that we read expressly called a Church in
the New Testament. So they are called, Act. 2.47. and we read not of any so
called before them.

Here then is the beginning of the Apostolic Church, the society of those that
believe in Jesus Christ, conceived by the H. Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary,
etc. which was the prime doctrine of the Apostles, the Society of these
baptized believers. Nor can a truer account be given of the Christian Church,
than by perusing diligently this story, where we have a clear description of,

The entrance of these three thousand into the Church. And,

Their practice after that entrance.

The sum is this:

St. Peter first preaches, and the substance of his Sermon is, the Doctrine
concerning Christ, and the point of Repentance, Faith and Repentance; advising
all that believed, embraced, and would profess this Doctrine, to be baptized.
And this was the door of their entrance into the Church, ver. 41. Then they
that gladly received his word, were baptized, and the same day there were added
unto them, (that is, to the 120) about 3000 souls. Baptism upon a profession of
faith and repentance, was their entrance into the Church.

Now then, their demeanor, being so entered and admitted, follows, ver. 42.44.
They continued steadfastly, and that together, in the Apostles Doctrine, and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. They persevered in
hearing the Apostles teach, in observing the orders of their society, and all
mutual offices of charity, in eating the Lord's Supper, and praying together.

So that here we are sufficiently resolved about the Christian Church, namely,
That it is a visible company of persons thus admitted, and thus continuing,
being once admitted. And this is the Church which was daily increased
afterward, and is to be preserved, and increased to the end of the world, by
the continued addition and accessions of other persons received into it, upon
the same terms, by the same door of entrance, and demeaning themselves, being
entered, after the same manner. Of these 3000, it is said, they were added to
the Apostles and Disciples, left by Christ, ver. 41. And, To this Church the
Lord added daily such as should be saved, verse 47. And this is the Church,
which our B. Savior promised to set up, and uphold for ever in the world, and
that the gates of Hell should not prevail against it. St. Matthew. 16.18. viz.

The Society of professing penitents and believers, baptized into the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and communicating together in the Apostolical
Doctrine, Discipline, Sacraments, and Devotions.

Now this Society afterward increasing, by the great multitude of believers,
was, of necessity, to be sub-divided into certain particulars, for the
performing of joynt-service to God, in an orderly communion; as accordingly it
was by the Apostles authority and direction. And that is the ground, why we
sometimes read of Church, in the singular number, as of one; and sometimes
again of Churches, as of many. I will declare this matter somewhat more
distinctly.

Sometimes we read of Churches, as many. They went through the Cities, Act.
16.4, 5.
and delivered the decrees of the Apostles to be kept, and so were the Churches
established in the faith, and increased in number daily. -- Romans 16 14.
All the Churches of the Gentiles. -- 1 Cor. 14 33.
All the Churches of the Saints. -- The brother, 2 Cor. 8.18, 19.
whose praise is in the Gospel, through all the Churches. -- And, Chosen of the
Churches, to travel with us. -- I robbed other Churches, chapter 11.8, 28.
to do you service. -- On me, daily, Act. 9.31.
the care of all the Churches. -- Gal. 1.21, 22.
The Churches throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, etc.

These Countries, through the successful preaching of the Gospel, had many
particular Churches, or congregations of the faithful, united under some
Minister or Bishop; the lesser congregations under some inferior minister. And
thus we read of a few believers convened together in the house of one single
person, as a Church. Romans 16.5.
Greet Priscilla and Aquila, likewise greet the Church in their house. The
Churches of Asia salute you, 1 Cor. 16.19.
Aquila and Priscilla salute you, with the Church that is in their house.
Salute Nymphas, Col. 4.15.
and the Church in his house. To Philemon, Philem. 1. ver. 2.
our dearly beloved, and fellow laborer, and to the Church in thy house. This
Church in their house, was the baptized believers of the family, with such
other neighbor Christians, as were admitted and received to join in Gods
worship and service with them there. -- Now many of these lesser congregations
were united under a superior Minister, or Bishop. For, in and about, great and
populous cities, there were many such little, and particular Churches, and yet
we may observe, that the Scripture speaks of such particulars, as united
together in one Church. A pertinent instance we have in the Epistle to the
Corinthians, Let your women keep silence in the Churches, 2 Cor. 14.34.
says St. Paul, that is, all the particular congregations belonging unto
Corinth; and yet the same Apostle dedicates this Epistle, not to the Churches
at Corinth, in the plural, 1 Cor. 1.1.
but in the singular number, To the Church of God which is at Corinth. And
thus, in like manner, we read of other great Cities, though there were many
particular, and lesser Churches, in them, and the adjacent parts belonging to
them, yet are they mentioned still but as one Church. So the Church of
Jerusalem, of Antioch, of Caesarea, of Ephesus, of Laodicea; of Smyrna, etc.
The reason this, already intimated: All the particular Churches belonging to
those great Cities, were united under the care and circumspection of one
superior Minister, or Bishop, and were therefore accounted as one Church.
There were many particular, or Parish-churches, as we speak, and yet all but
one Diocese, united under one Bishop, The case is plain, if we look but to the
seven Churches of Asia, in the Revelations. They are numbered, all of them,
according to their single Governors and Overseers, according to their seven
Angels, though each of them was certainly subdivided into many particular
Churches or Congregations. Every congregation of the Saints, with a Minister
among them, Cat. p. 117.
(without which, it is not organically complete; that I may borrow the
Catechist's phrase; nor, as he well calls it, a Spiritual corporation, attended
with rule and government,) was a little Church; and many of these, doubtless,
there were belonging severally to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Revel. chap. 2.3.
Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea; and yet are all these reckoned
but as seven Churches of Asia, because of those seven Angels, or Bishops,
presiding over them.

A collection then, of several congregations, every one of which may be called
a Church, is yet, in the Scripture-propriety, one Church, by virtue of their
subordination in government under one chief guide and ruler. There are many
lesser Churches, which are but members of one greater Church. And so, in like
manner, many of those greater Churches, united under single Bishops, may be no
more than members of one Provincial, or National Church, united under some
common superior, for order sake, whom we call Archbishop, and Metropolitan.
And there may be many Provincial, and National churches, which are yet but
members of the universal church of Christ, derived from the Apostles, which,
however consisting of so many homogeneous parts and members, called churches,
is yet but one Church, because under one supreme governor and ruler, namely,
Christ himself, the Great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls; That whole body
whereof he only is the Head.

Now the necessary badge of every member of Christ's visible Church, or any
particular Churches thereto appertaining, is the profession of faith and
obedience, with Baptism, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
whether that profession be true and in reality, or no; God alone judges. For
the visible Church of Christ is a communion of professors, wherein good and
bad, sincere and hypocrites; are mingled together. There was a Judas, a
Traitor, and false Apostle, among the twelve; and there will be false disciples
mixed with the true, whilst this world stands. Earth is no place for unmixed
communions. We are here in a middle-state and region (as it were) between the
perfection of good and evil. In Hell there are soli mali, evil ones only, and
none good to partake with them. In Heaven, there are soli boni, the good only,
and none that are impure or evil to communicate with them; but on Earth there
continue, and boni and mali, both good and bad together, and so are like to
continue, till their parting, at their remove hence to one of these other
places, the one on the right hand, the other on the left; and then the good
shall be advanced to a blessed society of just men made perfect; and the bad
cast down to the wicked combination of the damned. St. Matt. 13. 24. 30.
The Kingdom of heaven is therefore likened to a field, wherein the wheat and
tares grow together, until the harvest; -- to a net cast into the Sea, chap.
3.12.
good and bad fish; -- to a floor, on which there is chaff as well as corn.
It Is a great House, 2 Timothy 2.20.
in which, there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood, and
of earth, some to honor, and some to dishonor. St. Matthew. 25.32.
It Is a large sheepfold, wherein there are together sheep and goats, to be
separated at the last day. Fortissimo tene, and nuilatenus dubites A ream Dei
esse Ecclesiam Catholicam, and intra eam, usque in finem saeculi frumento
mixtas paleas contineris hoc est, bonis malos sacramentorum communione misceri.
Fulgentius ad Petr. Diacon.
It Is our B. Savior's own maxim, Many are called, and few chosen. A call
therefore, to Church Membership, does not necessarily include, or suppose the
truth of grace. The Church of Christ, indeed, is an holy Church; holy, by
virtue of the baptismal dedication, and separation of all its members unto God;
holy, by virtue of their external calling and profession; holy, by virtue of
their great obligation unto, and provisions for, real holiness; and, lastly,
holy, by virtue of the sincere holiness of the sincere members of it; but it no
ways follows from hence, that none may be looked upon as visible members of
this Church, but such as are truly, and inherently holy.

The Church then, being, as has been said, a mixed communion, there may be
sometimes in it, unworthy ministers, and false and corrupt members, Vide Chem.
ult. de Ecclesia, cap. 5.
and yet is not the efficacy of God's ordinances nulled by the one, nor the
communion it self polluted, barely by the presence of the other.

The efficacy of Church-ordinances depends not on the Minister's worthiness,
but the Divine institution; and therefore cannot be nulled by the Minister's
unworthiness, be that what it will. Suppose the man to have some private
errors, or to be noted for this or that vicious practice: These, indeed, are
things which ought not to be, especially in a man of his place and function;
but, though they should be (as sometimes it is like they may); yet, if he be a
commissioned, and ordained Minister, and do keep to the rightful forms of
administration, the efficacy of God's holy ordinances, he shall not be
prejudiced to the well-disposed, through his error, or impiety. The reason is,
the Ordinances are God's; man's is the ministration of them only; who, if he be
good, is a co-worker with God, and, though he be evil, may yet be an instrument
whereby God works, and conveys his grace to others* Water, we know, may be
brought into a Garden, to cause it to fructify, and bring forth plentifully,
as well by a pipe of wood or lead, or some baser matter, as by a pipe of silver
or gold; and the Prophet Elias his food was not the worse, because a black
Raven served it up. Our B. Savior warns his Disciples, to beware of the leaven
of the Pharisees; but yet he enjoined the hearkening to their sound doctrine,
and learning instruction from them. St. Matt. 23. 2, 3.
The Scribes and Pharisees, says he, sit in Moses seat, and therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their
works, for they say, and do not. He may set others in the right way,
heavenward, who, himself, it may be, (the more the shame and pity) either
stands still, or posts on a contrary way unto destruction. He may preach to
others successfully, who; yet, for want of self-government, proves a castaway
himself. So much may seem intimated by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.27. -- The
personal vices of Ministers, cannot disable the efficacy of Divine ordinances.
True, indeed, they do often prejudice people, against the ways of God, and (as
Eli's sons profaneness did) make them to abhor the sacred offerings; and
therefore all severity is to be used in the Church, for the restraining of such
provocations. But still there is a vice, and fault too, in the people, that
they do, for the sake of evil men, abhor that, which is of it self good and
holy. Where the people are themselves rightly disposed, the good Word and
^acraments of God, shall not, for the Ministers Errors or Vices, lose their
effect.

Neither shall the presence of evil-members in church communion, be the hurt of
such, who consent not to their sins and impieties; for, Quisquis in Ecclesia
been vixerit, nihil ei praejudicant peccata aliena; quia, ut Apostolus dicit,
Quisque proprium peccatum portabit. Gal. 6. Communio igitur malorum non maculat
aliquem participatione Sacramentorum, sed consensione factorum. Aug. Ep. 152.
Quibus mali placent in unione, ipsi communicant eum malis. Quiub^ vero mali
displicent, and eos emendare non possunt, non factis eorum, sed Altar Christi
communicant. Ep. 162. Etiam cogniti mali, non obsunt in Ecclesia, si eos a
communione prohibendi aut potestas desit, aut aliqua ratio conservanda pacis
impediat. Ep. 164.
every one shall bear his own burden. The Society of evil men, (as St. Austin
says well) does not corrupt us, in partaking with them of the same Sacraments,
but in consenting to their wickedness. And again, They communicate with evil
men, who are delighted in their society, as such; but, as for those, who are
displeased with them, and yet are not able to reform them, they communicate not
with their deeds, but Christ's Altar. And again, Evil men, though known in the
Church, do not hurt the good, if there be either power wanting of prohibiting
their communion, or some weighty reason of keeping the peace, hinder the
putting of that power in execution. These are the golden rules of that Learned
Father, who took so much labor and pains in his writings against the
Donatists, and fit they are to be remembered by us.

And it is very good advice which he quotes from St. Cyprian,; Cyprianus ad
Presbyterum Maximum scripsit, Non ideo quoniam zizania in Ecclesia esse
cernimus, ipsi de Ecclesia recedamus. Nobis tantummodo laborandum est, ut
Frumentum esse possimus; ut cum coeperit frumentum Dominicis horrcis condi
fructum pro opere nostro and labor capiamus. Contr. Crescen. Grammat. l. 1. c.
14.
That we are not therefore to depart from the Church our selves, because we see
tares to be in the Church, but only to labor, that we our selves may be pure
grain, that when that corn shall be lodged in God's granaries, we may receive
the fruit of our work and labor.

2 Cor. 2.15, 16.
It Is no prejudice unto those, to whom the Word of God is the savor of life,
unto eternal life, that the same Word, by reason of other men's infidelity,
becomes unto them, the savor of death, unto eternal death.

1 Cor. 11.
It Is no prejudice to the worthy receiver of the Holy Communion, who feeds upon
Christ's body and blood, by faith and love, and Divine meditation, that the
unworthy communicant, at the same time eats and drinks damnation to himself.

The very same meat, we know, is nourishment to a well-disposed stomach, which
to an ill, and depraved one, is the matter of crudities and diseases; nor is it
any whit the less a nourishment unto the healthful, because, it may be, at the
same time, it contributes accidentally to the increase of the sick man's
distemper.

Thus, now, have I declared, with all plainness, as much as seems necessary to
be spoken here, about the nature of Christian Churches, and the qualification
indispensably required in all the members of them.

CHAP. V.
Of the places we call Churches. That all difference of place is not taken away
in the New Testament. St. John 4.20, 21, 22. examined. The Temple at Jerusalem,
on some accounts Typical, on others Moral. David's resolutions of building the
Temple, grounded on a rational piety, and both He and Solomon arguing the
fitness of its Magnificence, by arguments of reason. Scripture-precepts of
reverence to God's house, have no sign in them of being Ceremonial only.
Rationally therefore applied by the Jews to their Synagogues. The Centurion's
Synagogue a proof of his love to their Nation. Christ and his Apostles constant
in frequenting the Temple and Synagogues. Probable it is, that even in the time
of the first Christians, there were certain places peculiar for their serving
God in. Intimations thereof in Sacred Scripture, Act. 11.26. A Local Church, as
early as the name Christians, 1 Cor. 11.18. The house of God opposed to their
private houses. Mr. Mede's conjectures, what that house was, and farther proofs
about it. The general reason of appropriating certain places to God's worship
and service.

YEt before I leave this Argument quite, I will take notice briefly of another
acceptance, familiarly used of the word Church. It Is confessed, indeed that
the word ((...) Ecclesia) which we translate church, does primarily referr to
the persons assembled; but this is no hindrance, but that the same word may at
other times signify the place of their assembling, in like manner, as is usual
with many other words; for instance sake, College, ^ynagogue, Senate, Synod,
etc. Somewhat therefore, of the place, which we are wont, (and that upon ground
enough) to call the church; and this, the rather, because of what the Catechist
has told the world.

Catec. p. 29.
[Under the New Testament all difference of, and respect unto place, is taken
away. John 4.21. The hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor
yet at Jerusasalem, worship the Father; but the hour comes, and now is, when
the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in truth; for the
Father seeks such to worship him. And we are commanded in all places equally,
to make our prayers and supplications. -- ]

Here then, it may not be amiss to consider, first, the true scope and
importance of the place of Scripture here quoted, and then such other
particulars, as shall appear pertinent for our right information about this
subject.

As to the Text of St. John. Our B. Savior was now conversing with a
Samaritan woman, who stood up for the worship of her Country, in Mount Gerizim,
against the Jews, who confined God's solemn appointed worship, St. John 4. 20.
to the Temple at Jerusalem. These are the words of the 20th. verse; [Our
Fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place
where men ought to worship.]. Hereupon therefore, 21. 22. etc.
Christ says unto her, [Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father;] That is,
The worship of God shall be so far from being limited to this place, to this
mountain, that it shall not be restrained to Jerusalem it self; nay, a
desolation shall shortly over whelm both. [Ye worship ye know not what: We know
what we worship.] that is, Ye Samaritans worship the God of the Land, (as it
is declared, 2 Kings 17.26.) without knowledge who that is, and your own Gods
with him; but we Jews worship the eternal God of Heaven, who has revealed
himself to us [for salvation is of the Jews.] The special revelations of God,
beyond what other nations enjoy, belong to the Jews, and so all manner of
advantages tovvard our eternal good. To them God sent his Prophets, and of them
comes the Messiah, the Savior of the world. The Jews then have the privilege
above the Samaritans, or any other people. -- Yet is not this an argument of
the perpetual duration of their way of worshipping God, by their Sacrifices
yearly, and other ceremonial observances, at Jerusalem. [But the hour comes,
and now is, that the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and
in truth; for the Father seeks such worshippers of him;] that is, Now the
time of reformation approaches, wherein God will be worshipped and obeyed no
longer by the Judaical rites, (which are often called carnal, consisting
most-what in external performances, and were to continue only till the time of
Reformation, Messiah's coming) much less, according to the Samaritan false
worship, who worshipped their own Idols together with God, 2 Kings 17. but,
comparatively with these, in a pure, spiritual manner; and such as was typified
by those shadows. And the Son of man is now come to draw all men to this way of
worship. i. e. from the Judaical, and Samaritan way, to the Christian. [God is
a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and truth.] It
is this Christian worship, which he is especially delighted with, as most
suitable to himself; nor indeed, was he ever pleased with any mere bodily
worship, principally, or in, or for it self. He will have our souls joined to
our external performances, and be worshipped after that way of truth, which
answers to the foregoing types and shadows. i. e. after the Christian manner,
by Christ revealed.

But now, how weakly is it from hence inferred, that, because these two places,
whereto the Jews and Samaritans confined their worship, are taken away, and
ruined; or, because there is no special place now under Divine command, as
there was to the Jews; therefore all difference and respect unto places, is
totally removed; neither is there any place to be appointed among Christians,
as peculiar, and separate to God's service. This fallacy lies in drawing an
universal conclusion from particular premises, which will not bear it. And it
is not much unlike to this. Because we are not obliged, as the Jews were, to
come three times a year before God; therefore, under the New Testament, all
difference of, and respect unto time, is also taken away; so that no certain
days may be appointed to God's worship, or have a special stamp of holiness
upon them, on the account of their separation thereunto.

St. Paul indeed wills, 1 Timothy 2.8.
that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting;
Every where therefore we may, upon occasion, pray lawfully, and pray
acceptably; but it follows not thereupon, that we are commanded to pray in all
places equally, and that there are to be no select oratories, and houses of
prayer; It follows not, I say, any more than that, 1 These. 5.
because the same Apostle bids us to pray without ceasing; i. e. continually;
therefore there are no special hours of Prayer, or days to be more peculiarly
set apart for that service. Thus much upon the occasion of the Text of
Scripture, by the Catechist referred unto.

Now it may deserve farther to be considered;

First, That the Temple it self, at Jerusalem, though it were, upon some
accounts, typical, yet had a moral end too in it; as set apart for the lauding
and magnifying of the most high God, after the solemnest manner, appointed
chiefly for prayer, and not for sacrifice; 1 Kings 8.28, 29, 30.
from whence also it had it is name, the House of Prayer; So the Prophet speaks
of it, with relation to the Gentiles, as well as Jews. Isa. 56.7.
My house shall be called an house of Prayer, for all people, And under this
moral notion, our B. Savior looked upon it, when his holy zeal drove out the
Merchants and Money Changers thence; St. Matt. 21. St. Mark 12. St. John 2.
not without evident marks of his displeasure at their impiety, who made his
Father's house, (devoted as an house of Prayer to God) a common mart. An
instance, so much the more remarkable, because this Temple Herod had, in a
great measure, re-edified, without any special command from God.

Secondly, When David entertained his resolutions of building the Temple, he
seems moved thereto, by a piety leaning upon common reason and equity; 2 Samuel
7.^.3.
"See now, says he, to Nathan the Prophet, I dwell in an house of Cedar, but
the Ark of God dwells in Curtains; and Nathan, upon the same principles,
(without special command received from God) commends, and encourages his
intentions; yea, and God himself, (though, for certain reasons, he prohibited
David the building of his Temple, according to his pious resolutions,) yet
allows, and justifies those resolutions themselves, Chapter 4. p. 24, 25. 1
Kings 2.1^.
as has been intimated already, in the first part of this book. Whereas it was
in thy heart to build an house to my name, thou did well, that it was in
thine heart.

Reason taught both David, and Solomon his son, that the House to be
appropriated to God's honor and worship, ought to be such in its beauty and
majesty, as might be expressive of their raised thoughts of God's Greatness,
and devout affections toward him. This therefore, was the motive to David's
great Liberality. The work, says he, is Great, 1 Chronicles. 29.1, 2.
for the palace is not for men, but for the Lord. Now I have prepared, with all
my might, for the house of my God. -- Moreover, because I have set my affection
to the house of my God, I have, of my own proper goods, etc. -- The motives
are, God's Great Majesty, and David's great affection. And Solomon his son,
after him, writing to Huram King of Tire, urges this weighty motive. -- 2 Chronicles. 2.6.
The house which I build is great, for Great is our God, above all gods. They
have not, it is to be feared, such great and honorable thoughts of God, or
affection toward him, who seek to demolish the magnificent structures
dedicated to his service, and think any mean, and common place as fit for it.

Thirdly, The Scripture-precepts of reverence to God's house and Sanctuary,
have no sign at all in them, of being ceremonial only; Levit. 19.30.26.2.
Eccles. 5.12
for they are ever urged with that moral reason of their relation unto God. The
Catechist, I remember, says.

[Whilst the mere institutions of the Old Testament continued, Cat. p. 14.
God enforced them with moral reasons, as his own holiness and authority; but
those reasons prove not any of those institutions to be moral, unless they
ensue upon those reasons alone, and are no where else commanded; for, being
once instituted and commanded, they are to be enforced with moral
considerations, taken from the nature of God, and our duty in reference to his
authority.]

Now this being granted, I see not, why [Ye shall reverence my Sanctuary] be
not concluded a moral institution; much rather than [Ye shall keep my Sabbaths]
linked in the same verse with it, whereof, I suppose, the Catechist and his
party make no doubt; inasmuch as the keeping God's Sabbaths is elsewhere
commanded, Exodus 11.23, 24.
upon positive, and particular grounds, and the Sabbath days are expressly
reckoned by the Apostle, as a shadovv of things to come, not obliging unto
Christians, Col. 2.17. But the reverencing of Gods house, or sanctuary, is no
where commanded, without an intimation of this moral reason of its relation
unto God, nor does the Apostle account the Temple among those ceremonies which
he there enumerates. The Jews, certainly, as they did, upon principles of
equity, build their Synagogues for the convenience of serving God in their
particular Cities, so did they in like manner, call them, houses of God, and
rationally argue, from the precepts of reverence due to God's Sanctuary, a
proportionable reverence due to these, vvriting over the doors, Haec est porta
Domini, This is the gate of the Lord; and forbidding all rudenesses, and
profanations of them, as has been before declared, Chapter 4. p. 26.
in the first part of this discourse. St. Luke 7.
The Centurion, we know, is commended in the Gospel, unto Christ, for having
given an excellent demonstration of love to the Jewish Nation by building of a
Synagogue. What then are they, but haters of their country, who, instead of
building, seek to demolish the Houses of God in the land, or make no difference
between them and common structures.

Fourthly, It may deservedly weigh somewhat with Christians, to behold our B.
Savior and his Apostles, so constantly frequenting the Temple and Synagogues,
those places appropriate unto Divine worship; as we read in the Holy Gospels,
and Acts of the Apostles.

Lastly, Probable it is, that, even in the times of the first Christians, (in
that their persecuted estate, and wilderness-condition) they yet did, as they
were able, set apart certain places, as peculiar for their common meeting
together, to serve God in. Intimations we find of this, in Sacred Scripture, as
well as Ecclesiastical writings, Acts 11.26. Acts 11.26.
For an whole year they assembled themselves with the Church, (the Margin has
it more rightly, in the Church) and taught much people, and the Disciples were
called Christians first in Antioch. They assembled together constantly, (...),
in Ecclesia, as both the Vulgar-Latin and Beza render it; i. e. in the Church,
the place appointed for religious meetings and assemblies. Here then we have a
Local Church, as early as the very name of Christians.

Again, 1 Cor. 11.18. 1 Cor. 11.18, 20.
When ye come together in the Church, (...), in the place of Religious
Assemblies; for so he afterward adds, When ye come together into one place,
and opposes it unto their own houses, verse 4. What, have ye not houses to eat
and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God? i. e. the house of God. St.
Austin is express for this sense. Ecclesia dicitur Locus, quo Ecclesia
congregatur. Hanc vocari etiam ipsam domum orationum idem Apostolus testis est,
ubi ait. Nunquid domos non habetis ad manducandum and bibendum? Ecclesiam Dei
contemnitis? Quast. super Levit. l. 3. c. 57. -- Hoc quotidianus loquendi usus
obtinuit, ut ad Ecclesiam prodire, aut ad Ecclesiam confugere non dicatur, nisi
quod ad locum ipsum parietesque prodierit vel confugerit, quibus Ecclesiae
congregatio continetur. id. ibid.
The place, says he, wherein the Church is gathered together, (the
Meeting Place, in the Brethren's Dialect) is called the Church, even the house
of prayers.

The Apostle counts their own houses, the proper place for ordinary and common
repasts, and not the Church, or house of God. So therefore, he speaks
afterward, If any man hunger, let him eat at home. And thus also Theophylact
interprets the word Church in this place of the Apostle. Nunquid domos. --
videlicet, Si aliis cibum communicare renuitis, eur non domi vescimini? Aut
Ecclesiam Dei contemnitis? Cum enim Dominicam coenam in privatam conver titis,
in Ecclesia scorsum edentes Loco ipsi inscrtis injuriam. Theophylact in 1 Cor.
11.22.
If, says he, you you refuse to communicate meat unto others, why eat you not
at home? for when you convert the Lords Supper into a private meal, eating
apart in the Church, you do injury to the very place.

See Mr. Mede of Churches.
Now, this Church of God, (as a Learned man conjectures) was, it is likely, Some
capable, and convenient room, within the walls and dvvellings of some pious
disciple, dedicated by the religious bounty of the owner, to the use of the
Church; and that usually, (...), an upper Room; such as the Latins call
coenaculum, being, according to their manner of building, as the most large and
capacious of any other, so likewise the most retired, freest from disturbance,
and next to Heaven, as having no room above it. Such places, we read more than
once, they made choice of. Acts 10.9.
St. Peter went up to the housetop to pray. Such is thought to be the room,
wherein the Apostles and Disciples, after our B. Savior's Ascension, assembled
together daily, for Prayer and Supplication, and where, being thus assembled,
the Holy Ghost came down upon them, in cloven tongues of fire, on the day of
Pentecost; and there goes a tradition in the Church, that this was the room,
wherein our B. Savior, before his passion, celebrated the Passover, and
instituted his Mystical Supper; and the same place, where, on the day of his
Resurrection, he came, and stood among his Disciples, and appeared again unto
them the Sunday after; and the place where James, the Brother of our Lord, was
created by the Apostles, Bishop of Jerusalem; where the seven Deacons were
elected and ordained; where the Apostles and Elders of the Church had their
first Council, for deciding the question about the believing Gentiles
circumcision; and, for certain (as Learned Mr. Mede proceeds) the place of this
coenaculum was afterward enclosed with a goodly Church, known by the name of
the Church of Sion, and it is called by St. Cyril, who was Bishop of the place,
(...), The upper Church of the Apostles; and, if this (says he) were so, why
may I not think that this coenaculum Sion, was that (...), that house, whereof
we read concerning the first Christian Society at Jerusalem, Act. 2.46. That
they continued daily in the Temple, and breaking bread, (...), in the house,
(not, as we read it, house by house) and eat their meat with gladness, and
singleness of heart? The meaning being, That when they had performed their
devotions daily in the Temple, at the accustomed times of prayer there, they
used to resort immediately to this Coenaculum, and there having celebrated the
mystical banquet of the H. Eucharist, took their ordinary, and necessary
repast, with gladness, and singleness of heart. -- Such a place, an upper room,
it is evident, it was, where the Disciples at Troas came together, Act. 20.7.
on the first day of the week, to break bread, where St. Paul preached unto
them, and whence, Eutychius, being overcome with sleep, sitting in the window,
fell down, (...), from the third story. Acts 28.22.
-- And such a place seems that of the Churches assembly at Caesarea, to which
St. Paul went up, -- and descendit Casarcam, and ascendit in domum
Christianorum, (i. e. Ecclesiam. and salutavit eos, and abit Antiochiam. Lud.
de Dien.
(...), and saluted the Church. The Et^iopic Translator so understood it, as
Lud. de Dieu observes, thus rendering the words; He went down to Caesarea, and
went up into the house of the Christians, ( i. e. the Church) and saluted
them, and went to Antioch.

And to this same purpose, of places appropriate to the first
Christian's-Assemblies, may be interpreted those peculiar characters given by
the Apostle, to some in his Salutations. Salute Nymphas, and the Church, (...),
Col 4.15.
at his house. So, -- To Philemon Philem. 1.2.
our dearly beloved -- (...), And to the Church in thy house. So, Romans 16.3, 5.
-- Greet Prisscilla and Aquila, -- likewise the Church that is in their
house. And, sending salutatitions from them to Corinth; 1 Cor. 16.29.
Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the Church that is in
their house. Where, the Church, at, or in, such and such a one's house, may be
rather understood of the congregation of Christians wont to assemble there,
than of their own particular families; for, otherwise, why should this be
singularly mentioned in the Salutations of some, and not of others, who are
recorded to have Christian families, as well as they? Romans 16.10, 11, 14, 15.
for so we find Aristobulus, and Narcissus, with their household, saluted;
Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, and the brethren which are with them.
Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his Sister, and Olympas, and all the Saints
which are with them. And in another Epistle, -- the household of Onesiphorus. 2 Timothy 4.19.
There seems therefore, to be some singular thing, in this singular appendix
peculiarized to them beforementioned, and this, probably, to be it; That in
their houses, they allotted, and set apart, a peculiar place for the Church to
assemble in, not altogether unlike some private Chapels which are yet in
certain great men's Houses. But I referr the Reader, who desires farther
satisfaction, to our Learned Mede, who has collected undoubted testimonies of
this same truth, throughout the three first Centuries and so long before the
time of Constantine the Great, wherein Christianity began to flourish, and to
be adorned with more beautiful fabrics. I will only intimate his general
reason, upon which the appropriation of certain places to God's public worship
and service leans, and it is briefly this, easily deducible from the Analogy of
the Old Testament; That, as the Majesty of God is most sacred and
incommunicable, and his worship and service, not be given unto any other; so it
is likewise a part of the honor we owe to his sacred, singular, and
incommunicable Eminency, that the things wherewith he is served, should not be
promiscuous and common, but appropriate and set apart to that very purpose. But
hitherto of Churches, both persons and places so called. The Catechist's method
leads us next to consider, Of Church Officers or Governors.

CHAP. VI.
The necessity of Government in the Church, intimated, and that as to it is
formal constitution. The Catechist's distinction of Church Officers,
extraordinary, and ordinary; without Scripture Proof. Extraordinaries granted
in the Apostles, and yet not their office it self, for a season only.
Archbishop Whitgift at large, of this distinction, against T. C. The
Catechist's enumeration of ordinary Officers; How politickly Deacons there left
out? His great argument from a community of names, to an equality among
Ministers; disabled. The name Bishop, not unfit to denote pre-eminence, whether
we consider the notation of it, or the use of it, in the Old Testament, or in
the New. The same demonstrated from the name Elder, wherewith the Catechist
matcheth it, and the several instances alleged by him to the contrary. A
Taste, by the way, of the Catechist's confidence. Prelacy in Church Government,
argued from the Scripture-instances of Deacons under Bishops, and the examples
of Timothy and Titus. The Catechist's exceptions at the two last, answered. The
enemies of superiority among Ministers, mean it in others, not themselves.

Q. Seeing the Church is a Society, Cat. p. 116.
or spiritual Incorporation of persons, under rule, government, or discipline;
declare who, or what, are the Rulers, Governors, or Officers therein, under
Jesus Christ?

Answ. They have been of two sorts. 1. Extraordinary, appointed for a season
only: And, 2. Ordinary, to continue unto the end of the world.

Q. Who are the extraordinary Officers, or Rulers, or Ministers of the Church,
appointed to serve the Lord Jesus Christ therein, for a season only?

Answ. (1.) The Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, with (2.) the Evangelists
and Prophets, endowed with extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, associated
with them, and employed by them, in their work of Ministry. (1) Mat. 10, 23.
Act. 1.26. 1 Cor. 1.28. Ephesians. 4.11. (2) Luke 10.1. 2 Timothy 4.5. Tit. 1.5. Act.
11.27, 28. -- 21.9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 1.1.

The necessity of government it self in the Church, is here well supposed, in
that the Church is called [a Spiritual Incorporation of persons, under Rule,
Government, or Discipline.] This therefore, in the explition, is rightly said
to be evident from the nature of the thing it self, p. 117.
as well as the testimonies of Scripture; but then, I skill not well to
reconcile this, with that which follows; That yet a Church may be formally
constituted, without rule and government. His words are these?

p. 117.
[Neither does this rule at all belong unto it, merely as materially considered
in men yielding obedience unto the Call; which is the foundation of the Church,
not absolutely as it is formally constituted a Church, by the consent and
agreement described; but moreover, it is required, that it be organically
complete, with Officers, or Rulers.]

It Is the Catechist's unhappiness here, to be over- Metaphysical., If the
Church, formally considered, be such a spiritual Incorporation, as he defines
it, certainly Rule Government and Discipline belongs unto it, as such; and the
want of such principal organs, or members, as Rulers are, must needs spoil its
formality, no less than the want of an head, that of the humane body.

As to the distinction of Church- officers into extraordinary and ordinary, it
ought to have been manifested out of the Holy Scriptures; wherein, it is most
certain, that we read of Apostles, and Evangelists, and Prophets, distinctly,
and by name; but not a word, that the chief and substantial part of their
office and power was extraordinary, and for a season only. That there were
some extraordinaries appertaining to them, is not questioned; but that evinceth
not, the office of Apostles and Evangelists to be such. The Catechist himself
tells us,

[These persons were in an extraordinary manner endued with all that power,
p. 119.
which afterward was to reside in the Churches themselves; and moreover,
with that which was peculiarly needful unto the discharge and performance of
that special duty and work that they were appointed unto.] At least then, as
to that power which was to reside in the Church for ever, they were not
extraordinary. For, that they were the first, and so immediately sent by
Christ, seems a matter of order only, that does not bespeak them of another
kind from those that followed and succeeded them. I will here annex the words
of Archbishop Whitgift, long since, in his Defense against T. C. upon occasion
of the like distinction with this of the Catechist's.

Arch Bishop Whitgift's defense of the Answ. to the Admonition. Tract. 4. p.
217.
Although, says he, you cannot vvarrant by the Scriptures this distinction, of
ordinary and extraordinary ecclesiastical functions: yet, I think, the
Apostolical function was extraordinary, in respect that it had for the time,
certain especial properties; as to bear witness of the Resurrection of Christ,
and of his Ascension, which they did see with their eyes; also to plant, and
found Churches; likewise to go through the whole world; these, I say, were
temporal and extraordinary, and so was the Apostleship in this respect; but yet
ordinary, in respect of their chief function, which was to preach the Gospel,
and to govern the Churches which they had planted. Likewise Evangelists have an
ordinary function, neither is there any cause why it should be called a
temporal office, but only in respect of writing the Gospel; for there is none
that thinks the office of preaching to be either extraordinary or temporal.
p. 118.
-- As for Prophets, if you mean in respect of the gift of telling things to
come, such as Agabus was, then be they temporal; but if you mean Prophets in
respect of their dexterity, and readiness of expounding Scriptures, such as
Simeon, Lucius, Manaen, and Saul; Act. 13.15. 1 Cor. 14.
likewise such as Judas and Silas, and such as the Apostle St. Paul speaks
of, 1 Cor. 14. I see no cause why the Calling should be extraordinary, or the
office and gift, temporal; except you have a liberty to make temporal and
perpetual, ordinary and extraordinary, what you please. But, seeing you would
have all things proved by Scripture, I pray you prove this that you have said,
either of the Apostles, Evangelists, or Prophets, by the Scripture; seeing you
teach that of them, which seems to be contrary unto Scripture. -- And, when
T. C. replies;

This passes all the Divinity that ever I read, that there are now Apostles,
T. C. p. 41. Sect. 1.
Evangelist, and Prophets. You shall assuredly do marvels, if you prove that,
as you say you will if any deny it. I deny it, prove you it. The Archbishop
answers thus:

Then have you not read much Divinity; p. 229.230.
for, if it be true, that the Apostle St. Paul, in the fourth Chapter to the
Ephesians, does make a perfect platform of a Church, and a full rehearsal of
the offices therein contained, (as you say, he does); then can I not
understand, how you can make those offices rather temporal, than the office of
the Pastors and Doctors. And forasmuch as you greatly contemn Authority, and
would have all things proved by Scripture; let me hear one word of the same,
that does but insinuate these offices to be temporal. The place it self seems
to import a continuance of these functions, unto the coming of Christ; for he
says, Ephesians. 4.
He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering together of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, etc. until we all meet together, in the
unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto
the measure of the age and fullness of Christ. -- I am persuaded, that you
cannot show any like place, which does so plainly import the abrogating of
them, as this does make for their continuance. I have, beside that place to the
Ephesians, the twelfth of the first to the Corinthians, and the fourteenth,
where he speaks of Prophets, as of perpetual ministers in Christ's Church.

I know, (says he) that there were certain things in the Apostles, which were
proper unto themselves, as their calling, which was immediately from God, p.
231.
(although Matthias was not immediately called by God, as it appears, Act. 1.
neither can you prove by Scripture, that Barnabas was so called; but the
contrary rather does appear, Acts 11. and yet he was an Apostle) their
commission to go into the whole world, etc. but to preach the Word of God, in
places where need requires, or to govern Churches already planted, I see no
cause why it should not be perpetual. -- Likewise, the office of Evangelist, if
it be taken for writing of the Gospel, then it is ceased, (being fully
perfected and accomplished; but if it be taken for preaching the Gospel,
plainly and simply, as Bullinger thinks, or generally, Bull. in. 4. ad Ephesians.
Musc. Tit. de Verb. minist. in Loc. com.
for preaching the Gospel, as Musculus supposes; in which sense also, Paul
said to Timothy, 2. Tim. 4. Do the work of an Evangelist; or for preaching more
fervently or zealously than other, as Bucer says; Bucer. in 4. ad Ephesians.
then I see no cause at all why it may not still remain in the Church. --
Moreover, Prophets, if they be taken for such as have the gift of foreshewing
things to come, then be they not in all times of the Church; but if they be
such as St. Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 14; such, I say, as have an especial gift
in interpreting the Scriptures, whether it be in expounding the mysteries
thereof to be learned, or in declaring the true sense thereof to the people; I
understand not, why it is not as perpetual as the Pastor or Doctor. -- Thus you
see, that I have both Scripture and Reason on my side; and, to the end that you
perceive that I am not destitute of the consent also of Learned men in this
matter, I will set down the opinions of one or two.

Ambrose upon these words, ad Ephesians. 4. Ambrose.
Et ipse dedit quosdam quidem Apostolos, etc. says thus; The Apostles are
Bishops; Prophets be interpreters of the Scriptures. Although in the beginning,
there were Prophets, as Agabus, and the four Virgins Prophetesses, as it is in
the Acts of the Apostles, -- yet now Interpreters be called Prophets.
Evangelists be Deacons, as Philip; for, although they be no Priests, yet may
they preach the Gospel without a chair, as both Stephen, and Philip
before-named. -- Bucer, Bucer.
upon the same same place, says, that there be Evangelists now; T. C.
and you your self, fol. 42. confess, that Hus, Jerome of Prague, Luther,
Zuinglius, etc. were Evangelists. Peter Martyr, Peter Martyr.
in his Commentaries upon 12. to the Romans, says, that the Apostle there
describes those functions and gifts which are at all times necessary for the
Church, and in that place the Apostle mentions prophesying. Mr. Calvin,
Calvin.
in his Institut. cap. 8. does confess, that God has stirred up Apostles and
Evangelists, since that time of the Primitive Church, and that he has done so
likewise, even now, in this time. Mr. Bullinger, Bullinger.
upon 4. Ephesians. says, that the words be confounded, and that an Apostle is
also called a Prophet; a Doctor an Evangelist; a Minister a Bishop; and a
Bishop an Evangelist and Prophet, etc. -- To be short, It is thus written in
the Confession of the Churches in Helvetia. Confess. Helvet.
The Ministers of the New Testament be called by sundry names; for they are
called Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Bishops, etc. And speaking of Prophets,
it says, The Prophets in time past, foreseeing things to come, were called
Seers, who are expounders of the Scriptures also; as some be even now a days.
Evangelists were writers of the History of the Gospel, and preachers also of
the glad tidings of Christ his Gospel; as Paul bid Timothy, do the work of an
Evangelist, etc. -- So that to say, there are in the Church, Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, in such sense as I have deelared, is no strange
Divinity to such as be Divines indeed. --

But enough of this distinction, 'till we again meet with it; Let us hear the
Catechist, of Ordinary Officers.

Q. 23. Who are the ordinary Officers or Ministers of Christ, in the Church,
Catec. p. 12^.
to be always continued therein?

Answ. Those whom the Scripture calls Pastors and Teachers, Bishops, Elders,
and Guides. Acts. 14.23. -- 20.17, 18. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2. -- 5.17. Tit. 1.5, 7. Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Pet. 5.1.

It had been certainly pertinent, to have added to this head of enumeration,
Deacons also; of whom, afterward, he is not unmindful.

Q. 32. Cat. p. 161.
Is there no other ordinary office in the Church, but only that of Elders?

Answ. Yes, of Deacons also.

But, it is possible, there might be some policy in here concealing of them,
lest they should too palpably have confronted his beloved parity of
Gospel Ministers. For thus he proceeds in the Explication.

[Sometimes they are called Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28.
page 120. 121.
Sometimes Bishops, or Overseers, Phil. 1.1. Act. 20.28. Tit. 1.5. Sometimes
Elders. 1 Pet. 5.1. 1 Timothy 5.17. Act. 14.23. Act. 20.17. Sometimes Guides, Heb,
13.7, 17. By all which names, and sundry others, whereby they are expressed,
the same sort, order, and degree of persons, is intended; nor is there any one
of those names applied, or accommodated unto any, but all the rest in like
manner; so that he who is a Pastor or Teacher, is also a Bishop or Overseer, a
Presbyter or Elder, a Guide or Ruler, a Minister, a servant of the Church, for
the Lord's sake.]

Now had Deacons here been named, they would not so plausibly have been
referred to the same sort, order, and degree of persons; it being a general
belief, that Deacons were certainly inferior unto their Bishops, Phil. 1.1.
and such as St. Paul may seem evidently to place in a lower rank, making them
capable of rising to an higher degree, by the good administration of their
office. 1 Timothy 3.13.

And yet, nevertheless, if this argument, from a community of names,, avail any
thing, these Deacons also may be advanced by it; not only to an equality with
their Bishops, but with the Evangelists and Apostles themselves; because that
they are sometimes called by that name, Acts 21.8. Philip the Evangelist was
one of the seven Deacons, and Timothy, who is commanded to do the work of an
Evangelist; from whence, it is eagerly contended, that he was an Evangelist; is
also bid by St. Paul, to fulfill his Deaconship, (...), 2 Timothy 4.5. Yea, he is
called by St. Paul, (...), God's Deacon. 1 These. 3.2. Yea, the Apostle St. Paul
too, as well as Apollos, goes by that name (...), a Deacon, which we English,
Minister, 1 Cor. 3.5. -- By this argument, in like manner, he may confound his
distinction of extraordinary, and ordinary officers, and equallize the later
with the former; because the Apostles are also called Elders. 1 Pet. 5.1. 2.
Ep. of St. John, v. 1. Yea, and he might equal them all to Christ himself, upon
the same account; because He, in like manner, is called an Apostle, Heb. 3.1.
and a Deacon, or Minister, Rom 15.8. -- So goodly, and convincing an argument
is this, drawn from a community of names and Titles.

It were therefore more material, and to the purpose, to enquire, if there be
not such a thing plainly described in the New Testament, as Prelacy in
Church Government, or some single persons in the Church, set over other
Ministers, as to the exercise of certain powers, both of Ordination and
Jurisdiction. But of this afterward, the Catechist being as likely to deny the
thing, as the name. He proceeds:

[Of all other names assigned to the Ministers of the Church, Cat. p. 121.
that of Bishop can least of all be thought to have designed any special order,
or degree of pre-eminence amongst them. -- And again, p. 121.
-- No name could be fixed on, with less probability, to assert from it a
special supreme order, or degree of men, in the Ministry, than this of
Bishops.]

How strangely has the Christian world been mistaken, for above these 1600
years, to abuse the name Bishop, as the title of Superiority in the Ministry,
if this man's observation be true? But let us examine a little, before we
swallow. If the name Bishop be so absurdly chosen, to denote a degree of
pre-eminence among Ministers, it must be either upon the account of the
notation of the name it self, or the constant use and application of it in Holy
Scripture. As to the former, the Catechist offers nothing; and certain it is,
that (...), a Bishop or Overseer, carries somewhat of Superiority along with
it, signifying one that is (...), over others. Take it in the Catechist's
sense, an Overseer or Bishop of the Flock; then he has certainly a
pre-eminence. Take it in the Churches sense, for an overseer of particular
overseers, and we cannot deny the same. This latter may be illustrated by an
inspection into Darius his policy, for the ruling of his Realm. Dan. 6.1, 2.
It pleased Darius to set over the Kingdom an 120 Princes, which should be
over the whole Kingdom; and, over those, three Presidents, (of whom Daniel was
first) that the Princes might give account to them. -- The 120 Princes had a
pre-eminence over their respective charges, and the three Presidents, set to
oversee them, no less a pre-eminence above those Princes. -- Well, but it may
be the constant use of the name Bishop, in the H. Scripture, will justify the
Catechist in his confidence. Some such thing indeed he seems to build on, as
his reason.

Cat. p. 121. 12^.
[For, whereas it is but four times, or in four places, used in the New
Testament, as denoting any officers in the Church, in each of them it is
manifest, that those expressed by the other names of Elders and Ministers, are
intended. So, Acts 20.28. the Bishops are the Elders of the particular Church
of Ephesus, ver. 17. Phil. 1.1. There were many Bishops in that one Church, who
had only Deacons joined with them, that is, they were the Elders of it, Tit.
1.8. The Bishops were the Elders to be ordained, verse 5. which persons are
also directly intended, 1 Timothy 3.2. as is evident from the co-incidence of the
directions given by the Apostle about them, and the immediate adjoining of
Deacons unto them, verse 8.]

He that would rightly understand the Original of the New Testament, must also
have an eye to the Greek translation of the Old, whom the writers of the new do
most frequently imitate. Now, in the Old Testament, See Dr. Ham. Annot. 1. on
Act. 1.20.
the Hebrew word, commonly rendered by (...), is, (...) and other derivatives of
(...) visitavit, (...); all which note a Prefect, or Governor, or any
empowered, by Commission to exercise any authority entrusted to him; and as it
is ordinarily rendered by (...), so elsewhere also, (...); all words of
government, or prefecture. And it is farther observable, that where it is
rendered (...), it is taken in five senses. 1. In an Army, (...), the Officer,
or Captain of the host. Numb. 31.14. Judge. 9. 28. 2 Kings 11.15. 2dly. Among
workmen; the principal that were set over all others, in the building of the
Temple, 2 Chronicles. 34.12, 17. 3dly, In the City; the Ruler or Prince, and
especially of the Priests and Levites, Nehem. 11. 9, 10, 14.22. 4thly, In the
Ministry of the Temple; Numb. 3.32.
Eleazar the son of Aaron (who is called (...), the Ruler of the Rulers of the
Levites) is styled, Numb. 4.16. (...) Bishop Eleazar, or Overseer. 5thly, In
the house of the Lord, over which, he that was set, is, (...), 2 Kings 11.18.
the Bishop over the house of the Lord. By all which it appears, that agreeable
to the notion of the word in the Old Testament, it will also in the New denote
prefecture, or ruling power in the Church.

Come we then, with the Catechist, to the New Testament. And first, It is much
that it should escape his notice, that the office of the Apostles themselves,
the Apostolate, which must needs be granted to include pre-eminence, is called,
from this very word, (...), Acts 1.20. a Bishopric. -- His Bishopric let
another take.

But, secondly, There needs no other conviction, than what his own Instances
will afford us; where,

First, He acknowledges, that Bishops are the same, that are elsewhere called
Elders, and makes that the ground of his argument, which I shall now urge
against him. The name Bishop then, apparently is not less fit to denote a
pre-eminence, than that of Elder; because he owns them equally characteristical
of the same persons. Let us therefore consider somewhat more distinctly, the
account of that name, and who are the persons pointed at by it in the New
Testament.

The word (...), among the Greeks, See Dr. H. on Act. 12.30. and Phil. 1.1.
is used both for Rulers and Old men, and accordingly it is now in use among
all nations, Italians, French Spaniards, English, to call their Rulers,
Seniors, Mayors, Aldermen, etc. which are literally the rendering of (...).
Among the Hebrews, the same is acknowledged, that (...) old men, (which, with
them that want degrees of comparison, is all one with Elders, and generally
rendered (...)) denotes dignity and prefecture in the Old Testament. So Eliezer
the Steward of Abraham's house, ( Genesis 15.2.) who was placed over all his
servants and goods, is called, Genesis 24.2. (...), the Elder of his house, and
Ruler of all that he had. So the Elders of Pharaoh's house, and of all Egypt,
Genesis 50.7. are the Prefects and Administrators of the King's house, and of all
Egypt. So the Elders of the Moabites, are the Princes of Moab, Numb. 22.7, 8.
So, when all dominion was founded in the privileges that belonged to the
firstborn, the Princes of the Families or Kindreds, are called indifferently
(...) and (...), Patriarchs, and Elders. Such were the Elders of Israel, Exodus
3.16, 18. and 4.29. the heads or rulers of the families or kindreds, chapter 6.14.
rulers of the congregation, chapter 16.22. who are again called the Elders of
Israel, chapter 17.5, 6. and 18.12. and Elders of the Tribes, Deuteronomy. 31.28. -- And
when Moses appointed Judges for lighter causes, Exodus 18.22. who should have
power over thousands, and hundreds, and fifties, and tens; i. e. first, over so
many families; after, over greater or lesser cities, these were by them called
(...) Elders, and (...) Rulers and Judges; and (...), and (...), Rulers of the
Synagogues, and the like. And so, when the 70 Elders were taken in to assist
Moses, Numb. 11.16. (to whom the great Sanhedrim at Jerusalem succeeded) it is
evident, that these were so called, because they were Princes, or Prefects, or
Rulers of the people, before they were thus chosen by Moses. And so the word
Elder was not a denotation of one of the Sanhedrim any otherwise, than as some
of those that were in the Sanhedrim had formerly been Elders, or Rulers of the
people. And accordingly, of three sorts of men, of which the Sanhedrim
consisted, but one is called Elders, the other Scribes, and Chief Priests. By
all which it appears, how fitly this word (...), Elders, being made use of by
the Apostles, and Writers of the New Testament, is affixed to the Governors of
the Christian church, the several Bishops of several Cities, answerable to the
(...). Rulers of thousands, or Patriarchs; which, being first used among the
Jews, are, in the christian church, the ordinary title of Bishops. And,
although this title of (...), Elders, has been also extended to a second order
in the Church; yet, in the Scripture-times, it belonged principally (if not
alone) to Bishops; there being little, or no evidence, that any of that second
order were then instituted; though soon after, before the writing of Ignatius
Epistles, there were such instituted in all Churches. When the Gospel was first
preached by the Apostles, and but few converted, they ordained in every City
and Region, no more but a Bishop, and one, or more Deacons to attend him. And
accordingly, when St. Paul gives directions to Timothy, for the ordaining of
Church Officers, he names Bishops and Deacons, but no second order between
them. 1 Timothy 3. and so to Titus. -- And thus the (...), or Eldership, that laid
hands on Timothy, and made him Bishop, may well be resolved to be the Bishops,
or Apostolical men, who, with St. Paul, consecrated him, 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy
1.6. Thus St. Peter calls himself, Peter the Elder, 1 Pet. 5.1. and St. John,
the Elder John, 2 John 1. 3 John 1. and Ignatius ep. ad Philad. calls the
Apostles, (...), the Presbytery, or Eldership of the Church. Thus then, though
it be generally resolved, that the word Bishop and Elder are equivalent in the
Scripture, yet is not this to be understood so, that either, and both of them,
signifies indifferently those whom we now call Presbyters, but that they both
signify Bishops, one settled in each Church by the Apostles.

So Act. 20. The Bishops there, are not, as the Catechist says, the Elders of
the particular Church of Ephesus, nor is there any such thing said of them,
verse, 17. whereto he referrs us, but rather of all Asia, at least, those that
belonged to Ephesus, as their Metropolis; and therefore St. Paul tells them,
they had known, how he had been with them, all the time, from the first day
that he came into Asia, verse 18. and St. Irenaeus says, l. 3. c. 14. In
Mileto convocatis Episcopis and Presbyteris ab Epheso and proximis civitatibus.
The Bishops and Elders being assembled at Miletus, from Ephesus, and the next
Cities. -- And so, in like manner, those, whom he calls the many Bishops in one
particular Church, Philip. 1.1. are, most probably, the ^ishops of the Churches
that belonged to Philippi, the Metropolis; for, that Philippi was such, is
affirmed by S. Luke, Act. 16.12. -- And so, in the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, quoted by the Catechist, it is agreeable to the affirmations of the
Ancients, as that there should be constituted ^ishops and Deacons in the
several Churches (as was before intimated); so that the word (...) distinctly
notes those Bishops, and not those whom we now call Presbyters. So that in all
these places the word is fairly appliable to the single Prefects, and
Governors of the Churches, whom we now call Bishops.

And then, in the last place, as a farther conviction, that there is a
pre-eminence included in this name of Bishop, we may take notice, that in three
of those Scriptures Bishops are joined with Deacons, as the Catechist also
notes; and most undoubtedly these their Deacons were not of equal degree with
them. Deacons, in the Christian Church, are known to have been such as
attended, and waited on the Bishop, and did what he appointed them. But of
these, we are to discourse more afterward. Enough has been said to shame the
confidence of our Catechist. We will leave names, and consider of the thing it
self, and in that too, he is no less peremptory.

[Neither is there any mention, Cat. p 122.
in any place of Scripture, of any such pre-eminence of one sort of these
Church Officers, or Ministers, over another; not in particular, where the
Officers of the Church are in an especial manner enumerated; as, 1 Cor. 12.28.
Ephesians. 4.11. Romans 12.5, 6, 7, 8. Nor is there any mention of any special office
that should be peculiar unto such Officers.]

The distinct mention of Bishops, and Deacons under them, is a sufficient
confutation unto this. Add hereunto, what is evident of Timothy and Titus. What
says the Catechist unto them?

[As for what is pleaded by some, Cat. p. 123.
from the example of Timothy and Titus, it is said, That when any persons can
prove themselves to be Evangelists, 1 Timothy 4.5. to be called unto their office
by antecedent prophecy, 1 Timothy 1.18. and to be sent by the Apostles, and in an
especial manner to be directed by them, in some employment, for a season, which
they are not ordinarily to attend unto, Tit. 1.5. and 3.12. It will be granted,
that they have another duty and office committed unto them, than those who are
only Bishops or Elders in the Scripture.]

Here, the cause, if we mark it well, is fairly yielded. Timothy and Titus are
acknowledged to have had a pre-eminence of authority over other Ministers, and
that by the Apostles appointment. Such authority then, is not in it self
Antichristian, and no where mentioned, or allowed of in Scripture. As for the
Salvo's here annexed, they are familiarly enough pretended, but very weakly, if
we look into them.

That Timothy was an Evangelist, properly so called, is not demonstrable from 1 Timothy 4.5. (it should be 2 Timothy.) where St. Paul wills him only to do the work of
an Evangelist; and he might be with more evidence concluded, a Deacon, because
in the same verse, it is said, (...) fulfill thy Deaconship. However, supposing
this allegation, as the Catechist understands it; it is no where said in H.
Scripture, that the power of ordaining Bishops and Deacons, and jurisdiction
over Elders ordained, (which is ascribed unto Timothy) did appertain to him
under this qualification; and, qua Evangelist, it is certain it did not belong
to him at all; the office of an Evangelist, as such, being only to assist the
Apostles in preaching the Gospel, where it was not received. Timothy's being
granted then, to have been an Evangelist, See Dr Ham. Vindic. of his Dissertat.
p. 55.
no ways prejudgeth his being also a Bishop, in the sense as we urge it; for,
What is an Evangelist, but one commissioned by any of the Apostles, to preach
the Gospel to any City or People? And what a Bishop, but one commissioned by
the like Apostle, to preside in, and govern, by way of pre-eminence, a Church
already planted? What hinders therefore, but that he that has been employed in
the former capacity, to plant, may, elsewhere, or in the same place, be
appointed to govern, and so the Evangelist be also a Bishop? As St. Mark the
Evangelist is recorded to have been after Bishop of Alexandria, and St. Luke
the Evangelist, Bishop of Thebais in Egypt. Again, as to Timothy's being
commanded to do the work of an Evangelist, it is answered, Dr. Ham. dissert. 3.
cap 6 p. 16^.
that he, being by St. Paul, made Bishop of Ephesus, had all Asia commended to
his care; and so was the Bishop, not only of those that did believe, but that
should believe; and therefore had this charge incumbent on him, not only to
Govern the Churches of the faithful, but to preach the Gospel also unto those
that did not yet believe; and that is most properly (...), 2 Timothy 4.2. and that
is (...), which is joined with (...), verse 5. This therefore is no argument
against his Episcopal authority, but rather, that the office of an Evangelist,
as well as Deacon, was comprehended under it -- However, had the pre-eminence
contended for, belonged to Timothy, as an Evangelist; yet, What was that to
Titus, who is no where insinuated to be such? -- That Timothy was called to his
office by antecedent prophecy, 1 Timothy 1.18. bespeaks no real difference in the
office it self, between him and other Bishops, relating only to his way of
admission into that office. -- And lastly, [That Titus was sent by the
Apostles, and in an especial manner directed by them, in some employment, for a
season, which he was not ordinarily to attend unto, Titus 1.5. and 3.12. is, in
part, without any reason, supposed; and, as to the whole, nothing to the
purpose. Without reason is it here presumed, that Titus was employed for a
season only, in his Episcopacy, and not ordinarily to attend to it. The words
of the Text speak no such thing, but rather the contrary, Tit. 1.5. For this
cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the things that
are wanting (or left undone, as the margin has it) and ordain Elders in every
City, as I appointed thee. And, that he is wished to come to St. Paul at
Nicopolis, when he sent to him, chap. 3.12. is not the least prejudice to his
making his usual residence in Crete (as much, as the moveable state of the
Church, then increasing amidst persecutions, would suffer). But, be it as the
Catechist will, that Titus his employment was, for a time and season only;
yet, certainly, for that time and season, he was an instance of Episcopal
pre-eminence; and a longer, and shorter continuance, alter not the nature of
the thing. That he was sent, and directed by the Apostles, to this employment,
or state of preheminencie, is also a concession, so far from endammaging our
cause, that it furnishes us with a plea of Apostolical warrant and authority,
for Prelatical Episcopacy. But,

I will conclude this Chapter with a note from our observing- Whitgift, of
these zealous contenders for equality in the Ministry.

Arch Bishop Whitgift. defense of Answ. to the Adm. Tra^t. 8. p. 299.
Though they pretend (says he) equality in words, yet they mean it in others,
not in themselves; for they would have him to be the best rewarded, and most
reverenced, that has the most, and best gifts, which every one of their chief
Captains persuades himself to have. So that, in the end, there would be as
great a do (after their manner) Which of them should be chief, as ever there
was betwixt the Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops, or betwixt Canterbury and
York in times past. In the mean time, you may easily understand, if you please,
that notwithstanding they themselves would be exempted from the jurisdiction of
Archbishop, Lord Bishop, etc. yet do they challenge to themselves as great
jurisdiction over their Parishes, (or congregrtions) and as lofty dominion over
Princes, Nobles, and all, as ever the Pope did over the whole Church.

CHAP. VII.
Dr Hammond's account of Church Government. Church Power originally in Christ,
and personally exercised by him on earth. This power described by Christ,
negatively and affirmatively. The Apostles, Christ's successor's. Their office
not Temporary, and to end with their persons; proved from Christ's affirmation,
and promise; and the histories of those times. The assumption of Matthias to
the Apostolacy. The seven Deacons. James the just made Bishop of Jerusalem, and
called an Apostle. Timothy and Titus ordained by St. Paul, with power
themselves to ordain others. They and other Bishops, successors of the
Apostles, and therefore also called Apostles. The Angels of the seven Churches
of Asia. Concordant testimonies out of Antiquity. The Council of Chalcedon.
Polycrates, Irenaeus, Tertullian. The manner of succession cleared. Commission
required in all Church Officers from them that received it immediately from
Heaven, or their successors.

NOw, for the Reader's satisfaction, in this matter of the Government of the
Church, I will subjoyn a clear relation, extracted from the elaborate writings
of our Learned, See Dr. Hammond Letter of Resol. uaere 5. Dissertat. and alibi.
and Judicious Hammond.

It cannot be denied, that Christ Jesus was sent down in our humane flesh, to
exercise in his own person (and so to found) an office of Government on Earth;
as it was prophesied of him, Isa. 9.6. Isa. 9.6.
and 61.1. 61.1.
That the Government should be upon his shoulder; and that the Lord had
anointed (which the Chaldee Paraphrase generally renders by exalting) him; and,
(as a preparative to that) that the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, to preach
the Gospel, etc. Which Prophecy is acknowledged to be fulfilled in Christ; St.
Luke 4. 18. 21. St. Matt. 3. 16.
That Spirit of God, upon his being baptized by John, immediately descending
upon him.

Now what this office was, is by Christ himself set down, first, negatively,
then affirmatively.

St. Luke 12. 14. St. John 18. 16.
Negatively, That he was not constituted a Judge of civil interests; and that
it was not a Kingdom of this world which he pretended to. And so all pretension
of right from him to interpose in, or disturb civil governments or judicatures,
or to make any change in the Principalities of the world, is utterly disclaimed
in the foundation.

Affirmatively, First, in the general, that he came to call sinners to
repentance, to save that which was lost, to bring the spirits and souls of men
into a regular compliance with the Laws of God, to rule and reign in men's
hearts by faith. And then in particular. First, To preach and reveal the Will
of God. Secondly, To gather proselytes, and admit them by Baptism, into his
Church, the Society of those who profess the Faith of Christ. Thirdly, To
confirm, and farther build up, and instruct those that are thus admitted. 4. To
remove those from the privileges of that Society who walk unworthy of them, by
that means, most probably to ^educe them. Fifthly, To receive these upon
testification of their repentance, into the embraces of his arms, the communion
of the Church again. And lastly, to communicate this power to others, in what
measure he thought expedient.

In all respects he is said to be sent into the world; St. John 17.18, 19, 20,
21
sent by his Father (as Governors are said to be sent by the Supreme Ruler, 1
St. Pet. 2. 14. St. Matt. 9. 6. 28, 18.
with Commission to that purpose) to have power on earth to forgive sins, to
have all power delivered unto him in Heaven and Earth; and particularly, St.
John 13. 33. Heb. 3. 1. 13. 20. 1 St. Pet. 2. 25.
to be the Teacher and Lord of his Church, or Disciples; our High Priest and
Apostle, the great shepherd of the sheep, and so the only Pastor, and Bishop
of our souls.

What Christ had thus received from his Father by his Mission or Commission, he
exercised in his own person, as long as he remained on the Earth; preached the
Gospel, instituted Rites, called and entertained Disciples, by them received
and baptized Proselytes or Believers, commanded them, and used their ministry,
their voluntary, not constrained obedience; designed some to certain offices,
and only for a time, (the Seventy, as Harbingers in one journey of his) to
assist or be useful to him; others he invested with a weightier, and more
lasting authority; left them his successors on earth, sent them as he was sent
by his Father, gave them the same Commission which he had received, to be
executed in the same manner by them, and each of them, after his departure, as
Joshua succeeded Moses, in his Office, and Power, All which is, in every branch
of it, clear from the express words of Scripture.

They that had this Commission from Him, were, in his lifetime called
Apostles, that title denoting Proxies or Procurators; which act in the name and
stead of him whose Proxies they are, according to the known rule of the Jews.
Apostolus cujusque est, ut quisque. Every ones Apostle is as himself; to which
our Savior seems to referr, St. Matt. 10.40. making himself his Father's
Apostle, or Proxy, and the Twelve, St John 17. 18, 20, 21.
his. But at his departing from the world, then he solemnly instated his power
on them, and sealed their Commission to them, as it had been sealed to him by
his Father.

This also is very distinctly and particularly set down in H. Writ, through the
several branches of this power. St John 5. 23. St. Matt. 19. 28. St. Luke 22.
30. 1 Cor. 6. 3. 2 Cor. 10. 6. St. Mat. 10. 6. St. John 20. 23. Isa. 22. 22.
Rev. 3. 7. St. Mat. 16. 19 St. Mat. 19 28. St. Luke 22. 30. St. Mat. 21. 42.
Ephesians. 2. 20. St. John 5. 24. 17, 18. 20, 21.
As the Father gave judgment to the Son, so the Son gave judgment to the
Apostles. As the Father gave the Son power on earth to remit sins; so the Son
gave the Apostles power to remit sins on earth also. As the Father gave the Son
the Keys of the house of David, so the Son gave the Keys to the Apostles. As
the Father gave the Son to sit on his Throne, so the Son gave the Apostles also
to sit on twelve Thrones, etc. As the Father gave the Son to be the Foundation,
or cornerstone of his Church, so the Son gave the Apostles to be the
Foundations upon the Foundation. And, lastly, As the Father sent the Son, so
the Son also sent the Apostles. And hence it is, that the Angel sent from
Heaven to St. John, who was one of this number, calls himself the
Fellow Servants of Him, Rev. 19 20.
and of those that have the testimony of Jesus, i. e. of the Apostles; adding
this reason of it, because (...), the testification of the Resurrection of
Christ, (and the Christian Faith) the Apostolical Office, Acts 1.22. was the
spirit of prophecy, i. e. a succeeding of Christ in his great Prophetic
office.

This power wherein the Apostles succeeded Christ, being thus entirely
conferred on each of them (a several Throne for every one) and being of so
visible use, not only for the first planting, but propagating and conservation
of the Church; it cannot be imagined, that it should be temporary, and
determine in the persons of those Twelve. The necessity of order and rules both
for the supply of those things which should be found wanting for the well-being
and preservation of each Church, Tit. 1.5.
and also for the securing of the flock from the wolves, Act. 20.29.
(the heretics) which, it was foreseen, would so early infest them, and the
plantation, and propagation of the Christian faith; without any assistance of
the Rulers among the Jews, and the Emperors and Princes among other parts of
the Heathen world; nay, when it was so opposed and persecuted by them; is a
competent collection of reasons to assure us, That the power which Christ gave
the Apostles, (who were but short-lived, and should many of them be put to
death by those persecutors) was designed to endure longer than their time.

But Reason is not a commodious medium, to infer, or conclude a matter of
fact; and therefore that must of necessity be done, either, 1. By affirmations,
and promises of Christ, touching this matter; or if those be not so clear, as
to convince the gainsayers, then, 2. By supplying that want of light from the
Histories and relations of those times, by which it will as clearly appear, as
any thing in story can, that the office of power in the Church, bestowed by
Christ on the Apostles, was not to determine in their persons, but to continue
in their successors to future ages.

For the former of these, we may discern somewhat perhaps from the passage in
Christ's prayer to his Father, where, St. John 17. 18, 20.
having spoken of his Apostles, whom he had sent as his Father sent him into
the world, verse 18. i. e. given them (in designation) Commissions for the
Government of his Church; and then to his prayer for them, verse 17. (that God
would sanctify them. (...), in, or for his truth; i. e. consecrate them for
the preaching of the Gospel, (as St. Chrysostom expounds it). Adding farther,
verse 19. That for their sakes he sanctifies himself; i. e. offers up himself a
sacrifice for the consecrating of them, that they also may be sanctified for
the truth; i. e. consecrated, and set apart for this function, and, after his
example, venture their lives, in their preaching God's Will, as he has done;
at length he concludes, verse 20. but I pray not for these alone. Which, being,
in all reason, to be interpreted of the same matter, concerning which he had
prayed for the Apostles before, it follows, that this Prayer of his, for the
consecrating of Officers in his Church, is not confined to his Apostles alone,
which then attended him; but the same prayer he offers up for those also that
shall believe through their word; i. e. for others, that by these Apostles
preaching, should be brought to the Faith, and (as the event demonstrates)
ordained by them to be Bishops and Deacons in several Churches. -- But then;
consider farther, Christ's promise to his Apostles, at his parting from them;
Behold, St. Matt. 28.20.
I am with you all the days, until the end of the world. It Is certain, that
this presence of Christ with them, referrs to his Authority derived, and
assistance made over to them, in order to the discharge of their office, of
gathering disciples, baptizing, and teaching, verse 19. and as certain, that
the Apostles should not personally live to execute that office, till the period
there named, the end of the world; and then it is not imaginable how Christ's
presence should be continued with them till the end of the world; unless they
be considered in complexo, in conjunction with their posterity or successors in
that office, (as the promises made to Abraham, are performed to his posterity,
though not to his person) to whom therefore this promised assistance belongs
all the days; i. e. for the whole term of this new age. And this is the more
demonstrative, because this was said by Christ after his Resurrection,
immediately before his Ascending to Heaven; which, being the beginning of the
last age of the world, the Kingdom of Christ, when all power was given unto
him, verse 18; It necessarily follows, that what was to be continued till the
consummation or conclusion of that age, should last till the end of the world,
in the largest sense that those words can signify.

And this may be supposed also to be meant by the promise of Christ, Rev 1.26,
27.
Rev. 2. to those of the Church of Thyatira, which should overcome and keep, i.
e. adhere constantly to the Faith, in spite of all temptations, verse 26. That
he will give them power over the Nations, as he received of his Father, verse
27. Where, in the very same manner, that S. John, 20. 21. Power is instated on
the Apostles; [As my Father sends me, so send I you] (sending, and giving
power, being sent, and receiving power, being phrases of the same importance).
The like power is by Christ promised to be instated on these faithful
Confessors afterward, and that belonging to the planting and propagating of the
Faith among the Gentiles, bringing them in to repentance, (which is the
breaking them to shivers there) and ruling them with a rod of iron, i. e. the
Scepter of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, his Gospel, and Power, and Pastoral
authority committed to them.

But, if this (being by the prophetic style wherein it is veiled, somewhat
obscure) bring not that evidence with it which is expected, let it pass for a
conjecture, which pretends only to be considerable by the accordance and
consent it has with other greater Evidences now to follow.

To proceed then to the Histories of those times, which are most competent to
clear the matter of fact.

A first evidence of this sort, is, the Assumption of Matthias into the place
of Judas the traditor and desertor, Act. 1, Act. 1.20, 22, 25.
who lost his office, and, soon after, his life. Wherein we see St. Peter, upon
the prophetical prediction of Judas's fate, and the last branch of that [ his
Bishopric let another take] concludes with a [(...)] a necessity that one of
those that had continued with them from the beginning, (and so was qualified
for it) should become with them a witness of the Resurrection; and by the form
of their Prayer for God's direction, and revelation of his will, which he had
pitched on; it is evident, that, taking his Bishopric, verse 20. is all one
with taking the lot or portion of that Ministry and Apostleship, verse 25.

Soon after this, it is apparent, Act. 6. that the Apostles, Act. 6.
to make their burden more supportable, did, by imposition of hands, create
seven Deacons in Jerusalem, which, although it be not an example of their
constituting successors to their whole Office; yet, is an evidence that they
were able to communicate to others, any part of that power committed to them
by Christ. And then, Why they might not in whole, as well as in part,
communicate it unto others, who might succeed to it (after their departure
from any place, or finally out of the world) as well as assist them, being
present, by undergoing, in their stead, some part of it, there is no imaginable
reason to be rendered; but, on the contrary, the example of Moses, who first
assumed the seventy to assist him, (and at that time God gave them of his
Spirit, and so part of his Power) and after constituted Joshua to succeed him,
will be directly applicable to this matter.

Thirdly, After, and beside, the instituting of this office, on the Twelve; it
was the Will, and Appointment of God, Act. 13.2.
that Saul and Barnabas should be assumed to it, and that immediately after
James the Apostle's death; chapter 12.2.
in the same manner as Ephraim and Manasses supplied the place of Joseph when
he dyed.

Fourthly, By comparing some passages of Scripture with the plain assertions of
ancient Writers, and Fathers of the Church, it may be concluded, that James the
just, that had the title of Brother of the Lord, was constituted Bishop of
Jerusalem, (being none of those twelve Apostles) by Christ himself, say some,
Theophyl. in 1 Cor. 15.7.
at his appearing to him after the Resurrection, but (as it is more generally
resolved on) by the Apostles, which received their power from Christ; and that
in the 19th year of Tiberius, i. e. the next year after the death of Christ,
says Eusebius in his Chronicle. Hence it is, that this James, though none of
the twelve, is called an Apostle, Gal. 1.19. and perhaps, Act. 15.6. and 22.
and, in the inscription of his Epistle, he is entitled the Apostle James; and
accordingly, Com. in Isai. --
St. Hierom calls him the thirteenth Apostle; which farther yields him a
priority before Paul and Barnabas (as being after him admitted to that dignity)
to whom he gives the right hand of fellowship, Gal. 2.9. And, being at
Jerusalem, his Episcopal See, See Dr. H. Dissert. 4. cap. 3.
is there named before Peter and John, two principal Apostles.

Fifthly, Of St. Paul, it is not only said by himself expressly, that he had
laid hands on Timothy, and that thereby the gift of God, 2 Timothy 1 6. 2 Timothy 4
1^.
fitting him for the Episcopal function, was given him; but farther, that he
was by him left at Ephesus, to exercise this Authority, to command some (which
includes power) to teach no other doctrine, i. e. to suppress heretics. 2 Timothy
1.^
And the same is as clear of Titus, who is by him left in Crete, Tit. 1.5.
with power of regulating things not yet ordered in that Island, and to ordain
Elders in every Church; which being two branches of Episcopal power, it is by
the Ancients generally affirmed, that he was instituted the Metropolitan, or
chief Bishop of that Island, as Timothy at Ephesus, the Metropolis of Asia; and
accordingly, these two are styled Apostles also, (as receiving the same power
or Commission that Christ had given to the twelve, Dissert. 4.
and to St. Paul) which is observable likewise of diverse others. And
accordingly, it is the general affirmation of Theodoret, that those who now are
called Bishops, were called Apostles; but, in process of time, they left the
name of Apostles to those that were truly so, sent immediately by Christ; and
imposed the name of Bishops on those others, that had been anciently called
Apostles.

Sixthly, It farther appears, that as Timothy and Titus were thus ordained by
St. Paul, so they had thereby also power to ordain others, through all Churches
in those Regions where they were placed, and accordingly did actually ordain
them. And so the power given the Apostles, was sure no temporary power; but, as
from them derived to others, so from those others farther communicated: and all
this by express testimonies of Scripture. For, that St. Paul should leave Titus
in Crete, on purpose to ordain Elders there, and prescribe Timothy as well as
him, What sort of men, and how qualified, should be constituted Bishops (and
Deacons) in the Churches, and they should make no use of that power, is not
imaginable, nor could be controverted, though there were no other book in the
world, but the New Testament; whereas the testimony of the following
Church-writers, is clear, that in ( rete the one, and in Asia the other, had
the ordaining first, and then the judging of many Bishops; and that as there,
so every where else, the Bishops, in their several Churches, were the
successors of the Apostles, and therefore many of them called Apostles also, as
has been already intimated. St. Hierom St Hieron. in Ps. 45.
is positive. Pro patribus Apostolis filii Episcopi. For the Fathers the
Apostles, are the Bishops their Sons. And again, Ep. ad Marcel.
Apudnos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent. Bishops with us, do hold the place
of the Apostles; and to the same effect, sundry others, which I list not here
to recite.

Seventhly, It is manifest, by the Epistle of Christ to the seven Churches of
the Proconsular Asia, delivered by vision to St. John, that there were, at the
date of that Epistle, Rulers, or Governors of each of those Churches, to whom,
under the title of Angels, the care of those Churches was committed. That these
were any of the twelve Apostles, or others, constituted from Heaven
immediately, neither is, nor can be pretended by any. It remains therefore,
that it must be a derived, communicated power, whether mediately or immediately
from one or more of the Apostles, that first preached the Gospel there, which
was thus vested in those Angels; in respect of which, not only that honorable
title of Angels is bestowed upon each of them by Christ himself, (the same that
on the High Priest among the Jews, Malach. 2.7.) but they are also resembled to
so many stars held by Christ in his right hand, Rev. 1.16. and 2.1. which is
an infallible evidence, that this dignity and power of theirs, was approved and
confirmed by Christ. And to so clear a testimony of Scripture, we may farther
add the words of the Council of Chalcedon, Council Calced. Act. 2.
concerning the Church of Ephesus, (one of those seven) that from Timothy to
that time there had been 27 Bishops there; to which it is consequent, that
either Timothy, or some follower of his, was this very Angel that Christ wrote
to. Ep. ad Victor. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 11. St. Iren. l 3. c. 3.
And so Polycrates, that was not long after St. John's time, affirms himself
to be the eighth Bishop of that City. And so, when Irenaeus affirms of Smyrna,
(another of those seven Churches) that Polycarp, a Disciple of the Apostles,
was by them constituted Bishop of that City; Tertull. de praeser. c. 32.
and when Tertullian says of him, that he was so constituted by St. John, as
Clemens was at Rome ordained by St. Peter, it is clear, that the Apostles power
was not determined in themselves; Ibid.
and of this, Tertullians testimony, is most distinct and universal, that, as
in Smyrna and Rome, perinde utique and caetera Ecclesiae exhibent quos ab
Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici seminis traduces habent. The
rest of the Churches in like manner, exhibit those, who, being constituted
Bishops by the Apostles, were their successors, spiritually begotten by them.
Adv. Marcion. l. 4. c. 5.
And again, speaking of these Churches of Asia, which were, Johannis alumnae,
taken care of, and fed by St. John, he says, Ordo Episcoporum ad originem
recensus in Johannem stabit authorem; The order of Bishops being recounted to
the beginning, devolves to St. John the Apostle, the first Author of it. -- I
forbear to add more, lest what I designed for a short discourse only, swell
into a Volume.

Thus has this controversy been sufficiently cleared, by some remains in the
Scriptures, whereto the concordant testimony of all antiquity most readily
affords a suffrage. And then, as to the settling the Monarchy of the Jews, the
way set down in Scripture is this, That God, by a Prophet sent immediately from
him, designed first the person of Saul, and after of David; and after the
succession, or line of David, (by Solomon and Rehoboam) came down from Father
to Son, through all the Kings of Judah, without any new revelation or mission
of Prophets to anoint and constitute a new King, when the former was deceased:
or (rather) as when God had first called Moses, and by miracles sealed him a
Commission from Heaven, to be Ruler over the Jews, and after taken of the
Spirit that was upon him, and put it upon the Elders to be his assistants; for
the succession to of either those offices, there was no more used, or thought
needful, but that Moses should lay his hands on Joshua, and give him a charge,
Numb. 27.19, 20, 21.
and put some of his honor upon him. -- and that the seventy thus created to
their office, should, by imposition of hands, admit others to the same dignity;
so, for the settling Governors in the Church, God first sent down his Son Jesus
Christ, to be personally the founder and head of it; sent down his Spirit to
demonstrate, and constitute him so; and, after his departure, this power being
before his death instated on the Apostles, the H. Ghost again descended on
those Apostles; and some the like prodigies from Heaven, were used toward
others, for the settling them in their dignities. But when that was done, the
w^ole business of a succession was provided for by a more easy and familiar
course, that those that were thus sent by the Apostles, through imposition of
their hands (as they had been by Christ, through the descent of his Spirit,
hovering over, and resting on them, and as Christ by his Father, with the like
solemnity) should, after the same manner, communicate it to others, fitly
qualified for it. Which, that it was actually done in the several Churches, as
it cannot be expected to be recorded in the New Testament, which can speak no
farther than to those times of which it writes; so, to some mentions of it,
which are found there, infinite suffrages are added from the following writers,
by whom it far more evidently appears, that this power of the Church did not
end in the Apostles persons, but continued to their successors, the Bishops in
the several branches than by the Old Testament, and other Jewish writings, now
extant, it appears, either that it was God's will, that the Son should succeed
the Father in the Kingdom, (of which yet there is no doubt, when it was not
countermanded by a Prophet sent from God) or that in the Sanhedrim new men were
received into the places of the deceased; of which also, there is yet no doubt
made by any.

Having cleared the whole matter thus far, there will be now no need to declare
what powers they are, which are thus conveyed to the Bishops, or officers in
the Church; it being already manifest, that the power of planting, governing,
and continuing of the churches, being first vested in Christ, was, from him
derived to the Apostles, and from the Apostles to the Bishops, and so that the
power of preaching, baptizing, teaching, confirming, consecrating the Sacrament
of the Eucharist, binding and loosing, blessing in marriage, visiting, and
praying over the sick, and at last constituting others like themselves, either
in whole, by communicating entirely their whole power to them, or in part, by
giving them some limited powers, for some certain offices, were thus
communicated. Of which, all that will be necessary to be added, is only this,
which natural reason dictates to every one; That no man ought to assume to
himself any Office in any Society, but he that is designed to it, by him that
has the supreme power in it; nor consequently, in the church, but he that is
called, as was Aaron; i. e. has received mission, or commission from God;
which, being not now pretended by any, to be received immediately from Heaven,
there is but one way imaginable for any man to claim it; viz. By receiving it
from them, who immediately have received it from Heaven. And then the whole
matter is devolved to a short issue; That every one that thus runs, is obliged
to show his commission, by which he may appear to be sent; and that being once
produced, to whatsoever acts that extends, to those he will be allowed to be
sufficiently authorized, but to nothing else. And whosoever will not stand to
this award, must not only cast off the Church of Christ from being his Mother,
and confess Christ so far from being a favourer, that he is a professed enemy
to his pretenses; but withal must acknowledge himself to have given a
precedent for all the unreasonable claims, and violences, and oppressions in
the world, which must all commence regular and just, when it shall once be
allowed, that any power belongs to any, which cannot justify (and does not so
much as plead) the derivation from above. A consideration very fit for our
times, and those especially who presume upon their own conceited gifts, and
qualifications, without legitimate ordination, to venture on the weightiest
part of the Ministerial function.

CHAP. VIII.
The Catechist's opinion of the indispensable necessity of Ministers being
chosen by the people, largely declared. His two Scripture-instances examined,
Act. 6. Act. 14. The choice of the seven Deacons, no rule for all Churches in
the constitution of Officers. The choice it self, an occasional permission. The
word (...) does not signify to ordain, by the election, or suffrages of the
community. A taste of the Catechist's Learning and Modesty. Antiquity untruly
referred to by him, for the peoples right to choose their Ministers. His reasons
strike at the Civil state, no less than the Ecclesiastical; that there must be
no Rulers in either, but by the peoples choice. There is no duty required of
the people, as to their Officers and Governors, which makes this choice
contended for, necessary. Arguments against Popular Elections, as
un-conformable to the way of the Old Testament, made by incompetent judges, the
occasion of divisions and factions, reflected on extremely by St. Paul's
Prophecy, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. leaving Ministers under too great a temptation, to
please and humor the people, and very injurious and dangerous to the
concernment of Christian Kings, in the ordering of the public Religion and
Reformation. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, of the Church of England, made,
ordained, and consecrated by the Vertual consent of the People.

THe foregoing Discourse, makes it needless to bestow any farther reflections
upon very much of what the Catechist next offers, concerning the differences
between those whom he calls extraordinary, and ordinary Officers, or Rulers in
the Church, Cat. p. 124, 125. And, as to the rest, we shall have occasion to
discover the falseness of his affirmations, in that which follows.

That then which I fix upon, is, the fourth thing required by him, to the due
constitution of an ordinary Officer of the Church, an Elder, Pastor, or Teacher.

Cat. p. 125.
[That he be called, and chosen by the suffrage and consent of the Church.] And
this he before assigned as the most characteristical difference of the ordinary
Ruler from the extraordinary. p. 124.
That [he is called by the suffrage, choice, and appointment of the Church it
self. And again, he goes over it, as a main foundation to be relied upon, ibid.
[That his authority is derived from Christ, by the election, and designation
of the Church; and therefore confined in the exercise to that Church, wherein,
and whereby, it is so derived.] And this, among others, is said to be [
indispensably necessary unto him that would be accounted to have taken that
office upon him, according to the mind of Christ, p. 126.
and plainly expressed in the Scripture.] Whereto I will annex all that he has
spoken in the explication of this particular.

[Fourthly, Cat. p. 131. 132, 133. 134, 135.
Election by the suffrage and consent of the Church, is required unto the
calling of a Pastor, or teacher, so that without it, formally, or virtually
given or obtained, the call, however otherwise carried on, or solemnized, is
irregular, and defective. There are but two places in the New Testament, where
there is mention of the manner whereby any are called in an ordinary way, unto
any Ministry in the Church, and in both of them, there is mention of their
election by the community of the Church; and in both of them the Apostles
themselves presided, with a fullness of Church Power, and yet would not deprive
the Churches of that which was their liberty and privilege. The first of these
is, Act. 6. where all the Apostles together, to give a rule unto the future
proceeding of all Churches, in the constitution of Officers amongst them; do
appoint the multitude of the Disciples, or community of the Church, to look
out, from among themselves, or, to choose the persons that were to be set apart
thereon, unto their office, which they did accordingly, verses 2, 3, 5. This
was done, when only Deacons were to be ordained, in whom the interest and
concernment of the Church, is not to be compared with that which it has in
it is Pastors, Teachers, and Elders. The same is mentioned again, Act. 14.23.
where Paul and Barnabas are said to ordain Elders in the Churches, by their
election and suffrage. For the word there used, will admit of no other sense,
however it be ambiguously expressed in our translation. Neither can any
instance be given of the use of that word, applied unto the communication of
any office or power, to any person or persons in an assembly wherein it
denotes any other action, but the suffrage of the multitude, and this it does
constantly, in all Writers of the Greek Tongue.

And hence it was, that this right and privilege of the Church in choosing of
those who are to be set over them, in the work of the Lord, was a long time
preserved inviolate in the primitive Churches, as the Ancients do abundantly
testify. Yea, the show and appearance of it, could never be utterly thrust out
of the world, but is still retained in those Churches, which yet reject the
thing it self. And this institution of our Lord Jesus Christ, by his Apostles,
is suited to the nature of the Church, and of the authority that he has
appointed to abide therein: for, as we have showed before, persons become a
Church by their own voluntary consent. Christ makes his subjects willing, not
slaves. His rule over them, is, by his Grace in their own wills, and he will
have them every way free in their obedience. A Church State is an estate of
absolute liberty under Christ, not for men to do what they will, but for men to
do their duty freely without compulsion. Now, nothing is more contrary to this
liberty, than to have their Guides, Rulers, and Overseers, imposed on them
without their consent. Besides, the body of the Church is obliged to discharge
its duty toward Christ, in every institution of his, which herein they cannot,
if they have not their free consent in the choice of their Pastors, or Elders,
but are considered as mute persons, or brute creatures, Neither is there any
other ordinary way of communicating authority unto any in the Church, but by
the voluntary submission and subjection of the Church it self unto them. For,
as all other imaginable ways may fail, and have done so, where they have been
trusted unto; so they are irrational, and unscriptural, as to their being a
means of the delegation of any power whatever.]

Here then we have the peoples election of their Ministers, pleaded for, as an
institution of the Lord Jesus Christ, by his Apostles, plainly expressed in the
Scripture, indispensably necessary to constitute a Gospel Ministry, observed
inviolate in the primitive Church; and all other ways condemned, as
irrational, and un-scriptural. Let us therefore, in the first place, view the
plain, and express Scriptures, that demonstrate this unto us, which, if they
fail the Catechist, all his other pretended arguments from Authority or Reason,
will not serve the turn. The Scriptures are two, Act. 6. and Act. 14. ["And in
both of them, Cat. p. 132.
he tells us, there is mention of their election by the community of the
Church, and in both of them, the Apostles themselves presided with a fullness of
Church Power, and yet would not deprive the Churches of that which was their
liberty and privilege.

As to this election by the community of the Church, said to be mentioned in
both these places, we shall see how far it extends upon examination. But if the
Apostles presided at the same time, with a fullness of Church Power, as is here
asserted; they might certainly have ordered the matter otherwise, no
Church Power being wanting, where the fullness of it is supposed. -- Now to the
instances themselves.

[The first of these, is Acts 6. where all the Apostles together, to give a
rule unto the future proceeding of all churches in the constitution of Officers
among them, do appoint the multitude of the Disciples, or community of the
Church, to look out, from among themselves, or to choose the persons, that were
to be set apart thereto, unto their Office, which they did accordingly, etc.]

If we look impartially into this story of the choice of Deacons, here
mentioned, we shall find no power at all of Election in the multitude of
Disciples, but what the Apostles condescended to allow them, upon this
occasion; they therefore do here appoint them to choose to look out men among
themselves, and they to determine certain bounds of their choice, and election.
1. To take seven, neither more, nor fewer. 2. Those seven men generally known
and reputed of. 3. In such estimation for fullness of the Spirit, of Faith, of
Wisdom and Discretion, for the managery of the affairs to be committed to them.
According to which permission of the Apostles, and rules prescribed by them,
they proceeded, verse 5, and chose Stephen, etc. whom they set before the
Apostles, and when they had prayed, they (the Apostles) laid their hands on
them. The right of Election here, evidently lay in the Apostles themselves; nor
did the community of Disciples act any thing otherwise, than by power delegated
from the Apostles, and according to their prescriptions; and this power
delegated, was no more than a bare nomination, or testimonial approbation, of
seven such persons to be ordained Deacons for the present service, by the
Apostles.

But, let the story be supposed never so full to the Catechist's purpose, [That
the Apostles did this to give a rule to the future proceeding of all Churches,
in the constitution of Officers among them,] is, I am sure, beside the text,
and not only destitute of, but contrary to, other Scripture-warrant; it being
impossible, amongst the Ordinations of Church Officers, recorded in Scripture,
to find such another pattern. And if this be the rule of all future
proceedings, there must be always seven chosen, and no officers in any Church,
but what are taken from among themselves, as these here were, and chosen by
the Laity only.

Now, for the remark made in the close of this story, [This was done, when only
Deacons were to be ordained, in whom the interest and concernment of the
Church, is not to be compared with that which it has in it is Pastors,
Teachers, and Elders.] It may easily be retorted, That it no ways follows,
Because the Apostles indulged a limited, and bounded choice of these inferior
officers, they therefore designed to warrant a perpetual power of election in
the people, as to officers of a much higher order, and in whom the interest and
concernment of the Church is much greater. Add hereunto, that there was some
special reason to move the Apostles to this indulgence unto the people at this
time. This is intimated by St. Chrysostom. S. Chrysostom. hom. (...) in Act. cit. a
Rev. Whitgift. Tract. 3. p. 155.
The Apostles (says he) did not commit the Election of Deacons to lot, nor did
they themselves choose them, whenas, being moved by the Spirit, they might so
have done; but rather establish what is approved by the testimonies of many.
For, to appoint the number, and ordain them, and that to such an use, this they
challenge to themselves; but to choose the men, they permit unto them (the
people) that they themselves might not seem to do any thing partially, and for
favor. There is the reason insinuated, a reason proper to the occasion.
Because these Deacons were to be employed about money-matters, in the
collecting, and distributing of Alms; the Apostles thought good to choose them
by a common consent, the rather to avoid the grudging of the people, and the
suspicion which any might harbor of themselves. And some such thing seems
declared in that, which is said to have put the Apostles upon this whole
business, Acts 6.1. There arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the
Hebrews, because their Widows were neglected in the daily ministration. --

And, upon this very score it is, that St. Paul mentions the Brother, 2 Cor.
8.19, 20, 21.
whose praise is in the Gospel, chosen (or ordained) of the Churches, to travel
with him in the distribution of the collections of the charity of Christians.
Avoiding this, says he, that no man should blame us in this abundance which is
administered by us* providing for honest things, not only in the sight of the
Lord, but in the sight of men. To which purpose also, of declining the censure
of mis-employing any part of the public charity, he thus writes to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.3.
-- Whomsoever you shall approve by your Letters, them will I send to bring
your liberality to Jerusalem. The aim of St. Paul's referring these messengers
to the Churches choice and approbation, was manifestly this, That his upright
dealing in the distribution of their Alms, might never be brought into the
least suspicion. And the same motive had the Apostles for their referring the
choice of the seven Deacons, unto the multitude of the Disciples. So that we
may not of this occasional permission, frame an universal, and perpetual law,
or rule for all Church Officers. This first, therefore had need to be backed
and secured with a second text of Scripture.

[The same is mentioned again, Act. 14.23. where Paul and Barnabas are said to
ordain Elders in the Churches, by their election and suffrage, for the word
there used, will admit of no other sense, etc.]

I wish the Catechist learning and ingenuity proportionable to the confidence
wherewith he manageth this instance. We read, Act. 14 [When they had ordained
them Elders in every Church] this he, to serve his purpose, changes into
[ordained them Elders in every Church, by the election and suffrage of the
community]; and, to set off this translation, tells us farther, that [the word
there used, will admit of no other sense; and thus it constantly signifies in
all the Writers of the Greek Tongue.

Now then, to the Trial. The word used, is (...), and a compound of the very
same, is made use of, Act. 10.41. to express God's praeordination of the
Apostles, (...). We English it, [Witnesses chosen before of God]; and
certainly, there was not any thing of the peoples suffrage here included. Beza
therefore, who, in the 14. chap. of the Acts, verse 23. reads, [ per suffragia
creassent,] with the Catechist, instead of the vulgar [constituissent]; yet, in
his marginal note to this other place, opposes the ordination of God;
expressed by the same word, to al humane suffrage. Beza in Act. 10.41.
[ Hoc loco tacita antithesis inter Dei Cheirotoniam, and hominum suffragia
siquidem a Deo immediate designantur Apostoli.] Nor is there any truth in that
affirmation, that [All writers of the Greek Tongue do constantly use the word
(...), to denote the suffrage of the multitude] Philo Judaeus says of Joseph,
See Dr. Ham. Letter of Res. Quaere 5. p. 3^4. etc. and Annot. in Act 14.23.
(...), He was ordained Governor of all Egypt, under the King: where it is
clear, that without any other suffrages, he was by Pharaoh so constituted, Genesis
41.40. Psalm 105.21. Acts 7.10. So again, of Moses, (...). He was constituted
their Ruler, not by any choice of theirs, but only by God's appointment. So of
Aaron's sons (...), God constituted them Priests. So in Josephus, Alexander son
of Antiochus Epiphanes, writes to Jonathan, (...). We, (i. e. I, in the Regal
style) constitute thee chief Priest of the Jews, and to be called my Friend. So
Lucian, of Alexander's kindness to Hephaestion, (...), that he made him a God
when he was dead; which sure, being a single act of Alexander's, was not done
by voices or suffrages. So Maximus Tyrius, of Darius's horse, which by neighing
made his Master King of the Persians, says, (...), The Persians did not adore,
or salute Darius, till his wanton horse had created him King. In all these
places, the word signifies constituting, or ordaining, without any intimation
of suffrages of a community. And, for Ecclesiastical Writers, the case is
plain, that they use it familiarly for ordaining, and especially for imposition
of hands. Accordingly Theophylact, on 2 Timothy 1.6. instead of St. Paul's (...).
by imposition of my hands; has, (...), when I ordained thee Bishop. And so St.
Chrysostom on those words, Act. 6.6. having prayed, they laid hands on them,
says, (...), they were ordained by Prayer, for this is ordination; making
(...) and (...) all one. Socrates speaking of Constantine, in the twentieth
year of his Reign, (...), but on the thirtieth, (...); where it is all one with
(...), both noting the constituting, or creating of Caesar, a work of the
Emperor only. So Theodoret, in the person of Joseph, (...), my Master has
constituted me over all his house. Whereto might be added many others.

It Is granted indeed, that the word (...), as to it is literal Etymon, signifies
to stretch out the hand, or to hold it up, and noted, among the ancient Greeks,
choosing, or giving sentence, or suffrages, which, in popular elections, or
judicatures, was done by lifting up the hand. But this being the original of
the word, it is (as is ordinary with other words) somewhat enlarged and changed
in the ordinary usage of it, and signifies (as has been said) indifferently,
constituting, or ordaining, without any intimation of suffrages, or plurality
of persons, or voices, by whom this ordination is made. -- We will,
nevertheless, for once, suppose that the original word, in Acts 14. must needs
import, to ordain by holding up of hands, to testify suffrage, consent, or the
like. Be this supposed, (though it has been evidently confuted) yet it serves
not the purpose whereto the Catechist here urges it; for it was distinctly
Paul and Barnabas, which did thus (...), ordain by this holding up of hands,
and not the assembly, or community of all the Christians. -- When they had
ordained them Elders, be it by suffrage, They, viz. who came from Derbe, verse
20. returned thence to Lystra, Iconium, Antioch, verse 21. and these were none
other, save Paul and Barnabas; no mention here, no not the least intimation, of
the peoples joint concurrence in the action. As for the suffrages of any
others, if such could be imagined, to have interposed here, it would not then
be Paul and Barnabas, but those others, who did (...), stretch out their hands,
or give the suffrages. And for Paul and Barnabas to do it by the suffrages of
others, is far from the original use of the word, from whence it is pretended
to be concluded; for, where (...) in the primitive sense, is used of choosing by
suffrages, (as in popular elections, etc.) it is certain, that their own, not
others suffrages, are meant by it. They then that look so far back to the
original of the word, as to think it necessary to render it, Suffragiis creare,
to ordain by suffrages, are certainly guilty of very impertinent nicety, for to
say, that they created them by their own suffrages, is, to say no more, but
that they jointly did ordain them, (and indeed, being but two, there could be
no place for suffrages); and to affirm, they did it by the suffrages of others,
is not agreeable to the pretended use of the word.

These Scripture-proofs, therefore, we have been referred unto; afford nothing
for any man's conscience to rely upon, as to this popular election of
Ministers, so zealously contended for, as an Institution of Christ by his
Apostles, the rightful liberty of the community of Disciples, and necessary,
and indispensable qualification of every Church Officer; and, we are already
instructed by the Catechist, not to satisfy our selves with any arguments, be
they never so plausible, that are not derived from the H. Scriptures. What
indeed can bespeak a thing to be Christ's institution, but his own word of
command?

And yet I will bestow a few reflections upon his reasons, superadded to these
Scriptures; and then offer him some contrary arguments to chew upon.

First, he tells us, [That the Ancients do abundantly testify this right and
privilege of the Church, in choosing their Governors, to have been a long time
preserved inviolate in the primitive Churches;] but he names none of those
Ancients, and apparently slights the authority of the Ancients in other
matters. And I challenge him to produce any of those Ancients, who assert this,
1. To be the right and privilege of the Church; and then, 2. As such, to have
been preserved inviolate a long time, in the Primitive Churches, It Is
acknowledged indeed, that St. Cyprian and others do teach, that the ordaining
of Ministers ought to be in the presence of the people, to the intent they may
object any thing against them, if they can; and that it was the ordinary custom
[mores and merita singulorum communi consilio ponderare,] to advise and weigh
with common advice, (viz. of such as knew them) every man's manners and
deserts; but they no where affirm it the right of the people, to Elect those
that shall be set over them.

Secondly, We are pointed to [the suitableness of this imaginary institution of
Christ, to a Church State, which is said to be founded by voluntary consent,
and to be a state of absolute liberty; and, to have their Rulers and Overseers
imposed on them without their choice, is contrary to that liberty.] We have
seen Chap. 3.
before, this Church State of his, to be as very a dream, as this, which he
now calls Christ's institution in it: and it may not be unseasonable here, to
remarque, That his argument of entering into a Society by consent, and the
liberty of Christians, no less strikes at the Civil government, than the
Ecclesiastical; having before told us, Cat. p. 117.
that [without this consent, no Society of any kind can exist.] In reasoning
thus therefore against the Government of the Church, the state of the Kingdom
is certainly concerned. Christ requires a free and voluntary obedience, for
conscience sake, to the Civil government, no less than to that of the Church;
and subjection, in lawful matters, to the lawful powers of both, is no piece of
slavery and bondage, nothing opposite to Christian liberty, save unto those
only, who make all dutiful obedience unto their Superiors, such. If so it be,
that our Catechist's reason stand good, that, [where the people have not their
free consent in the choice of their Pastors, they are considered as mute
persons, or brute creatures] This reasoning extends no less to the
Commonwealth, than to the Church, and there must not be in the one, any more
than in the other, any Rulers, but such as are of the peoples choice and
appointment, And we have seen enough in these late times, to persuade us, that
this is the mind and sense of the separate brethren, had they but power
answerable to their wills.

Thirdly, It is insinuated, that, [The body of the Church has some duty to be
discharged toward Christ, in this institution of Church Government, which they
cannot perform, if the choice of Pastors be denied them.]

But what duty of the people he means, is not farther expressed; nor do I know
any obligation which the people have, as to the Officers set over them, besides
their Prayers for them; their endeavors by testimonies of known crimes to
lawful Authority, for to prevent unfit persons ordination, and their obedience
unto those that shall be set over them; all which may well enough be performed,
though the choice of their Pastors be denied them.

Lastly, It is boldly affirmed, [That there is no other ordinary way of
communicating authority unto any, which is either Rational or Scriptural]; but
as this is affirmed only, without either Reason or Scripture to back it, so it
may suffice as peremptorily to deny it.

Which, I the rather do, to shorten my discourse on this subject; and, because
I am now, according to my promise, to demonstrate, That it is, upon several
accounts, unmeet and unreasonable, (whatever is by the Catechist and others
pretended) that the election and choice of Ministers, should be left unto the
people.

1. The Priesthood under the Law was not of the peoples choice, but of God's,
by the hand of Moses, Exodus, 28.1. And in their consecration afterward, the
people are assembled indeed, for solemnity-sake, and, it may be, a suffrage of
Prayer, but act nothing toward the performance of the whole business, Levit.
8.6, 7. And again, after that, upon Aaron's decease, Moses alone, without the
peoples suffrage, substitutes Eleazar into his Office, Numb. 20.18. True
indeed, at the consecration of the Levites, the people put their hands on the
Levites heads, Numb. 8.10, 12. but that was done only in token of their being
presented to God's service, instead of their firstborn, as God had chosen
them, Numb. 3.45. -- There was not then this way of Election, as to the Old
Testament; and what says the New? No man takes this honor unto himself, but
he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. But I will not urge this
matter farther.

2. The people have not requisite, and fitting parts, to make a competent and
meet judgment in the choice of their Pastors; and therefore it is not likely God
has called them to a work they are not first fitted for. I will appeal to the
Catechist here, as Judge, Whether the first qualification for any Office, Cat.
p. 125. 126.
be not the Gift for it; the gift in order to the discharge of the work. It is
the doctrine taught by himself; That, [It is not lawful for the Church to call
any man to that work, p. 137.
where the Lord Christ has not gone before them in qualifying him for it.]

3. There is nothing so likely to occasion Divisions in the Church, and, which
more usually ends in factious determinations, than popular election. Contention
and Sedition have been the known fruit of this way of choosing Pastors, where it
has obtained.

4. That which is prophetically spoken by St. Paul, reflects extremely upon
these popular elections. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
The time will come, says he, that they will not endure sound doctrine, but
after their own lusts, shall they heap up to themselves teachers, having itching
ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned
unto fables. Where the people are at their own choice, every one will seek to
gratify their itching ears; and those whom they choose, are left under some
obligation to claw them.

The people will (if it be possible) choose one suitable to their own humors;
one that shall speak pleasing things unto them; and the Minister's dependence
upon their choice, will bias and incline him vehemently not to displease them,
though in the performance of his bounden duty.

Lastly, This election of Ministers by the people, would be highly injurious
unto Christian Kings, unto whom the especial care of God's public service, in
their respective Dominions, does appertain; They shall never be able to procure
such reformation, consent, or agreement, in matters of Religion, as when they
have the placing of the chief of the Clergy at their disposal; for, the people,
who are commonly bent to noveltie and factions, and most ready to receive that
doctrine that is contrary to the present state, and inclines to liberty; will
usually choose men according to their own fancies; so that the Prince shall
neither have quiet Government, nor be able to preserve the peace of the Church,
nor yet to plant and defend that Religion, and Worship of God, which, in his
conscience, he is persuaded to be most sincere and requisite; Yea, and his
whole Kingdom shall be filled with swarms of different Sects, which he is not
aware of, and has no means of Remedy left against the mischievous consequences
of, but by maintaining of a standing Army, for the suppressing of all emergent
insolences and rebellions.

Now, to shut up this Chapter, I call to mind, that the Catechist has said,
[The calling of Pastors or Teachers, must be by the election, suffrage, and
consent of the Church, formally or virtually given or obtained.] How far this
virtual consent extends, he should have done well to have taught his disciples;
for thus we are able to defend the people's virtual consent to the calling of
those Ministers which yet they have not the choice of, inasmuch as whatsoever
is concluded and established by the several Estates of the Kingdom in
Parliament, is also done virtually by the consent of the people; but, such is
the form and manner of making, ordaining, and consecrating of Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, in the Church of England; and therefore they are called by the
virtual consent of all the people, being made, ordained, and consecrated,
according to that form, order, and rule, which the whole Realm in Parliament
has allowed of, and appointed.

If any desire to see farther into this matter, about the people's election of
their Pastors, he may find it handled at large, in Archbishop Whitgift's
defense against Cartwright, Tract. 3. p. 156. to p. 216.

CHAP. IX.
Imposition of hands in ordination, limited by the Catechist, to the Presbytery
of that particular Church, wherein the person is ordained. The Scripture gives
this power to Bishops. Calvin's judgment of the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. Two Questions resolved by the Catechist, in the negative. Qu. 1.
Whether a person may be lawfully called to, or employed in a part of the
office, or work of the Ministry only? The Catechist's grounds examined, and
disabled. Scripture-presidents instanced in the seven Deacons. Christ's
baptizing by his Disciples. St. Paul's allegation as to himself. The
Catechist's own Pastors and Teachers divided in the parts of their office, and
his Ruling-Elders opposed to Preaching-Elders. No repugnancy herein with the
authority of the Ministry, or relation between the Elders and the Church. The
exercise of gifts restrainable, till there be right and authority given, and
after that too, by the rules of prudence, good order, and edification. The
Church may lawfully admit to a part of the Ministry only, and advance her
Ministers by degrees. Qu. 2. Whether a person may hold the relation, or
exercise, the duty of a Minister, to more Churches than one, at the same time?
The Catechist's opinion set down at large, with the reasons of it, and then
refuted under six propositions, which are manifested to be asserted by him. 1.
That none can be a Gospel-minister, unless first chosen by some particular
Church. 2. That none can be ordained a Minister, but with relation to some
particular Church, as his cure and charge. 3. That no Minister has power to
depute another for his Curat, Vicar, or Substitute. 4. That no Minister may
exercise his power, or office, out of that particular Church, wherein, and
whereto he is ordained. 5. That no Minister may have relation to more Churches
than one, at the same time. Archbishop Whitgift's Answer to T.C. about the
Similitudes vulgarly used from a Shepherd and his Flock, etc. 6. The no
Minister may remove from one Church, or Charge, to another, without
reordination. Mr. Hooker's judgment, for the avoiding confusion in such like
questions as these, moved by the Catechist.

THe fifth thing required by the Catechist, to the due constitution of an
Elder, Pastor, or Teacher of the Church, is;

Cat. p. 125. 126.
[That he be solemnly set apart, by Fasting and Prayer, and imposition of hands
unto his work and Ministry, Acts 13.2. 1 Timothy 5.22. 1 Timothy 4.14.] Which runs in
the Explication thus;

page 135.
[Fifthly, Unto this Election succeeds, the solemn setting apart of them that
are chosen by the Church unto this work and ministry, by fasting, prayer, and
imposition of the hands of the Presbytery before constituted in the Church,
wherein any person is to be set apart.]

Now, the Exception I make to this, is, That in the Answer it self, there is no
mention made of the persons that are to lay on their hands. In the ordination
and in the explication, it is limited and restrained, 1. To the Presbytery, in
the modern notion of the word; and, 2dly. To the Presbytery of that particular
Church, where the person is to be set apart. The three places of Scripture,
referred unto in the Answer, may afford us some better light in this matter. --
Act. 13.2, 3. which treats of the ordination of Barnabas and Saul, referrs the
imposition of hands to Simeon, Lucius, and Manaen, Bishops of the Churches of
Syria, called in the Text Prophets, and Doctors, and Teachers (some of them,
probably, having the special gift of prophecy) verse 1. -- 1 Timothy 5.22.
referrs the laying on of hands to Timothy alone, in the singular number, to
whom the Apostle there sends this command, Lay hands suddenly on no man. -- The
third Text, 1 Timothy 4.14. speaks of Timothie's own ordination, where mention is
made of the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Unto which yet, it had
been but good manners to have added a fourth, 2 Timothy 16. speaking plainly of
the same thing, Stir up, says S. Paul to Timothy, the gift that is in thee, by
the putting on of my hands. I will not here insist on that difference which
some observe in the original, that the preposition in this latter Text, is
(...), denoting the chief instrumentality, by the imposition of my hands; but
the preposition in the foregoing Text, is (...), denoting a concomitancy only,
with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. -- (...). St. Chrysostom. in loc.
It Is possible that Presbytery, in the former place, may denote other Apostles
or Bishops, who assisted with St. Paul in this work, (as has been intimated by
the way before, in chapter 6.) And, it is also possible, that it may signify
only the Office it self, whereto Timothy was ordained, called by that name, as
Calvin is known to interpret it. His words are these, which I will only annex,
and so leave this point. Quanquam incertum est An plures, semper manus
imposuerint, necne; Illud quidem in Dia conis. Paulo and Barnaba, and paucis
quibusdam aliis factum fuisse constat. Sed Paulus ipse alibi se, non alios
complures Timotheo, manus imposuisse commemorat. Admonco Te (inquit) u^ gratiam
suscites, quae in te est per Impositionem manuum mearum. Nam quod in altera
Epistola de impositione manuum P^e^byterii dicitur; Ita accipio quasi Paulus de
seniotum Collegio loquatur; sed hoc nom^ne Ordinationem ipsam intelligo, quasi
diceret, Fac ut gratia quam per manuum impositionem recepisti, quum te
Presbyterum createm non sit irrita. Calvin. Instit. l, 4. c. 3. S. 16.
It is uncertain, says he, Whether more than one did always lay on their
hands. That indeed appears to have been done in the Deacons, Paul, and
Barnabas, and some few others. But Paul himself does elsewhere commemorate,
that He, and no more, did lay hands upon Timothy. I admonish thee, says he,
that thou stir up the grace that is in thee by the imposition of my hands. For,
as to what is said in the other Epistle, of the laying on of hands of the
Presbytery, I do not so conceive of, as if Paul spoke of the College of
Elders; but by this name I understand the Ordination it self; as if he had
said, Endeavor, that the grace thou have received by the imposition of hands,
when I made thee an Elder, be not in vain.

And this interpretation of Calvin may be the more relished by the Catechist,
if he considers how much his friend he stands, as to a popular election, in
Sect. 15. immediately precedent to that from whence I have cited this.

The next Question moved by the Catechist, is.

[ Q. 26. May a person be called to, Cat. p. 135, 136.
or be employed in, a part only of the Office, or Work of the Ministry? Or, may
he hold the relation, and exercise, the duty of an Elder or Minister, unto more
Churches than one, at the same time?] To each part of which Question, he thus
Answers.

[ Answ. Neither of these have either Warrant or President in the Scripture;
nor is the first of them consistent with the Authority of the Ministry, nor the
latter with the Duty thereof; nor either of them with the nature of that
Relation which is between the Elders and the Church, Act. 14.23. 1 Pet. 5.2.
Act. 20.28.]

There are (as he says well in the Explication) two parts of this Question and
Answer, to be spoken unto severally.

The first is concerning a person to be called or employed in any Church, Q. 1.
in a part only of the Office or Work of the Ministry. As, suppose a man should
be called or chosen by the Church, to administer the Sacraments, but not to
attend to the work of Preaching, or unto the rule, or guidance of the Church;
or, in like manner, to any other part or parcel of the work of the Ministry,
with an exemption of other duties from hi^ charge or care.

This is the case, and thus resolved.

If this be done by consent and agreemen^ for any time or season, it is
unwarrantabl^ and disorderly. (What may be done occasionally upon any
emergency, or in case o^ weakness or disability, befalling any Elder, ^ to the
discharge of any part of his duty, i^ not here enquired after.)

Now his reasons I thus abridge.

Cat. p. 117. ^1^.
The person either has gifts fitting hi^ for the whole work, or he has not.
If he has, the exercise of them is not to be restrained by any consent or
agreement; he must trade with them, 1 Cor. 12.7. But, (...) he has not, it is
not lawful for the Church to call him to the Ministry, which the Lord Jesus
Christ has not before qualified him for.

This, with what is contained in the gener^^ Answer, is the sum of what he
offers as to this Quaery.

In the reflection upon which, I note,

First, That the thing, which he denies, may be done occasionally, is, by
himself insinuated, p. 139. It is not therefore absolutely, and in it self,
unlawful to be done; for what is so, may not be done occasionally.

Secondly, It seems here to be presupposed, that the work of the
Gospel Ministry, is not divisible, but such as must necessarily go altogether,
and appertain to all Ministers alike; the several names given them in
Scripture, appertaining unto all in like manner; as he had before taught, p.
120. 121. Which foundation being already overthrown, chap 6. and 7. that which
is built upon it falls down with the same blow.

It will not be difficult therefore, to answer to his arguments here pointed to
in particular.

First, then, Whereas he says, [It has not warrant, or president in
Scripture]; I instance to the contrary. 1. In the seven Deacons, who were
admitted to a part of the Ministry only, Act. 6. and therefore Philip the
Deacon, though he preached, and baptized the Samaritans, yet presumed not to
lay his hands on them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost, but left that as
a special prerogative of the Apostles, Acts 8.12, 14, 17. 2. Christ himself
(though he wanted neither Gift nor Authority, yet) in the exercise of his
Ministry, baptized not, himself, but by his Disciples, St. John 4.2. 3. St.
Paul says of himself, I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and
Gaius, lest any should say, that I had baptized in mine own name; and I
baptized also the household of Stephanas: besides, I know not whether I baptized
any other; for, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor.
1.14, 15, 16, 17. And, 4thly, I object to the Catechist, his Pastors and
Teachers, Cat. p. 151.
divided in the parts of their office and function, and his Ruling-Elders only
opposed to Preaching-Elders. Of which, in their place, hereafter.

2. He alleges [That it is not consistent with the authority of the Ministry.]

To this I reply. That he answers the authority of his Ministry, who observes
the rules of that particular function and office whereto he is commissioned and
ordained, be it more or less, of an inferior or superior degree, that makes
no difference. An inferior Officer may be as true to his Authority, as a
superior, though it extend not so far, or to so many acts. Nor is he wanting
to the Authority of his Ministry, who, that he may attend, himself, to some
higher Concern of his Office, leaves certain lower parts of it, to be supplied
by others, who are also authorized thereunto.

3. He says, [It is not consistent with the nature of that relation which is
between the Elders and the Church,] but he specifies not his meaning in any
particular.

A Church Officer, certainly, is no farther related to the Church, than as to
those acts whereto his Authority and Commission extends, nor ought the Church
to expect more from him than he is authorized unto.

4. He says, [The exercise of Gifts received, is not to be restrained.] But
here he should do well to remember, 1. That the exercise of gifts is by himself
allowed to be restrained, till there be right and authority thereunto. Cat. p.
140. 141.
[Ministerial power is not a^ absolute ability, or faculty, of doing what (...)
man is able, but a right whereby a man has power to do that rightly and
lawfully, which before he could not do. This, Gifts will not give to any; for,
if they did, they would do it to all that have received them.]

2. That after power and authority received, Gifts, in their exercise are still
to be restrained by the rules of prudence, good order, and edification, so as
to keep their subserviency to an higher end. And thus the Apostle limits the
exercise even of those extraordinary, and miraculous gifts, that were in his
time in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

Lastly, Whereas he says, That, [If he have not received such Gifts, as
completely to enable him to the discharge of the whole work of the Ministry in
the Church, it is not lawful for the Church to call him thereunto]; It Is
answered, That the Church may lawfully admit a man to a part of the Ministry,
for which he is qualified, though she admit him not unto the whole, for which
he is not qualified. And, where the person is completely qualified for the
whole Ministry, yet may the Church, for order sake, admit him to it by degrees;
making trial of him first in lower offices, and then advancing him to an higher
rank. And thus, briefly, of the first Quaery.

[The second part of the Question is, Q. 2. Ca^. p. 138.
concerning the relation of the same person to more Churches than one, at the
same time, and his undertaking to discharge the duty of his relation unto them,
as an Elder or Minister.] Whereto his Answer is short. [And this also is
irregular and unwarrantable.] The general reasons are to to be fetched out of
the general answer before prefixed. 1. [There is no president, or warrant for
this in Scriture.] 2. ['Tis not consistent with the duty of the Ministry.] Nor,
3. [With the nature of the relation between the Elders and the Church.]
Whereto, in the Explication, little new is added, save an applying of them more
particularly to the matter, as considered under a twofold qualification, or
distinction: viz. a formal, or virtual relation unto more Churches; yet I will
annex the whole.

[Now, a man may hold the relation of an Elder, Pastor, or Minister, unto more
Churches than one, two ways. 1. Formally, and directly, by an equal formal
interest in them, undertaking the pastoral charge equally, and alike, of them
being called alike to them, and accepting of such a relation. 2. Virtually,
when by virtue of his relation unto one Church, he puts forth his power and
authority in ministerial acts, in, or to wards another.

Cat. p. 138. 139, 140, 141.
The first way is destructive both of the office and duty of a Pastor; for, as
Elders are ordained in, and unto the Churches respectively that they are to
take care of, Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5. and their office or power consists in a
relation to the Church that they are set over; so they are commanded to attend
unto the service of the Churches, wherein, and whereunto they are so ordained,
Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.2. and 5.2. and with all diligence, care, and
watchfulness, as those that must give an account, Heb. 13.17. Which no man is
able to do toward more Churches than one, the same duty being at all times to
be performed toward all. And, because the whole authority of the Elders,
Pastors, or Bishops of Churches, is ministerial, 1 Cor. 4.1. consisting in a
power of acting upon a command of Christ, they are bound, in their own persons.
to the discharge of their duty and office, without the least pretense of
authority to delegate another, or others, to act their part, or to do their
duty, which would be an effect of autocratical authority, and not of obedience
or ministry.

The latter way also of relation unto many Churches, is unwarrantable. For,
(1.) It has no warrant in the Scripture, no law nor constitution of Christ, or
his Apostles, can be produced, to give it countenance, but Elders were ordained
to their own Churches, and commanded to attend unto them. (2.) No rule is given
unto any Elders, how they should behave themselves, in reference unto more
Churches than one, in the exercise of their ministerial power, as there are
rules given unto every one for the discharge of that duty in the Church,
whereunto he is related. (3.) There is no example to give it countenance
recorded in the Scripture. (4.) The authority to be put forth, has no
foundation. (1) Not in the gifts they have received; for, ministerial power is
not an absolute ability, or faculty of doing what a man is able, but a right,
etc. (2) Not in their election; for they are chosen in, and by that Church,
whereunto they stand in especial relation, whose choice cannot give ministerial
power over any but themselves. (3) Not in their setting apart by fasting,
prayer, and imposition of hands; for, this is only unto that office, work and
power whereunto they are chosen. They are not chosen for one end, and set apart
for another. (4) Not from the communion of Churches; for that gives no new
power, but only a due exercise of that which was before received.]

Thus has the Catechist resolved the second Quaery.

In the examination whereof, I observe five or six propositions, which here
seem to be asserted contrary to truth; and a brief reflection upon them will
shake the principal foundations that the Catechist leans unto.

1. That none can be a Gospel-minister, unless he be first chosen by some
particular Church] Ordination being here said, to be only a setting apart to
that office and work, and for that end whereunto they are chosen. But this has
been before disproved.

2. That none can be ordained a Minister, but with relation unto some
particular Church, as his cure and charge;] for, [ Ministerial power is here
said to consist in a relation to the Church they are set over.] Now, it will
not be sufficient for the eviction of this, that Paul and Barnabas are said to
ordain Elders in every Church, Act. 14, 23. or that Titus is willed to ordain
Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5. which are the Scriptures referred unto; but
there must be some such Text alleged, which says, No Ministers of the Word
shall be appointed, but unto a certain particular Church, as their pastoral
charge; for, there may be Elders ordained in, and unto particular Churches, as
their especial cure; and yet others also admitted to the Ministry, which have
no such determinate cure committed to them. This was usual in the Apostles
times, and therefore may still be warrantably, as well as profitably
continued, The Catechist should do well to show what particucular Church
Philip, Epaphroditus, Andronicus, Junius, and others, were ordained unto. --
The Canon indeed provideth, that Ministers be not commonly ordained sine
titulo, without some title; or (...), absolutely, and at large, as the Council
of Chalcedon has it; Council. Chalced. cap. 6. Act. 15.
but the meaning is, a prudential provision, that none none be admitted into
any Ecclesiastical degree, Distinct. 70. See Whitgift. Tract. 4. p. 223.
except he have something to live upon; Ne dicatur, Mendicat in plateis
infaelix clericus, as the Gloss in Gratian well interprets; and not a law that
every ordained Minister must have of necessity, some particular Flock committed
to his cure. Perceive they not how by this means they make it unlawful for the
Church to employ men at all, in converting Nations? for, if so be, the Church
may not lawfully admit to an Ecclesiastical function, unless it tie the party
admitted unto some particular Parish; then, surely, a thankless labor it is,
whereby men seek the conversion of Infidels, which know not Christ, and
therefore cannot be, as yet, divided into their special Congregations and
Flocks? H^oker, l. 5. p. 330.


[3. That no Minister has power to depute another for his Curat, Vicar, or
Substitute,] [because, says he, the whole authority of Elders, Pastors, or
Bishops, is ministerial, 1 Cor. 4.1. consisting in a power of acting upon a
command of Christ, they are bound, in their own persons, to the discharge of
their duty and office, without the least pretense of Authority, to delegate
another, or others, to act their part, or do their duty, which would be an
effect of autocratical authority, and not of obedience or ministry.] The
authority of the Apostles was ministerial, as well as that of others; so much
the Text quoted declares, 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us, as of the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God: and yet did they
delegate others to part of their duty, when they set apart the seven Deacons,
to ease them of their care in providing for the poor. And a prime steward may
depute certain officers under himself, without the assuming of autocratical
authority. It no ways follows, because a Shepherd charge another with the
oversight of his Flock, for a time, that therefore he makes himself Lord, or
Owner of the Sheep; or because a Watchman, tired himself, deputes another in
his room, that he makes himself the Mayor of a Corporation, or Prince of a
Kingdom. Ministerial authority is not wholly debarred the privilege of
deputation; not but that every Minister is obliged to do his duty; for the very
performance of that duty of his, to the universal Church of Christ, the Kingdom
wherein he is, and sometimes his private concerns, may engage him for a while
from his particular cure, and so make it necessary for him to use a delegate.
As when St. Paul sent for Timothy from his charge at Ephesus, to Rome, etc.

[4. That no Minister may exercise his power and office, out of his own
particular Church and Charge whereto he is chosen and ordained,] as having no
Ministerial power, but by, and from the Election of that particular Church
whereunto he stands in especial relation, and whose choice cannot give
ministerial power over any but themselves. This I take to be the sense of the
Catechist. And if thus it be, it will be impossible for any cure, upon the
greatest occasion of absence, sickness, or the like, to be supplied. For,
according to the Catechist, First, There is no Minister, without his particular
Church, which he is obliged at the same time to attend unto; And, secondly,
None has power and authority to officiate out of the Church wherein, and
whereto he was chosen. And, thirdly, the communion of Churches gives no new
power but only an exercise of what was before received.

[5. That no Minister may have relation to more Churches than one, at the same
time.] This is most directly contended for. But methinks, (1.) So much being
ascribed to the peoples call and choice, by the Catechist, this Election at
least, by more Churches, should empower him to their oversight. And (2.) This
the rather still, where two particular Churches may be so small, and nearly
conjoined, as not to equal the greatness of some other single, and particular
charge. Well, but he has determined it to be irregular and unwarrantable.

[(1) Because it has not warrant or president in the Scripture.] I instance in
St. Paul, his care of all the Churches, and, if that sound too high, in Titus
his charge of, and relation to, all the Churches of Crete; and indeed,
answerably, every Bishops cure of the particular Churches in his Diocese.

[(2.) It Is destructive to the office and duty of a Pastor;] but this cannot be
made good, unless the Catechist can justify his grand supporters of it. [1.
That the same duty is at the same time, to be performed toward all.] Why may it
not suffice, if it be performed successively, one hour, suppose, to the one
Church, and another unto the second, etc? [(2. That a Minister may not depute
another to officiate for him.] Which has been already considered.

Now, what can be argued farther [3. from the nature of that relation which is
between the Elders and the Church,] I understand not, unless he can
demonstrate, that a Shepherd may not have two or three Flocks under his
charge. I will only here add a specimen of the vulgar rhetoric used among the
Brethren of the Separation, in these matters, from the resemblances between a
Pastor and his People, with a Shepherd and his Flock, a Watchman and a City,
and such like; as I find it managed by cartwright the head of this faction: and
then the apt Reply made unto him by our Reverend Whitgift.

For those that preach, T. C.
to have a whole Diocese, or Province, or Realm, to be their Flock, or City to
attend upon, is contrary to the policy, or good husbandry, of all those that
would have their City fafe, or their Flock sound. For, Who are they that would
appoint one for the watch of a thousand Towns or Cities, whenas, all they which
love their safety, would rather have for every City many Watchmen, than for
many cities, one? Or, What is he, that is so watchful and circumspect, whose
diligence and watchfulness, one City, assaulted with enemies, will not wholly
occupy, and take up? Or, What is he, whose sight is so sharp, that he can see
from one end of the Diocese, or Province, or Realm, to the other end thereof?
Or, What is he that will commit the keeping of twenty thousand sheep to one
man, that looks for any good, or increase of them? How shall all these hear
his whistle? how shall all know his voice, when they cannot hear it? how shall
they acknowledge him, when they cannot know him? how shall they follow him,
when they cannot see him go before? how shall he heal their diseases, when he
cannot possibly know them? These are analogies drawn from the nature of those
things which Ministers are likened unto, and are, for the most part, used of
the Holy Ghost expressly. Now mark the Answer.

Whitgift, Defense, Tract. 4. p. 220. 221.
It is a great point of good husbandry, and policy also, to have, beside the
several Shepherd over several Flocks, and sundry watchmen over sundry cities,
diverse others to feed the sheep as occasion serves; and to admonish the
Watchmen and the Cities of their duties Else, Why did the Apostles, after they
had planted the Churches, and placed Shepherd and Watchmen over them, so
diligently afterward visit them? Was the Watch, think yo^ the worse kept, or
the Sheep the negligentlie looked unto? The policy that Darius used Dan. 6.
when he appointed an 120 governors over all his Realm; and, over then, three
to oversee them, and take an account of their doings, is greatly commended: And
Why may not this Policy be necessary in the Ecclesiastical state also? But you
here run smoothly away with the matter, and suppose that there may not be for
several Cities, and several Flocks, several Watchmen and Shepherds, because
there be some that have a general care over many Flocks and Cities. If ^
thousand Towns or Cities have a thousand watchmen appointed unto them, to have
the particular care over them, and also one, two, or more, to have a general
care both over the watchmen, and over the Cities also; do you not think, that
all shall be in better order, and in much more safety. But you Similitudes fail
marvellously in sundry points, which I must admonish you of, because you glory
so much in them, and think that you have reasoned strongly, when you have used
the weakest kind of argument that can be, to prove any thing; for, as the
Logicians say, Similitudo rem illustrat, sed non probat; A Similitude makes a
matter plain, but proves it not, and it is easily overthrown, ostensa
dissimilitudine, by showing the unlikelihood. In this, the similitude agrees,
That, as every City must have a Watchman, and every Flock a Shepherd, so every
Church, or Parish, a Watchman or Pastor; and, as the Watchman's and Shepherd's
office is, to watch, and feed, and have a necessary care over their charges; so
must also the Spiritual Watchman and Shepherd, over the people committed unto
them. All this is true, and neither proves, nor disproveth any thing in
question. I might as well say, that if the City be well watched, and the Flock
carefully looked unto, though it be not by the Watchman, or Shepherd himself,
but by his means and procurement, there can be no just fault found with either
of them. Likewise, that when* the Shepherd has brought his sheep into a
pasture, where they may both be sure from all danger, and have meat sufficient;
then his presence is not so necessary for them, so he do sometimes visit them.
Also, That there is no one Watchman, that either does, or can, watch
continually; but must, of necessity, have his rest, so that some other supply
his absence: and likewise, that there is no Master-shepherd, but that he has
some under him, either boy or man, to supply his absence, whilst he is about
other matters. To be short, That one Shepherd has care over sundry men's sheep,
sundry Flocks, of sundry Towns and Parishes, etc. Diverse other such similitudes
of Shepherds and Watchmen, might I also use, to prove many things contrary to
your meaning, I might also show unto you the dissimilitudes betwixt a temporal,
and spiritual Shepherd: unreasonable Sheep, that cannot feed themselves, or by
any means provide for themselves, nor have any charge to look to themselves;
and reasonable Sheep, such as God has endued with knowledge, to whom he has
left his word, which contains in it sufficient to salvation, whom he has
charged to read, and to hear it; who shall also answer for themselves, etc.
Finally, what difference there is betwixt temporal meat and drink, which is
soon digested, and therefore daily to be renewed; and spiritual food which
continues, etc. These, and a great number more of dissimilitudes, could I
bring, to overthrow all that you can build on these similitudes. I might
farther say, that, in the Prophets, and other places of Scripture, Kings and
mighty Princes, that have ample, and large Dominions, be called both Shepherds
and Watchmen; as namely, in Jerem. 23. Ezekiel. 34. etc. and therefore all your
reasons might as well be alleged against them; and of them also might you say,
What is he, whose sight is so sharp, that he can see from one end of the
Diocese, Province, or Realm; to another? for these names be as common, and
usual, to Kings and Princes, as they be to Ministers of the Word, and Bishops.
And truly, if these similitudes sink once into the peoples heads, and be
applied unto Civil Government, (against which they be as forcible, as against
the Ecclesiastical) they will as easily, and far more easily, stir them up to
seek alteration in that also.

6. It is deducible, by way of inference from what the Catechist has
delivered, in the resolving of this question, [That no Minister may remove from
one Church, or charge, to another, without reordination.] The reason this.
Because his former ordination was in, and unto the Church only which had chosen
him; which, therefore, while he lives, he may not defert; and, should that
fail, (suppose in time of Pestilence, War, or great Mortality) he is not any
longer a qualified Minister, he has no longer any Ministerial power, which
consists in a relation to his Church deceased; and therefore, to make him a
Gospel-minister, he must be elected by another Church, and set apart, (that is,
ordained,) de novo. Could some of the Catechist's friends believe this, they
would not boggle so much at reordination. -- But, as our Judicious Hooker
Hooker. Eccle. Pol. l. 5. p. 35.
says, upon an occasion like to this before us, in the questions now examined.
For the avoiding of confusions, incident to these matters, there is not any
thing more material, than (1.) to separate exactly the nature of the Ministry,
from the use and exercise thereof. (2.) To know, that the only, true, and
proper act of ordination is, to invest men with that power which does make them
Ministers, consecrating their persons to God, and his service, in holy things,
during term of life, whether they exercise that power or no? (3.) That, to give
them a Title, or Charge, where to use their Ministry, concerns not the
making, but the placing of God's Ministers,; and therefore the laws which
concern only their election or admission unto that place of charge, are not
applicable to infringe any way their Ordination. And, (4.) That, as often as any
ancient Constitution, Law, or Canon, is alleged concerning either Ordinations
or Elections, we forget not to examine, whether the personal case, be the same
which the ancient was, or else do contain some just reason, for which it cannot
admit altogether the same rules which former affairs of the Church (now
altered) did then require.

It shall suffice to have quoted from him these generals; he that would know
more, may peruse the Author.

CHAP. X.
The necessity of a rightful derivation of Church Authority from Christ,
usually suggested by the Catechist. Of the Peoples consent required to the
exercise of the Elders Authority, and the Catechist's Directory in case of
their dissent; and from thence, how poor and weak a thing the power of
church governors appears to be made by him. What kind of obedience is allowed
by those of the Separation, as due to Ministers. Dr. Jackson, of the necessity
and nature of true-obedience, with the danger of the sin of Disobedience to
their Pastors. The Catechist's difference between Pastors and Teachers,
considered, with the fond grounds of the same.

THe Duties of the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, Cat. p. 141. 142.
spoken to in the next Question, are granted, and I shall not therefore speak
anything of them. But,

In that which follows, Q. 28. p. 143, 144.
concerning the authority of the Elders of the Church; we meet,

First, with very useful matter to be considered of.

[1. That all Church Power is originally vested in Jesus Christ, p. 1^4. 145.
the sole Head and Monarch thereof, Matt. 28.18.2. That he does communicate of
this authority by way of trust to be exercised by them, in his name, unto
persons by him appointed, so much as is needful for the ordering and disposing
of all things in his Churches, unto the Blessed ends for which he has
instituted and appointed them. For, no man can have any power in his Church,
for any end whatever, but by delegation from him. What is not received from
him, is mere usurpation. And, whoever takes on himself the exercise of any rule
or authority, or power in the Church, not granted unto them by him, or not
rightly derived from him, is an oppressor, a t^ief, and a robber. This
necessarily follows, upon the absolute investiture of all power in him alone,
etc.] This may well be referred by way of confirmation to what has been said
before, chap 7. And, let them look to themselves, whoever they are, that cannot
derive their power from those whom Christ has authorized to communicate it
unto others, to the end of the world; the Apostles of Christ, I mean, and their
successors, the Bishops of the Christian Church.

2. As to that which follows, touching the [consent of the Church required unto
the authoritative acting of the Elders therein,] enough has been already said,
till we see farther proof from Scripture or Reason, that the authority
communicated by Christ is ineffectual, and to no purpose, unless the people
please. Well, but then, What must the officers do in this case, that the people
consent not? It Is worth the while, to hear him put the case, and resolve it.

[But, if it be asked, p. 149. 150.
What then shall the Elders do in case the Church refuse to consent unto such
acts as are indeed according to rule, and warranted by the institution of
Christ? It is answered, That they are, (1.) Diligently to instruct them from
the Word, in their Duty, making known the mind of Christ unto them, in the
matter under consideration. (2.) To declare unto them the danger of their
dissent in obstructing the edification of the body, to the dishonor of the
Lord Christ, and their own spiritual disadvantage. (3.) To wait patiently for
the concurrence of the grace of God with their Ministry, in giving light and
obedience unto the Church. And, (4.) In case of the Churches continuance in any
failure of Duty, to seek for advice and counsel from the Elders and Brethren of
other Churches.] So poor a thing is the authority derived from Christ,
according to this representation made of it, that not one act can be put forth
without their consent and liking, who are to be under the discipline, and will
be always inclined, we may presume, to favor themselves. It Is a pitiful
power that is subjected to the peoples breath; and that can only instruct and
counsel and must wait patiently when that is done, not extending to any act of
punishment and censure where it is contemned. But, I need say no more, than
that this directory in the case supposed, is framed by the Catechist without
any Scripture-pattern or warrant.

^a^. p. 150.
The 29th. Question is, of the Duty of the Church, toward their Elders,
Pastors, and Teachers. And, in the Answer, Reverence and Obedience are well
placed first. But, the truth is, I see not much room left for any Obedience,
properly so called, according to the Catechist's principles, since the Pastor
has his authority by the peoples election, and cannot exercise it without
their consent; so that, in effect, their obedience is unto themselves. And then
farther, This obedience is thus limited by the Catechist.

[To obey conscienciously, in all things wherein they speak unto them in the
name of the Lord;] that is, in the Catechist's meaning, in all things warranted
by some Divine command, or precept, and evidently appearing so to be, unto
their consciences; for, this way all of the Separation go, allowing of no
obedience to authority, in matters appertaining to Religion, farther than they
apprehend some Divine command and warrant to back it; no obedience in the
determination of matters indifferent, or to them doubtful; which are indeed the
most proper matter of obedience. But, the Catechist, having barely named this
point, I will not enlarge on it farther, than to annex the words of a very
Learned and pious man, on this subject.

"Sundry by profession Protestants, in eagerness of opposition to the Papists,
See Dr. Jackson, l. 2. c. 4. and 5. etc.
affirm, that spiritual Pastors must then only be believed, then only be
obeyed, when they give sentence according to the evident and express law of
God, made evident to the hearts and consciences of such as must believe and
obey them, And this, in one word, is, to take away all authority of spiritual
pastors, and to deprive them of all obedience, unto whom, doubtless, God, by
his written word, has given some special authority and right, to exact some
peculiar obedience of the flock. Now, if the Pastor be then only to be obeyed,
when he brings evident commission out of Scripture, for those particulars, unto
which he demands belief, or obedience; What obedience do men perform unto him,
more than to any other man whomsoever? for, whosoever he be that can show us,
the express, undoubted command of God, it must be obeyed of all; but, whilst it
is thus obeyed, it only, not He that shows it unto us, is obeyed. And, if
this were all the obedience which I ow unto others, I were no more bound to
believe or obey any other man, than he is bound to obey or believe me; the
Flock no more bound to obey their Pastors, than the Pastors them. Yet,
certainly, God, who has set Kingdoms in order, is not the Author of such
confusion in the Spiritual regiment of his Church.

-- Some peculiar obedience is due unto Spiritual Governors, unless we hold,
that when Christ ascended on high, and led captivity captive, his donation of
spiritual authority, was but a donation of bare titles, without realities
answering to them. -- Conditional assent, and cautionary obedience, we may, and
must perform to our Spiritual Pastors, Overseers, and Governors, albeit, we
see not express commission out of Scripture, to warrant these particulars,
whereunto they demand assent or obedience. It is sufficient that they have
their general commission for obedience expressly contained in Scripture. --
Disobedience, unless upon evident and just occasions, is as dangerous as blind
obedience, in matters unlawful; the one usually is the forerunner of
Superstition and Idolatry, and the other the mother of carnal Security, Schism
and Infidelity. -- The first mischief which befell the Church, in her prime,
was, from the want of due reverence, and awful regard of Ecclesiastical
injunctions, and constitutions. Hence did Heresies spring, in such abundance.
Satan had sown their seeds in proud hearts, and the Civil Magistrates facility
to countenance every prating discontent, or forth-putting Vocalist, in
preaching what he list, though contrary to his Governors constitutions, was as
the Spring-Sun to cherish, and bring them forth. -- Seeing obedience is God's
express commandment; yea, seeing we can no more obey, than love God, whom we
have not seen, but by obeying our Superiors, whom we have seen. True spiritual
obedience, were it rightly planted in our hearts, would bind us rather to like
well of the things commanded, for Authority sake, than to disobey Authority,
for the private dislike of them. Both our disobedience to the one, and dislike
of the other, are unwarrantable, unless we can truly derive them from some
formal contradiction, or opposition betwixt the public or general injunction
of Superiors, and express law of the most High.

I could easily be tempted to transcribe more out of this profound Divine, to
this purpose. But I pass on with the Catechist.

Quaest. 30. Cat. p. 151. 152. 153. 154, 155.
Are there any differences in the office or offices of the Guides, Rulers,
Elders, or Ministers of the Church?

Answ. The office of them that are Teachers, is one and the same among them
all, but where there are many in the same Church; it is the will of Christ,
that they should be peculiarly assigned unto such especial work in the
discharge of their office -- power, as their gifts, received from him, do
peculiarly fit them for, and the necessities of the Church require, Rom, 12.4,
5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 8.11. 1 Pet. 4.10. and 5.2.]

Explication.

The Office of them that are to instruct the Church in the name and authority
of Christ, is one and the same, as has been showed before; and, there are many
names that are equally accommodated unto all that are partakers of it, as,
Elders, Bishops, Guides. They are all alike Elders, alike Bishops, alike
Guides; have the one Office in common amongst them, and every one the whole
entire unto himself. But there are names also given unto them, whereby they are
distinguished, not as to office, but as to their work and employment, in the
discharge of that office: such are Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. which are
placed, as distinct persons in their work, partakers of the same office. Now,
the foundation of this distinction and difference lies, (1.) In the different
gifts that they have received. (2.) In the nature of the work of the Ministry
in the Church, which in general may be referred unto two heads, or ends; 1.
Instruction in the knowledge of God, and Christ, and the mysteries of the
Gospel. 2. Exhortation to walk answerably unto light received, in holiness and
universal obedience. -- He that teaches on teaching, he that exhorts on
exhortation, Rom, 12.7, 8.]

How the office should be entirely the same, and the work statedly, and by the
will of Christ, distinct, I must confess my self so dull, as not to comprehend;
since the office is nothing else but the power in order to the whole work. And
I do much admire the illuminations of those, who can discern no difference at
all in all other names given to Ministers in H. Scripture, and yet can find so
palpable an one in Pastors and Teachers. St. Hierom, to be sure, saw not by
their light, when he took their Pastors and Teachers both for one, and made
this remarque upon Ephesians. 4.11. That the Apostle says not, as before, Alios
pastores, alios doctores. Some pastors, and some doctors or teachers; but
joyneth them together, and says, Alios pastores and doctores. Some pastors and
teachers.

It Is, methinks, a pretty device, thus to refer all the work of the Ministry to
preaching, and then to share it so between two, (like Dod and Cleaver) that one
make the doctrinal part, and the other the use and application. But then, as to
the ground, and foundation of this distinction and difference, if it be. (1.)
The different gifts that Ministers receive, and that too, according to the
different degrees of those gifts, (as the Catechist farther explains himself);
then sure, there must be almost as many names of difference, as there are
persons in the Ministry, for they do generally vary in their gifts, or, at
least, the degrees of their gifts. But if, (2.) In the nature of the work of
the Ministry, we must add to Pastors and Teachers, Baptizers, Catechists,
Orators, Comforters, Administerers of the Sacrament, etc. for these all refer
to different works of the Gospel Ministry, which are not here specified; viz.
Baptizing, Catechizing, Prayer, Visiting, and Comforting the Disconsolate,
giving the Lord's Supper, etc.

St. Paul therefore, who is here referred to, contents not himself with the
mention of these two, but puts many other acts, by way of instance, in company
with them. Having then gifts differing, Romans 12.6, 7, 8.
according to the grace that is given unto us, whether prophesying, let us
prophecy according to the proportion of faith; or Ministry, let us wait on our
ministering; or he that teaches on teaching, or he that exhorts on
exhortation; he that gives, let him do it with simplicity; he that rules,
with diligence, etc. And, in the same place, he speaks, not only of the
officers of the Church, but other members also, ver. 4.5. For as we have many
members in one body, and all members have not the same office; so we, being
many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another. -- I shall
not therefore here bestow the pains of a larger refutation; but proceed to his
discourse concerning Ruling-Elders, which will engage me to a greater
prolixity; and therefore I shall allot it a Chapter by it self.

CHAP. XI.
Of Ruling Elders. The distinction of the Church into Clergy and Laity,
defended. 1 S. Pet. 5.3. no proof, that the whole Church is called God's
Clergy. Ministerial power, a mark of separation. That Laymen among us have a
principal rule in the Church, and, upon that account, our objection against
Lay Elders unreasonable, disproved. The scarcity of persons fit for this ruling
Eldership, in every Church, and the burden of their maintenance, acknowledged
by some friends to the cause, great prejudices against them. What kind of
Elders, or Seniors, are countenanced by Antiquity. The Jewish Elders joined in
the Sanhedrim, and other assemblies, with the Priests, no pattern to be urged
here. An examination of the express Scriptures pretended to authorize these
Officers. Mr. Mede's excellent discourse upon 1 Timothy 5.17. Who are meant, 1. by
Elders there, Five expositions, which do all exclude these Lay Elders pleaded
for, in contradistinction to the civil Magistrate, as well as Teaching
Prebyter. 2. By double honor. The Catechist's exceptions to some branches of
the exposition given of these words, answered. The word (...) does not denote
that ordinary labor which is incumbent upon all Pastors and Teachers, as their
constant duty. Bishops may pertinently enough be meant by the Elders spoken of,
notwithstanding the catechist's cavils. The same qualifications absurdly
required in the Ruling, as in the Teaching-Elder, however their office be said
to be so distinct.

Qu. 31. ARe there appointed any Elders in the Church, Cat. p. 155. to p. 165.
whose Office and Duty consists in Rule and Government only?

Answ. Elders, not called to teach ordinarily, or administer the Sacraments;
but to assist and help in the Rule and Government of the Church, are mentioned
in the Scriture, Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Timothy 5.17.]

To what purpose the word ordinarily is here added, I apprehend not, unless he
will allow these Elders to preach extraordinarily, and so rank them among the
Officers, that were for a season only, p. 116.

Explication.

[This office of Ruling-Elders in the Church, is much opposed by some, and in
especial by them, who have least reason so to do. For, first, they object
against them, that they are Lay Elders, when those with whom they have to do,
deny that distinction of the Church, into the clergy and Laity. For, although
they allow the distribution of it into Officers, and the multitude of the
Brethren, yet they maintain, that the whole Church is God's Clergy, his lot and
portion, 1 Pet. 5.3. Again, they affirm them to be Elders, and therein not
merely of the members of the Church, but Officers, set apart unto their Office,
according unto Rule, or the Appointment of Christ. And, if by Laity, the people
distinct from the Officers of the Church, are to be understood, the very term
of a Lay-Elder implies a contradiction, as designing one, who is, and is not, a
Church Officer. Besides, themselves do principally govern the Church by such
whom they esteem Laymen, as not in holy Orders, to whom the principal part of
its rule, at least in the execution of it, is committed, which renders their
objection to this sort of Church Officers, unreasonable.]

See Mr. Theyre's Aeri^-mastix, p. 132 133. etc.
First, as to the distinction of the Church, into the Clergy and Laity, it
certainly deserves to be better handled, upon the account of it is antiquity,
and general usage amongst Ecclesiastical Writers; nor is it fitting, that so
innocent, and justifiable a custom of speaking, be controlled by the fancies
of a few private persons. If the Catechist and his Brethren deny, and disown
this distinction, we have not much reason to think the worse of it, upon that
score, because we know they do so, as to many other things, which yet they
ought to allow of, and reverence; and, upon a little search, probably, we shall
find this denial of theirs no better grounded, than in other cases it appears
to be.

The distinction it self is all one in effect with those correlates in the Old
Testament, so frequently used; Priests and People; Priests, Isa. 28.2. Neh.
8.1, 2, 3.5, 6, 7.
and Levites, and all the People. The whole multitude, that* is not separated
to any sacred function, is called, by way of distinction, (...), The People, or
Laity. But that which offends most, is, That persons, separated from the
multitude, and taken into Holy Orders, are called the Clergy, whereas, [They
maintain that the whole Church is God's Clergy, his lot and portion, 1 S. Pet.
5.3. 1 St. Pet. 5.3.
] What they maintain, is so far considerable, as the ground upon which they
maintain it, is truly Scriptural. To this Text therefore, let us cast our eye.
We read the words, [Neither as being Lords over God's heritage]; but it is to
be noted, that the word [God's] is not in the Original. (...). Neque ut
dominantes in Cleris. So the Vulgar Latin. And so Beza too, Neque ut dominantes
cleris, Beza in loc.
Neither as Lording over the Cleri, in the plural number. Though he is bolder
in his note than he durst make with the Text. [Clerus sortem and haereditatem
Domini significat; i. e. populum Christianum.] Now, I demand, Why must the word
(...), which we English, hot so properly in the singular number heritage, be
referred here to God, immediately; and not rather to the Priests or Bishops,
whom St. Peter is exhorting, in the place, not to abuse their power over their
respective Charges; i. e. (...), their Lots?

See Dr. li. in loc.
The word here may very well signify the several Provinces over which each of
the Governors, spoken to in the plural number, verse 1. were placed; in like
manner as, Acts 1.25. (...); the lot of Ministry and Apostleship, is that
charge or portion, assigned by lot, unto Matthias, whither he was to go,
officiate, and preach the Gospel. That the whole Church then, is God's Clergy,
cannot be maintained from this place; for, the Apostle does not so much as name
[God's Clergy,] but rather, if we would read it most properly, [ your lots, or
charges,] speaking to the Elders or Bishops. -- Well, but suppose we,
nevertheless, that the community of the Church, the people, are ^h^re styled
God's Clergy, his Lot, and Portion, What Argument were this against the using
of the same phrase in a stricter application of it, of those who are separated
from the rest to God's service? Or, Why might they not, upon the same score,
except against the distribution of the Old Testament, into Priests and People,
because the people also are in some respects, called a Royal Priesthood, Exodus
19.6. 1 St. Pet. 2.9? -- They themselves allow the substantial importance of
the distinction, when they distribute the church, into Officers, and the
multitude of the Brethren. We have indeed expressed in Scripture, Act. 15.22,
23. The Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church. And again, The Apostles,
and Elders, and Brethren; but the word [Officers] is as much without
Scripture-warrant, as [God's Clergy] appropriated to all that are in Holy
Orders; and, as for the thing signified, this latter, there, no less truly than
the former.

It may not be amiss to consider, -- Clericus, qui Christi servit Ecclesiae,
interpretetur primo Vocabulum suum, and. nominis definitione prelata, nitatur
esse quod dicitur. Si enim (...) Grae^e, sers Latin appellatur, propterea
vocantur Clerici, vel quia de sort sunt Domini, vol qui^ Dominus sors, i. e.
par, Clericorum est. St. Hieron. Ep. ad Nepo^^an.
what St. Hierom has said of this word. Let the Clergyman, says he, who
serves the Church of Christ; interpret first his name, and having defined
that, endeavor to be as he is called; for, if (...) in Greek be sors in Latin,
i. e. a lot or portion; they are therefore called Clerks, or clergymen,
because they are the Lord's lot, or, because the Lord himself is their lot or
portion.

If the Catechist still mislike the word Lay-Elder, or Elder of the people, let
him please himself with some other name. But certainly, the distinction of
Clergy and Laity is not to be blamed. God's Ministers are a state of men
separated from the community of Christians. The lowest rank of them, under the
Law, the Levites, Numb 16 9.
are said to be separated from the congregation of Israel, and to be brought
near to God. And the H. Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul. Acts 23.2.


Ministerial power, therefore, (as our Judicious Hooker expresses it) "is a
mark of Separation, Eccles. ^ol. l. 5. p. 314.
because it severeth them that have it from other men, and makes them a
special Order consecrated unto the service of the most High, in things
wherewith others may not meddle. Their difference from other men, is, in that
they are a distinct Order. So Tertullian calls them; and St. Paul himself,
dividing the body of the Church into two moieties, names the one part (...). 1
Cor. 14.16, 23, 24. which is as much as to say, the Order of the Laity; the
opposite part whereunto, we, in like manner, term, the Order of God's Clergy,
and the spiritual power which he has given them, the power of their Order; so
far forth as the same consists in the bare execution of holy things, called
properly the affairs of God, -- and they which have once received this power,
may not think to put it off and on, like a cloak, as the weather serves.

-- But, and if the term Lay-Elder imply a contradiction; it concerns them
especially to look to that, who defend the thing; and when they can prove him a
church officer, ordained, and separated to some spiritual office in the Church,
by Divine appointment, we shall say unto him, Sir, Sit up ligher; and promote
him to a place among God's Clergy. -- Well, but all the Grudg is not yet over.

[Besides, themselves do principally govern the Church, by such whom they
esteem Laymen, as not in Holy Orders, to whom the principal part of its rule,
at least as to the execution of it, is committed, which renders their objection
to this sort of Officers, unreasonable.] Soft and fair! Indeed, Turpe est
Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum; It Is unbecoming, and unseemly, and so far
unreasonable, for any one to reprove another for what he practices himself,
and all his reproaches in this case, reverberate upon himself; but this renders
not an objection against a thing altogether unreasonable, inasmuch as we know,
It Is familiar enough in men, to blame the vices and faults in others, which
they see not in themselves. The objection against the vice it self, is
reasonable, be it found in others, or in themselves, or both in others and
themselves; though fitting it were, they should first amend themselves, who
correct others.

We are content therefore, to take the shame so far as we allow, the practice
of what we reprove in them; but then we must secure withal, that the case be
right-stated. Our Objection against them, is, that they make this sort of
Officers, whom we call Lay Elders, to be instituted by express warrant from
Christ, and not a prudential appointment only of the Church; but we do not
affirm the like of our Laymen, employed in Ecclesiastical affairs, as
Chancellors, Proctors, Apparitors, Churchwardens, etc. Though we think they
might crowd in under the protection of their Ruling-Elders, as well as any
other; and it may be, if some of them turned out too with them, the Church
would find no great loss. But then, again, The Catechist is wrong, when he
says, that, [Lay-men, among us, have a principal rule in the Church,] and he
traps himself, when he adds immediately, [at least in the execution.] An
inferior Officer may serve an Execution, whose authority yet ddpends on some in
a far higher rank and place. A mean Lictor may hang a Felon, or cut off a
Traytor's head, whereas yet, the Sentence warranting him thereto, must first be
given by a commissioned Judge. --

[Others also, have given advantage, by making this Office annual, or biennial,
in them that are chosen to it; which, though they plead the necessity of their
Churches for, as not having persons meet for this work and duty, who are
willing to undertake it constantly, during their lives, without such a
contribution for their maintenance, as they are not able to afford; yet the
wisest of them do acknowledge an irregularity in what they do, and wish it
remedied.]

These others are presumed well-willers to the cause, and therefore I leave
them to answer for themselves, and, as they see good, to to justify, or
condemn their own practice. Only I take notice of two Arguments, here
intimated, which, certainly, contribute very much by way of prejudice against
this Eldership, imposed on all Churches.

1st. The want, or scarcity of persons meet for this work, or duty. And, 2dly,
The great burden and charge, which a contribution for their maintenance would
prove unto the people; and yet this maintenance too, will be exacted by as
Divine a right, as their Office and Authority is urged with; that place, 1 Timothy
5.17. including as much, in the double honor to be given unto those that rule
well.

[But this hinders not, but that such Church Officers are indeed designed in
the Scripture, and of whom frequent mention is made in the Ancient Writers, and
footsteps yet remain, in most Churches, of their institution, though woefully
corrupted; for, besides that, some light in this matter may be taken from the
Church of the Jews, wherein, the Elders of the people were joined in rule with
the Priests, both in the Sanhedrim and all lesser Assemblies, there is, in the
Gospel, express mention of persons, that were assigned, peculiarly, for Rule
and Government in the Church. As 1 Cor. 12.28. -- ]

Three things are here offered by the Catechist, to recommend his Ruling-Elders
to the world. 1. The Testimony of Antiquity. 2. The Example of the Jewish
Church. And, 3. Express Text of Scripture; the two first are but glanced at by
the way, and therefore I shall bestow the shorter reflection on them.

First, That there is frequent mention made of his Ruling-Elders in Ancient
Writers, requires more than his bare saying so, to make it evident. The Elders,
or Seniors, See Defense of the Humble Remonstrance. S^^ p. 144.146.
mentioned by the Ancients, have been declared by the Learned, to have been
either old and grave men, in civil authority, (such as we style Aldermen) whose
advice and assistance the Church made use of in great occasions; or else, an
inferior rank of appointed officers, reckoned by them, after Deacons, such as
our Churchwardens, or Vestry-men still are; men trusted with the utensils and
stock of the Church, and employed about the ordering of Seats, and Rates, and
such like outward affairs of the Church. Of these, therefore, we retain not
only some footsteps, but the things themselves.

Secondly, [Some light in this matter, says the Catechist, may be taken from
the Church of the Jews, wherein the Elders of the people were joined in Ruling
with the Priests, both in the Sanhedrim, and all less Assemblies.]

It Is much he should not discern by this light, the vanity of cavilling against
the term of [Lay-Elder,] which is but the very same with [Elder of the People,]
to whom he is now compared. But, as to the thing it self here referred to, it
shall suffice to annex this short observation. Dr. Doughtee Vel. Polem. p. 92.
That the main reason of joining Elders to the Priests, Synodical Elders, among
the Jews, was the mixed condition of the Judaical Law they had to deal with;
howbeit, of Divine institution wholly, and from God; yet, in regard of the
drift and scope thereof, partly divine, and partly humane, occupied in a
decision of doubts happening betwixt God and Man, as likewise, betwixt Man and
Man; and accordingly, the Priests and Levites, besides the ordering of the
Sanctuary, their peculiar task, (1 Chronicles. 24.5. 2 Chronicles. 34.8.) had principally
to do in matters of it appertaining unto God, and the Elders, in things
belonging unto Men, the one over the matters of the Lord, the other over the
matters of the King, 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 9, 10, 11. -- In brief, the Jewish
Sanhedrim (if so, at leastwise, it be to be understood in those places
commonly alleged, Exodus 18.25, 26. Numb. 11.16, 17. Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9. and 19.16,
17.) was, upon the point, a Civil Court, and had to deal in matters of Right or
Title, yea, of Life it self. But come we,

Thirdly, to his express Scriptures [There is, says he, in the Gospel, express
mention of persons that were assigned peculiarly for Rule and Government in the
Church. As, 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17.]

I might here except, First, at the phrase here, as well as in the general
Answer, "Ruling-Elders are mentioned in the Scripture. A phrase very distant
from proving their institution by Christ, inasmuch as many things are mentioned
in H. Scripture, which are not there allowed of, much less enjoined and
prescribed. Secondly, That, he says, there is express mention of these in the
Gospel, and yet brings all his proofs out of St. Paul's Epistles. But these are
lesser incongruities, which I shall not insist on. We will view impartially,
the places themselves, which are here brought in to prove, That there are such
Church Officers instituted by Christ, and so, of perpetual necessity, to be
retained; as Elders, whose duty consists in rule and government only; Elders in
distinction, as well from the Civil Magistrate, as the Pastors of the Christian
Church.

The first Text is, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, first,
Apostles; secondarily, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers; after that, Miracles; then
gifts of Healings, Helps, Governments, Diversities of Tongues. Well, here are
mentioned [Helps, Governments,] here are also [ Miracles, gifts of Healings,
Diversities of Tongues;] now, What is this to Ruling-Elders, or Lay-Presbyters?
It Is answered moreover by some, That these were so many gifts and endowments
appertaining to the Officers before, mentioned, Apostles, Prophets, and
Teachers. To which purpose, it is observable, that the Apostle uses the
Abstract, and, upon an exact recapitulation, made afterward in the Concrete,
of the said Church-administrations, he omitteth [ helps, governments,] as being
only appendents, it is like, to the foregoing Offices, and so comprised under
them, ver. 29, 30. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? Are
all Workers of Miracles? have all Gifts of Healing? do all speak with Tongues?
do all Interpret? and then follows an Exhortation to the pursuit of the best
gifts, verse 31. So that this Exposition seems well grounded upon the Text. But
what says the Catechist?

[It is in vain pretended, that those words, helps, governments] do denote
gifts only, seeing the Apostle expressly enumerates the persons in Office, or
Officers, which the Lord Christ then used, in the foundation and rule of the
Churches, as then planted.]

What? and were Miracles, Gifts of Healings, Diversities of Tongues too,
reckoned in the number of those Officers? -- But, grant what is pleaded for,
that helps and governments import here, a distinction of Offices, personally
different; Are therefore Ruling-Lay-Elders presently the men? or, Dr. D. Vel.
Polem. p. 77.
must they necessarily be understood? Why not rather Deacons,? (if there be
room for guesses;) who were plainly taken in as helps to the Apostles, in their
work of Ministering to the Saints, Acts 6.1, 2. and had moreover, some power,
questionless, assigned them, in the rule and government of the Church; which
makes St. Paul require, before their admission, a skill of governing their own
houses well, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5, 12. This then, for the first Text. The second
follows.

[He that rules also, is distinguished from him that teaches, and him that
exhorts, Romans 12.8. and is prescribed diligence, as his principal
qualification, in the discharge of his duty.] Let the whole period be viewed,
from the 6th verse, which, upon another occasion, we consulted once before; and
I demand, first, How it appears, that the Apostle treats there of Offices
subjectively distinct, as to persons; and not rather of a diversity of
spiritual gifts co-incident to the same person? since, at his very entrance
upon the enumeration, he expressly names Gifts, verse 6. Having then gifts
differing, according unto the grace that is given unto us, etc. And, it may
certainly appertain to one and the same person to prophecy (be that to expoun^
Scripture, or what it will); and do the ministry of a Deacon, and to teach, and
to exhort and to distribute Church-goods, and to govert, and to give alms,
which are the particulars there specified. -- And then, (supposing the question
resolved)

Secondly, How appears it, that the Apostle here meant any distinct officer in
the Church, any Ruling-Elder, and not rather extended his admonition unto all
to whom the charge of Ruling is committed; even the Civil Magistrate, as well
as any other, of whom doubtless, diligence, is also required? for, having, in
the beginning of this 8 verse, joined to the two immediately precedent, gone
through with Church-offices, he may be thought, without injury to the Text, to
strike out into more general, and common duties, wherewith he holds on to the
end of the Chapter.

As yet then, we have not Ruling-Elders, so much as mentioned in the H.
Scripture, not one word or syllable of these Ruling-Elders, that are
contra-distinguished to Teaching-Presbyters, and Civil Magistrates. It may be,
the third place will satisfy for all. Ad Triari^s ventum est. If this fail,
the Catechist must quit the field. To that therefore, let us bend our
observation.

[The words of the Apostle to this purpose, are express, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the
Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially those
that labor in word and doctrine. For, the words expressly assign two sorts of
Elders, whereof, some only attend unto rule, others moreover, labor in the
word and Doctrine. Neither does that word, as some would have it, Labor in the
Word, intend any other labor, but what is incumbent on all the Pastors and
Teachers of their Church, as their constant duty. See Romans 6.12. Act. 20.35. 1
These. 5.12. Now, can we suppose, that the Apostle would affirm them to be
worthy of double honor, whom, comparing with others, he notes as remiss and
negligent in their work? For, it seems, that others were more diligent in the
discharge of that duty, which was no less theirs, if only one sort of Elders
be here intended. The Scripture is not wont to commend such persons, as worthy
of double honor, but rather to propose them, as meet for double shame and
punishment, Jer. 48.10. 1 Cor. 9.16. And they are unmindful of their own
interest, who would have Bishops that attend to the rule of the Church, to be
distinctly intended by the Elders that rule well, seeing the Apostle expressly
prefers before, and above them, those that attend constantly to the word and
doctrine.]

I cannot give the Reader better satisfaction about this place, than by
abbreviating what our Learned Mr. Mede has already offered concerning it, in a
most excellent discourse upon this Text.

Mr. Mede, on 1 Timothy 5.17.
There are two things, says he, in these words, to be explicated. 1. What is
meant here by Elders. And, 2. What by this double honor due unto them.

For the first: there is no question but the Priests, or Ministers of the
Gospel of Christ, were contained under this name, for so the word (...), or
Presbyter, is used for the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, in the Gospel;
whence comes the Saxon word Priester, and our now English word Priest. And the
Ancient Fathers thought these only to be here meant, and never dreamed of any
others. None of the Fathers, which have commented upon this place, neither
Chrysostom, Hierom, Ambrose, Theodoret, Primasius, Oecumenius, or Theophylact,
(as they had no such, so) ever thought of any such Lay Elders to be here meant;
but, as was said, Priests only, which administered the Word and Sacraments.

But, How, will you say then, is this place to be understod, which may seem, as
it is alleged, to intimate two sorts of Elders; some that ruled only, others
that labored also in the the Word and Doctrine?

The Divines of our Church have given diverse Expositions of these words, none
of which give place to any such newfound Elders. I will relate four of the
chief, to which the rest are reducible.

The first is grounded upon the use of the participle in the Greek Tongue,
which is often wont to note the reason, or condition of a thing, and
accordingly to be resolved by a causal, or conditional conjunction. [Let the
Elders, or Presbyters, that rule or govern their Flocks well, be accounted
worthy of double honor, and that chiefly, in respect, and because, of their
labor in the Word and Doctrine.] And so this manner of speech will imply two
duties, but not two sorts, or orders of Elders; and that, though this double
honor be due unto them for both, yet principally, for the second, their labor
in the Word and Doctrine. And this way goes St. Chrysostom, and other Greek
Writers.

A second Exposition is taken from the force and signification of the word
(...), which signifies, not simply, (...), to labor, but to labor with much
travail and toil, (for, (...) is derived from (...), Vexor, laboribus and
molestiis premor, and so properly signifies molestiam, or fatigationem ex
labor.) Thus the meaning will be, [Let the Elders that do (been praesidere)
govern and instruct their flock well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially such of them as take more than ordinary pains in the Word and
Doctrine.] Or thus; [Let the Elders that discharge their Office well, be, etc.
especially, by how much the more their painfulness and travel shall exceed in
preaching the Word and Doctrine.]

Thus have we seen two Expositions, neither of them implying two sorts or
Orders of Presbyters, but only distinguishing several Offices, or Duties, of
the same Order; or implying a different merit in the discharge of them. But, if
they will by no means be persuaded, but that two sorts of Elders are here
intimated, Let it be so; two other Expositions will yield them it, but so as
will not be for their turn, for their Lay Elders will be none of them.

The first is this, That the Apostle should speak here of Priests and Deacons,
considering both as members of the Ecclesiastical consistory, or Senate, which
consisted of both orders, and in that respect might well include them both
under the name of Elders, it being a common notion in Scripture, to call the
Associates of a Court of Judicature by that name. Senatus has it is name a
Senibus, i. Senioribus, of Eldership; and, is as much to say, as (...). And,
according to this supposal, the Apostle's words may have this construction;
[Let the Elders which rule well, whether Priests or Deacons, be counted worthy
of double honor; but more especially the Priests, who, besides their
Government, labor also in the Word and Doctrine.] And, it is not improbable,
but the Apostle should make provision, as well for the maintenance of Deacons,
as of Priests, seeing he omits it not of Widows, in the verse going next before
this; but, unless he includes them under the name of Elders, he makes no
provision for them at all.

2. There is another Exposition, which allows also of two sorts of Elders to be
here employed, but makes them both Priests; namely, that Presbyters or Priests,
in the Apostles time, were of two sorts, one of Residentiaries, and such as
were affixed to certain Churches, and so did (...), praesidere Gregi. Another,
of such as had no fixed station, or charge over any certain place, but
traveled up and down to preach the Gospel, where it was not; or to confirm the
Churches where it was preached already; such as are elsewhere known by the
names of Evangelists, and Doctors, or Prophets. That these were those (...),
spoken of here by the Apostle; That both these sorts of Presbyters were to be
counted worthy of double honor, as well (...), as those that traveled up and
down to preach the Gospel; (...); but especially these latter, because their
pains were more than the others* This is confirmed from the use of the word
(...), which in Scripture signifies, not only corporal labor, as may appear in
many places; but seems to be used by St. Paul, even in this very sense now
given, 1 Cor. 15. where he says, comparing himself with the other Apostles,
(...). I have traveled up and down more than they all; as is manifest he did.

But, give me leave, says Mr. Mede; to propound a fifth Exposition, which
shall yield all they contend for so eagerly, to be employed in this Text;
namely, That there are not only two sorts of Elders here implied, but also that
the one of them are Lay Elders, such as have nothing to do with the
administration of the Word and Sacraments. What would they have more? yet they
will be never the nearer for this concession; for, the Lay Elders here employed,
may be no Church Officers, but Civil Magistrates, which, in Scripture Language,
we know are called Elders; as, when we read of the Elders of Israel, of the
Elders of Judah, of the Elders of the Priests, and the Elders of the People, of
Priests and Elders, and the like; according to which notion, the words may be
construed thus; [Let all Elders that govern well, of what sort soever, be
counted worthy of double honor; especially, the Elders of the Church, which
labor in Word and Doctrine.] Is not this good sense? and does not the Apostle,
in the beginning of this very Chapter, use the name Elder, in the larger, and
more general sense, when he says, Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a
Father, etc. Why may he not then do so here? And does not St. James, in his
last Chapter, call the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, (...), as it were
in distinction from, (...).

Thus, having informed our selves, who they are, which are here termed Elders,
we will now see also briefly, what is that honor which is due into them. That
by honor is here meant, honorarium stipendium, or a tribute of maintenance, is
manifest, by the following words, which the Apostle brings in to enforce it.
For, the Scripture-saith, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that
treads out the corn; and, The labourer is worthy of his hire. Who sees not
what these proof^ infer? The first of them, he alleges also, in the same
argument, 1 Cor. 9. where he adds, Does God take care for Oxen? or, says he it
altogether for our sakes? (ours, namely, that preach the Gospel) for our sakes,
no doubt, this is written, that he which ploweth, should plow in hope, and he
that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope. The case is plain. It Is
an Hebrew notion. To bring honor. i. e. to pay tribute, or bring a present,
Revel. 21.26. -- But, what is meant by double honor? Some, (as among the
Fathers, St. Ambrose) will have it to be honor of Maintenance, and honor of
Reverence. But, because the Apostle's proofs here infer only maintenance, I
take it to be meant in this place only of it. And, as for double, I take it to
be an allusion to the right of the firstborn, to whom, at first, the Office of
Priesthood belonged in their families, and into whose room the Levites were
taken, and whom the Presbyters of the Gospel now succeed. As therefore, they
had a double portion among their brethren, in like manner should the Presbyters
of the Gospel be counted worthy of double honor. And, if we admit of the fifth
Exposition before-given of these words, to comprehend the Elders of the
Commonwealth, as well as the Elders of the Church, it will agree yet far
better; because both the one and the other succeed in the place of the
Firstborn, to whom belonged, both to be Priests, and Civil Governors, in
their Tribes and Families. Yet, howsoever the ancient Christians were wont, in
their Love Feasts, to give their Presbyters ^ double portion, (...), with some
reference to this Text, as appears by Tertullian nevertheless, I think double
honor is not here so precisely to be taken, but only to note ^ liberal and
ingenuous maintenance, such a^ might set them above the Vulgar; as the
Firstborn, by their double portion, were preferred above the rest of their
brethren. Th^^ far he. --

And more need not be said, to disable the Catechist's proof of his
Ruling-Elders, from this Text of Holy Writ. I will therefore only Answer the
Exceptions taken by him, to the Exposition of this place, that is given by
others.

[Neither does that word labor in the Word, as some would have it, intend any
other labor, but what is incumbent on all the Pastors and Teachers of the
Church, as their constant duty. See Romans 6.12. Act. 20.35. 1 These. 5.12.]

I have, according to the reference, seen these places, and yet cannot learn
from them, that the word (...), in this 1 Timothy 5.17. does not intend any other
labor, but what is incumbent on all the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, as
their constant duty. Romans 6.12. is mis-quoted, for chap. 16.12. as I suppose.
Where, (compare it with the 1st. verse, and 6th. verse) the great pains of
those good women, and others, that administered necessaries to the Apostles, and
so eased them of care in that particular, seems to be the thing which St. Paul
sets forth by that phrase of [labouring in the Lord] and [labouring much in the
Lord,] Act. 20.35. St, Paul thus recommends his own example. Ye your selves
know, that these hands have ministered to my necessities, and to them that were
with me. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to
support the weak, and to remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how it is said,
It is more blessed to give, than to receive. -- Sure, it is not the constant and
bounden duty of all the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, so to labor with
their hands, as St. Paul did. But then, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. We beseech you,
Brethren, know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in love, for their works sake;
comes in aptly, 1. To confirm the notion of laboring, which he seeks to
confute by it, prescribing of special notice unto such Laborers. And, 2. To
inform us withal, that the Ruling, and Labouring-Elder are both one person; or
that it may appertain to the Office of one and the same sort of persons, to
labor among Christians, and to have the inspection, or oversight of them, for
rule and government, to admonish them. To which purpose also, might be annexed,
Hebr. 13.17. where this Office of Ruling, is given without controversy to the
Preaching-Minister. Remember them who have the rule over you, who have spoken
unto you the Word of God. -- To the Catechist's reasoning therefore, [Now can
we suppose, that the Apostle would affirm them to be worthy of double honor,
whom, comparing with others, he notes, as remiss and negligent.] The Answer is,
that he argues from a wrong Supposal. The Apostle does no ways denote him that
rules well, as remiss, and negligent, but as one ordinarily diligent, though
not eminently so. All, therefore, built upon this, comes to nothing; and, for
any thing that yet appears to the contrary, the Ruling, and Teaching-Elders
spoken of, may be the same sort of persons, and they too Bishops of the
Christian Church. What has the Catechist to allege against this?

[They are unmindful of their own interest, who would have Bishops, that attend
to the rule of the Church, to be distinctly intended by the Elders that rule
well, seeing the Apostle expressly prefers before, and above them, those that
attend constantly to the Word and Doctrine.] Know then, that Bishops are not
said to be distinctly intended by the Elders only that rule well, but, both
there intended, and in what follows also, they that labor in Word and
Doctrine; the Compare is made between Bishops, or Ministers of the same rank
and order; and there are degrees of comparison certainly to be taken notice of,
as the Catechist might have remembered, from his very Accidence; there is a
Positive, comparative, and Superlative. Some, therefore, may do the office of a
Bishop well; and yet others may do it better; and others, in a most eminent
degree, both for their skill and industry in ruling and preaching. And whoever
do so ought to have the special encouragement of this double honor. What now
is this against the Episcopal Interest?

And by this time it may appear, upon what sandy and deceitful foundations, the
Catechist and his brethren can rear a mighty Superstructure. It Is usual with
them to speak big, of proofs from express Scriptures, but it has been
evidenced, that none of the Texts serve their purpose. -- But if Scripture
fail, the Catechist is resolved to Reason-out the point.

[And besides, Cat. p. 159.
what is thus expressly spoken concerning the appointment of this sort of Elders
in the Church, their usefulness, and the necessity of their work, is evident.]
How expressly their Divine appointment is spoken of in the Scriptures, we have
already seen, and the necessity and usefulness of ruling well, we can
understand sufficiently, who deny any usefulness or necessity of these novel
officers and rulers, who usurp unto themselves, what appertained to Christian
Kings and Bishops, and such, who are Authorized and Commissioned by, and under
them.

The Catechist, therefore, might have spared his sharp censure and reproof of
Christian Churches, for their neglect of these his Ruling-Elders.

[But, whereas, in most Churches, Cat. p. 160.
there is little or no regard unto the personal holiness of the members of
them, is is no wonder, that no account should be made of them who are Ordained
by the Lord Christ, to look after it, and promote it.]

This favors rank of, I am holier than thou, Isa, 65.5. and he must give some
better assurance of Christ's ordination in the case, before his reproof will
signify any thing other, than a proud and arrogant presumption.

One Note more, and I dismiss this subject.

Cat. p460.
[The qualifications of these Elders, with the way of their Call and setting
apart unto their office, being the same with those of the Teaching-Elders,
before insisted on, need not to be here again repeated.] Nor, indeed was there
more need of repeating Ruling-Elders, than their qualifications. But, if the
offices of Ruling, and Teaching-Elders, are so distinct, as we have been told
they are; the same qualifications, one would think, should not be required in
both, and, I know not how the Catechist will answer himself, in what he before
urged, against the engaging in a part of the office or work of the Ministry
only.

Cat. p. 137.
[If the person so called, or employed, have received gifts, fitting him for
the whole work of the Ministry, the exercise of them is not to be restrained by
any consent or agreement, seeing they are given for the edification of the
Church, to be traded withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man to profit withal; and this, he which has received such
gifts, is bound to attend unto, and pursue.] It Is a thousand to one, but the
Ruling-Elder, in whom are required the same qualifications, as in the
Teaching-Elder, do now and then, by virtue of this reason, stop up into the
Teachers chair or Pulpit, for the exercise of his gifts, and so invade an
Office which belongs not at all unto him.

CHAP. XII.
Of Deacons. Stephen and Philip, two of the seven Deacons, did preach and
baptize. The word (...), of a large signification. The Office of Deacons, in
the Christian Church, to be gathered, not only from Acts 6. but other places.
The Catechist's rash censure of all Churches, which confine not their office to
the care of the poor. The ordination of the first Deacons, managed wholly by
the Apostolic prudentials. The circumstances of our state, vastly different
from the Churches then. The change of the Levites, when the Temple was built,
from their first office, in attending on the Tabernacle, a competent plea for
our case. 1 Cor. 16.2. considered. The Catechist urges that occasional
precept, as a binding law, to perpetuity; and so, in effect, adds to the word
of God. A sort of Shee-officers, Female-Elders, Deaconesses, and Widows, in the
Apostolic, and Primitive Church, forgotten by the Catechist, in describing the
pattern given in the Mount. His unkindness, in excluding that Sex from a share
in Church Discipline, noted; and the good women admonished, by what he has
said elsewhere, to look to their privilege and duty, as Church Members.

Cat. p. 161
[ Quest. 32. IS there no other Officer in the Church, but only that of Elders?

Answ. Yes, of Deacons also.]

Why these were before left out in the enumeration of the ordinary officers of
the Church, Catech, p. 120. I cannot imagine; unless, as I have Chap 6.
before also intimated, to render the parity, and equality of those officers,
the more colorable.

[ Quest. 33. What are the Deacons of the Church?

Answ. Approved men, chosen by the Church, to take care for the necessities of
the poor, belonging thereunto, and other outward occasions of the whole Church,
by the collecting, keeping, and distribution of the Alms, and other supplies of
the Church, set apart, and commended to the grace of God therein, by Prayer,
Act. 6.3, 5, 6. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.]

It is not denied by any, That the first seven Deacons, chosen, and ordained in
the Church of Jerusalem, were primarily appointed for the service of Tables,
the care of the poor, to the ease of the Apostles, who had more
concerning-engagements of the Ministry to attend unto. But then, to make this
the enclosure, limitation, and boundarie of the Office of Deacons, is not from
hence warranted, inasmuch as we find their power afterward farther enlarged.
For of these seven Deacons, we read not only Stephen, Act. 6.5, 8. but also
Philip, chap. 8. preaching the word of God, to the conversion of the
Samaritans, whom also he then baptized. Nor is it reasonable, that, wherever
we find the word Deacon, as a name of Office, to confine it to this first
occasion, mentioned Act. 6. For, evident it is, (1.) That the word (...) it
self, is of a large signification, importing as much as Minister, or Servant,
in the general, (and so we often translate it). Christ himself is thus called,
Romans 15.8.
the Deacon, or Minister of the circumcision for the truth of God; i. e. One,
who endeavored to do them service, in working of their conversion, by the
preaching of the truth of God unto them. 1 Cor. 3.5.
So Paul and Apollo are called Deacons, or Ministers, by whom the corinthians
believed. And Paul calls himself a Deacon, or Minister of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.7.
Col. 1.25.
and of the Church; and the Apostles are styled Deacons, or "Ministers of the
New Testament. 2 Cor. 3.6.
And, (2.) at the first institution of the Seven, we may observe both these
Deaconships, or Ministrations, united in the Apostles; What was there done in
the Church by Deacons, which the Apostles did not first discharge, being
Teachers? Hooker, l. 5. p. 321.
viz. The ministration of the Word, and serving Tables, together, in the same
persons, Act. 6.1, 2, 4. until, upon the increase of Disciples, and the
complaint of the Grecians, that their widows had shorter commons than the
Hebrew^; and the Avocations which the Apostles had themselves, to matters of
greater importance; they did communicate some part of their power to these
seven, by way of delegation, for the present necessity; (...), verse 3. Yea,
and (as appears by matter of fact) together with this charge in relation to the
poor, the power of preaching and baptizing too, when occasion should serve. And
then farther, (3.) The office of Deacons in the Church, is to be learned
moreover from those other Texts of Scripture wherein they are mentioned after
Bishops, Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.
pointed to, as the Bishops ministers, serving in an inferior degree, under
them, and where such qualifications as are apparently required in them; which
plainly import, that they were then designed to some weightier employments in
the ^hurc, than the care of the poor only; even the Ministry of the word of
faith, and subserviency in the government of the Church; and where, They that
have used the office of a Deacon well, ver. 13.
are said to purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in faith.

This matter therefore, being thus declared out of Scripture, it may appear,
without farther reference to the testimonies of the Fathers, concerning the
employment of Deacons afterward in the Church, how impertinently the Catechist
proceeds in the explication of this general Answer.

Cat. p. 163. ^.^
[But, whereas many have grown weary of the observation of the institutions of
the Gospel, this Office has for a long time been lost, amongst the most of
Christians: By some the name is retained, but applied to another work, duty,
and employment, than this, to which it is peculiarly, appropriated in the
Scripture. Their proper, and original work, of taking care for the poor, they
say, is provided for by others, and therefore, that Office being needless,
anot^er, unto another purpose, under the same-name, is erected. Such are
Deacons, that may read Service, preach and baptize, when they have license
thereunto. But this choice, to reject an office of the appointment of Christ,
under pretense of provision made for the duties of it, another way, and the
erecting of one, not appointed by him, seems not equal. But, whereas it is our
duty, in all things to have regard to the authority of Christ, and his
appointments in the Gospel, if we claim the privilege of being called after
his name; some think, that, if what he has appointed, may be colourably
performed another way, without respect unto his institutions, that is far the
best.] The Catechist here charge all, that confine not the Office of Deacons
in the Church. to the taking care for the poor, as growing weary of the
observation of the institutions of the Gospel, and rejecting of an Office
appointed by Christ, etc. But it would become him to be more free of his
proofs, or sparing in his censures.

We meet not with any command or institution of Christ, in this matter, St.
Cyp^^^n Ep. ad Regatian. cited by Hooker, l. 5. p. 320.
but the ordination of the Apostles only. Deacons must know, says S. Cyprian,
that our Lord himself did elect Apostles; but Deacons, after his Ascension into
Heaven, the Apostles ordained. Yea, and the business seems, then too, wholly
managed by the Apostolic prudentials. For, so the ground of that first
institution is given us, after a mention of the special occasion moving, Act.
6.1. It is not reason, say they, that we should leave the Word of God, and
serve Tables, verse, 2. i. e. that we neglect the weightier part of our charge,
by attending to a less considerable: Wherefore, Brethren, look ye out among
you, seven men of honest report, etc. Evident it is, that the appointment of
those seven to the service of Tables, was to ease the Apostles of a part of
their care, and to provide for the pressing necessity of the Church, in that
state and time. So that here I might borrow that of Musculus, Tit. de Magistr.
frequently referred to by our Reverend Whitgift. Si revocas temporum illorum
mores, primum conditiones and statum quoque illorum revoca. If you will urge
the manners of those times, first call back their conditions and state also.
There cannot certainly be a necessity of this part of the then Deacons Office,
in a Christian Kingdom and Commonwealth, where the Laws are so charitable, as
to provide for the poor some other Overseers: and it seems, in good earnest, an
uncharitable doom, that no such Officers may be erected, without respect to
some special institution of Christ, and regard had to his authority; as if the
general commands of charity were not sufficient to justify any institution
serviceable to that end. All the clamor here is, that we vary from an
occasional institution, or practice of the Apostles, when that occasion it self
is ceased, and the circumstances of the case are extremely different. -- But,
if we might be privileged to argue, as the Catechist himself did, about
Ruling-Elders, Cat. p. 157. Cat. p. 157.
Some light in this matter, may be taken from the Church of the Jews; where we
find the Levites, whose Office, at first was, to set up, and take down, and
carry about, the Tabernacle; so soon as the Israelites were settled, and the
Temple prepared, appointed to attend upon different ministeries, some to be
Porters, and others Singers, etc. A point, the due consideration whereof, may
serve to justify the assignment of Deacons now in the Church, to some other
Offices, than what was most conspicuous in their first institution, whilst the
Church remained without the patronage of Christian Magistrates, and in her
wilderness, and persecuted condition. -- There is one farther mistake, of
ignorance, in the Catechist's words, when he upbraids us with our [Deacons that
may read Service, Preach, and Baptize, when they have license thereunto] For,
Deacons, with us, need not a farther license for baptizing, than their
Ordination. -- But, passing this, I proceed to a brief reflection on those
things which concern this Office, which, says the Catechist, Cat. p. 154.
are clear in the Scripture.

[1. The persons called unto it, are to be of honest report, furnished with the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, especially with Wisdom, Act. 6.3.] To keep close to
this pattern, he should also have said, seven men, and told us where we might
expect those gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were then familiar in the Church.

[2. The way whereby they came to be made partakers of this Office, is, by the
choice or election of the church, Act. 6.2, 3, 5 whereupon they are solemnly to
be set apa^ by Prayer.] Of the election of these seve^ Deacons, I have spoken
enough before, Chap. ^ But, as to the election of those other Deacon; of whom
we read, as annexed to Bishops, this Text of the Acts is no competent proof.
And then, as to their ordination, Imposition of hand should questionless be
added unto Prayer, both in the general Answer, and this branch of the
Explication.

Cat. p. 165.
[3. Their work, or duty, consists in a daily ministration unto the necessities
of the poor Saints, or Members of the Church, Act. 6.1, 2.] If so, among the
separate congregations, which are observed to be usually combinations of the
richer sort, there is but little work for them.

[4. To this end, that they may be enabled so to do, it is ordained, That every
first day, the members of the Church do contribute, according as God enables
them, of their substance, for the supply of the wants of the poor, 1 Cor.
16.2.]

To change an occasional precept, given by St. Paul, for the expediting a
charitable contribution toward Jerusalem, into a constantabiding, and
conscience-binding command, for perpetuity, is, doubtless, in effect, an
unlawful, and pernicious adding to the Word of God And that the Catechist has
done so here, we shall be satisfied, if we look into the place which we are
referred unto. The Apostle, in the 1 Cor. 16. speaks of a contribution for the
supply of the urgent wants of the poor Christians in Judea, exhausted partly by
their own former liberality, (Act. 2.45.) and partly spoiled by the persecuting
Jews, (1 These. 2.14.) And, to prevent the delay and trouble of Gatherings, when
the Apostle came amongst them, he prescribes this Order to the Churches of
Galatia and Corinth, that upon so special, and worthy an occasion as this, they
would, upon the first day of the week, the day of Christian assembly, every one
lay aside, what, by by God's blessing, had accrued to them, by way of increase,
so that there might be a full Collection in readiness; and then he tells them,
they should have the choice of faithful messengers, to send, and dispose
thereof, unto Jerusalem. The words are plain to this sense. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2, 3.
Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye, upon the first day of the week, etc.

[5. Hereunto is to be added, whatever, Cat. p. 165.
by the Providence of God, may be conferred upon the Church, for it is outward
advantage, with reference unto the end mentioned, Act. 4.34, 35.] That place in
the Acts, treats of those that sold their possessions, and laid down the price
of them at the Apostles feet, to make distribution to every man as he had need;
which therefore, was no farther committed to the Deacons, than by deputation
from the Apostles, and with what reserves, limits, and bounds they pleased.

The rest that follows in the Catechist, belonging to the discharge of this
Office, by him appropriated unto Deacons, and being grounded upon what has
been already spoken to, is from thence also sufficiently reflected upon.

And now, we have run through all that he has offered to our consideration,
about Church Officers, and seen the weakness of his foundations, upon which he
seeks to establish a new platform of Church Government; only let me observe in
the close, That, if we are obliged, in all things, to conform to the discipline
and example of the Apostolic, and Primitive Church, as the Catechist would
have it, he is short and defective in his enumeration; for, we read of a sort
of She officers, not a all mentioned by him.

Romans 16 1.
There is Pho^be, whom St. Paul calls (...), Deaconess at the Church of
Cenchrea; woe English the word, Servant. There are Women-Elders, ordained to
certain Church-offices, though our Translation does somewhat vail that
expression of them, as if they were the Deacon's wives, or old women only, 1 Timothy 3.11. 1 Timothy 3.11.
(...), even so the Women, [we English it, even so must their wives] grave, not
slanderers, sober, faithful in all things; i. e. Women that have any office in
the Curch, are thus to be qualified. So Titus 2.3. The aged women likewise,
Tit. 2.3.
that they be in behavior, as becomes holiness, not false-accusers, not given
to wine, teachers of good things, that they may teach the young women to be
sober, etc. The original words are more Emphatical. (...): requiring these
She-Elders to behave themselves as sacred persons, those who are received into
Holy Orders, for the service of the Church, such as were afterward also called
Deaconesses. And then, besides these, there were also certain widows, under
special qualifications, maintained at the Churches cost, 1 Timothy 5.
1 Timothy 5.3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11.

These things now, one would think, should have been regarded by the Catechist,
according to his own principles, appertaining so evidently to the pattern in
the Mount, as he and his brethren are wont to speak in other matters, which
have not the like Scripture-ground as these have.

But the Catechist, on the contrary, is very careful, that VVwomen be excluded,
whose kindness yet to the way deserves otherwise at his hands.

The body of the Church, says he, Cat. p. 18^.
or the multitude of the Brethren, ( Women being excepted by especial
prohibition, 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.) is by the law and
constitution of Christ in the Gospel, interested in the administration of this
power of discipline in the Church.] I know not how the women relish this
doctrine. But, it may seem hard, that his Church State, which is (as he has
argued) necessarily a state of absolute liberty, Cat. p. 1^^.
and freedom to all that are engaged in i^ should be only to the female sex
unkind, a sta^ of mere servitude and bondage, and they who^ly exempted from the
privilege competible^ all other members of the Church, as such, ^ the
Catechist has not before misinformed (...) Yet, it is to be hoped, the
good-women will (...) be overawed by his Authority; and let (...) so far help
them, as to be their remembrance that these places of Scripture, referred to,
(...) only restrain them, (1.) From speaking (...) the Church; And, (2.) From
excrcising a^thority over their own husbands. As to t^ rest therefore, let them
courageously stand (...) to vindicate the liberty of all Church-me^bers. And to
this purpose, the more to hea^ them, let them weigh well the words of t^
Catechist, elsewhere.

Cat. p. 172.
[The sinful neglect of Churches, in the discharge of their duty, was one great
mea^ of that Apostasy from the rule of the Gospel, which they generally, of
old, fell in^ When the members of them began to thi^ that they had no advantage
by their state an^ condition, but only the outward participation of some
ordinance of worship, and n^ duty incumbent on them, but only to attend and
follow the motions and actings of their Guides; the whole Societies did quickly
become corrupt, and fit to be disposed of, according to the carnal interest of
those the had, by their neglect and sin, gotten dominion over them. And, at all
times, as the People were negligent in their duty, the Leaders of them were apt
to usurp undue authority. When the one sort will not do what they ought, the
other are ready to take upon them what they ought not.]

And now I shall spare the labor of enquiring particularly, into what is said
under the next Question, concerning the duty of the whole Church, and every
member thereof, Cat. p. 167. to 174.
out of which I have cited the words immediately precedent. The duty of
Church Members is sufficiently to be collected from what has been said before
of Churches. Chap. 3. and 4.


Thus much therefore, of the first Gospel-Institution, so called by the
Catechist, the calling, gathering, and settling of Churches, with their
Officers. I shall dispatch the rest with greater brevity.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Prayer. A Catalogue of Scripture-forms of Prayer, out of the Old and New
Testament. The lawfulness of imposing them. The Catechist's Arguments against
the use of such Forms, answered. Public Prayer, is to provide for common, not
personal wants. Among all gifts in Holy Scripture, no gift of Ex-tempore-Prayer
mentioned. No injury to any Gift, to be confined to a subserviency unto good
Order. The promise of the Spirit not rendered hereby needless, or useless. Abba
Father, at no odds with, Our Father, The gift of Prayer no more promised the
Minister, than People. Part of our Ministry to be fulfilled, is, Officiating
according to the Public Liturgy. Prescribed Forms hinder not, but tend rather
to forward and promote Edification.

THe second Gospel-Institution, named by the Catechist was, Prayer with
Thanksgiving; and as to this, he moves two Questions.

Cat. p. 174.
[ Quest. 35. Whence do you reckon Prayer, which is a part of moral, and
natural worship, among the Institutions of Christ in his Church?

Answ. On many accounts. As, (1.) Because the Lord Christ has commanded his
Church to attend unto the worship of God therein. (2.) Because he bestows on
the Ministers of the Church Gifts, and Ability of Prayer, for the benefit, and
edification thereof. (3.) He has appointed, that all his other Ordinances
should be administered with Prayer, whereby it becomes a part of them. (4.)
Because himself ministers in the Holy place, as the great High Priest of his
Church, to present their prayer to God, at the Throne of grace. (5.) Because in
all the Prayers of the Church, there is an especial regard had unto himself,
and the whole work of his mediation.

(1.) Luke 18.1. and 21.36. Romans 12.5. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

(2.) Ephesians. 4.8, 12, 13. Romans 8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6.

(3.) Acts 2.42. 1 Timothy 4.5.

(4.) Rev. 8.3, 4. Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. and 6.20. and 10.20, 21, 22.

(5,) John 14.13. and 15.16, 22, 26. Ephesians. 3. 14, 15.]

That Christ bestows peculiar gifts of Prayer on his Ministers, as is asserted
in the second particular, is not to be proved by any of the Scriptures we are
referred unto; but we shall examine that matter more thoroughly, under the
following Question.

[ Quest. 36. May not the Church, Cat. p, 175.. 176.
in the solemn worship of God, and celebration of the ordinances of the Gospel,
make use of, and content it self, in the use of Forms of Prayer, in an unknown
Tongue, composed by others, and prescribed unto them?

Answ. So to do, would be contrary (1.) To one principal end of Prayer it self,
which is, that believers may therein apply themselves to the Throne of Grace,
for spiritual supplies, according to the present condition, wants, and
exigencies of their souls, (2.) To the main end, that the Lord Jesus Christ
aimed at, in supplying men with Gifts for the discharge of the work of the
Ministry, tending to render the promise of sending the Holy Ghost, which is the
immediate cause of the Churches preservation and continuance, needless, and
useless. Moreover, (3.) It will render the discharge of the duty of Ministers.
unto several precepts and exhortations of the Gospel, for the use, stirring up,
and exercise of their gifts, impossible. And (4.) Thereby hinder the
edification of the Church, the great end of all ordinances and institutions.
(1) Romans 8.26. Phil. 4.6. Hebr. 4.16. 1 Pet. 4.7. (2.) Ephesians. 4.8.12, 13. (3.) 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.7. Coloss. 4.17. Matthew. 25.14, 15, 16. (4.) 1 Cor. 12.7.]

The phrase [ in an unknown Tongue] is certainly added to the Question, only to
bring more color to it; for, there is nothing in the Answer, which is directed
unto that restriction, but it concludes downright against all Forms of Prayer,
prescribed to, and imposed on Ministers of the Church; nor is it disputed among
any, that call themselves Protestants, Whether Prayers, in an unknown tongue,
may be imposed on the Church.

Excluding therefore, this impertinent restriction, foisted in upon design, our
enquiry must be in the general, (1.) Whether Forms of Prayer, may warrantably
be used by the Christian Church in God's Worship. And, (2.) Whether such Forms,
as are composed and prescribed by others, i. e. made to the Ministers hands. --

Of which, when I have offered somewhat out of the H. Scriptures, I will reply
briefly to the Arguments of the Catechist, and then enter into a more distinct
consideration of the Gift and Spirit of Prayer, so called in the next Chapter.

That Forms of Prayer, are, in themselves, lawful to be used; there needs not
any other evidence, than a naked repetition of the many instances thereof,
which occurr in the Old and New Testament.

God himself appointed a Form to the Sons of Aaron, for blessing the people,
saying, Numb 6.23.24, 35.27.
On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord
bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be
gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace.

Moses had a Form of Prayer at the motion and rest of the Ark. -- It came to
pass, Numb. 1^.35, 36.
when the Ark set forward, Moses said, Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thee. And, when it rested,
he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel. And, accordingly,
David prays, at the removing of the Ark; Let God arise, Psalm. 68.1.
let his enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him, flee before him.

At the offering of the basket of first fruits, a Form of Confession was
enjoined, after this manner, Thou shall go unto the Priest, Deuteronomy. 26.3.4, 5.6,
7, 8, 9, 10.
that shall be in those days, and say unto him, I profess this day, unto the
Lord thy God, that I am come unto the country, which the Lord swear unto our
Fathers, for to give us; -- A Syrian, ready to perish, was my father, and he
went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, etc. -- And now, behold,
I have brought the first fruits of the Land, which thou, O Lord. have given me.
-- And again, at the bringing of the third years tithe, Ver. 13.14, 15.
the Form of Prayer was this. "Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, I
have brought away the hallowed things out of mine house, and also have given
them unto the Levite, etc. Look down from thy holy habitation, from Heaven, and
bless thy people Israel, and the Land which thou have given us, etc.

I forbear to mention here those particular Forms of Prayer, See Fagius. on
Deuteronomy. 8. cited in part before. P. 1. Chapter 5.
which the Jewish Antiquaries record, to have been used at their daily meals,
on their Festivals, and at theit Sacrifices; because I now deal with those, who
will be satisfied with nothing but plain and express Scripture, at our hands;
though we have as good assurance otherwise, of these matters, as can be given,
of Historical Relations.

David, at the settlement of the Ark in the place prepared for it, appointed
certain Levites to minister before it, 1 Chronicles. 16.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
and to record, and to thank, and to praise the Lord God of Israel, and
delivered a set Psalm at the same time, into the hand of Asaph and his
brethren, for the said purpose; a Psalm composed for that solemn service, out
of certain parcels of other Psalms put together, with some occasional additions
only, (chiefly from Ps. 105. and Ps. 96. conjoined); and that Psalm also
concludes with the prescribing of an express Form. O give thanks unto the Lord,
Ver. 34.35, 36.
for he is good, and his mercy endures for ever; And, say ye, Save us, O Lord
God of our Salvation, and gather us together, and deliver us from the Heathen,
that we may give thanks to thy holy name, and glory in thy praise. Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, for ever and ever. Whereupon follows the peoples
obedience and conformity. And all the people said, Amen, and praised the Lord.

The Form of Prayer in the Temple, was, Arise, O Lord God, into thy
resting place, 2 Chronicles. 6.41, 42.
Thou, and the Ark of thy strength. Let thy Priests, O Lord God, be clothed
with salvation, and thy Saints rejoice in goodness. O Lord God, Ps. 132.8, 9,
10.
turn not away the face of thine Anointed, remember the mercies of David thy
servant, 2 Chronicles. 6.41, 42. Whereof we read again, with very little change,
Psalm. 132.8, 9, 10.

At Hezekiah's great and good reformation, He and the Princes commanded the
Levites to sing praise unto the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 29.30.
with the words of David, and Asaph the Seer: and they accordingly sang praises
with gladness, and bowed their heads and worshipped, 2 Chronicles. 29.30.

After the Captivity, in EZra's time, Ezra 3.10, 11.
when the Builders laid the foundation of the Temple of the Lord; they set the
Priests in their apparel, with trumpets, and the Levites, the sons of Asaph,
with cymbals, to praise the Lord, after the Ordinance of David King of Israel;
and they sang together, by course, in praising, and giving thanks unto the
Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures for ever toward Israel. Ezra
3. 10, 11. A like form to which, we have, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. 2 Chronicles. 5.13.


What else indeed, is the book of Psalms, but a sacred Volume of Forms of
Prayer, and Praises? The 92. Psalm Psalm 92.
has this inscription, A Psalm, or Song, for the Sabbath day. The 90th. Psalm
90.
this; A prayer of Moses the man of God; (and another of his composition we
have, Exodus 15.
sung by him and the children of Israel with solemnity, after the overthrow of
Pharaoh and his host, in the red Sea, Exodus 15.) The 102 Psalm this; Ps. 102.
A Prayer of, or for, the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and powers out
his complaint before the Lord. And, at the conclusion of Psalm 72. Ps. 72.
we read, The Prayers of David the son of Jesse, are ended. I will borrow but
one instance out of the body of the Psalms themselves. Psalm. 80.3. Ps. 80.3.
Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
Verse 7. Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we
shall be saved. Verse 19.

Add we yet to these, a double instance, out of the Prophets, Hosea 14.2. Hosea
14.2.
Take with you, words, and turn to the Lord. Say unto him, Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we render the calves of our Lips,
etc. Joel. 2.17. Joel 7.18.
"Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the
Altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage
to reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them; wherefore should they say
among the people, Where is their God?

Come we now to the New Testament.

It came to pass, as Christ was praying in a certain place, that when he
ceased, one of his Disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John
also taught his Disciples. And he said unto them, when ye pray, say, Our
Father, etc. St. Luke 11.1, 2. Qui fecit vivere, docuit and orare; ut dum
oratione quam filius, docuit, ad patrem loquimur, facilius audiamur. St.
Cyprian de Orat. Domin.
A Form of Prayer, doubtless, and so esteemed by the Primitive Christians.

Of Christ himself, we read, That he prayed the third time, saying the same
words; S. Matthew. 26.44. St. Matthew, 26.44.


And he prescribed this rule to the Seventy, St. Luke 10.1.5.
whom he sent two and two before his face, into every City and place whither he
himself would come; Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this
house. We have then, the precept, and practice of our Savior, both on our side.

Next, for his Apostles. St. Paul's Form of Apostolical salutation, at the
entrance of his Epistles, is this Set-prayer. Grace be to you, Romans 1.7.
and Peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 1.7. 1 Cor.
1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. 1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. etc.
Gal. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. 2 Thessalonians. 1.2. Philem.
3. Grace, Mercy, and Peace. 1 Timothy 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.2. Titus 1.4. and his
acoustomed farewell, his wish at parting, Romans 16.20. 1 Cor. 16.2^. etc.
and taking leave, is this; The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Amen. Romans 16.20. 1 Cor. 16.23. Phil. 4, 23. 1 These. 5.28. 2 Thessalonians. 3.18.
Philem. verse 25. somewhat enlarged. 2 Cor. 13.14. varied. Gal. 6.18. Ephesians. 6.
23.24. contracted. Col. 4.18. 1 Timothy 6.21. 2 Timothy 4.22. Tit. 3.15.

Consult we next the Apostolical Exhortation unto Timothy, for the providing a
public Liturgy. I exhort, says St. Paul, that first of all, Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and Giving of Thanks, be made for all men, for Kings,
and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
[ q. d. In the first place, Dr. H. paraph^.
I advise thee, and all other Bishops, under thy inspection, that you have
constant public offices of devotion, consisting, 1st. Of Supplications, for
the averting of hurtful things, sins and dangers. 2dly, Of Prayers, for the
obtaining of all good things which you want. 3dly, Of Intercessions for others.
And 4thly, Of Thanksgiving for mercies already received: and all this, not only
for your selves, but, in a greater diffusion of your charity, for all mankind;
for the Emperors especially, and Rulers of Provinces under them, to whom we
owe all our peaceable living, in any place, in the exercise of Religion, and a
virtuous life; and therefore ought, in reason, to pray, and give thanks for
them.] Now, how can this exhortation be more properly and effectually complied
with, than by the making of certain Forms of Prayer, with Thanksgiving,
suitable to those Heads and; appointing the use of them?

Two Texts of Scripture more, shall conclude this catalogue of citations.
Revel. 4.8.12. The four Beasts rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Revel. 4.8.12.
Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. -- And the 24 Elders
worship him that lives for ever and ever; saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have created all things; and,
for thy pleasure, they are, and were-created, Revel. 15.3.4. Revel. 1^.^, 4.
"And they (who had gotten the victory over the beast, verse 2.) sing the song
of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, Just and true are thy ways, thou
King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for
thou only art holy, etc.

He, certainly, must have a forehead of brass, who, after these
Scripture-patterns and warrants for Set Forms of Prayer, dare presume to deny
their lawfulness, or declaim against their expediencie. -- And, by the way, I
have also cleared sufficiently, the justifiableness of imposing, and
prescribing of them. It savours rankly of a spirit of disobedience, to refuse
the doing of that, upon our Superiour's command, which we may do lawfully of
our selves. And to determine this Quaery in a word. Wherever there is Public
Prayer performed in a Congregation,, he that speaks, does thereby prescribe a
Form for the time, unto all that hear, and join with him; and it were worth the
while, to know, Why that privilege should be denied to a greater authority,
which they cannot avoid the granting to a less.

Briefly then, to the Catechist's Arguments.

[1. It Is contrary, says he, to one principal end of Prayer it self, which is,
that Believers may therein apply themselves to the Throne of Grace, for
spiritual supplies, according to the present condition, wants, and exigencies
of their souls, Romans 8.26. Phil. 4.6. Heb. 4.16. 1 Pet. 4.7.]

I answer, That public prayer is to provide for public and common wants;
private and secret prayer, for private and personal wants; and yet, both
public and private wants may be comprised in a Form of Prayer; the public in
a Form prescribed, the private in a Form premeditated. But, for the private and
personal wants of every particular, to be regarded in Public Prayer, is a
thing that never was, and never will be practicable; farther than as
particulars are provided for, under certain general heads, whereto they may be
referred. For the Texts of Scripture cited, Romans 8.26. The Spirit's helping our
infirmities, I design to speak to in the next Chapter. Phil. 4.6. is only an
injunction of the duty of Prayer, upon every occasion. Heb. 4.16. is an
encouragement to come boldly on all occasions to the Throne of Grace. 1 Pet.
4.7. requires from us watching unto Prayer. Which may certainly be done, by
premeditation, and a carefulness over our own Spirits, that we be not
discomposed for that service. There is nothing in all these Texts, against the
using of Set Forms of Prayer.

[2. It Is contrary to the main end that our Lord Jesus Christ aimed at, in
supplying men with gifts, for the discharging the work of the Ministry, tending
to render the promise of sending the H. Ghost, which is the immediate cause of
the Churches preservation and continuance, needless and useless, Ephesians. 4.8, 12,
13.

I answer, That, among all the Gifts mentioned in H. Scripture, we meet with no
such thing as a Gift of Extempore-Prayer; and, were there any such, yet is it
no more injury unto that, than to other gifts, to be confined in the exercise
within such bounds and limits, as tend to order and edification; For, God is
not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints, 1
Cor. 14.33. Not is the promise of the H. Ghost rendered needless and useless,
who has other weightier effects to promote, than this; and who does as well
direct and assist the Church, in composing and prescribing a Form of Prayer for
public use, as any private Minister for his present Auditory. Ephesians. 4. (whereto
we are referred) speaks only in the general, of Gifts, by Christ bequeathed
unto men, but names not the Gift of Prayer, much less asserteth it to appertain
unto every Minister.

-- But the Catechist had before told us, Cat. p. 174.
(it will be said) [That Christ bestows on the Ministers of the Church, Gifts,
and ability of Prayer, for the benefit and edification thereof; citing Romans
8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6.] I answer, That in these two Scriptures, mention indeed is
made of the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, but that,
nevertheless, is at no odds with saying, Our Father which art in Heaven. --
Nay, it is possible, it may relate unto it. And besides, these Texts concern not
more the Ministers privilege, than the Peoples, referring in common unto
Christians.

[3. It will render the discharge of the duty of Ministers, unto several
precepts and exhortations of the Gospel, for the use, stirring up, and exercise
of their gifts, impossible, 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6, 7. Coloss. 4.17. Matt.
25.14, 15, 16.] I answer, That Prayer is a work, more for Grace, than Gifts, to
be employed about; and the Ministers of the Gospel are no where particularly
commanded and exhorted, to stir up, and exercise the gift of Prayer. The Gift
spoken of, 1 Timothy 4.14. is the Ministerial power in the general, received at
Ordination. And so again, 2 Timothy 1.6, 7. Coloss. 4.17. look the same way. "Take
heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.
Now, it is an eminent part of the Ministry, received at Ordination, in the
Church of England, to officiate according to that public ^orm of
Common Prayer, which is devoted by the whole Church and Kingdom, unto God's
honor and service. And therefore this place of St. Paul obliges us to fulfill
it. St. Matthew. 25. refers only in the general, to trading with the Talents
which are committed to us. And where now are the several precepts and
exhortations given to Ministers in the Gospel, for the use, stirring up, and
exercise of their gifts, wherewith Forms of Prayer are inconsistent?

The fourth and last Argument of the Catechist, is inferred from the rest, and
so falls together with them.

[And 4. Thereby hinder the edification of the Church, the great end of all
Ordinances and Institutions, 1 Cor. 12.7.] Others are of the mind, that it
tends very much to the forwarding of the edification of the Church, to have
such common Forms of Prayer, appointed, which, all knowing before, may the more
readily and devoutly join together in, with one mind, and one mouth, to
glorify God, and pay their bounden acknowledgments to him. -- The 1 Cor.
12.17. speaks of the miraculous gifts of the Spirit then in the Church. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given unto every man to profit withal.

-- Here also, it might be farther noted, That the Gift of Prayer, being no
peculiar of the Minister's, but common also to the People, (who have no less an
interest in the promise, Romans 8. than he) upon the score of this allegation now
made, every one may pretend to a liberty of praying, and so venting the private
manifestations of the Spirit (as he thinks) to himself, at the same time as the
Minister prays, unless the Catechist remember to interpose his Prudentials,
for the preventing of this disorder.

But, to leave this whole matter more clear than I found it; and lead some, if
possible, out of the snares wherein they are entangled, I will, according to my
promise, speak more distinctly and plainly of the Spirit of Prayer and
Supplication, and what we are to expect from him under that notion, in a
Chapter by it self.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Spirit, Gift, and Grace of Prayer. The agencie of the H. Ghost,
necessary in order unto right Prayer. (...), in St. James, what it signifies.
The gift of prayer, soberly understood, nothing else but a gift of Oratory,
owing it is rise to former Premeditations, Quick Parts, a competent degree of
modest Confidence, and frequent Exercise. What the Vulgar call a Special Gift
of Prayer, is the result, sometimes, of Impudence and Presumption, Pride and
Ambition, or some worse Principle. It Is not to be expected, that the H. Spirit
help us immediately to the matter and words of Prayer. Romans 8.26. considered.
Three Arguments to demonstrate the proposition. The Spirit helps us to the
matter, and words of Prayer, by the use of proper, and fit means; among which,
may be reckoned, pious and useful Forms, composed to our hands, by others.
Grace most considerable in Prayer, and the principal work of the H. Spirit is,
to excite, assist, and strengthen the exercise of proper Graces. Where the Form
is prescribed, one grace more to be exercised. The chief operations of the
Spirit of Supplications lie inwards, in fixing the intention, illuminating the
understanding, inflaming the affections, etc. A wide difference between saying
Prayers, and praying Prayers.

It Is, confessedly, one of the Titles appertaining to the Holy Ghost, Zech.
12.10.
The Spirit of Grace and Supplications. And of this, St. Paul speaks more
largely, in his Epistle to the Romans, chap. 8.26, 27. Romans ^.26, 27.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we
should pray for, as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for
us, with groanings which cannot be uttered; and he that searches the heart,
knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the
Saints, according to the will of God. Where the Spirit is said, not only in the
general, (...), to help our infirmities, which imports his joining with us,
taking up a part, as it were of the burden with us, setting his power against
our weaknesses; but, for a particular specification of his help and relief of
us in Prayer, he is said to intercede, or make intercession for us; nay, (...),
more than intercede: that is, not only to intercede, but to bestow the very
things he intercedes for. He intercedes prevailingly, beyond the power of an
ordinary intercessor. He more than intercedes for us. As, Christ is said in
Heaven, to live always for this very end, Heb 1.7.25.
to make intercession for us; so the Spirit also, upon Earth, does help
together with our spirits, and does intercede for us within us, and intercede
prevailingly. And look, as Christ from his intercession on our behalf, 1 Ep. S
John 2.1. St. John 14, 16, 26. St. John 15.26. and 16.7.
with the Father, is called an Advocate, (...): so, that very name is usually
given to the H. Ghost, though we usually English it Comforter. The name is four
several times given to the Holy Ghost, and but once to Christ, and that too, by
one and the same Apostle, St. John; yet, where it is given by him to Christ, we
read it Advocate; where, to the Holy Ghost, (upon what reason I know not)
Comforter. -- There is no right Christian fervent prayer, without the H. Ghost,
as an Advocate, inte^ceding within us, bearing a part, and helping together
with us against our infirmities and weaknesses.

St. Jude S. Jude, v. 20.
therefore uses this phrase, praying in the Holy Ghost, or, as Beza reads it,
per Spiritum Sanctum, by the H. Ghost. And St. Paul has a like phrase, Ephesians.
6.18.
Praying always with all prayer and supplication, in (or by) the Spirit. And,
upon this account, possibly, St. James St. James 5.16.
calls the prayer of a rig^teous man, (...), we English it, [ effectual
fervent] but should rather render it [ inspired] "A Prayer wrought in him, See
Dr. H. not. in Gal. 5.
(as the word imports) whereto, and wherein he is incited, and moved, and
wrought upon by the Spirit.

That place, it is true, has peculiar reference to the gift of Miracles,
miraculous cures wrought, at that time upon persons desperately sick, by prayer
and anointing, Pray one for another, says the Apostle, that ye may be healed.
(...), The prayer of a man of God, a righteous man, to which he is incited by
the spirit (as the Prophets were, when they prayed, and as they were, under the
Gospel, who had the gift of Miracles) avails much, will be very ^ffectual,
work miraculous cures. Such are called (...), in a badsense, who are acted by
evil Spirits: such therefore are (...), in a good sense, who are acted by the
good Spirit of God. The extraordinary gifts of the Spirit are called by St.
Paul, (...), 1 Cor. 12.6, 10. Of which, the gift of healing being one, it is
very probable, that (...), in St. James, is to be understood of the prayer of
him that had the gift of healing, the prayer whereto he is moved by the Spirit;
which is formed within him, by the enditing of the Spirit; a prayer that joined
manifestly with the gift of healing, 1 Cor. 12.9.
and therefore called (...), verse 15. The prayer of Faith, viz. of that Faith
which enabled them to work cures to recover the sick, as there it follows; of
which therefore, the Apostle affirms, (...), It can do very much, it is of
mighty force, it avails much; i. e. miraculously, even as Elias his prayer
for rain, and fair weather, whereof he speaks verse. 17, 18. immediately
following. Inspired prayer therefore, in St. James, has a peculiar Emphasis,
relating to a Faith of Miracles, and miraculous effects. And yet, in a sober
Latitude, it helds true of all right prayer; it must be (...) acted and
inspired by the H. Ghost, praying in or by the Spirit, the spirit of
supplications. But here we have need of great caution, that we neither deny a
most certain truth, nor yet extend it beyond its reach, to the countenancing of
any popular error and mistake. That we may therefore separate truth from
pretenses, the precious, from the vile and counterfeit, 'twill be convenient to
enquire more particularly into this matter. First, as to that which is called
the gift of Prayer; And, secondly, as to the grace of Prayer, what, in both,
are the proper operations of the H. Ghost, and what assistances we may
groundedly expect from Him, as the Spirit of Supplications; and so consequently
what it is, and what it is not, to pray in, or by the Spirit; a phrase more
commonly used, than understood.

First then, concerning the gift of prayer, by which, I mean no more, but the
ability of conceiving, forming, and uttering the words of prayer, or digesting
the materials of prayer, into fitting and pertinent expressions. There is not,
any where that I know of, throughout the Bible, mention made of such a special
gift to be looked for, and expected from the Spirit of God. St. Paul indeed,
speaks of praying with the Spirit, after an extraordinary manner, 1 Cor. 14.15.
1 Cor. 14.15
but he means it of praying in an unknown Tongue, by virtue of that
extraordinary Gift of the Spirit, then frequent, the Gift of Tongues; and
therefore in the same verse, and to the same purpose, he speaks of singing with
the Spirit, and to any that had this faculty, he gives the advice, that they
would take heed, that by the interpretation of these Tongues, their
understanding might become fruitful unto others also that heard them. I will
pray, says he, with the Spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also.
i. e. So as to be understood by others. I will sing with the Spirit, but I will
sing with understanding also. He therefore, that will from hence draw an
Argument, to uphold the common belief, of a gift of Ex-tempore-prayer, to be
expected from the Spirit, is wholly mistaken. He must pretend to
extraordinaries, if this place signify to his advantage, even to the
miraculous gifts of the Spirit, at first bestowed on the Church, to the gift of
Tongues; and he may as well expect an immediate inspiration from this Spirit,
of a Psalm, as of a Prayer. -- We find, I confess, our B. Savior arming of his
Apostles against the persecutions, they were to meet withal in the world, by a
direct and express promise of informing them by his Spirit, what, and how, to
speak before Kings and Governors, St. Matthew. 10.19, 20. St. Matthew. 10.19.20.
But, when they deliver you up, take no thought how, or what ye shall speak:
for it shall be given you in that same hour, what ye shall speak; for it is not
ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you. Christ
engages here, as well for the (...) as the (...), both for the Quid and
Quomodo, what, and How they are to speak; and assures them, that in that very
hour the Spirit shall speak in them. But this belongs not unto the business of
Prayer unto God, and, if it did, it would be as cross to a Directory for the
Quid, the matter of prayer, as to a Common Prayer Book, for the Quomodo, the
very Form of Prayer it self. We have no such counsel about Prayer to God, as
this; "Take no thought how, or what you shall speak, for it shall be given you
in that same hour. No, the Preacher gives a general caution, Eccles. 5.2.
looking quite another way. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart
be hasty to utter any thing before the Lord, -- Bring not the sacrifice of
fools, who consider not. -- If, therefore, you ask me, What account is to be
given of the Gift of Prayer, so much talked of, I answer,

That which passes for a special, and peculiar gift of the Spirit of Prayer
and Supplications, may, I think, be reduced to these following heads:

1. Sometimes it is the result of pious meditations, formerly had, and the
habitual digesting of the ordinary and known heads of practical Divinity lodged
in the memory. For rules, once digested, work afterward like an habit, and
require not any particular, and distinct attention to, or animadversion of
them. He that has understood, and digested the Rules of Grammar, can make, and
speak, true Latin, without an immediate forethought, or reflection upon those
particular rules which he follows. He that has learned the Rules of Music,
Vocal, or Instrumental, can sing, or play, without an immediate forethought,
or distinct reflection upon those Rules. The like I might say of Logic, or any
other mystery. For, in all these cases, Rules, known and understood, turn into
an habitual disposition within; the man acts from an habitual knowledge and
preparation.

And, on the same account, he that has inured his thoughts to the meditation
and consideration of the heads of practical Divinity, such as the Attributes of
God, the Laws and Rules of a good life, the Sins contrary to those Laws and
Rules, the Mercies received from God, the ordinary Temptations we are
surrounded with, etc. may be habitually provided for Prayer upon occasion; i.
e. for the turning of these heads into Prayer, without the flying to any
peculiar, or special gift of the Spirit, in the case. He may call upon God,
under such and such Attributes, make confession of such and such sins, implore
grace for the performance of such and such Christian duties, and aid against
such and such temptations, and return to God thanks for such and such
blessings; and this, for others as well as himself. Especially if there be
added hereunto,

2. A quick invention and ready elocution, an active fancy and a nimble
tongue. The Gift of Prayer indeed, is the immediate result of these. A man thus
accomplished, premising but an ordinary understanding of the Rules of Prayer,
may be able to speak his mind in fit and pertinent words, with as much ease, by
the secret and un-observed multiplying of quick and active thoughts, as one of
slower parts, by much premeditation. But then there is no more of a special and
peculiar gift of the Spirit in this, than in some men's being qualified to speak
their minds upon several points on the sudden, whilst others are more slow of
conceit, and worse-provided for utterance.

3. These two foregoing heads, ( viz. former premeditation, and understanding
of the chief heads of practical Divinity, and the general rules of Prayer, and
a natural quick invention and promptitude of speech) are much relieved and
advanced by an ingenuous boldness, where the spirits are not pent in, as often
it happens in over-modest persons, by bashfulness and fear. And then,

4. Frequent exercise in the same kind, is a great, and considerable improver
of these qualifications al eady mentioned. And thus it is observed to be in all
other matters; custom byasseth, and we are ready, and inclined to do what we
have frequently done. But still these are no more than the ordinary requisites
to an Ex-tempore vein of Oratory in other matters; for, whoever would be ready,
and provided to speak his mind, with a little warning, upon any occasion, must
be furnished beforehand, with a stock of meditation and understanding, must
have a nimble and active fancy, a ready and voluble tongue, a competent degree
of confidence, to speak before others, and accustom himself occasionally, to
utter and deliver his mind. And these particulars now, as I conceive, are the
true account to be given of the Gift of Prayer, in the most sober understanding
of it.

It Is nothing else but the Gift of Oratory, Utterance, and Elocution, in Divine
matters, and ows its rise to former premeditations, quick parts, a competent
degree of modest confidence, and frequent exercise.

But then, there are yet some other accounts to be given of that, which, among
the Vulgar, is often cried up, for the Gift of Prayer.

5. Therefore, sometimes it is the result of plain boldness, impudence, and
presumption, whereby men dare vent themselves freely, and utter, Quicquid in
buccam venerit, whatever comes next, even in this sacred performance; which, so
it be done with a loud voice, and passionate accent, and a taking, or affected
gesture and countenance, goes current among the crowd of unobserving-persons,
as a peculiar gift of the Spirit, whereas it is indeed the talkative Spirit of
impudence and presumption, putting off the shame and modesty proper to a Man,
and Christian.

6. Sometimes it is the result of Pride and Ambition, whereby men, to gain
themselves a Name, and Reputation among a party, affect to make an ostentation
of their Parts and Abilities; and strain themselves to the uttermost, so to
frame their dialect of prayer, as may best comply with the known humors and
affections they have to deal withal.

Lastly, It Is to be feared, it may be sometimes the result of Malice, Envy,
and Indignation against the Forms of Prayer prescribed, to procure Envy
against the complyers with them, and to hold a Faction together by the ears
against them, by making a show and display of this Gift of Prayer; for, if
Indignation be able to inspire a man with the Gift of Poetry, facit indignatio
versum, we may easily believe, it will do as much where it has engaged the
zeal of the affections in order to this pompous show of a Gift of Prayer.

And, if it owe its rise to these three latter heads, of Impudence and
Presumption, of Pride and Ambition, of Malice and Envy, it is a thing abominable
before God and man, that the Holy performance of Prayer should be employed as
an engine of so much baseness and wickedness. Otherwise, the thing it self is
not culpable, provided, that the exercise and straining of invention, take not
up the room of (and so justle out) true devotion.

Thus much of the Gift of Prayer in the general; but then the Question remains,
of the agency and influence of the H. Spirit, in reference to this Gift of
Prayer. To this therefore, I will answer, both in the negative, and the
affirmative.

1. Negatively. It Is not to be expected from the H. Spirit, that He should Help
us immediately to the matter and words of Prayer. It Is true indeed, the Apostle
says, in a particular case, Romans 8.26. We know not what to pray for, as we
ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us. But then we must
remark, 1. What the Apostle there speaks of; viz. The begging from God, the
determination of his Providence in this world, toward them, in those
circumstances they were then in. And here we are often put to that plunge, that
we know not what in particular to ask of God, what to ask as we ought, Whether
deliverance from such a sickness and trouble, etc. or the enjoyment of such and
such an outward mercy and prosperity; and therefore, in these cases, we are
instructed to submit our wills to God, and never to ask any of these things,
without an item of his pleasure, and without an if in the mean while, without a
clause conditional; If it seem good unto God, if God so please, and judge best
for us, etc. 2. We, of our selves, as of our selves, are not sufficient for any
thing that is good; "but all our sufficiency is of God, as the same Apostle
elsewhere speaks; 2 Cor. 5.5.
no wonder then, if of our selves, we know not what to pray for as we ought;
and yet, for all this, we may be better instructed, informed, and directed,
taught from God, and then it will remain no longer true, that we know not what
to pray for as we ought. 3. In this very place, where the spirit is said to
relieve and help against this infirmity of our ignorance, as to the particular
we are to ask of God, by making intercession for us; it is not said, with words
and expressions, but (...), with un-uttered groanings, or sighs that cannot be
uttered. They are inward sighs and pantings of the heart, vibrations of the
pious soul God-wards; not external motions of the tongue and lips. Groans
unexpressed. These are they that have a degree of Elocution in them, beyond the
Rhetoric of words and phrases. It Is not necessary, that there be so much as an
audible groan, much less, that whining effeminacy, by some indulged to; for,
the Spirit is here said to make intercession, (...), with groanings unuttered.
And certainly, the Spirit of true Devotion, is often most, when the tenor of
the voice is still, and void of affectation; as we observe, the Water to be
deepest, where it runs with the least of noise and murmur. This then I assert,
in the negative, That we have no vvarrant, to expect from the H. Spirit, an
immediate inspiration of the matter and words of Prayer: and I will confirm it,
by a threefold Argument.

1. Were it otherwise, neither John the Baptist nor our B. Savior need have
taught their Disciples any Forms of Prayer, as they did. This pains were
superfluous, if it were the office and work of the Spirit, immediately to
inspire the matter and words of prayer. To what purpose were this waste? And, I
think, he may as reasonably deny the Sun to shine at noonday, who will affirm,
the Lord's Prayer to be no Set Form; whereas the words are evidently molded
into a Prayer, and enjoined by our Savior, St. Luke 11.1, 2.
in their use, for such; -- When ye pray, say, Our Father -- And this
injunction given too, in answer to their request, Lord, teach us to pray, as
John also taught his Disciples.

Now, Were it the Office of the Spirit, to put words and matter immediately
into men's thoughts and tongues, Christ should have given, instead of this
answer, [When ye pray, say, Our Father. -- ] that which he elsewhere gave for
their encouragement, when arraigned before Heathen-Governours, [Take no thought
how, or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given you in that same hour; the
Spirit of my Father shall speak in you.]

2. Were this conceit true, of the Spirit's immediate dictating of the matter
and words of Prayer, then every Prayer should be of as good and authentic
authority, as the H. Scripture it self. For, whence is the Divine (...) of Holy
Scripture; and, why do we afford it so absolute a reverence, but because it is
(...), given by inspiration from God? The Prophets and Penmen of it, spoke and
wrote, as they were moved and acted by the H. Ghost. Now, if the Spirit did
immediately help every person that prays, to the matter and words of Prayer;
we must needs affirm, Every Prayer to be in like manner, by inspiration from
God, and every man that prays, to be moved and acted by the Spirit, and to
speak as he is moved by the H. Ghost. Were this so, it might prove, I confess,
of considerable advantage unto some, and help them to new Scriptures for their
ways and actions, directly contrary to the old, which we know to have been
truly inspired of God. But, far be it from us, to canonize all the
extravagancies (to say nothing worse) of some men's prayers, pretending most
highly to the Spirit, as of equal authority with the holy, pure, and infallible
Word of God.

3. Were it the Office of the H. Spirit, immediately to suggest unto every one
that prays, the matter and words of Prayer, it were then impossible for any
number to join together in offering up the same prayers and petitions unto God:
For, let the Speaker, or Minister, pray never so much Ex-tempore, as it is
called, and without premeditation, and by the Spirit's inspiration, as is
pretended; yet his very Prayer will be the hearer's direction and help, both to
the matter and words of Prayer, and as much a confinement for the time, as any
other Form made, and prescribed to their hands. The most Extempore-Prayer, is
(as I have before also intimated) an absolute set Form to all but the utterer
of it; and therefore, it is the meerest nonsense in the world, to exclaim
against Praying in Public by a Form, when there can be no Public Prayer
managed without it. It is not then to be expected from the H. Spirit, that he
should immediately furnish us with the matter and words of Prayer. That for
negative: And from thence,

2. The affirmative follows. If not immediately, then, of necessity, mediate,
by the use of proper and fitting means conducing thereunto: For there is no
third way to be conceived of. The Spirit's help, as to the matter and words of
Prayer, ( i. e. the Gift of Prayer) must be either immediate, without the use
of means; or mediate, by the use of means conducible thereunto. I will not
deny, but the Apostles might sometimes pray by the extraordinary and immediate
inspirations of the Spirit, as they received immediately other extraordinary
gifts. But, I have already discountenanced our expectation of any such gift
immediately from the Spirit.

We may as justly pretend to an immediate gift of Tongues, whereas it is our
lot, by the use of fitting and ordinary means, to attain to a part of that
perfection, which God sometimes bestowed, without the use of these means,
extraordinarily. The Children of Israel were fed with Manna from Heaven, in the
Wilderness; but when they came to Canaan, they lived upon the sweat of their
own brows, the fruits and increase of their own labor. --

Now, these proper means, by the diligent use of which, the Spirit furnishes
us with the matter and words of prayer, are, consideration of our wants,
premeditation of the things we are to ask of God, the improvement of our
natural faculties of reason and utterance, good instruction, etc. And, among
the rest, those useful Forms which are recommended to us from pious and good
men, or prescribed by Authority, the Common Prayers of the Church. Thus, if we
are qualified for Prayer by the help of our natural parts, our knowledge and
memory of divine truths, our invention and elocution; the Spirit may be said by
these, to help us to the materials and words of Prayer, viz. remotely, inasmuch
as every good gift is from him, and through his blessing. -- And thus,
sometimes, whilst we are giving our selves to meditation, in order unto Prayer,
the Spirit may set our sins before our eyes, and bring to our remembrance
fitting truths to be thought upon. -- And thus also by the help of "Forms
composed to our hands. The Spirit, no question, helped the Baptist's Disciples
to the matter and words of Prayer, by that Form which John the Baptist taught
them; and the Spirit helped Christ's Disciples, to the matter and words of
Prayer, by that absolute, and perfect Form of Prayer, which our B. Savior
taught them, and we also have received. And thus the Spirit, in like manner,
may be said to help us, to the matter and words of Prayer, by those excellent
Forms of Common Prayer, publicly enjoined by the Church wherein we live. For,
What an excessive vanity and dotage is it, for particular persons to conceit
themselves so highly in favor with the Sacred Spirit, as to be assisted, in
order to the matter and words of prayer themselves; and yet deny this
privilege to a company of men, as pious and learned as themselves, (to speak
the least); and more modest and humble than they, (and so the more likely to be
taught by Him) gathered together in the name of Christ?

But, hitherto, of the Gift of Prayer, which concerns the matter and words of
it.

Secondly, It is Grace which is most confiderable in Prayer; for there may be
this matter and words of Prayer, and yet no praying all the while. It Is the
Heart and Soul of man that prays in God's account, and Prayer by him is
weighed by the exercise of proper graces, and not of natural gifts or
improvements, Fancy or Elocution. -- Non vox, Psalm. 62.8.
sed votum. -- Prayer is the pouring forth of the heart before God. If the Soul
of the Supplicant be not chiefly engaged in it, the Soul and Life of Prayer is
wanting. It was one of the Sentences written in the Jewish Synagogues; Prayer
without Attention, is like a Body without a Soul. That which is most
considerable in Prayer, is, (as I said) the exercise of inward graces, proper
thereunto. Hebr. 12.28.
Let us have grace, says the Apostle, whereby we may serve God acceptably,
with reverence, and with godly fear. This therefore, is the principal work of
the H. spirit, in reference unto Prayer, to awaken and enliven, excite, assist
and strengthen those graces, that are therein to be employed. These two Titles
are connexed, Spiritus gratiae and precum, The Spirit of Grace and
Supplications; Zech. 12.10.
he is the Spirit of gracious supplications, the Spirit of supplications
chiefly, as the Spirit of that grace which animates them. When St. Paul
therefore had exhorted the Ephesians to be filled with the Spirit, and in the
power thereof, Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
to speak to themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual songs; he adds, in
the close, that which is indeed the principal, and most to be heeded by them,
"Singing, and making melody, in your heart, to the Lord; or, as his phrase is
to the Colossians, Coloss. 3.16.
Singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. The gracious melody of the
heart, is the great demonstration of the H. Spirit's assistance of, and agencie
within us. To this purpose, He is said to help against our infirmities, Romans
8.26, 27.
and make intercession for us, with groanings unuttered, with sighs
unexpressed, as was before showed; and it follows, "He that searches the
heart, knows what is the mind of the Spirit. The Spirit's agencie is chiefly
in the heart, and therefore exposed chiefly to the Searcher of hearts. The
Spirit of Prayer then is, wherever there is an Heart exercising the graces
which are proper unto Prayer; wherever there are those gracious dispositions
and affections actuated: be the Form of words premeditate by our selves, or
prescribed by others, it matters not; save that where the Form is prescribed,
there is one grace more to be exerted, viz. the grace of obedience.

The great benefit we have from the Spirit, as to Prayer, lies inwards, in
such works as these are;

1. The fixing of our intentions to the work we are about, driving away of
wandering, roving, and impertinent thoughts, that we may wait upon God without
distraction, (...) without avocations, that we may mind what we are about, that
we may serve God with a fixed heart, as the Psalmist speaks of himself, Psalm
57.7. Psalm 57.7.
and therefore he prays elsewhere in this Form of words; Unite my heart to
fear thy Name, and 86.11.
Psalm 86.11. q. d. Gather together the scattered and dispersed parcels of it,
unite and fix my divided-thoughts, that I may attend to thee only, in thy
worship, and serve thee with an entire and single heart, and thoughts combined
together. This is a work too great for our strength, without the gracious
assistance of the H. Spirit of Prayer, to govern and keep close our spirits to
what we are about, that so we may be fervent in Spirit, while we are serving
the Lord. The due fixation and composure of our thoughts, to what we are about,
is the benefit of the Spirit of Prayer, who thus assists us, in the stirring up
of our selves to the duty, and recollecting of our wandering thoughts in it. And
this, believe it, is the prime part of the grace of prayer. There is none,
says the Prophet, Isa. 64.7.
that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee.
Upon which place, Forerius well notes, That it avails little, Qui consurgat]
seipsum excitet, exsuscitet magno animi conatu. Parvi enim refert frigide
precari, and dicere or^ tenus. Domine, Domine. Vera Oration est, cum sui-ipsius
exsuscitatione tanquam ad rem setiam and magni ponderis, excutere desidiam,
avocare ab aliis omnibus animum, and magna animi contentione, ad deprecandum
Deum accedere. Hoc qui facit, tenet Deum, seu apprehendit quasi manu, and ne
elabatur tenet, ut sententiam revocet, neque prius abeat quam nobis benedicat,
ut fecit Jacob, ob quod Israel vocatus est, quasi in Deum praevaluisset. Sic
teneba^ Moses Deum: illae enim voces, Dimitte me, ut irascetur futor meus, etc.
quid aliud sonant, nisi quod a Mose fortiter teneretur? Forer, in Loc.
to pray coldly, and to say with the mouth only, Lord, Lord. True Prayer is,
with the stirring up of a man's self, as to some serious and weighty matter,
shaking off sloth, and calling the mind from all other things, and coming to
pray unto God, with great endeavor of mind. He that does this, holds God, or
takes him, as it were by the hand, and suffers him not to go without a
blessing: as Jacob did, for which he was called Israel, a prevailer with God.
And so did Moses hold God; for those words, Let me alone, -- do intimate as
much.

2. The assistance of the Spirit of Prayer, lies in this; as to our
understandings, the illumination of our minds, in the distinct apprehension of
the matter and words of Prayer, the causing of an inward sense and feeling of
what we think or say in Prayer, awakening in us feeling apprehensions of the
Divine Attributes which we ascribe unto God, of the worth, excellency, and
necessity of the things we ask of God; of the indignity, unworthiness,
baseness, and aggrauation of the sins we confess to God; of the certainty and
assurance of the promises upon which we hope for audience from God, etc. And,
in this sense we pray in the Spirit, when we pray with Vunderstanding also, 2
Cor. 14.15.
if I may borrow the Apostle's phrase, which properly belongs to another
matter, as I before noted; viz. the praying so, as to be understood by others.

3. The assistance of the Spirit of Prayer, concerns the affectionate part of
the Soul, and the employment of that in Prayer; the causing of our hearts to
burn with inward fervor of desire, and actuating those other affections and
dispositions, which are agreeable to the several parts of Prayer. Such as, an
humble, and reverential awe in our acknowledgments of the Divine Majesty,
penitent sorrow in our confessions, earnest longings for the things we ask of
God, love and gratitude in our thanksgivings unto God, forgiveness of others,
and tender compassion toward them we pray for; faith, hope, and filial
confidence, in our approaches unto God, which the Apostle calls, Hebr. 4.16.
coming boldly to the throne of grace; not with a rude and unmannerly
impudence, which is intolerable in a creature approaching the Heavenly Majesty,
who must be served with reverence and godly fear, but yet with a modest and
ingenuous confidence, becoming Children drawing near to a Loving, and Merciful
Father; such a temper, as is styled in Scripture, the Spirit of Adoption,
crying, Abba, Father; Romans 8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6. Romans 5.5.
the love of God, being shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is
given us. It Is the display of such gracious dispositions as these now
mentioned, viz. humility and reverence, godly sorrow and repentance, desire and
love, and gratitude, and charity, and compassion, and faith, and hope, and
filial confidence: whereto may be added, hearty dependence upon God, and
contented submission and resignation to his blessed will. It Is, I say, the
display and exercise of these, and the like graces, that makes our Prayers to
ascend up, as sweet incense and perfume. acceptable unto God. And the special
work of the Spirit of Prayer lies, in the quickening and enlivening of these
gracious dispositions within us. This wind blows upon the Garden of Grace, that
the Spices may flow out (as the expression is in the Canticles Cant. 4.16.
) that our beloved may be invited to come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant
fruits.

There is, we see, more required unto Prayer, than the generality of people
dream of, who reckon only of saying over a few words, repeating a parcel of
good sentences, etc. The common objection against the appointed Prayers read in
the Church, seems to relish, and savor of this Spirit, That it is an easy
Office, a very child may thus pray in the Congregation; we make an Idle
Ministry, excuse and hinder the exercise of gifts, etc. Whereas the great work
of Prayer lies, in the exercise of proper and suitable graces, as has been
declared; and here is enough to keep us all busy at home, within our selves,
both Minister and People, that we may stir up our hearts to lay hold on God,
and prepare those good dispositions of Soul, which are agreeable to those
expressions which we are going to utter unto God; that our heart may be as a
well-tuned Instrument, answering to the words of our mouths. It Is easy to say
a Prayer, but not so easy to pray a Prayer; which we call the people to, as
often as they hear, Let us pray.

Some are pleased to Object; In such places, and at such times, where, and
when, there is no Sermon, What should they come to Church for? there is nothing
but a few Prayers to be read, etc. They forget, by the way, that the Word of
God, the Holy Scriptures are appointed to be read also, which, one would think
as good as any Sermon of man's framing.

But, bating that oversight, they mistake farther; They are not invited
thither to hear Prayers read barely, but to pray with the Minister in the House
of Prayer, the Prayers that are read by him, and to exercise and actuate graces
suitable to those Prayers. Were this, as it should be, thought on, people
would, I am persuaded, quarrel more at their own naughty hearts, for not being
fitted unto good and wholesome Forms of Prayer, than declaim against the Forms
themselves; they would think meaner of the Gift of Prayer, and labor more
after the Grace of Prayer. They would find work enough left them, in the
exercise of Prayer-graces, and not mutter, that they are abridged the liberty
of their private fancy and invention in Public Prayers, to make room for a
joint, united, and undistracted-devotion.

-- But thus much now, for the second Gospel-Institution, spoken of by the
Catechist, Prayer with Thanksgiving.

CHAP. XV.
Singing of Psalms, the Catechist's third Gospel-Institution, stily passed
over. Six points propounded about it, to be resolved from Scripture. Of
Preaching the Word, the fourth Gospel-Institution. Needful distinctions about
it. Difference between Preaching and Teaching, Evangelists and Doctors, Word
and Doctrine; between Preaching by Inspiration, and by Pains and Industry.
Preaching, more ways than that of Sermons, by the Vulgar fixed on; viz. By
Reading, by Writing, by Proxy. The fifth Gospel-Institution, Administration of
the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Sacraments no Scripture-word.
The proper subjects of Baptism, proper Church Members. The Anabaptist mis-lead,
by the Catechist's principles. Baptism ill confined to the infant seed of
Believers only. The carriage of the Synod of Dort, as to that point. Sitting,
not a gesture prescribed for the Lord's Supper. It Is not certain to conscience,
that Christ and his Disciples used the same gesture at the Supper, as at the
Passover. The gesture of the Passover, different from our sitting. No
evidence of the will of Christ, that we conform to the gesture then used,
rather than to other circumstances. The last Gospel-Institution,
Church Discipline. The power given to the community of the people, Women
excepted, in the administration thereof, by the Catechist. His
Scripture-instances considered. A threefold Directory given by him, for the
exercise of discipline. The politic contrivance of the separate Churches, for
perpetuating themselves. The Catechist's two concluding Questions.

Cat. p. 83.
THe Third, in order, as they were before recited, should have been Singing of
Psalms; but of that the Catechist has said nothing at all particularly: It may
be, because he was conscious to himself. that the manner and circumstances of
this Gospel-Institution are not determined any where by Christ. This had been
certainly, -- Nodus tali vindice dignus, a work worthy of his pains, to have
showed the express mind of Christ about; and would have gone far, in wiping off
that aspersion from himself, which he so freely lays upon others; viz. Cat. p.
48.
A negligence of enquiring into the will of Christ, what he has prescribed; or
some guilt worse than this, the envy of communicating to the world, the result
of his more diligent enquiries. He should here resolve us, where Christ has
determined, 1. What Psalms are to be sung. And, 2. Whether in Prose or in
Meeter. And, 3. Whether with Rythm, or without it. And, 4. What Tunes and Notes
are to be observed. And, 5. Whether Instrumental Music may be added or no to
Vocal. And, 6. Whether all are bound to sing together, or there be liberty
indulged of singing alternatim, and by way of response. These, being points
left altogether undetermined by Christ, must either be determined by the
Church, or there can be no orderly observance of this Gospel-Institution; for
every one, otherwise, may have a particular Psalm, and, possibly, a diverse
tune; and so many men as there be, so many minds, agreeing in nothing, but an
universal confusion, somewhat like that described, 1 Cor. 14.26.

Now, therefore, let the Catechist and his brethren, well consider of this
matter; and so I am content to pass on with him to the Fourth particular, The
preaching of the Word. In his re-view of which, this is the only Question.

Cat. p. 176. 177.
[ Q. 37. Is the constant work of Preaching the Gospel, by the Elders of the
Church, necessary?

And to that he answers thus:

Answ. It is so; both on the part of the Elders or Ministers themselves, of
whom that duty is strictly required, and who principally therein labor and
watch for the good of the Flock; and on the part of the Church, for the
furtherance of their faith and obedience, by Instruction, Reproof, Exhortation,
and Consolation, Matthew. 24.45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Cor.
9.17, 18. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. 1 Timothy 4.15, 16. and chap. 5.17. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
and chap. 3.14, 15, 16, 17. and chap. 4.2.]

That the Preaching of the Gospel is necessary, both upon the account of the
Minister's duty, and in order to the Churches benefit, for the furtherance of
their faith and obedience, will readily be granted: But then it will be
seasonable for us here to remember,

1. That there is some difference between the words Preaching, and Teaching,
strictly understood according to the propriety of their Original; (...), and
(...). The former, (...), to preach, St. Mark 16.15. St. Mark 16.15.
is, (...), to evangelize, Act. 5.42. Act. 5.42.
and (...), to make Disciples, St. Matt. 28.19. St Matt. 28.17.
which peculiarly belongs to the first promulgation of the Gospel. The latter,
(...), to teach, Act. 15.35. Act. 15.35.
referrs to the instruction and confirmation of Disciples and Believers. Our
Savior puts both together, St. Matt. 28.19. S. Matthew. 28.19.
(...), make Disciples, teaching them. Where, therefore, the Apostles are said
to do both, to preach, and teach Jesus Christ, Act. 5.42. Act. 5.42.15 35.
the meaning is, that they taught those, who were already converted, and
preached the faith of Christ also to those who were yet strangers to it. Thus
Paul and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching the Word of God,
Act. 15.35. St. Paul strived (...), to preach the Gospel, where Christ had not
been named, and he did, (...), teach in every Church, Romans 15.20, 21. 1 Cor.
4.17. Romans 15.20, 21. 1 Cor. 4 17.
And, upon this is grounded the Apostle's difference between Evangelists (or
Preachers) and Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. Ephesians. 4.11.
Evangelists were those, that were sent forth to plant the Gospel; Doctors or
Pastors those that built upon this foundation, whose work it was to strengthen
and confirm believers, and retain the gathered sheep within the fold of the
Church. This difference likewise, may be observed, between (...) and (...), the
Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Timothy 5.17.
The former, having respect to unbelievers, out of the Church; the latter, to
believers, abiding in the Church. Which difference premised, there cannot be
now the same degree of necessity for the preaching of the Word, as there was
before the Apostles had published it to the world, and afterward consigned it
to writing. And, upon strict observation, it will appear, that Preaching, in
the Gospel-notion, and under the most express command of Christ, is the first
promulgation of the Gospel to unbelievers; and to this, the Texts, which leave
the Apostles under the pain of God's heavy displeasure upon neglect, do plainly
refer, Act. 4.19, 20. 1 Cor. 9.16.

2. Taking the word Preaching, as it is now used, for any declaration of the
word and will of God; there is difference to be made between preaching by
inspiration, so as Christ and his Apostles, and those that were endued with
extraordinary gifts of prophesying, in the Apostles times preached, who spoke
with tongues, as the S^^rit gave them utterance; and preaching by pains and
industry, as Timothy was exhorted, to give attendance to reading and study, and
to show himself a workman that needed not to be ashamed, etc. That frequency
therefore of preaching, cannot be rightfully expected from us, which was used
sometime by the Prophets and Apostles, because they preached by inspiration,
we by pains and industry; and moreover, since our preaching is not by
immediate inspiration, it is fallible, and subject to error, as we our selves
are; and therefore ordinable by our Superiors, and reducible to such Rules,
Orders, and Directions as are found most to conduce to the promotion of Peace
and Piety.

3. There are diverse ways of preaching, besides that of Sermons, which yet are
not, vulgarly taken notice of. There is (1.) Preaching by reading of the Word
of God. This is preaching over again, and proclaiming the Sermons of Moses and
the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, to the world, It cannot be denied, but a
man does truly preach, though he read his own Notes; much less then, is it to
be denied, that he preaches, who, being authorized thereto, reads those
inspired Sermons to the people. Thus says St. James, the Bishop of Jerusalem,
Act. 15.21. Act. 15 21.
Moses, of old time, has in every City them that preach him, being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day. The Church of God does preach, as a faithful
witness, making a mere relation of what God has himself revealed, by reading,
as well as in the notion of a careful expounder, teacher, and perswader
thereof. (2.) There is preaching also, by writing; from whence the Writers of
the Holy Gospel, are called Evangelists; i. e. Preachers of it. And thus did
they preach the Gospel to unbelievers; and the Apostles also by writing of
their Epistles, did teach the Christian Church: and thus Solomon's Writing;
call him a Preacher. (3.) There is preaching by a Proxy, as well as one's own
person. Christ preached himself, in his own person, while he was on earth, but,
after his Ascension, he preached by Proxy; so Christ came, and preached peace
to the Ephesians. See the Preachers Guard and Guide. By Dr. S.
Ephesians. 2.17. -- Many therefore may preach in the true notion of the Word, who,
yet, do not preach in the vulgar notion of it, which confines it to Sermonizing
only.

But this, briefly, of the fourth Gospel-Institution, reckoned up by the
Catechist, Preaching of the Word.

Cat. p. 83.
The fifth follows, viz. [The Administration of the Sacraments of Baptism, and
the Supper of the Lord.] And this is dispatched by the Catechist, in three
short Questions and Answers.

Cat. p. 177. 178.
[ Q. 38. Who are the proper Subjects of Baptism?

Answ. Professing Believers, if not baptized in their infancy, and their infant
seed, Matt. 28, 19. Act. 2.38, 39. and 16.33. 1 Cor. 1.16. and 7.14. Coloss.
2.12, 13. with Genes. 17.10, 11, 12.]

[ Q. 39. Where, and to whom is the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper to be
administered?

Answ. In the Church, or Assembly of the Congregation, to all the Members of
it, rightly prepared, and duly assembled; or to such of them as are so
assembled, 1 Cor. 11.20, 21, 22, 28, 29, 33, Act. 2.46.]

[ Q. 40. How often is that Ordinance to be admmistred?

Answ. Every first day of the week, or at least, as often as opportunity and
convenience may be obtained, 1 Cor. 11.26. Act. 20.7.]

The Catechist should do well, for the credit of his own principles, to show us
the word Sacraments in the H. Scripture, or, where Baptism and the Supper of
the Lord, are there called Sacraments; not that I disallow the name, but cannot
reconcile his using it, with his doctrine, of adhering in all things to the
pattern in the Mount.

Touching Baptism, it had been pertinent for him to have declared the matter,
and the form of it, and the manner of administration, whether by immersion or
sprinkling; out of the sacred Bible.

That he makes professed believers, the proper subjects of Baptism, is
certainly consonant to the word of God; but how he can avoid making the said
Professors Church Members, since Baptism is the door of admission into the
Church, I apprehend not; and so, I leave him to be reconciled to himself, in
what he has before taught, Cat. p. 105, 106. Whereof see what has been
remarqued, chap. 2.

Next, that he disallows re-baptization, and approves of paedo-baptism, I
mislike not; but he may do well to consider, that the Anabaptists generally
argue from his beloved principles, and nothing is more ordinary in their mouths
than this, Where have you an express warrant, or Command, in the word of God,
for baptizing infants? And, possibly, upon trial, he will find it difficult so
to decide the points against them, by naked Scripture, as to pronounce them
heretics, for not being of his belief.

Lastly, That Baptism should be confined to the infant seed only of professed
believers, I find no Scripture Proof, but rather, the contrary appears from the
parallel between Circumcision and Baptism, whereto he sends us, when he quotes
Coloss. 2.12, 13. with Genesis 17.10, 11, 12. For there, expressly, not only he
that is born in the house, but he that was bought of any stranger with money,
and not of Abraham's seed, is yet commanded to be circumcised.

Some such Argument as this, the English College urged in the Synod of Dort,
when they answered, See this story a^ la^ge in Mr Hales Letters to Sr. D
Carlton. L. Ambassador.
in the affirmative, That the Children of Ethnic parents, adopted into the
families of Christians, were to be baptiZed, if so be they, who did offer them
to be baptized, did undertake, that they should be brought up in the Christian
Faith. But that Synod however, thought good to resolve it in the Negative; and
when 'twas moved, that some of the especial reasons brought by the Synod, might
be added to the Decree; 'twas nobly answered, That Reasons were obnoxious to
cavil and exceptions; and it was not for the authority of the Synod to reason,
but to decree.

Thus; briefly, of Baptism.

As to the Lord's Supper, he speaks nothing of the nature of it, but only
where, to whom, and how often it is to be administered; and the answers are
passable; unless, by asserting, that this ordinance is to be administered in the
Church or Assembly of the Congregation, his design be to exclude So he seems to
m^an, where he says before, Some Ordinannaunces are and spens^bly appointed in
the Assemblies of the Church. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and 11 20.24.25, 33.] Cat. p.
47.
private communions with the sick, and persons detained from the public, as
unlawful; and, if so, his proof is short and insufficient, from the
warrantableness or examples of Communions in the Congregation, to argue the
warrantableness of any in private, whenas both fairly consist together.

And now I would dismiss this matter, but that I call to mind, the Catechist
has elsewhere reflected upon the determinate gesture to be used at the Lord's
Supper; and it is but fitting, that I reduce the consideration of it to this
place.

Having spoken of the way and manner of the ordinances of Christ, appointed and
commanded by him, and therefore duly to be attended to, and observed as part of
the worship of God; Of this nature, says he, among other things, Cat. p. 46.
47.
are Gestures, in some sacred actions, Matt. 26.20, 26. John 13.23. All which,
the Church is diligently to attend unto, as things that belong to the pattern
of the house of God, etc.

His meaning is, questionless, to hint and intimate, that sitting at the Lord's
Supper, is a Gesture determined by Christ, and therefore to be observed by the
Church, without any liberty of altering from it, or substituting any other in
the room of it.

Here, therefore, let it be considered,

That it is impossible to demonstrate so, as the conscience may infallibly
build thereon, That either Christ or his Apostles, sat in the Eucharistical
Supper. That they sat at the Passover, (or used a gesture, which we so
English) is expressed, but no word of the gesture used by them, at the
institution and participation of the Communion; And at the best, it is but a
probability, that they did not change and alter their gesture, from what it was
before, there being a great distance of time between the Passover and that
sacred Supper, our B. Saviviour preaching an heavenly Sermon to his Disciples
before that took place, S. John 13.

2. Granting that the same gesture was used in the Lord's Supper, as at the
Passover, their sitting then in the position of the parts of the body, was as
far from our sitting, as from our kneeling; being a manner of lying along, used
in those Eastern Countries to this day. The Greek works are, See also S. Matt.
8.11. (...). with S. Mark 6.3^, 40.
(...), S. Matt. 26.20. S. Mark 14.18. S. Luke 22.14. S. John 13.12. One of the
Disciples was (...), (S. John 13.23. (...), S. John 21.20.) we cannot translate
it, sitting in Jesus bosom, we read it therefore, Leaning on Jesus bosom; and
(S. John 13.25.) Lying on Jesus breast. And so, elsewhere, Jesus entered in
where the damsol was lying; the word is the same, (...), S. Mark 5.40. Of this
gesture we read in the Prophet Amos, Amos 2.8.
chap. 2.8. They lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge, by every
Altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God. i.
e. They ate and drank at, and before their Altars, as they lay down upon the
beds pawned unto them. Chap. 6.4. Amos 6.4, 7.
They lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and
eat the Lambs out of the flock, etc. And verse 7. The banquet of them that
stretch themselves, shall be removed. They were wont, in those times, to say,
They lay at meat, as we, They sat at meat; and they used to pluck off their
shoes before they lay down, (as it seems Christ in the Passover, and his
Apostles did, St. John 13.5.) and this was done, says Calvin, to keep their
beds fair, which they laid their feet on, according to the fashion of that
Country.

The Gesture is thus described to us: The fore-most laid his feet along behind
the back of the second, and the second leaned in his bosom; and so, in that
fashion, round about the Table, subordinately. Mary is said therefore, St. Luke
7.38.
to stand at Christ's feet, behind him, as he sat, or lay upon a bed, at meat.
St. John, St. John 13. St. Luke 16.
to have leaned or lien in Jesus bosom. And so Lazarus, in like sort, in
Abraham's bosom; i. e. sat next to Abraham, as at a festival entertainment.
Now then, if the gesture then used, must be our pattern, sure it must not be
sitting, as we do, but a lying down, such as their Eastern discubitus was. Our
way of sitting, manifestly is not according unto Christ's example. But,

3. Grant we this also: It was not the will of Christ, that we should make his
example i^ this gesture, an everlasting Rule unto us, so as we should ever be
bound to follow it. Christ's binding-pleasure cannot possibly be fetched from
the historical relation of his using a variable gesture but one time; nay, when
the same gesture is used many times, it bindet^ not us. Christ sat daily
teaching, St Matt. 26. 55. St. Matt. 26. 55.
yet the Preacher is not bound to that now. Much less then, in this case, when
it is storied, He sat at supper, but once. If Christ had continued upon earth,
to receive this Sacrament among his Disciples, by it self, without the
conjunction of any other meal, it is hard to say, what gesture then he might
have used. Who does not see, if Christ continued the same gesture at the
Supper, that yet it was occasional from the as^ over?

Lastly, Why should this circumstance alone, by it self, be more binding than
any other, in that example of our B. Savior's, that are freely omitted? e. gr.

1. For persons, the number but twelve; for sex, only men; for qualification,
only Ministers of the New Testament. 2. For actions; putting off their shoes;
in what manner the Disciples divided the bread; what quantity of bread and wine
they received; how long they did, in this eating, tarry together. 3. For
things: What kind of bread, both for matter and form; what kind of wine; what
manner of cup; what manner of Table, what covering for the Table. And, 4. For
other circumstances: The time of eating, after another Supper which had been a
full meal: The place, a private chamber, in a private house; And for gesture
too, sitting with their heads covered, as Drusius affirms the Jews did, in
Divine worship; all that communicated together at one Table, the nearest
friends next one another; the same gestures used in blessing, and giving
thanks, as in receiving; he that administered, or delivered the Elements, sat
also, in the act of administering or delivering, as well as the Disciples in the
act of receiving.

Now, if in all these considerations we are at liberty, and not bound to the
example of Christ and his Apostles; Wherefore is there strife about this single
gesture of sitting?

The Reader may find this Argument more fully handled by Mr. Paybody, in his
elaborate Tractate, entitled, A Just Apology for the Gesture of kneeling, in
the reciving of the Lord's Supper. And thus much of the fifth
Gospel-Institution.

The sixth, and last, is the Discipline of the Church.

[" Q. 41. Cat. p. 178.
What is the Discipline of the Church?

Answ. It consists in the due exercise of that Authority and Power, which the
Lord Christ, in, and by his Word, has granted unto the Church, for its
continuance, increase, and preservation, in purity, order, and holiness,
according to his appointment, Matt. 16.19. Romans 12.8. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. Rev.
2.2, 20. Cat. p. 182. 183.
]

[ Q. 42. Unto whom is the Power and Administration of this Discipline
committed, by Jesus Christ?

Answ. As to the Authority to be exerted in it, In the things wherein the whole
Church is concerned, unto the Elders; as unto trial, judgment, and consent, in,
and unto its exercise unto the whole brotherhood; as unto love, care, and
watchfulness, in private, and particular cases, to every member of the Church,
Matt. 24.45. Ephesians. 4.13, 14. Act. 20.28. 1 Timothy 3.5. and 5.17. Hebr. 13.17. 1
Pet. 2.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, Gal. 6.1, 2. 1 Cor. 4, 14. and 5.2, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 2.6,
7, 8. 2 Timothy 4.2.]

p. 186, 187, 188.
[The body of the Church, or the multitude of the Brethren. (women being
excepted by especial prohibition, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12,) is by the
law and constitution of Christ, in the Gospel, interested in the administration
of this power of discipline in the Church; so far as, (1.) to consider, try,
and make a judgment, in and about all persons, things, and causes, whereunto it
is to be exercised. Thus the Brethren at Jerusalem joined in the consideration
of the observation of Mosaical ceremonies, with the Apostles and Elders, Act.
15.23. and the multitude of them to whom Letters were sent about it, likewise
did the same, verse 30.31, 32. and this they thought it their duty and
concernment to do, chap. 21.22. And they are blamed, who applied not themselves
to this duty, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 6. Thence are the Epistles of Paul to the
Churches, to instruct them in their duties and privileges in Christ. --
Neither can what they do in compliance with their Guides and Rulers, be any
part of their obedience to the Lord Christ, unless they make previously
thereunto, a rational consideration and judgment, by the rule of what is to be
done. Neither is the Church of Christ to be ruled without its knowledge, or
against its will; nor in any thing is blind obedience acceptable unto God. (2.)
The Brethren of the Church are entrusted with the privilege of giving and
testifying their consent unto all acts of Church Power; which, although it
belong not formally to the Authority of them, it is necessary to their validity
and efficacy, and that so far forth, as they are said to do, and act, what is
done and effected thereby, 1 Cor. 5.4, 13. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. And they who have
this privilege of consent, which has so great an influence into the action
and validity of it, have also the liberty of dissent, when any thing is
proposed to be done, the warrant whereof, from the Word, and the rule of its
performance, is not evident unto them.]

Discipline being nothing else but the due exercise of the authority of the
Officers of the Christian Church, for the regulation and preservation thereof.
This sixth Gospel-Institution might very well have been referred to the first;
and I shall content my self, to have there showed the weakness of the
foundations here again built upon.

Only, we may observe, that, by the Catechist's distribution of this power of
discipline between Minister and People, the Authority which he leaves, in
words, wholly to the Elders, See Chapter 10.
is little more than a power of executing the Brotherhood's decrees, to whom,
he says, "the power of trial, judgment, consent, or dissent, appertains; a
power yet without authority, which looks very like a contradiction. -- However,
he tells us, Women are barred and excepted from this duty of the body of the
Church, and consequently, these female-members of the Church, perform not that
obedience unto the Lord Christ, which is required in the rest, as to this
Institution, acting in compliance with their Guides and Rulers, with the
consent of the Brethren only, without any previous, rational consideration of
their own; and so, if his reason hold, are ruled without their knowledge, and
against their will, and by a blind obedience, which is not (says he) in any
thing acceptable unto Christ. I admonish these good women therefore, once more
to stand up for their privileges of Church Membership, and refer them to what
has been already noted, Chap. 12.

But a word or two, ere we part, of the places of Scripture, here referred to,
as a proof, that this power of discipline is so far by Christ committed to the
body of the Church, the male-members.

1. All that can be observed from Acts 15. is this; that the Brethren consented
unto what the Apostles and Elders determined and appointed, verse 6. The
Apostles and Elders came together, to consider of this matter; and therefore
all that speak to the case, are, (1.) Peter, verse 7. (2.) Barnabas and Paul,
verse 12. and then (3.) James, the Bishop of the place, concludes with his
sentence, whereto they all agree. It Is expressly said, of the Multitude, verse
12. All the multitude kept silence. As for the multitude gathered together at
Antioch, verse 30. needs must the Church be assembled, since the Letter written
was directed to be read unto them, for their satisfaction. -- But then, that
the multitude of the Brethren thought it their duty to meet together, as
fellow-tryers and judges of the difficult question about Mosaical Ceremonies,
is weakly inferred, from Act. 21.22. See this place before quoted. P. 1. Chapter 5.
Where James the Bishop of Jerusalem tells Paul, how much the multitude of
Jewish converts were offended at his preaching down Circumcision, and
Nonconformity to their approved Customs; and, since it could not be, but that
they would hear of his presence, there was a necessity to call them together,
that he might vindicate himself before them, and remove the prejudice they had
concerning him, verse 22. What is it therefore? The multitude must needs come
together, for they will hear that thou art come. Nor is it likely, that the
devout women, more zealous and forward usually than others ( Act. 13.50) were
excluded from this multitude,; and then, if the Catechist have observed right,
there is a must for them too, as well as the Brethren; they also have a Duty
and concernment to look after, the administration of Church Discipline.

2. For, 1 Cor. 5. "Where, says the Catechist, the multitude are blamed, who
applied not themselves to this duty. -- The matter is, the Excommunication of
the incestuous Corinthian. That which S. Paul charge upon them, in general,
is, That there was so notorious an offender among them, as one that had married
his Father's wife; and they yet demean themselves so unconcernedly, as if it
had not been a crime deserving censure and reproach. But then, as to the
judging part, he takes that to himself, verse 3. I, verily, as absent in body,
but present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present,
concerning him that has done this deed. i. e. Though I am not present with
you, yet by virtue of that authority which belongs to me, being sufficiently
assured of the truth of the fact, I have already passed sentence on him that
has thus offended. He does not expect their trial, and judgment, and consent,
(as the Catechist would order the matter) but gives the doom without it, and
commands them to see it inflicted, ver. 4.5. In the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my Spirit, with the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one to Satan. -- i. e. That in a public
Assembly, gathered in the name of Christ, in which you are to suppose me
vertually present among you, by authority of Christ committed to me, and from
me to you, ye proceed to excommunicate him. And then farther, it is to be
noted, that this speech of St. Paul, might have a prime reference to the
Ministers of the Church of Corinth; for his Epistle was written to the whole
Church, the Pastors as well as the Flock. However, there cannot be from hence
inferred any thing, but that the matter was to be done according to St. Paul's
charge and command, and by virtue of his authority, in the presence of the
whole congregation, (women no dobut, as well as men) or, at most, all the whole
congregation, for the freeing themselves from the scandal of allowing his
wickedness, appearing in some way of declarative suffrage and consent; which
consent of theirs, entitles them, by way of interpretation, so far to have
acted in this censure; but no way intimates, that the Apostle's excommunication
had not been valid and efficacious, without their consent. Certainly, the power
of binding and loosing, was never given by Christ, to the promiscuous
multitude; nor do we ever read, that he required their consent, as necessary to
the validity or efficacy of it. -- And this is all I shall add of this matter.

Two or three short reflections more, shall end this Chapter, and Book
together. And,

First, I take notice of a threefold Directory, One more was observed before,
Chap. 10.
prescribed by the Catechist, for the exercise of Church Discipline, a thing
not becoming so professed a Champion, of Christ's prescribing the very manner
of his own Institutions. The first Directory is, for private admonition; in
four particulars, Cat. p. 195. 196. Cat. p. 195. 196.


[Especially four things are to be diligently heeded. (1.) That the whole duty
be so managed, that the person offending may be convinced, that it is done out
of love to him, and affectionate conscientious care over him, that he may take
no occasion thereby, for the exasperation of his own spirit. (2.) That the
persons admonishing others of their offense, do make it appear, that what they
do, is in obedience to an Institution of Christ, and therein to preserve their
own souls from sin, as well as to benefit the offenders. (3.) That the
admonition be grounded on a rule which alone gives it authority and efficacy.
(4.) That there be a readiness manifested by them, to receive satisfaction,
either, 1. In case that upon trial it appears, the information they have had
of the miscarriage, whence the offense arose, was undue, or not well-grounded;
or, 2. Of acknowledgment and repentance.]

The second Directory is, for public admonition, by the Elders, Cat. p. 202,
203. Cat. p. 202. 203.
In five particulars.

[This admonition, says he, consists of five parts. (1.) A Declaration of
the crime, or offense, as it is evidenced to the Church, (2.) A conviction of
the evil of it, from the rule, or rules transgressed against. (3.) A
declaration of the authority and duty of the Church in such cases. (4.) A
rebuke of the offender, in the name of Christ, answering the nature and
circumstances of the offense. (5.) An exhortation unto humiliation, and
repentance, and acknowledgment.]

The third Directory is, for admonition, given occasionally, or on set purpose,
to the person excommunicate, Cat. p. 209. Cat. p. 209.
in three particulars.

[Which admonition is to contain, (1.) A pressing of his sin, from the rule, on
the conscience of the offender. (2.) A declaration of the nature of the censure
and punishment which he lies under. (3.) A manifestation of the danger of his
impenitency, in his being either hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, or
exposed unto new Temptations of Satan.]

2. I observe, how politickly the Gathered and Separate Churches have laid the
foundation of perpetuating themselves. 1. In order to the entrance of any into
their fellowship, it is required particularly, that there be soundness in the
Faith, in the party to be admitted, which is principally to be regarded in the
fundamental truths of the Gospel, Cat. p. 217. 218.
and in the fundamental principles of Gospel Worship. Among which, doubtless,
the chief is, That nothing is to be admitted of, or practiced in, or about,
Gospel Worship, without express warrant from God's Word; and then, in
particular, what the Catechist has offered, of the six Gospel-Institutions.
Cat. p. 220, 221.
(2.) At their entrance there is a special consent, agreement, or covenant, of
all the members to walk together in the observation of the same ordinances,
numerically. And, (3.) Among the causes and grounds of Excommunication, which
are presumed to be the same, and no other but such, Cat. p. 205. 206. 207.
as they judge, according to the Gospel, that the Lord Christ will proceed upon
in his final judgment at the last day) are reckoned up, not only moral evils
and offenses against mutual love; but, 3dly, False Doctrines, against the
Fundamentals in faith and worship. 4thly, Blasphemy, or speaking evil of the
ways and worship of God in the Church. And, 5thly, Desertion, or total,
causeless relinquishment of the Society and Communion in the Church. So that
any doctrine against their grand fundamental principle, or any of their
Gospel-Institutions, or any thing which may bring any of their ways into
discredit, is matter of Excommunication, nor is it likely, they will ever think
any desertion of their Communion, to have cause, and ground for it.

They secure then, their members beforehand, by a previous examination, whether
they be rightly qualified, men of their principles; at their entrance, they
bind them fast with the bonds of a Solemn League and Covenant; and threaten
them with the Terrors of Excommunication, upon any dislike of their ways, and
practice; or departure from the Communion. I will say no more of this, but that
where there is so much of the Serpent's wisdom, there had need also be a great
proportion of the Dove's innocence.

Now, after the Questions which appertain to Church Discipline, there remain
only these two following.

Cat. p. 223.
[ Q. 52. Wherein consists, the duty of any Church of Christ, toward other
Churches?] With the Answer to which, I will not trouble the Reader, since none
will be allowed by the Catechist for Churches, that are not molded according
to his principles. And then,

[ Q. 53 What ^re the ends of all this dispensation, and order of things in the
Church?]

Which Question supposes the truth of all that the Catechist has before
asserted; viz. That there is such a dispensation, and order of things in the
Church.

Yet the Answer annexed, is such, as certainly deserves to overruled all
determinations of these matters, as the end and scope of them; with which
therefore, I will also end, for we cannot end better.

[ Answ. The Glory of God, ibid.
the honor of Jesus Christ the Mediator, the furtherance of the Gospel, the
edification and consolation of Believers here, with their eternal Salvation
hereafter, Rev. 4.9, 10, 11. and 5.12, 13. 1 Cor. 3.22, 25. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.]

Whatsoever it is, which according to the genuine sense of Holy Scripture,
attested to by the church of Christ from the beginning, bears the truest
proportion unto these, confessedly great, and weighty Ends, challenges of
right the preference of our choice and acception.

Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth, Peace, Good will toward Men. FINIS.
ERRATA.
The Courteous Reader is desired to pardon the Errata of the Press, by reason
of the Author's absence; and, if he please, to corect these following mistakes.
PAge 3. line 2. for does read do. line 31. for have read leave. p. 9. l. 20.
for they required r. required them. p. 15. l. 12. for is the substance r. is of
the substance. p. 21. l. 29. f. Jegar-Sahadutha r. Jegar Sahadutha. p. 24. l.
4. f. seats in r. seats, as in. p. 29. marg. f. providere r. prandere. line 25.
after washings, supply, and. p. 51. l. 13. for singing one r. singing, one. l.
18. f. considered of, r. considered, of. p. 52. l. 9. blot out that. p. 58.
marg. for and rel. r. pro rel. l. 6. after calf, supply but. p. 65. l. 26. for
and give r. to give. p. 72. Contents, l. 11, after only blot out and. p. 77.
l. 16. after keep, supply my. p. 78. l. 6. blot out that. p. 93 l. 4. f.
Aminadab, r. Abinadab. p. 102. l. (...). f. here r. hence. after convingcingly,
blot out the comma. p. 103. l. 7. f. rules r. rulers. p. 115. l. 22. blot out
i. p. 118. l. 26. f. principlet r principles. p. 129. l. 25. f. actions, r.
action. p. 138. l. 2 blot out he, p. 139. marg. f. quiubs r. quibus. p. 150. l.
16. blot out you. p. 153. l. 17. after families supply only. p. 156. l. ult. f.
not r. nor. p. 161. l. 18. f. be learned r. the learned. l. 23. f. you
perceive. r. you may perceive. etc.

In the Appendix.

Page 3. l. 14. for (...) ^eal (...). p. 5. l. 31. for (...) read (...). p. 13.
l. 2. f. and stubborn r. the stubborn. p. 19. l. 25. f. nto r. not. p. 20. blot
out Quomodo ergo, etc. in the marg. p. 22. l. 7. for changes r. changers. p.
23. l. ult. f. higer. r. higher. p. 37. l. 1. f. know r. know^n.

THE CONTENTS Of the FIRST PART.
Chap. 1 ERror in first and foundation-Principles, most dangerous. The
Catechist's grand mistake noted. The Method of this first part, in order to the
full conviction thereof. The Protestant Doctrine of the perfection of H.
Scripture, as a Rule and guide, restrained to matters of Divine belief and
practice necessary unto Salvation. from page 1. to p. 4. Chap. 2. The Puritan
disguises of this Protestant principles: 1st. That nothing at all is to be done
by us, without Scripture-Warrant: The absurdity of that, declared. 2dly. That
nothing is to be done, or admitted of, in or about Religion, or the Worship of
God, at least without the warrant, 1st. of some general precepts; or 2dly.
examples in the written Word. Those additional explications manifested to be
impertinent and retorted. from page 4. to p. 10. Chap. 3. The Catechist's
opinion, as to this point, set down at large in his own words, from above
twenty places of his Book; and then summed up together, to be viewed at once.
from page 10. to p. 19. Chap. 4. The falsehood of his general Opinion
demonstrated from the practice of all Churches. First, Of the Jewish Church,
wherein the Instances are, The Rites used by them in swearing, putting the hand
under the thigh, or lifting it up to Heaven. Jacob's Pillar and Vow. The
Gileadites Altar on the other side Jordan. The Heap and Pillar between Laban
and Jacob, at their covenant. Ioshuae's great Stone set up at Sechem. Solomon's
new Altar. The Stone of Bethshemesh. Samuel's Altar at Ramah. David's pious
resolution for building the Temple. Determinate hours of Prayers, thrice a Day;
the Third, the Sixth, the Ninth hour. The erecting Oratories and Synagogues for
God's service and worship, and several things observable in them. Set
Festivals, for which there was no Divine Precept. The days of Purim. Solomon's
seven days for the dedication of the Altar. Hezekiah's seven days added to
the Passover. The Feast of Dedication in Winter. Stated Fasts voluntarily
undertaken, or enjoined. The fast of the fourth, fifth, seventh. and tenth
month, in Zechary. Weekly Fasts of the Pharisees, and John the Baptist's
Disciples, no where reproved otherwise than for the Hypocrisy of some
observers of them. Anna's commendation for worshipping God with such Fasts. The
custom of the religious Jews, fasting every day till Morning Prayer, and on
their Sabbaths and Festivals, till noon. The rites used at the Passe-ovet, and
other Festivals; at Circumcision, Marriage, and Burial. from page 20 to p. 31.
Chap. 5. (II) Of the Church of the New Testament, in the time of Christ and his
Apostles, wherein the instances are; Christ's approbation of those rites and
usages among the Jews, which were not founded upon a Divine Command. His
Apology for, and commendation of, the two Women that Anointed him; whereto is
added, the story of the good women at his Sepulcher, and of Joseph of
Arimathra. His frequenting the Synagogues, and demeaning himself according to
their customs. His carriage at the Passover, and the institution of his own
Supper. The observance in the Church of Jewish customs and ordinances, a long
time after their conversion to Christianity. Certain things imposed on the
Gentiles, by way of compliance with the Jews, to avoid offense and division.
The Sabbath day kept with the first day of the week. The holy Kiss. The
Love Feasts. St. Paul's injunctions in order to the decency of Divine worship,
that the man be uncovered, and the woman covered; with the concluding of that
matter of Ceremony, against the contentions, by the custom of the Churches.
from page 31. to p. 45. Chap. 6. (III) Of the Churches following the Apostles
downward to this day. (1) The Primitive Church, wherein the instances are; The
observation of the great Festivals, in memory of Christ's Birth, Resurrection,
etc. Standing at Prayer on all Lords days, and every day between Easter and
Whitsunday. Fasting on Wednesday and Friday weekly, and constantly before
Easter. The honorable and frequent use of the Cross: receiving the Sacred
Eucharist fasting. (2) The Reformed Churches; Their general Tenent of the power
of National Churches* to make laws in things neither commanded nor forbidden by
God. (3) The Independent Congregations; wherein the instances are, Singing
David's Psalms, translated by humane invention into rythm and meter, and that
too bare headed, whilst they heat the Sermon with the hat on. Sprinkling
Infants Taking the Communion sitting. Their particular forms of Church
Covenant. And the Catechists Prudentials allowed of in Divine worship, with his
way of evading the obligation of some things granted by himself to have been
commanded by Christ. The mischievous consequences of this general principle of
Non conformity and Separation, reflected on. from page 44. to p. 54. Chap. 7.
The common abuse of Holy Scripture, by the Writers of this way. An explication
of certain places of Scripture, brought in, to countenance the foregoing
Principles, or some appendant to it, under five heads. Such texts, (1) which
referr us to the word of God, as our rule, and commend unto us the perfection
of it. (2) Which use the negative argument of Gods not commanding a thing, as a
reproof and condemnation. (3) Which forbid the adding to, or taking from the
Word of God. (4) Which prohibit the worshipping of God by the commands of men,
and will worship. (5) Which require faith of us, in order to the pleasing of
God, and impute the guilt of sin to whatsoever is not of Faith. from page 54.
to p. 72 Chap. 8. Other Texts of Scripture examined, under seven heads more.
viz. (6) Which describe Christ's faithfulness compared with Moses, and point
unto him as the one, Lord of his house, the Church. (7) Which command us to
hear, and obey Christ, under the greatest penalty. Wherein also Christ enjoins
his Disciples, to teach all his commandments, and wherein others are commanded,
or exhorted to obey them, or commended for examples of a diligent and exact
obedience. (8) which relate to the pattern given in the Mount to Moses, and the
other in Vision to Ezekiel. (9) Which point us to the spiritual worship
required by God under the Gospel. (10) The second commandment, said to forbid
us the making to our selves any thing in the worship of God, to add unto his
appointments. (11) Which are said to speak of the Apostasy of the Church
prophetically, under the name of fornication and whoredom, and of the innocence
of those that keep themselves undefiled therewith. Lastly, Which are alleged
as instances of severity, against persons, who, by ignorance, neglect, or
regardlesness, have miscarried, in not observing exactly God's will and
appointment, in, and about, his worship. Particularly, Nadab and Abihu, Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram. The Sons of Eli, Vzzah, whom the Catechist says, against
the Scripture-Text to have sinned, in putting the Ark into a Cart, when he
should have born it on his shoulders. Vzziah's offering incense. 1 Cor. 11.30.
Hebr. 10.25, 26, 27, 28, 29. from page 73. to p. 93.
The Contents of the Second Part.
Chap. 1. The Catechist's confidence, with the boldness usual to men of his
way, remarqued. His sixfold enumeration of Gospel-Institutions. The first of
them fixed upon, viz. The calling, gathering, and settling of Churches, with
their officers, as the seat, and subject of all other solemn instituted
worship. Quaere, How settled Churches are the subject of all instituted worship,
since Preaching of the word goes before them; which the Catechist names for the
fourth Gospel-Institution. from page 97. to p. 100. Chap. 2. The Catechist's
general doctrine of Churches proposed. Proofs from the Catholic Church, or the
National Church of the Jews, impertinent to his particular Churches. The
Catechist's texts for Christ's institution and appointment of such particlar
Churches, as the foundation-ordinance of Gospel Worship, examined. St.
Cyprian's comment upon those words, Where two or three are gathered together in
my name, I am with them. Particular Churches acknowledged to have been
intended, and approved by Christ, though not in the Catechist's sense, nor by
the cogency of his arguments. The proper difference between the Jewish and
Christian Church, stated. from page 100. to p. 109 Chap. 3. The qualification
of his Church Members, enquired into. His opinion, that none be admitted
members of particular Churches, but true believers, real Saints, (persons
regenerated, converted, vivified, illuminated, justified, adopted, elected,)
declared. The danger of this opinion, intimated. The Catechist set against
himself, and posed with his own arguments about it. The word of God, not the
only means of conversion. The solemn League and Covenant, required by the
Catechist, to the formal constitution of particular Churches. The several
pretensions unto this, as Christ's institution, examined and rejected The
consent required to all other societies, and pattern of the Jewish Church,
untruly, and impertinently urged. The chief reformations of the Jewish Church,
not by any voluntary covenants of the people, but the authority of the supreme
Rulers. 2 Cor. 8.5. abused and misapplyed, to the Macedonian's entrance into a
Church state. The way of the Church at Jerusalem, glanced at. The Baptismal
covenant renewed at Confirmation conformable thereunto, but will not serve the
Catechist 's turn. The weakness of other proofs offered. from page 109. to p.
127. Chap. 4. A Scripture account given of the Christian Church. Christ speaks
of it as afterward to be built. The power of planting, and building it, to
whom, and when given. The beginnings of this Church left by Christ. The story
of its first building by St. Peter, Act. 2. Baptism upon Profession, the door
of entrance. The practice after admission. The Christian-Church defined. Of
Churches, as many; and Church, as one. The necessary qualification of
Church Members. The visible Church, a communion of professors wherein are good
and bad, Saints and Hypocrites mixed together. The Minister's unworthiness
nulls not the officacy of Divine Ordinances, the presence of evil members in
Church Communion, hurts not those who consent not to their sins and impieties.
from page 128. to p. 141. Chap. 5. Of the places we call Churches. That all
difference of place is not taken away in the New Testament. St. John 4.20, 21,
22. examined. The Temple at Jerusalem, on some accounts Typical, on others
Moral. David's resolutions of building the Temple, grounded on a rational
piety: and both He and Solomon arguing the fitness of its Magnificence, by
argument of reason. Scripture-precepts of reverence to God's house, have no
sign in them of being Ceremonial only. Rationally therefore applied by the Jews
to their Synagogues. The Centurions Synagogue a proof of his love to their
Nation. Christ and his Apostles constant in frequenting the Temple and
Synagogues. Probable it is, that even in the time of the first Christians,
there were certain places peculiar for their serving God in. Intimations
thereof in Sacred Scripture, Act. 11.26. A Local Church, as early as the name
Christians, 1 Cor. 11.28. The house of God opposed to their private houses. Mr.
Mede's conjectures, what that house was, and farther proofs about it. The
general reason of appropriating certain places to Gods worship and service.
from page 141. to p. 155. Chap. 6. The necessity of Government in the Church,
intimated, and that as to it is formal constitution. The Catechist's distinction
of Church Officers, extraordinary, and ordinary; without Scripture Proof.
Extraordinaries granted in the Apostles, and yet not their office it self, for
a season only. Archbishop Whitgift at large of this distinction, against T. C.
The Catechist's enumeration of ordinary Officers; How politickly Deacons there
left out? His great argument from a community of names, to an equality among
Ministers; disabled. The name Bishop; not unfit to denote pre-eminence, whether
we consider the notation of it, or the use of it, in the Old Testament, or in
the New. The same demonstrated for the name Elder, wherewith the Catechist
matcheth it, and the several instances alleged by him to the contrary. A
Taste, by the way, of the Catechist's confidence. Prelacy in Church government,
argued from the Scripture-instances of Deacons under Bishops, and the examples
of Timoth, and Titus. The Catechist's exceptions at the two last, answered. The
enemies of superiority among Ministers, mean it in others, not themselves. from
page 155. to p. 177. Chap. 7. Dr. Hammond's account of Church Government.
Church power originally in Christ, and personally exercised by him on earth.
This power described by Christ, negatively and affirmatively. The Apostles,
Christ's successor's. Their office not Temporary, and to end with their
persons; proved from Christ's affirmation, and promise; and the histories of
those times. The assumption of Matthias to the Apostolacy. The seven Deacons.
James the just made Bishop of Jerusalem, and called an Apostle. Timothy and
Titus ordained by St. Paul, with power themselves to ordain others. They and
other Bishops, successors of the Apostles, and therefore also called Apostles
The Angels of the seven Churches of Asia. Concordant testimonies out of
Antiquity. The Council of Chalcedon. Polycrates, Irenaeus, Tertullian. The
manner of succession cleared, Commission required in all Church Officers from
them that received it immediately from Heaven, or their successors. from page
178. to p. 195. Chap. 8. The Catechist's opinion of the indispensable necessity
of Ministers being chosen by the people, largely declared. His two
Scripture-instances examined, Act. 6. Act. 14. The choice of the seven Deacons,
no rule for all Churches in the constitution of Officers. The choice it self,
an occasional permission The word (...) does not signify to ordain, by the
election, or suffrages of the community. A taste of the Catechists Learning and
Modesty. Antiquity untruly referred to by him, for the peoples right to choose
their Ministers. His reasons strike as the Civil State, no less than the
Ecclesiastical; that there must be no Rulers in either, but by the people's
choice. There is no duty required of the people, as to their Officers and
Governors, which makes this choice contended for, necessary. Arguments against
Popular Elections, as unconformable to the way of the Old Testament, made by
incompetent judges, the occasion of divisions and fashions, reflected on
extremely by St. Paul's Prophecy, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. leaving Ministers under too
great a temptation, to please and humor the people, and very injurious and
dangerous to the concernment of Christian Kings, in the ordering of the public
Religion and Reformation. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons of the Church of
England, made, ordained, and consecrated by the Vertual consent of the People.
from page 196. to p. 219. Chap. 9. Imposition of hands in Ordination, limited
by the Catechist, to the Presbytery of that particular Church, wherein the
person is ordained. The Scripture gives this power to Bishops. Calvin's
judgment of the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Two Questions
resolved by the Catechist, in the negative. Qu. 1. Whether a person may be
lawfully called to, of employed in a part of the office, or work of the
Ministry only? The Catechist's grounds examined, and disabled.
Scripture-presidents instanced in the seven Deacons. Christ's baptizing by his
Disciples. St. Paul's allegation as to himself. The Catechist's own Pastors and
Teachers divided in the parts of their office, and his Ruling Elders opposed to
Preaching-Elders. No repugnancy herein with the authority of the Ministry or
relation between the Elders and the Church. The exercise of gifts restrainable,
till there be right and authority given; and after that too, by the rules of
prudence, good order, and edification. The Church may lawfully admit to a part
of the ministry only, and advance her Ministers by degrees. Qu. 2. Whether a
person may hold the relation, or exercise the duty of a Minister, to more
Churches than one, at the same time? The Catechist's opinion set down at large,
with the reasons of it, and then refuted under six propositions, which are
manifested to be asserted by him. 1. That none can be a Gospel-minister, unless
first chosen by some particular Church. 2. That none can be ordained a
Minister, but with relation to some particular Church, at his cure and charge.
3. That no Minister has power to depute another for his Curat, Vicar, or
Substitute. 4. That no Minister may exercise his power, or office, out of that
particular Church wherein, and whereto he is ordained. 5. That no Minister may
have relation to more Churches than one, at the same time. Archbishop
Whitgift's Answer to T. C. about the Similitudes vulgarly used from a Shepherd
and his Flock, etc. 6. That no Minister may remove from one Church, or Charge,
to another, without reordination. Mr. Hooker's judgment, for the avoiding
confusion in such like questions as these, moved by the Casechist. from page
216. to p. 237. Chap. 10. The necessity of a rightful derivation of
Church Authority from Christ, usually suggested by the Catechist. Of the
Peoples consent required to the exercise of the Elders Authority, and the
Catechists Directory in case of their dissent; and from thence, how poor and
weak a thing the power of Church Governors appears to be made by him. What
kind of obedience is allowed by those of the Separation, as due to Ministers.
Dr. Jacksons, of the necessity and nature of true obedience, with the dtnger of
the sin of Disobedience to their Pastors. The Catichist's difference between
Pastors and Teachers, considered, with the fond grounds of the same. from p.
237. to p. 246. Chap. 11. Of Ruling Elders. The distinction of the Church into
Clergy and Laity, defended. 1 S. Pet. 5.3. no proof, that the whole Church is
called Gods Clergy-Ministerial power, a mark of separation. That Laymen among
us have a principal rule in the Church, and, upon that account, our objections
against Lay Elders unreasonable, disproved. The scarcity of persons fit for
this ruling Eldership, in every Church, and the burden of their maintenance,
acknowledged by some friends to the cause, grear prejudices against them. What
kind of Elders, or Seniors, are countenanced by Antiquity. The Jewish Elders
joined in the Sanhedrim, and other assemblies with the Priests, no pattern to
be urged here. An examination of the express Scriptures prerended to authorize
these Officers. Mr. Mede's excellent discourse upon 1 Timothy 5.17. Who, are
means. 1. by Elders there. Five expositions, which do all exclude these
Lay Elders pleaded for, in contra distinction to the civil Magistrate, as well
as Catechist's exceptions to some Branches of the Exposition given of these
words, answered. The word (...) does not denote that ordinary labor which is
incumbent upon all Pastors and Teachers, as their constant duty. Bishops may
pertinently enough be meant by the Elders spoken of, notwithstanding the
Catechist's cavils. The same qualifications absurdly required in the Ruling, as
in the Teaching Elder, however their office be said to be so distinct. from p.
246. to 273. Chap. 12. Of Deacons. Stephen and Philip, two of the seven
Deacons, did preach and baptize. The word (...), of a large signification. The
Office of Deacons, in the Christian Church, to be gathered, not only from Acts
6. but other places. The Catechist's rash censure of all Churches, which
confine not their office to the care of the poor. The ordination of the first
Deacons, managed wholly by the Apostolic prudentials. The circumstances of our
state, vastly different from the Churches then. The change of the Levites, when
the Temple was built, from their first office, in attending on the Tabernacle,
a competent plea for our case. 1 Cor. 16.2. considered. The Catechist urges
that occasional Precept, as a binding Law to perpetuity; and so, in effect,
adds to the Word of God. A sort of She-officers, Female-Elders, Deaconesses,
and Widows, in the Apostolic, and Primitive Church, forgotten by the
Catechist, in describing the pattern given in the Mount. His unkindness, in
excluding that Sex from a share in Church Discipline, noted; and the good women
admonished, by what he has said elsewhere, to look to their privilege and
duty, as Church Members, from page 273. to 285. Chap. 13. Of Prayer. A
Catalogue of Scripture-forms of Prayer, out of the Old and New Testament. The
lawfulness of imposing them. The Catechist's Arguments against the use of such
Forms, answered. Public Prayer, is to provide for common, not personal wants.
Among all gifts in Holy Scripture, no gift of Ex-tempore-Prayer mentioned. No
injury to any Gift, to be confined to a subserviency unto good Order. The
promise of the Spirit not rendered hereby needless, or useless. Abba Father, at
no odds with Our Father. The gift of Prayer no more promised the Minister, than
People. Part of our Ministry to be fulfilled, is, Officiating according to the
Public Liturgy-Prescribed Forms hinder not, but tend rather to forward and
promote Edification, from page 285. to 300. Chap. 14. Of the Spirit, Gift, and
Grace of Prayer. The agency of the Holy Ghost, necessary in order unto right
Prayer. (...) in St. James, what it signifies. The gift of prayer, soberly
understood, nothing else but a gift of Oratory, owing its rise to former
Premeditations, Quick Parts, a competent degree of modest Confidence, and
frequent Exercise. What the Vulgar call a Special Gift of Prayer, is the
result, sometimes, of Impudence and Presumption, Pride and Ambition, or some
worse Principle. It Is not to be expected, that the H. Spirit help us
immediately to the matter and words of Prayer, Romans 8.26. considered. Three
Arguments to demonstrate the Proposition. The Spirit helps us to the matter,
and words of Prayer, by the use of proper, and fit means; among which, may be
reckoned, pious and useful Forms, composed to our hands, by others. Grace most
considerable in Prayer, and the principal work of the H. Spirit is, to excite,
assist, and strengthen the exercise of proper Graces. Where the Form is
prescribed, one grace more to be exercised. The chief operations of the Spirit
of Supplications he inwards, in fixing the intention, illuminating the
understanding, inflaming the affections, etc. A wide difference between saying
Prayers, and Praying-Prayers. from p. 300. to 323. Chap. 15. Singing of Psalms,
the Catechist's third Gospel-Institution, slily passed over. Six points
propounded about it, to be resolved from Scriture. Of Preaching the Word, the
fourth Gospel-Institution. Needful distinctions about it. Difference between
Preaching and Teaching, Evangelists and Doctors, Word and Doctrine; between
Preaching by Inspiration, and by Pains and Industry. Preaching, more ways than
that of Sermons, by the Vulgar fixed on; viz. By Reading, by Writing, by Proxy.
The fifth Gospel-Institution, Administration of the Sacraments, Baptism and the
Lords Supper. Sacraments no Scripture-word. The proper subjects of Baptism,
proper Church Members. The Anabaptist misledd, by the Catechists principles.
Baptism ill confined to the Infant Seed of Believers only. The carriage of the
Synod of Dort, as to that point. Sitting, not a gesture prescribed for the
Lords Supper. It Is not certain to conscience, that Christ and his Disciples
used the same gesture at the Supper, as at the Passover. The gesture of the
Passover, different from our sitting. No evidence of the Will of Christ, that
we conform to the gesture then used, rather than to other circumstances. The
last Gospel-Institution, Church Discipline. The power given to the community of
the people. Women excepted, in the Administration thereof, by the Catechist.
His Scripture-instances considered. A threefold Directory given by him, for the
Exercise of Discipline. The politic contrivance of the separate Churches, for
perpetuating themselves. The Catechist's two concluding Questions. from page
323. to 347.
FINIS.
An APPENDIX Of the Authority of KINGS, AND Obedience of SUBJECTS.
The Contents.
A Specimen of the Separatists Loyalty, and Opinion of the Magistrates Power in
matters of Religion. Government an Ordinance of God. In all orderly Government
some Supreme nec^ssary. That Supreme so far Independent, Absolute, and
Uncontrollable. There can be but one Supreme: all besides must needs be
Subject. That the Supreme over us is the King's Majesty, undeniably evidenced.
His power about Religion proved by four considerations. No Ecclesiastical
person has an exemption from his Tribunal. A Scheme of the orderly
subordination of Government appointed and approved of God. Active obedience the
principal due to Authority, and that in matters antecedently good, indifferent,
and doubtful, but not in matters evidently sinful. Here the passive obedience
takes place. The reasonableness of that Subjection.

SInce the committing of the foregoing Pages to the Press, I have considered
with my self, that among all the Brethren of the Separation, whom I have either
known or heard of, there has not one been found of that Loyal Disposition, as
to call the War against the last King a Rebellion, or his Death a Murder, or
the Government of O. C. an unjust Usurpation; but then as to Religion, it is
most palpable, that they do all deny any Authority in the King to intermeddle
with it, and are no less professed Enemies to his Supremacy in matters
Ecclesiastical (a foundation-Principle of the English Protestant Reformation)
than the Jesuited Papists. Their Judgment jointly is, Let Kings take care of
Civil State,
Let Church of Church Matters debate.


Now so long as these Doctrines are entertained and acknowledged, it is but
labor lost to press them unto obedience and conformity to the Laws of the
Realm about Religion, and the Service of God; since these Laws themselves are
adjudged by them no other then extravagancies beyond the compass of their
Rulers Commission, invasions of Christ's Authority, the Churches Privilege,
and every Christians Liberty, unjustifiable in themselves, and therefore of no
power to oblige them unto duty, or brand their most contemptuous neglects for
sinful transgressions. I have therefore thought it requisite in order to the
fuller confutation of their way and principles, to annex this Appendix, for the
rectifying of their apprehensions, who shall be willing impartially to
deliberate upon what is here offered to them, briefly of these two heads.

First, the Power and Authority of Kings or Governors. And

Secondly, The obedience due from Subjects. For these two are relatives, not to
be separated each from other.

First then concerning the former. I take it for granted that Government and
Magistracy is an Ordinance of God, and they who list to dispute it, may if they
please, confront and oppose St. Paul's thirteenth Chapter to the Romans. That
which I design to recommend shall be comprised and demonstrated in the
following particulars.

1. In all regular Governments needs must there be some Supreme and Principal.
Some (...). Some Princeps. Some first and chief. Some uppermost and Head of the
rest, to whom the last appeal must be made, and at whose tribunal and decision
they must acquiesce: Ordo non datur nisi cum relatione ad aliquid primum.
for without this there can be no settled and determined order, but there will
be a progress to infinity, and controversies can never be ended. A necessity
there is in all Government for some to be uppermost.

2. The supreme or chief power wherever it is seated must needs be so far
independent, absolute, and uncontrollable; Independent upon any but God
himself, for otherwise there will be some above it, and so it will not be
supreme and uppermost. Absolute it must needs be to obtain the ends of
Government, where by absolute I mean, not freed from an obligation to observe
the Laws of God and Nature, and to Govern according to humane Laws, so far as
equity will bear: but freed from the fetters of all humane Laws, when the
necessity of Government (whereof the Supreme is also to judge) calls for it.
And without this no Government can well be upheld and managed, there being ever
some cases happening which humane Laws cannot in particular foresee and provide
against; and therefore the breast of the Supreme must make a supply. And then
being independent on any upon earth, and absolute in the sense explained, it
must needs follow that it is unaccountable unto any, uncontrollable by any but
God, Subject to the coercive restraint of none besides: for if so, that to
which it is subject will be above it, and so it is no longer Supreme and
Uppermost; and we shall lay the Principles of confusion in the prime foundation
of order.

3. The supreme and chief Power can be but one, whether seated in a single
Person, or in more, the supreme Power still is but one, not in reference to the
subject of it, but in respect of the power it self, and the actions of command
and judgment thence proceeding. Governments are commonly distributed into
their kinds according to the difference of their supreme Powers. If the higher
Power be one single Person, it is called a Monarchy, i. e. the Government of
one. If the higher Power be more then one, it is either in the Chief, and
Nobles, and then it is called an Aristocracy, i. e. the Government of the best
men, the more excellent and noble; or else in the People, and then it is called
a Democracy, i. e. the Government of the People, a Commonwealth. Now wherever
it be placed, there must be granted to be but one Supreme and Chief, where for
order sake all Subjects must needs rest, and to whose decision they must
necessarily submit, as final and terminative in the case. Were there more then
one Supreme, their Laws, and Commands might be contrary, and so the judgment
and execution impossible. One may call to the Church, another at the same time
to the Camp, and a third at the same time to the Court; and one will punish for
disobeying him, the second for disobeying him, and the third also for
disobeying him. And from hence must needs follow as a discord and division in
the Supreme: So also among the Subjects, one Faction for this, another for
that, etc. Now Impossibilities, Contradictions, and Principles of division in
Government, must necessarily be avoided. And here those Axioms of our Blessed
Savior take place, No man can serve two Masters, and A Kingdom divided against
it self cannot stand. We may as well suppose two supreme Wills appointed by God
in chief to govern a man, two Heads for a body, two Suns in the Firmament; yea,
two Gods in the world, as two Supremes in an orderly Government. And therefore,

4. Whoever be the Supreme, all others must of necessity be subject, some-wayes
dependent on him, deriving from him, or subordinate to him. It belongs, as
Philo the Jew speaks, Lib. de creat. Principis.
(...), to him that has the highest and greatest place in Government to choose
such assistants as shall rule together with and under him in the administration
of those things which concern the public utility, the common good. 1 Pet.
2.13.14.
-- To the King, says St. Peter, as Supreme, or to Governors as sent by him
(i. e. by the King as Supreme or Principal) for the punishment of evil doers,
and the praise of them that do well. Could the Supreme and Principal do all
himself, and be every where present in his own person, other Governors were
needless; but that being in great Provinces impossible, he must send forth his
Deputies, and appoint his Vicars and Substitutes. I will exemplify this by the
instance of Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.4, 5.
Moses (says the Sacred Text) commanded us a Law, even the Inheritance of the
Congregation of Jacob, and he was King in Jesurun, when the heads of the
people, and the tribes of Israel were gathered together. -- We have here Moses
the principal Lawgiver, and King in Israel (Supreme under God) and we have
withal the Princes and Heads of the people: and that these were under Moses,
and chosen by his appointment, we are elsewhere instructed. Moses did indeed
lead and judge Israel a while alone, but necessity enforced him in the end to
profess unto them, Deuteronomy. 1.9. to 18.
I am not able to bear you my self alone. How can I my self alone bear your
cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife? Take you wise men and
understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over
you. So (says the Text of Moses) I took the chief of your tribes, wise men and
known, and made them heads over you; captains over thousands, and captains over
hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and officers among
your tribes: And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes
between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his brother,
and the stranger that is with him; and the cause that is too hard for you,
bring it unto me, and I will hear it. We see here the whole subordination in
Government is ordered and appointed, commissioned and sent from Moses the
Supreme, and to him subjected. He gives the charge they must conform to, and
reserves the last appeal to himself. So that the Supreme has not more need of
subordinate Magistrates, for his help and assistance, than they have of him as
their Head of influence, life, and motion. Upon this account Saint Paul is bold
to tell Festus the Governor sitting on the Bench at Caesarea, Acts 25.6, 10, 11
who had commanded him to be brought before him, I stand at Caesar's
judgment seat, I appeal unto Caesar. He knew that Festus was but commissioned
by him, sent by him to that place of Judicature; and therefore from him he
appeals unto Caesar as the Supreme. Subordinate Magistrates are necessary
instruments for the Supreme to govern by; but their dependence upon, and
subjection to the Supreme is ever to be acknowledged: for by him are the bounds
and limits of their respective Jurisdictions determined, and to him they are
accountable. Inferior powers compared to the Supreme and the People, are like
the Genus subalteruum in Logic, which is a species in reference to the summum
Genus, but in reference to the species contained under it a Genus it self. In
like manner inferior Magistrates in reference to the People under the^r
Authority are a ruling Power, but in reference to the Supreme, no other then
the people are to them, that is in plain terms, Subjects themselves. This is
the Profession of the Centurion in the Gospel, St. Luke 7.8.
I also am a man set under authority, having under me Soldiers; and I say unto
one, go and he goes; and to another, come, and he comes; and to my servant,
do this, and he does it. I, says he, have soldiers (...) under my self; so
far he was a Commander and Governor, and they to be subject and obedient to
him as such; but then says he farther, I my self am (...) ordered and ranked
under authority, and so a Subject also, i. e. subjected to the authority above
him, as his Soldiers and Servants were subjected unto his authority.

These Propositions spoken to, are all demonstrable, relying upon the evidence
of natural reason and policy, and are but the plain English of the Scripture
distinction, between Principalities and Powers, the King as Supreme, Tit. 3.1.
and Governors sent by him. But now, to pass [a Thesi ad Hypothesin] to that
particular wherein we are more nearly concerned, I add,

5. The supreme Power over us is questionless the King's Majesty. The
Government of England is no question Monarchical, declared by our known Laws to
be an Empire governed by one supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and
Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, Unto whom (says the Statute) a
Body politic, compact of all sorts and degrees of people, divided in terms and
by names of Spiritualty and Temporalty been bounden and owen to bear next to
God all natural and humble Obedience. See 24. Hen. 8. c. 12. Now in every true
Monarchy and Empire the Supreme Majesty and Authority is in the Person of the
King as in its proper Genter, whom therefore all in their right wits must needs
acknowledge with Tertullian, [a Deo secundum, and quicquid est a Deo
consecutum, and solo Deo minorem] Next under God over them, having whatever he
is from God, and inferior unto God only, and by consequence to have on earth,
[Nec superiorem nec parem] neither superior nor equal; for, as that Father
speaks pertinently, [Ea est Summi conditio ut nihil aliud adaequet, nedum
superet] That is the nature of a Supreme and Chief to have no Competitor, much
less one above it self. And what is more obvious to this purpose then the
public acknowledgements required of the Subjects of this Realm in those two
famous Oaths, the one of Supremacy, the other of Allegiance.

As for that of Supremacy made first in the time of King Henry the Eighth,
because it is but short, I will here insert it.

The Oath of Supremacy.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that the King's
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
things or causes as Temporal, and that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within
this Realm; and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities: and do promise
henceforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs, and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Authorities granted or belonging
to the King's Highness, his Heirs, and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

In which Oath he that runs may read that whoever takes it declares sincerely,

1. That the King is the Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all his other
Dominions, and that in all Causes.

2. That he is the only Supreme Governor

3. That no Foreign Power has or ought to have any Jurisdiction or Authority
within this Realm.

4. That he does therefore utterly renounce and forsake the owning of, or
appealing unto any such.

5. That he does promise from henceforth not only Faith and true Allegiance to
the King, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, but to his power to assist and
defend all the King's Prerogatives. And

Lastly, That he does Recognize the Crown of this Realm to be an Imperial
Crown, i. e. such, which as to the coercive part is subject to no man.

Now for the farther illustration of this it is to be noted that Queen
Elizabeth Queen Eliz. Injunct.
of Blessed Memory in her Injunctions to take away the scruples of some well
meaning Subjects concerning the intendment of this Oath, (1.) denies it to be
the challenging Authority and Power of Ministry and Divine Service in the
Church. And (2.) declares it to be no other than what was of ancient time due
to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, that is, (as she proceeds) under God to
have the Sovereignty and rule over all manner of persons born within these her
Realms, Dominions, and Countries of what Estate (either Ecclesiastical or
Temporal) soever they be, so as no other Foreign power shall or ought to have
any Superiority over them.

Of the same nature, and to the same effect is that which is recorded in the
37. Article of the Church of England, agreed on Anno 1562. and established by
Law.

Arti. 37. An. 1562.
The Queens Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does appertain, and is
not nor ought to be subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction. Unto which this
Explication is immediately annexed.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief Government, by which Titles
we understand the minds of some dangerous folks to be offended, we give not
our Princes the Ministering either of Gods Word or of the Sacraments, the which
thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen do most
plainly testify, but that only Prerogative, which we see to have been given
always to all godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, That
they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword,
and stubborn and evil doers.

To all which I will only add that both in the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth,
Queen Eliz. Injunct. Can. 1. K James.
and the Constitutions and Canons of King James (since allowed and ratified by
King Charles the Martyr, and our Gracious Sovereign now reigning over us) All
Ecclesiastical Persons having cure of Souls, and all other Preachers and
Readers of Divinity-Lectures are obliged to the uttermost of their wit,
knowledge, and learning, purely and sincerely without any color or
dissimulation to teach, manifest, open, and declare four times every year at
the least in their Sermons, and other Collations, and Lectures, That all
Usurped and Foreign Power, forasmuch as the same has no establishment nor
ground by the Law of God, is for most just causes taken away and abolished, and
that therefore no manner of obedience and subjection within his Majesty's
Realms and Dominions is due unto any such Foreign Power, but that the Kings
Power within his Realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and other his
Dominions and Countries, is the highest Power under God, to whom all men as
well Inhabitants as born within the same, do by God's Laws owe all Loyalty and
Obedience over and above all other Power and Potentates in the Earth.

The other Oath of Allegiance made at the Sessions of Parliament in the Reign
of King James immediately after the Powder Plot, is overlong to be here
recited: And therefore I will only observe, that the Sum of it is -- An hearty
acknowledgement and declaration, The sum of the Oath of Allegiance.
That our Sovereign Lord King Charles is lawful and rightful King of this
Realm, neither deposable by the Pope nor by any other, and That we will
constantly bear to him, his Heirs or Successors, that Faith and true
Allegiance, which becomes Subjects, defending him, and them to the utmost of
our power against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever which shall be made
against his or their persons, their Crown or Dignity; and use our best
endeavors to disclose them and make them known.

It is, we see, undoubtedly evidenced from our most public Declarations and
acknowledgements, that the Sovereignty and Supremacy is seated in the King's
Majesty only. And therefore,

For any persons to challenge or plead for a superiority over, or co-ordination
and equality of power with the Kings Majesty, is notorious usurpation.

And

For any of his Subjects or all of them together to resist or fight against the
King, their only Supreme Governor, can never by the wit of man be reasonably
excused or defended from the crime of Rebellion; yea, as the case stands with
us, a Rebellion grounded on, and accompanied with horrid perjury. Which are
points certainly to be religiously and severely pondered on by all and every
one of those who had an hand or share in the late unnatural War, that by their
repentance they may procure pardon and peace of Conscience from the King of
Kings, whose Authority is violated in the affronting of his Vicegerents.

But hitherto we have considered of Supreme Power in the General and in whom it
is seated amongst us in particular; it may be requisite now to suggest somewhat
of the extent of this power as to Religion and Religious persons; which shall
be the work of two farther propositions.

6. Then, The King's Majesty has a coercive power about the matters of
Religion. Bishops and Priests indeed (as an excellent Author speaks) are the
great Ministers of Religion, but Kings are the (...), the great Rulers and
Governors of it. Religion is ministered by persons ordained and appointed to
that service, but yet Governed by the Supreme Magistrate.

1. If it be well considered how great an influence Religion has into the
happiness, and the neglect of it, into the misery of Polities and
Commonwealths, we must certainly conclude, that either the care of it belongs
unto Kings, or they want the best means of obtaining the end of Government, the
peace and happiness of their people. A considerable influence true Religion
has on people to make them loving and charitable, just and honest; and
therefore Plutarch well called it (...), the Cement of every Society, and bond
of Legislation: It is that which lies at the bottom of an Oath, which the
Apostle calls the End of all Controversy, i. e. the last resolution among men;
An appeal unto God, which without Religion were a vain matter. Nor is there any
security for a Ruler against Treasons and Conspiracies, like to the fear God,
and true Religion obtaining among his Subjects. -- But whatsoever opinions are
entertained in the name of Religion are not without effect. Suetonius observes
of Tiberius, that he was [Religionis negligentior, quippe persuasionis plenus
cuncta fato agi] Careless of Religion, because full of this persuasion, that
all things come by destiny. Nor indeed can it be well imagined men should be
over-careful either of serving God or their Prince, or doing any virtuous
action, that drink in this persuasion, That if men are bad, they are so
unavoidably; and if good, they are so necessarily and fatally inclined and
determined to be: and therefore Plato wisely pronounced, that such are not to
be suffered in a Commonwealth who teach God to be the cause of sin: and we know
too well what malignant influence other Opinions also, espoused for Religion,
have been, and are daily of, to work all manner of confusion; such Principles I
mean as these, That Dominion and Authority is founded in Grace: That evil and
Heretical Princes lose and fall from their Authority; That Kings are but the
Ministers and Executors of the Popes or Parliaments, or Presbyters, or peoples
Decrees; That all things ought to be common; That inferior Magistrates may
reform things supposed amiss against the will of the Supreme; That men are to
act according to the impulses of the spirit within them, which they can give no
reasonable account of; That Oaths are in themselves unlawful and forbidden to
Christians. -- These and the like Principles of Religion, as they are esteemed
by some, and have been furiously prosecuted by the Zealots of several parties,
have given evidence enough, how intolerable they are in a well ordered
Government. But besides this energy and power either of the true Religion to
dispose persons to live together happily; or of whatever is entertained under
the notion of Religion to drive men on fervently to prosecute it, God himself
blesses or punishes Kingdoms and Nations according to their care and neglect
of Religion. The very Heathens have observed this.

[Dii multa neglecti dederunt.
Hesperiae mala luctuosae.] says Horace.
And Livie remarques in the general, [ Omnia prospera eveniunt colentibm Deos,
adversa spernentibus.] Godliness, 1 Timothy 4.
says the Holy Scripture, has the promises of this present life as well as of
that to come. S. Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God (says our Blessed Savior) and his
righteousness, and other things shall be added to you. And it is clearly
legible throughout the Old Testament, how an happy, fruitful, peaceable, and
victorious state is promised upon the condition of Piety, and the contrary
threatened to impiety. Hence is that of Solomon, Prove. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach (a ruin) to any
people. And upon this is that expostulation grounded, 2 Chronicles. 24.20.
Thus says God, why transgress ye the Commandments of the Lord that ye cannot
prosper? because ye have forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. Unless
therefore the Supreme Magistrate have power about the matters of Religion, he
wants the main thing necessary to the end of his office, the happy Government
of his people. This is no trivial argument.

2. Parents without question have a Power, and ought therefore to have a care
of bringing up their Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians.
6.4.
i. e. teaching, instructing, and disciplining of them in the matters of
Religion. Genesis 18.19.
I know Abraham, says God, that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. -- Now what belongs to
Parents in their Family, is not to be denied to him who is Pater Patriae, the
Father of his Country in his Dominions. Judges 5.7. 2 Chronicles. 29.11. Apud
Gerarenses commune Regum nomen erat Abimelech. i. e. Pater meus Rex. Genesis c.
20, 21, 26. Rivet in Decal.
For thus Deborah was called a Mother in Israel, and Hezekiah a Father, yea,
and that of the Priests too, for them he calls his sons. And therefore the
fifth Commandment which bids us to honor our Father and Mother, is understood
not only of natural Parents, but political likewise, i. e. of Governors and
Superiors. An household (as Aristotle observes) is a kind of little
Commonwealth, and a Commonwealth a great household.

3. Kings being God's Vicegerents, it is very incongruous and unseemly that
they should not have a primary regard unto the honor of their master, by whose
authority, and for whom they rule. Nay they are commanded in this capacity to
serve God. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings (says the voice of God in the
Psalmist) Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12.
be instructed ye judges of the earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
with trembling: Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish. -- Now the
Religious service proper to, and expected from Kings is not only personal, such
as is required of all other men, but that of their regal Capacity, in the use
of their Royal power and authority. St. Austin declares excellently well how
Kings ought to serve God. In hoc Reges (sicut eis divinitus praecipitur) Deo
serviunt in quantum reges sunt, si in suo regno bona jubeant, mala prchibeant,
non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem verum etiam quae pertinent ad
divinam religionem. Aug. contr. Cresc. l. 3. c. 51.
In this (says he) Kings do, as it is commanded them, serve God as Kings if in
their Kingdom they command what is good, and prohibit what is evil, and that
nto only with reference to humane or civil Society, but concerning Divine
Religion.

And again, says he, Quomodo ergo Reges Domino serviunt in timore, nisi ea
quae contra jussa Domini fiunt religiosa severitate prohibendo atque plectendo.
Id. ep. ad Bonifac.
How do Kings serve the Lord in fear, unless by prohibiting and punishing with
a Religious severity such things as are done against Gods Commands? Quomodo
ergo Reges Domino serviunt in timore, nisi ea quae contra jussa Domini fiunt,
Religiosa severitate prohibendo atque plectendo. Id. Ep. ad Bonifac.
For they serve God otherwise [qua homines] as men, and another way [qua Reges]
as Kings; As men [vivendo fideliter] by living uprightly, but as Kings [leges
justa praecipientes and contraria prohibentes convenienti rigore sanciendo] by
establishing Laws with a convenient rigor which command righteous things, Thus
Josiah made all Israel to serve the Lord their God. 2 Chronicles. 34.33.
and forbid the contrary. In this they serve God as Kings [cum ea faciunt ad
serve end^m illi, quae non possunt facere nisi reges] when they do those things
in order to the serving of him, which they cannot do but as Kings, which none
else can do but Kings. To this purpose was that Injunction to the King of
Israel. That he should write a copy of the Law in a book out of that before the
Priests the Levites, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19.
and it shall be with him (says the Sacred Text) and he shall read therein all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and keep all
the words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them. And at the inauguration
of Joash, 2 Chronicles. 23.11.
the Book of the Testimony was given unto him; as an intimation that he was to
be [custos utriusque Tabulae] an observer of both Tables; and that not only
himself, but to see them observed by others, and, if not, vindex to punish
them. And that we may not think this charge of Religion peculiar to those Kings
of Israel, it is promised to the Church of the New Testament also, That Kings
shall be her nursing Fathers, Isa. 49.23 60 16.
and Queens her nursing Mothers, and that she should suck the breasts of Kings.
And besides this a supply of Arguments might be drawn from the largeness of
their Commission specified in the New Testament it self. Where they are called
The Ministers of God, Romans 13.
and the Ministers of God for good, and revengers to execute wrath upon
evildoers indefinitely; and Prayers are required to be put up for Kings and
all in Authority, 1 Timothy 2.2.
that we may under them lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. But

4. It seems to deserve some special observation, that Kings as such are
properly enough to be called Christ's Vicars, deriving from, and holding under
him their Kingly Power. Prove. 8.15.
By me, says he) Kings Reign, and he is elsewhere styled, The King of Kings,
Rev. 17.14.19.16. chapter 1.5.
and Lord of Lords, and Prince of the Kings of the Earth. And so they are to be
looked upon, not only as the Ministers of Divine Providence in the general, for
the good of humane Societies; but Christ's Vicars also in the external
Government and Administration of his Church. The Kings of Israel were Types of
Christ to come, and Christian Kings now are and ought to be as his Vice gerents
and deputies in his Kingdom, to exercise that coercive power which he prohibits
the Officers of his Church as such to execute. Our Blessed Lord and Savior
indeed in the state of his Humility on earth, did not much exert his Kingly
Authority by using of outward force in matters appertaining to God's Religious
Worship and Service; and yet two notable instances we have, wherein he has set
a copy to be transcribed by others, St. John 2. St. Mat. 21.
both of them upon the occasion of his finding in the Temple those that sold
Oxen, Sheep, and Doves, and the changes of money sitting: He made, says the
Text, a scourge of small cords, and drove them out of the Temple, etc. -- And,
This we find he did when he came as King riding on an Ass, the multitudes
crying Hosanna to the Son of David.

Christ the Head of all Principality and Power, to whom all power is given in
Heaven and Earth, has some things in his Kingdom reserved peculiar to himself;
but yet in others he uses certain Ministers and Deputies.

The Actions in the administration of the Kingdom of Christ which he reserves
as peculiar to himself, to his own management, are such, De imperio sum.
p^test, c. 4. sect. 5.
as Grotius calls Terminales, referring to the beginning and ending, the
entrance and conclusion of his administration: such, as concern the beginning
and entrance, are the giving of Laws to his Church under hope of eternal
reward, or under pain of eternal damnation, and the constituting of a Ministry
unto himself: and thus is he the only Lawgiver, (as I had occasion to intimate
toward the end of the first part of the discourse precedent) That which
concerns the end is a definitive Jurisdiction at the last day, the final
sentence of Absolution and Condemnation, in which respect he is the only Judge
of all, and as he alone has done the former, so will he do the other himself
alone in his own person without a Substitute or Vicegerent. But then,

There are other Actions of Christ's Kingdom, called by Grotius, Mediae, of a
middle nature, coming between these two terms (i. e. between the beginning and
ending of Christ's regal Administration) and these partly concern the inward,
and partly the outward man. Christ acts in the inward man by the secret
motions of his Spirit, in subserviency unto which yet he uses the Ministry of
men in order to the ends of Illumination, Conversion, strength against
Temptations, the forgiving and retaining sins. -- In reference to which those
Ministers of his produce not acts of the same kind with the Spirit it self,
but acts subservient only unto his. But then the actions that concern the
outward man consist in defending, delivering, adorning, and ordering of the
Church; and herein he uses not only the Ministry, but the Vicar-ship of Kings
and Magistrates, as being capable in this matter to produce acts congeneal to
his own. These outward acts now belong to his providence over his Church; and
as the universal Providence of God, which is of it self sufficient for the
managing all things, yet for the manifestation of a manifold wisdom uses the
higer Powers on earth as Vice-royes to preserve and order the common Society of
men, from whence they are called Gods: so also the special Providence of Christ
which watches over his Church, not only makes use of, and implies the Ministry
of Angels for the good of the Heirs of Salvation, but takes also the Ministers
of God's more general Providence in the world into part of this care, as his
Vicars, having once submitted to his Scepter; and by them governs and orders
his Church, who are called likewise after his name (...), Christ's the Anointed
of God.

Christianity then is so far from taking away the power of the chief Magistrate
in the matters of Religion, which has been proved necessary to the obtaining
of the ends of Government, that it highly establishes it, and gives the
Magistrate both a stronger obligation, and a greater capacity to discharge his
duty therein. (1.) A stronger obligation being now to esteem himself not only
the Minister of God's ordinary Providence, but a Substitute of Christ in the
external ordering and ruling of his Church. And (2.) a greater capacity,
because it acquaints him more clearly with the rules of God's will and pleasure
which he is to see observed.

More, I think, need not be said for the evincing, That Kings have certainly a
Power in the matters of Religion, in the ordering and governing the external
Administrations of the Church. A power of reforming what is amiss. A power of
adding outward penalties the better to enforce an observation of the Divine
Commands. And A power of ordering and appointing the outward circumstances of
God's Worship (undetermined by God) as may be most decent, and comely, and
beneficial to the unity, and peace, and edification of Church and State.

Lastly, I add, That no Ecclesiastical Person whatsoever has an exemption from
the King's Tribunal, or from being ordered and governed by him in the external
Administrations of his Office and Function. It has been observed that some
Church men are of that make and temper [Vt, ni pareant, territent] That unless
they obey, they may terrify and affright; and the multitude, as Curtius once
said, [Vana religione capta, melius vatibus quam ducibus paret] being blinded
with a vain Religion, obey their admired Prophets better than their Captains
and Leaders: and therefore it is good reason that Princes for their own
security should have an eye even over these, and a hand long enough to reach
them. Romans 13.
Let every soul, says the Apostle, be subject to the higher Powers. St.
Chrisostom's Commentary upon it is, That the Command reaches not only to
seculars, but to Priests and Monks also; yea, says he, Be thou an Apostle, be
thou an Evangelist, be thou a Prophet, or whatsoever thou art. And Aeneas
Sylvius could once say, [Nec animam Papae excipit] Neither does St. Paul except
the soul of the Pope; though when himself was afterward made Pope under the
name of Pius the second, he seemed to recant it. [ Quod Aeneas probavit, Pius
damnavit.]

Our learned King James in his Declaratio projure Regio, against Cardinal
Perron, well observes, p. 65.
That this general command, by which all Christians are equally obliged, is yet
directed by St. Paul, especially to the Church of Rome, as if he had foreseen
and would have premonished -- [Illa in urbe seditionum fontem erupturum, ibi
nascituram belluam quae civili obedient^ae nervos corroderet] that in that City
the fountain of Seditions would burst forth, and there the Beast be born which
should gnaw asunder the sinews of Civil obedience. What Samuel said of Saul
belonged to other Kings of Israel as well as he -- Wast thou not made the Head
of the Tribes of Israel? 1 Samuel 15.17.
and the Lord anointed thee King over Israel. -- King over Israel, and Head of
the tribes of Israel are all one. Now we read that those tribes had their
several Heads; but Saul was the head of those Heads, as well as of the rest of
the tribes of Israel: and certainly Levi's tribe was not exempted. Moses the
first Supreme Governor of the Jews was to be a God to Aaron the High Priest,
and the whole ordering of their Religion was subject to him; and I might lead
you through the series of Scripture History to exemplify the same in other
Kings, and then annex a particular reply to the exceptions wont to be made in
these matters; but that would swell my Discourse into too great a bulk. All I
shall now say farther is to borrow Saint Bernard's arguing upon the Apostles
Universal, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers. [Si omnis and
vestra] so says he in an Epistle written to an Archbishop, Bernard. ep. ad
Archiepisc. Senonensem.
If every soul then yours. [Quis enim vos excipit ab universitate?] For who can
except you from every one? [Si quis tentat excipere, conatur decipere] If any
one attempt to make an exception, he does endeavor to deceive.

To conclude, here is the Scheme of that orderly subordination appointed and
approved by God.

1. God and Christ above all. 2. Under God and Christ the King. 3. Under the
King.
1. The whole series of Civil Powers deriving all their Authority from him. And

2. The Ecclesiastical Order, deriving indeed their Spiritual Powers and
Functions from Christ himself, yet for order sake subjected to the King's
Government in all their external administrations, and owing all their Temporal
Privileges unto the Kings Laws as the proper Fountain of them.

I will end this subject with a memorable saying of Marcus Aurelius the
Emperor, [Magistratus de privatis; principes de Magistratibus; Deum autem de
principibus decernere ac judicare] Magistrates are to judge of private persons,
Princes of Magistrates, and God of Princes. Wherewith agrees that of Horace,
[Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.


A few words now.

II.
Secondly, Of the Obedience due from Subjects, and I have done what I intended.

The prime Due unto Authority is active Obedience to its commands, doing what
is required, and forbearing what is prohibited; for therefore are things
commanded that they may be performed, and therefore forbidden that they may be
forborne: and therefore is punishment threatened to urge persons either to do or
forbear as the Laws require. Laws then are not properly fulfilled by submitting
to the punishment annexed, for that is only the due reward of neglect and
disobedience; and therefore supposes them under sin and guilt for
transgression.

Now this active Obedience must be in every thing not plainly forbidden by God,
[In omnibus licitis and honestis] in all things lawful and honest. The Supreme
Authority having none above it but God, can have none else to prescribe and set
bounds to its Decrees; and consequently whatever it enjoins without any
^position or contradiction to the Divine Laws is to be obeyed and performed by
all within the compass of its Dominion. To exemplify this somewhat more
particularly, I consider, that Authority does either

1. Command what God commands, and forbid what God forbids. Or,

2. Command and forbid what God neither commands nor forbids. Or,

3. What it is doubtful whether God commands or forbids. Or,

4. What is evidently contrary unto that which God commands or forbids. And it
is this last only which can excuse our non-Obedience, as I shall now
demonstrate.

If the Supreme Authority commands what God has before commanded, and forbids
what God has forbidden, we are beyond question obliged actively to obey, We
cannot disobey it without disobeying God; yea there is an obligation added to
that wherewith God had before obliged us. There is a double Cord as it were
binding us fast unto obedience; First the Authority of God, and under him the
Authority of the King. Such matters as these are the Scripture styles
[Praecepta Regis ex verbo Dei] the Commandments of the King by the word of the
Lord. 2 Chronicles. 29.15.30.12.
And St. Austin has thus resolved the case, Et apud homines poenas luit, and
apud Deum sortem non habebi:, qui hoc facere n^luit, quod ei per cor Regis ipsa
veritas jussit. Ep. 166.
That he shall both suffer punishment among men, and have no part with God in
bliss, who refuses to do that which truth it self by the heart of the King
has commanded him.

2. If Authority command where God has neither commanded nor forbidden, we are
likewise bound to an active obedience; for what is neither commanded nor
forbidden by God, is to us left indifferent, not necessary in it self to be
done, because not commanded by God, and yet lawful to be done, not sinful if
done, because not forbidden by God, and therefore we may do it if we will; and
what we may do if we will in the use of our private judgment and prudence, we
not only may but must, i. e. ought to do if Authority require it. An eminent
instance of this obedience we have in the Rechabites obeying the command of
their Father Jonadab, See Jer. 35. chapter
in not drinking wine throughout their generations, whose practice is commended
and rewarded by God himself, and urged upon the Jews as an instance of
obedience worthy to upbraid them with and by. Things indeed of this kind (i.
e. neither commanded nor forbidden by God) are the most proper subject for
humane Authority to display it self about, by inducing an obligation where none
was before. Nor can there be any thing pleaded for our non-obedience, but the
obstinacy of our own wills.

3. If Authority commands what it is doubtful to us whether or no God has
forbidden, or forbid what it is doubtful to us whether or no God have
commanded, so long as we have only doubts and scruples in the case, we are
still actively to obey; for in doubtful cases there are Arguments pro and con
equally pressing on both sides, the Scales hang as it were in aequilibrio, and
therefore (as I find it handsomely phrased) if the weight of Authority will
not turn the scales, either the Authority is made very light of, or there is
some fault in the beam. A twofold rule there is, whereby the best of Casuists
have resolved this matter. (1.) That in doubtful things the safest part is to
be chosen. In dubiis pars tutior eligenda est.
Now here it is safer for us to obey Authority then not. For the thing is
certainly commanded by God's Deputy that has Authority over us, but it is
uncertain that God has forbidden it (for so all doubtful cases are uncertain)
and thus by disobeying Authority we run into a certain sin of disobeying God in
his Deputies, to avoid an uncertain sin against God immediately. Obedience
therefore is the most safe and certain side. In dubiis melior est conditio
possidentis.
(2.) That in doubtful cases possession is a good plea; and therefore in case
of Controversy between the Lawmakers and the Subject concerning the
warrantableness of what is enjoined, it is always to be presumed the Lawmakers
is in the right, being in the actual possession of Authority, Vnusquisque
praesumitur bonus, donec constet de contrario.
and so his commands to pass for lawful till the contrary plainly appear; but
where the case is doubtful there is nothing to counterpoize his Authority. That
word of God which commands obedience in the most general and express terms to
Principalities and Powers, does warrant our obedience in all particulars not
forbidden by the same word; and therefore it concerns men to take heed how they
prefer a conjectural conceit or surmise of obeying God rather then men, See Dr.
Jacbsen on the Creed. l. 2. c. 5.
before a greater probability of obeying God by obeying men commissioned and
authorized from God. In case indeed our Disobedience to Authority redounded
only to men, and not to God, the least probability or suspicion of disobeying
God should make us refuse obedience; but in as much as the powers over us are
ordained by God, and God has commanded us to be subject to them for conscience
sake, since they are God's Ministers and Vicegerents, our Disobedience unto
them will prove disobedience unto God himself: and therefore Obedience must not
be denied to such, but upon those great, weighty, and well examined reasons as
will secure us from the damnation threatened to the disobedient.

He that actively obeys Authority in those matters, of the lawfulness of which
he yet doubts, cannot be said to act against Conscience; for in doubtful
matters to do is no more against his Conscience then not to do. What is to a
man doubtful is no more against his Conscience then with it.

Nor does he yet prefer man's command before God's, but only chooses to obey a
more certain and manifest command of God before an uncertain and dubious.

True indeed, While the man hangs in an equal doubt, he ought not to determine
himself on either hand, there is no reason on the one side more then on the
other; but the command of a Superior is a sufficient reason to remove or
overruled the doubt, which was before in the matter: so that after it the man
ought no longer to doubt.

Here therefore it will not boot any to allege that of the Apostle, Romans 14.23.
He that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of Faith; for
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. The Apostle speaks of one that is not
satisfied about the abrogation of those Laws of God which made a difference
between meats clean and unclean, or which forbad the eating of things offered
to Idols under the guilt of Idolatry. This is St. Paul's doubter, and of such
an one he says, If he eat when he doubts that God has forbidden him, he is
damned; because he eats not of Faith: i. e. he ventures upon an act which he
knows not but he shall sin grievously in the doing of: for whatsoever a man
does without this Faith, i. e. without this persuasion of the lawfulness of it
(as has been showed in the first part of the foregoing discourse) it is sin
unto him. The case he speaks of was very weighty. On the one hand there was the
supposal of the Law of God forbidding to eat, and on the other hand nothing to
weigh against it; for no Authority had here interposed in the case. And
therefore for him to venture on the breach of a certain command of God, as he
fears, without any other warrant then the gratisying of his appetite, or
complying with others cannot be other then a sin. For to venture upon what we
know not to be lawful is to declare a willingness to admit of what is unlawful,
to adventure on a sin. When therefore it is determined, that if there be only a
doubt of the matter, the command or law of Authority should be actively obeyed,
the meaning is, that Authority is a sufficient reason to move us first to lay
down the doubt, to doubt no longer, and then to betake our selves to obedience;
and thus we keep to our rule; we are persuaded of the lawfulness of what we do
in these circumstances.

He that will state the case aright, when the Powers require what he doubts
of, Must weigh the plain command of God to obey his Superior in all lawful
matters, the virtue and goodness of obedience, and the evil and scandal of
disobedience impartially in the scale against the single doubt he retains on
the other hand: and if he do thus with a few grains of modesty and humility,
and distrust of his own private judgment in reverence unto that of public
Authority, there is little question but he will soon be persuaded to an active
obedience. But many there be in our age who say, They dare not do this or that
which Authority injoyns, because they doubt whether it be pleasing unto God or
no: but they never put the question on the other hand, "How am I assured but my
disobedience unto Authority in this matter is my sin, and certainly displeasing
unto God? How am I assured that the motives upon which I proceed will warrant
my disobedience? Is it as certain to me that God has forbidden the thing
commanded as I am sure he has commanded me to obey in every thing lawful? and
if it be not so certain, how can I acquit my self in choosing the weaker more
uncertain, and so unsafer side? There are, it is true, some Scripture
expressions that I sometimes fancy to favor me, but many wise and godly men
are of opinion, another meaning may be in them then I have supposed; how
therefore can I justify my immodesty and rashness in leaning to my own
understanding, but upon very weighty and pressing motives? Few there are that
reason thus on the behalf of Authority, and its injunctions against their
private doubts and scruples, but spend rather their whole time and zeal in
strengthening their prejudices, doubts, and scruples against that Authority
which ought to overruled them.

I will shut up this point with the words of two Reverend Authors, their very
enemies being judges, It is in the general more safe, Bishop Sanderson, de
consc. prael. 6. page 229.
says one of them, for a person to judge himself obliged to obedience where he
is not, then to judge himself not obliged where he is: For seeing, says he,
that men through the innate pravity of their heart more often sin by too much
boldness then by too much fear; and we are all more ready then we should to
give liberty to the flesh, and shake off every yoke, Unless we shall beforehand
set down this firm resolution of mind that we ought to obey those Laws which
are not evidently unjust: the wisdom of the flesh backed with the subtlety of
the Serpent will be apt to suggest those excuses to us which may often hinder
us herein from doing our duty. And

Bishop Usher, Obed. of Subj. p. 138, 139.
Men of sound judgment, says the other, have always been of the mind, that
the Authority of such as God has placed over us should be esteemed so
inviolable, that unless the thing by them commanded did certainly and evidently
appear to be unlawful, we ought to yield obedience thereto, and not to suspend
or defer the doing thereof upon every idle scruple that may come into our
heads, much less do otherwise then we are commanded, because we imagine we have
better reason to lead us otherwise. But then,

Acts 4.19 5 29. Ipsos humanarum rerum gradus adverte. Si aliquid jusserit
curator, faciendum: non tamen si contra proconsul jubeat aut si consul aliquid
jubeat and aliud imperator. Non utique contemnis potestatem, sed eligis majori
servire; nec hinc debet minor irasci, si major praelatus est. St. Aug. de
verbis Domini S^rm. 6. Valde perversum est profiteri te obedientem, in quo
nosceris superiorem propter inferiorem, id est, divinam propter humanam solvere
obedientiam. Epist. 7.
4. If after due caution and impartial examidation of the case the Laws of
Authority shall appear evidently to be cross and contrary to the Laws of God,
opposite to his commands and prohibitions, it is our duty here, as the Apostles
speak, rather to obey God then men. And this is manifest from the consideration
of the subordination of all power^ unto God. God only is absolutely supreme,
and all else are ordained by him, hold of, and under him. Now therefore as in
the powers of humane Society the greater is still preferred before the less,
the Supreme before the Subordinate; so must God above all and against all: and
as St. Bernard says excellently, It Is a strange perverseness for any one to
profess himself obedient in that wherein he is know to dissolve a superior for
an inferior, that is, a divine for an humane obedience. -- We ought not
therefore to obey any power commanding us to believe or do what God has
forbidden us, or forbidding us to believe and do what God has commanded us;
for we are all of us first obliged to God for our being and preservation, as
his creatures, and devoted unto God in a solemn Vow and Covenant as Christians.
God's power is greater over us, and his interest greater in us; and our
dependence more upon God, and our engagements first and more unto him. Tu
carcerem, illo Gehennam minatur. S. Aug.
Our obedience unto him is necessary and indispensable; and his punishment for
disobedience is most dreadfully formidable. Much more might be spoken to this
effect, namely, to declare, that the commands of any Authority, which are
plainly opposite unto God's, cannot challenge an active obedience from us.

But then we must remember that there is another kind of obedience, which
Divines usually call passive, becomes our duty. Where we cannot (...) obey
actively without sin, Titus 3.1.
we must yet (...), that is, keep the rank and order of good Subjects under the
Principalities aad Powers appointed over us; we may not oppose, (...).
resist, or rebel; but in all cases either do what is commanded us, or
patiently undergo what penalties are inflicted on us. And it is the patience
proper to our Christian calling, wherein we are to tread in the steps of the
Blessed Jesus, See 1 St. Pet. c. 2.
Thus to suffer even in and for well doing, committing our selves and our cases
unto God, who judges righteously. -- Now the reasonableness of this passive
subjection is apparent, (...), etc. Grot. in Mat. 26. c. ver. 52.
because without it there can be no end of Controversies, Contentions, and
Injuries. Somewhere we must needs stop [ Ne effraeni licentia detur locus] We
must reverence some, as unaccountable to any but God himself; whose errors and
miscarriages therefore are to be reserved unto God's Judgment only, unless we
will open a door to an infinity of wickedness, to all manner of licentiousness.
For if once it be permitted unto Subjects to revenge their conceived injuries
upon Authority [ Omnia erunt tumultu plena. Nulla legum, nulla judiciorum
Authoritas.] All places will be filled with tumult, nor will there be any
Authority left to Laws or Judgments; because the grieved person, he against
whom the determination at any time proceeds, will steer some other course, and
attempt by Arms and violence to assert and vindicate his cause. We must
therefore sit down satisfied with the old resolution (...), Euripid*
quietly to suffer the mistakes and follies of our Rulers, having indeed no
power to redress them without a farther inconvenience, without implunging our
selves in the Devils Circle, an endless round of confusion, whilst we profess
our selves subject unto Authority, and yet at the same time subject that
Authority to our selves.

THE END.

