ARTICLES TO BE Enquired of in the DIOCESE of NORWICH In the First Visitation,
OF THE Right Reverend Father in GOD; Edward LORD BISHOP of NORWICH.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for G. T. 1662.

The Tenor of the Oath, to be tendered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOU shall, upon due consideration of these Articles given you in Charge,
diligently Enquire, and true Presentment make of such defaults and offenses
against the same, as are Enquirable by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Land: So
help you God.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry within the Diocese OF NORWICH.
Concerning Churches or Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture belonging to
them.
I. IS ^o^r Parish Church or Chapel with the Chancel thereof, the Steeple, or
Tower, the (...), (...), Pavements, (...)dows, Seats, and all (...) (...) in
good and sufficient Re^a^r, as ^ecometh the (...) (...) cafed to Gods Public
Worship.

II. IS there a Font of Stone standing in the ancient usual place for the
Administration of Baptism?

III. IS there a comely Table conveniently placed for the Administration of the
Lords Supper with a Carpet of Silk, or other decent stuff to cover it in time
of divine Service, and a fa^^ ^^nnen Cloth to spread on it at the time of
Administration? What Cup, Chalice, Pa^^en, or Fl^gons, have you belonging to
that service?

IV. HAVE you a convenient Seat for the Minister to read divine service in? and
a comely Pulpit with a fair Cu^hion or Pulpit-Cloth see^ly kept for the
Preaching of Gods. (...) (...) you (...) Bible of the largest Uolume, and of
the last Tra^^^ation, with the Book of Common Prayer (...) estab^^hed, the
B(...)s of Ho(...)lies allowed by Authority, and the Book of Canons o^
Constitutions Ecclestastical? And have you the works of Bishop Jewel, in
defense of the Church of England, and a printed Table of the Deg^^^^, wherein
by Law men are prohibited to marry?

V. HAVE (...) (...) b^^k of (...), wherein to set down the names and sir-names
of all that are Baptized, Married, and Buried within your Parish? Is there a
Book wherein to keep the Churchwardens Accounts? and another book, wherein to
enter the name of any stranger t^^t preache^^ in your Parish, and of the Bishop
that gave (...) a Li^^^se to pr^^ch?

VI. HAVE you a large Surplice for the use of the Minister in his public
Administrations?

VII. HAVE you a Box wherein to keep the Alms for the poor? and have you a
strong Chest with locks and keys, wherein may be safely kept the plate,
vessels, books, carpets, vestmen^s belonging to the Church? and have you a Bier
with a Herse-cloth for the decent burial of the dead?

C^^cer^^ng the Ch^^c^-ya^^, H^use^, ^leb^, and Tithes belongi^^ to the Church.
I. IS ^om: ^^urch-^^rd ^^fficie^^ly fe^^ed and main^ained with Walls, Railes,
or Pales as has been accustomed, and so as it may be kept from all Annoyance?
Has any person encroached upon the same? Have any Trees there growing been cut
down, by whom, and for what use?

II. (...) (...) belonging to your Minister kept in good and sufficient repair?
Have any encroached upon the Gardens, Orchards, ^or ^^^ses belonging to the
same? or cut up any trees growing thereon? Are there any other Houses belonging
to the Church; and are they likewise kept in good repair?

III. ARE there any ^lede-la^^^ belonging to y^^r Parso^^ge or Uicar^^ge, and
have you a (...) and (...) ^e^r^er kept of the sa^^? and a C^^y thereof
delivered (...) the (...) Register? And have ^ou a ^^te of such Pensions,
Rate-Tythes, and portions of Tithes as (...) (...) thereunto? Are any of these
taken away, or withheld from your Minister? or has the ^ust value of your
Parsonage or Uicaridge by any undue means been diminished?

IV. IS there any Hospital, Al^^s-House or (...) School (being not of the Kings
foundation) in your Parish? and are they and their G^dowments preserved and
employed to their right use?

Concerning Ministers.
I. HAS your Minister been freely presented, and legally instituted, and (...)
into his (...) Did he within two months after his In^^^tion rea^ upon so^^
Sunday or Holy Day publicly in the Church in the time of divine Service, the
thirty nine Articles of Religion, and declare his Assent thereunto?

II. IS your Minister constantly Resident upon his Bene^^ce? or has he any
other Benefice or Dignity, and is he qualified to hold the same? How many weeks
in a year has he been Absent without urgent necessity?

III. HAS your Minister a Curate to assist hi^? and is he a Man of able parts,
and of a pious and discreet conversation, and allowed by the Bishop to serve in
your Church?

V. IS your Minister a person of a Godly, sober, and peaceable conversation?
Does he so frame his own Life, and the Lives of such as are of his Family, that
he and they may be Examples to the Flock of Christ? Or on the contrary, is he a
frequenter of Taverns and Alehouses, a common Gamester, a profane or obscene
person, a Swearer, Curser, Blasphemer, Railer, Scoffer, Quarreller, Fomenter of
Suits, and contention, among Neighbors, an ordinary Companion of Drunkards and
Riotous persons in such their wicked Courses: a Resorter unto suspected and
infamous Houses? Is his carriage and course of Life in any kind scandalous, and
such as becomes not a Minister of Jesus Christ? Does he exercise himself in
any such secular Employments, or sordid Labor, as is unbe^^tting the Duty and
Dignity of his Office? Is he grave and comely in his Hair and Apparel? and
does he in all his behavior, so carry himself, as that he may adorn the
Gospel, whereof he is a Minister?

V. DOES he with all diligence attend upon his Ministry, and discharge all the
duties belonging thereunto? Does he read the public Prayers, Psalms and
Lessons out of the Old and New Testament, and other parts of divine service,
and celebrate every divine Office, in such form, manner, and habit as is
prescribed?

VI. DOES he rightly and duly administer the holy Sacraments, of Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord? Does he take care that Godfathers and Godmothers
present Infants unto Baptism, and undertake for them? and does he being
thereunto desired baptize Infants at home in case of weakness or danger. Does
he frequently, or at the least thrice every year whereof Easter to be one,
administer the Lords Supper? and does he give warning thereof the Lords day
before at Morning-prayer, and exhort the people duly to prepare for the same?
Is he careful not to admit thereunto any strangers, or any that live in any
atrocious or grievous Crime, or in open Malice and Hatred, to the offense and
scandal of the Church; and does he, having upon ^ust Reasons not admitted them,
give within a fortnight notice thereof unto the Bishop? or does he admit any
before they have been first Catechized and instructed in the Principles of
Religion, ^^d are able to give an account of the same, and before they have
been Confirmed, and are ready and desirous to be Confirmed?

VII. DOES he give notice of Holydays, and of the Ember-we^ks, that the people
may ve minded to pray for such as are to be solemnly called to the work of the
Ministry? Does he give notice of the yearly Perambulation in Rogation w^^k for
preserving the Bounds of the Parish, and for desiring Gods blessing upon the
fruits of the Earth? Does he observe the 5th. of November, the 30th. of
January, and the 29th. of May?

VIII. IS he a Licensed Preacher? Does he, if not hindered by some necessary
Impediment, constantly Preach in your Church every Lords day, or being hi^^r^d,
does he take care that it be done by another? and does he diligently instruct
children and servants, (...) Ignorant persons of the Parish in the principles
of Religion, contained in the Creed, ten Commandments Lords prayer, and
doctrine of the Sacraments, according to the Church-catechism, that so they may
be brought to understand and take upon Themselves their Baptismal Covenant, and
be Confirmed and admitted Communicants? Does he in his Sermons preach only
sound and wholesome doctrine, tending to Peace, Holiness, and Edi^^cation;
consonant to the Holy (...)ord of God, and the doctrine contained in the
Articles of the Church of England? And does he four times in the year teach the
doctrine of the Kings Supremacy, and put the people in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates; or does he at any time
preach any false, Heretical, seditious, dangerous doctrine, tending to public
disturbance, and to alienate the Hearts of the people from their Loyalty and
obedience?

IX. DOES he endeavor to reclaim Popi^h Recusants, or any other Persons of
corrupt Judgments, from such their Errors to the acknowledgement of the Truth?

X. HAS he celebrated Matrimony between any persons (without faculty granted
by such as have Authority to grant it) except the Banes of Matrimony have been
first published three several Sundays or Holy Days in the time of divine
Service, in the Parish Churches or Chapels where the said parties dwell? or
does he Marry Persons, though Licensed, at any unseason^ble times, and not
between the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoon? Or, does he Marry them
in any private place, and not in the Church or Chapel? Or does he, after the
banes are thrice asked, Marry any under the age of one and twenty years before
the Parents or Governors of the said Parties have either person^lly, or by
sufficient testimony, signified their consent to the said marriage?

XI. DOES he, when any Persons are dangerously sick, having notice thereof,
resort unto them to pray with them, to instruct, to comfort, to exhort them to
faith, repentance, brotherly love, and works of charity?

XII. DOES herefuse, having had convenient warning given him, to bury any
Corpse that is brought to the Church or Churchyard, the dead Person being such
as is not denied Christian burial?

XIII. DOES he and the Churchwardens cause the names of all that have been
baptized, married, and buried, to be entered into the Register, Book, and a
transcript from thence yearly sent into the Bishop's Office? If not, you are to
send in such transcripts for the several years past as have not been hitherto
sent in.

XIV. HAVE you a weekly Lecture in your Parish? is it preached by the Parson or
Uicar himself, or by a combination of neighbour-Ministers? or by one single
Lecturer? if so, is he in holy Orders, of good learning, of a godly and
peaceable life? is he Licensed to preach your Lecture, and does he therein
behave himself as by the Laws and Constitutions of this Church is required?

Concerning Parishioners.
I. ARE there any in your Parish that come not to the Public Assemblies and
services of the Church, or that make profession of any other then the true
Reformed Religion which is professed and established in the Church of England,
or do any ways reproach the same Religion, or seduce others from it?

II. HAVE you any in your Parish that oppugn or gainsay his Majesty's
Supremacy over all persons, and in all causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, within
any of hi^ Dominions?

III. DO any in your Parish profane the Lords day by working in their ordinary
callings, by loytring, tippling, or any other unlawful practices? and do they
observe all the holy days appointed by the Church, according to the orders of
the Church prescribed in that behalf? Or, do any Uintners, Innekeepers, or any
other Uictuallers or sellers of B^^r or Ale; suffer any persons to tipple and
game in their houses upon those days in the time of divine service?

IV. DO all in your Parish resorting unto your Church or Chapel, upon every
Lords day, and holy day appointed for divine service, in their carriage and
gesture there behave themselves with such reverence, order, decency and
attention, during the time of common Prayer, preaching, and other service of
God there used, as the nature of such holy duties, and the order of the Church
does require; none neglecting or disturbing the public service by sleeping,
talking, walking, laughing, removing, going out, or any other profane, rude and
offensive behaviors? or do any interrupt the Minister in any of his
Administrations?

V. ARE there any in your Parish that keep their Infant-children unbaptised or
are there any persons of riper years in your Parish unbaptised?

VI. DO all Governors of Families instruct their children and servants in the
Catechism, and send them to the Minister to give an account thereof openly in
the Church upon the Lords days and holy days, as is appointed?

VII. DO all Communicants thrice at the least every year, whereof Easter to be
one, in that meek and reverent manner which is required, partake of the Lords
Supper: and do such signify their names, and purpose to communicate unto the
Minister, at least the day before the celebration of the said holy Sacrament?

VIII. DO any persons that are open and notorious evil doers, who live in
malice and hatred, with whom for such their wickedness the Congregation is
justly offended, presume to come to the Lords Table, not having first declared
their repentance that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied?

IX. DO all Communicants pay their Easter dues to your Minister, and do they
pay all other Rates assessed upon them for relief of the poor, repairs of the
Church, and providing all things required of them to provide in order to divine
Offices?

X. ARE there any in your Parish that have married within the forbidden degrees
of affinity or consanguinity (Have any been clancularly married in private
houses? Do any lawfully married and not separated by due course of Law, yet
live asunder, and not co-habit together? Do married women after they have been
safely delivered, come in due time to the Church to offer thanksgiving unto God
for so great a mercy, and pay their accustomed duties?

XI. ARE such as dye in your Parish decently buried according to the order of
this Church?

XII. ARE there any Wills or Testaments of persons-dead in your Parish that be
not yet proved, or are any goods administered without a due grant from the
Ordinary? Have any left Legacies to pious uses in your Parish, and how are
those Legacies bestowed?

XIII. ARE there in your Parish any that are common swearers, or blasphemers of
Gods holy Name, drunkards, adulterers, fornicators, concealers or harbourers of
fornicators and adulterers, incestuous persons, railers, unclean and filthy
talkers, sowers of sedition, faction, and discord amongst their Neighbors? and
who are they?

XIV. IS there any person in your Parish, who having the gift of any
Ecclestastical Benefice, has made gain thereof by presenting a Clerk or
Minister to it by any bargain or symoniacal compact? or is suspected thereof?

Concerning Parish Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAVE you a Parish Clerk chosen by your Minister, Aged twenty years at the
least, of honest conversation, and sufficient for the executing of his place by
skill in reading, writing, and singing?

II. DOES he diligently attend the Minister in all divine services at the
Church, and are the ancient wages belonging unto him duly paid without fraud or
diminution? Does he or the Sexton (if you have any) keep your Church or Chapel
clean, and free from all annoyance, in due time ring or Toll the Bells before
the beginning of divine Service; open and lock the Church-doors, and carefully
preserve all the things belonging unto the Church, that are committed unto his
custody?

Concerning Schoolmasters.
I. Have you any Public or Private School in your Parish, is your
Schoolmaster of sober, honest, and religious conversation? And is he allowed
by the Bishop or his Chancellor? does he instruct his Scholars in the
Church-catechism, and take care to train them up, not only in Learning, but in
Religion, and in the Fear of God, framing their manners unto Modesty and
Virtue? Does he upon holy and Festival days cause his Scholars orderly to
repair to your Church or Chapel, and there to behave themselves attenti^ely
and reverently, during the whole time of service and Sermon? and does he
enquire after their proficiency in the things which they have there learned, by
examining them at convenient times what they have remembered of such Sermons?

Concerning Physicians, Chirurgions and Midwives.
I. DO any practice Physic or Surgery in your Parish without due License;
Or does any woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife there,
without approbation and License from the Ordinary?

Concerning Churchwardens.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish, chosen every year in Easter week by
the joint consent of the Minister and Parishioners, or one by the Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners? And are Sidemen likewise chosen by the Minister
and Parishioners;

II. HAVE the last Churchwardens within a month after the end of their year
given before the Minister and Parishioners a just account of the moneys they
have received, and what they have expended for reparations and other uses of
the Church? And have they truly delivered up to the Parishioners whatsoever
money or other things are of right belonging to the Church or Parish?

YOU the Churchwardens and sidemen are to take diligent care to see the
Parishioners duly resort on the Lords days and holy days to their Church, and
there continue the whole time of Public Worship in due attendance thereupon;
You are not to suffer any to Walk, or Talk, or play, or stand Idle, or any way
to behave themselves unseemly in the Church, Church Porch, or Churchyard,
during the time of the public Worship to the disturbance and offense of the
Congregation: if any so do, you are to present them; as also all such as at any
time Strike, Quarrel or Brawle in the Church or Churchyard.

Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
HAVE any Ecclesiastical Judge or Officer any Advocate, Register, Procter,
Clerk, Apari^or, or Summoner, any way offended in their Offices, Ministeries,
or Services, contrary to the Laws and Canons Ecclesiastical in that behalf
provided.

FINIS.

