ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQVIRY Concerning Matters Ecclesiastical,
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within
the Arch-deaconry of Gloucester, In the VISITATION OF THE ARCHDEACON.

London Printed, 1665.

The Form of the Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen of
every Parish.
YOU shall Swear, That you will faithfully present to all the Articles given
you in charge at this VISITATION, according to your best knowledge and ability.
So help you God.

Articles of Visitation within the Arch-deaconry of GLOUCESTER.
SECT. 1. Concerning MINISTERS.
I. IS your Parsonage or Vicaridge void of a Minister or Curate? II. IS your
Minister a Priest, or Deacon ordained by a Bishop? III. HAS your Minister
subscribed and declared publicly his unfeigned assent and consent to all
things contained and prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, according to the
Act of Uniformity in the words there set down? IV. IS your Minister constantly
resident upon his Cure? V. IF your Minister has a Curate to assist him, is the
said Curate in Holy Orders? and is he Licensed by the Bishop of the Diocese?
VI. DOES your Minister and Curate when either of them do Officiate, read the
whole Common Prayer distinctly and reverently, appointed to be read on all
Sundays and Holy Days, at Morning and Evening Service: and does he observe the
Orders, Rites and Ceremonies prescribed in that Book of Common Prayer, in all
Administrations of the Holy Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of
Women after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and
pronouncing of Gods commination against Sinners? Does he read the Letany
without addition, diminution or alteration of the same, or in any part of
Divine Service prescribed in the foresaid Book? VII. DOES your Minister give
notice of the Sacrament, and read the Exhortation prescribed to be read on the
Sunday before the day he shall appoint to administer the Sacrament, as it is
appointed by the Book of Common Prayer? and does he admit to the Sacrament any
person, that does not kneel? VIII. DOES your Minister or Curate wear a
Surplice, and being a Graduate, wear a Hood agreeable to his degree in the
celebration of Divine Offices in the Church, or Chapel? IX. DOES your Minister
preach one Sermon every Sunday, or read an Homily? X DOES your Minister four
times in the year at least declare the Kings Majesty's power within his Realms
to be the highest power under God, to whom all people within the same, owe
obedience? XI. HAS your Minister preached any False, Heretical, or Seditious
Doctrine? XII. HAS your Minister married any persons in private houses, or any
being under the age of twenty one years without the consent of Parents: or
without Banes first duly published on three Sundays or Holy days in the
Church, unless he had a sufficient License or Dispensation so to do? XIII. DOES
your Minister upon every Sunday and Holyday for some good space before Evening
Prayer hear the Youth and ignorant persons of your parish repeat the Catechism
set down in the Book of Common Prayer, and after the second Lesson, instruct
them, and expound to them some part of the same Catechism? does he labor to
reduce Recusants and Sectaries to the Church? XIV. DOES he Baptize any person
without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit any to be Godfathers and
Godmothers, who cannot give an account of their Christian Religion according to
the Church Catechism? XV. DOES any Minister preach in your parish as a Lecturer
without License from the Bishop? and does he before his Lecture read Divine
Service according to the Book of Common Prayer? and is he conformable to the
Laws and Orders of the Church? XVI. DOES your Minister, or other Lay-person
hold any Conventicles, or private Meetings in any Houses, or other places in
your parish? XVII. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer a man of a sober,
honest and exemplary life? Is he vehemently suspected, or guilty of any
scandalous Vice? Is he contentious and ready to set neighbors at variance, and
to encourage suits and contentions?
SECT. 2. Concerning Churches and Chapels with the Ornaments thereto
belonging, and also Church yards.
I. IS your Parish Church, or Chapel and Chancell kept in sufficient repair,
well covered and roofed, and all things in it, and about it so decently ordered
as becomes the house of God? Are your Steeple and Bells in such order as they
ought to be? Is no part of your Church or Chapel, converted to profane Uses?
II. HAVE you a Font of Stone with a convenient cover thereto, standing in a
convenient place in the lower part of the Church for the Administration of
Baptism? III. IS there in your Chancel a decent Communion Table covered with a
Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine Woollen Cloth in time of Divine Service, and
another covering of fine white Linen to spread on it at the administration of
the Sacrament? and have you a Plate or Paten, and a fair Communion Cupp or
Chalice, with a Cover of Silver, or one or more Flaggons of Silver, or Pewter,
set apart for that purpose? and are they used by any to any other common use?
IV. HAVE you in your Church or Chapel a convenient Pew and Desk for your
Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit with a comely Cloth and Cushion
for the same? A Bible of the last Translation in a large Volume well bound?
Have you two Books of Common Prayer of the latest Edition set forth by
Authority of this present Parliament? Have you the Books and Forms of Divine
Service set forth for the Fifth of November, the Thirtieth of January, and the
Twenty ninth of May? Have you also the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority?
Have you a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical? Have you a Printed
Table of the Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, wherein Marriage is
prohibited and void in Law, hang*d in a convenient place in your Church? V.
HAVE you a fair large Surplice, which is to be provided and washed at the
charge of the Parish, and which your Minister is to use and wear in the time of
Divine Service, and Administration of the Sacraments? VI HAVE you a Register
Book of Parchment? and are therein Registered the Names and Sirnames of all such
persons that are Married, Christened or Buried within your Parish, together with
the Names and Sirnames of both the Parents of the Children so Christened? Are
therein expressed the Day, Month and Year of all such Marriages, Christnings
and Burials? and is the Copy thereof written in parchment within one Month
after the (...) fifth of March yearly brought into the Bishops Registry? VII
H^VE you another Book of paper to write down the Church (...) accounts, and the
names and Licenses of strangers as are admitted to preach in your Parish Church
or Chapel? VIII. HAVE you a strong Chest with Locks and Keys wherein to keep
the foresaid Books, with all other Vtensils and Furniture of your Church in
safe custody? And have you a convenient Bier for the Burial of the Dead? IX.
IS your Churchyard set apart for Burial of the Dead, sufficiently mounded and
fenced with Walls, Rails, or Pales, and decently kept from Annoyance of Swine,
and other Cattle? and are your Dead buried there, or within the Church?
SETC. 3. Concerning the Houses, Gleabs and Tithes belonging to Churches and
Ministers.
I. IS the House of your Parson, or Vicar, with all Outhouses belonging to it
kept in sufficient reparation? or has any part thereof been pulled down by any
private person? Has any man encroached upon any Garden, Orchard, Yard, Close
belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarige, cut any Trees growing thereon? II.
HAVE you a true Terrier of all the Glebe Lands, Gardens, Orchards or Tenements
belonging to your Parsonage, or Vicarige? and is this Terrier kept in your
common Chest, and a copy of it delivered into the Bishops Registry? III. HAVE
any of the ancient Glebe Lands belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarige been
taken away, or exchanged for others without the free consent and license of the
Ordinary? if so, declare, when, and by whom; as also what Tithes, Rates,
portions of Tithes, Pensions, or yearly profits are detained from your
Minister.
SECT. 4. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there in your Parish any person known or reputed to be an Heretic or
Schismatic? Any Papish, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary, that
refuse to come to Divine Service established in the Church of England? Is there
any that impugn the kings Supremay in Causes Ecclesiastical, or the Book of
Common Prayer? II. IS there in your Parish any that lies under a feign or
vehement suspicion of Adultery, Incest, or Fornication? Any that harbor such
incontinent persons? Are there any common Drunkards, common Swearers, any
Blasphemers of Gods Word, or his holy Name? Any Deboist persons? any Sowers of
Rebellion, Sedition, Faction and Discord among Neighbors within your parish?
III. HAVE you any in your parish that profane and mispend the Lords Day by
opening their Shops, trading, buying or selling? Do any Vintners, Victuallers,
Alehouse-keepers suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses on that
Day? Declare the names of the Offenders herein. IV. DO all the persons of your
parish, having no lawful impediment, duly resort to your Church or Chapel
upon Sundays and Holy days? Do they there abide quietly with Reverence, Order
and Decency during all the time of Divine Service? Or is there any in your
parish that forbear to partake of the Common Prayer? present the names of the
faulty. V. DOES every person coming to Church reverently uncover his head, and
so continue all the time of Divine Service; kneel at the receiving the
Communion, and at prayers; stand up at the Creed, and when the Gospel is read?
VI. ARE there any in your parish, that refuse or wilfully neglect to send their
Infant-children to be baptized in the Church, unless in case of necessity or
urgent danger? or do they send them to be baptized in other parishes, or after
other form then is appointed? Or are there any Infants, or more aged persons in
your parish Unbaptized? VII. ARE there any in your parish, that on Sundays, or
Holy Days do not send their children and servants to the Church to be
Catechized by the Minister? VIII. ARE there any in your parish who being
fifteen years of age, and well instructed and prepared, do not receive the
Lords Supper frequently kneeling from the hand of the Minister? Or is there any
that repair for it to other parishes? Or do any of other parishes, forsaking
their own Church, repair to yours for that end? IX. ARE there any in your
parish that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by due course
of Law, do not dwell together as Man and Wife ought? X. ARE there any married
Women in your parish, who after their delivery from the peril of Childbirth,
refuse to make their public Thanksgiving in the Church? and when they repair
to Church so to do, do they then, and there offer their accustomed Offerings?
XI. ARE there any in your parish, that refuse to pay their Easter-offerings to
the Minister? or that refuse to pay the rate assessed upon them for the repair
of your Church or Chapel, or for Bread and Wine used in the Holy Communion?
or for such Books, Ornaments and Vtensils, as are requisite for the performance
of Divine Offices there? XII. Do any of your parish refuse to bury their Dead
according to the Form and Order of the Church of England? XIII. ARE there any
Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your parish concealed, or not yet
proved? or my goods of persons dying Intestate administered without due grant
from the Ordinary? XIV. DID any dying in your parish or elsewhere leave any
Legacy to your Church, or to the poor, or to any other pious and charitable
use? Declare what those Legacies were, and how they have been bestowed, or in
whose hands they are detained? XV. DO you know any persons that have presumed
to brawle, fight, quarrel, or strike one the other in your Church, Chapel, or
Churchyard? if such, present their Names.
SECT. 5. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Church wardens of your parish yearly and duly chosen by the consent
of your Minister and Parishioners? or one of them by your Minister, and the
other by the Parishioners, in defect of their joint consent? II. HAVE the
former and last Churchwardens given up their just accounts to the parish, and
delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens, the moneys remaining in their
hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chapel?
III. DO you against every Communion provide a sufficient quantity of fine white
Bread, and of good Wine, according to the advice and direction given you by
your Minister for the number of Communicants?
SECT. 6. Concerning Parish Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAVE you a sufficient Parish Clerk, that can perform his duty in Reading,
and Answering, and Singing? and does attend in all Divine Services? and is his
wages duly paid him? II. DOES he or the Sexton, (if you have one) diligently
lock and open your Church doors at due times? Does he keep your Church or
Chapel clean? Does he toll and ring the Bells at the accustomed hours before
Divine Service?
SECT. 7. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, and Schoolmasters.
I. IS there any Hospital, School, or Almshouse founded in your Parish? if so,
who was the Founder, and what is the yearly Revenue? and whether is the yearly
Stipend paid to the Schoolmaster? II. DOES any man keep a public or private
School in your Parish? Is he licensed and allowed thereto by the Bishop or
Chancellor: Is your Schoolmaster of sound Religion, and good Life? Does he
teach his Scholars the Catechism set forth in the Common Prayer Book? Does he
cause his Scholars upon Sundays and Holidays orderly to repair to your
Church or Chapel? and see that they behave themselves quietly, and reverently
all the time of Divine Service and Sermon?
FINIS.

