CONSTITUTIONS AND Canons Ecclesiastical, TREATED UPON By the BISHOP of LONDON,
President of the CONVOCATION FOR THE Province of CANTERBURY, AND The rest of
the Bishops and Clergy of the said Province: AND Agreed upon with the King's
Majesty's License in their Synod begun at London Anno Domini, 1603.

And in the Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord JAMES, by the Grace of God
King of England, France, and Ireland the First, and of Scotland the Thirty
seventh:

AND Now Published for the due Observation of them, by His Majesty's Authority,
UNDER THE Great Seal of England.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Mearne, Stationer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, and Robert Pawlet, 1678.

JAMES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas our Bishops, Deans of our Cathedral Churches, Archdeacons, Chapters and
Colleges, and the other Clergy of every Diocese within the Province of
Canterbury, being summoned and called by Virtue of our Writ directed to the
most Reverend Father in God, John, late Archbishop of Canterbury, and bearing
Date the 31. Day of January, in the First Year of Our Reign of England, France
and Ireland, and of Scotland the 37. to have appeared before him in our
Cathedral Church of St. Paul in London, the 20. Day of March then next ensuing,
or elsewhere, as he should have thought it most convenient, to treat, consent,
and conclude upon certain difficult and urgent Affairs mentioned in the said
Writ, Did thereupon at the time appointed, and within the Cathedral Church of
St. Paul aforesaid, assemble themselves, and appear in Convocation for that
purpose, according to Our said Writ, before the Right Reverend Father in God,
Richard, Bishop of London, duly (upon a second Writ of Ours dated the 9. Day of
March aforesaid) authorized, appointed and constituted, by reason of the said
Archbishop of Canterbury his Death, President of the said Convocation, to
execute those things which by Virtue of Our first Writ did appertain to him the
said Archbishop to have executed if he had lived: We, for diverse urgent and
weighty Causes and Considerations Us thereunto especially moving, of Our
especial Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, did by Virtue of our
Prerogative Royal, and Supreme Authority in Causes Ecclsieastical, give and
grant by Our several Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of England, the one
dated the 12. Day of April last past, and the other the 25. Day of June then
next following, full, free and lawful Liberty, License, Power and Authority
unto the said Bishop of London, President of the said Convocation, and to the
other Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Chapters and Colleges, and the rest of the
Clergy before mentioned of the said Province, That they from time to time
during Our first Parliament now Prorogued, might confer, treat, debate,
consider, consult and agree of, and upon such Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions, as they should think necessary, fit and convenient for the
Honor and Service of Almighty God, the good and quiet of the Church, and the
better Government thereof, to be from time to time observed, performed,
fulfilled, and kept as well by the Archbishops of Canterbury, the Bishops and
their Successors, and the rest of the whole Clergy of the said Province of
Canterbury in their several Callings, Offices, Functions, Ministeries, Degrees
and Administrations, as also by all and every Dean of the Arches, and other
Judge of the said Archbishop's Courts, Guardians of Spiritualties, Chancellors,
Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, Registers, and all
and every other Ecclesiastical Officers, and their inferior Ministers
whatsoever, of the same Province of Canterbury, in their and every of their
distinct Courts, and in the order and manner of their and every of their
Proceedings: and by all other Persons within this Realm, as far as lawfully,
being Members of the Church, it may concern them, as in our said Letters
Patents amongst other Clauses more at large does appear. Forasmuch as the
Bishop of London, President of the said Convocation, and others the said
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Chapters and Colleges, with the rest of the
Clergy, having met together at the time and place before mentioned, and then
and there by Virtue of Our said Authority granted unto them, treated of,
concluded, and agreed upon certain Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions, to the end and purpose by Us limited and prescribed unto them,
and have thereupon offered and presented the same unto Us, most humbly desiring
Us to give Our Royal Assent unto their said Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions, according to the Form of a certain Statute or Act of Parliament
made in that behalf, in the 25. Year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and
by Our said Prerogative Royal and Supreme Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical,
to ratify by Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of England, and to
confirm the same; the Title and Tenor of them being word for word, as ensues.

Constitutions and Canons ECCLESIASTICAL, Treated upon by the Bishop of London,
President of the Convocation for the Province of Canterbury, and the rest of
the Bishops and Clergy of the said Province; and agreed upon with the King's
Majesty's License in their Synod begun at London, Anno Dom. 1603. And in the
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord JAMES by the Grace of God, King of
England, France, and Ireland the First, and of Scotland the Thirty seventh.
Of the Church of ENGLAND.
I. The King's Supremacy over the Church of England, in Causes Ecclesiastical,
to be maintained.
AS our Duty to the King's most Excellent Majesty requires, We first decree
and ordain, That the Archbishop of Canterbury (from time to time) all Bishops
of this Province, all Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, and all other
Ecclesiastical Persons, shall faithfully keep and observe, and (as much as in
them lies) shall cause to be observed and kept of others, all and singular
Laws and Statutes made for restoring to the Crown of this Kingdom, the Ancient
Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical, and abolishing of all Foreign Power
repugnant to the same. Furthermore, all Ecclesiastical Persons having Cure of
Souls, and all other Preachers, and Readers of Divinity Lectures, shall to the
uttermost of their Wit, Knowledge and Learning, purely and sincerely (without
any color or dissimulation) teach, manifest, open, and declare four times
every Year (at the least) in their Sermons and other Collations and Lectures,
That all usurped and Foreign Power, (forasmuch as the same has no
Establishment, nor ground by the Law of God) is for most just Causes taken away
and abolished: and that therefore no manner of Obedience, or Subjection within
His Majesty's Realms and Dominions, is due unto any such Foreign Power: but
that the King's Power within His Realms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and
all other His Dominions and Countries, is the Highest Power under God, to whom
all men, as well Inhabitants, as born within the same, do by God's Laws owe
most Loyalty and Obedience, before and above all other Powers and Potentates in
Earth.

II. Impugners of the King's Supremacy, censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the King's Majesty has not the same
Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings had amongst the Jews,
and Christian Emperors of the Primitive Church, or impeach any part of His
Regal Supremacy in the said Causes restored to the Crown, and by the Laws of
this Realm therein established: Let him be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not
restored, but only by the Archbishop, after his Repentance and Public
Revocation of those his wicked Errors.

III. The Church of England, a true and Apostolical Church.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Church of England by Law
established under the King's Majesty, is not a true and an Apostolical Church,
teaching and maintaining the Doctrine of the Apostles: Let him be
Excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but only by the Archbishop, after
his Repentance and Public Revocation of this his wicked Error.

IV. Impugners of the Public Worship of God established in the Church of
England, censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affim, That the Form of God's Worship in the Church
of England, established by Law, and contained in the Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, is a corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful Worship
of God, or contains any thing in it that is repugnant to the Scriptures: Let
him be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but by the Bishop of the
Place, or Archbishop, after his Repentance and Public Revocation of such his
wicked Errors.

V. Impugners of the Articles of Religion established in the Church of England,
censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, That any of the Nine and thirty Articles
agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole
Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, in the Year of our Lord God, One
thousand five hundred sixty two, for avoiding diversities of Opinions, and for
the establishing of Consent touching true Religion, are in any part
superstitious or erroneous, or such as he may not with a good Conscience
subscribe unto: Let him be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but
only by the Archbishop, after his Repentance and public Revocation of such his
wicked Errors.

VI. Impugners of the Rites and Ceremonies established in the Church of
England, censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
of England by Law established, are wicked, Antichristian, or superstitious, or
such as being commanded by lawful Authority, men who are zealously and godly
affected, may not with any good Conscience approve them, use them, or as
occasion requires, subscribe unto them: Let him be Excommunicated ipso facto,
and not restored until he repent, and publicly revoke such his wicked Errors.

VII. Impugners of the Government of the Church of England by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Government of the Church of England
under His Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the rest
that bear Office in the same, is Antichristian, or repugnant to the Word of
God: Let him be Excommunicated ipso facto, and so continue until he repent, and
publicly revoke such his wicked Errors.

VIII. Impugners of the Form of consecrating and ordering Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. in the Church of England, censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm or teach, That the Form and manner of making
and consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons, contains any thing in it, that
is repugnant to the Word of God; or that they who are made Bishops, Priests or
Deacons in that Form, are not lawfully made, nor ought to be accounted either
by themselves or others; to be truly either Bishops, Priests or Deacons, until
they have some other calling to those Divine Offices: Let him be Excommunicated
ipso facto, not to be restored until he repent, and publicly revoke such his
wicked Errors.

IX. Authors of Schism in the Church of England, censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter separate themselves from the Communion of Saints, as
it is approved by the Apostles Rules in the Church of England, and combine
themselves together in a new Brotherhood, accompting the Christians who are
conformable to the Doctrine, Government, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, to be profane and unmeet for them to join with in Christian
Profession: Let them be Excommunicated ipso facto; and not restored, but by the
Archbishop, after their Repentance and Public Revocation of such their wicked
Errors.

X. Maintainers of Schismatics in the Church of England, censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, That such Ministers as refuse to subscribe
to the Form and manner of God's Worship in the Church of England, prescribed in
the Communion Book, and their Adherents, may truly take unto them the Name of
another Church not established by Law, and dare presume to publish it, That
this their pretended Church has of long time groaned under the Burden of
certain Grievances imposed upon it, and upon the Members thereof before
mentioned, by the Church of England, and the Orders and Constitutions therein
by Law established: Let them be Excommunicated, and not restored until they
repent, and pulickly revoke such their wicked Errors.

XI. Maintainers of Conventicles, censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm or maintain, That there are within this Realm
other Meetings, Assemblies or Congregations, of the King's born Subjects, than
such as by the Laws of this Land are held and allowed, which may rightly
challenge to themselves the Name of True and Lawful Churches: Let him be
Excommunicated, and not restored, but by the Archbishop, after his Repentance,
and Public Revocation of such his wicked Errors.

XII. Maintainers of Constitutions made in Conventicles, censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, That it is lawful for any sort of Ministers
and Lay-persons, or of either of them, to join together, and make Rules,
Orders, or Constitutions in Causes Ecclesiastical, without the King's
Authority, and shall submit themselves to be ruled and governed by them: Let
them be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not be restored until they repent, and
publicly revoke those their wicked and Anabaptistical Errors.

Of Divine Service, and Administration of the SACRAMENTS.
XIII. Due Celebration of Sundays and Holy Days.
ALL manner of Persons within the Church of England, shall from henceforth
celebrate and keep the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday, and other Holy Days,
according to God's Holy Will and Pleasure, and the Orders of the Church of
England, prescribed in that behalf; that is, in hearing the Word of God read
and taught, in private and public Prayers; in acknowledging their Offenses to
God, and amendment of the same, in reconciling themselves charitably to their
Neighbors, where displeasure has been, in oftentimes receiving the Communion
of the Body and Blood of Christ, in visiting of the poor and Sick, using all
godly and sober Conversation.

XIV. The prescript Form of Divine Service to be used on Sundays and Holy Days.
THE Common Prayer shall be said or sung distinctly and reverently upon such
days as are appointed to be kept holy by the Book of Common Prayer, and their
Eves, and at convenient and usual times of those days, and in such place of
every Church as the Bishop of the Doicess, or Ecclesiastical Ordinary of the
Place shall think meet for the largeness or straitness of the same, so as the
People may be most edified. All Ministers likewise shall observe the Orders,
Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, as well in
reading the holy Scriptures, and saying of Prayers, as in Administration of the
Sacraments, without either diminishing in regard of preaching, or in any other
respect, or adding any thing in the matter or form thereof.

XV. The Letany to be read on Wednesdays and Fridays.
THE Letany shall be said or sung when, and as it is set down in the Book of
Common Prayer, by the Parsons, Vicars, Ministers, or Curats, in all Cathedral,
Collegiate, Parish Churches and Chapels, in some convenient Place, according to
the discretion of the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ecclesiastical Ordinary of the
Place. And that we may speak more particularly, upon Wednesdays and Fridays
weekly, though they be not Holydays, the Minister at the accustomed hours of
Service, shall resort to the Church and Chapel, and warning being given to the
People by tolling of a Bell, shall say the Letany prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer: whereunto we wish every Householder dwelling within half a mile
of the Church, to come or send one at the least of his Household fit to join
with the Minister in Prayers.

XVI. Colleges to use the Prescript Form of Divine Service.
IN the whole Divine Service, and Administration of the holy Communion, in all
Colleges and Halls in both Universities, the Order, Form and Ceremonies, shall
be duly observed, as they are set down and prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer, without any Omission or Alteration.

XVII. Students in Colleges to wear Surplices in time of Divine Service.
ALL Masters and Fellows of Colleges or Halls, and all the Scholars and
Students in either of the Universities, shall in their Churches and Chapels
upon all Sundays, Holydays, and their Eves, at the time of Divine Service, wear
Surplices according to the Order of the Church of England: and such as are
Graduats, shall agreeably wear with their Surplices such Hoods as do severally
appertain unto their Degrees.

XVIII. A Reverence and Attention to be used within the Church in time of
Divine Service.
IN the time of Divine Service, and of every part thereof, all due Reverence is
to be used, for it is according to the Apostle's Rule, Let all things be done
decently, and according to order: Answerable to which Decency and Order, we
judge these our Directions following; No man shall cover his Head in the Church
or Chapel in the time of Divine Service, except he have some Infirmity; in
which case, let him wear a Nightcap or Coif. All manner of Persons then
present, shall reverently kneel upon their knees when the general Confession,
Letany, and other Prayers are read; and shall stand up at the saying of the
Belief, according to the Rules in that behalf prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer: And likewise when in time of Divine Service the Lord Jesus shall
be mentioned, due and lowly Reverence shall be done by all Persons present, as
it has been accustomed; testifying by these Outward Ceremonies and Gestures,
their inward Humility, Christian Resolution, and due acknowledgement, that the
Lord Jesus Christ, the true Eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of the
World, in whom alone all the Mercies, Graces and Promises of God to Mankind,
for this Life and the Life to come, are fully and wholly comprised. None,
either Man, Woman or Child, of what calling soever, shall be otherwise at such
times busied in the Church, than in quiet attendance to hear, mark and
understand that which is Read, Preached or Ministered; saying in their due
places audibly with the Minister, the Confession, the Lord's Prayer and the
Creed; and making such other Answers to the Public Prayers, as are appointed
in the Book of Common Prayer: Neither shall they disturb the Service or Sermon
by walking or talking, or any other way, nor depart out of the Church during
the time of Service or Sermon, without some urgent or reasonable cause.

XIX. Loyterers not to be suffered near the Church in time of Divine Service.
THE Churchwardens or Quest-men, and their Assistants, shall not suffer any
idle Persons to abide either in the Churchyard or Church Porch, during the
time of Divine Service or Preaching; but shall cause them either to come in, or
to depart.

XX. Bread and Wine to be provided against every Communion.
THE Churchwardens of every Parish against the time of every Communion, shall
at the charge of the Parish, with the advice and direction of the Minister,
provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good and wholesome
Wine for the number of Communicants that shall from time to time receive there:
which Wine we require to be brought to the Communion Table in a clean and sweet
standing Pot, or Stoop of Pewter, if not of purer Metal.

XXI. The Communion to be thrice A Year received.
IN every Parish Church and Chapel where Sacraments are to be administered
within this Realm, the holy Communion shall be ministered by the Parson, Vicar,
or Minister, so often, and at such times as every Parishioner may Communicate,
at the least thrice in the Year (whereof the Feast of Easter to be one)
according as they are appointed by the Book of Common Prayer. Provided, That
every Minister as often as he administreth the Communion, shall first receive
that Sacrament himself. Furthermore, no Bread or Wine newly brought shall be
used; but first the Words of Institution shall be rehearsed when the said Bread
and Wine be present upon the Communion Table. Likewise the Minister shall
deliver both the Bread and the Wine to every Communicant severally.

XXII. Warning to be given beforehand for the Communion.
Whereas every Lay Person is bound to receive the holy Communion thrice every
Year, and many notwithstanding do not receive that Sacrament once in a year: We
do require every Minister to give warning to his Parishioners publicly in the
Church at Morning Prayer, the Sunday before every time of his administering that
holy Sacrament, for their better preparation of themselves: Which said warning
we enjoin the said Parishioners to accept and obey, under the penalty and
danger of the Law.

XXIII. Students in Colleges to receive the Communion four times A Year.
IN all Colleges and Halls within both the Universities, the Masters and
Fellows, such especially as have any Pupils, shall be careful that all their
said Pupils, and the rest that remain amongst them, be well brought up, and
thoroughly instructed in Points of Religion, and that they do diligently
frequent Public Service, and Sermons, and receive the holy Communion; which we
ordain to be administered in all such Colleges and Halls, the first and second
Sunday of every Month, requiring all the said Masters, Fellows, and Scholars,
and all the rest of the Students, Officers, and all other the Servants there so
to be ordered, that every one of them shall communicate four times in the Year
at the least, kneeling reverently and decently upon their Knees, according to
the Order of the Communion Book prescribed in that behalf.

XXIV. Copes to be worn in Cathedral Churches by those that Administer the
Communion.
IN all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, the holy Communion shall be
administered upon principal Feast-days, sometimes by the Bishop, if he be
present, and sometimes by the Dean, and at some times by a Canon, or
Prebendary, the principal Minister using a decent Cope, and being assisted with
the Gospeller and Epistler agreeably, according to the Advertisements published
Ann. 7 Elizabethae: The said Communion to be Administered at such times, and
with such limitation as is specified in the Book of Common Prayer. Provided,
that on such limitation by any construction shall be allowed of, but that all
Deans, Wardens, Masters, or Heads of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches,
Prebendaries, Canons, Vicars, Petty Canons, Singing-men, and all others of the
Foundation, shall receive the Communion four times yearly at the least.

XXV. Surplices and Hoods to be worn in Cathedral Churches when there is no
Communion.
IN the time o` Divine Service and Prayers in all Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, when there is no Communion, it shall be sufficient to wear Surplices:
saving that all Deans, Masters and Heads of Collegiate Churches, Canons and
Prebendaries being Graduats, shall daily at the times both of Prayer and
Preaching, wear with their Surplices such Hoods as are agreeable to their
Degrees.

XXVI. Notorious Offenders not to be admitted to the Communion.
NO Minister shall in any wise admit to the receiving of the holy Communion,
any of his Cure or Flock which be openly known to live in sin notorious without
Repentance, nor any who have maliciously and openly contended with their
Neighbors, until they shall be reconciled: Nor any Churchwardens or Sidemen,
who having taken their Oaths to present to their Ordinaries all such Public
Offenses as they are particularly charged to enquire of in their several
Parishes, shall (notwithstanding their said Oaths, and that their faithful
discharging of them is the chief means whereby public Sins and Offenses may be
reformed and punished) wittingly and willingly, desperately and irreligiously
incur the horrible Crime of Perjury, either in neglecting or in refusing to
present such of the said Enormities and Public Offenses, as they know
themselves to be committed in their said Parishes, or are notoriously offensive
to the Congregation there, although they be urged by some of their Neighbors,
or by their Minister, or by their Ordinary himself, to discharge their
Consciences by presenting of them, and not to incur so desperately the said
horrible Sin of Perjury.

XXVII. Schismatics not to be admitted to the Communion.
NO Minister when he celebrateth the Communion, shall wittingly administer the
same to any but to such as kneel, under pain of Suspension, nor under the like
pain to any that refuse to be present at Public Prayers, according to the
Orders of the Church of England, nor to any that are common and notorious
Depravers of the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments,
and of the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies therein prescribed, or of any thing
that is contained in any of the Articles agreed upon in the Convocation, One
thousand five hundred sixty and two, or of any thing contained in the Book of
ordering Priests and Bishops, or to any that have spoken against and depraved
His Majesty's Sovereign Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical; except every such
Person shall first acknowledge to the Minister before the Churchwardens, his
repentance for the same, and promise by word (if he cannot write) that he will
do so no more; and except (if he can write) he shall first do the same under
his Handwriting, to be delivered to the Minister, and by him sent to the
Bishop of the Diocese, or Ordinary of the Place. Provided, That every Minister
so repelling any (as is specified either in this or in the next precedent
Constitution) shall upon complaint, or being required by the Ordinary, signify
the cause thereof unto him, and therein obey his Order and Direction.

XXVIII. Strangers not to be admitted to the Communion.
THE Churchwardens or Quest-men, and their Assistants, shall mark as well as
the Minister, whether all and every of the Parishioners come so often every
Year to the holy Communion, as the Laws and our Constitutions do require: And
whether any Strangers come often and commonly from other Parishes to their
Church, and shall show their Minister of them, lest perhaps they be admitted to
the Lord's Table amongst others, which they shall forbid, and remit such home
to their own Parish Churches and Ministers, there to receive the Communion with
the rest of their own Neighbors.

XXIX. Fathers not to be Godfathers in Baptism, nor Children not Communicants.
NO Parent shall be urged to be present, nor be admitted to answer as Godfather
for his own Child: nor any Godfather or Godmother shall be suffered to make any
other Answer or Speech, than by the Book of Common Prayer is prescribed in that
behalf: Neither shall any Person be admitted Godfather or Godmother to any
Child at Christening or Confirmation, before the said Person so undertaking
has received the holy Communion.

XXX. The lawful use of the Cross in Baptism explained.
WE are sorry that His Majesty's most Princely care and pains taken in the
Conference at Hampton Court, amongst many other Points, touching this one of
the Cross in Baptism, has taken no better effect with many, but that still the
use of it in Baptism is so greatly stuck at and impugned. For the further
declaration therefore of the true use of this Ceremony, and for the removing of
all such scruple as might any ways trouble the Consciences of them who are
indeed rightly Religious, following the royal Steps of our most worthy King,
because he therein follows the Rules of the Scriptures, and the Practice of
the Primitive Church; we do commend to all the true Members of the Church of
England, these our Directions and Observations ensuing.

First, It is to be Observed, That although the Jews and Ethnicks derided both
the Apostles, and the rest of the Christians, for preaching and believing in
him who was crucified upon the Cross; yet all, both Apostles and Christians,
were so far from being discouraged from their Profession by the Ignominy of the
Cross, as they rather rejoiced and triumphed in it. Yea, the holy Ghost, by the
mouths of the Apostles, did honor the Name of the Cross (being hateful among
the Jews) so far, that under it he comprehended not only Christ crucified, but
the force, effects and merits of his Death and Passion, with all the Comforts,
Fruits and Promises which we receive or expect thereby.

Secondly, The honor and dignity of the Name of the Cross, begat a reverend
Estimation even in the Apostle's times, (for ought that is known to the
contrary) of the Sign of the Cross, which the Christians shortly after used in
all their Actions, thereby making an outward show and profession, even to the
Astonishment of the Jews, That they were not ashamed to acknowledge him for
their Lord and Savior, who died for them upon the Cross. And this Sign they
did not only use themselves with a kind of glory, when they met with any Jews,
but Signed therewith their Children when they were Christened, to dedicate them
by that badge to his Service, whose Benefits bestowed upon them in Baptism, the
name of the Cross did represent. And this use of the Sign of the Cross in
Baptism was held in the Primitive Church, as well by the Greeks as the Latins,
with one consent and great applause. At what time, if any had opposed
themselves against it, they would certainly have been censured as Enemies of
the Name of the Cross, and consequently of Christ's Merits, the Sign whereof
they could no better endure. This continual and general use of the Sign of the
Cross, is evident by many Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers.

Thirdly, It must be confessed, that in process of Time the Sign of the Cross
was greatly abused in the Church of Rome, especially after that corruption of
Popery had once possessed it. But the abuse of a thing does not take away the
lawful use of it. Nay, so far was it from the purpose of the Church of England
to forsake and reject the Churches of Italy, France, Spain, Germany, or any
such like Churches, in all things which they held and practiced, that, as the
Apology of the Church of England confesses, it does with reverence retain
those Ceremoni^s which do neither endamage the Church of God, nor offend the
minds of sober men: and only departed from them in those particular Points,
wherein they were fallen both from themselves in their Ancient Integrity, and
from the Apostolical Churches which were their first Founders. In which
respect, amongst some other very Ancient Ceremonies, the Sign of the Cross in
Baptism has been retained in this Church, both by the Judgment and Practice of
those reverend Fathers and great Divines in the Days of King Edward the Sixth,
of whom some constantly suffered for the Profession of the Truth; and others
being exiled in the time of Queen Mary, did after their return, in the
beginning of the Reign of our late Dread Sovereign, continually defend and use
the same. This Resolution and Practice of our Church has been allowed and
approved by the censure upon the Communion Book, in King Edward the Sixth his
Days, and by the Harmony of Confessions of later Years: because indeed the use
of this Sign in Baptism was ever accompanied here with such sufficient Cautions
and Exceptions against all Popish Superstition and Error, as in the like Cases
are either fit or convenient.

First, The Church of England since the abolishing of Popery has ever held and
taught, and so does hold and teach still, That the Sign of the Cross used in
Baptism, is no part of the Substance of that Sacrament: For when the Minister
dipping the Infant in Water, or laying Water upon the face of it, (as the
manner also is) has pronounced these Words, I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, the Infant is fully and
perfectly Baptized. So as the Sign of the Cross being afterward used, does
neither add any thing to the virtue and perfection of Baptism, nor being
omitted does detract any thing from the Effect and Substance of it.

Secondly, It is apparent in the Communion-Book, that the Infant Baptized is by
virtue of Baptism, before it be Signed with the Sign of the Cross, received
into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, as a perfect Member thereof, and not
by any power ascribed unto the Sign of the Cross. So that for the very
remembrance of the Cross, which is very precious to all them that rightly
believe in Jesu Christ, and in the other respects mentioned, the Church of
England has retained still the Sign of it in Baptism: following therein the
Primitive and Apostolical Churches, and accounting it a lawful outward Ceremony
and honorable Badge, whereby the Infant is dedicated to the Service of him
that died upon the Cross, as by the Words used in the Book of Common Prayer, it
may appear.

Lastly, The use of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, being thus purged from
all Popish Superstition and Error, and reduced in the Church of England to the
primary Institution of it, upon those true Rules of Doctrine concerning things
indifferent, which are consonant to the Word of God, and the Judgments of all
the Ancient Fathers, we hold it the part of every private man, both Minister
and other, reverently to retain the true use of it prescribed by Public
Authority considering that things of themselves indifferent, do in some sort
alter their Natures, when they are either commanded or forbidden by a lawful
Magistrate, and may not be omitted at every man's pleasure contrary to the Law,
when they be commanded, nor used when they are prohibited.

Ministers, their Ordination, Function and Charge.
XXXI. Four Solemn Times appointed for the making of Ministers.
FOrasmuch as the Ancient Fathers of the Church, led by Example of the
Apostles, appointed Prayers and Fasts to be used at the Solemn ordering of
Ministers; and to that purpose allotted certain times, in which only Sacred
Orders might be given or conferred: We, following their holy and religious
Example, do constitute and decree, That no Deacons or Ministers be made and
ordained, but only upon the Sundays immediately following Jejunia quatuor
temporum, commonly called Ember-weeks, appointed in Ancient time for Prayer and
Fasting, (purposely for this cause at their first Institution) and so continued
at this Day in the Church of England. And that this be done in the Cathedral or
Parish Church where the Bishop resideth, and in the time of Divine Service, in
the presence not only of the Archdeacon, but of the Dean and two Prebendaries
at the least, or (if they shall happen by any lawful cause to be let or
hindered) in the presence of four other grave Persons, being Masters of Arts at
the least, and allowed for Public Preachers.

XXXII. None to be made Deacon and Minister both in one Day.
THE Office of Deacon being a step or degree to the Ministry, according to the
Judgment of the Ancient Fathers, and the Practice of the Primitive Church; We
do ordain and appoint, That hereafter no Bishop shall make any Person, of what
qualities or gifts soever, a Deacon and a Minister both together upon one day;
but that the order in that behalf prescribed in the Book of making and
consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons, be strictly observed. Not that
always every Deacon should be kept from the Ministry for a whole Year, when
the Bishop shall find good cause to the contrary; but that there being now four
times appointed in every Year for the Ordination of Deacons and Ministers,
there may ever be some time of trial of their behavior in the Office of
Deacon, before they be admitted to the Order of Priesthood.

XXXIII. The Titles of such as are to be made Ministers.
IT has been long since provided by many Decrees of the Ancient Fathers, that
none should be admitted either Deacon or Priest, who had not first some certain
place where he might use his Function. According to which Examples we do
ordain, that henceforth no Person shall be admitted into Sacred Orders, except
he shall at that time exhibit to the Bishop of whom he desires Imposition of
hands, a Presentation of himself to some Ecclesiastical Preferment then void in
that Diocese: or shall bring to the said Bishop a true and undoubted
Certificate, that either he is provided of some Church within the said Diocese,
where he may attend the cure of Souls, or of some Ministers place vacant,
either in the Cathedral Church of that Diocese, or in some other Collegiate
Church therein also situate, where he may execute his Ministry: or that he is
a Fellow, or in right as a Fellow, or to be a Conduct or Chaplain in some
College in Cambridge or Oxford: or except he be a Master of Arts of five years
standing, that lives of his own Charge in either of the Universities: or
except by the Bishop himself, that does ordain him Minister, he be shortly
after to be admitted either to some Benefice or Curatship then void. And if any
Bishop shall admit any Person into the Ministry that has none of these
Titles, as is aforesaid, then he shall keep and maintain him with all things
necessary, till he do prefer him to some Ecclesiastical Living. And if the said
Bishop shall refuse so to do, he shall be suspended by the Archbishop, being
assisted with another Bishop, from giving of Orders by the space of a Year.

XXXIV. The Quality of such as are to be made Ministers.
NO Bishop shall henceforth admit any Person into Sacred Orders, which is not
of his own Diocese, except he be either of one of the Universities of this
Realm, or except he shall bring Letters Dimissory (so termed) from the Bishop
of whose Diocese he is, and desiring to be a Deacon, is three and twenty years
old, and to be a Priest, four and twenty years complete, and has taken some
Degree of School in either of the said Universities, or at the least, except he
be able to yield an account of his Faith in Latin, according to the Articles of
Religion approved in the Synod of the Bishops and Clergy of this Realm, One
thousand five hundred sixty and two, and to confirm the same by sufficient
Testimonies out of the holy Scriptures: and except moreover, he shall then
exhibit Letters Testimonial of his good Life and Conversation, under the Seal
of some College of Cambridge or Oxford, where before he remained, or of three
or four grave Ministers, together with the Subscription and Testimony of other
credible Persons, who have known his life and behavior by the space of three
years next before.

XXXV. The Examination of such as are to be made Ministers.
THE Bishop before he admit any Person to holy Orders, shall diligently examine
him in the presence of those Ministers that shall assist him at the Imposition
of hands: And if the said Bishop have any lawful impediment, he shall cause the
said Ministers carefully to examine every such Person so to be Ordered.
Provided that they who shall assist the Bishop in examining and laying on of
hands, shall be of his Cathedral Church, if they may conveniently be had, or
other sufficient Preachers of the same Diocese, to the number of three at the
least: And if any Bishop or Suffragan shall admit any to Sacred Orders, who is
not so qualified and examined, as before we have Ordained, the Archbishop of
his Province having notice thereof, and being assisted therein by one Bishop,
shall suspend the said Bishop or Suffragan so offending, from making either
Deacons or Priests for the space of two years.

XXXVI. Subscription required of such as are to be made Ministers.
NO Person shall hereafter be received into the Ministry, nor either by
Institution or Collation admitted to any Ecclesiastical Living, nor suffered to
Preach, to Catechize, or to be a Lecturer or Reader of Divinity in either
University, or in any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, City or Market Town,
Parish Church, Chapel, or in any other place within this Realm, except he be
Licensed either by the Archbishop, or by the Bishop of the Diocese, (where he
is to be placed) under their Hands and Seals, or by one of the two Universities
under their Seal likewise; and except he shall first subscribe to these three
Articles following, in such manner and sort as we have here appointed.

1. That the King's Majesty under God, is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other His Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things or Causes, as Temporal, and that no Foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual, within His Majesty's said Realms, Dominions and Countries.

2. That the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordering of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, contains in it nothing contrary to the Word of God, and that it may
lawfully so be used, and that he himself will use the Form in the said Book
prescribed in Public Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and none
other.

3. That he allows the Book of Articles of Religion agreed upon by the
Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London in the Year of our Lord God, One thousand five
hundred sixty and two: and that he acknowledges all and every the Articles
therein contained, being in number Nine and thirty, besides the Ratification,
to be agreeable to the Word Of God.

To these three Articles whosoever will subscribe, he shall for the avoiding of
all ambiguities, subscribe in this Order and Form of Words, setting down both
his Christian and Surname, viz. IN. N. do willingly and ex animo subscribe to
these three Articles abovementioned, and to all things that are contained in
them. And if any Bishop shall Ordain, Admit or License any, as is aforesaid,
Except he first have subscribed in manner and form as here we have appointed,
he shall be suspended from giving of Orders and Licenses to Preach for the
space of twelve Months. But if either of the Universities shall offend therein,
we leave them to the danger of the Law, and His Majesty's Censure.

XXXVII. Subscription before the Diocesan.
NOne Licensed, as is aforesaid, to Preach, Read Lecture, or Catechize, coming
to reside in any Diocese, shall be permitted there to Preach, Read Lecture,
Catechize or Minister the Sacraments, or to execute any other Ecclesiastical
Function, by what Authority soever he be thereunto admitted) unless he first
consent and subscribe to the three Articles before mentioned, in the presence
of the Bishop of the Diocese, wherein he is to Preach, Read Lecture, Catechize
or Administer the Sacraments, as aforesaid.

XXXVIII. Revolters after Subscription, censured.
IF any Minister, after he has once subscribed to the said three Articles,
shall omit to use the Form of Prayer, or any of the Orders or Ceremonies
prescribed in the Communion-Book, let him be suspended: and if after a Month he
do not reform and submit himself, let him be excommunicated: and then if he
shall not submit himself within the space of another Month, let him be deposed
from the Ministry.

XXXIX. Cautions for Institution of Ministers into Benefices.
NO Bishop shall institute any to a Benefice, who has been Ordained by any
other Bishop, except he first show unto him his Letters of Orders, and bring
him a sufficient Testimony of his former good Life and Behavior, if the Bishop
shall require it: and lastly, shall appear upon due Examination to be worthy of
his Ministry.

XL. An Oath against Simony at Institution into Benefices.
TO avoid the detestable sin of Simony, because buying and selling of Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Functions, Offices, Promotions, Dignities and Livings, is
execrable before God; therefore the ArchBishop, and all and every Bishop or
Bishops, or any other Person or Persons, having Authority to Admit, Institute,
Collate, Install, or to Confirm the Election of any Archbishop, Bishop, or
other Person or Persons to any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Function, Dignity,
Promotion, Title, Office, Jurisdiction, Place or Benefice, with Cure or without
Cure, or to any Ecclesiastical Living whatsoever, shall before every such
Admission, Institution, Collation, Installation or Confirmation of Election,
respectively minister to every Person hereafter to be Admitted, Instituted,
Collated, Installed or Confirmed in or to any Archbishopric, Bishopric, or
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Function, Dignity, Promotion, Title,
Jurisdiction, Place or Benefice with Cure or without Cure, or in or to any
Ecclesiastical Living whatsoever, this Oath in Manner and Form following, the
same to be taken by every one whom it concerns in his own Person, and not by
a Proctor: IN. N. do swear, That I have made no Simoniacal Payment, Contract or
Promise, directly or indirectly, by my self or by any other to my Knowledge or
with my Consent, to any Person or Persons whatsoever, for or concerning the
Procuring and Obtaining of this Ecclesiastical Dignity, Place, Preferment,
Office or Living, (respectively and particularly naming the same whereunto he
is to be Admitted, Instituted, Collated, Installed or Confirmed) nor will at
any time hereafter perform or satisfy any such kind of Payment, Contract or
Promise made by any other without my knowledge or consent: So help me God
through Jesus Christ.

XLI. Licenses for Plurality of Benefices limited, and Residence enjoined.
NO License or Dispensation for the keeping of more Benfices with Cure than
one, shall be granted to any, but such only as shall be thought very well
worthy for his Learning, and very well able and sufficient to discharge his
Duty, that is, who shall have taken the Degrce of a Master of Arts at the least
in one of the Universities of this Realm, and be a public and sufficient
Preacher Licensed. Provided always, That he be by a good and sufficient Caution
bound to make his personal Residence in each his said Benefices for some
reasonable time in every year: And that the said Benefices be not more than
thirty miles distant asunder: and lastly, that he have under him in the
Benefice where he does not reside, a Preacher lawfully allowed, that is able
sufficiently to teach and instruct the People.

XLII. Residence of Deans in their Churches.
EVery Dean, Master or Warden, or chief Governor of any Cathedral or
Collegiate Church, shall be resident in his said Cathedral or Collegiate Church
fourscore and ten days Conjunction or Divisim in every Year at the least, and
then shall continue there in Preaching the Word of God, and keeping good
Hospitality, except he shall be otherwise let with weighty and urgent Causes to
be approved by the Bishop of the Diocese, or in any other lawful sort dispensed
with. And when he is is present, He, with the rest of the Canons or
Prebendaries resident, shall take special Care, that the Statutes and laudable
Customs of their Church, (not being contrary to the Word of God, or Prerogative
Royal) The Statutes of this Realm being in force concerning Ecclesiastical
Order, and all other Constitutions now set forth and confirmed by his Majesty's
Authority, and such as shall be lawfully enjoined by the Bishop of the Diocese,
in his Visitation, according to the Statutes and Customs of the same Church, or
the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, be diligently observed, and that the
petty Canons, Vicars choral, and other Ministers of their Church, be urged to
the Study of the Holy Scriptures; and every one of them to have the New
Testament not only in English, but also in Latin.

XLIII. Deans and Prebendaries to Preach during their Residence.
THE Dean, Master, Warden or chief Governor, Prebendaries and Canons in every
Cathedral and Collegiate Church shall not only Preach there in their own
Persons so often as they are bound by Law, Statute, Ordinance or Custom, but
shall likewise Preach in other Churches of the same Diocese where they are
Resident, and especially in those Places whence they or their Church receive
any yearly Rents or Profits. And in case they themselves be sick, or lawfully
absent, they shall substitute such licensed Preachers to supply their turns, as
by the Bishop of the Diocese shall be thought meet to Preach in Cathedral
Churches. And if any otherwise neglect or omit to supply his Course, as is
aforesaid, the Offender shall be punished by the Bishop, or by him or them to
whom the Jurisdiction of that Church appertains, according to the Quality of
the Offense.

XLIV. Prebendaries to be resident upon their Benefices.
NO Prebendaries nor Canons in Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, having one or
more Benefices with Cure, (and not being Residentiaries in the same Cathedral
or Collegiate Churches) shall under color of their said Prebends, absent
themselves from their Benefices with Cure above the space of one Month in the
Year, unless it be for some urgent Cause, and certain time to be allowed by the
Bishop of the Diocese. And such of the said Canons and Prebendaries as by the
Ordinances of the Cathedral or Collegiate Churches do stand bound to be
Resident in the same, shall so among themselves sort and proportion the times
of the Year, concerning Residence to be kept in the said Churches, as that some
of them always shall be personally Resident there: and that all those who be,
or shall be Residentiaries in any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, shall after
the days of their Residency appointed by their local Statutes or Customs
expired, presently repair to their Benefices, or some one of them, or to some
other charge where the Law requires their Presence there to discharge their
Duties according to the Laws in that Case provided. And the Bishop of the
Diocese shall see the same to be duly performed and put in Execution.

XLV. Beneficed Preachers being Resident upon their Livings, to Preach every
Sunday.
EVery Beneficed man allowed to be a Preacher, and residing on his Benefice,
having no lawful Impediment, shall in his own Cure, or in some other Church or
Chapel where he may conveniently, near adjoining (where no Preacher is) preach
one Sermon every Sunday of the Year, wherein he shall soberly and sincerely
divide the Word of Truth to the glory of God, and to the best Edification of
the People.

XLVI. Beneficed men, not Preachers, to procure monthly Sermons.
EVery Beneficed man, not allowed to be a Preacher, shall procure Sermons to be
Preached in his Cure once in every Month at the least, by Preachers lawfully
Licensed, if his Living in the Judgment of the Ordinary, will be able to bear
it. And upon every Sunday when there shall not be a Sermon preached in his
Cure, he or his Curate shall read some one of the Homilies prescribed, or to be
prescribed by Authority to the intents aforesaid.

XLVII. Absence of Beneficed men to be supplied by Curates that are allowed
Preachers.
EVery Beneficed man Licensed by the Laws of this Realm, upon urgent Occasions
of other Service not to reside upon his Benefice, shall cause his Cure to be
supplied by a Curate that is a sufficient and Licensed Preacher, if the worth
of the Benefice will bear it. But whosoever has two Benefices shall maintain a
Preacher Licensed, in the Benefice where he does not reside, except he preach
himself at both of them usually.

XLVIII. None to be Curates but allowed by the Bishop.
NO Curate or Minister shall be permitted to serve in any Place, without
Examination and Admission of the Bishop of the Diocese or Ordinary of the Place
having Episcopal Jurissdiction, in Writing under his Hand and Seal, having
respect to the greatness of the Cure, and meetness of the Party. And the said
Curates and Ministers, if they remove from one Diocese to another, shall not be
by any means admitted to serve without Testimony of the Bishop of the Diocese,
or Ordinary of the Place as aforesaid, whence they came, in Writing, of their
Honesty, Ability, and Conformity to the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of
England. Nor any shall serve more than one Church or Chapel upon one day,
Except that Chapel be a Member of the Parish Church, or united thereunto; and
unless the said Church or Chapel where such a Minister shall serve in two
places, be not able in the Judgment of the Bishop or Ordinary as aforesaid, to
maintain a Curate.

XLIX. Ministers not allowed Preachers may not Expound.
NO Person whatsoever not examined and approved by the Bishop of the Diocese,
or not Licensed as is aforesaid, for a sufficient or convenient Preacher, shall
take upon him to Expound in his own Cure or elsewhere, any Scripture or matter
of Doctrine, but shall only study to read plainly and aptly (without glossing
or adding) the Homilies already set forth, or hereafter to be published by
Lawful Authority, for the Confirmation of the true Faith, and for the good
Instruction and Edification of the People.

L. Strangers not admitted to Preach without showing their License.
NEither the Minister, Church wardens, nor any other Officers of the Church,
shall suffer any man to preach within their Churches or Chapels, but such as by
showing their License to Preach, shall appear unto them to be sufficiently
authorized thereunto, as is aforesaid.

LI. Strangers not admitted to Preach in Cathedral Churches without sufficient
Authority.
THE Deans, Presidents, and Residentiaries of any Cathedral or Collegiate
Church, shall suffer no Stranger to Preach unto the People in their Churches,
except they be allowed by the Archbishop of the Province, or by the Bishop of
the same Diocese, or by either of the Universities. And if any in his Sermon
shall publish any Doctrine, either strange or disagreeing from the Word of God,
or from any of the Articles of Religion agreed upon in the Convocation House,
Anno 1562. or from the Book of Common Prayers, the Dean or the Residents shall
by their Letters subscribed with some of their Hands that heard him, so soon as
may be, give notice of the same to the Bishop of the Diocese, that he may
determine the Matter, and take such Order therein as he shall think convenient.

LII. The Names of Strange Preachers to be noted in a Book.
THAT the Bishop may understand (if Occasion so require) what Sermons are made
in every Church of his Diocese, and who presume to preach without License, the
Churchwardens and Sidemen shall see that the Names of all Preachers which
come to their Church from any other Place, be noted in a Book, which they shall
have ready for that Purpose: wherein every Preacher shall subscribe his Name,
the Day wherein he preached, and the Name of the Bishop of whom he had License
to Preach.

LIII. No Public Opposition between Preachers.
IF any Preacher shall in the Pulpit particularly, or namely of purpose, impugn
or confute any Doctrine delivered by any other Preacher in the same Church, or
in any Church near adjoining, before he has acquainted the Bishop of the
Diocese therewith, and received Order what to do in that Case, because upon
such public and Dissenting and contradicting, there may grow much Offense and
Disquietness unto the People: the Churchwardens or Party grieved shall
forthwith signify the same to the said Bishop, and not suffer the said
Preacher any more to occupy that place which he has once abused, except he
faithfully promise to forbear all such matter of Contention in the Church until
the Bishop has taken further Order therein: who shall with all convenient
Speed so proceed therein, that public Satisfaction may be made in the
Congregation where the Offense was given. Provided, That if either of the
Parties Offending do appeal, he shall not be suffered to preach pendentelite.

LIVE. The Licenses of Preachers refusing Conformity, to be void.
IF any man Licensed heretofore to Preach, by any Archbishop, Bishop, or by
either of the Universities, shall at any time from henceforth refuse to conform
himself to the Laws, Ordinances, and Rites Ecclesiastical established in the
Church of England, he shall be admonished by the Bishop of the Diocese, or
Ordinary of the Place, to submit himself to the Use and due Exercise of the
same. And if after such Admonition, he do not conform himself within the space
of one Month, We determine and decree, That the License of every such Preacher
shall thereupon be utterly void and of none effect.

LV. The Form of a Prayer to be used by all Preachers before their Sermons.
BEfore all Sermons, Lectures and Homilies, the Preachers and Ministers shall
move the People to join with them in Prayer, in this Form or to this effect, as
briefly as conveniently they may. Ye shall pray for Christ's holy Catholic
Church, that is, for the whole Congregation of Christian People dispersed
throughout the whole World, and especially for the Churches of England,
Scotland and Ireland. And herein I require you most especially to pray for the
Kings most excellent Majesty, our Soveraingn Lord JAMES, King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Supreme Governor in
these his Realms, and all other his Dominions and Countries, over all Persons,
in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. Ye shall also pray for our
gracious Queen Anne, the Noble Prince HENRY, and the rest of the King and
Queens Royal Issue. Ye shall also pray for the Ministers of Gods holy Word and
Sacraments, as well Archbishops and Bishops, as other Pastors and Curates. Ye
shall also pray for the Kings most honorable Council, and for all the Nobility
and Magistrates of this Realm, that all and every of these in their several
Callings, may serve truly and painfully to the glory of God, and the edifying
and well governing of his People, remembering the Account that they must make.
Also ye shall pray for the whole Commons of this Realm, that they may live in
the true Faith and Fear of God, in humble Obedience to the King, and Brotherly
Charity one to another. Finally let us praise God for all those which are
departed out of this Life in the Faith of Christ, and pray unto God that we may
have Grace to direct our Lives after their good Example: that this life ended,
we may be made Partakers with them of the glorious Resurrection in the Life
everlasting; always concluding with the Lord's Prayer.

LVI. Preachers and Lecturers to read Divine Service, and administer the
Sacraments twice a year at the least.
EVery Minister being possessed of a Benefice, that has Cure and Charge of
Souls, although he chiefly attend to Preaching, and has a Curate under him to
execute the other Duties which are to be performed for him in the Church, and
likewise every other stipendiary Preacher that reads any Lecture, or
catechiseth or preaches in any Church or Chapel, shall twice at the least
every year read himself the Divine Service upon two several Sundays publicly,
and at the usual times, both in the Fore-noon and Afternoon in the Church
which he so possesses, or where he Reads, Catechiseth, or Preaches, as is
aforesaid, and shall likewise as often in every year administer the Sacraments
of Baptism (if there be any to be baptized) and of the Lords Supper, in such
Manner and Form, and with the Observation of all such Rites and Ceremonies as
are prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer in that behalf: which if he do not
accordingly perform, then shall he that is possessed of a Benefice (as before)
be suspended: and he that is but a Reader, Preacher, or Catechiser, be removed
from his Place by the Bishop of the Diocese, until he or they shall submit
themselves to perform all the said Duties, in such manner and sort as before is
prescribed.

LVII. The Sacraments not to be refused at the hands of unpreaching Ministers.
WHereas diverse Persons seduced by false Teachers, do refuse to have their
Children baptized by a Minister that is no Preacher, and to receive the Holy
Communion at his hands in the same respect, as though the Virtue of those
Sacraments did depend upon his Ability to preach: Forasmuch as the Doctrine
both of Baptism and of the Lord's Supper is so sufficiently set down in the
Book of Common Prayer to be used at the Administration of the said Sacraments,
as nothing can be added unto it that is material or necessary: We do require
and charge every such Person seduced as aforesaid, to reform that their
Wilfulness, and to submit himself to the Order of the Church in that behalf,
both the said Sacraments being equally effectual, whether they be ministered by
a Minister that is no Preacher, or by one that is a Preacher. And if any
hereafter shall offend herein, or leave their own Parish Churches in that
respect, and communicate, or cause their Children to be baptized in other
Parishes abroad, and will not be moved thereby to reform that their Error and
unlawful Course: Let them be presented to the Ordinary of the place by the
Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen or Quest-men of the Parishes where they
dwell, and there receive such punishment by Ecclesiastical Censures, as such
Obstinacy does worthily deserve: that is, Let them (persisting in their
wilfulness) be suspended, and then after a months further Obstinacy,
excommunicated. And likewise if any Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall after the
publishing hereof, either receive to the Communion any such persons which are
not of his own Church and Parish, or shall baptize any of their Children,
thereby strengthening them in their said Errors: Let him be suspended and not
released thereof, until he do faithfully Promise that he will not afterward
offend therein.

LVIII. Ministers reading Divine Service, and administering the Sacraments, to
wear Surplices, and Graduates therewithal, Hoods.
EVery Minister saying the public Prayers, or ministering the Sacraments, or
other Rites of the Church, shall wear a decent and comely Surplice with
Sleeves, to be provided at the Charge of the Parish. And if any question arise
touching the Matter, Decency, or Comeliness thereof, the same shall be decided
by the Discretion of the Ordinary. Furthermore, such Ministers as are
Graduates, shall wear upon their Surplices at such times, such Hoods as by the
Orders of the Universities are agreeable to their Degrees, which no Minister
shall wear (being no Graduate) under pain of Suspension. Notwithstanding it
shall be lawful for such Ministers as are not Graduates, to wear upon their
Surplices instead of Hoods, some decent Tippet of black, so it be not Silk.

LIX. Ministers to catechize every Sunday.
EVery Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon every Sunday and Holy Day before Evening
Prayer, shall for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the Youth and
ignorant Persons of his Parish, in the Ten Commandments, the Articles of the
Belief, and in the Lord's Prayer: and shall diligently hear, instruct, and
teach them the Catechism set forth in the Book of Common Prayer. And all
Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, shall cause their Children, Servants,
and Apprentices, which have not learned the Catechism to come to the Church at
the time appointed, obediently to hear, and to be ordered by the Minister until
they have learned the same. And if any Minister neglect his Duty herein, let
him be sharply reproved upon the first Complaint, and true notice thereof given
to the Bishop or Ordinary of the Place. If after submitting himself, he shall
willingly offend therein again, let him be suspended. If so the third time,
there being little hope that he will be therein reformed, then excommunicated,
and so remain until he will be reformed. And likewise, if any of the said
Fathers, Mothers, Masters or Mistresses, Children, Servants, or Apprentices
shall neglect their Duties, as the one sort in not causing them to come, and
the other in refusing to learn as aforesaid: Let them be suspended by their
Ordinaries, (if they be not Children) and if they so persist by the space of a
month, then let them be excommunicated.

LX. Confirmation to be performed once in three years.
FOrasmuch as it has been a solemn, ancient, and laudable Custom in the Church
of God, continued from the Apostles times, that all Bishops should lay their
Hands upon Children baptized and instructed in the Catechism of Christian
Religion, praying over them and blessing them, which we commonly call
Confirmation, and that this holy Action has been accustomed in the Church in
former Ages, to be performed in the Bishops Visitation every third Year: We
will and appoint, that every Bishop or his Suffragan in his accustomed
Visitation, do in his own Person carefully observe the said Custom. And if in
that year, by reason of some Infirmity, he be not able personally to Visit,
then he shall not omit the Execution of that Duty of Confirmation the next year
after as he may conveniently.

LXI. Ministers to prepare Children for Confirmation.
EVery Minister that has Cure and Charge of Souls, for the better accomplishing
of the Orders prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer concerning Confirmation,
shall take especial Care, as that none shall be presented to the Bishop for him
to lay his Hands upon, but such as can render an account of their Faith
according to the Catechism in the said Book contained. And when the Bishop
shall assign any time for the Performance of that part of his Duty, every such
Minister shall use his best endeavor to prepare and make able, and likewise to
procure as many as he can to be then brought, and by the Bishop to be confirmed.

LXII. Ministers not to marry any Persons without Banns or License.
NO Minister, upon pain of Suspension per triennium ipso facto, shall celebrate
Matrimony between any Persons without a Faculty or License granted by some of
the Persons in these our Constitutions expressed, except the Banns of Matrimony
have been first published three several Sundays or Holy Days in the time of
Divine Service in the Parish-Churches and Chapels where the said Parties dwell,
according to the Book of Common Prayer. Neither shall any Minister, upon the
like pain, under any Pretense whatsoever, join any persons so Licensed in
Marriage at any unseasonable times, but only between the hours of Eight and
Twelve in the Fore-noon, nor in any private Place, but either in the said
Churches or Chapels where one of them dwells, and likewise in time of Divine
Service: nor when Banns are thrice asked (and no License in that respect
necessary) before the Parents or Governors of the Parties to be married, being
under the age of twenty and one years, shall either personally, or by
sufficient Testimony, signify to him their Consents given to the said Marriage.

LXIII. Ministers of Exempt Churches, not to Marry without Banns or License.
EVery Minister who shall hereafter celebrate Marriage between any Persons
contrary to our said Constitutions, or any part of them, under color of any
peculiar Liberty or Privilege claimed to appertain to certain Churches and
Chapels, shall be suspended per triennium, by the Ordinary of the Place where
the offense shall be committed. And if any such Minister shall afterward
remove from the Place where he has committed that Fault before he bo
suspended, as is aforesaid, then shall the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ordinary
of the Place where he remains, upon Certificate under the hand and Seal of
the other Ordinary from whose Jurisdiction he removed, excute that Censure upon
him.

LXIV. Ministers solemnly to bid Holy Days.
EVery Parson, Vicar or Curate, shall in his several Charge declare to the
People every Sunday at the time appointed in the Communion Book, whether there
be any Holy Days, or Fasting-days the Week following. And if any do hereafter
wittingly offend herein, and being once admonished thereof by his Ordinary,
shall again omit that Duty, let him be censured according to Law, until he
submit himself to the due performance of it.

LXV. Ministers solemnly to denounce Recusants and Excommunicates.
ALL Ordinaries shall in their several Jurisdictions carefully see and give
Order, that as well those who for obstinate refusing to frequent Divine Service
established by public Authority within this Realm of England, as those also
(especially of the better sort and condition) who for notorious Contumacy or
other notable Crimes stand lawfully Excommunicate, (unless within three months
immediately after the said Sentence of Excommunication pronounced against them,
they reform themselves, and obtain the Benefit of Absolution) be every six
months ensuing, as well in the Parish Church as in the Cathedral Church of the
Diocese, in which they remain, by the Minister openly in time of Divine Service
upon some Sunday, denounced and declared Excommunicate, that others may be
thereby both admonished to refrain their Company and Society, and excited the
rather to procure out a Writ De Excommunicato capiendo, thereby to bring and
reduce them into due order, and obedience. Likewise the Register of every
Ecclesiastical Court, shall yearly between Michaelmas and Christmas, duly
certify the Archbishop of the Province of all and singular the Premises
aforesaid.

LXVI. Ministers to confer with Recusants.
EVery Minister being a Preacher, and having any Popish Recusant or Recusants
in his Parish, and thought fit by the Bishop of the Diocese, shall labor
diligently with them from time to time, thereby to reclaim them from their
Errors. And if he be no Preacher, or not such a Preacher, then he shall
procure, if he can possibly, some that are Preachers so qualified, to take
pains with them for that purpose. If he can procure none, then he shall inform
the Bishop of the Diocese thereof, who shall not only appoint some Neighbor
Preacher or Preachers adjoining to take that Labor upon them, but himself also
(as his important Affairs will permit him) shall use his best Endeavor by
Instruction, Persuasion, and all good means he can devise, to reclaim both them
and all other within his Diocese so affected.

LXVII. Ministers to Visit the Sick.
WHEN any Person is dangerously sick in any Parish, the Minister or Curate
(having Knowledge thereof) shall resort unto him or her (if the Disease be not
known, or probably suspected to be infectious) to instruct and comfort them in
their Distress, according to the Order of the Communion Book, if he be no
Preacher; or if he be a Preacher, then as he shall think most needful and
convenient. And when any is passing out of this Life, a Bell shall be tolled,
and the Minister shall not then slack to do his last Duty. And after the
Parties Death (if it so fall out) there shall be rung no more but one short
Peal, and one other before the Burial, and one other after the Burial.

LXVIII. Ministers not to refuse to Christen or Bury.
NO Minister shall refuse or delay to Christen any Child according to the Form
of the Book of Common Prayer, that is brought to the Church to him upon Sundays
or Holydays to be Christened, or to Bury any Corpse that is brought to the
Church or Churchyard (convcnient Warning being given him thereof before) in
such manner and Form as is prescribed in the said Book of Common Prayer. And if
he shall refuse to Christen the one or Bury the other, except the Party
deceased were denounced Excommunicated Majori Excommunicatione, for some
grievous and notorious Crime, (and no man able to testify of his Repentance)
he shall be suspended by the Bishop of the Diocese from his Ministry by the
space of three months.

LXIX. Ministers not to defer Christening, if the Child be in Danger.
IF any Minister being duly without any manner of Collusion, informed of the
Weakness and Danger of Death of any Infant unbaptized in his Parish, and
thereupon desired to go or come to the Place where the said Infant remains,
to Baptize the same, shall either wilfully refuse so to do, or of Purpose, or
of gross Negligence shall so defer the time, as when he might conveniently have
resorted to the Place, and have Baptized the said Infant, it dies through such
his Default unbaptized; the said Minister shall be suspended for three months,
and before his restitution shall acknowledge his Fault, and promise before his
Ordinary, that he will not wittingly incur the like again. Provided, that where
there is a Curate or a Substitute, this Constitution shall not extend to the
Parson or Vicar himself, but to the Curate or Substitute present.

LXX. Ministers to keep a Register of Christenings, Weddings and Burials.
IN every Parish Church and Chapel within this Realm, shall be provided one
Parchment Book at the Charge of the Parish, wherein shall be written the day
and year of every Christening, Wedding and Burial which have been in that
Parish since the time that the Law was first made in that behalf, so far as the
ancient Books thereof can be procured, but especially since the beginning of
the Reign of the late Queen. And for the safe keeping of the said Book, the
Churchwardens at the Charge of the Parish, shall provide one sure Coffer with
three Locks and Keys; whereof the one to remain with the Minister, and the
other two with the Churchwardens severally; so that neither the Minister
without the two Churchwardens, nor the Churchwardens without the Minister,
shall at any time take that Book out of the said Coffer. And henceforth upon
every Sabbath day, immediately after Morning or Evening Prayer, the Minister
and Churchwardens shall take the said Parchment Book out of the said Coffer,
and the Minister in the presence of the Churchwardens shall Write and Record
in the said Book, the Names of all Persons Christened, together with the Names
and Surnames of their Parents, and also the Names of all Persons Married and
Buried in that Parish, in the Week before, and the day and year of every such
Christening, Marriage and Burial: And that done, they shall lay up that Book in
the Coffer as before: And the Minister and Churchwardens unto every Page of
that Book, when it shall be filled with such Inscriptions, shall subscribe
their Names. And the Churchwardens shall once every year within one Month
after the five and twentieth day of March, transmit unto the Bishop of the
Diocese, or his Chancellor, a true Copy of the Names of all Persons Christened,
Married or Buried in their Parish in the year before (ended the said five and
twentieth day of March) and the certain days and months in which, every such
Christening, Marriage and Burial was had, to be subscribed with the Hands of
the said Minister and Churchwardens, to the end the same may faithfully be
preserved in the Registry of the said Bishop: which Certificate shall be
received without Fee. And if the Minister or Churchwardens shall be negligent
in performance of any thing herein contained, it shall be lawful for the Bishop
or his Chancellor to convent them, and proceed against every of them as
contemners of this our Constitution.

LXXI. Ministers not to preach or administer the Communion in Private Houses.
NO Minister shall Prench or Administer the holy Communion in any private
House, except it be in times of necessity, when any being either so impotent as
he cannot go to the Church, or very dangerously sick, are desirous to be
Partakers of the holy Sacrament, upon pain of Suspension for the first Offense,
and Excommunication for the second. Provided, that Houses are here reputed for
Private Houses, wherein are no Chapels dedicated and allowed by the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. And provided also under the pains before
expressed, that no Chaplains do Preach or Administer the Communion in any other
places, but in the Chapels of the said Houses; and that also they do the same
very seldom upon Sundays and Holy Days: So that both the Lords and Masters of
the said Houses and their Families shall at other times resort to their own
Parish Churches, and there receive the holy Communion at the least once every
year.

LXXII. Ministers not to appoint public or private Fasts or Prophesies, or to
Exercise, but by Authority.
NO Minister or Ministers shall without the License and Direction of the Bishop
of the Diocese first obtained and had under his Hand and Seal, appoint or keep
any solemn Fasts, either publicly or in any private Houses, other than such as
by Law are, or by public Authority shall be appointed, nor shall be wittingly
present at any of them, under pain of Suspension for the first Fault, of
Excommunication for the second, and of Deposition from the Ministry for the
third. Neither shall any Minister not Licensed, as is aforesaid, presume to
appoint or hold any Meetings for Sermons, commonly termed by some Prophesies or
Exercises, in Market Towns or other places, under the said Pains: Nor without
such License to attempt upon any Pretense whatsoever, either of Possession or
Obsession, by Fasting and Prayer to cast out any Devil or Devils, under pain of
the Imputation of Imposture or Cozenage, and Deposition from the Ministry.

LXXIII. Ministers not to hold private Conventicles.
Forasmuch as all conventicles and secret Meetings of Priests and Ministers
have been ever justly accounted very hurtful to the State of the Church wherein
they live: We do now Ordain and Constitute, That no Priests or Ministers of the
word of God, nor any other Persons shall meet together in any private House or
elsewhere, to consult upon any matter or course to be taken by them or upon
their motion or direction by any other, which may any way tend to the
Impeaching or Depraving of the Doctrine of the Church of England, or of the
Book of Common Prayer, or any part of the Government and Discipline now
established in the Church of England, under pain of Excommunication ipso facto.

LXXIV. Decency in Apparel enjoined to Ministers.
THE true, ancient and flourishing Churches of Christ being ever desirous that
their Prelacy and Clergy might be had as well in outward Reverence, as
otherwise regarded for the Worthiness of their Ministry, did think it sit by a
prescript Form of decent and comely Apparel, to have them known to the People,
and thereby to receive the Honor and Estimation due to the special Messengers
and Ministers of Almighty God: We therefore following their grave Judgment, and
the ancient Custom of the Church of England, and hoping that in time
new-fangleness of Apparel in some Factious Persons will die of it self, do
constitute and appoint, That the Archbishops and Bishops, shall not intermit to
use the accustomed Apparel of their Degrees. Likewise all Deans, Masters of
Colleges, Archdeacons and Prebendaries in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches,
(being Priests or Deacons) Doctors in Divinity, Law and Physic, Batchellors in
Divinity, Masters of Arts and Batchellors of Law having any Ecclesiastical
Living, shall usually wear Gowns with standing Collars and Sleeves strait at
the Hands, or wide Sleeves, as is used in the Universities, with Hoods or
Tippets of Silk or Sarcenet, and square Caps. And that all other Ministers
admitted or to be admitted into that Function, shall also usually wear the like
Apparel as is aforesaid, except Tippets only. We do further in like manner
ordain, That all the said Ecclesiastical Persons above mentioned, shall usually
wear in their Journeys Cloaks with Sleeves, commonly called Priests Cloaks,
without Gards, Welts, long Buttons or Cuts. And no Ecclesiastical Person shall
wear any Coife or wrought Nightcap, but only plain Night-caps of black Silk,
Satin or Velvet. In all which Particulars concerning the Apparel here
Prescribed, our meaning is not to attribute any Holiness or special Worthiness
to the said Garments, but for Decency, Gravity and Order, as is before
specified. In private Houses and in their Studies, the said Persons
Ecclesiastical may use any comely and Scholar-like Apparel, provided that it be
not cut or pinckt; and that in public they go not in their Doublet and Hose,
without Coats or Cassocks: And that they wear not any light colored Stockings.
Likewise poor Beneficed men and Curates (not being able to provide themselves
long Gowns) may go in short Gowns, of the Fashion aforesaid.

LXXV. Sober Conversation required in Ministers.
NO Ecclesiastical Person shall at any time, other then for their honest
Necessities resort to any Taverns or Alehouses, neither shall they boad or
lodge in any such Places. Furthermore, they shall not give themselves to any
base or servile Labor, or to drinking, or Riot, spending their time Idly by
day or by night, playing at Dice, Cards or Ta^les, or any other unlawful Game:
But at all times convenient, they shall hear or read somewhat of the Holy
Scriptures, or shall occupy themselves with some other honest Study or
Exercise, always doing the things which shall appertain to Honesty, and
endeavoring to profit the Church of God, having always in Mind that they ought
to excel all others in Purity of Life, and should be examples to the People to
live well and Christianly, under Pain of Ecclesiastical Censures to be
inflicted with Severity, according to the qualities of their Offenses.

LXXV. Ministers at no time to forsake their Calling.
NO man being admitted a Deacon or Minister, shall from thenceforth voluntarily
relinquish the same, nor afterward use himself in the Course of his Life, as a
Layman, upon pain of Excommunication. And the Names of all such Men so
forsaking their Calling, the Churchwardens of the Parish where they dwell shall
present to the Bishop of the Diocese, or to the Ordinary of the Place, having
Episcopal Jurisdiction.

Schoolmasters.
LXXVII. None to teach School without License.
NO Man shall teach either in public School, or private House, but such as
shall be allowed by the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ordinary of the Place under
his Hand and Seal, being found meet, as well for his Learning and dexterity in
Teaching, as for sober and honest Conversation, and also for right
understanding of Gods true Religion, and also except he shall first subscribe
to the first and third Articles aforementioned simply, and to the two first
Clauses of the second Article.

LXXVIII. Curates desirous to teach, to be Licensed before others.
IN what Parish Church or Chapel soever there is a Curate which is a Master of
Arts, or Bachelor of Arts, or is otherwise well able to teach Youth, and will
willingly so do, for the better increase of his Living, and training up of
Children in Principles of true Religion: We will and ordain, That a License to
teach Youth of the Parish where he serves, be granted to none by the Ordinary
of that place, but only to the said Curate. Provided always, That this
Constitution shall not extend to any Parish or Chapel in Country Towns, where
there is a public School founded already: In which case we think it not meet
to allow any to teach Grammar, but only him that is allowed for the said
public School.

LXXXIX. The Duty of Schoolmasters.
ALL Schoolmasters shall teach in English or Latin, as the Children are able
to bear, the larger or shorter Catechism heretofore by public Authority set
forth. And as often as any Sermon shall be upon Holy and Festival days, within
the Parish where they teach, they shall bring their Scholars to the Church
where such Sermon shall be made, and there see them quietly and soberly behave
themselves, and shall examine them at times convenient after their return, what
they have born away of such Sermons. Upon other days, and at other times they
shall train them up with such Sentences of holy Scriptures, as shall be most
expedient to induce them to all Godliness: and they shall teach the Grammar set
forth by King Henry the Eighth, and continued in the times of King Edward the
Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth of noble Memory, and none other. And if any
Schoolmaster being Licensed, and having subscribed, as aforesaid, shall offend
in any of the premises, or either speak, write, or teach against any thing
whereunto he has formerly subscribed, (if upon admonition by the Ordinary he
do not amend and reform himself) let him be suspended from teaching School any
longer.

Things appertaining to Churches.
LXXX. The great Bible and Book of Common Prayer, to be had in every Church.
THE Churchwardens or Quest-men of every Church and Chapel, shall at the
charge of the Parish provide the Book of Common Prayer, lately explained in
some few points by his Majesty's Authority according to the Laws and his
Highness Prerogative in that behalf, and that with all convenient speed, but at
the furthest within two months after the publishing of these our Constitutions.
And if any Parishes be yet unfurnished of the Bible of the largest Volume, or
of the Books of Homilies allowed by Authority, the said Churchwardens shall
within convenient time provide the same at the like charge of the Parish.

LXXXI. A Font of Stone for Baptism in every Church.
ACcording to a former Constitution, too much neglected in many places, we
appoint, That there shall be a Font of Stone in every Church and Chapel where
Baptism is to be ministered; the same to be set in the Ancient usual places. In
which only Font the Minister shall baptize publicly.

LXXXII. A decent Communion Table in every Church.
Whereas we have no doubt but that in all Churches within the Realm of
England, convenient and decent Tables are provided and placed for the
celebration of the holy Communion, we appoint that the same Tables shall from
time to time be kept and repaired in sufficient and seemly manner, and covered
in time of Divine Service with a Carpet of Silk or other decent stuff thought
meet by the Ordinary of the place, if any question be made of it, and with a
fair Linen cloth at the time of the ministration, as becomes that Table, and
so stand, saving when the said holy Communion is to be administered. At which
time the same shall be placed in so good sort within the Church or Chancel, as
thereby the Minister may be more conveniently heard of the Communicants in his
Prayer and Ministration, and the Communicants also more conveniently and in
more number may Communicate with the said Minister: and that the Ten
Commandments be set upon the Eastend of every Church and Chapel where the
people may best see and read the same, and other chosen Sentences written upon
the walls of the said Churches and Chapels in places convenient and likewise,
that a convenient Seat be made for the Minister to read Service in. All these
to be done at the charge of the Parish.

LXXXIII. A Pulpit to be provided in every Church.
THE Churchwardens or Quest-men at the common charge of the Parishioners in
every Church, shall provide a comely and decent Pulpit, to bo set in a
convenient place within the same, by the discretion of the Ordinary of the
place, if any question do arise, and to be there seemly kept for the Preaching
of Gods word.

LXXXIV. A Chest for Alms in every Church.
THE Churchwardens shall provide and have within three months after the
publishing of these Constitutions, a strong Chest, with a hole in the upper
part thereof, to be provided at the charge of the Parish (if there be none such
already provided) having three Keys; of which one shall remain in the custody
of the Parson, Vicar or Curate, and the other two in the custody of the
Churchwardens for the time being: which Chest they shall set and fasten in the
most convenient place, to the intent the Parishioners may put into it their
Alms for their poor Neighbors. And the Parson, Vicar or Curate shall
diligently from time to time, and especially when men make their Testaments,
call upon, exhort, and move their Neighbors to confer, and give as they may
well spare to the said Chest, declaring unto them, That whereas heretofore they
have been diligent to bestow much substance otherwise then God commanded, upon
superstitious uses, now they ought at this time to be much more ready to help
the poor and needy, knowing that to relieve the poor, is a sacrifice which
pleases God: And that also whatsoever is given for their comfort, is given to
Christ himself, and is so accepted of him, that he will mercifully reward the
same. The which Alms and Devotion of the people, the keepers of the Keys shall
yearly, quarterly, or oftener (as need requires) take out of the Chest, and
distribute the same in the presence of most of the Parish, or six of the chief
of them, to be truly and faithfully delivered to their most poor and needy
neighbors.

LXXXV. Churches to be kept in sufficient reparations.
THe Churchwardens or Questmen shall take care, and provide that the Churches
be well and sufficiently repaired, and so from time to time kept and
maintained, that the Windows be well glazed, and that the Floors be kept paved,
plain, and even, all things there in such an orderly and decent sort, without
dust, or any thing that may be either noisome or unseemly, as best becomes the
House of God, and is prescribed in an Homily to that effect. The like care they
shall take, that the Churchyards be well and sufficiently repaired, fenced and
maintained with Walls, Rails or Pales, as have been in each place accustomed,
at their charges unto whom by Law the same appertains: but especially they
shall see that in every meeting of the Congregation peace be well kept, and
that all persons Excommunicated, and so denounced, be kept out of the Church.

LXXXVI. Churches to be surveyed, and the decays certified to the High
Commissioners.
EVery Dean, Dean and Chapter, Archdeacon, and others which have Authority to
hold Ecclesiastical Visitations by Composition, Law or Prescription, shall
survey the Churches of his or their Jurisdiction, once in every three years in
his own person, or cause the same to be done, and shall from time to time
within the said three years, certify the High Commissioners for causes
Ecclesiastical, every year of such defects in any the said Churches, as he or
they do find to remain unrepaired, and the names and sirnames of the parties
faulty therein. Upon which Certificate we desire that the said High
Commissioners will ex officio mero send for such parties and compel them to
obey the just and lawful Decrees of such Ecclesiastical Ordinaries making such
Certificates.

LXXXVII. A Terrier of Glebe-lands and other Possessions belonging to Churches.
WE Ordain, That the Archbishops, and all Bishops within their several
Diocesses, shall procure (as much as in them lies) that a true Note and
Terrier of all the Glebes, Lands, Medows, Gardens, Orchards, Houses, Stocks,
Implements, Tenements and portions of Tithes, lying out of their Parishes
(which belong to any Parsonage, or Vicarage, or rural Prebend) be taken by the
view of honest men in every Parish by the appointment of the Bishop, whereof
the Minister to be one, and be laid up in the Bishops Registry there to be for
a perpetual memory thereof.

LXXXVIII. Churches not to be Profaned.
THe Churchwardens or Quest-men and their Assistants shall suffer no Plays,
Feasts, Banquets, Suppers, Church-ales, Drinkings, temporal Courts or Lets,
Lay-jurys, Musters, or any other profane usage to be kept in the Church,
Chapel or Churchyard, neither the Bells to be rung superstitiously, upon
Holy Days or Eves abrogated by the Book of Common Prayer, not at any other
times, without good cause to be allowed by the Minister of the place, and by
themselves.

Churchwardens or Quest-men, and Sidemen or Assistants.
LXXXIX. The choice of Churchwardens, and their account.
ALL Churchwardens or Quest-men in every Parish, shall be chosen by the joint
consent of the Minister and the Parishioners, if it may be: But if they cannot
agree upon such a choice, then the Minister shall choose one, and the
Parishioners another: and without such a joint or several choice, none shall
take upon them to be Churchwardens, neither shall they continue any longer
then one year in that Office, except perhaps they be chosen again in like
manner. And all Churchwardens at the end of their year, or within a month
after at the most, shall before the Minister and the Parishioners, give up a
just account of such Money as they have received, and also what particularly
they have bestowed in Reparations, and otherwise for the use of the Church. And
last of all, going out of their Office, they shall truly deliver up to the
Parishioners whatsoever Money or other things of right belonging to the Church
or Parish, which remains in their hands, that it may be delivered over by
them to the next Churchwardens by Bill indented.

XC. The choice of Sidemen, and their joint Office with Church wardens.
THE Churchwardens or Quest-men of every Parish and two or three or more
discreet persons in every Parish to be chosen for Sidemen or Assistants, by the
Minister and Parishioners, if they can agree, (otherwise to be appointed by the
Ordinary of the Diocese) shall diligently see, that all the Parishoners duly
resort to the Church upon all Sundays and Holydays, and there continue the
whole time of Divine Service: and none to walk or to stand idle or taking in
the Church, or in the Churchyard, or the Church Porch, during that time. And
all such as shall be found slack or negligent in resorting to the Church,
(having no great or urgent cause of absence) they shall earnestly call upon
them: and after due monition (if they amend not) they shall present them to the
Ordinary of the place. The choice of which persons, viz. Churchwardens or
Quest-men, Sidemen or Assistants shall be yearly made in Easter-week,

Parish Clerks.
XCI. Parish Clerks to be chosen by the Minister.
NO Parish Clerk upon any vacation shall be chosen within the City of London,
or elsewhere within the Province of Canterbury, but by the Parson or Vicar: or
where there is no Parson or Vicar, by the Minister of that place for the time
being: Which choice shall be signified by the said Minister, Vicar or Parson,
to the Parishioners the next Sunday following in the time of Divine Service.
And the said Clerk shall be of twenty years of age at the least, and known to
the said Parson, Vicar or Minister, to be of honest conversation, and
sufficient for his Reading, Writing, and also for his competent skill in
Singing (if it may be.) And the said Clerks so chosen shall have and receive
their ancient Wages, without fraud or diminution, either at the hands of the
Churchwardens at such times as has been accustomed, or by their own
collection according to the most ancient custom of every Parish.

Ecclesiastical Courts belonging to the Archbishops Jurisdiction.
XCII. None to be cited into diverse Courts for probate of the same Will.
FOrasmuch as many heretofore have been by Aparitors both of inferior Courts,
and of the Courts of the Archbishops prerogatives much distracted, and diversely
called, and summoned for probate of Wills, or to take Administrations of the
goods of persons dying Intestate and are thereby vexed and grieved with many
causeless and unnecessary troubles, molestations and expenses: we constitute
and appoint, That all Chancellors, Commissaries or Officials, or any other
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whatsoever, shall at the first charge
with an Oath all persons called, or voluntarily appearing before them for the
probate of any Will, or the Administration of any Goods, whether they know, or
(moved by any special inducement) do firmly believe that the party deceased
(whose Testaments or Goods depend now in question) had at the time of his or
her death, any Goods or good Debts in any other Diocese or Diocesses, or
peculiar Jurisdiction within that Province, then in that wherein the said party
died, amounting to the value of five pounds. And if the said person cited, or
voluntarily appearing before him, shall upon his Oath affirm, That he knows,
or (as aforesaid) firmly believes, that the said party deceased had Goods or
good Debts in any other Diocese or Diocesses, or peculiar Jurisdiction within
the said Province, to the value aforesaid, and particularly specify and
declare the same: then shall he presently dismiss him, not presuming to
intermeddle with the probate of the said Will, or to grant Administration of
the Goods of the party so dying Intestate: neither shall he require or exact
any other charges of the said parties more then such only as are due for the
Citation, and other Precess had and used against the said parties, upon their
further contumacy; but shall openly and plainly declare and profess, That the
said cause belongs to the Prerogative of the Archbishop of that Province,
willing and admonishing the party to prove the said Will, or require
Administration of the said Goods in the Court of the said Prerogative, and to
exhibit before him the said Judge the probate or Administration under the Seal
of the prerogative within forty days next following. And if any Chancellor,
Commissary, Official or other exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
whatsoever, or any their Register shall offend herein, let him be ipso facto
suspended from the execution of his Office, not to be absolved or released
until he have restored to the party all expenses by him laid out contrary to
the tenor of the Premises and every such probate of any Testament or
Administration of Goods so granted, shall be held void and frustrate to all
effects of the Law whatsoever.

Furthermore, we charge and enjoin, that the Register of every inferior Judge
do without all difficulty or delay, certify and inform the Apparitor of the
Prerogative Court, repairing unto him once a Month, and no oftener, what
Executors or Administrators have been by his said Judge for the Incompetency of
his own Jurisdiction, dismissed to the said Prerogative Court within the Month
next before, under pain of a Months Suspension from the exercise of his Office
for every default therein. Provided, that this Canon or any thing therein
contained, be not prejudicial to any Composition between the Archbishop and any
Bishop, or other Ordinary, nor to any inferior Judge that shall grant any
Probate of Testament of Administration of Goods to any Party that shall
voluntarily desire it, both out of the said inferior Court, and also out of
the Prerogative. Provided likewise, that if any Man dye in itinere, the Goods
that he has about him at that present, shall not cause his Testament or
Administration to be liable unto the Prerogative Court.

XCIII. The rate of Bona notabilia liable to the Prerogative Court.
FUrthermore, we decree and ordain, That no Judge of the Archbishops
Prerogative shall henceforward Cite, or cause to be Cited ex officio any Person
whatsoever to any of the aforesaid Intents, unless he have knowledge that the
Party deceased was at the time of his death possessed of Goods and Chattels in
some other Diocese or Diocesses, or peculiar Jurisdiction within that Province,
than in that wherein he died, amounting to the value of five Pounds at the
least: decreeing and declaring, that whosoever has not Goods in diverse Diocesses
to the said sum or value, shall not be accounted to have bona notabilia. Always
provided, that this Clause here, and in the former Constitution mentioned,
shall not prejudice those Diocesses where by Composition or Custom bona
notabilia are rated at a greater sum. And if any Judge of the Prerogative
Court, or any his Surrogate, or his Register or Apparitor, shall cite, or cause
any Person to be Cited into his Court contrary to the tenor of the premises,
he shall restore to the party so cited all his Costs and Charges, and the Acts
and proceedings in that behalf shall be held void and frustrate. Which Expenses
if the said Judge or Register, or Apparitor shall refuse accordingly to pay, he
shall be suspended from the Exercise of his Office until he yield to the
performance thereof.

XCIV. None to be cited into the Arches or Audience, but dwellers within the
Archbishops Diocese or Peculiars.
NO Dean of the Arches nor Official of the Archbishops Consistory, nor any
Judge of the Audience, shall henceforward in his own Name, or in the name of
the Archbishop, either ex officio, or at the Instance of any party, originally
cite, summon, or any way compel, or procure to be cited, summoned, or compelled
any person which dwells not within the particular Diocese or peculiar of the
said Archbishop, to appear before him or any of them, for any cause or matter
whatsoever belonging to Ecclesiastical Cognizance, without the License of the
Diocesan first had and obtained in that behalf, other than in such particular
Cases only as are expressly excepted and reserved in and by a Statute Ann. 23 H.
8. cap. 9. And if any of the said Judges shall offend herein, he shall for
every such offense be suspended from the exercise of his Office, for the space
of three whole Months.

XCV. Fhe Restraint of double Quarrels.
ALbeit by former Constitutions of the Church of England, every Bishop has had
two Months Space to enquire and inform himself of the sufficiency and qualities
of every Minister, after he has been presented unto him to be instituted into
any Benefice: yet for the avoiding of some inconveniences, we do now abridge
and reduce the said two Months unto eight and twenty days only. In respect of
which Abridgement, we do ordain and appoint, that no double Quarrel shall
hereafter be granted out of any of the Archbishops Courts at the suit of any
Minister whosoever, except he shall first take his personal Oath, that the said
eight and twenty days at the least are expired, after he first tendered his
Presentation to the Bishop, and that he refused to grant him Institution
thereupon: or shall enter Bonds with sufficient sureties to prove the same to
be true, under pain of Suspension of the Granter thereof from the execution of
his Office, for half a year toties quoties, to be denounced by the said
Archbishop, and Nullity of the double Quarrel aforesaid, so unduly procured, to
all intents and purposes whatsoever. Always provided, that within the said
eight and twenty Days, the Bishop shall not institute any other to the
prejudice of the said party before presented, sub poena mullitatis.

XCVI. Inhibitions not to be granted without the subscription of an Advocate.
THAT the Jurisdictions of Bishops may be preserved (as near as may be) entire
and free from prejudice, and that for the behoof of the Subjects of this Land,
better provision be made, that henceforward they be not grieved with frivolous
and wrongful Suits and Molestations: It is ordained and provided, that no
Inhibition shall be granted out of any Court belonging to the Archbishop of
Canterbury at the instance of any Party, unless it be subscribed by an Advocate
practicing in the said Court: which the said Advocate shall do freely, not
taking any Fee for the same, except the party prosecuting the suit, do
voluntarily bestow some Gratuity upon him for his Counsel and Advice in the
said Cause. The like Course shall be used in granting forth any Inhibition at
the instance of any party by the Bishop or his Chancellor against the
Archdeacon, or any other person exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: And if
in the Court or Consistory of any Bishop there be no Advocate at all, then
shall the subscription of a Proctor practicing in the same Court be held
sufficient.

XCVII. Inhibitions not to be granted until the Appeal be exhibited to the
Judge.
IT is further ordered and decreed, That henceforward no Inhibition be granted
by occasion of any interlocutory Decree, or in any cause of correction
whatsoever, except under the form aforesaid: And moreover, That before the
going out of any such Inhibition, the Appeal it self, or a Copy thereof
(avouched by Oath to be just and true) be exhibited to the Judge or his lawful
Surrogate, whereby he may be fully informed, both of the quality of the Crime,
and of the cause of the Grievance, before the granting forth of the said
Inhibition. And every Appellant or his lawful Proctor shall before the
obtaining of any such Inhibition, show and exhibit to the Judge or his
Surrogate in Writing, a true Copy of those Acts, wherewith he complains
himself to be aggrieved, and from which he appealeth, or shall take a Corporal
Oath that he has performed his Diligence, and true endeavor for the obtaining
of the same, and could not obtain it at the Hands of the Register in the
Country, or his Deputy, tendering him his Fee. And if any Judge or Register
shall either procure or permit any Inhibition to be Sealed, so as is said,
contrary to the Form and Limitation above specified, let him be suspended from
the Execution of his Office, for the space of three Months: If any Proctor, or
other Person whatsoever by his appointment, shall offend in any of the
Premises, either by making or sending out any Inhibition, contrary to the
tenor of the said Premises, let him be removed from the Exercise of his
Office, for the space of a whole Year without hope of release or restoring.

XCVIII. Inhibitions not to be granted to factious Appellants, unless they
first Subscribe.
FOrasmuch as they who break the Laws cannot in reason claim any benefit or
protection by the same: We decree and appoint, that after any Judge
Ecclesiastical has proceeded judiciously against obstinate and factious
persons, and contemmers of Ceremonies, for not observing the Rites and Orders
of the Church of England, or for contempt of public Prayer, no Judge ad quem,
shall admit or allow any his or their Appeals, unless he having first seen the
Original Appeal, the party Appellant do first personally promise and avow, that
he will faithfully keep and observe all the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
of England, as also the prescript Form of Common Prayer, and do likewise
subscribe to the three Articles formerly by us specified and declared.

XCIX. None to marry within the Degrees prohibited.
NO persons shall Marry within the Degrees prohibited by the Laws of God, and
expressed in a Table set forth by Authority in the year of our Lord God 1563.
and all Marriages so made and contracted shall be adjudged incestuous and
unlawful, and consequently shall be dissolved as void from the beginning, and
the parties so married shall by course of Law be separated. And the aforesaid
Table shall be in every Church publicly set up and fixed at the charge of the
Parish.

C. None to Marry under xxi years, without their Parents Consent.
NO Children under the age of one and twenty years complete, shall contract
themselves or marry without the consent of their Parents, or of their Guardians
and Governors, if their Parents be deceased.

CI. By whom Licenses to Marry without Banns shall be granted, and to what sort
of persons.
NO Faculty or License shall be henceforth granted for solemnization of
Matrimony betwixt any parties, without thrice open publication of the Banns
according to the Book of Common Prayer, by any person exercising any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or claiming any Privileges in the right of their
Churches; but the same shall be granted only by such as have Episcopal
Authority, or the Commissary for Faculties, Vicars general of the Archbishops
and Bishops sede plena or sede vacant, the Guardian of the Spiritualties, or
Ordinaries exercising of right Episcopal Jurisdiction in their several
Jurisdictions, respectively, and unto such persons only as be of good state and
quality, and that upon good caution and security taken.

CII. Security to be taken at the granting of such Licenses, and under what
Conditions.
THE Security mentioned shall contain these Conditions: First, that at the time
of the granting every such License, there is not any impediment of precontract,
consanguinity, affinity, or other lawful cause to hinder the said Marriage.
Secondly, that there is not any controversy or suit depending in any Court
before any Ecclesiastical Judge touching any contract or Marriage of either of
the said parties with any other. Thirdly, that they have obtained thereunto the
express consent of their Parents (if they be living) or otherwise of their
Guardians or Governors. Lastly, that they shall celebrate the said Matrimony
publicly in the Parish Church or Chapel where one of them dwells, and in no
other place, and that between the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoon.

CIII. Oaths to be taken for the Conditions.
FOR the avoiding of all fraud and collusion in the obtaining of such Licenses
and Dispensations: We further constitute and appoint, That before any License
for the celebration of Matrimony, without publication of Banns be had or
granted, it shall appear to the Judge by the Oaths of two sufficient witnesses,
one of them to be known either to the Judge himself, or to some other person of
good reputation then present, and known likewise to the said Judge, that the
express consent of the Parents or Parent, if one be dead, or Guardians, or
Guardian of the parties, is thereunto had and obtained. And furthermore, that
one of the parties personally swear, that he believes there is no let or
impediment of precontract, or kindred, or alliance, or of any other lawful
cause whatsoever, nor any suit commenced in any Ecclesiastical Court, to bar or
hinder the proceeding of the said Matrimony, according to the tenor of the
foresaid License.

CIV. An Exception for those that are in Widowhood.
IF both the parties which are to Marry being in Widowhood, do seek a Faculty
for the forbearing of Banns, then the clauses before mentioned requiring the
Parents consents, may be omitted; but the Parishes where they dwell both shall
be expressed in the License, as also the Parish named where the Marriage shall
be celebrated. And if any Commissary for Faculties, Vicars general, or other
the said Ordinaries shall offend in the Premises, or any part thereof, he
shall for every time so offending, be suspended from the execution of his
Office for the space of six months; and every such License or Dispensation
shall be held void to all effects and purposes, as if there had never been any
such granted, and the parties marrying by virtue thereof, shall be subject to
the punishments which are appointed for clandestine Marriages.

CV. No Sentence for Divorce to be given upon the sole confession of the
Parties.
FOrasmuch as Matrimonial causes have been always reckoned and reputed amongst
the weightiest, and therefore require the greater caution when they come to be
handled and debated in Judgment, especially in Causes wherein Matrimony having
been in the Church duly solemnized, is required upon any suggestion or pretext
whatsoever to be dissolved or annulled: We do straightly charge and enjoin, that
in all proceedings to Divorce and Nullities of Matrimony, good circumspection
and Advice be used, and that the truth may (as far as is possible) be sifted
out by the deposition of witnesses, and other lawful proofs and evictions, and
that credit be not given to the sole confession of the parties themselves
howsoever taken upon Oath, either within or without the Court.

CVI. No Sentence for Divorce to be given but in open Court.
NO Sentence shall be given either for Separation a thoro and mensa, or for
annulling of pretended Matrimony, but in open Court, and in the Seat of
Justice, and that with the knowledge and consent either of the Archbishop
within his Province, or of the Bishop within his Diocese, or of the Dean of the
Arches, the Judge of the Audience of Canterbury, or of the Vicars general, or
other principal Officials, or sede vacant of the Guardians of the
Spiritualties, or other Ordinaries to whom of right it appertains, in their
several Jurisdictions and Courts, concerning them only that are then dwelling
under their Jurisdictions.

CVII. In all Sentences for Divorce, Bond to be taken for not marrying during
each others life.
IN all Sentences pronounced only for Divorce and Separation a thoro and mensa,
there shall be a caution and restraint inserted in the Act of the said
Sentence, That the parties so separated, shall live chastely and continently;
neither shall they, during each others life, contract Matrimony with other
person. And for the better observation of this last clause, the said Sentence
of Divorce shall not be pronounced, until the party or parties requiring the
same, have given good and sufficient caution and security into the Court, that
they will not any way break or transgress the said restraint or prohibition.

CVIII. The penalty for Judges offending in the Premises.
AND if any Judge giving Sentence of Divorce or Separation shall not fully keep
and observe the premises, he shall be by the Archbishop of the Province, or by
the Bishop of the Diocese, suspended from the exercise of his Office for the
space of a whole year, and the Sentence of Separation so given contrary to the
form aforesaid, shall be held void to all intents and purposes of the Law, as
if it had not at all been given or pronounced.

Ecclesiastical Courts belonging to the Jurisdiction of Bishops and
Archdeacons, and the Proceedings in them.
CIX. Notorious Crimes and Scandal to be certified into Ecclesiastical Co^rts
by Pre^entment.
IF any offend their brethren, either by Adultery, Whoredom, Incest, or
Drunkenness, or by Swearing, Ribbaldry, Usury, or any other uncleanness and
wickedness of Life, the Church wardens or Quest-men, and Sidemen in their next
presentiments to their Ordinaries, shall faithfully present all and every of the
said offenders, to the intent that they and every of them may be punished by
the severity of the Laws, according to their deserts; and such notorious
offenders shall not be ad^^tted to the holy Communion till they be reformed.

CX. Schismatics to be presented.
IF the Churchwardens or Quest-men or Assistants, do or (...) any man within
their parish or elsewhere, that is a hindere^ (...) the Word of God to be read
or sincerely preached, or of the (...) these our Constitutions, or a factour of
any usurped or foreign (...) by the Laws of this Realm justly rejected and
taken away, or a (...) Popish and erroneous Doctrine: they shall detect and
present the same to the Bishop of the Diocese or Ordinary of the place, to be
censured and punished according to such Ecclesiastical Laws as are prescribed
in that behalf.

CXI. Disturbers of Divine Service to be presented.
IN all Visitations of Bishops and Archdeacons, the Churchwardens or
Quest-men and Sidemen, shall truly and personally present the names of all
those which behave themselves rudely and disorderly in the Church, or which by
untimely Ringing of the Bells, by walking, talking, or other noise shall hinder
the Minister or Preacher.

CXII. Not Communicants at Easter to be presented.
THE Minister, Churchwardens, Quest-men and Assistants of every Parish Church
and Chapel, shall yearly within forty days after Easter exhibit to the Bishop
or his Chancellor, the names or Sirnames of all the parishioners, as well men
as women, which being of the age of sixteen years, received not the Communion
at Easter before.

CXIII. Ministers may present.
BEcause it often comes to pass, that the Churchwardens, Sidemen, Quest-men,
and such other persons of the Layity as are to take care for the suppressing of
sin and wickedness in their several Parishes, as much as in them lies, by
admonition, reprehension, and denunciation to their Ordinaries, do forbear to
discharge their duties therein, either through fear of their Superiors, or
through negligence, more then were fit, the Licentiousness of these times
considered: We ordain, That hereafter every Parson and Vicar, or in the lawful
absence of any Parson or Vicar, then their Curates and Substitutes may join in
every presentment with the said Churchwardens Sidemen, and the rest above
mentioned at the times hereafter limited, if they the said Churchwardens and
the rest will present such enormities as are apparent in the Parish: or if they
will not, then every such Parson and Vicar, or in their absence as aforesaid,
their Curates may themselves present to their Ordinaries at such times and when
else they think it meet, all such crimes as they have in charge, or otherwise,
as by them (being the persons that should have the chief care for the
suppressing of sin and impiety in their Parishes) shall be thought to require
due Reformation. Provided always, that if any man confess his secret and hidden
sins to the Minister for the unburthening of his conscience, and to receive
spiritual consolation and ease of mind from him, We do not any way bind the
said Minister by this our Constitution, but do straightly charge and admonish
him, that he do not at any time reveal and make known to any person whatsoever,
any crime or offense so committed to his trust and secrecy (except they be such
crimes as by the Laws of this Realm his own life may be called into question
for concealing the same) under pain of irrgularity.

CXIV. Ministers shall present Recusants.
EVery Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall carefully inform themselves every Year
hereafter, how many Popish Recusants, Men, Women and Children above the age of
thirteen Years; and how many being Popishly given (who though they come to the
Church, yet do refuse to receive the Communion) are Inhabitants, or make their
abode either as Sojourners or common Guests in any of their several Parishes,
and shall set down their true Names in writing (if they can learn them) or
otherwise such names, as for the time they carry, distinguishing the obsolute
Recusants from half Recusants: and the same so far as they know or believe so
distinguished and set down under their Hands, shall truly present to their
Ordinaries before the Feast of the Nativity next ensuing, under pain of
Suspension to be inflicted upon them by their said Ordinaries, and so every
year hereafter upon the like Pain, before the Feast of St. John Baptist. Also
we ordain, That all such Ordinaries, Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons,
Officials, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers to whom the said Presentiments
shall be exhibited, shall likewise within one Month after the Receipt of the
same, under pain of Suspension by the Bishop, from the Execution of their
Offices for the space of half a Year (as often as they shall offend therein)
deliver them or cause to be delivered to the Bishop respectively; who shall
also exhibit them to the Archbishop within six Weeks, and the Archbishop to his
Majesty within other six Weeks after he has received the said Presentiments.

CXV. Ministers and Churchwardens not to be sued for Presenting.
Whereas for the Reformation of Criminous persons and disorders in every
Parish, the Churchwardens, Questmen, Sidemen, and such other Church Officers
are sworn, and the Minister charged to present as well the Crimes and Disorders
committed by the said Criminous persons, as also the common Fame which is
spread abroad of them, whereby they are often maligned and sometimes troubled
by the said Dilinquents or their Friends: We do admonish and exhort all Judges,
both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, as they regard and reverence the fearful
judgment seat of the highest Judge, that they admit not in any of their Courts,
any Complaint, Plea, Suit, or Suits against any such Churchwarden, Questmen,
Sidemen, or other Church Officers, for making any such presentiments, nor
against any Minister for any pres^ntment that he shall make: all the said
presentiments tending to the restraint of shameless Impiety, and considering
that the Rules both of Charity and Government do presume that they did nothing
therein of Malice, but for the discharge of their Consciences.

CXVI. Churchwardens not bound to present oftener than twice a Year.
NO Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidemen of any Parish, shall be enforced to
exhibit their Presentiments to any having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, above
once in every Year, where it has been no oftener used, nor above twice in any
Diocese whatsoever, except it be at the Bishops Visitation. For the which
presentiments of every Parish Church or Chapel, the Register of any Court where
they are to be Exhibited, shall not receive in one Year above four pence, under
pain for every offense therein, of Suspension from the Execution of his Office
for the space of a Month toties quoties. Provided always, that as good occasion
shall require, it shall be lawful for every Minister, Churchwardens, and
Sidemen, to present offenders as often as they shall think meet. And likewise for
any godly disposed Person, or for any Ecclesiastical Judge, upon knowledge or
notice given unto him or them, of any enormous Crime within his Jurisdiction,
to move the Minister, Churchwardens, or Sidemen, as they tender the Glory of
God and Reformation of Sin, to present the same, if they shall find sufficient
cause to induce them thereunto, that it may be in due time punished and
reformed. Provided, that for these voluntary presentiments, there be no Fee
required or taken of them under the pain aforesaid.

CXVII. Churchwardens not to be troubled for not presenting oftener then twice a
year.
NO Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen shall be called or cited, but only
at the said time or times before limited, to appear before any Ecclesiastical
Judge whosoever, for refusing at other times to present any faults committed in
their Parishes, and punishable by Ecclesiastical Laws. Neither shall they nor
any of them, after their presentiments exhibited at any of those times, be any
further troubled for the same, except upon manifest and evident proof it may
appear that they did then willingly and wittingly omit to present some such
public crime or crimes as they knew to be committed, or could not be ignorant
that there was then a public fame of them, or unless there be very just cause
to call them for the explanation of their former presentiments. In which case of
wilful omission, their Ordinaries shall proceed against them in such sort as in
causes of wilful Perjury in a Court Ecclesiastical it is already by Law
provided.

CXVIII. The old Churchwardens to make their Presentiments before the new be
sworn.
THe Office of all Churchwardens and Sidemen, shall be reputed ever hereafter
to continue until the new Churchwardens that shall succeed them, be sworn,
which shall be the first week after Easter, or some week following, according
to the direction of the Ordinary. Which time so appointed, shall always be one
of the two times in every year, when the Minister and Churchwardens, and
Sidemen of every Parish shall exhibit to their several Ordinaries, the
presentiments of such enormities as have happened in their Parishes since their
last Presentiments. And this duty they shall perform before the newly chosen
Churchwardens and Sidemen be sworn, and shall not be suffered to pass over
the said presentiments to those that are newly come into Office, and are by
intendment ignorant of such crimes, under pain of those censures which are
appointed for the reformation of such dalliers and dispencers with their own
Consciences and Oaths.

CXIX. Convenient time to be assigned for framing Presentiments.
FOr the avoiding of such inconveniences as heretofore have happened by the
hasty making of Bills of Presentiments, upon the days of the Visitation and
Synods, it is ordered, That always hereafter, every Chancellor, Archdeacon,
Commissary and Official, and every other person having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, at the ordinary time when the Churchwardens are sworn: and the
Archbishop and Bishops when he or they do summon their Visitation, shall
deliver, or cause to be delivered to the Churchwardens, Quest-men and Sidemen
of every Parish, or to some of them, such Books of Articles as they or any of
them shall require for the year following the said Churchwardens, Quest-men
and Sidemen, to ground their presentiments upon at such times as they are to
exhibit them. In which Book shall be contained the form of the Oath which must
be taken immediately before every such presentment: to the intent that having
beforehand time sufficient, not only to peruse and consider what their said
Oath shall be, but the Articles also whereupon they are to ground their
Presentiments, they may frame them at home both advisedly and truly to the
discharge of their own Consciences, after they are sworn, as becomes honest
and godly men.

CXX. None to be cited into Ecclesiastical Courts by Process of Quorum nomina.
NO Bishop, Chancellor, Archdeacon, Official, or other Ecclesiastical Judge,
shall suffer any general Processes of Quorum nomina, to be sent out of his
Court: except the names of all such as thereby are to be cited, shall be first
expressly entered by the hand of the Register, or his Deputy, under the said
Processes, and the said Processes and names be first subscribed by the Judge,
or his Deputy and his Seal thereto affixed.

CXXI. None to be cited into several Courts for one Crime.
IN places where the Bishop and Archdeacon do by prescription or composition
visit at several times in one and the same year, lest for one and the self same
fault any of his Majesty's Subjects should be challenged and molested in diverse
Ecclesiastical Courts: We order and appoint, That every Archdeacon or his
Official, within one month after the Visitation ended that year, and the
presentiments received, shall certify under his Hand and Seal, to the Bishop or
his Chancellor, the names and crimes of all such as are detected and presented
in his said Visitation, to the end the Chancellor shall thenceforth forbear to
convent any person for any crime or cause so detected or presented to the
Archdeacon. And the Chancellor within the like time after the Bishops
Visitation ended, and Presentiments received, shall under his Hand and Seal
signify to the Archdeacon or his Official, the names and crimes of all such
persons which shall be detected or presented unto him in that Visitation, to
the same intent as is aforesaid. And if these Officers shall not certify each
other as is here prescribed, or after such Certificate shall intermeddle with
the crimes or persons detected and presented in each other Visitation; then
every of them so offending shall be suspended from all exercise of his
Jurisdiction, by the Bishop of the Diocese, until he shall repay the costs and
expenses which the parties grieved have been at by that vexation.

CXXII. No Sentence of Deprivation or Deposition to be pronounced against a
Minister, but by the Bishop.
WHEN any Minister is complained of in any Ecclesiastical Court belonging to
any Bishop of his Province for any Crime, the Chancellor, Commissary, Official,
or any other having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to whom it shall appertain,
shall expedite the cause by Processes and other proceedings against him: and
upon contumacy for not appearing, shall first suspend him, and afterward his
Contumacy continuing, excommunicate him. But if he appear and submit himself to
the Course of Law, then the matter being ready for Sentence, and the merits of
his offense exacting by Law, either deprivation from his Living, or deposition
from the Ministry, no such Sentence shall be pronounced by any Person
whosoever, but only by the Bishop, with the assistance of his Chancellor, the
Dean (if they may conveniently be had) and some of the Prebendaries, if the
Court be kept near the Cathedral Church, or of the Archdeacon, if he may be
had conveniently, and two other at the least grave Ministers and Preachers to
be called by the Bishop, when the Court is kept in other places.

CXXIII. No Act to be sped but in open Court.
NO Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other Person using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whosoever, shall speed any judicial Act, either of
contentious or voluntary Jurisdiction, except he have the ordinary Register of
that Court, or his lawful Deputy: or if he or they will not, or cannot be
present, then such Persons as by Law are allowed in that behalf to write or
speed the same, under pain of Suspension ipso facto.

CXXIV. No Court to have more than one Seal.
NO Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall without the Bishops Consent have any more
Seals than one for the Sealing of all matters incident to his Office: Which
Seal shall always be kept either by himself, or by his lawful Substitute
exercising Jurisdiction for him, and remaining within the Jurisdiction of the
said Judge, or in the City, or principal Town of the County. This Seal shall
contain the Title of that Jurisdiction which every of the said Judges or their
Deputies do execute.

CXXV. Convenient places to be chosen for the keeping of Courts.
ALL Chancellors Commissaries, Archdeacons, Officials, and all other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall appoint such meet places for the keeping of
their Courts by the assignment or approbation of the Bishop of the Diocese, as
shall be convenient for Entertainment of those that are to make their
appearance there, and most indifferent for their travel. And likewise they
shall keep and end their Courts in such convenient time, as every Man may
return homewards in as due Season as may be.

CXXVI. Peculiar and inferior Courts to exhibit the original Copies of Wills
into the Bishops Registry.
WHereas Deans, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Parsons, Vicars, and others
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, claim Liberty to prove the last Wills
and Testaments of Persons Deceased within their several Jurisdictions, having
no known nor certain Registers, nor public place to keep their Records in, by
reason whereof many Wills, Rights and Legacies, upon the Death or Change of
such Persons and their private Notaries, miscarry, and cannot be found, to the
great prejudice of his Majesty's Subjects: We therefore order and enjoin that
all such Possessors and Exercisers of peculiar Jurisdiction, shall once in
every Year exhibit into the public Registry of the Bishop of the Diocese, or
of the Dean and Chapter, under whose Jurisdiction the said peculiars are, every
original Testament of every person in that time Deceased, and by them proved in
their several peculiar Jurisdictions, or a true Copy of every such Testa meant
examined, subscribed, and sealed by the peculiar Judge and his Notary.
Otherwise if any of them fail so to do, the Bishop of the Diocese, or Dean and
Chapter, unto whom the said Jurisdictions do respectively belong, shall suspend
the said Parties, and every of them from the exercise of all such peculiar
Jurisdiction, until they have performed this our Constitution.

Judges Ecclesiastical and their Surrogates.
CXXVII. The quality and Oath of Judges.
NO Man shall hereafter be admitted a Chancellor, Commissary or Official, to
exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, except he be of the full age of six
and twenty Years at the least, and one that is learned in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws, and is at the least a Master of Arts, or Bachelor of Law,
and is reasonably well practiced in the Course thereof, as likewise well
affected, and zealously bent to Religion, tou^hing whose Life and manners no
evil example is had, and except before he enter into, or execute any such
Office, he shall take the Oath of the Kings supremacy in the presence of the
Bishop, or in the open Court, and shall subscribe to the Articles of Religion,
agreed upon in the Convocation, in the year one Thousand five Hundred, sixty
and two, and shall also swear that he will to the uttermost of his
Understanding, deal uprightly and justly in his Office, without respect, or
favor of Reward: the said Oaths and Subscription to be recorded by a Register
then present. And likewise all Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, Registers,
and all other that do now possess or execute any places of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, or Service, shall before Christmas next, in the Presence of the
Archbishop of Bishop, or in open Court, under whom or where they exercise their
Offices, take the same Oaths, and subscribe as before is said: Or upon refusal
so to do, shall be suspended from the execution of their Offices, until they
shall take the said Oaths, and subscribe as aforesaid.

CXXVIII. The Quality of Surrogates.
NO Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other person using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall at any time substitute in their absence any
to keep any Court for them, except he be either a grave Minister and a
Graduate, or a licensed public Preacher, and a beneficed man near the place
where the Courts are kept, or a Batcheler of Law, or a Master of Arts at least,
who has some skill in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, and is a favourer of
true Religion, and a man of modest and honest conversation, under pain of
suspension for every time that they offend therein from the execution of their
Offices for the space of three months toties quoties: And he likewise that is
deputed, being not qualified as is before expressed, and yet shall presume to
be a Substitute to any Judge, and shall keep any Court as is aforesaid, shall
undergo the same censure in manner and form as is before expressed.

Proctors.
CXXIX. Proctors not to retain Causes without the lawful Assignment of the
parties.
NOne shall Procure in any Cause whatsoever, unless he be thereunto constituted
and appointed by the party himself, either before the Judge, and by Act in
Court, or unless in the beginning of the Suit, he be by a true and sufficient
Proxy thereunto warranted and enabled. We call that Proxy sufficient, which is
strengthened and confirmed by some Authentical Seal, the parties Approbation,
or at least his Ratification therewithal concurring. All which Proxies shall be
forthwith by the said Proctors exhibited into the Court, and be safely kept and
preserved by the Register in the public Registry of the said Court. And if any
Register or Proctor shall offend herein, he shall be secluded from the exercise
of his Office for the space of two months, without hope of release or restoring.

CXXX. Proctors not to retain Causes without the counsel of an Advocate.
FOR lessening and abridging the multitude of Suits and Contentions, as also
for preventing the complaints of Suitors in Courts Ecclesiastical, who many
times are overthrown by the oversight and neglience, or by the ignorance and
insufficiency of Proctors, and likewise for the furtherance and increase of
Learning, and the advancement of Civil and Canon Law, following the laudable
customs heretofore observed in the Courts pertaining to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, We will and ordain, That no Proctor exercising in any of them shall
entertain any Cause whatsoever, and keep and retain the same for two Court
days, without the Counsel and advice of an Advocate, under pain of a years
suspension from his Practice: neither shall the Judge have power to release or
mitigate the said penalty, without express Mandate and Authority from the
Archbishop aforesaid.

CXXXI. Proctors not to conclude in any cause without the knowledge of an
Advocate.
NO Judge in any of the said Courts of the Archbishop, shall admit any Libel,
or any other matter, without the advice of an Advocate admitted to practice in
the same Court, or without his subscription: neither shall any Proctor conclude
any Cause depending, without the knowledge of the Advocate retained and fee'd
in the cause: which if any Proctor shall do, or procure to be done, or shall by
any color whatsoever defraude the Advocate of his Duty or Fee, or shall be
negligent in repairing to the Advocate, and requiring his Advice what course is
to be taken in the cause, he shall be suspended from all practice for the space
of six months, without hope of being thereunto restored before the said term be
fully complete.

CXXXII. Proctors prohibited the Oath, In Animam Domini sui.
FOrasmuch as in the probate of Testaments and Suits for Administration of the
Goods of persons dying Intestate, the Oath usually taken by Proctors of Courts,
In animam constituentis, is found to be inconvenient: We do therefore decree
and ordain, That every Executor or Suitor for Administration, shall personally
repair to the Judge in that behalf, or his Surrogate, and in his own person
(and not by Proctor) take the Oath accustomed in these cases. But if by reason
of sickness or age, or any other just let or impediment, he be not able to make
his personal appearance before the Judge: it shall be lawful for the Judge
(there being faith first made by a credible person, of the truth of his said
hinderance or impediment) to grant a Commission to some grave Ecclesiastical
person abiding near the party aforesaid, whereby he shall give power and
Authority to the said Ecclesiastical person in his stead, to minister the
accustomed Oath above mentioned, to the Executor or Suitor for such
Administration, requiring his said Substitute, that by a faithful and trusty
Messenger he certify the said Judge truly and faithfully what he has done
therein. Lastly, we ordain and appoint, That no Judge or Register, shall in any
wise receive for the Writing, Drawing or Sealing of any such Commission, above
the sum of six shillings and eight pence; whereof one moiety to be for the
Judge, and the other for the Register of the said Court.

CXXXIII. Proctors not to be clamorous in Court.
FOrasmuch as it is found by experience, that the loud and confused cries and
clamours of Proctors in the Courts of the Archbishop, are not only troublesome
and offensive to the Judges and Advocates, but also give occasion to the
standers by, of contempt and calumny toward the Court it self: that more
respect may be had to the Dignity of the Judge, then heretofore, and that
causes may more easily and commodiously be handled and dispatched, we charge
and enjoin, That all Proctors in the said Courts do especially intend, that the
Acts be faithfully entered and set down by the Register, according to the advice
and direction of the Advocate, that the said Proctors refrain loud speech and
brabling, and behave themselves quietly and modestly, and that when either the
Judges or Advocates, or any of them, shall happen to speak, they presently be
silent, upon pain of silencing for two whole Terms then immediately following
every such offense of theirs. And if any of them shall the second time offend
herein, and after due monition shall not reform himself; let him be for ever
removed from his practice.

Registers.
CXXXIV. Abuses to be reformed in Register
IF any Register or his Deputy, or Substitute whatsoever, shall receive any
Certificate without the knowledge and consent of the Judge of the Court, or
willingly omit to cause any person cited to appear upon any Court day to be
called, or unduly put off, and defer the examination of witnesses to be
examined by a day set and assigned by the Judge, or do not obey and observe the
judicial and lawful monition of the said Judge, or omit to write, or cause to
be written such Citations and Decrees as are to be put in execution and set
forth before the next Court day, or shall not cause all Testaments exhibited
into his Office to be Registered within a convenient time, or shall set down or
enact as decreed by the Judge any thing false, or conceited by himself, and not
so ordered o^ decreed by the Judge, or in the transmission of Processes to the
Judge Ad quem, shall add, or insert any falsehood or untruth, or omit any thing
therein, either by cunning, or by gross negligence, or in causes of Instance,
or promoted of Office, shall receive any reward in favor of either party, or
to be of counsel directly or indirectly with either of the parties in Suit, or
in the execution of their Office shall do ought else maliciously, or
fraudulently, whereby the said Ecclesiastical Judge or his proceedings may be
slandered or defamed: We Will and Ordain, that the said Register or his Deputy
or Substitute, offending in all, or any of the premises, shall by the Bishop
of the Diocese be Suspended from the exercise of his Office, for the space of
one, two or three months, or more, according to the quality of his offense, and
that the said Bishop shall assign some other public Notary to execute and
discharge all things pertaining to his Office, during the time of his said
Suspension.

CXXXV. A certain rate of Fees due to all Ecclesiastical Officers.
NO Bishop, Suffragan, Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, nor any
other exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whatsoever, nor any Register of
any Ecclesiastical Courts, nor any Minister belonging to any of the said
Officers or Courts, shall hereafter for any cause incident to their several
Offices, take or receive any other or greater Fees, then such as were certified
to the most Reverend Father in God, John, late Archbishop of Canterbury, in
the year of our Lord God, One thousand five hundred ninety and seven, and were
by him ratified and and approved, under pain that every such Judge, Officer or
Minister offending herein shall be Suspended from the exercise of their several
Offices, for the space of six Months for every such offense. Always provided,
that if any question shall arise concerning the certainty of the said Fees or
any of them: those Fees shall be held for lawful, which the Archbishop of
Canterbury for the time being shall under his Hand approve, except the Statutes
of this Realm before made, do in any particular case express some other Fees to
be due. Provided furthermore, that no Fee or Money shall be received either by
the Archbishop, or any Bishop or Suffragan, either directly or indirectly, for
admitting of any into Sacred Orders, nor that any other person or persons under
the said Archbishop, Bishop or Suffragan, shall for Parchment, Writing, Wax,
Sealing, or any other respect thereunto appertaining, take above ten shillings,
under such pains as are already by Law prescribed.

CXXXVI. A Table of the Rates and Fees to be set up in Courts and Registries.
WE do likewise constitute and appoint, That the Registers belonging to every
such Ecclesiastical Judge, shall place two Tables, containing the several Rates
and Sums of all the said Fees: one in the usual place or Consistory where the
Court is kept, and the other in his Registry, and both of them in such sort, as
every man whom it concerns may without difficulty come to the view and
perusal thereof, and take a Copy of them; the same Tables to be so set up
before the Feast of the Nativity next ensuing. And if any Register shall fail
to place the said Tables according to the Tenor hereof, he shall be Suspended
from the execution of his Office, until he cause the same to be accordingly
done: And the said Tables being once set up, if he shall at any time remove or
suffer the same to be removed, hidden or any way hindered from sight, contrary
to the true meaning of this Constitution, he shall for every such offense be
Suspended from the exercise of his Office for the space of six Months.

CXXXVII. The whole Fees for showing Letters of Orders, and other Licenses, due
but once in every Bishops time.
FOrasmuch as a chief and principal cause and use of Visitation is, that the
Bishop, Archdeacon or other assigned to Visit, may get some good knowledge of
the State, Sufficiency and Ability of the Clergy, and other persons whom they
are to Visit: We think it convenient, that every Parson, Vicar, Curate,
Schoolmaster, or other person Licensed whosoever, do at the Bishops first
Visitation, or at the next Visitation after his Admission, show and exhibit
unto him his Letters of Orders, Institution and Induction, and all other his
Dispensations, Licenses or Faculties whatsoever, to be by the said Bishop
either allowed, or (if there be just cause) disallowed and rejected: and being
by him approved, to be, as the custom is, signed by the Register; and that the
whole Fees accustomed to be paid in the Visitations in respect of the
Premises, be paid only once in the whole time of every Bishop, and afterward,
but half of the said accustomed Fees, in every other Visitation during the said
Bishops continuance.

Apparitors.
CXXXVIII. The Number of Apparitors restrained.
FOrasmuch as we are desirous to redress such abuses and aggrievances as are
said to grow by Somners or Apparitors; We think it meet that the multitude of
Apparitors be (as much as is possible) abridged or restrained: Wherefore we
decree and ordain, That no Bishop or Archdeacon, or their Vicars or Officials,
or other inferior Ordinaries, shall depute or have more Apparitors to serve in
their Jurisdictions respectively, then either they or their Predecessors were
accustomed to have thirty years before the publishing of these our present
Constitutitions. All which Apparitors shall by themselves faithfully execute
their Offices, neither shall they by any color or pretense whatsoever cause or
suffer their Mandates to be executed by any Messengers or Substitutes* unless
it be upon some good cause to be first known and approved by the Ordinary of
the place. Moreover, they shall not take upon them the Office of Promoters or
Informers for the Court, neither shall they exact more or greater Fees than are
in these our Constitutions formerly prescribed. And if either the number of the
Apparitors deputed shall exceed the fore said limitation, or any of the said
Apparitors shall offend in any of the Premises, the Persons deputing them, if
they be Bishops, shall upon Admonition of their Superior, discharge the
Persons exceeding the number so limited: If inferior Ordinaries, they shall be
suspended from the execution of their Office until they have dismissed the
Apparitors by them so deputed, and the Parties themselves so deputed shall for
ever be removed from the Office of Apparitors: and if being so removed, they
desist not from the exercise of their said Offices, let them be punished by
Ecclesiastical censures as persons contumacious. Provided, that if upon
experience the number of the said Apparitors be too great in any Diocese in the
judgment of the Archbishop of Canturbury for the time being, they shall by him
be so abridged as he shall think meet and convenient.

Authority of Synods.
CXXXIX. A National Synod the Church Representative.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the sacred Synod of this Nation in the
Name of Christ, and by the KING's Authority assembled, is not the true Church
of England by representation, let him be Excommunicated, and not restored until
he repent and publicly revoke that his wicked Error.

CXL. Synods conclude as well the absent as the present.
WHosoever shall affirm, That no manner of person either of the Clergy or
Laity, not being themselves particularly assembled in the said sacred Synod,
are to be subject to the Decrees thereof in causes Ecclesiastical (made and
ratified by the Kings Majesty's supreme Authority) as not having given their
voices unto them; let him be Excommunicated, and not restored until he repent
and publicly revoke that his wicked Error.

CXLI. Depravers of the Synod censured.
WHosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the sacred Synod assembled as
aforesaid, was a company of such persons as did conspire together against godly
and religious professors of the Gospel: and that therefore both they and their
proceedings in making of Canons and Constitutions in causes Ecclesiastical by
the Kings Authority as aforesaid, ought to be despised and contemned, the same
being ratified, confirmed and enjoyed by the said Regal Power, Supremacy and
Authority: let them be Excommunicated, and not restored until they repent and
publicly revoke that their wicked Error.

WE of our Princely inclination, and Royal care for the maintenance of the
present Estate and Government of the Church of England, by the Laws of this our
Realm now settled and established, having diligently, with great contentment
and comfort, read and considered of all these their said Canons, Orders,
Ordinances, and Constitutions agreed upon, as is before expressed; and finding
the same such, as We are persuaded will be very profitable, not only to our
Clergy, but to the whole Church of this our Kingdom, and to all the true
members of it, (if they be well observed) Have therefore Us, our Heirs and
lawful Successors, of our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion
given, and by these presents do give our Royal Assent, according to the form of
the said Statute or Act of Parliament aforesaid, to all and every of the said
Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, and to all and every thing in
them contained, as they are before written.

And furthermore, We do not only by our said Prerogative Royal, and supreme
Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, ratify, confirm, and establish by these
our Letters Patents, the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, and
all and every thing in them contained, as is aforesaid, but do likewise
propounid, publish, and straightway enjoin and command by our said Authority,
and by these our Letters Patents, the same to be diligently observed, executed,
and equally kept by all our loving Subjects of this our Kingdom, both within
the Province of Canturbury and York, in all points wherein they do or may
concern every or any of them according to this our Will and Pleasure hereby
signified and expressed: and that likewise for the better observation of them,
every Minister, by what Name or Title soever he be called, shall in the Parish
Church or Chapel where he has charge read all the said Canons, Orders,
Ordinances and Constitutions once every year, upon some Sundays or Holy days,
in the afternoon before Divine Service, dividing the same in such sort, as that
the one half may be read one day, and the other another day: the Book of the
said Canons to be provided at the charge of the Parish betwixt this and the
Feast of the Nativity of our Lord God next ensuing: Straightly charging and
commanding all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other that exercise any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Realm, every man in his place, to see,
and procure (so much as in them lies) all and every of the same Canons,
Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions to be in all points duly observed, not
sparing to execute the Penalties in them severally mentioned, upon any that
shall wittingly or wilfully break, or neglect to observe the same, as they
tender the Honor of God, the Peace of the Church, the Tranquillity of the
Kingdom and their Duties and Service to Us their King and Sovereign.

In VVitness, etc.
THE TABLE.
Of the Church of England.
1 THE Kings Supremacy over the Church of England in Causes Ecclesiastical, to
be maintained. Page 1 2 Impugners of the Kings Supremacy, censured 2 3 The
Church of England, a true and Apostolical Church. ib. 4 Impugners of the
public Worship of God established in the Church of England, censured. ib. 5
Impugners of the Articles of Religion established in the Church of England
censured. 3 6 Impugners of the Rites and Ceremonies established in the Church
of England censured. ib. 7 Impugners of the Government of the Church of England
by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. censured. ib. 8 Impugners of the Form of
consecrating and ordering Archbishops, Bishops, etc. in the Church of England,
censured. ib. 9 Authors of Schism in the Church of England, censured. 4 10
Maintainers of Schismatics in the Church of England, censured ib. 11
Maintainers of Con^nticles, censured. ib. 12 Maintainers of Constitutions made
in Conventicles, censured. 5
Of Divine Service and Administration of the Sacraments.
13 DUe celebration of Sundays and Holy Days. 5 14 The prescript Form of Divine
Service to be used on Sundays and Holy Days. ib. 15 The Letany to be read on
Wednesdays and Fridays. 6 16 Colleges to use the Prescript Form of Divine
Service. ib. 17 Students in Colleges to wear Surplices in time of Divine
Service. ib. 18 A Reverence and Attention to be used within the Church in time
of Divine Service. 7 19 Loyterers not to be suffered near the Church in time of
Divine Service. 8 20 Bread and Wine to be provided against every Communion. ib.
21 The Communion to be thrice a Year received. ib. 22 Warning to be given
beforehand for the Communion. ib. 23 Students in Colleges to receive the
Communion four times a Year. 9 24 Copes to be worn in Cathedral Churches by
those that Administer the Communion. ib. 25 Surplices and Hoods to be worn in
Cathedral Churches when there is no Communion. 10 26 Notorious Offenders not to
be admitted to the Communion. ib. 27 Schismatics not to be admitted to the
Communion. ib. 28 Strangers not to be admitted to the Communion. 11 29 Fathers
not to be Godfathers in Baptism, nor Children not Communicants. ib. 30 The
lawful use of the Cross in Baptism explained. 12
Ministers, their Ordination, Function and Charge.
31 FOur Solemn Times appointed for the making of Ministers. 14 32 None to be
made Deacon and Minister both in one Day. 15 33 The Titles of such as are to be
made Ministers. ibid. 34 The Quality of such as are to be made Ministers 16 35
The Examination of such as are to be made Ministers. ib. 36 Subscriptions
required of such as are to be made Ministers. 17 37 Subscription before the
Diocesan. 18 38 Revolters after Subscription, censured. ib. 39 Cautions for
Institution of Ministers into Benefices. ib. 40 An Oath against Simony at
Institution into Benefices. ib. 41 Licenses for Plurality of Benefices limited,
and Residence enjoined. 19 42 Residence of Deans in their Churches. 20 43 Deans
and Prebendaries to Preach during their Residence. ib. 44 Prebendaries to be
resident upon their Benefices. 21 45 Beneficed Preachers being Resident upon
their Livings, to Preach every Sunday. 21 46 Beneficed men not Preachers, to
procure monthly Sermons. ib. 47 Absence of Beneficed men to be supplied by
Curates that are allowed Preachers. 22 48 None to be Curates but allowed by the
Bishops. ib. 49 Ministers not allowed Preachers may not Expound. ib. 50
Strangers not admitted to Preach without showing their License. 23 51 Strangers
not admitted to Preach in Cathedral Churches without sufficient Authority. ib.
52 The Names of Strange Preachers to be noted in a Book. ib 53 No Public
Opposition between Preachers. ib. 54 The Licenses of Preachers refusing
Conformity, to be void. 24 55 The Form of a Prayer to be used by all Preachers
before their Sermons. ib. 56 Preachers and Lecturers to read Divine Service,
and Administer the Sacraments twice a year at the least. 25 57 The Sacraments
to be refused at the hands of unpreaching Ministers. 26 58 Ministers reading
Divine Service, and administering the Sacraments, to wear Surplices, and
Graduates therewithal, Hoods. ib. 59 Ministers to Catechize every Sunday. 27 60
Confirmation to be performed once in three years. ib. 61 Ministers to prepare
Children for Confirmation. 28 62 Ministers not to marry any Persons without
Banns or License. ib. 63 Ministers of Exempt Churches, not to Marry without
Banns or License. 29 64 Ministers solemnly to bid Holy Day. ib. 65 Ministers
solemnly to denounce Recusants and Excommunicates: ib. 66 Ministers to confer
with Recusants. 30 67 Ministers to Visit the Sick. ib. 68 Ministers not to
refuse to Christen or Bury. 31 69 Ministers not to defer Christning, if the
Child be in danger. ib. 70 Ministers to keep a Register of Christenings,
Weddings and Burials. ib. 71 Ministers not to preach or administer the
Communion in Private Houses. 32 72 Ministers not to appoint public or private
Fasts or Prophesies or to Exercise, but by Authority. 33 73 Ministers not to
hold private Conventicles. ib. 74 Decency in Apparel enjoined to Ministers. 34
75 Sober Conversation required in Ministers. 35 76 Ministers at no time to
forsake their Calling. ib.
Schoolmasters.
77 NOne to teach School without License. 35 78 Curates destrous to teach, to
be Licensed before others. 36 79 The Duty of Schoolmasters. ib.
Things appertaining to Churches.
80 THe great Bible, and Book of Common Prayer, to be had in every Church. 36
81 A Font of Stone for Baptism in every Church 37 82 A decent Communion Table
in every Church. ib. 83 A Pulpit to be provided in every Church. 38 84 A Chest
for Alms in every Church ib. 85 Churches to be kept in sufficient reparation.
ib. 86 Churches to be surveyed, and the decays certified to the High
Commissioners. 39 87 A Terrier of Glebe-lands and other Possessions belongin to
Churches. ib. 88 Churches not to be Profaned. 40
Churchwardens or Quest-men, and Sidemen or Assistants.
89 THe choice of Churchwardens, and their account. 40 90 The choice of
Sidemen, and their joint Office with Churchwardens. ib.
Parish Clerks.
91 PArish Clerks to le chosen by the Minister. 41
Ecclesiastical Courts belonging to the Archbishops Jurisdiction
92 NOne to be cited into diverse Courts for probate of the same Will. 41 93 The
rate of Bona notabilia liable to the Prorogative Court. 43 94 None to be cited
into the Arches or Audience, but dwellers within the Archbishops Diocese or
Peculiars. ib. 95 The Restraint of double Quarrels. 44 96 Inhibitions not to be
granted without the subscription of an Advocate. ib. 97 Inhibitions not to be
granted until the Appeal be exhibited to the Judge. 45 98 Inhibitions not to be
granted to factious Appellants, unless they first subscribe. ib. 99 None to
marry within the Degrees prohibited. 46 100 None to Marry under xxi years,
without their Parents Consent. ib. 101 By whom Licenses to Marry without Banns
shall be granted, and to what sort of persons. ib. 102 Security to be taken at
the granting of such Licenses, and under what Conditions. 47 103 Oaths to be
taken for the Conditions. ib. 104 An Exception for those that are in
Widdowhood. ib. 105 No Sentence for Divorce to be given upon the sole
confession of the Parties. 48 106 No Sentence for Divorce to be given but in
open Court. ib. 107 In all Sentences for Divorce, Bond to be taken for not
marrying during each others life ib. 108 The penalty for Judges offending in
the Premises. 49
Ecclesiastical Courts belonging to the Jurisdiction of Bishops and
ArchDeacons, and the Proceedings in them.
109 NOtorious Crimes and Scandal to be certified into Ecclesiastical Courts by
Presentment. 49 110 Schismatics to be presented. ib. 111 Disturbers of Divine
Service to be presented. 50 112 Not Communicants at Easter to be presented ib.
113 Ministers may persent. ib. 114 Ministers shall present Recusants. 51 115
Ministers and Churchwardens not to be sued for Presenting. ib. 116
Churchwardens not bound to present oftener than twice a Year. 52 117
Churchwardens not to be troubled for not presenting oftener then twice a year.
ib. 118 The old Churchwardens to make their Presentiments before the new be
sworn. 53 119 Convenient time to be assigned for framing Presentiments ib. 120
None to be cited into Ecclesiastical Courts by Process of Quorum nomina. 54 121
None to be cited into several Courts for one Crime. ib. 122 No Sentence of
Deprivation or Deposition to be pronounced against a Minister, but by the
Bishop. 55 123 No Act to be sped but in open Court. ib. 124 No Court to have
more than one Seal. ib. 125 Convenient places to be chosen for the keeping of
Courts. 56 126 Peculiar and inferior Courts to exhibit the Original Copies of
Wills into the Bishops Registry. ib.
Judges Eccleslastical and their Surrogates.
127 THe quality and Oath of Judges. 56 128 The Quality of Surrogates. 57
Proctors.
129 PProctors not to retain Causes without the lawful Assignment of the
parties. 58 130 Proctors not to retain Causes without the counsel of an
Advocate. ib. 131 Proctors not to conclude in any cause without the knowledge
of an Advocate. 59 132 Proctors pohibited the Oath, In Animam Domini sui ib.
133 Proctors not to be clamorous in Court. 60
Registers.
134 A Buses to be reformed in Registers. 60 135 A certain rate of Fees due to
all Ecclesiastical Officers. 61 136 A Table of the Rates and Fees to be set up
in Courts and Registers. 62 137 The whole Fees for showing Letters of Orders,
and other Licenses, due but once in every Bishops time. ib.
Apparitors.
138 THe number of Apparitors restrained 63
Authority of Synods.
139 A National Synod the Church representative. 64 140 Synods conclude as well
the absent as the present. ib. 141 Depravers of the Synod censured. ib.
FINIS.

