ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the Diocese of CHICHESTER, In the
First Episcopal Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God, PETER, by
Divine Permission, Lord Bishop of Chichester.

In the Second Year of his Consecration.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, 1670.

The Tenor of the Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOU shall Swear diligently to Enquire, and true Presentment make, of every
person now or lately of your Parish, which has made any default or offense
enquirable by the King's Laws Ecclesiastical, and become known unto you: For
your direction wherein, you shall duly consider all and every of these Articles
given you in charge; and neither present, nor spare to present any for favor
or malice, hope of reward, or fear of displeasure: So help you God.

Concerning Religion, and the Government of the Church established in this
Realm.
IMprimis. Is there any in your Parish, who are guilty of Atheistical or
blasphemous Speeches against the Majesty of Almighty God, or Scoffers of
Religion, Artic. 1.2, 3, etc.
^n the Soul's future Immortal state? Is there any guilty of Speeches of
Infidelity against the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ? Any who in their
communication, or otherwise, defend the Sociman, or Arrian Heresy, denying the
Eternal Godhead of the Lord Jesus, or Pelagian, denying the nece^sity of Grace,
and of Baptism for the washing away of Original Sin?

II. Is there any one that does affirm or teach (and who is he) that the Holy
Scripture does not contain all things necessary to Salvation? or, Artic. 8.
that what is contained in the three Creeds ought not thoroughly to be received
and believed, or that the Church has not Authority in Controversies of faith?

III. Can. 3.
Is there any in your Parish that does affirm and teach that the Church of
England by law established, is not a true and Apostolical Church* and a true
member of the Catholic Church, having in her ^ll things necessary to
Salvation? Or is there any that does ^ffirm and teach that the xxxix Articles
agreed upon by the Arch*B^shops and Bishops of both Provinces, Can. 5.
and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, A D. 1562, are in
any part erroneous, or superstitious, or such as may not with a good conscience
be subscribed unto?

IV. Is there any in your P^rish that does affirm and teach, Can. 4.
that the form of God's W^rship in the Church of England established by law,
and contained in the book of Common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments*
is a corrupt Popish, or any way superstitious or unlawful Worship of God, or
contains any thing in it that is repugnant to Scripture; or to the Doctrine
and Worship in the Catholic or Primitiv^ Church?

V. Is there any that does affirm or teach (and who is he) that Baptism of
Infants according to the Church of England is unlawful or unnecessary, or
better to be delayed, or not appointed for the Remission of Sins, Galat. 3.
Rubric after Baptism
or that it may be repeated, or that Infants duly baptized according to the
^hurch's Order, and dying before they commit ^ctual st^^^re not saved,
everlastingly through God's grace given them in Baptis^?

VI. Is there any who does affirm or teach that the K^ng's, Majesty has not
the same Preroga^ive in C^uses E^^^^si^st^cal, Can. 1 and 2.
which we see has been given ^lwaies to ^ll god^y Princes by God himself both
among the Jews, and in the Christian Church? Art. 37.
Or that does any way deny or impugn the King's Majesty's Royal Authority or
Supremacy in C^use^ Ecclesiastical in this Realm? Or who denies that within his
Maiestie's Realms of England, Scotland, and (...), and all other his Dominions
and Countries* our Lord the King is the highest Power under God, to whom the
chief G^vernment of all Estates whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil in ^ll
Causes does appertain without any subjection due from Him or his Subjects to
any foreign Jurisdiction?

VII. Is there any who does affirm and teach (and who is he) that the
Government of the Church of (...) under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Arch-De^cons, or other chief Ministers bearing office in the same, Can.
7.
or that the forms or manner of Ordaining and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons established by law contains any thing that is Antichristi^n, Can. 8.
or repugnant to the lord of God, or to the practice of the Catholic Church?
Or that pers^^s so ordained Bishops Priests or De^cons h^^e not s^ffic^ent
external calling, or that they ought not to be (...) truly Bishops, Priests, or
Deacons till they h^ve some other external calling unto those divine Offices?
or (...) teaches that those three Holy Orders above^^^^ have not been ever in
Christ's Church even from the Apostles time?

VIII. Is there any in your P^^i^h (and who is h^) that by separation of
himself from the Church, or by joining himself to Convonticles breaks the
Communion of the Church of England, or accounts of others as profane, Can. 9.
and none of the godly, for their orderly conforming themselves to the Church
of England as established by law? Or that any combining themselves in
Assemblies or Congreg^tions of the King's born Subjects within this Land, other
then such as by the laws of this Land are held and allowed may truly take unto
themselves the name of another purer Church, or of the Church of England?

IX. Is there any who does affirm and teach (and who is he) that the Rites and
Ceremonies, Can. 6.
and the Rules of the Church of England by law established, are Antichristian,
supe^stitious, or frivolous; Or any way unlawful or burdensome, or such as may
not be subscribed unto, and practiced with a good consc^ence, Can. 10.
or that the Church has no power to decree any such Rites and Ceremonies?

Concerning the Clergy* their Duty and Office.
I. IS the Parson, Act. of Unifor. Car. II. 14.
Uicar (or also Curate) in holy Orders by Episcopal Ordination, a Pri^st
ordained according to the laws of the Church of England* has he been legally
instituted and inducted into his Benefice, or is he known or suspected to have
obtain^d his Parsonage or Uicaridge by any Symoniacal Contract?

II. Did he within two Months after his Induction publicly in your Church or
Chapel upon some Sunday or Holy Day in the time of Divine S^rvice openly read
the xxxix. Ibid.
Articles established by Authorit^ in this Church, A.D. 1562; and then profess
and publish his assent, and subscribe his name thereto in the presence of the
Church W^rdens? Do you not know, or have you not ^ear^ that ^n his reading, or
pretending to read those xxxix Articles, he p^ssed over some one or more of
them, or some part of one or more, and what part of the Articles was it that he
left u^read* Di^ your Person* Uicar or Curate upon some Lord^-d^y before ^he
Feast of St. ^^rtholomew, A.D. 1662, or some Lord^-day within two Months after
Sis Induction, solemnly read in your Church or Chapel both Morning and Evening
Prayer, as it is appointed in the book Common Prayer by law established? And
did he after such reading, publicly before the Congregation declare his
un^eigned assent and consent to the use of all things in the said book
contained, as is prescribed in the Act of Parliament lately made for the
Uniformity of public Prayers? And did he within three Months after the said
Feast of St. Bartholomew 1662, or within three Months after his Induction into
your Church or Chapel, publicly upon some Lord's Day in your Parish Church
read a Certificate under the hand and seal of the Archbishop, Bishop or
Ordinary of the Diocese, That he the said Parson, Uicar or Curate, did before
his admission to be incumbent, subscribe a declaration of the unlawfulness to
take up arms against the King, of his conforming to the Liturgy of this Church,
and of his disavowing the unlawful Oath commonly called, The Solemn League and
Covenant, according as is prescribed in the aforesaid Act for Uniformity?

Act of Parliament. Can. 47.48.
III. Or after his lawful Entrance is your Pa^son or Uicar resident upon his
benefice: or if his residence be legally dispens^d with, is his place supplied
by a Curate allowed by the Bishops, and a licensed Pre^c^er, and const^ntly
resident amongst you? and what yearly Stipend does your Minister allew him? And
if your Person or Uicar be both resident himself and keep a Curate, does he
notwithstanding himself, at least once a Month, openly read Common Prayer in
your Church or Ch^ppel, and (if there be occ^sion) administer each Sacrament in
such order, manner and form as is prescribed in the Liturgy and Canons of this
Church?

IV. Having both lawful Entrance and Residence among you; is he (your Parson,
Uicar, or also Curate) of blameless Conversation, the Husband of one Wife,
sober, grave, not double tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy
lucre, ruling his Children, 1 Timothy 3.
and his own house well, sound in faith, in chari^y, in patience? Or on the
contrary, is he a frequenter of T^verns or Alehouses, Can. 75,
a common G^mester a profane or obscene jester, a swearer, railer, scoffer, or
qu^rreller? Does he set Neighbors at v^riance one with another? Does he
f^miliarly converse with persons Excommunicate, ungodly or vicious? Does he
resort to suspected and infamous houses? Or is he himself vehemently suspected
of Incontinency, with any person within or without your Parish? Or does your
Curate or Minister lodge or board at any Tavern, Inn, Alehouse, or house of any
ill report?

V. Does your Minister or Curate plainly, audibly, distinctly, and reverently
read the Divine Service of Morning and Evening-Prayer, without any diminution,
addition, Act of Uni^or. Rubric.
or alteration, upon all Sundays and Holy Days, not omitting also other days
appointed by the book of Common Prayer as fit and usual times, Can. 14. Can. 15.
as Wednesdays and Fridays (with the Litanies added) and the Eves of every
Sunday and Holy Day, with Ember and Rogation days? And moreover, when he is at
home, and not otherwise reasonably hindered himself, Rubric after Preface.
or not able to get two or three gathered together, does he every day say
Divine Service Morning and Ebening in the Parish Church, where he ministers,
and cause a Bell to be tolled thereunto, that the People may come to hear Gods
Word, and to pray with him?

VI. Does your Minister reverently and publicly, Rubric
at the Font only, administer the Holy Sacrament of Baptism? Or does he refuse
or delay to Christen any child that is brought to him to Church on any Sunday
or Holy Day, Can. 68. Rubr. of Baptism
knowledge thereof being given to him over Night, or in the Morning before
Morning-Prayer, or neglect to persuade all those who have the use of Reason,
and are still unbaptiz'd (having been seduced by An^b^p^ists) to come to Holy
Baptism, and does he take care for their Baptism as in the Common Prayer Book
is prescribed? Can. 29.30.
Or does he refuse or neglect at any time to sign the child baptized with the
sign of the Cross; Rubric.
or does he admit such to be Godfathers or Godmothers who are either the
Parents or who have not themselves received the Holy Communion?

VII. Does your Minister duly and reverently administer the Holy Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ our Lord so often, at least, and at such times,
Rubr. Can. 21.
as every Parishioner may Commu^icate at the least three times in every year in
public, whereof the Feast of Easter to be one? And does he reverently and
carefully in all things obse^ve all the Churches Order in the Celebration? Does
he give warning publicly in the Church at Morning-Prayer the Sunday before
Can. 22.
for the better preparation of his Parishioners? And do such as purpose to
Communicate, signify their Names at least some time the day before? and when
he sees the People negligent to come to the Communion, R^b^ick
does he use the Churches second Exhortation? and when there is no Communion,
does your Minister every Sunday and Holy Day through^ut the year re^d the
Communion Service, so much of it as is appointed to be read by the Book of
(...)-Prayer* and a^ the place app^^n^e^* the^eb^* profess^ng his and the
Churches re^diness to the ^ore frequent Celebr^tion of the Holy Eucharist, if
Communi^^^^s (...) of wanting?

V^II Does your Minister wittingly admit to the receiving the Holy Communion,
Rubr.
any one such who is known to live in open and notorious sin without
repentance? or that h^s wronged his Neighbor by word or deed, Can. 26.
so as that the Congregation is thereby offended, or such betwixt whom he
perceives malice or hatred to reign, and will not be reduced by him to a
reconcilement, or to any who refuse to be present at the other public Prayers
of the Church or to any that be common or notorious depravers of the Book of
Common Prayer, or of any thing contained in the xxxix Articles; or in the Book
of Ordaining Bishops, Priests, and Deacons or to any that has spoken against
his Majesty's Supreme Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, except such persons
do acknowledge to the Minister, before you the Churchwardens that he is sorry
for the same, and promise under his hand (if he can write) or otherwise by word
of mouth, that he will do so no more? Or lastly, to any that refuse to receive
the said Holy Communion kneeling, and of all such persons by him put from the
communion, does he give an account to his Ordinary according to Law? Can. 27.


IX. Does he at the Celebration of the Holy Communion in the due places
appointed by the Liturgy, take the Paten into his hands, and break the bread,
and lay his hand upon all the bread, and take the cup into his hand, and lay
his hand upon every Uessel in which there is any Wine to be consecrated? Rubr.
and when that which is consecrated is spent, does he communicate any persons
without consecrating more according to the form prescribed, and does he
severally deliver the Bread and Wine to every Communicant; Rubr.
and at his delivering the same, does he rehearse, Can. 21.
the whole form prescribed in the Communion-book, saying, The Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. And The Blood o^ ou^ Lord Jesus Christ which wa^shed, etc Or
does he use only some part thereof as he lists himself? and when all h^ve
communicated does he cover wh^t rem^ineth of the Consecrated Elements wi^h a
fair Linen Cloth? and what remains is it reverently eaten and drunken by some
of the Communicants within your Church?

X I^ any person si^k or in health (especially before the Rec^^ving the Holy
Communion fi^ding his conscience troubled with any w^ighty m^tters, ^. Exhort.
to Con. m.
does for the quieting of his conscience, and for fu^^her comfort and counsel,
unburden his conscience to his Priest or Minister; does then the said Priest or
Minister upon special confession of his sins made (to make which ^l^o h^ is by
the Minister to be moved) upon his repentance administer unto him absolution,
together with Ghostly counsel and advice? and have you ever heard that the said
Priest or Minister ha^h revealed or made known at any time to any person
whatsoever directly or indirectly any crime or offense confessed to him in
secret by any such Penitents whatsosoever (except they be such crimes as by the
Laws of this Realm for the public concern, Can. 113
1. Exhort. for the Comm. in the Rubr. of the Visitation of the sick. and Can.
the Life of the said Priest may and ought to be called in question for
concealing of them?)

II. Is you^ Minister ^ li^ensed Preacher, by the Bishop, or either of the two
Universities? and if so, does he then constantly, ^ unless in case of sickness*
necessary absence, or other reasonabl^ imped^ment himself preach in your Church
or Chapel, or in some other near adjoining, one Sermon every Lord's Day? or in
such cases of impediment, does he procure some lawful Minister and licensed
Preacher, to read Praye^s and to pre^ch one Sermon and to pe^form other
Ministerial Duties each such Day besides the F^^st^ of Christ's Nativity,
Passion, Can. 45.46.49.47.
and Ascension at the least* or if no Sermon be, take care that one of the
Hom^^ie^ set forth by Authority, be there read by a Priest or Deacon lawfully
ordained on every Sunday, and Holy Day in the Year? has he in his own Sermons
at any time or in other Discourse (as you know or have heard of) preached or
maintained any unsound Heretical, Seditio^s, or Schismatical Doctrine so far as
you can judge? or spoken ought privately in contempt of Religion, or that
Religion or any part of it, which he by his office in this Church professes?

XII. Does he or any other admitted to preach in your Church, omit before his
Sermon or Homily briefly to move and exhort the people in the form laid down in
the 55 th Canon, or to the same effect, (declaring for whom, and for what
mercies they are to pray, Can. 55.
and to give God thanks) to join with him finally in Prayer for all those
mercies in that most Holy and Comprehensible Prayer of our Lord?

XIII. Does your Minister diligently catechize the Youth of your P^rish every
Sunday and Holy Day by way of Question and Answer, Rubric.
according to the Church's public Catechism, or also further instruct them in
the sense thereof, as he shall think fit, and this after the second lesson
openly in the Church? Does he by this and all other good me^ns and admonitions,
prepare and procure them (as occasion is offered devoutly to come and seek to
be confirmed by the Bishop; and himself either bring or send in writiting under
his hand the names of^ all such persons in his Parish, as he shall find by his
Examination fit to be presented to the Bishop, humbly to seek and ask that
benefit of Confirmation?

XIV. Does your Minister endeavor privately to reclaim and reduce all Popish
Recusants, and all Sectaries in your Parish to the Communion in the public and
established Worship of God in this Church? Can. 66.
Is he also ready to visit the sick? And does he call upon them to receive the
holy Sacrament in their sickness? Can, 67. Rub^ic.
And does he administer it to them? And is he also ready to baptize Infants in
danger of death* Is any Infant or more aged person in the Parish yet unbaptized
by his default? Have those Children that have been baptized in private houses
by your Minister or other law^ul Minister, afterward been brought into the
Church and the Order of the Church concerning them, there duly observed?

XV. Has your Minister, or any other, baptized Children, churched any Women,
Rubric.
or ministered the holy Communion in any private house, (where they have any
Church or Chapel in the Parish) otherwise then by Law is allowed in cases of
necessity?

XVI. Does your Minister on the three R^gation days before the Feast of the
holy Ascension, go in pe^^m^ulation of the Circuit of the Parish? And when he
so goes, do^^ he admonish the people to give thanks to God, in the beholding
of his benefits, for the increase and abundance of his (...) upon the face of
the Earth? And when there appears any ^ear of scarcity, to pray to God for his
mercy and favo^^ unto the L^nd, going into the Church with them, and reading
the Litany and one part of one of the Homiles, set forth and appointed for that
purpose of the Rogations?

XVII. Does he bid or observe the Holy Days* Can. 22.
and Fasting-days, and days of Abstinence, and other solemn days for which
particular Services are appointed, as they occur or return from time to time,
Can 64. Rubric.
giving notice to the Parishon^rs of every of the same in the Church, in the
time of Divine Service, the Sunday next before?

XVIII. Does your Minister always at the reading or celebrating any divine
office, constantly wear the Surplice and other Scholastical Habit, according to
his degree if he be a Gr^duate, and without a Ho^d (only instead thereof a
Tipet of black Stuff, not Silk being permitted him) if he be no Graduate? And
does he wear his Hair of a moderate and comely length? Is his usual Apparel
decent in fashion and in color, such as in enjoined him by the Canons of the
Church?

XIX. Does he in the presence ^f the Churchwardens, write and record in your
Register Book, the Names and Sirnames of all persons baptized, m^rried, and
buried in your Parish from time to time, yearly transmitting a Copy of those
Christenings, Marrying, and Bu^yings, subscribed with his own the
Churchwardens or Overseers names into the Bishops and Registry?

XX. Does your Minister permit any strange Ministers to preach in your Church
who is not sufficiently licensed and Authoriz^d thereto?

XXI. Does your Parson, U^^ar, or Curate celebrate Matrimony betwixt any
persons without the Banes of Matrimony first pub^ished on three several Sundays
or Holy Days in the Parish Church or Chapel where the said Parties dwell, Can.
62.
or at the time by Law prohibited, without special Faculty or License in either
case, granted by lawful Authority? Or does h^ celebrate the same in any other
place than in the Church? or in the Church at any other time, then between the
hours of eight and twelve in the forenoon? Or betwixt such persons as are
prohibited by the Laws of God. expressed in the Table of Marriage; or under the
Age of One and twenty years* without the consent of their Parents or of their
Guardians and Governors (if their Parents be de^d) signified unto him?

XXII. Or have any any such Licenses as above mentioned, that you know of, Can.
103 and Constit^t. 1597. Tit. d. Moderandis indulgentiis.
been granted by any under the Jurisdiction of this Dioc^ss, for the
Celebr^tion of Matrimony, until it do appear to the person himself, who is judge
in these cases, by the O^ths of two sufficient witnesses, one of them known to
the Judge, or to some person, whom the Judge dares trust in this particular, That
the express consent of the Parents or Parent (if one be dead) or Guardian or
Guardi^ns of the Parties, is thereunto had and obtain'^, and until one of the
Parties to be married have pesonally sworn, that he believes there is no let
or impediment of Pre-contract, Kindred or Alliance, nor any other lawful cause,
nor any suit commenced in any Ecclesiastical Court to bar or hinder the
proceeding of the said Matrimony?

XXIII. Has your Minister admitted any Women begotten withChi^d in Adultery or
Fornication, to be churched without license from the Ordinary?

XXIV. Does your Minister serve more than one Church or Chapel in distinct
Parishes on one day? Can. 48. Can. 15.71.
if so, how f^r distant are those Churches or Chapels which he so serves?

XXV. Does your Parson Uicar or Curate (if commanded by the Ordinary) openly
some Sunday denounce and declare for to Excommunicate all such as stand
Excommunicate by the Law of the Church, Can. 65.
that others may be admonished to refrain their Company? has he s^id Divine
Service whilst he knew such Excommunicate persons to have been in the Church?
or admitted such to the Communion whilst they stood so excommunicate.

XXVI. Does your Parson, Uicar, Can. 68.
or Curate (having convenient notice given) delay or refuse to bury any that
are brought to the Church or Churchyard according to the form prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer except such as die unbaptized, Excommunicate (...)
Excommunicationepunc; and no man able to testify their Repentance, or have
l^id violent hands upon themselves?)

XXVII. Does your Minister in the Parish Church or Chapel where he has
charge, read the Book of Can^ns and Constitutions, agreed on at the Synod
holden at London A.D. 1603, once every year upon some Sundays or Holy Days, in
the afternoon before Divine Service, and does he so divide the same, as the one
half may be read one day, and the other half the other day?

XXVIII. Is any Lecture preach^d in your Church? Can. 53, 54.
is he or are they who preach it, Licensed so to do by the Bishop? Does every
such one, before his Lecture either read the whole public Service himself
appointed for that day by the Church in his Surplice, or at least be present at
the whole reading thereof? and is he in all respects conformable to the Laws
and Orders of the Church of England? Or does he any way ende^vour to bring the
Parson or Uicar of the place into disrepute with his Parishioners?

XXIX. Does every one abide in his own calling whereunto he is called? Can. 76.
viz. Does any Layman that is not duly ordained openly read Common Prayer, or
execute any Ministerial duty in your Church? Or is there any Clergyman, viz.
in Holy Orders who does voluntarily relinquish those his Orders, and use
himself as a Layman only without taking any care of the Church of God?

Concerning the Pari^hioners.
I HAve you any (...) or person living in your Parish tha^ to you^ (...) live
not as becomes a Christian, according to his (...) and vow made in his Baptism;
viz. de (...) world^y (...), Tit. 2.
living sob^^^y, j^stly and god (...)

II. (...) in your Parish who wilfully absent themselves (...) Church or
Ch^^pel either at Morning or (...) upon S^ndays and other days ^ppointed by
(...)? 1 (...) cap. 2.
Or who come late to the Church or (...) before Service be done, and the
blessing (...) upon any Holy Days employ themselves in they (...) labor, or
apply or permit their servants so to (...) in (...) of u^ge^t necessity, as may
be in Ha^vest? have you any that upon such days keep open shops or sell wares
especially in time of Divine Service? Or have you any Uintuers, Inn-keep^rs, or
other Uictuallers, or sel^ers of Bee^ or Ale, that permit any on such days to
tipple or game in their houses, or upon any pretense whatsoever, (except in
some necessity as of sickness) to remain in their houses in the time of Divi^e
Service, or Sermon, forenoon, or afternoon, upon those d^ys? or any that will
come to hear S^^mons but will not come to Common Prayer and Worship of G^^
appointed in this Church?

III A^^ there any in your Parish of years of unde^standing that remain
unbaptiz'd, R^br. of B^pti^m
or any that refuse to send their Infants to be b^p^iz^d publicly in the
Church (except in cases of necessity) or in such cases do they procure them to
be b^ptiz'd at home in due manner according to the order of the Church of
England? ^.
Or any persons that being unconfirmed are not brough^ ^o confirmation, or
being of years, neglect themselves to seek it upon pretense of having received
the Communion, or Orders, or upon any other pretense whats^ever? Or are there
any that being Sixteen years of Age, do not receive the Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist three times in the year, C^n. 112
(whereof E^ster to be one?) Or that does forsake their own Parish Church to
receive elsewhere? Can. 51.
Or are there any married Women, who after their delivery from the Pai^ and
Peril of Childbearing, refuse in convenient time to return a pubblick
Thansgiving to God, according to the Order o^ the Church? Or are there any that
refuse to bury their d^^d according to the Rites of the Church?

IV. Do any in your Parish entertain in their house any Sojou^n^^, common
Guests, or other persons, who ^e^use to ^requent Divine Service, or receive the
Holy Communion as aforesaid, and what are the names, qualities, and conditions
of such S^journ^rs?

V. Do any refuse to be uncovered during the ^i^e of Divine Service, or
dev^utly to kneel when by the Common Prayer Book they are comm^nded so to do?
or to stand up, Can. 18.
at the Glory be to the Father, etc. and at the C^^^ds and Holy G^sp^l, and to
make answer at all the (...) appointed by the the said Book, and due reverence,
when the N^me of ou^ Lord Jesus is mentioned? And say the Cre^d and the Lor^'s
(...) in a loud voice with the Minister* (...) in the time of Divine Service
behave themselves (...) walking, talking, C^n 111
whispering, laughing* or sleepi^^*

VI. Do any persons (...) into your Church in time of Divine (...), or does any
other person disturb your Ministe^ doing (...) part of his Ministerial Office?
or (...) challenge one another* or fight in the Church or (...) Or are any
Plays, Feasts Drinkings (...) in your Church or Churchyard? C^n. 59.


VII Do an^ (...) ^n you^ P^rish ^egles to ^^use (...) or other Persons living
in their (...) yet learned the Church's Catechism, to (...) come to Church on
Sundays and Holy Days (...) by their Minister and instru^te^ therein?

(...) any in your Parish, Master or S^^v^nt, C^n. 10^ 115
(...), (...) Man or Woman, that live in Adultery, (...) h^ving married within
the degrees pr^h^^i^ed (...) in a T^able set ^orth by Authority) Or (...) you
(...) together in your Parish as man and wi^e, wh^ (...) in make known, when,
where, or by whom they were Married? Or any that being lawfully Married do yet
live asunder wi^hou^ separation in due form of Law? Or h^ve you any B^wd^,
Entertainers or concealers of incontinent persons, or any common Drunkards
E^^ortioners, Swearers, Railers, R^vilers, common Slandere^s of their
Neighbors, fi^thy and lascivious talkers, or which h^ve solicited any person
to unchastity? or any which have used any Charms, Enchantments* or
consult^ti^ns of these called Wizards, or cunning men and Sorc^rie^, such ^s
a^e not made Felony by the Laws of this Realm? or which h^ve committed perjury
in any Ecclesi^stical C^urt (...)?

Can. 114
IX. Are there any Recusants in your Parish or other Schismatically affect^d
^h^ ke^p in their houses any that take upon them to be spiritual guides and
just u^ters, or any Schoolmaster in their Family which come not to Church to
hear Divine Se^vice, and to receive the Holy C^mm^nion? or that labor to
seduce and w^thdraw others within, or without the Family, from the Religion in
th^s Church est^blished* or any in your Parish that retain, sell, or disperse
any Popish books or writings, or other books or writings of any Sectaries
touching the Religion, State, or Government Eccl^si^stical of this Kingdom of
England, or books of Heresy?

X. Have you any in your Parish that are suspected to be Ana-Baptists,
Familists, Lib^rtin^s Brownists, Qu^kers, Independents, or Presbyterian
opposers of the Epis^op^l Government.

Can. 92.
XI. Are there any in your Parish that do to your knowledge, or as you h^ve
heard, withold the stock of the Church, or any part thereof, or any goods or
legacies, or other things given to pious and charitable uses, any pr^visio^e
for free Schools, A^ms-houses or Hospitals (such as are not of his M^jesties
Found^tion or Patron^ge) employed otherwise than according to the intent of
their several fou^dations? Are there any T^st^ments or Wills by any conce^l'd
or improved, or any Goods unadministred by lawful Authority?

Can. 112 114 Rubric after Comm.
XII H^ve you any in your P^rish that refuse to pay their duty for ^^ster
off^rings to your Minister or (...) re^kon with him then, or tha^ refuse to
contribute and (...) Rate c^ssed upon them for the repair of your Church or
Ch^^p^l* or for the providing of such Books, Furniture, or necessary Ornaments
as are requisite for the performance of any of the Divine Offices there?

XIII. Do you know of any person in your Parish having the Presentation or gift
of any Ecclesi^stical Benefice, who has presented a Minister to it upon any
Bargain, either for Money, or Pension, or Lease, or reserve of Tithes, or
Glebe, or any part thereof, or upon any other Symon^acal contract whatsoever?

Concerning Churchwardens, Sidemen, Parish-Clarks and Sextons.
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen, and sworn?
C^n. 89.
Have the last Churchwardens given up their Accounts before the Minister and
Parishioners, delivering up also the money remaining in your hands, C^n. 90.
and other things of right belonging to your Church or Chapel? and is the some
delivered to you by bill indented?

II. Does any person or persons trouble or molest you the Churchwardens for
presenting any offenders in any of the premises, C^n. 115
or for performing the duty that lies upon you in executing any part of your
office, and who are they that do so molest and trouble you?

III. Do you the Churchwardens against every Communion provide a sufficient
quantity of fine white bread, Rubr. Can. 20.
and good and wholesome Wine for the number of the Communicants? and do you
bring ^he Wine so provided in a cle^^ and sweet standing Flagon of Pewter, or
other purer Metal.

IV. Do you suffer the Table for the Holy Communion to be applied at any time,
to any profane ^r com^on use, as of writing, setting dead Corpse upon it at
Funerals, or others in the Church to sit upon it, or irreverently to make it a
place to lay their arms or hats upon it?

V. Do you the Churchwardens note them that come late to Church after Divine
Service is begun, or depart before it be ended? Act. 1. ^ Eliz.
and do you take diligent notice of the absent and (by Warrant desired from
some of the Justices of peace) according as by law you are directed, do you
lev^e by way of distress from every person of the Parish that does not resort
to your Parish Church or Chapel on every Sunday and Holy Day (having no l^wful
or reasonable excuse to be absent) the sum of 12 d. for every Sunday or
Holy Day in which he is so absent? and do you distribute the several sums so
levied to the poor of your Parish according to the law in that case provided?
and before you present any for such default, do you first seriously admonish
them?

VI. Do you suffer none in time of Divine Service to stand idle, Can. 90.
or talk together in the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church or Churchyard,
nor children playing or crying in or about the Church? nor suffer any to bring
Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds into the Church to the disturbance of the Congregation?

VII. Are the Sidemen duly chosen? do they assist the Churchwardens in the
executing their Office? and do they join with them in framing Presentiments?

VIII. Have you a Parish Clark aged 20 years at the least, chosen by your
Minister, of honest life and conversation, and sufficiently able to perform his
duty in reading, Can. 91.
writing, and singing? and does he duly attend the Minister in all Divine
Offices at the Church? does be keep clean the Church, and carefully look to it,
and to the Books? and is he paid the ancient and usual wages as has been
accustomed?

IX. Does your Clark, or your Sexton (if there be any such in your Parish)
diligently look to the doors of the Church that they be locked and opened at
due times, and the Bells tolled and rung at the due and accustomed hours before
the beginning of Morning and Evening Service, that the People may be warned and
invited; to come to the Church? and when any person is passing out of this
life, does he upon notice given thereof, toll a Bell as has been accustomed,
that ^evout and charitable persons may thereby be warned to recommend the Soul
of the dying person to the grace, Can. 67.
mercy, and peace of God Almighty?

X. Do they at the instance of any, make any grave in any part of the Church
(except in such Isles where some person has propriety) without the express
consent of your Minister.

Concerning Churches, and their Possessions, Ornaments, Utensils, and other
Necessaries to the same belonging.
I. IS your Church or Chapel kept in good repair? are the roofs, the walls,
the floors, windows, seats and doors, Can. 15
well maintained? and is your Porch and Steeple in good repair, and Bells kept
in good order by the care and oversight of the Churchwardens at the charge of
all persons occupying any Lands or Tenements within your Parish, as well
out-dwellers as Inhabitants, rating all proportionably for the Lands and
Tenements they occupy therein? And is your Church or Chappelyard sufficiently
fenced with walls, rails, or pales, as has been accustomed, and that by the
moneys cessed upon Lands and Tenements in your Parish as aforesaid, except you
have a special custom otherwise directing you?

II. Are there any Isles adjoining to your Church or Chancel which time out of
mind have been repaired by the owners of any M^ss^age in your Parish? if so do
the owners thereof repair the same?

III. Is the Chancel of the Church sufficiently repaired and beautifi^d by the
Minister or other person to whom that does belong?

IV. Is there any in your Parish that has converted to his own, or to any
common secular use, any Timber, Wood, Stone, or other Materials belonging to
any Church or Chapel, Parson^ge or Uicaridge house, or outhouses thereof?

V. Have you in your Church a decent Font of stone for the Administration of
Holy Baptism, and the same set in the ancient and usual place appointed for it;
and have you in the Chancell a decent Table for the Celebration of the Holy
Communion, and for the Communion-service, and a Carpet of silk or other decent
stuff, to lie continually upon the T^ble, during the time of Divine Service,
and a fair linen cloth to lay on the same, at the time of the Holy Communion?
and have you i^ fair Communion Cup of Silver, with a Cover, a Plate, and a
Flagon of Pewter, or purer Metal, the one to place the Bread on, the other to
bring the Wine into the Holy Table, and a fair linen cloth for covering the
Consecrated Elements? Have you in your Church or Chapel a convenient reading
Seat or Pew, erected for your Minister wherein to read the daily Morning and
Evening Service, as also a decent Pulpit set in a convenient place for the
preaching of God's Word.

VI. Have you belonging to the Church or Chapel a perfect Bible of the largest
Uolumn, Can.
of the last Translation allowed by Authority? Have you two Books of
Common Prayer set forth according to the last Act of Parliament for the
Uniformity of public Prayers? And are both also of the largest Uolumn, fairly
bound, one for the Minister, and another for the Clark, to use at the
celebration of all Divine Offices? the Book of Homilies, the Book of Canons and
Constitutions made in the Synod held at London 1603, a Table of Degrees in
marriage prohibited, set forth by Authority, A. D. 1563; a Parchment
Register-book, to register the several Christenings, Marriages, and Buryings
within the Parish? Have you a Book to set down the names of such Strangers as
preach in your Church? and another Book wherein to write down and keep the
Accounts of the Churchwardens, and an Inventory of all things provided and
belonging to your Church? Have any other Books, as the Works of Bishop Jewel,
Erasmus his Paraphrase upon the Gospel, or any other good Books been carried
out of the Church, into any man's private House, Or been l^s^?

Can, 82
VII. Are the ten Commandments and chosen Sentences of Scripture, or the Lords
Pr^yer and others set up in your Church or Chapel, as the Canon does require?

Can.
V^II. Have you a large and decent Surplice, one, or more, for the Minist^r to
wear at all times of his public Ministrati^n? And have you a Ho^d or Typet for
your Minister to wear over his Surplice, if he be a Graduate?

IX H^ve you in your Church or Chapel a strong Chest (...) three Lo^k^ and
Keys for the Alms of the poor, and a hole therefore in the upper part thereof?
and is one of those Keys in the custody of the Parson, Uicar, or Curate? And
have you one other convenient Chest, for keeping the Books and Furniture
belonging to the Church; and a Bier with a Hersecloth for the burial of the
dead?

X. Have any trees been cut down, growing in the Churchyard or fences thereof,
and by whom, and for what use was it done? what private doors are made into the
Churchyard, whereby Nusances are committed, and by whom were those doors made?
Is any Encroachment made upon that ground?

XI. Have you any Lands or Tenements given or belonging to the repairing of
your Church? what is the quantity and value thereof, and in whose possession
are they?

XII. When any of those things mentioned in the 6, 7, 8 or 9. Articles above
are wanting, are they provided by the Churchwardens, at the charge only of the
Inhabitants of the Parish, according to each Inhabitants personal State, and
not otherwise? And do you the Church Wardens when you make a Rate for the same,
and also for the buying of Bread and Wine for Communions, and for the expenses
of your selves and Sidemen at Uisitations, and to pay for scouring your Plate,
and washing the Surplice and Communion clothes, and if you have not a Custom to
the contrary) to pay your Parish Clark his ancient Wages; When you m^ke, I say
at any time such a Rate, or a Rate according to the first Article for the
repair of your Church, do you give public notice in the Church to the
Parishioners of the time and place of your making them, and also of the time
and place when and where your Rate shall be ^ffer'd to be confirmed by your
Ordinary? that the Objectio^s of any may be heard, before they be by the
Ordinary ratified?

X^II. Is the House of your Parson Uicar, or Curate, with all the out^ houses
thereto belonging, kept in good and sufficient repair? or have any of the said
houses or outhouses been pulled down without License from the Ordinary? and by
whom? Has any person (...) upon any Orchad, Garden, Yard, or (...) belonging
to your Parsonage or Uicaridg^house, or fe^^d any tree thereon growing?

X^V (...) of the ancient Globe Lands belonging to your Minist^rs, been taken
aw^y, or exchanged for other Lands, wi^^out the free consent of the Patron
Incumbent, and License from the Ordinary? And have you a perfect terrier of all
Glebe-Lands, Maddows, Gardens, Orchads, Stocks, Implements, Tenements or
Cottages belonging to your Parsonage, Can. 87.
or Uicaridg? as also, a Note of such Pensions, Rate-tithes, and Portions of
Tithes (or other yearly profits either within or without your Parish) as belong
thereunto? and finding no such terier, do you the Churchwardens and Sidemen,
together with your Minister and others of your Parish, make a terrier of the
Premises in Parchment, subscribed and signed by you to be kept by your
Minister, and a Copy thereof subscribed and sign'^ sent into the Bishops
Registry?

XV. Are the Bones of them that h^ve been buried in your Church or Churchyard
kept decently, interred there, or laid up in some ^it place as beseems
Christians? and is the whole consecrated ground kept free from Swine and other
filth and annoyance, as becomes a place so dedicated?

Concerning Schoolmasters, Physicians, Chyrurgeons and Midwives.
Can. 77.79.
I. DO any in your Parish teach or instruct Youth in any public School, or
private House, without License from his Ordinary? and does he cause his
Scholars on Sund^ys and Holy Days to resort to Church, to hear Divine Service,
Sermons and Catechize? and does he see that they behave themselves there
orderly and reverently? and does he himself teach them the Catechism set forth
by Authority? and is he deligent to bring them up in the fear of God, in good
learning, and manners?

II. Do any in your Parish practice Physic or Surgery without a License from
the Bishop himself if at home, or in his absence by the Ordinary upon the
place? Are your Midwives also licensed by the Ordinary?

Touching Public Ecclesiastical Officers of the whole Diocese (within the
Bishops Visiration.)
I. ARe there any Ecclesiastical Officers (within the Bishops Uisitation) any
Advocate, Register, Proctor, Clerk, Apparitor, or other Minister belonging to
the Ecclesiastical Court, that takes and exacts any extraordinary or greater
fees then are due and accustomed?

II. Has any Apparitor taken Reward or Fee to excuse any appearance before the
Ecclesiastical Court? or has the Register-sped any Act, or dismissed any
person detected without the knowledge and actual consent of the Judge? Are any
gifts or rewards taken by any for perverting justice.

III. Has ay person within your Parish paid or promised any sum of Money, or
other reward for commu^ation of Penance for any crime of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance? If so, how has the same been disposed of, to pious and charitable
uses (as far as you know?)

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the Churchwardens, and Sidemen, and Minister.
IF you know of any other Default or Crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, you
are to present the same. The Minister of every Parish, may join in Presentment
with the Churchwardens and Sidemen, and if they be not faithful in their Care
to admonish and present, then the Parsons or Vicars, or in their absence, the
Curates (being the persons that should principally have care of suppressing of
sin and impieties in their Parishes) may, and may find themselves in conscience
obliged to present especially the greater Crimes, and whatsoever in their
conscience they know needs reformation in their Parish, Can 113
as they tender the good of the Souls of their Parish; For So Much as in both the
Churchwardens, with the Sidemen and the Minister, the true discharge of the
duty of presenting is one chief means apppointed whereby public Disorders,
Sins, and Offenses against God, may be reformed and punished; so that their
wilful refusing to make true presentment, leaves the unreformed Vices of the
Nation at the Doors of such Officers, and for which they are to answer to
Almighty God, and the sworn-men also to the King in his Ecclesiastical Courts.


