ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED OF WITHIN THE DIOCESE OF LINCOLN, In the General and
Triennial Visitation OF THE Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM By Divine
Permission Lord Bishop of that DIOCESE, Anno Dom. 1671. Et Translationis suae
Anno Quarto.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb 1671.

THe Churchwardens are not to put off the making of their Presentiments to the
very day of the Bishops Visitation, but at some convenient time before, the
Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, are to read over these Articles of
Enquiry diligently. The Minister at the reading of each Article, is to ask the
Churchwardens and Sidemen what they can present concerning that Article, and
accordingly to write and set it down. And to avoid all Errors in drawing up the
Bill of Presentment, it is to be made according to this following Form, or as
near unto it, as conveniently may be; and to be given up in a Sheet of Paper,
viz.

A Direction for the Churchwardens to draw up, their Presentations.
At the Lord Bishop of Lincolns Visitation held at the day of 1671.
WE the Churchwardens and Sidemen of (...) have diligently perused all the
particulars contained in the First Title of the Book of Articles; and we
present (...)

And otherwise we have nothing to present concerning that Title.

Also we have perused the Second Title, and we present (...)

And so the Third, until the Book be gone through.

And under all, let every Church-wurden and Side-man write or subscribe his own
hand or mark to the Presentment, and so deliver it; for it will be required of
them to give an Answer thus particularly unto every Title of these Articles, if
not to every particular Article in the Book.

THe Minister of every Parish, both may and ought to join with the
Churchwardens, or other sworn Men, for the Presenting of Offenses; and if they
be so irreligious as not to do it, the Minister of himself may and ought to
present either the Offenses, or the Churchwardens and Questmen, for not
presenting the same; and is required in his Canonical Obedience so to do.

And if (their Oath and all this punctual Direction and Advertisement
notwithstanding) any Churchwardens or other sworn Men, shall follow the
Customary manner, and be careless in inquiring and presenting as they ought,
then shall they not be able hereafter to say; that they had not fair warning to
the contrary given them in the spirit of Meekness, or to complain they are
hardly dealt with, if (upon information and proof otherwise had) they be called
to answer their wilful Perjury, in some other Court, or Course of Justice, for
neglecting to enquire and present to all the particulars herein proposed.

Lastly, with their Bill of Presentment they are to certify the Names of all
Persons which have been married in their Parish since the 28th day of May last,
by any License or Dispensation, and what Ecclesiastical Judge granted the same?
And also the Name and Sirnames of all Persons which since the same day have
died possessed of any Goods in their Parish, and who do now possess the same,
and by what Right? And this will be particularly required of all Churchwardens.

The Oath ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear diligently and duly to enquire, and true Presentment make, so
far as by Law you stand bound, of all Offenses or Defaults mentioned in the
Articles given you in charge, or otherwise against the Ecclesiastical Laws,
together with the Names of the several Offenders therein: And that you will not
present any person out of malice or ill will, nor spare any for fear or favor.

So help you God.
ARTICLES to be enquired of in the Diocese of LINCOLN.
TIT. I. Concerning the Kings Supremacy and Authority.
1. IS there any who does affirm or teach, Canon 1, and 2.
That the Kings Majesty has not the same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical,
that the Godly Kings had among the Jews, and Christian Emperors in the
Primitive Church? Or that the Kings Majesty within his Realms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and all other his Dominions and Countries, is not the
highest Power under God? Or that does impeach any part of his Royal Supremacy?
Who is it, declare your knowledge herein, etc?

2. Is there any that does affirm or teach, Canon 12.
That it is lawful for any sort of Ministers and Lay Persons, or either of
them, to join together and to make Rules, Orders, and Constitutions in Causes
Ecclesiastical, without the Kings Authority? Or any that submit themselves to
be ruled and governed by the same?

TIT. II. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments, Furniture, and
Possession belonging to them.
1. IS your Parish Church or Chapel well and sufficiently repaired? Canon 85.
Are the Windows well glazed, the Floor kept paved plain and even, and all
things therein in such an orderly and decent sort without dust, or any thing
that may be either noisome or unseemly?

2. Is there in the Church or Chapel a Font of Stone standing in the usual
ancient place, with a Cover to it, Canon 81.
for the Administration of Baptism? Can. 82.
Is there also a convenient Communion Table, with a fair Carpet of Silk or
other, decent Stuff, in the time of Divine Service, and with a fair Linen
Cloth, at the time of Administering the Sacrament? Can. 20.
What Cup, Chalice, Patin, or Flagons, have you belonging to that service?

3. Have you a fur Surplice for the Minister to wear at the time of his public
Administration, Can. 58.
provided and duly washed at the Charge of the Parish?

4. Have you in the Church or Chapel a convenient Seat or Pew for the Minister
to read Divine Service in, Can. 83.
and a Pulpit with a decent Cloth or Cushion for the same? Can. 99.
A Bible of the last Translation in a large Volume, and two Books of Common
Prayer well bound, one for the Minister and another for the Clerk, Can. 58.
the Book of Homilies, the Book of Canons, and the Table of Degrees allowed and
prohibited in Marriages?

5. Have you a Register Book in Parchment of all the Names and Sirnames of all
such as are Christened, Can. 70
with the Names and Sirnames of their Parents, as also of such as are Buried
and Married? And is the same kept in all Points according to the ancient use?
And are the Names of all such Parties set down by your Minister every Lords Day
in the presence of the Churchwardens? Can. 52.
Have you a Book of Paper, to record the Names, Sirnames, and Licenses of such
Strangers as are admitted to preach in the Church or Chapel? And do such
Strangers subscribe their Names? As also a third Book for the Churchwardens
Accounts? Can. 89.
And also a Chest with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep the said Books and the
aforementioned Furniture? And is the Transcript of all these Books yearly
within one Month next after the 25th of March brought into the Bishops
Registry?

6. Is your Churchyard well and sufficiently fenced, maintained, Can. 85.
and kept with Walls, Railes, or Pales, as has been heretofore accustomed; and
it not, by whose negligence or default is it that the Fences of the same are
grown to decay? And are the Trees therein preserved?

7. Have any Persons encroached upon the ground of the Churchyard or other
consecrated ground, if so, set out what quantity of ground is so encroached
upon, and what new door has been made out into the Churchyard?

Except. in the Act of Indempn.
8. Do you know, or have you heard of any person who has imbezzled, concealed,
or converted to his own use, or sold to others any Ornaments, Utensils, or
Materials, belonging to any Church, Chapel, Parsonage, or Vicaridge House,
during or since the late War?

9. Is the House of the Parson, Lind. lib. 1. (...) Offic. Archid.
Vicar, or Curate, (with all the Outhouses thereunto belonging) kept in good
and sufficient repair? Or have any of the said Houses or Outhouses been
defaced or pulled down without License from the Ordinary, and by whom? Has any
person encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or Close belonging to the Parsonage or
Vicaridge House? Or cut up any Trees growing thereon? Ibid. de Ecclesiast.
Aedif.
Or changed, or removed the Ancient Marks and Bounds of the same?

10 Have any of the ancient Glebe Lands belonging to the Parsonage or Vicarage
been taken away or exchanged for other, Lind. lib. 3. de Rebus Ecclesiast.
without the free consent of the Incumbent, and License from the Ordinary? Have
any Enclosures been made in the Parish, to the detriment of the Church, by the
decay of Tillage, and converting Arable Land into Pasture? By whom has the
same been made, and how many years since; and how much is your Parsonage or
Vicarage damnified thereby in the yearly value thereof, as you know, believe,
or have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1. IS the Minister, Curate, or Lecturer, Episcopally ordained? Can. 36.
Is he licenced to preach by the Bishop or either of the Universities?

2. Is the Minister suspected to have obtained his Benefice by any Simonaical
Contract? Has he been legally inducted into the same? Q. Eliz. Injunct. 26.
And did he within two Months after his Induction, Can. 40.
publicly in your Church, upon some Sunday or Holyday, in the time of Divine
Service, read the 39 Articles of the Church of England, established by
Authority, and there publicly declare his assent thereunto?

3. Is the Minister constantly resident among you? Can. 47, and 48.
Has he an able and conformable Curate to assist him in his absence or
presence? Does he carry himself in all things as an able and discreet Minister,
and conformable to the Church of England? Does he serve any more Cures beside
that of the Parish, and at what distance? What is the name of your Curate, and
what yearly Stipend does your Minister allow him?

4. Have you in the Parish besides the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, Can. 55, and
56. Can. 54.
any Lecturer or Lecturers, not having Cure of Souls therein? Does your
Lecturer conform himself to the Laws, Ordinances, and Rites Ecclesiastical
established in the Church of England? Act of Parliament before the Common
Prayer.
Does he at the place appointed for his Lecture, upon the first Lecture day of
every Month, before his Lecture, openly, publicly, and solemnly read the
Common Prayer and Service appointed to be read for that time of the day? And
does he as often in every year administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, in such manner and form, and with the observation of such Rites and
Ceremonies as are prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer?

5. Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, audibly and distinctly, with reverence
and devotion, Can. 14
read all Morning and Evening Service, and in reading of the same,
Administration of the Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of Women
after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and Pronouncing
Gods Commination against Impenitent Simers, use the form and words prescribed
in the Common Prayer, without any addition, omission, or alteration of the
same? And does he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine
Service, as are appointed in the said Book, so far as you have observed?

6. Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, read the Canons of the Church publicly
once every year; Can. 15.
and does he publicly read the Letany every Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday in
every Week? Does he declare on the Sunday what Holy Days and Fasting days are
in the Week following? Can. 64.
And does he and the Parishioners observe the same? Does he give notice of the
Communion, Banns of Matrimony, Can. 65.
and Perambulation in Rogation Weeks, and read the Briefs and Excommunications
delivered to him?

7. Does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, preaching or catechizing in
your Church or Chapel, declare or assert any Opinion or Doctrine Schismatical,
Can. 51.
Heretical, or Seditious, contrary to the Articles of the Church of England by
Law established; thereby to seduce the People into Parties and Factions, to the
disturbance of the Public Peace and Unity of the Church of State?

8. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any Public or Private Fasts,
Can. 72, and 73.
Prophecyings, or Exercises, not appointed by Authority? Or does he or any
other, either Minister or Lay Person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in
Private Houses within your Parish, for People of several Families to resort
unto, under the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving or Humiliation,
co^tr^ry to the Laws and Canons in that Case provided?

9. Does your Minister, Can. 45, and 46.
being licenced to preach himself, preach in your Church or Chapel one Sermon
every Sunday in the year? Being no licenced Preacher, does he procure Sermons
to be preached in his Cure once every Month at the least by Preachers which
are l^wfully licenced: Or one of the Homilies set forth by Authority to be
there read every Sunday by a Priest or Deacon?

10. Does your Minister at the reading or celebrating any Divine Officeth your
Church or Chapel wear the Surplice, Can. 58.
together with such other Scholastical Habit as is suitable to his degree; and
in preaching does he wear a Gown?

11. Does your Minister refuse or delay to Christen any Child that it brought
to him to the Church on Sundays or Holydays? Can 68.
Does he proceed therein in all things according to the Form of Public
Baptism in the Common Prayer Book? Or does he permit any person to be
Godfather or God-mother before he or she has received the Holy Communion?
Can. 29.


12. Does your Minister, being duly informed of the weakness and danger of
Death of any Infant unbaptized in his Parish; Can. 69.
and being thereupon desired to go unto the place, and baptize the same, either
wilfully refuse to do, or negligently delay the time; so that the Child
departs without Baptism through his default: Or if the Child so baptized do
recover afterward, is it brought into the Church by the Godfathers and
Godmothers, to the intent that the Congregation may be satisfied of the
Baptizing thereof?

13. Does your Minister diligently instruct the youth of your Parish in the
Church Catechism (...), Can. 59, and 61.
and does he prepare and present them, being so instructed, to be confirmed by
the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish Recusants and other
Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion
established in the Church of England, and to their bounden duty, in obeying the
Law, and submitting to the Government thereof?

Rubric for Confirmat.
14. Does your Minister, as often as the Bishop gives notice for Children to be
brought to him for their Confirmation, either bring or send in Writing to the
Bishop of the Diocese the Names of all those Children whom he thinks to be fit
for Confirmation?

15. Does your Minister, or any other in your Parish, celebrate Matrimony
between any Persons, Can. 62.
without Banes of Matrimony first published on three several Sundays or
Holydays, except by special License granted duly and by lawful Authority; or at
any other place than in the Church: and in the Church at any other time than
between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the Forenoon: Can. 99.
and at any time betwixt such Persons as are prohibited in the Table of
Marriage, or are under the age of One and twenty years, without the consent of
the Parents signified unto him, Can. 100.
or of their Guardians and Governors, if the Parents be deceased? Or has he
married those, of whom neither party dwells in the Parish?

16. Does your Minister refuse or delay to bury any Corpse that is brought into
the Church or Churchyard, Can. 68.
convenient warning being given him before; except the party deceased were
denounced Excommunicate (Majori Excommunicatione) for some grievous Crime, and
no man able to testify of his repentance; and does he do it decently and
gravely, not swerving from the Form prescribed by the Church in the
Common Prayer Book?

17. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a Man of sober, Can. 75.
unblameable, and exemplary life? Does he familiarly converse with ungodly,
vicious, and excommunicate persons? Can. 62.
Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Ale house (...) Common Gamester, a Swearer,
Railer, or Quarreller's D^ll ho^se^ Neighbor (...) one with another, or
encourage them to Suits and Contentions? Is he noted to be an intemperate
Drinker, or vehemently suspected of Incontinenty with any Person, either within
the Parish or without? Does he wear his Hair and Band of an immoderate and
uncomely length? Is his App^rel gra^e and decent, Can. 74.
as the Canons of the Church require; or is his Carriage and Conversation, in
any kind whatsoever, disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of
Jesus Christ?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1. IS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretic or
Schismatic, Can. 110.
any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectaries, that refuse to
come unto the Public Assemblies, Prayers, or Services of the Church, that
makes Profession of any other Religion than what is established in the Church
of England; and if there be any such, what are their Names?

2. Is there any person in your Parish that lives under a common same, Can.
109.
or vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any
Common Drunkards within your Parish, or Common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods
Name; or any that are hoted to be Railers, unclean, or filthy Talkers, or
Sowers of Sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their Neighbors?

3. Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holydays, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. Chap. 3.
Can. 13.
follow their bodily and ordinary labor; or permit their Servants so to do,
unless it be at the time of Harvest, or any other time when necessity requires?
Are any Shops kept open, or Wares sold: Or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or
other Victuallers and Sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or
game in their Houses upon those days?

4. Does every person inhabiting and so journing within your Parish, 1. Q.
Eliz. 2.
duly resort unto your Church or Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holyd^y
appointed for Divine Service; Do they then and there abide quietly, with
reverence, Can. 18.
order, and decency, during all the whole time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or
other Service of God there used: And are there any among you that come only to
the Preaching, and not to the Common Prayers of the Church?

5. Does every person reverently uncover his head, Can. 18.
and so continue all the time of Divine Service in the Church? Do they all
reverently kneel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are
read, making due reverence when the Name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned?

Rubric of Baptism.
6. Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-Children to be
baptized publicly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger; in which
case the Child may be baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the Form and
Rites appointed in the Liturgy? If baptized at home, by whom? Give his Name and
Place of abode* Or do they send them from their own Minister, to be baptized in
any other Parishes; or after other Form than is appointed? Or do they keep them
unbaptized any longer time than the Church allows* and are there any Infants
or more aged persons in your Parish, as yet unbaptized?

7. Does every Householder in your Parish cause their Children and Servants to
come to Church to learn their Catechism, Can. 59.
and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of
them openly in the Church upon Sundays and Holydays, as in the Book of
Common Prayer is appointed; that when they are well instructed in the same,
they may be confirmed by the Bishop?

8. Is there any person in your Parish, Can. 112.
who being sixteen years of age, and well-instructed in Religion, does not
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times in the year, of
which Easter is always to be one? Can. 114.
Does any in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling, or from the hands
of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad:
Or are there any Strangers, not of your Parish, that forsake their own
Churches, and usually repair to yours for it?

9. Have you any among you that be denounced and declared Excommunicate, Can.
65.
for any Crime committed? How long have they been so excommunicated; and do any
of your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church
and absolved?

10. Are there any in your Parish, Can. 99.8.1
who are known or suspected to be unlawfully married, contrary to the Laws of
God and his Church? Or any living as Man and Wife, who are within the Degrees
prohibited? Or any (who being lawfully married and never divorced) do yet live
asunder: Or any who being lawfully divorced, Can. 107.
do live together again: Or being separated for Adultery, have afterward
entermarried with any other, during the life of their first Consort?

11. Are there any Married-Women in your Parish, who, Rubric Com. Pray.
after their Delivery from the Peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their
Public Thanksgiving to God in the Church: And when they come so to do, do they
come decently apparelled, and make their Offerings according to Custom?

12. Are there any belonging to your Parish, 27 Hen. 8.20. Rubric Com. Pray.
who refuse to pay their duty for Easter-Offerings to your Minister: Or any
that refuse to contribute and pay the Rate assessed upon them for the repair of
your Church or Chapel; and for the providing of such Books, Furniture, and
Ornaments, Can. 85.
as be requisite for the performance of all Divine Offices there? Present the
Names of such as do refuse.

13. Do any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? Rubr.
Do any bury their Dead in unconsecrated places? Can. 92.
Name them. Are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish,
that be yet unproved; or any Goods administered, without a due Grant from the
Ordinary? Lind. lib. 3. de Test.
Did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or
Chapel, to the use of the Poor, or any other Charitable Purposes: What were
those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

14. Is there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews
or Seats in the Church? Have any new Pews been erected in the Chancel, or in
the Body of the Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

15. Do you know, Act Parl. 1671.
or have heard of any Person or Persons, who detain in their hands any Money
collected for the Poor, afflicted by the late Plague or Burning of the City of
London, what is the sum, and by whom is it detained?

TIT. V. Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
1. DO you know that any Ecclesiastical Judge, Vide Oath. Can. 127.
or any of the Registrars or Apparators, or other Officer belonging to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, has taken Rewards or Gifts for perverting Justice, or
denied Justice to any man who lawfully required the same?

2. Do you know or have heard that any of the said Judges or Registrars, or any
belonging to the said Courts, do favor any Popish or other Recusants, or do
forbear to enquire, cite, denounce and censure them?

3. Have the said Ecclesiastical Judges appointed and constituted certain and
determined Surrogates and Substitutes, Can. 128.
such as are Persons of Gravity, Favorers of true Religion, and men of modest
and honest Conversation? Or otherwise have they appointed persons scandalous
for being addicted to Intemperance, Incontinence, or any kind of vice, or
Persons that are Favorers, Promoters, or Assisters of Clandestine Marriages, or
such as care not to preserve the necessary Discipline, and honor of the Church?

4. Whether has the Chancellor, Commissaries, or any using Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction upon the Presentment or Information given unto him, of any foul
Offenses or Scandals in your Parish, not punished the Persons detected, so that
the Congregation has not been satisfied both of Justice done, and of the
amendment of the Party, and who were the Parties committing the said Offenses,
as Incest, Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, Blasphemy, Heresy, Clandestine
Marriage, Profaning of the Church, or such like?

5. Whether has any Ordinary in the Diocese commuted the Penance of any
Delinquent convicted? Vide Can. An. 1571. Tit. Cancellarii and Can. 1597* C.
nequa, etc. Can. 115.
What persons have so commuted, and how has the Money been disposed of to
Charitable Uses, as far as you know or have heard?

6. Whether do the Ecclesiastical Judges suffer any persons detected for
Crimes, to sue and molest Churchwardens who detected them for the same?

7. Whether do you know or have heard that any of the said Judges, when the
deceased died without a Will, Plowden, An. 7 Eliz. fol. 278.
has assigned any part of the Goods to Charitable Uses, and how have you known
them to have been employed?

8. Whether in such Cases of dying without a Will, does the Ecclesiastical
Judge send out Intimation to summon the Creditors, Wife, Stat. 21 H. 8.
Children, and Kindred to come and take Administration, and commit the same as
far as the Law permits, not to needy persons, but to able men, and such as
enter sufficient Bond, to preserve the Estate, and to answer all that is due,
and save the Lord Bishop harmless?

9. Whether does the said Judge Ecclesiastical when a Benefice is vacant,
commit Sequestration to able men, that do answer and account truly for the mean
profits? And whether are the Parishes during the vacancy well served with able
Ministers?

10. Whether do you know, or have credibly heard, that the said Judges
Ecclesiastical, Registers, or Apparators, do take any extraordinary or more
Fees for Probate of Wills, Administrations, Accounts, Can. 135.
Assignations of Portions or Citations, or for any other Act or thing done or
sped by them, then are allowed by the Statutes of the Land, or any Fees greater
then heretofore have been accustomed, in other Businesses belonging to their
Courts?

11. Whether do you know, or have heard, Can. 134.
that any Registrar of the said Courts has sped any Act, or dismissed any
Person detected, without the knowledge and actual consent of the Judge?

12. Does the Chancellor, Commissary, or Official, Can. 103. and Constit. 1597.
Tit? de moderandis Indulgentiis.
or any of their Surrogates, carelessly, or for hope of gain, disperse or grant
Licenses for the Celebration of Matrimony, until it do appear to the person
himself who is Judge in these Cases, by the Oaths of two sufficient Witnesses,
one of them known to the Judge, or to some person whom the Judge dares trust in
this particular, That the express consent of the Parents or Parent (if one be
dead) or Guardians, or Guardian of the Parties, is thereunto had and obtained,
and until one of the Parties to be married have personally sworn that he
believes there is no let or impediment of Precontract, Kindred, or Alliance,
nor any other lawful Cause, nor any Suit commenced in any Ecclesiastical Court,
to bar or hinder the proceeding of the said Matrimony?

13. Whether is there in every place where Ecclesiastical Courts are Can. 136.
kept, and also in the Registry of every such Office or Court a Table of Fees
set up, that every one may read the same, containing all the Fees that every
Officer of the Court ought to take, according to the Canon made at the
Convocation under Archbishop Whitguift, An. Dom. 1597.

14. Whether are there more Apparators belonging to the Courts than the Law
allows, Can. 138.
or heretofore were accustomed? Whether do any of the Apparators buy or take to
farm their Offices, or the execution of the same? Or do entrench upon the
Office of the Judge?

15. Whether does any person to your knowledge, or as you have heard, take upon
him to execute both the places of Judge and Register, directly or indirectly?

TIT. VI. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
1. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a Parish-Clerk, Can. 91.
aged 21 years at least? Is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient
or able to perform his duty, reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by
your Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the
Church? Are his Wages duly paid unto him? and who with holds the same from
him?

2. Does he or the Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the Doors of the Church, that they be locked and opened at
due time; and does he keep the Church or Chapel clean from dust, cobwebs, and
other annoyances? Does he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours
before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people
may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of
this life, Canon 67.
does he upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell, as has been accustomed,
that the Neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the dying person to the
grace and favor of God?

TIT. VII. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, School-Mistresses,
Physicians, Chyrurgeons, and Midwives.
1. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, 2 Men. 5.1. Q. Eliz. A. 3, 4.
Almshouse, or Free School, not of the Kings, Foundation or Patronage? Who was
the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? Or what is the yearly Revenue, or
Stipend, belonging to the Governors or Masters of the same? Is the same
ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? And are the Revennes
thereof rightly employed, according to the intention of the Founder, and of
such Grants or Ordinances as have been made concerning the same?

2. Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Can. 77.
Does your Schoolmaster or Usher teach his Scholars the Catechism of the
Church? Can. 79.
Does he teach any other Catechism or any other Grammar, than what are set
forth by Authority? Does he cause them upon Sundays and Holy Days orderly to
repair to your Church or Chapel; and see that they behave themselves there
quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine Service and Sermon?

3. Does any Woman keep a School in your Parish, who is not allowed thereunto
by the Bishop? Is she modest, of good report, and conformable to the Church of
England? Does she teach them the Catechism of the Church, and does she with
them repair to the Church upon Sundays and Holydays, and there demean
themselves reverently the whole time of Divine Service and Sermon? And does she
bring her Scholars to the Minister of the Parish, to be prepared for
Confirmation by the Bishop?

4. Does any man in your Parish practice Physic, or Chyrurgery, 3 H. 8.11.
or any Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without
Approbation and License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VIII. Queries to be put to the Minister, concerning the Churchwardens
and Sidemen.
1. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of the Minister and Parishioners; Can. 89.
or one of them by the Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? And are
there Sidemen appointed to assist them for the due ordering of the Church?

2. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, Can. 89.
and delivered up to the suceeding Churchwardens the moneys remaining in their
hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chapel?

3. Do the Churchwardens and Sidemen take diligent care, Can. 90.
and see who of the Parishioners be absent from the Divine Service and Sermon
in your Church or Chapel, upon Sundays or Holy Days? And if they find any of
them to have absented themselves without a sufficient cause? Do they by Warrant
from some of the Justices of Peace, levy of them by way of Distress upon their
Goods, 1 Q. Eliz. 2.
the sum of 12 d. for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of
Parliament in that case provided? And do they, the several sums so levied,
distribute among the Poor of the Parish, according to the Law?

4. Do they present them that come late to Church, Can. 18.
after Divine Service is begun, or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer
none to stand idle, or talk together in the Church Porch, Can. 19.
or to walk in the Church or Churchyard, during the time of Prayers,
Preaching, or other Sacred Offices? Do they about the midst of Divine Service
asually wall forth and make search for such as are then abroad in the Streets
or in Taverns or Alehouses, suspected to harbor ill company?

5. Do they suffer no misbehaviour or disorder to be done by Men, Can. 18.
or Women, Servants or Children, in your Church or Chapel? Are they careful
that none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Can.
88.
Do they permit no Minstrels, no Morrice-Dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, to
be brought into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation?

6. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, Can.
20.
provide a sufficient quantity of fine White Bread, and of good Wine, according
to the number of Communicants?

7. Do they cause all Strangers, Can. 52.
that preach in your Church or Chapel, to subscribe their Names the same day
in a Book provided for that purpose, together with the Name of the Bishop that
licenced them to preach in this Diocese? And do they permit no other to preach?

8. Were there any Presentiments made upon any of the Articles before rehearsed
at my Primary Visitation, Anno Dom. 1668. by the Churchwardens of your Parish?
were the Presentiments prosecuted, and Delinquents punished, if not, by whose
fault or neglect was the same omitted, declare your knowledge, and what you
have heard herein?

9. Have they (the Church warden and Sidemen) now sworn to give in a true
Answer unto all these Articles of Inquity in all their several Titles, Can. 119.
taken sufficient time to draw up their Presentiments, and therein consulted
with you their Minister, for your faithful Assistance?

FOr know you assuredly, that as the true discharging of your Office is the
chist means whereby public Disorders, Sins, and Offenses in your Parish may be
reformed and punished, the Bishop however willing, not being able to punish,
till due Presentiments are made: so if you wilfully refuse to present such
Grimes and Faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise to
have heard of by public same; that, in such Cases the Bishop and his Officers
are to proceed against you, in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in Cases of
Wilful Omission and Perjury.

THe Ministers of every Parish are desired to prepare and give in the Names of
such of the younger sort of their several Parishes, as they judge fit to
receive Confirmation from the Bishop, and to present them to be confirmed;
especially such as having competently learned their Catechism* have not yet
received the Holy Communion, and to present them to the Bishop to be confirmed,
as there shall be opportu^^y.

FINIS.

