A COPY OF The proceedings of some worthy and learned Divines, appointed by
the Lords to meet at the Bishop of Lincolnes in Westminster: Touching
Innovations in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England. Together
with Considerations upon the Common Prayer Book.

Innovations in Doctrine.
1 QVare, Whether in the twentieth Article these words are not inserted, Habet
Ecclesia authoritatem in controversiis fidei. 2 It appears by Stetfords and
the approbation of the Licencers, that some do teach and preach, that good
works are concauses with faith in the act of Justification. Doctor Dove also
has given scandal in that point. 3 Some have preached that works of Penance
are satisfactory before God. 4 Some have preached, that private Confession by
particular enumeration of sins is necessary to salvation, necessitate medii,
both those errors have been questioned at the Consistory at Cambridge. 5 Some
have maintained, that the Absolution, which the Priest pronounces, is more
then Declaratory. 6 Some have published, that there is a proper Sacrifice in
the Lords Supper, to exhibit Christ's death in the Postfact, as there was a
sacrifice to prefigure in the old Law in the Antefact, and therefore that we
have a true Altar, and therefore not only metaphorically so called, so Doctor
Heylin and others in the last Summers Convocation, where also some defended,
that the Oblation of the Elements might hold the nature of the true sacrifice,
others the consumption of the Elements. 7 Some have introduced prayer for the
dead, as Master Brown in his printed Sermon: and some have colored the use of
it with questions in Cambridge, and disputed, that preces pro defunctis non
supponunt purgatorium. 8 Diverse have oppugned the certitude of Salvation. 9
Some have maintained the lawfulness of monastical vows. 10 Some have
maintained that the Lords day is kept merely by Ecclesiastical constitution,
and that the day is changeable. 11 Some have taught as new and dangerous
doctrine, that the subjects are to pay any sums of money imposed upon them,
though without law, nay contrary to the laws of the Realm, as Doctor Sybthorp
and Doctor Manwaring Bishop of Saint David's, in their printed Sermons, whom
many have followed of late years. 12 Some have put scorns upon the two Books
of Homilies, calling them either popular discourses, or a doctrine useful for
those times wherein they were set forth. 13 Some have defended the whole gross
substance of Arminianisme, that Electio est ex fide praevisa, That the act of
conversion depends upon the concurrence of man's free will, That the justified
man may fall finally and totally from grace. 14 Some have defended universal
grace, as imparted as much to Reprobates as to the Elect, and have proceeded
usque ad salutem Ethnicoru^, which the Church of England has anathematized. 15
Some have absolutely denied original sin, and so evacuated the Cross of
Christ, as in a disputation at Oxen. 16 Some have given excessive cause of
scandal to the Church as being suspected of Socinianisme. 17 Some have
defended that concupiscence is no sin, either in the habit or first motion. 18
Some have broacht out of Socinus a most uncomfortable and desperate doctrine,
that late repentance, that is, upon the last bed of sickness, is unfruitful,
at least to reconcile the penitent to God.
Add unto these some dangerous and most reproveable books.
1 THe reconciliation of Sancta Clara, to knit the Romish and Protestant in
one; Memorand. that he be caused to produce Bishop Watsons book of the like
reconciliation which he speaks of. 2 A Book called Brevis disquisitio, printed
(as it is thought) in London, and vulgarly to be had, which impugneth the
doctrine of the holy Trinity, and the verity of Christ's body (which he took of
the blessed Virgin) in heaven, and the verity of our resurrection. 3 A Book
called Timotheus Philalethes de pace Ecclesiae, which holds that every Religion
will save a man, if he hold the covenant.
Innovations in Discipline.
1 THe turning of the holy Table Altarwise, and most commonly calling it an
Altar. 2 Bowing toward it, or toward the East, many times, with three
congees, but usually in every motion, access, or recesse in the Church. 3
Advancing Candlesticks in many Churches upon the Altar so called. 4 In making
Canopies over the Altar so called, with traverses and curtains on each side and
before it. 5 In compelling all Communicants to come up before the rails, and
there to receive. 6 In advancing Crucifixes and Images upon the parafront, or
Altar-cloth so called. 7 In reading some part of the Morning prayer at the holy
Table, when there is no Communion celebrated. 8 By the Ministers turning his
back to the West, and his face to the East, when he pronounces the Creed, or
reads Prayers. 9 By reading the Letany in the midst of the Body of the Church
in many of the Parochial Churches. 10 By pretending for their Innovations, the
Injunctions and advertisements of Queen Elizabeth, which are not in force, but
by way of commentary and imposition, and by putting to the Liturgy printed
secundo, tertio Edwardi sexti, which the Parliament has reformed and laid
aside. 11 By offering of Bread and Wine by the hand of the Churchwardens, or
others, before the consecration of the Elements. 12 By having a Credentia, or
side Table besides the Lords Table for diverse uses in the Lords Supper. 13 By
introducing an Offertory before the Communion, distant from the giving of Alms
to the poor. 14 By prohibiting the Ministers to expound the Catechism at
large to their Parishioners. 15 By suppressing of Lectures, partly on Sundays
in the afternoon, partly on week days, performed as well by combination, as
some one man. 16 By prohibiting a direct prayer before Sermon, and bidding of
prayer. 17 By singing the Te Deum in prose after a Cathedral Church way, in
diverse Parochial Churches, where the people have no skill in such Music. 18
By introducing Latin Service in the Communion of late in Oxford, and into some
Colleges in Cambridge, at Morning and Evening Prayer, so that some young
Students, and the servants of the College do not understand their prayers. 19
By standing up at the Hymns in the Church, and always at Gloria Patri. 20 By
carrying children from the Baptism to the Altar so called, there to offer them
up to God. 21 By taking down Galleries in Churches, or restraining the
building of such Galleries where the Parishes are very populous.
Memorandum.
1 THat in all the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches two Sermons be preached
every Sunday by the Deane and Prebendaries, or by their procurement, and
likewise every Holiday, and one Lecture at the least to be preached on working
days every week, all the year long. 2 That the Music used in Gods holy
Service in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches be framed with less curiosity,
that it may be more edifying and more intelligible, and that no Hymns or
Anthemes be used where Ditties are framed by private men, but such as are
contained in the sacred Canonical Scriptures, or in our Liturgy of prayers, or
have public allowance. 3 That the Reading Deske be placed in the Church where
divine Service may best be heard of all the people.
Considerations upon the Book of Common Prayer.
1 Whether the names of some departed Saints and others should not be quite
expunged the Calendar. 2 Whether the reading of Psalms, sentences of Scripture
concurring in diverse places in the Hymns, Epistles and Gospels, should not be
set out in the new translation. 3 Whether the Rubrique should not be mended,
where all Vestments in them of divine Service are now commanded which were
used, 2. Ed. 6. 4 Whether Lessons of Canonical Scripture should be put into
the Calendar in stead of Apocrypha. 5. That the Doxologie should be always
printed at the end of the Lords prayer, and be always said by the Minister. 6
Whether the Rubrique should not be mended, where it is (that the Lessons should
be sung in a plain tune) why not (read with a distinct voice.) 7 Whether
Gloria Patri should be repeated at the end of every Psalm. 8 Whether according
to that end of the Preface before the Common Prayer, the Curate should be bound
to read Morning and Evening Prayers every day in the Church, if he be at home,
and not reasonably tet^ed, and why not only on Wensday, and Friday morning, and
in the Afternoon on Saturdaies, with holyday eves. 7 Whether the Himnes,
Benedicite omnia opera, etc. may not be left out. 10 In the Prayer for the
Clergy, that the phrase perhaps to be altered, which only works great
marvails. 11 In the Rubrique for the administration of the Lords Supper whether
this alteration to be made, that such as intend to communicate shall signify
their names to the Curate over night or in the morning before Prayers. 12 The
next Rubrique to be cleared, how far a Minister may repulse a scandalous and
notorious sinner from the Communion. 13 Whether the Rubrique is not to be
mended, where the Churchwardens are straightly appointed to gather the Alms for
the poor before the communion begin, for by experience it is proved to be done
better when the People depart. 14 Whether the Rubrique is not to be mended,
concerning the party that is to make his general confession upon his knees,
before the Communion, that it should be said only by the Minister and then at
every clause repeated to the people. 15 These words in the form of the
Consecration, This is my body, this is my blood of the New Testament, not to be
printed hereafter in great Letters. 16 Whether it will not be fit to insert a
Rubrique touching kneeling at the Communion, that is, to comply in all humility
with the prayer which the Minister makes when he delivers the Elements. 17
Whether Cathedral and Collegiate Churches shall be straightly bound to celebrate
the holy Communion every Sunday at the least, and might not it rather be added
once in a month. 18 In the last Rubrique touching the Communion, is it not fit
that the Printer make a full point, and begin with a new great letter at these
words. And every Parishioner shall also receive the Sacraments. 19 Whether in
the first prayer at the Baptism, these words, Did sanctify the flood
Jordan, and all other waters, should be thus changed, Did sanctify the
Element of water. 20 Whether it be not fit to have some discreet Rubrique made
to take away all scandal from signifyng the sign of the Cross upon the
infants after Baptism, or if it shall seem more expedient to be quite
difused, whether this reason should be published, that in ancient Liturgies no
Cross was confined upon the party, but where Oil also was used, and therefore
Oil being now omitted so may also that which was Concomitant with it the sign
of the Cross. 21 In private Baptism, the Rubique mentions that which must not
be done, that the Minister may dip the child in water being at the point of
Death. 22 Whether in the last Rubrique of conformation those words be to be
left out, and be undoubtedly saved. 23 Whether the Catechism may not receive a
little more enlargement. 24 Whether the times prohibited for marriage are quite
to be taken away. 25 Whether none hereafter shall have licenses to marry, nor
be asked their banes of Matrimony, that shall not bring with them a Certificat
from their Ministers that they are instructed in their Catechism; 26 Whether
these words in Matrimony, with my body I thee worship, shall not be thus
altered, I give thee power over my body. 27 Whether the last Rubrique of
marriage should not be mended, that new married persons should receive the
Communion the same day of their marriage, may it not well be, or upon the next
Sunday following when the Communion is celebrated. 28 In the absolution of the
sick, were it not plain to say, I pronounce thee absolved. 29 The Psalm of
thanksgiving of women after Childbirth, were it not fit to be composed out of
proper Versicles taken from diverse Psalms. 30 May not the Priest rather read
the Commination in the Desk, then go up to the pulpit. 31 The Rubric in the
Commination leaves it doubtful whether the Letany may not be read in diverse
places in the Church. 32 In the order of the Burial of all persons, it is said,
We commit his body to the ground, in sure and certain hope of resurrection to
eternal life, Why not thus, Knowing assuredly, that the dead shall rise
again. 33 In the Collect next unto the Collect against the pestilence, the
Clause perhaps to be mended, For the honor of Jesus Christ sake. 34 In the
Letany instead of fornication and all other deadly sin, would it not satisfy
thus? from fornication and all other grevious sins. 35 It is very fit that
the imperfections of the meeter in the singing Psalms should be mended, and
then lawful Authority added unto them, to have them publicly sunge before
and after Sermons, and sometimes instead of the Hymns of morning and evening
Prayer.
Arch Bishop of Armach. Bp. of Lincoln. Dr. Prideaux. Dr. Ward. Dr. Brownrig.
Dr. Featly. Dr. Hacket.



