ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning Matters Ecclesiastical,
according to the Laws and Canons of the Church of ENGLAND, EXHIBITED To the
Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within the Diocese of
Worcester, By the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of WORCESTER.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty, 1662.

The Tenor of the Oath to be tendered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen of
every Parish in the Diocese of Worcester.
YOu shall Swear, after diligent enquiry, to make a true answer, according to
your knowledge, unto the Articles in this Book now given you in Charge; and to
present such of your Parish as are Offenders therein, contrary to the duty they
owe to God and the Laws Ecclesiastical: and this you shall do, as in the sight
of God, uprightly and truly. So help you God.

ARTICLES Of Visitation and Enquiry, etc.
TITUL. I. Concerning Churches or Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
belonging to them.
I.IS your Church-Fabrick (or Chapel) with all things appertaining to it, kept
in good repair within and without, with such cleanliness, decency and order,
as becomes the house dedicated to the Public Worship and solemn service of
God?

II. Has any part of them, or any thing belonging to them, been sold or
embezelled? when? and by whom?

III. Is there in your Church or Chapel an handsome Font of Stone, standing in
a convenient place, with a good cover to it, for the Administration of
Baptism? Is there also a decent Communion Table, with a fair Carpet of Silk or
fine Cloth, also a fine linen covering to be used at the holy Administration
of the Lords Supper? What Cup, Chalice, Patin, or Flagons have you belonging to
that Service?

IV. Have you in your Church (or Chapel) a convenient Pew for your Minister to
read Divine Service in? Also a Pulpit, with a decent Cloth and Cushion? Have
you a large Folio Bible of the last Translation, with two Books of
Common Prayer well bound, one for the Minister, the other for the Clark? Have
you the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority; also the Book of Canons, and a
Table of allowed deg^ee^ in Marriage?

V. Have you a Register Book of Parchment for all that are Christened, Married,
and Buried in your Parish, in which are set down the names of the parties, with
the Day, Month and Year of each Christning, Marriage, and Burial? Is the
transcript of these every year within one month after March 25. brought in to
the Bishops Registry?

VI. Have you a Paper-Book, in which the names of strangers that Preach or
Officiate in your Church or Chapel are set down; and another Book for your
Churchwardens accounts.

VII. Have you a fair Surplice and other Ornaments, according to his degree,
for your Minister to use in his Public Administrations, only for outward
decency, order, and distinction?

VIII. Have you a strong Chest, with Locks and Keys, wherein the Plate and
other Vessels, with the Books and Vestments belonging to the Church, may be
safely and decently kept? Have you a Bier with a black Herse-cloth for the
decent interment of the dead?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, Houses, Glebes, Tithes or Rents belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently senced with Walls, Rails, or Pales, and
decently kept from all annoyance and encroachment? Are the trees therein
preserved?

II. Is the Mansion House of your Minister, with all other houses thereto
belonging, kept in good repair? Have any of them been pulled down or defaced?
Has any encroached upon the Land thereto belonging, or felled the Trees there
on growing?

III. Have you a perfect Terrier of all Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards, and
Tenements belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? Also a particular List of
such Pensions, Tithes, Rents, Customs, and other yearly Profits within or
without your Parish, as belong thereto? Are any of them withheld from your
Minister? and by whom?

IV. Have any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage been taken away, or alienated by Lease, Sale, or Exchange, without
License from the Ordinary, and the free consent of the Incumbent? Have any
Enclosures been made in your Parish to the detriment of the Church?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister Episcopally Ordained (Deacon or Priest) according to the
Laws of the Realm of England, and the ancient practice of the Church
universal, no less then of this National Church?

II. Is he defamed or suspected to have obtained his Orders or Benefice by any
Simoniacal compact?

III. Has he been legally Instituted and Inducted into his Benefice? Did he
within two months after his Induction publicly read in the Church, upon some
Lord's Day or other Holy Day, in the time of Divine Service, the 39. Articles of
Religion established in the Church of England? Did he then and there publicly
declare his assent thereunto?

IV. Has your Minister been Licenced to officiate by the Bishop of this
Diocese, or either of the two Universities? Does he being thus Licenced
diligently read Divine Service, and Preach every Lord's Day, in your Church or
Chapel, unless hindered by Sickness or reasonable absence? and in such cases
does he procure some lawful Minister to read Prayers, to Preach, and perform
other Ministerial duties?

V. Does your Minister Preach sound Doctrine only, both for Faith and Manners,
tending to the Edifying of people in the knowledge of God and their Savior
Jesus Christ, according to the holy rule of the Scripture, and the obedience of
the Gospel? Do you know that he has at any time within one years space last
past preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, Scandalous or Schismatical
Doctrine, thereby to seduce people to Error or Faction, to the danger of their
Souls, and the disturbance of the Peace of this Church and Kingdom?

VI. Does your Minister in his Prayer before Sermon devoutly and discreetly
commend to the grace of God the Church Catholic here on earth, particularly
these British Reformed Churches; also the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
according to his just and Royal Titles; together with all Estates
Ecclesiastical and Civil? Does he praise God for the faithful, who have
overcome this World, and are at rest from their labors? Does he always
conclude with the Lords Prayer? Does he in his Prayer or Sermon affect any odd
or Fanatic expressions, or excessive length?

VII. Does your Minister in the Morning and Evening Service, and in the
Administration of the Holy Sacraments, and in performing of other public
Religious Offices appointed by the Church of England, use the respective Forms
in the Book of Common Prayer, together with those Rites and Ceremonies which
are enjoined in this Church, and declared to be not any necessary parts of
Divine Worship, but only things of Decency, Order, and Edification, tending to
the Peace and Uniformity of the Church?

VIII. Does your Minister diligently examine in the Church- Catechism the
Youth of your Parish every Lord's Day in the afternoon? Does he also instruct
others that are ignorant in the Fundamental points of Christian Religion? Does
he prepare and, as occasion is offered, present the Youth so instruct to the
Bishop, to be Confirmed by the laying on of his hands, with Prayer and
Benediction, in that faith they profess, according to the Primitive practice
of the Church of Christ? Does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and
other Sectaries in your Parish, to the true Religion established in the Church
of England?

IX. Is your Minister, whether Parson, Vicar, or Curate, conformable in his
Doctrine and Life to the holy Rule and great example of the Lord Jesus Christ?
Is he a man of a studious, sober, peaceable, unblameable and exemplary life,
for Piety, Sanctity, Charity, and Industry in his calling? Is he Grave, Modest,
and Regular in his outward demeanor, for Hair and Clothes, according to the
Constitutions and Customs of the Church of England? Is his Company, Carriage
and Conversation in Word and Deed such as becomes a Minister of the Gospel,
who remembers the great account he must give for his own and other men's Souls
committed to his charge?

X. Is he ready to visit the Sick, and to perform those Offices to them which
are required in the Church of England; al^o to Baptize any Infant in danger of
Death, when he is desired so to do? Is any Infant or other by his default yet
unbaptized in your Parish? Does he refuse to give the Sacrament to any in your
Parish, and for what Cause? or does he give it to such as are scandalous
notorious sinners, or such as are excommunicate, or refuse to be reconciled to
their Neighbou^s?

XI. Does your Minister Marry any persons in private Houses, or such as are
under Age, not having the consent of their Parents or Guardians? Does he marry
any without Bannes first published three Sundays or Holy Days in the Church?
Does he marry at other Hours than between eight and twelve in the Forenoone,
without having any License so to do?

XII. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private
Fasts, Prophecyings, or Religious exercises, without lawful Authority? Does he
in those that are duly appointed use the Forms prescribed by Authority? Does
he, or any other Minister or Lay-person, hold any Conventicle or Religious
meetings in private houses within your Parish, for people of several Families
to resort unto, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

XIII. Is your Minister constantly Resident among you? And how many weeks in a
year has he been absent from his Benefice? Has he any Curate to assist him in
his absence or presence? Is that Curate in Holy Orders according to the Church
of England? Has he a License from his Bishop to serve the Cure? And does he
carry himself also as an able and discreet Minister, and conformable to the
Church of England? What yearly stipend has he?

XIV. Is there in your Parish beside the Parson, or Vicar and Curate, any that
Preaches only as a Lecturer? Is he in Holy Orders, and conformable to the
Church of England, and Licenced by the Bishop of this Diocese? Does he read
Divine Service before his Lecture, and in all things demean himself as is most
for the Peace of the Church of England and of your Parish?

XV. Does your Minister give notice of and duly observe Holy Days, Festivals,
or Fasts, with other solemn times, as Ember and Rogation Weeks, according as is
by the Laws and Canons of this Church appointed?

TIT. IV. Concerning Parishioners.
I. IS there any in your Parish that are reputed Heretics or Schismatics,
refusing Communion with the Church of England, or professing any other Religion
than what is Established in this Church, seducing others from it, and railing
against it? Are there any convicted Papists, known Anabaptists, Familists,
Quakers, and other Separatists in your Parish?

II. Is there any person in your Parish that lies under any common fame or
vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common
Drunkards, Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods Name, and his Holy Word? Are any
noted for railers, unclean and filthy talkers, or sowers of sedition, or living
in discord and contention? Are there any excommunicated by the censures of the
Church, and not yet reconciled?

III. Do any of your Parish profane the Lord's Day, by neglecting of public
Holy Duties, or by doing the works of their ordinary callings, or by using
unlawful Recreations, or permitting their Children and Servants so to do? Do
they duly observe other Holy Days, Festivals, or Fasts appointed by Authority,
for the advancement of piety, charity, and devotion?

IV. Do those that inhabit or sojourn in your Parish duly resort to your Church
or Chapel, there to worship God according to the Religion of the Church of
England? Do they come thither, and continue there during Divine Service,
Sermons, and other Holy Duties, with that reverence, order and decency,
befitting humble and devout Christians, as is required by the Laws, Canons, and
laudable customs of the Church of England?

V. Are there in your Parish any that refuse to have their Infant Children
Baptized by your Minister? or do they keep them unbaptized longer than this
Church allows? Are there any Infants or more aged persons in your Parish not
yet Baptized?

VI. Does every House-holder in your Parish cause their Children, Apprentices
and Servants to learn the Church Catechism, and give account of it to your
Minister, as he shall require it in the Church on Sundays or other Holy Days,
as is appointed? And when they are therein well instructed, do they take care
to have them brought by the Minister to Confirmation, when occasion is offered,
by the Bishop, for the increase of all spiritual gifts and graces in them?

VII. Is there any person in your Parish, who being sixteen years of age, and
well instructed in Religion, neglects or refuses to receive the Blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper at least three times in one year (of which Easter
to be one?) Do all receive this Sacred Mystery with that outward gesture of
humility, reverence, and lowly adoration, which becomes them to their God and
Savior, meekly kneeling, according to the Order and Custom of the Church of
England?

VIII. Are there any of your Parish who do keep familiar Society with them that
are excommunicated, so as to countenance them in their sins, or encourage them
in their contumacy?

IX. Are there any of your Parish who are known or suspected to be unlawfully
married, contrary to the Laws of God and this Church? Are there any who having
been lawfully divorced do live together again; or who being lawfully married
and not divorced, do yet live asunder?

X. Are there any married Women in your Parish, who after their safe delivery
from Childbirth refuse to make their humble and public thanksgiving to God
for so great a mercy, according to the Rites and Appointment of the Church of
England?

XI. Are there any of your Parish who refuse to pay their Easter-Offerings and
other Duties to your Minister; or to pay the Rates assessed on them for the
repair and provisions of the Church?

XII. Do any among you refuse to bury their dead according to the Forms and
Rites of the Church of England, which are so consonant to the faith, hope, and
charity of true Christians, toward those that dye in the peace of the Church?
Are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish yet unproved,
or any Goods Administered without a legal grant from the Ordinary? Do you know
of any Legacies given to your Church, or the poor, or other pious and
charitable uses, not yet received by you, or detained from you?

XIII. Do you know or have heard of any in your Parish, who having the
presentation of an Ecclesiastical Living, has made any Simoniacal compact or
gain thereby, either in money, or by reserve of any part of the Tithes or Glebe
belonging to that Benefice?

XIV. Have any Pews or Seats been erected in your Church or Chapel without
leave from the Ordinary? Is there any strife or contention about Seats in the
Church? Have any occasioned Riot, Clamor, or Fighting in the Church at any time?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons belonging to the Church.
I. HAve you a Parish-Clerk, who is of a sober life and good report? Is he able
for Reading, Writing, and Singing as a Clerk? Is he chosen by your Minister and
approved by the Parish? Are his wages duly paid him?

II. Does he or your Sexton take care of the Church, to keep it locked and
clean, to open the doors, and to ring the Bells in due time, to call the living
to the Worship of God; also to admonish them by tolling of a Passing Bell of
any that are dying, thereby to meditate of their own Deaths, and to commend the
others weak condition to the mercy of God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals and Almes-houses, Schools and Schoolmasters,
Physicians, Surgeons, and Midwives.
I. WHat Hospital, Almes-house, or Free School has been Founded in your
Parish? Are they so ordered in the Revenue and Use as the Founders appointed,
and the Law of the Land allows?

II. What Schoolmaster private or public is there in your Parish? Is he (or
they) Licenced by the Bishop or his Chancellor? Does he instruct his Scholars
in the Catechism and Religion of the Church of England, according to that
Conformity and Order which is established as necessa^y for the Public Peace?

III. Do any in your Parish practice Physic, Surgery or Midwifery, without
License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly chosen according to Law, and
do they appoint Sidemen to assist them for the due ordering of the Church?

II. Have the last Churchwardens given up their accounts to those that succeed
them, together with all moneys and other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

III. Do your Churchwardens and Sidemen diligently take notice of their
names, who without a sufficient cause are absent from Divine Service and
Sermons on the Lords-dayes and other Holy Days? Do they by Warrant from the
next Justices levy 12. pence by way of distress (according to Law) upon their
Goods, in case they refuse to pay it, for their wilful and causeless absence?
and is the money so levied distributed to the poor of your Parish, and kept
upon account in a Book?

IV. Do you suffer none to stand idle, or to play, or walk, or talk together,
or to behave themselves rudely and unseemly within or without the Church during
the time of Gods Holy Worship and Service, to the scandal and disturbance of
the Minister and Congregation?

V. Do you provide fine White-Bread and good Wine against every Communion,
according to the number of Communicants?

VI. Do you cause all strangers who preach in your Church to enter their names
in a Book, and by what Bishop they are Licenced to Preach?

VII. Have you taken care to give a true Answer unto these Articles, and to
draw up your presentiments according to your Oaths, consulting with your
Minister and other Neighbors?

THis you are seriously to consider, That as the faithful discharge of your
Offices according to your Oaths and Duties is a special means to repress,
punish, and reform sins, scandals, and disorders in your Parish; also to
preserve the honor of Religion and the Peace of this Church, to the glory of
our God and Savior (which are the great Uses and Ends of all Church Government
and Discipline:) So if you neglect your Duties herein, you sin against God,
your Consciences, and the Churches Prosperity, being liable, in case of wilful
Omission and Perjury, to those Punishments which are by the Law to be inflicted
on you for your defaults.

The Ministers of every Parish, are desired to given in the Names of such as
having not yet received the Lords Supper, are by them upon examination judged
fit for Confirmation, and so for the Holy Communion.

THE END.

