ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQVIRY Concerning Matters Ecclesiastical,
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within
the Arch-deaconry of Gloucester, In the First VISITATION OF THE ARCHDEACON.

LONDON, Printed for William Leak, at the Sign of the Crown in Fleet street,
near the two Temple-Gates. 1663.

The Form of the Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen of
every Parish.
YOU shall swear, That upon due and faithful enquiry, you will make a true
answer unto every Article in this Book now given you in charge, all affection,
favor, hatred, hope of reward, gain, fear of displeasure, laid aside. And
present every person that now is, or of late was inhabiting within your Parish,
that has committed any offense, or omitted any duty therein mentioned; neither
presenting, or sparing to present any person, contrary to truth. And this you
shall do, as in the sight of God, uprightly, truly, and impartially. So help
you God.

Articles of Visitation and Enquiry within the Archdeaconry of GLOUCESTER.
SECT. 1. Concerning MINISTERS.
I. IS your Parsonage or Vicarage void and destitute of a Minister or Curate?
how long has it been void? and who is known, or accounted to be the rightful
Patron thereof?

II. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Ordained by some Bishop, according to
the known Laws of the Church of England?

III. IS he Defamed, or suspected to have obtained either Holy Orders, or his
Benefice, by Contract or Simony? And,

HAS he been lawfully instituted and inducted into his Benefice, as you know
or believe? and did he within Two Months after his Induction, openly, on some
Sunday, in the time of Divine Service, in the Parish Church of his Benefice,
read the 39. Articles of Religion of the Church of England, established by
Authority, and there Publicly declare his Assent to every one of them? and did
he openly and publicly before the Congregation (according to the Act of
Parliament) declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent to all things in the Book
of Common Prayer contained and prescribed, in these words, and no other.

I A. B. do hereby declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every
thing contained in and by the Book entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter, or
Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung, or said in Churches, and the
Form, or Manner of Making, Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests and
Deacons.

IV. HAS he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prehend or Dignity? is he
constantly Resident upon his Benefice amongst you? how many weeks in any one
year has he been absent from it, without urgent Necessity, allowed by the
Bishop of the Diocese?

V. IF your Minister has a Curate to assist him, is the said Curate in Holy
Orders? an able, Or hodor and Discreet Person, and Conformable to the Laws and
Orders of the Church of England? is he Licensed by the Bishop to serve in your
Church or Chapel? and does be serve in any Church beside?

VI. DOES your Minister read the whole Common Prayer distinctly and reverently
every Sunday and Holyday, and observe the Orders, Rites and Ceremonies
prescribed in that Book of Common Prayer, at Morning and Evening Service,
Administration of the Holy Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage, Churching of
Women after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the Dead, and
pronouncing Gods Commination against Sinners, use the Form and Words prescribed
in the Book of Common Prayer, without any Addition, Diminution or Alteration of
the same? and does he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine
Service, as are appointed in the said Book?

VII. WHETHER your Minister, after he has Consecrated the Bread and Wine at
the Communion Table, does first receive it himself, and deliver both the Bread
and Wine to every Communicant severally, and give Notice publicly in the
Church at Morning Prayer the Sunday before, for the better preparation of the
Parishoners? and does he admit to the Communion any notorious Sinner before
Repentance, or such as refuse to kneel, or deny to be present at public
Prayers?

VIII. DOES your Minister at the Reading or Celebrating any Solemn or Divine
Office in your Church or Chapel, wear the Surplice? or being a Graduate, does
he wear a Hood, according to the Order of the Universities, agreeable to his
Degree?

IX. DOES he also observe the Holidays and Fasting-dayes, and also the Ember
Weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation Week? and does he give Notice
to his Parishoners of every the same Duties in the Church in the time of Divine
Service, upon the Sunday next before?

X. HAS your Minister been Licensed to Preach by the Bishop, or either of the
Two Universities, or by any other lawful Authority? does he then constantly,
unless in Case of Sickness, necessary Absence, or other reasonable Impediment,
himself Preach in your Church or Chapel, one Sermon every Sunday?

XI. DOES he in his Sermons four times in the Year at least, Declare the Kings
Majesty's Power within His Realms, to be the Highest Power under God, to whom,
all People within the same owe Loyalty and Obedience, and that all Foreign
Power is justly taken away?

XII. DOES you Minister every Lords Day and Holyday before Evening Prayers (for
the space of half an hour at least) hear the Youth, and ignorant People of
your Parish, repeat the Catechism set down in the Book of Common Prayer, and in
the time of Evening Prayer, after the Second Lesson, Instruct them, and Expound
to them some part of the said Catechism? and does he prepare, and at fitting
times Present them, being so Instructed, to be Confirmed by the Bishop? and
does he endeavor to Reclaim all Popish Recusants, and other Sectaries (if any
such inhabit in your Parish) to the true Religion established in the Church of
England, and to their bounden Duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the
Government thereof?

XIII. DOES your Minister or Curate neglect to Visit the Sick, or delay the
Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of death? is there in your Parish any
Child past Infancy, or other person of more years, through your Ministers
default, or otherwise, yet remaining unbaptized in your Parish? does he Baptize
any without Godfathers and Godmothers, who have not first received the
Communion, or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their
own Children?

XIV. DOES he in his Sermons Preach sound Doctrine, tending to the Edification
of the People in the Knowledge and Faith of Jesus Christ, and in Obedience to
Gods Holy Commandment? or has he at any time (as you know, or have heard) held
Conventicles, or secret Meetings, tending to the Depraving of the
Common Prayer, and established Government of the Church? or Preached any False,
Heretical, Seditious or Schismatical Doctrine, tending to the Breach of the
Unity of the Church, and with intent thereby to draw the People into Parties
and Factions, to the disturbance of the public Peace, and Unity either of
Church or State?

XV. HAS your Minister presumed to Marry any persons in private Houses, or
elsewhere, out of the Church? or has he Married any, who being under the Age
of Twenty one Years, have not had the Consent of their Parents; or without
Banes first duly published on three Sundays or Holidays in the Church, unless
he had a sufficient License or Dispensation so to do? or if he had, has he
Married at any other hours than between Eight and Twelve in the Morning, or
any times of the Year prohibited by the Law?

XVI. DOES any person Preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? has he Allowance
from the Bishop for so doing? does he before his Lecture read Divine Service,
according to the Book of Common Prayer? and is he Conformable to the Laws and
Orders of the Church of England? and in his Prayer before Sermon, does he
observe that Order that is prescribed in the 55. Canon of Ecclesiastical
Constitution?

XVII. HAS your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private
Fasts, Prophecyings, or Exercises not appointed by Authority? does he, or any
other, either Minister or Lay-person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in
private Houses, or other places within your Parish, for people of several
Families to resort unto, under the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving
or Humiliation, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that Case provided.

XVIII. IS there any Curate or Minister employed under the Parson or Vicar of
your Parish? is he Admitted and Licensed to serve in that Office by the Bishop
of the Diocese? and is your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man of a
Sober, Honest and Exemplary Life? or does he familiarly Converse with Ungodly,
Vicious, or Excommunicate persons? is he a Frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses?
a common Gamester at Cards, Dice, Tables, or any other unlawful Games? a
profane or obscene Jester? a Swearer, Railer, Scoffer or Quarreller? does he
set Neighbors at variance one with another, or encourage them to Suits and
Contentions? is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker? or vehemently suspected
of Incontinency with any person either within your Parish, or without? or does
he follow any base or servile Labor, whereby he is scandalous to his Function
or Ministry?

XIX. Lastly, IS any such Ministers Apparel grave and decent both for Fashion
and Color, as the Canons of the Church do require? or does he wear his Hair of
an immoderate or unbeseeming length? or do you in any other kind whatsoever
find and know his Carriage and Conversation to be disorderly or scandalous, and
unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ?

SECT. 2. Concerning as well Churches and Chapels with the Ornaments and
Furniture thereunto belonging, as also Churchyards or Grounds set apart for
Burial.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel, or any part thereof, converted and
employed to profane, secular or common uses, and what are those uses, and who
they are that so employ them?

II. IS your Parish Church or Chapel, and Chancel, kept in good and sufficient
Repair? are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or Slate, Windows
well glazed, well ^eised within, the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastened,
and conveniently well placed, and all things so decently ordered, as becomes
the House of God, without any thing noisome or unseemly? and are the Seats of
your Church in good Repair, and the Parishoners orderly set? or is there any
contention or striving for any Seat, or place among them? what are their Names?

III. HAS the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chapel, or any part thereof,
been pulled down? or have any of the Lead or Bells, formerly belonging
thereunto, been imbezelled, sold or made away, or removed to some other Church?
in whose hands or custody does the same, or any part thereof, remain? Declare
what you know, or have heard herein.

IV. IS there a Font of Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a
convenient place toward the lower part of your Church, for the Administration
of Baptism? and is there in your Chancel a decent Communion Table for the
Administration of the Lords Supper, covered with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or
fine woollen Cloth in time of Divine Service, and another Covering of white and
pure linen to spread thereupon, at the Administration of the Sacrament? and
have you a Plate or Paten, and a fair Communion-Cup, or Chalice, with a Cover
of Silver, and one or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging?
have none of these things been purloyned, destroyed or made away? or if they
have, who did it, and what was the value?

V. WHETHER in your Church the partition between the Body of the Church and
Chancel, is taken away? how long since, or by whom?

VI. HAVE you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient Seat, or Pew for
your Minister to read Divine Service in? a Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or
Cushion for the same? a Bible of the last Translation in a large Volume, and
two Books of Common Prayer, of the latest Edition, set forth by Authority of
this present Parliament, both of them well and substantially bound? have you
the Books and Forms of Divine Service set forth for the Fifth of November, the
Thirtieth of January, and the Twenty ninth of May? have you likewise the Book
of Homilies set forth by Authority? a Book of Canons and Conctitutions
Ecclesiastical? and a printed Table of the Degrees of Consanguinity and
Affinity, within which Marriage is prohibited and void in Law, hanging in some
convenient place in your Church?

VII. HAVE you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at the times of
his Public and Solemn Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly
washed at the Charge of the Parish?

VIII. HAVE you a Register-book of Parchment, wherein ought to be Registered the
Names and Sirnames of all such persons as are Married, Christened, or Buried
within your Parish? together with the Names and Sirnames of both the Parents of
the Children so Christened, expressing the Day, Month and Year of all such
Marriages, Christenings and Burials? and is the Transcript thereof yearly
within one Month next after the Twenty fifth of March, duly brought into the
Bishops Registry?

IX. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper wherein to Record the Names and
Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your
Church or Chapel? as also a Third Book, wherein to enter and write down the
Churchwardens Accounts, together with a strong Chest with Locks and Keys
wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned Vtensils
and Furniture in safe Custody? and have you a convenient Bier for the Burial of
the Dead?

X. Lastly, IS your Churchyard and Ground set apart for Burials, sufficiently
mounded and fenced with Walls, Rails or Pales, and decently kept from the
Annoyance of Swine, and other Cattle? has any person incroached upon the
ground of the Churchyard, or mifused it to profane or common uses, or made any
Door into it out of his own Ground or Habitation, without Allowance from the
Ordinary? have any Trees there growing been cut down? how long since? by whom?
and to whose use and benefit?

SECT. 3. Concerning the House, Gleabs and Tithes belonging to Churches and
Ministers.
I. IS the House of your Parson, Vicar or Curate (with all the Outhouses
thereto belonging) kept in good and sufficient Repair? or have any of the said
Houses been defaced or pulled down by any private person, and by whom? what is
the value as you think in your Consciences? has any person incroached upon any
Garden, Yard or Close belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage-house, or cut up
any Trees growing thereon, or changed or removed the ancient Marks and Bounds
of the same?

II. HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebelands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to Parsonage or Vicarage? as also a
Note of such Pensions, Rates, Tithes, and portions of Tithes, or other yearly
profits either within or without your Parish, as belong thereunto? have any of
the same been withheld from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or have
heard? is this Terrier kept in your Vestry, and a Copy of it delivered into the
Bishops Registry?

III. HAVE any of the Ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage, been taken away, or exchanged for others, without the free Consent of
the Incumbent, and License from the Ordinary? when, and by whom were they so
taken away or exchanged? and not employed to the right uses?

SECT. 4. Concerning the Parishoners.
I. IS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretic or
Schismatic? any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary, that
refuse to come unto the public Assemblies, Prayers, or Services of the Church?
or that make Profession of any other Religion than what is established in the
Church of England? impugning the Kings Majesty's Supremacy in Causes
Ecclesiastical, the Form of Gods Worship contained in the Book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Holy Sacraments?

II. IS there any person in your Parish that lies under the accusation of a
common fame, or vehement suspicion of adultery, fornication or incest? or that
harbor such incont^nent lewd persons in their houses? are there any common
Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods Name?
or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean or filthy Talkers, or sowers of
Sedition, Faction and Discord amongst Neighbors?

III. WHETHER any in your Parish have irreverently abused your Minister, or
have laid any violent hands upon him, or disgraced his Office and Ministry by
words or deeds?

IV. HAVE you any in your Parish that profane or mispend the Lords day, or any
part of that day by an offensive Conversation, or by following their servile
Trades or Employments? or appoint or permit their servants or children so to
do? are upon those days any shops kept open, or wares sold? or do then any
Vintners, Inne-keepers, or other Victuallers and Sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer
any persons to Tipple or Game in their Houses? Declare the names of the
Offenders herein.

V. DOES every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish, having no
lawful Let, duly Resort unto your Church or Chapel, upon every Sunday and
Holyday appointed for Divine Service? do they then and there abide quietly with
Reverence, Order and Decency, during the time of Common Prayer, Prayer,
Preaching, or other Service of God there used? and are there any among you,
that forbear to partake of the Common Prayers of the Church, and forbear to
come upon His Majesty's Proclamation, and come only to the Preaching? Specify
the Names of those that you know to be faulty herein.

VI. DOES every person coming to Church, Reverently uncover his Head, and so
continue all the time of Divine Service in the Church? do they all Reverently
kneel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read?

VII. ARE there any in your Parish that refuse, or wilfully neglect to send
their Infant-children to be Baptized publicly in the Church, unless in tase of
urgent Danger, in which case, the Child may be Baptized at home by a lawful,
Minister, according to the Form and Rites appointed in the Liturgy? or do they
send them to be Baptized in any other Parishes, or after other Form than is
appointed? and are there any Infants or more aged persons in your Parish as yet
unbaptized?

VIII. DOES every Householder in your Parish cause their Children and Servants
ignorant in the Principles of Religion, to learn the Catechism set forth in the
Common Prayer Book* and upon notice from the Minister, send them to him to give
an Account thereof, when be shall require it of them openly in the Church upon
Sundays and Holidays, as in the Rubric of the Common Prayer Book is
appointed? to the intent that being well instructed in the same, they may be
capable to be Confirmed by the Bishop? and are they sent and brought to the
Bishop for that end?

IX. IS there any person in your Parish, who being Sixteen years of Age, and
well instructed in Religion, does not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
at least three times in the Year, of which Easter is always to be one? and do
any of your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling, or from the hand of
your Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad? or are
there any Strangers not of your Parish, that forsake their own Church, and
usually Repair to yours for it?

X. HAVE you any among you, that he denounced and declared Excommunicate for
any crime committed? for how long time have they continued so Excommunicated?
and do any of your Parish (not being of the same Family) usually keep society
with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and Absolved?

XI. ARE there any living in your Parish, who have been Married together
contrary to the Laws of God, and within the Degrees forbidden? or any persons
that being lawfully divorced, or rather separated from Bed and Board, have
(both parties being living) one or both Married to some other? or be there any
that being lawfully Married, and not separated or divorced by course of Law, do
not dwell together as man and wife?

XII. ARE there any Married Women in your Parish, who after their delivery from
the peril of Child birth, refuse or omit to make their public Thanksgiving in
the Church? and when they repair to Church so to do, do they then and there
offer the accustomed Offerings?

XIII. ARE there any belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay their Duty for
Easter-Offerings to your Minister? or any that refuse to contribute and pay the
Rate assessed upon them for the Repair of your Church or Chapel, for Bread and
Wine used in the Holy Communion, and for such Books, Furniture and Ornaments
(provided and bought) as be requisite for the performance of all Divine Offices
there?

XIV. DO any of your Parishoners refuse to Bury their Dead according to the
Form and Order of the Church of England? and are there any Wills and Testaments
of persons dead in your Parish, that are not yet proved by lawful Authority? or
are any Goods of persons dying Intestate, administered without a due Grant from
the Ordinary? did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to
your Church or Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other Pious and
Charitable purposes? what were those Legacies, and how have they ban bestowed,
or in whose hands are they detained?

XV. DO you know, or have heard of any Patron or other person in your Parish,
having the Presentation or Gift of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, who has made
gain thereof, by presenting a Clerk or Minister to it upon any bargain either
for money or pension, or Lease, or Reserve of Tithes or Glebe, or any part
thereof, or upon any other Simoniacal Compact whatsoever?

XVI. IS there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their
Pews or Seats in your Church? have any new Monuments or Pews been erected in
your Chancel, or in the Body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the
Ordinary? have any late Combe-stones been erected in your Churchyard, whereby
the Parishioners are prejudiced, and the Ground set apart for Burials is
encumbered and lessened? know you any person or persons that have presumed to
Brawle, Fight, Quarrel, or strike one another in your Church, Chapel, or
Churchyard? if such, what are their Names?

XVII. DO you know any person who has concealed the last Will and Testament of
the dead? or administered such goods without Order? or having administered, yet
do neglect to perform such Wills, or to pay Legacies given to the Church, Poor,
or other Charitable uses?

SECT. 5. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish-Clerk, aged Twenty
one Years at the least? is he of honest Life and Conversation, and sufficient
or able to perform his Duty in Reading, Writing and Singing? has he taken his
Oath? is he chosen by your Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine
Services? are his Wages justly paid unto him? or who withholds the same from
him?

II. DOES he or your Sexton (if you have any such) with diligence and care lock
and open the doors of your Church at due times? is any thing by his Default
lost or spoiled in the Church? and does he keep your Church or Chapel clean
from Dust, Cobwebs, or other Annoyance? does he toll or ring the Bells at the
due accustomed hours before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and
Evening, that the people may be warned to come unto the Church? and when any
person is passing out of this Life, does he upon notice given him thereof, toll
a Bell, as has been accustomed?

SECT. 6. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Chyrurgions and Midwives.
I. IS there any Hospital, Almeshouse, or Free School founded in your Parish?
who was the Founder, or is now the Patron or Visitor thereof? and what is the
yearly Revenue or Stipend belonging to the Governors, or Masters of the same?
is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? and are
the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the intention of the
Founder, and of such Grants and Ordinances as have been made concerning the
same?

II. DOES any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Bishop or his Chancellor? is your Schoolmaster of
sound Religion and good Life? does he teach his Scholars in the Catechism of
Religion, comprised in the Common Prayer Book? does he cause them upon Sundays
and Holidays orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see that they
behave themselves there quietly and reverently during the time of Divine
Service and Sermon?

III. DOES any man in your Parish practice Physic or Chyrurgery, or any woman
take upon her to exercise the Office of Midwife, without Approbation and
License from the Ordinary, or other License equivolent?

SECT. 7. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishoners? or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishoners, in defect of their joint consent.

II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their just Accounts to
the Parish, and delivered up also to the succeeding Churchwardens the moneys
remaining in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your
Church or Chapel?

III. DO you the Churchwardens and Sidemen take diligent care, and see who of
your Parishoners be absent from the Divine Service in your Church or Chapel
upon Sundays and Holidays? and if you find any to have absented themselves
without a sufficient Cause, do you by Warrant from some of the Justices of
Peace, levy of them, by way of distress upon their Goods, the sum of Twelve
pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of Parliament
in that Case provided? and do you distribute the several sums so levied, and
other alms given to the poor of the said Parish, according to the Act of
Parliament?

IV. DO you note them that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun,
or without lawful cause depart before it be ended? do you suffer none to stand
idle, or talk together in the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church or
Churchyard, during the time of prayers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices, to
the disturbance of the Minister and Congregation?

V. DO you take care to hinder, and not to suffer any misbehaviors or disorders
to be done by men, women, servants or children in your Church or Chapel? are
you careful that none of them sit, lean, or lay their hats upon the
Communion Table? and are you diligent to restrain all such things as may tend
to the disturbance of Divine Service, or the Congregation?

VI. DO you against every Communion provide a sufficient quantity of fine white
Bread, and of good Wine, according to the advice and direction given you by
your Minister for the number of Communicants?

VII. DO you cause all Strangers that Preach in your Church or Chapel, to
subscribe their Names in a Book provided for that purpose?

VIII. HAVE any in your Parish given the Churchwardens or Sidemen, or either
of them, evil words for doing their Duty according to their Oath and
Conscience, in making Presentment for any default?

IX. DO you know any matter or cause which is a breach of the Laws
Ecclesiastical not here expressed, present the names of such as are faulty?

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE Churchwardens are required and charged conscionably to perform their
Office, and duly to consider the obligation of their Oath, and the danger of
Perjury. For as the true discharging of their Office, is the chief means
whereby public disorders, sins and offenses in their Parish may be reformed
and punished: So if they wilfully refuse, or omit to present such crimes or
faults, as either they know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of
by public Fame, then in such Cases, the Bishop and his Officers are to proceed
against them, as in Cases of wilful Omission and Perjury.

When you have seriously considered of these Articles, you are to write an
Answer or Presentment particularly and truly according to your Consciences, and
to bring your Presentiments to the Visitation, subscribed with your hands.

FINIS.

