The Form of the Oath of Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOU shall swear, Truly and faithfully to Execute the Office of Churchwarden,
(or Side-man) within your Parish; and according to the best of your skill and
knowledge, present such Things and Persons, as to your knowledge are
presentable by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm.

So help you GOD, and the Contents of this BOOK.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL;
Exhibited to the Ministers, Churchwardens and Sidemen Of every Parish within
the Diocese of Canterbury.

In the Ordinary Visitation OF THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, WILLIAM, By
Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate of all
England, and Metropolitan.

In the Savoy, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1682.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry Within the Diocese of Canterbury.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, and Chapels; the Fabric, Furniture, and
Ornaments thereof.
I. IS your Parish Church (or Chapel) kept in good, and sufficient repair? Are
the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile, or Slate? the Windows well
glazed? the Floors well paved? the Seats well fastened, and conveniently placed?
the Utensils, and Ornaments fairly kept, and preserved from spoil, abuse, and
profanation? And all things so decently ordered, as becomes the House of God?

II. HAS the Steeple, or Tower, or any other part of your Church, or Chapel,
been pulled, or fallen down? Or have any of the Bells, Lead, or other
Materials, or Utensils, formerly belonging thereunto, been imbezelled, sold, or
made away? and by whom?

III. IS there a Decent Font of Stone, fixed in the Ancient, and usual place in
the lower part of the Church, for the Administration of Holy Baptism? and a
decent Table for the Holy Communion, placed in the Chancel where it ought to
be, with a Carpet of Silk, or other decent Stuff, to be used upon it in the
time of Divine Service; and a fair Linen Cloth at the time of the
Administration of the Holy Eucharist? And have you a fair Chalice, or
Communion-Cup of Silver, with a Cover of the same; and a Plate, or Patin of
Silver for the Bread; and a clean, and sweet standing Pot, or Flagon of Pewter,
or purer Metal, in which only the Wine for the Holy Communion is set upon the
Holy Table?

IV. HAVE you in your said Church, or Chapel, a convenient Seat or Pew for
your Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit with a comely Cloth, and
Cushion; A Bible of the last Translation, in a large Uolume; and the Book of
Common Prayer, (established by the late Act of Uniformity;) both well, and
substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies set forth by
Authority? A Book of Canons, and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, set forth in the
year of our Lord 1603, by the King's Authority? And a printed Table of the
Degrees, wherein Marriage is prohibited?

V. Have you a comely large Surplice, for the Minister to wear at all times of
his public Ministration in the Church, provided, and washed at the charge of
your Parish? And also a Hood, agreeable to his Degree, or a Tippet, to be used
or worn over the Surplice?

VI. HAVE you a Register-Book of Parchment, wherein the Names and Sirnames of
all persons, Married, Christened, or Buried within your Parish, are duly
Registered from time to time, together with the Names and Sirnames of both the
Parents of the Children so Christened, and the Day, Month, and Year of all such
Christnings, Marriages, and Burials? And have your Minister, and Churchwardens
subscribed their Names unto every Page of that Book? And is the Transcript
thereof yearly within one Month next after the 25th of March, brought into the
Archbishop's Registry*

VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein are duly Recorded the
Names, and Licenses of all such Strangers, as are admitted at any time to
preach in your Church, or Chapel? As also a third Book, wherein are Entered the
Churchwardens Accounts for every year? And have you a strong Chest, or Coffer,
wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all the aforementioned Furniture in
safe custody? And another with an Hole in the upper part thereof, placed in the
most convenient part of the Church, that the Parishioners may put their Alms
into it? And are both the said Chests secured with three several Locks and
Keys; One Key remaining with the Minister, and the other two with the
Churchwardens severally? And lastly, Have you a Bier, and a Black Hearse-Cloth
for the more decent Burial of the Dead?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, Tithes, and other
Dues belonging to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently Fenced, and decently kept from all
Profanation, and Encroachment? Has any person made any Door into it out of his
own House, or Ground? Have any Trees there growing been cut down? How long
since? By whom? and to whose Use, and Benefit?

II. IS there a House belonging to your Parson, Uicar, or Curate? And is the
same, with all the Outhouses thereunto belonging, kept in good, and sufficient
repair? Have any of the said Houses, or Outhouses been pulled down, or
defaced? and by whom? Has any encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or Close
belonging to your Parsonage, or Uicarage-House? Or cut up any Trees growing
thereon? or changed, or removed the ancient Marks, and Bounds of the same?

III. HAVE you a true, and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-Lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages, Stocks, or Implements belonging to your
Parsonage, or Uicarage? As also a Note of such Pensions, Rate Tithes, and
Portions of Tithes, or other yearly profits (either within, or without your
Parish) as belong thereunto? And is there a Copy of the said Terrier, and Note
delivered in, to be laid up in the Registers Office? Have any of these been
withheld from your Minister? and when, or by whom?

IV. HAVE any of the ancient Glebe-Lands, belonging to your Parsonage, or
Uicarage, been alienated, taken away, or exchanged for others, without the free
consent of the Incumbent, and License of the Ordinary? And by whom, and when
has the same been done? And how much is your Parsonage, or Uicarage damnified
thereby in the yearly value thereof, as you know, believe, or have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning the Clergy.
I. IS your Minister (so far as you know, or believe) in Holy Orders according
to the Rules of the Church of England? And is he a Licensed Preacher, and by
whom?

II. Is he lawfully admitted to the Cure of Souls in your Parish, as you
believe, or have heard? Or is he reported, or suspected to have obtained either
his Orders, or Benefice by any Simoniacal, or undue practice?

III. DID he within two Months after his Induction publicly in the Church upon
some Sunday, or Holy Day in the time of Divine Service, read the 39 Articles of
the Church of England, Established by Authority; and there publicly declare
his assent thereunto? Did he within the same time upon some Lord's Day publicly
read the appointed Morning and Evening Prayers; and thereafter declare his
unfeigned Assent, and Consent to the use of all things in the Book of
Common Prayer contained, in the Form prescribed by the late Act of Uniformity?
And did he within three Months after his Induction upon some Lord's Day, and in
the time of Divine Service, publicly and openly read the Declaration or
acknowledgment required in the said Act; together with the Ordinaries
Certificate of his Subscription to the same?

IV. HAS he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice with Cure, or without? and how
far distant from you, and in what Diocese? Is he constantly Resident among you?
Or how many weeks in any one year has he been absent from you?

V. HAS he a Curate to assist him, able, and sufficient, and conformable to
the Laws, and Orders of the Church of England? Does he, or his Curate serve in
any other Church beside? What yearly Stipend does your Minister allow his
Curate?

VI. DOES your Parson, Uicar, or Curate read Divine Service on all Sundays, and
Holy Days, and publicly administer the Holy Sacraments of Baptism, and the
Eucharist, and perform all other Ministerial Offices, and Duties in such manner
and form, as is directed by the Book of Common Prayer, lately Established, and
the Act of Uniformity therewith published, without addition, diminution, or
alteration? And does he in those his Ministrations wear the Surplice, with a
Hood befitting his Degree?

VII. DOES he administer the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist publicly in the
Church at least thrice every year, (whereof once at Easter;) giving solemn
notice thereof beforehand by reading the Exhortation appointed for that
purpose? And does he endeavor to his utmost does in his public Sermons, and
private Conferences to prevail with his Parishioners to receive it oftener? Does
he on the Lord's Day give notice of the Holy Days, and Fasting-Days in the week
following, that the people may be put in mind, and incited to resort to public
prayers in the Church upon those solemn Occasions? And do your Minister, and
Parishioners observe the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, for preserving
the Bounds of the Parish, and desiring Gods blessing upon the Fruits of the
Earth? Does he also duly observe the Fifth of November, giving warning of the
same the Sunday before; as also the Thirtieth of January, and the Nine and
Twentieth of May, according to the Statutes, and Orders set forth in that
behalf?

VIII. DOES your Minister twice every year on some Sundays after Evening Prayer
in your Church, or Chapel publish the Statutes made against profane Swearing
and Cursing, and against the Profanation of the Lord's Day? and on the Fifth of
November after Morning Prayer or Sermon, read distinctly and plainly the Act
made in the Third of King James for public Thanksgiving on that day, according
as it is by those Laws required?

IX. DOES he himself constantly every Sunday (unless in case of sickness, or
other reasonable impediment) preach in your Church, or Chapel; or procure a
Sermon to be so preached by some other Licensed Preacher? Or one of the
Homilies set forth by Authority to be there read by a Priest, or Deacon? And
does he constantly at the beginning of his Sermons pray for the Kings Majesty
in his due Style, and Title; for the Queen, and Royal Family; and for all
Archbishops, and Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons, as the Canon
enjoins?

X. DOES your Minister diligently examine and instruct the youth of your Parish
in the Church Catechism, as in the Rubric at the end of the said Catechism is
directed? And being thus prepared, and of convenient age, does he take care to
present them to the Bishop to be confirmed?

XI. DOES he endeavor to reclaim all Popish, and other Recusants, and
Sectaries, (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the profession,
and practice of the true Religion, established in the Church of England, and to
their bounden duty in obeying the Law, and submitting to the Government of the
Realm?

XII. DOES he refuse, or neglect to visit, comfort, and pray with the Sick, or
to bury the Dead? Does he delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of
death? Or Baptize them in any other place than the Church, when there is no
such danger? And when they are (in case of necessity) thus privately Baptized,
does he cause them afterward, if they live, to be brought into the Church, and
certify the Congregation of the Form of Baptism used in private, and proceed
thereupon in all points, as in the Office of private Baptism is directed? Is
there any Child past Infancy, or other person of riper years, through the
default of your Minister or others, yet remaining unbaptized in your parish?
Does he use to Baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either
of the parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children?

XIII. HAS he at any time (to your knowledge, or as you have heard) preached
any false, Heretical, Schismatical, or Seditious Doctrine, which may seduce the
people into parties and Factions, to the disturbance of the public peace and
Unity, either of Church or State?

XIV. HAS he presumed to Marry any persons in private Houses? Or such, as
being under age, have not the consent of their parents, or without the Banes
first published on three Sundays or Holydays in the Church? Or at any other
hours, than between eight and twelve in the Morning, unless he had a License or
Dispensation so to do?

XV. DOES any person preach in your parish as a Lecturer? Has he License from
the Bishop so to do? Does he before his Lecture read the Divine Service, as the
late Act of Uniformity requires? And is he in all respects conformable to the
Laws and Orders of the Church of England?

XVI. DOES your Minister, or any other, (either Minister or Lay-person) hold
any Conventicle or Meeting within any private House or place within your
Parish, to which persons of several Families, above the number of five, do
resort, under any pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving, or Humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

XVII. IS your Parson, Uicar, or Curate, and your Lecturer (if you have any) of
a sober, unblameable and exemplary life; given to Hospitality, and Alms-deeds?
In his Apparel grave and decent, as the Canons of the Church require? Or on the
other side, is his carriage and conversation in any kind whatsoever disorderly,
or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ? Does he familiarly
converse with vicious, ungodly, or excommunicate persons? Is he a frequenter of
Taverns, Alehouses, or other Houses of ill fame? A common Gamester, or User of
unlawful, or undecent Sports? A Swearer, Railer, or Quarreller? Does he set
Neighbors at variance one with another? Or encourage them to Suits and
contentions? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker? Or vehemently suspected
of Incontinency with any person, either within your parish, or without? Does he
use any Trade, Occupation, Traffic, or Merchandising for Filthy Lucre sake?

XVIII. IS there within your parish dwelling or residing any one, who being in
Holy Orders has quitted his profession, and turned Lay*man? Or any stranger,
or unlicens'd Minister or Preacher, that has been deprived, ejected, or
suspended for false Doctrine, Inconformity, or other evil Manners? If so, how
do they now behave themselves? and what profession, or course of Life do they
follow?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there in your Parish any known or reputed Heretic, Schismatic or
Separatist? Any person notoriously known, or vehemently suspected to be of
Atheistical Principles, or Opinions? Any Libertine, or profane person? Any
Depravers, Disturbers, or Contemners of the public Service of God, and the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England by Law established? Any
Papist, Presbyterian, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary, that
refuse or neglect to come unto the public Assemblies, and to join in the
prayers, and Service of God in the Church, or that makes profession of any
other Religion, or Way of Worship, than what is established in the Church of
England?

II. IS there any person in your Parish, that lies under a common Fame, or
vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Any Common Drunkards,
or Common Swearers, or Blasphemers of God's Holy Name? or any that are noted to
be Railers, unclean or filthy Talkers, Sowers or Maintainers of Sedition,
Faction, or Discord among their Neighbors? Or in sum, any whose Life and
Manners are contrary to Godliness, Peace, and Honesty?

III. DO any of your Parish upon the Sunday-days, or Holy Days follow their
bodily, or ordinary Labor? or compel, or permit their Servants so to do? Are
any Shops kept open, or Wares sold at such times? Or do any Uintners,
Innkeepers, or other Uictuallers, and Sellers of Beer and Ale, suffer any
persons to Tipple or Game in their Houses upon those days?

IV. DOES every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish duly resort
unto your Church or Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holyday appointed for Divine
Service? Do they then and there abide quietly with Reverence, Order and
Decency, during the whole time of Common prayer, Preaching, or other Service of
God there used? Or are there any among you that come only to the Preaching, and
not to the Common Prayers of the Church?

V. ARE there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-Children to
be Baptized publicly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger? Or do
they send them from their own Minister, to be Baptized in any other place, or
after other form, than is appointed? Or do they keep them unbaptized any longer
time, than the Church allows? And are there any Infants or persons of riper
years in your Parish, who as yet remain unbaptized?

VI. DO all the House-holders in your Parish cause their Children, and Servants
to Learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister
(when he does require it of them) openly in the Church upon Sundaies, and
Holy Days as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed; that when they are well
instructed in the same, they may be confirmed by the Bishop?

VII. IS there in your Parish any person, who being 16 years of age, does not
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times in the year, of
which Easter is always to be one? Does any in your Parish refuse to receive the
same kneeling, or from the hands of your own Minister; repairing for it to
other Parishes, and Ministers abroad? Or are there any Strangers not of your
Parish, that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for it?

VIII. HAVE you any among you, that be denounced, and declared Excommunicate
for any crime committed? How long have they been so? And do any of your Parish
keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and absolved?

IX. ARE there any living in your Parish, as Man and Wife, who are within the
Degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully Divorced have Married again? Or
any that being lawfully Married, and not separated, or Divorced by course of
Law, do not cohabit together?

X. ARE there any Married Women in your Parish, who after their delivery from
the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their public Thanksgiving to God in
the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and
make their Offerings according to Custom?

XI. ARE there any belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay their
Easter-Offerings, or Duties to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute,
and pay the Rate assessed upon them for the repair of your Church or Chapel,
and for the providing of such Books, Furniture, and Ornaments, as be requisite
for the performance of all Divine Offices there?

XII. DO any refuse to Bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? Are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish, that
be yet unproved? Or any Goods Administered, without a due grant from the
Ordinary?

XIII. IS there any Strife or Contention among any of your Parish for their
Pews, or Seats in your Church? Or have any of them erected new Pews in your
Chancel, or in the Body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the
Ordinary?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chapel a fit Parish Clerk, aged 21
years at the least, of honest Life and Conversation, and sufficiently able to
perform his duty in Reading, Writing, and Singing? Is he duly chosen by your
Minister? and does he diligently attend him in all Divine Offices; audibly
making, and repeating the Responses and Suffrages, as in the Liturgy he is
directed? Are his Wages duly paid unto him? Or who withholds the same?

II. DOES he, or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the Doors of your Church, that they be Locked, and Opened at
due times? Does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from Dust, Cobwebs, and
other Annoyance? Does he Ring, and Toll the Bells at the due accustomed hours,
before Morning and Evening Service, that the people may be warned to come unto
the Church? And when any person is passing out of this Life, does he upon
notice given him thereof, Toll a Bell as has been accustomed, that the
Neighbors may thereby be put in mind to recommend the dying person to the
Grace, and Favor of God, and to meditate upon their own Death?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Surgeons and Midwives.
I. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School? Who was
the Founder? Who is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue?
what Stipends belong to the Governors, or Masters of the same? Is the same
ordered, and governed in every respect, as it ought to be? And are the Revenues
thereof rightly, employed according to the intention of the Founder, and the
tenor of such Statutes and Ordinances, as have been made in pursuance of the
same?

II. HAVE any living or dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, given any Gift, or
Legacy by Will, or otherwise to the use of your Church, or Poor, or of the
Parishioners in general? How is it settled, and in whose hands? and is it, or
has it been misemployed, or disposed of to other Uses?

III. DOES any Man keep a public or private School in your Parish? Is he
allowed so to do by the Ordinary? Is he of sober Life, and honest Conversation,
and conformable to the Doctrine and Discipline Established? Does he teach his
Scholars the Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Does he upon
Sundays, and Holydays, and all good Occasions repair to your Church, or
Chapel, and cause his Scholars to do so too, and see that they behave
themselves there quietly, orderly, and reverently during the time of Divine
Service and Sermon? and does he teach them good Manners, Sobriety, Modesty, and
Obedience, as well as other Learning?

IV. Does any Man or Woman in your Parish take upon them to practice Physic,
or Surgery? Or any Woman to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without being
first examined, and approved, and thereupon Licensed by the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
I. HAVE any abuses, or offenses, presented by the Churchwardens or others,
been suppressed, or left unpunished by any Officers exercising Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within this Diocese? Do they unnecessarily delay, or protract any
causes brought before them? Do they vexatiously cite any into their Courts for
greediness of Gain, or other undue Ends? Do they demand, exact, or take
unlawful or extraordinary Fees? Or in any kind grieve, or oppress His Majesty's
good Subjects?

II. IS there a Table of Fees publicly fastened, and set up in the Consistory,
or Ecclesiastical Court, to which you are called to appear, and make your
Presentiments; that so every one may know, what Fees he ought to pay, as the
Canons enjoin?

III. HAVE any Apparitors taken any Reward for the concealing any Offense, or
the avoiding the Punishment or Reformation of Offenders? And do they summon any
to appear at the Consistory without Citation first had, and granted from the
Ecclesiastical Judge?

IV. HAS any Sum of Money been lately, or heretofore paid to any
Ecclesiastical Officer for Commutation of Penance? What was the Sum? Unto whom
was it paid, and to what Use appointed, or employed?

If you know of any other default, or Crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, you
are to present the same.

TIT. VIII. Queries to be put to the Minister, concerning the Churchwardens
and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish duly chosen by the joint consent of
the Minister, and Parishioners? Or one of them by the Minister, and the other
by the Parishioners? Or as the custom of the Parish is?

II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church, or
Chapel?

III. DO your Churchwardens and Sidemen take diligent care to see, and
observe, who of the Parishioners are absent from Divine Service, and Sermon in
your Church or Chapel every Sunday and Holy Day? and when they find any to
have absented themselves without a sufficient cause, do they by Warrant of some
Justice of the Peace, levy of them by way of Distress upon their Goods, the Sum
of 12 Pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of
Parliament in that case provided? And do they distribute the several Sums so
levied among the Poor of your Parish, according to Law?

IV. DO they present all them that come late to Church, after Divine Service is
begun, or depart before it be ended? Do they take care, that none stand idle,
or talk together in the Church Porch, or walk in the Church, or Churchyard,
during the time of Prayers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices?

V. DO they take care, that no Misbehaviour or Disorder be done by Men, Women,
Servants, or Children in your Church or Chapel? that none of them sit, lean,
or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? That no Minstrels, nor
Morris-Dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds be brought or come into your Church
or Chapel, to the disturbance of the Congregation?

VI. DO they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel,
provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according
to the number of Communicants, at the Parish charge?

VII. DO they cause all Strangers, that preach in your Church or Chapel, to
enter their Names the same day in a Book provided for that purpose; together
with the Name of the Bishop that Licensed them to preach in this Diocese? and
do they permit no other to preach?

VIII. HAVE they (the Churchwardens and Sidemen, now sworn to give in a true
answer unto all these Articles of Enquiry in all their several Titles) taken
sufficient time to draw up their Presentiments; and therein consulted with you
their Minister for your faithful assistance?

WE do not by Virtue of this Oath require or expect that the Parson, Vicar, or
Curate, or any one of the Churchwardens, or Sidemen of any Parish, should
detect, impeach or accuse himself of any Fault inquired off in these Articles:
Nevertheless the Faults of any one of them may and ought to be presented by the
rest. And if the Churchwardens, or Sidemen will not do their Duty herein; yet
the Minister of every Parish, (or in his absence the Curate) may, and ought to
present such Persons, and Things as want due Reformation; for upon them is the
chief Care incumbent of suppressing Sin, and Wickedness, and all Irregularities
in their Parishes. And let all of both sorts know assuredly, that as the
Conscientious Discharge of their Duty herein is the next, and readiest Mean,
whereby public Disorders and Offenses may come to be punished, and reformed;
so if they wilfully refuse, or neglect to discover such Things, as either they
themselves know, or by common Fame have heard to have been, or to be amiss in
their Parish, the Guilt will lie at their Doors; and in such cases the Bishop,
and his Officers will proced against them in their Courts with all the
Severity, which the Law enables them to use in such cases.

FINIS.

