ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL,
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within
the Diocese of BATH and WELLS, At the Triennial Visitation Of the Right
Reverend Father in God PETER LOrd Bishop of the said DIOCESE.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, Anno Dom.
1676.

YOU shall Swear that you shall well and truly execute the Office of a
Churchwarden. And that upon due consideration had of these Articles given you
in charge, you shall diligently Enquire, and make true Presentment, so far as
by Law you ought, of every person inhabiting or resident within your Parish,
who has committed any offense, or omitted any duty therein mentioned enquirable
into, or punishable by, the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Kingdom: And this you
shall do as in the sight of God, uprightly and truly, without favor, or
malice, hope of reward, or fear of displeasure: So help you God.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY within the Diocese of BATH and WELLS.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and furniture
thereunto belonging.
Canon 85
IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and Sufficient Repair? Are the
Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile, or Slat; the Windows well glazed,
the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastened, and conveniently placed; and
all things so decently ordered as becomes the house of God?

II. Has the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chapel, or any part thereof
been pulled down, or any of the Lead, or Bells, formerly belonging thereunto,
been imbezelled, sold, or made away? In whose hands or custody does the same or
any part thereof remain? Declare what you know or have heard herein.

Injunct, Eliz.
III. Is there a Font of Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a
convenient place toward the lower part of your Church, for the Administration
of Baptism? Can. 81
And is there in your Chancel a decent Communion Table for the Administration
of the Lords Supper, Can. 82
with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine Woollen Cloth; And an other covering of
white and pure Linen to spread thereupon? Rub. Com.
Can. 20
And have you a fair Communion Cup or Chalice, with a cover of Silver; and one
or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging?

Can. 82
IV. Have you in your Church or Chapel a convenient Seat or Pew for your
Minister to read divine Service in, a Pulpit with a comely Cloth or Cushion for
the same, Can. 83
a Bible of the last Translation in a large Volume, and two Books of Common
Prayer established by Act of Parliament Anno 1662. well and substantially
bound? Can. 80
Have you likewise the Book of Homilyes set forth by Authority, a Book of
Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a Printed Table of such Degrees
wherein Marriage is prohibited?

Can. 58
V. Have you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of
his public Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly washed at the
charge of the Parish?

Can. 70
VI. Have you a Register Book of Parchment wherein to Register the Names, and
Sirnames, of all such Persons as are Married, Christened or Buried within your
Parish; together with the Names and Sirnames of both the Parents of the
Children that are Christened, expressing the Day, Month, and Year of all such
Christnings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the transcript thereof yearly
within one month next after the 25. of March brought into the Bishops Registry?

Can. 52
VII. Have you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the Names and
Licenses of all such Strangers as are at any time admitted to Preach in your
Church or Chapel? Can. 85
As also a third Book, wherein to write down the Churchwardens Accounts;
together with a strong Chest with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep the aforesaid
Books and all other the aforementioned Furniture in safe custody? Can. 89
And lastly, have you a Bier with a black Herse-Cloth for the burial of the
dead?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebe and Tithes belonging to
the Church.
Can. 83
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Railes, or Pales, and
decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattle, or any
other abuse whatsoever? Has any Person incroached upon the same, or made any
door into it out of his own ground or habitation without allowance from the
Ordinary? Have any Trees there growing been cut down, how long since, by whom,
to whose use and benefit?

II. Is the house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate with all the Outhouses
thereunto belonging kept in good and Sufficient repair, or have any of the said
houses or Outhouses been defaced or pulled down without License from the
Ordinary, and by whom? Has any Person incroached upon any Garden, Yard or
Close, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage house, or cut up any Trees
growing thereon, or changed or removed the ancient Marks and bounds of the
same? declare what you know, or have credibly heard thereof.

Can. 87
III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage; as
also a note of such Pensions, Rate-tithes, or portions of tithes or other
yearly profits either within or without your Parishes, as belong thereunto?
Has any of the same been withheld from your Minister, and by whom, as you
know or have heard?

IV. Have any of the Ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage been taken away or exchanged for other; without the free consent of
the Incumbent, and Patron, and License from the Ordinary?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
Act Unifor. Injunct.
I. IS your Minister a Priest or a Deacon, Episcopally ordained according to
the Laws of the Church of England?

Eliz. 26
II. Is he defamed or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders
by any Simoniacal compact?

13. Eliz. cap. 12
III. Has he been legally instituted and inducted into his Benefice: and did
he within two Months after his Induction publicly in the Church, upon some
Sunday or Holyday, in the time of divine Service, read the 39. Articles of the
Church of England established by Authority, and there Publicly declare his
assent thereunto? Act Unifor.
And has he likewise read the Declaration enjoined by the Act of Uniformity?

14. Caroli 2
IV. Has he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prebend or Dignity? Is he
constantly resident upon his Benefice amongst you? How many weeks in one year
has he been absent from you without urgent necessity?

V. Has your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate in Holy
Orders, an able and discreet Person, and conformable to the Laws and Orders of
the Church of England? Is he allowed by the Bishop to serve in your Church or
Chapel? And does he serve in any other Church besides? And what yearly Stipend
does your Minister allow him?

Can. 14. 21. 68.
VI. Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate in reading the Morning and evening
Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage,
Churching of Women after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial of the
Dead, Rub. Matr. Visitat. Burial. Comminat.
and Pronouncing Gods Commination against Impenitent Sinners, use the Form and
words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any addition, omission,
or alteration of the same? And does he use all such rites and ceremonies in all
parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said book, so far as you have
observed?

Can. 58. Rub.
VII. Does your Minister at the reading or celebrating any divine office wear
the Surplice, together with such other Scholastical habit as is suitable to his
Degree?

Can. 64
VIII. Does he observe the Holy Days and Fasting-daies, as also the Ember
Weeks, Rub. Com.
and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation week, as in the Common Prayer Book,
or by the Ecclesiastical Canons is appointed, Pr. Injunct. Eliz. 19
giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same, in the Church in the
time of divine Service, upon the Sunday next before?

Can. 48, 49.
IX. Has your Minister been Licenced to Preach by the Bishop or either of the
two Universities? Rub. Com.
If so, does he then constantly (unless in case of Sickness, necessary absence,
or other reasonable impediment) Can. 45, 46.
himself Preach in your Church or Chapel one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be
not a licenced Preacher, or being so licenced, be hindered by Sickness, or
otherwise as aforesaid, does he procure a Sermon to be Preached by some other
Minister, a Licensed Preacher: or is one of the Homilies set forth by
Authority, there read by a Priest or Deacon lawfully ordained?

Can. 59.61.
X. Does your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church-Carechism, Can. 66
Injunct. Eliz. 44
and does he prepare and present them being so instructed to be confirmed by
the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and other
Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion
established in the Church of England, and to their bounden Duty in obeying the
Laws, and submitting to the Covernment thereof?

Can. 67, 68, 69.
XI. Does he neglect to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant that
is in danger of death? Is there any Child in your Parish past Infancy, or other
Person of more years through your Ministers default yet remaining unbaptized?
Rub. Com. Pra.
Does he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, Can. 29
or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or God-mother to their own
Children?

13. Eliz. 12. Injunct.
XII. Does he in his Sermons at any time (as you know or have heard) Preach any
false, Heretical, Eliz. 31
Seditious or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the People into parties
and factions, to the disturbance of the public Peace, and Unity of the Church
or State?

Can. 16
XIII. Has he presumed to Marry any Persons in private Houses, or such as
being under age, Rub. Mat.
have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banes first published on
three Sundaies or Holy Days in the Church, unless he had License or
Dispensation so to do, or at any other hours then between Eight and Twelve in
the Morning, who are the Persons so Married, and when were they so married!

Act Uniform.
XIV. Does any person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Has he allowance
from the Bishop for so doing? Does he before his Lecture read Divine Service
according to the Book of Common Prayer, and is he in all respects conformable
to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England?

Can. 72, 75.
XV. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophecyings or Exercises, not appointed by Authority, or does he, or any
other, either Minister or Lay person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in
private Houses within your Parish for people of several Families to resort
unto, under the pretense of preaching, praying, thanksgiving or humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided.

Can. 75
XVI. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer a man of sober, unblamable, and
exemplary life? Does he familiarly converse with ungodly, vicious,
excommunicate persons, otherwise then to instruct or reform them? Is he a
frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses, a common Gamester, a profane or obscene
Iester, a swearer, a Railer, Scoffer or Quareller? Does he set Neighbors at
variance one with another, or encourage them to suits and contention? Is he
noted to be an intemperate Drinker, or vehemently suspected of Incontinence
with any person either within your Parish or without? Is his Apparel grave and
decent both for fashion and color, as the Canons of the church require? Or is
his carriage and conversation in any kind whatsoever disorderly or scandalous,
and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ.

Act. Vnifor.
XVII. Has any person presumed to execute the office of a Priest or a Deacon
in your Parish Church, and to say, read or celebrate Divine Service there, or
to serve the Cure of your Parish, not being a Deacon, or to do any other
Ministerial Office in your Church belonging to a Priest or Deacon? If so, you
are to present what his name is, where he dwells, and how often he has
offended therein.

Can. 55
XVIII. Does your Minister use before his Sermon to Pray for the King's
Majesty, King Charles, his Royal Consort Queen Catharine, James Duke of York,
and the Royal Progeny, giving unto his Majesty such style and title of Supreme
Governor in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal as are due unto his Majesty? Has your Parson, Vicar, Curate, Act
Uniform.
or Lecturer a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Archbishop, Bishop,
or Ordinary, of his Subscription to the Declaration appointed by the Act of
Uniformity, and has he publicly and openly read the same together with the
Declaration upon some Lord's Day within three months after the date of the said
Certificate, in your Parish Church, in the presence of the Congregation in time
of Divine Service.

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
Can. 110
I. IS there in your Parish any person, reputed Heretic or Schismatic, any
Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary, that refuse to come
into the public Assemblies, Prayers, Services of the Church, or that make
profession of any other Religion then that is established in the Church of
England? And if there be any such what are their Names?

Can. 109
II. Is there any person in your Parish on whom there is a common fame, or
vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest committed by him or her?
Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or
Blasphemers of Gods name, or any that are noted to be unclean, lewd or obscene
Talkers, or such who are Sowers of Sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their
Neighbors?

Injunct. Eliz. 34
III. Do any of your Parish upon Sundaies or Holy Days follow their bodily and
ordinary labor, or permit their servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open or
wares sold? Or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victuallers and sellers of
Beer, Ale, or Sider, suffer any person to tipple or game in their Houses on
those days?

Injunct. Eliz. 33
IV. Does every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish, duly resort
unto your Church or Chapel, 1. Eliz. 2
upon every Sunday and Holy Day to Divine Service? Injunct. Eliz. 46
Do they then and there abide quietly, with reverence, order and decency,
during all the whole time of Common Prayer or Preaching? Injunct. Eliz. 52
And are there any among you that come only to the Sermon, and not to the
Common Prayers of the Church?

Rub. Bapt.
V. Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-Children to
be baptized publicly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger, in which
case the Child may be baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the form and
rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them to be baptized in any
other Parishes, or after other form then is appointed? Or do they keep them
unbaptized any longer time then the Church allows? And are there any Infants,
or more aged persons in your Parish, as yet unbaptized, or any that have been
privately baptized that are not afterward brought to the Church as is appointed?

Can. 59
VI. Do all Householders in your Parish cause their Children and Servants to
learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he
shall require it of them openly in Church upon Sundaies and Holy Days, as in
the Book of Common Prayer is appointed, that when they are well instructed in
the same, they may be confirred by the Bishop?

Can. 114. 21.
VII. Is there any person in your Parish who being sixteen years of age, and
well instructed in Religion, does not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
at least three times in the year, Rub. Com.
of which Easter is always to be one? Can. 57
Does any in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling, or from the hands
of your own Minister, Rub. Com. Pra.
repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there any
Strangers not of your Parish, that Forsake their own Churches, and usually
repair to yours for it?

Can. 65
VIII. Have you any among you that be denounced and declared excommunicated for
any crime committed? How long have they been so excommunicated? And do any of
your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church and
absolved?

Can. 99
IX. Are there any living in your Parish as man and wife who are within the
degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced have married again? Or
any that being lawfully married and not separated or divorced by course of Law,
do not cohabit together.?

Rub.
X. Are there any Married Women in your Parish, who after their Delivery from
the peril of Childbirth refuse to make their public Thanksgiving to God in
the Church, in such manner, as by the Law and Book of Common Prayer is requited?

Rub. Com.
Act Vnifor.
XI. Are there any belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay their duty for
Easter Offerings to your Minister; or any that refuse to pay the Rate Assessed
upon them for the Repair of your Church or Chapel, and for the providing of
Bread and Wine for the Communion, and such Books, Furniture and Ornaments as be
requisite for the performance of all Divine Offices there? And what is each
persons particular Rate who refuses so to pay?

Rub. Com.
XII. Do any refuse to Bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish
that be yet Unproved; or any Goods Administered, without a due Grant from the
Ordinary? Did any Dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your
Church or Chapel, Can. 62
or to the use of the Poor, or to any other Pious and Charitable purposes; what
were those Legacyes, and how have they been bestowed?

XIII. Is there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their
Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel,
or in the body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

XIV. Is the Fifth day of November observed and kept in your Parish; and also
the Thirtieth of January, and the Nine and Twentieth day of May, every of them
yearly according to the several Acts of Parliament, and in such form, as by
public Authority is appointed for the same?

Can. 4. 6.
XV. Are there any in your Parish who have Depraved, Vilified or Spoken against
the Book of Common Prayer now established in the Church of England, or any part
thereof, or against the Government of the Church under his Majesty, by
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Officers, or have spoken
Disgracefully of the Courts Ecclesiastical?

XVI. Do you know of any that have abused the Churchwardens of your Parish, or
given them evil words for executing their Office, or to dis-hearten and deterr
them from executing it as by Oath and Duty they are bound?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
Can. 67
1. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish Clerk, aged one and
twenty years at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation, and
sufficient and able to perform his duty in reading, writing and singing? Is he
chosen by your Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Offices? Are
his due wages justly paid unto him? Or who withholdeth the same from him?

Can. 91
II. Does he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the doors of your Church that they be locked and opened at
due time? And does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from dust, cobwebs, and
other annoyance? Does he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours
before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the People
may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of
this life, does he (upon notice given him thereof) toll a Bell as has been
accustomed, that the Neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the dying
person to the grace and favor of God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Chyrurgions and Mid-wifes.
I. Is there in your Parish any Hospital, Almes-house or Free School, not of
the Kings Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron
thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the
Governors or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every
respect as it ought to be; And are the Revenues thereof rightly employed,
according to the intention of the Founder and of such Grants and ordinances as
have been made concerning the same?

II. Does any Man keep a Public or Private School in your Parish, or is there
any Tutor or Schoolmaster in any Private family who is not allowed thereunto
by the Ordinary? Does he teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion, set
forth by Authority? Does he himself repair, and also cause his Scholars upon
Sundays and Holy Days orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see
that they behave themselves quietly and reverently during the time of Divine
Service and Sermon?

III Does any in your Parish practice Physic or Chyrurgery? or any woman take
upon her the Office of a Midwife, without License from the Ordinary?

Queries to be put to the Ministers.
TIT. VII. Concerning the Church Wardens and Sidemen.
Can. 69
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen?

Can. 89
II. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining
in their hand, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

1 Eliz. 2
III. Do the Churchwardens and Sidemen take diligent care and see who of your
Parishioners are absent from the Divine Service and Sermon in your Church or
Chapel, upon Sundays and Holy Days? And if they find any to have absented
themselves without a sufficient cause, do they by warrant from some of the
Justices of the Peace Levy of them by way of Distress upon their Goods the Sum
of Twelve Pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of
Parliament in that case provided? And do they Distribute the several Sums so
levied among the Poor of your Parish, according to the Law?

Can. 90, 19.
IV. Do they note them, that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun,
or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer none to stand Idle, or talk
together in the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church or Churchyard, during
the time of Prayers, Preaching and Sacred Offices?

Can. 18
V. Do they suffer any Misbehaviour, or disorder to be done by Men, Women, or
Children in your Church or Chapel? Are they careful that none of them sit,
lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do they permit any Dogs, or
Hawks, to be brought or come into your Church to the disturbance of the
Congregation?

Rub. Can. 20
VI. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel,
provide a sufficient quantity of fine White Bread, and good Wine, according to
the Number of Communicants?

Can. 52
VII. Do they cause all Strangers that Preach in your Church, or Chapel, to
subscribe their names the same day in a Book provided for that Purpose,
together with the name of the Bishop, that Licenced them to Preach in this
Dioces? And do they permit no other to Preach?

Can. 219
VIII. Have they (the Churchwardens and Sidemen) now Sworn to give in a true
answer unto all these Articles of Inquiry in all their several Titles, taken
sufficient time to draw up their Presentiments, and therein consulted with you
their Minister for your faithful assistance?

You the Churchwardens are duly to consider these Articles and well and
faithfully to Perform your duty in all the Premises, and to consult with your
Minister (as the case requires) for his assistance to you in making your
Presentiments thereupon. For know you assuredly, that as the true discharging of
your Office is the chief means whereby Public Disorders, Sins and Offenses in
your Parish may be reformed and punished: so if you wilfully refuse to present
such crimes and faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise
have heard of by public fame; that in such cases, the Ordinary and his
Officers are to proceed against you in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in case
of wilful Omission and Perjury.

The Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of
their younger sort in their several parishes as they judge fit to receive
Confirmation from the Bishop, and to present them to be Confirmed; especially
such as, having competently learned their Catechism, have not yet received the
holy Communion.

FINIS.

