THE Church and Crown's Felicity CONSUMATED: OR, Englands Happiness Complete,
IN THE JOYFUL RECEPTION OF THE Princess of Orange.
THe wondrous Happiness, that England once reaped, from the Uniting of the Red
and White Rose, in the Marriage of Henry the 7th, to the establishing the Peace
of the Kingdom, by Reconciling the Bloody Wars between the House of York and
Lancaster, are Blessings infinitely inferior to the larger Portion of National
Happiness we are destind to enjoy, in the Illustrious Prince and Princess of
Orange's Accession to the the Imperial Crown of England. For in the Former
Union, the Fewds of two Corrival Families were only appeased; but in the
Present more Glorious Union, we have that Great work, which Ages have been
laboring for, Completely finished and perfected. viz. In that unshaken and
lasting Foundation of our Religion and Liberty (the nearest and dearest concern
of mankind,) so firmly laid, that the power of Rome, and Gates of Hell it self,
shall never prevail against them. And more and above the security, Peace, and
Happiness of the People so entirely consumated, we have likewise the Glory of
the Nation exalted above all the former Grandeur of preceding Ages; that is in
the unity of all Hearts, to strengthen the Royal Arm; and 2dly, by Rivetting
the English and Dutch Interest, Our Naval walls, and Maritime Strength, will
soon render Us the Terror of the World, and make Us once more the Arbiters of
Europe, A Title which our long frenchify'd Interest, and Alliance before, had
so meanly and ignobly lost Us, by giving up the Reins to the insatiate Ambition
of that wild Ravager of the Christian World, and plague of all Europe, the
French Tyrant.

There only wanted this Blessed Day to perpetuate the Security of the
Protestant Religion and the Liberties of England. And to our no little
Satisfaction, and Delight the welcome Tidings of her Arrival is our only
remaining Felicity.

Accordingly the Guns of the Tower, and the General Ringing of Bells, have
already proclaimed Our Universal Joys: and the whole Court, the more immediate
sharer of so Divine a Blessing, is filled with the Highest Transports suitable
to Her Royal Reception.

London Printed for T. Tillier. 1689.


