CERTAIN SERMONS OR HOMILIES Appointed to be Read in CHURCHES In the Time of
Queen Elizabeth OF FAMOUS MEMORY: And now Reprinted for the Use of Private
Families.

In Two Parts.

LONDON: Printed for George Wells at the Sun, Abel Swall at the Unicorn, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and George Pawlett at the Bible in Chancery Lane. 1687.

THE PREFACE As it was Published In the Year 1562.
COnsidering how necessary it is that the Word of God, which is the only food
of the Soul, and that most excellent Light that we must walk by, in this our
most dangerous Pilgrimage, should at all convenient times be Preached unto the
People, that thereby they may both learn their Duty toward God, their Prince,
and their Neighbors, according to the Mind of the Holy Ghost, expressed in the
Scriptures: And also to avoid the manifold Enormities which heretofore by false
Doctrine have crept into the Church of God: And how that all they which are
appointed Ministers, have not the Gift of Preaching sufficiently to instruct
the People, which is committed unto them, whereof great inconveniences might
rise, and ignorance still be maintained, if some honest Remedy be not speedily
found, and provided. The Queens most Excellent Majesty tendering the Souls
Health of Her Loving Subjects, and the Quieting of their Consciences, in the
Chief and Principal Points of Christian Religion; and willing also by the true
setting forth, and pure declaring of God's Word, which is the principal Guide
and Leader unto all Godliness and Virtue, to expel and drive away as well
corrupt, vicious, and ungodly Living, as also Erroneous and poisoned Doctrines,
tending to Superstition and Idolatry: Has by the Advice of Her most Honorable
Counselors, for her discharge in this behalf, caused a Book of Homilies, which
heretofore was set forth by Her most Loving Brother, a Prince of most worthy
Memory, Edward the Sixth, to be Printed anew, wherein are contained certain
Wholesome and Godly Exhortations, to move the People to Honor, and Worship
Almighty God, and diligently to Serve Him, every one according to their Degree,
State, and Vocation. All which Homilies, Her Majesty Commands, and straightly
Charge all Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and all others having Spiritual Cure,
every Sunday and Holiday in the Year, at the ministering of the Holy Communion;
or if there be no Communion ministered that day, yet after the Gospel and Creed,
in such order and place, as is appointed in the Book of Common Prayers, to Read
and Declare to their Parishioners, plainly and distinctly one of the said
Homilies, in such order as they stand in the Book, except there be a Sermon,
according as is enjoined in the Book of Her Highness Injunctions, and then for
that Cause only, and for none other, the Reading of the said Homily to be
deferred unto the next Sunday, or Holiday following. And when the foresaid Book
of Homilies is read over, Her Majesty's pleasure is, that the same be repeated
and read again, in such like sort as was before prescribed. Furthermore, Her
Highness Commands, that notwithstanding this Order, the said Ecclesiastical
Persons shall read Her Majesty's Injunctions at such times, and in such order,
as in the Book thereof appointed. And that the Lords Prayer, The Articles of
the Faith, and the Ten Commandments, be openly read unto the People, as in the
said Injunctions is specified, that all Her People, of what Degree or Condition
soever they be, may learn how to invocate and call upon the Name of God, and
know what Duty they owe both to God and Man: So that they may Pray, Believe,
and Work according to Knowledge, while they shall live here, and after this
life be with him that with his Blood has bought us all: To whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

AN ADMONITION TO ALL MINISTERS Ecclesiastical.
FOR that the Lord does require of his Servant, whom he has set over his
Household, to show both Faithfulness and Prudence in his Office: it shall be
necessary, that Ye, above all other, do behave your Selves most faithfully and
diligently in your so high a Function: That is, aptly, plainly, and distinctly
to read the Sacred Scriptures, diligently to instruct the Youth in their
Catechism, gravely and reverently to Minister his most Holy Sacraments,
prudently also to choose out such Homilies, as be most meet for the time, and
for the more agreeable instruction of the People committed to your charge, with
such discretion, that where the Homily may appear too long for one Reading, to
divide the fame to be read, part in the Forenoon, and part in the Afternoon.
And where it may so chance, some one or other Chapter of the Old Testament to
fall in order to be read upon the Sundays or Holidays, which were better to be
changed with some other of the New Testament of more edification, it shall be
well done to spend your time to consider well of such Chapters beforehand,
whereby your prudence and diligence in your Office may appear, so that your
People may have cause to Glorify God for you, and be the readier to embrace
your Labors, to your better commendation, to the discharge of your Consciences
and their own.

A TABLE OF THE SERMONS Contained in this present Volume.
I. A Fruitful Exhortation to the Reading of Holy Scripture. Page 1. II. Of the
Misery of all Mankind. Page 10 III. Of the Salvation of all Mankind. Page 19
IV. Of the true and lively Faith. Page 32 V. Of Good Works. Page 46 VI. Of
Christian Love and Charity. Page 61 VII. Against Swearing and Perjury. Page 69
VIII. Of the Declining from God. Page 78 IX. An Exhortation against the Fear of
Death. Page 89 X. An Exhortation to Obedience. Page 105 XI. Against Whoredom
and Adultery. Page 119 XII. Against Strife and Contention. Page 137 XIII. Of
the right Use of the Church. Page 159. XIV. Against peril of Idolatry. Page 175
XV. For repairing and keeping clean the Church. Page 282 XVI. Of Good Works.
And First of Fasting, Page 289 XVII. Against Gluttony and Drunkenness. Page 309
XVIII. Against excess of Apparel. Page 322 XIX. An Homily of Prayer. Page 334
XX. Of the Place and Time of Prayer. Page 356 XXI. Of Common Prayer and
Sacraments. Page 370 XXII. An Information of them which take offense at certain
places of Holy Scripture. Page 385 XXIII. Of Alms-Deeds. Page 402 XXIV. Of the
Nativity. Page 421 XXV. Of the Passion, for Good Friday. Page 434, and 435
XXVI. Of the Resurrection, for Easter Day. Page 455 XXVII. Of the worthy
receiving of the Sacrament. Page 467 XXVIII. An Homily concerning the coming
down of the Holy Ghost for Whitsunday. Page 480 XXIX. An Homily for
Rogation-week. Page 497 XXX. Of the state of Matrimony. Page 530 XXXI. Against
Idleness. Page 540 XXXII. Of Repentance and true Reconciliation unto God. Page
556 XXXIII. An Homily against Disobedience, and wilful Rebellion. Page 583
A Fruitful EXHORTATION TO THE Reading and Knowledge OF HOLY SCRIPTURE.
UNto a Christian Man there can be nothing either more necessary or profitable,
The praise of Holy Scripture.
than the Knowledge of Holy Scripture, forasmuch as in it is contained God's
true Word, setting forth his Glory, and also Man's Duty. The perfection of Holy
Scripture. The knowledge of Holy Scripture is necessary. To whom the knowledge
of Holy Scriture is sweet and pleasant. Who be enemies to Holy Scripture.
And there is no Truth nor Doctrine necessary for our Justification and
everlasting Salvation, but that is (or may be,) drawn out of that Fountain and
Well of Truth. Therefore as many as be desirous to enter into the Right and
Perfect way unto God, must apply their Minds to know Holy Scripture, without
the which, they can neither sufficiently know God, and his Will, neither their
Office and Duty. And as Drink is pleasant to them that be Dry, and Meat to
them that be Hungry; So is the Reading, Hearing, Searching, and Studying of
Holy Scripture, to them that be desirous to know God or themselves, and to do
his Will. And their Stomachs only do loath and abhor the Heavenly Knowledge and
Food of God's Word, that be so drowned in worldly Vanities, that they neither
favor God, nor any Godliness: For that is the cause, why they desire such
Vanities, rather than the time knowledge of God. As they that are sick of an
Ague, An apt Similitude, declaring of whom the Scripture is abhorred. An
exhortation unto the diligent reading and searching of the holy Scripture.
Matthew. 4. The Holy Scripture is a sufficient Doctrine for our Salvation. What
things we may learn in the Holy Scripture.
whatsoever they eat and drink, (though it be never so pleasant,) yet it is as
bitter to them as Wormwood, not for the bitterness of the Meat, but for the
corrupt and bitter humor that is in their own Tongue and Mouth: Even so is the
sweetness of God's Word bitter, not of itself, but only unto them that have
their Minds corrupted with long custom of Sin, and love of this World.
Therefore forsaking the corrupt judgment of fleshly Men, which care not but for
their Carcass: Let us reverently hear and read Holy Scripture, which is the
Food of the Soul: Let us diligently search for the Well of Life, in the Books
of the New and Old Testament, and not run to the stinking Puddles of Men's
Traditions (devised by Men's Imagination,) for our Justification and Salvation.
For in Holy Scripture is fully contained what we ought to do, and what to
eschew; what to believe, what to love, and what to look for at God's hands at
length. In these Books we shall find the Father from whom, the Son by whom, and
the Holy Ghost in whom, all Things have their Being, and Keeping up; And these
Three Persons to be but One God, and One Substance. In these Books we may learn
to know ourselves, how Vile and Miserable we be, and also to know God, how Good
He is of Himself, and how He makes us and all Creatures partakers of His
Goodness. We may learn also in these Books to know God's Will and Pleasure, as
much as (for this present time,) is convenient for us to know. And (as the
great Clerk and godly Preacher St. John Chrysostom says,) whatsoever is
required to the Salvation of Man is fully contained in the Scripture of God. He
that is Ignorant, may there learn, and have Knowledge. He that is Hard-hearted,
and an obstinate Sinner, shall there find Everlasting Torments (prepared of
God's Justice,) to make him afraid, and to mollify or soften him. He that is
oppressed with Misery in this World, shall there find Relief in the promises of
Everlasting Life, to his great Consolation and Comfort. He that is wounded by
the Devil unto death, shall find there Medicine whereby he may be restored
again unto Health; If it shall require to teach any Truth, or reprove any false
Doctrine, to rebuke any Vice, to commend any Virtue, to give good Counsel, to
Comfort or Exhort, or to do any other thing requisite for our Salvation; All
those things (says St. Chrysostom,) we may learn plentifully of the
Scripture. There is (says Fulgentius,) abundantly enough, Holy Scripture
ministers sufficient Doctrine for all Degrees and Ages. Matthew. 4. Luke 3. John
17. Psalm. 19. What commodities and Profits, the knowledge of Holy Scripture
brings.
both for Men to eat, and Children to suck. There is, whatsoever is meet for
all Ages, and for all Degrees and sorts of Men. These Books therefore ought to
be much in our Hands, in our Eyes, in our Ears, in our Mouths, but most of all
in our Hearts. For the Scripture of God is the Heavenly Meat of our Souls, the
Hearing and Keeping of it makes us Blessed, Sanctifies us, and makes us
Holy; it turns our Souls, it is a light Lanthorn to our Feet, it is a sure,
steadfast, and everlasting instrument of Salvation, it gives Wisdom to the
humble and lowly Hearts, it Comfort, makes Glad, Cheereth and Cherishes
our Conscience: It is a more excellent Jewel or Treasure, than any Gold or
precious Stone, it is more sweet than Honey, or Honeycomb; it is called the
best part, which Mary did choose, for it has in it everlasting Comfort. The
Words of Holy Scripture be called Words of Everlasting Life: For they be God's
Instruments ordained for the same purpose. They have power to turn through
God's Promise, and they be effectual through God's assistence; Luke 10. John 6.
and (being received in a faithful Heart,) they have ever an Heavenly spiritual
working in them: They are lively, quick, and mighty in Operation, and sharper
than any two-edged Sword, and enter through, Heb. 4.
even to the dividing asunder of the Soul and the Spirit, of the Joints and the
Marrow; Christ calls him a Wise Builder, Matthew. 7.
that Builds upon his Word, upon his sure and substantial Foundation. By this
Word of God, we shall be judged: For the Word that I speak (says Christ, John.
12.
) is it, that shall judge in the last day. He that keeps the Word of Christ,
is promised the Love and Favor of God, John 14.
and that he shall be the Dewlling Place, or Temple of the Blessed Trinity.
This Word, whosoever is diligent to Read, and in his Heart to Print that he
reads, the great affection to the transitory things of this World shall be
minished in him, and the great desire of Heavenly things (that be therein
promised of God,) shall increase in him. And there is nothing that so much
strengthens our Faith and Trust in God, that so much keeps up Innocence and
Pureness of the Heart, and also of outward Godly Life and Conversation, as
continual Reading, and recording of God's Word. For that thing, which (by
continual use of Reading of Holy Scripture, and diligent searching of the
same,) is deeply Printed and Graven in the Heart, at length turns almost into
Nature. And moreover, the Effect and Virtue of God's Word is, to illuminate the
Ignorant, and to give more light unto them, that faithfully and diligently read
it, to comfort their Hearts, and to encourage them to perform that, which of
God is commanded. 1 Reg. 14. 2 Per. 20. 1 Cor. 15. 1 John 5.
It teaches Patience in all Adversity, in Prosperity Humbleness: What Honor
is due unto GOD: What Mercy and Charity to our Neighbor. It gives good
Counsel in all doubtful things. It shows of whom we shall look for Aid and
help in all Perils, and that God is the only giver of Victory, in all Battles
and Temptations of our Enemies, Who profit most in reading Gods Word.
Bodily and Ghostly. And in reading of God's Word, he not always most profits
that is most ready in turning of the Book, or in saying of it without the Book;
but he that is most turned into it, that is most inspired with the Holy Ghost,
most in his Heart and Life altered and changed into that thing which he
reads: He that is daily less and less Proud, less Wrathful, less Covetous,
and less desirous of worldly and vain Pleasures: He that daily (forsaking his
old vicious Life,) increases in Virtue more and more. And to be short, there
is nothing that more maintains Godliness of the Mind, and drives away
Ungodliness, than does the continual Reading or Hearing of God's Word, Esa. 5.
Matthew. 22. 1 Cor. 14. What discommodities the ignorance of God's Word brings.
if it be joined with a Godly Mind, and a good Affection to know and follow
God's Will. For without a single Eye, pure Intent, and good Mind, nothing is
allowed for good before God. And on the other side, nothing more darkeneth
Christ, and the Glory of God, nor brings in more Blindness, and all kinds of
Vices, than does the ignorance of God's Word.

The Second part of the Sermon of the Knowledge of Holy Scripture.
IN the first part of this Sermon, which exhorts to the Knowledge of Holy
Scripture, was declared wherefore the knowledge of the same is necessary and
profitable to all Men, and that by the true Knowledge and Understanding of
Scripture, the most necessary points of our Duty toward God and our Neighbors
are also known. Now as concerning the same Matter, you shall hear what
follows. If we profess Christ, Why be we not ashamed to be ignorant in his
Doctrine? Seeing that every Man is ashamed to be ignorant in that Learning
which he professes. That Man is ashamed to be called a Philosopher, which
reads not the Books of Philosophy, and to be called a Lawyer, an Astronomer,
God's Word excels all Sciences.
or Physisian, that is ignorant in the Books of Law, Astronomy, and Physic.
How can any Man then say, that he professes Christ and his Religion, if he
will not apply himself (as far forth as he can or may conveniently,) to read
and hear, and so to know the Books of Christ's Gospel and Doctrine? Although
other Sciences be good, and to be learned, yet no Man can deny, but this is the
chief, and passes all other incomparably. What excuse shall we therefore make
(at the last day before Christ) that delight to read or hear Men's Fantasies
and Inventions, more than his most Holy Gospel? And will find no time to do
that, which chiefly (above all things,) we should do, and will rather read
other things than that, for the which we ought rather to leave reading of all
other things. Let us therefore apply ourselves, as far forth as we can have
time and leisure, Vain excuses diswading from the knowledge of God's Word. The
First. The Second. Matthew. 22.
to know God's Word, by diligent hearing and reading thereof, as many as
profess God, and have Faith and Trust in Him. But they that have no good
affection to God's Word (to color this their fault,) allege commonly two vain
and feigned excuses. Some go about to excuse them by their own frailness and
fearfulness, saying, that they dare not read Holy Scripture, lest through their
ignorance they should fall into any error. Others pretend, that the difficulty
to understand it, and the hardness thereof, is so great, that it is meet to be
read only of Clerks and learned Men. As touching the first: Ignorance of God's
Word is the cause of all Error, as Christ himself affirmed to the Sadducees,
saying that they erred, because they knew not the Scripture. How should they
then eschew Error, that will be still ignorant? And how should they come out of
ignorance, that will not read nor hear that thing which should give them
knowledge? He that now has most Knowledge was at the first Ignorant, yet he
forbear not to read, for fear he should fall into Error: But he diligently
read, lest he should remain in Ignorance, and through Ignorance in Error. / And
if you will not know the Truth of God, (a thing most necessary for you,) lest
you fall into Error, by the same reason you may then lie still, and never go,
lest (if you go,) you fall into the Mire: Nor eat any good Meat, lest you take
a Surfeit, nor sow your Corn, nor labor in your Occupation, nor use your
Merchandise, for fear you lose your Seed, your Labor, your Stock, and so by
that reason, it should be best for you to live idly, and never to take in hand
to do any manner of good thing, lest peradventure some evil thing may chance
thereof. And if you be afraid to fall into Error, by reading of Holy Scripture;
I shall show you, how you may read without danger of Error. Read it humbly with
a meek and lowly Heart, How most commodiously and without all peril the Holy
Scripture is to be read.
to the intent you may glorify God, and not yourself, with the knowledge of it:
And read it not without daily praying to God, that he would direct your Reading
to good effect: And take upon you to expound it no further, than you can
plainly understand it. For (as St. Augustine says,) the knowledge of Holy
Scripture, is a great, large, and a high place, but the Door is very low, so
that the high and arrogant Man cannot run in, but he must stoop low and humble
himself, that shall enter into it. Presumption and Arrogance are the Mother of
all Error; and Humility needs to fear no Error. For Humility will only search
to know the Truth, it will search, and will bring together one place with
another, and where it cannot find out the meaning, it will pray, it will ask of
others that know, and will not presumptuously and rashly define any thing which
it knows not. Therefore the humble Man may search any Truth boldly in the
Scripture, without any danger of Error. And if he be ignorant, he ought the
more to read and to search Holy Scripture, to bring him out of Ignorance. I say
not nay, but a Man may profit with only hearing, but he may much more profit,
with both hearing and reading. This have I said, as touching the fear to read,
through ignorance of the Person. Scripture in some places is easy, and in some
places hard to be understood.
And concerning the hardness of Scripture, he that is so weak that he is not
able to brook strong Meat, yet he may suck the sweet and tender Milk, and defer
the rest until he wax stronger, and come to more knowledge. For God receives
the Learned and Unlearned, and casts away none, but is indifferent unto all.
And the Scripture is full, as well of low Valleys, plain Ways, and easy for
every Man to use, and to walk in: As also of high Hills and Mountains, which
few Men can climb unto. God leaves no Man untaught, that has good Will to
know his Word.
And whosoever gives his Mind to Holy Scriptures, with diligent Study and
burning Desire, it cannot be (says St. Chrysostom) that he should be left
without help. For either God Almighty will send him some Godly Doctor, to teach
him, as he did to instruct the Eunuch, a Nobleman of Ethiope, and Treasurer
unto Queen Candace, who having affecton to read the Scripture, (although he
understood it not) yet for the desire that he had unto God's Word, God sent his
Apostle Philip to declare unto him the true Sense of the Scripture that he
read; or else, if we lack a learned Man to instruct and teach us, yet God
himself from above will give light unto our Minds, and teach us those things
which are necessary for us, and wherein we be ignorant. How the knowledge of
the Scripture may be attained unto. Matt. 7. A good rule for the understanding
of Scripture.
And in another place St. Chrysostom says, that Man's Human and Worldly
Wisdom or Science is not needful to the understanding of Scripture; but the
revelation of the Holy Ghost, who inspireth the true meaning unto them, that
with Humility and Diligence do search therefore. He that asks shall have, and
he that seeks shall find, and he that knocks, shall have the Door opened.
If we read once, twice, or thrice, and understand not, let us not cease so, but
still continue Reading, Praying, Asking of others, and so by still knocking (at
the last) the Door shall be opened (as St. Augustine says,) although many
things in the Scripture be spoken in obscure mysteries, yet there is nothing
spoken under dark Mysteries in one place, but the selfsame thing in other
places is spoken more familiarly and plainly, to the capacity both of learned
and unlearned. No Man is excepted from the knowledge of God's Word.
And those things in the Scripture that be plain to understand, and necessary
for Salvation, every Man's Duty is to Learn them, to print them in Memory, and
effectually to Exercise them. And as for the dark Mysteries, to be contented to
be ignorant in them, until such time as it shall please God to open those
things unto him. In the mean season, if he lack either aptness or opportunity,
God will not impute it to his folly: But yet it behooves not, that such as be
apt should set aside reading, because some other be unapt to read:
Nevertheless, for the hardness of such places, the reading of the whole ought
not to be set apart. And briefly to conclude, What persons would have Ignorance
to continue.
(as St. Augustine says,) by the Scripture all Men be amended, weak Men be
strenthened, and strong Men be comforted. So that surely none be enemies to the
reading of God's Word, but such as either be so ignorant, that they know not
how wholesome a thing it is; or else be so sick, that they hate the most
comfortable Medicine that should heal them: Or so ungodly, that they would wish
the People still to continue in blindness and ignorance of God.

Thus we have briefly touched some part of the Commodities of God's Holy Word,
The Holy Scripture is one of God's chief Benefits.
which is one of God's chief and principal Benefits given and declared to
Mankind here on Earth. Let us thank God heartily for this his great and special
Gift, beneficial Favor, and Fatherly Providence. The right reading, use, and
fruitful studying in Holy Scripture. Psalm. 50.
Let us be glad to receive this precious Gift of our Heavenly Father. Let us
Hear, Read, and Know these Holy Rules, Injunctions, and Statutes of our
Christian Religion; and upon that we have made profession to God at our
Baptism. Let us with fear and reverence lay up (in the chest of our Hearts,)
these necessary and fruitful Lessons. Let us night and day muse, and have
Meditation and Contemplation in them. Let us ruminate, and (as it were,) chew
the Cud, that we have the sweet Juice, spiritual Effect, Marrow, Honey, Kernel,
Taste, Comfort and Consolation of them. Let us stay, quiet, and certify our
Consciences, with the most infallible Certainty, Truth, and perpetual assurance
of them. Let us pray to God, (the only Author of these Heavenly Studies,) that
we may Speak, Think, Believe, Live and Depart hence, according to the wholesome
Doctrine and Verities of them. And by that means in this world we shall have
God's Defense, Favor, and Grace, with the unspeakable solace of peace, and
quietness of Conscience; and after this miserable life we shall enjoy the
endless Bliss and Glory of Heaven: which he Grant us all that died for us all,
Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all Honor and
Glory, both now and everlastingly.

A SERMON OF THE Misery of Mankind, and of his condemnation to Death
everlasting by his own Sin.
THe Holy Ghost, in Writing the Holy Scripture, is in nothing more diligent,
than to pull down Man's Vainglory and Pride, which of all Vices is most
universally grafted in all Mankind, even from the first infection of our first
Father Adam. And therefore we read in many places of Scripture many notable
Lessons against this old rooted Vice, to teach us the most commendable virtue
of Humility, how to know ourselves, and to remember what we be of ourselves. In
the Book of Genesis, ^^n. 3.
Almighty God gives us all a Title and Name in our great Grandfather Adam,
which ought to warn us all to consider what we be, whereof we be, from whence
we came, and whither we shall, saying thus, In the sweat of thy Face shall thou
eat thy Bread, till thou be turned again into the ground; for out of it wast
thou taken, inasmuch as thou art Dust, into Dust shall thou be turned again.
Here (as it were in a Glass,) we may learn to know ourselves to be but Ground,
Earth, and Ashes, and that to Earth and Ashes we shall return.

Also, the Holy Patriarch Abraham did well remember this Name and Title, Dust,
Earth, and Ashes, appointed and assigned by God to all Mankind: and therefore
he calls himself by that Name, when he makes his earnest Prayer for Sodom
and Gomorrah. And we read that Judith, Esther, Job, Jud. 4. and 9. Job 13. Jer.
6. and 25.
Jeremy, with other Holy Men and Women in the Old Testament, did use Sackcloth,
and to cast Dust and Ashes upon their Heads when they bewailed their sinful
living. They called and cried to God for Help and Mercy, with such a ceremony
of Sackcloth, Dust and Ashes, that thereby they might declare to the whole
World, what an humble and lowly estimation they had of themselves, and how well
they remembered their Name and Title aforesaid, their vile, corrupt, frail
Nature, Dust, Earth, and Ashes. Sapi. 7.
The Book of Wisdom also willing to pull down our proud Stomachs, moves us
diligently to remember our mortal and earthly Generation, which we have all of
him that was first Made; and that all Men, as well Kings as Subjects, come into
this world, and go out of the same, in like sort; that is, as of ourselves,
full miserable, as we may daily see. And Almighty God commanded his Prophet
Esaias to make a Proclamation, and cry to the whole World, and Esaias asking, What
shall I cry? The Lord answered, Cry, That all Flesh is Grass, Esaias 40.
and that all the Glory thereof is but as the Flower of the Field, when the
Grass is withered the Flower falls away, when the Wind of the Lord blows
upon it. The People surely is Grass, the which dries up, and the Flower fades
away. And the Holy Man Job, Job 14.
having in himself great experience of the miserable and sinful estate of Man,
does open the same to the World in these words, Man (says he,) that is born of
a Woman, living but a short time, is full of manifold Miseries, he springs up
like a Flower, and fades again, vanishes away as it were a shadow, and never
continues in one state. And do thou judge it meet (O Lord,) to open thine
Eyes upon such a one, and to bring him to judgment with thee? Who can make him
clean, that is conceived of an unclean Seed; and all Men, of their evilness,
and natural proneness, be so universally given to Sin, that (as the Scripture
says,) God repented that ever he made Man. And by Sin his Indignation was so
much provoked against the World, that he drowned all the World with Noes Flood,
Genesis 7.
(except Noe himself and his little Household.) It is not without great cause,
that the Scripture of God does so many times call all Men here in this world by
this Word, Earth, O thou Earth, Jer. 22.
Earth, Earth (says Jeremy,) hear the word of the Lord. This our right Name,
Calling, and Title, Earth, Earth, Earth, pronounced by the Prophet, shows
what we be indeed, by whatsoever other Style, Title, or Dignity Men do call us.
Thus he plainly named us, who knows best, both what we be, and what we ought
of right to be called. And thus he sets us forth, speaking by his faithful
Apostle St. Paul, All Men, Jews and Gentiles, are under sin, there is none
righteous, no not one: There is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God, they are all gone out of the way, they are all unprofitable,
there is none that does good, no not one: Their throat is an open Sepulcher,
with their tongues they have used craft and deceit, the poison of serpents is
under their Lips, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are
swift to shed blood, destruction and wretchedness are in their ways, and the
way of peace have they not known; Romans 11. Gal. 3.
there is no fear of God before their eyes. And in another place, St. Paul
writes thus, God has wrapped all nations in unbelief, that he might have
mercy on all. The Scripture shuts up all under Sin, Ephesians. 2.
that the Promise by the Faith of Jesus Christ should be given unto them that
believe. St. Paul in many places painteth us out in our colors, calling us the
Children of the wrath of God, when we be born; saying also, that we cannot
think a good thought of ourselves, much less can we say well, or do well of
ourselves. And the Wise Man says in the Book of Proverbs, Prove. 24.
The just man falls seven times a day. The most tried and approved Man Job,
feared all his Works. Luke 1.
St. John the Baptist being Sanctified in his Mothers Womb, and praised before
he was Born, being called an Angel, and great before the Lord, filled even from
his Birth with the Holy Ghost, the preparer of the way for our Savior Christ,
and commended of our Savior Christ to be more than a Prophet, Matthew. 3.
and the greatest that ever was born of a Woman: Yet he plainly grants, that
he had need to be washed of Christ, he worthily Extolleth and Glorifieth his
Lord and Master Christ, and Humbles himself as unworthy to unbuckle his
Shoes, and gives all Honor and Glory to God. So does S. Paul both often and
evidently confess himself, what he was of himself, ever giving (as a most
faithful Servant,) all Praise to his Master and Savior. So does blessed St.
John the Evangelist, in the name of himself, and of all other Holy Men (be they
never so just,) make this open Confession: If we say, we have no sin, 1 John 1.
and 2.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: If we acknowledge our sins,
God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness: If we say, we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us, Wherefore the Wise Man in the Book called Ecclesiastes,
makes this true and general Confession, Eccles. 7.
There is not one just man upon the Earth, that does good, and sins not. And
David is ashamed of his sin, but not to confess his sin. Psalm. 51.
How often, how earnestly, and lamentably does he desire God's great Mercy for
his great Offenses, and that God should not enter into judgment with him? Psalm.
113.
And again, How well weighs this Holy Man his sins, which he confesses, that
they be so many in number, and so hid, and hard to understand, that it is in a
manner impossible to know, utter, Psalm. 19.
or number them? Wherefore, he having a true, earnest, and deep Contemplation,
and Consideration of his sins, and yet not coming to the bottom of them, he
makes Supplication to God, to forgive him his privy, secret, hid sins: The
knowledge of which he cannot attain unto. He weighs rightly his Sins from the
Original root and Springhead, perceiving Inclinations, Provocations,
Stirrings, Stingings, Buds, Branches, Dregs, Infections, Tastes, Feelings, and
Scents of them to continue in him still. Wherefore he says, Mark, and Behold,
I was conceived in sins. He says not Sin, Psalm. 51.
but in the plural number, Sins, forasmuch as out of one (as a Fountain,)
spring all the rest. Mark 10. Luke 18.
Our Savior Christ says, There is none good, but God: And that we can do
nothing that is good, without him, nor can any man come to the Father, but by
him. He commands us also to say, that We be unprofitable servants, John 15.
Luke 17.
when we have done all that we can do. He prefers the penitent Publican
before the Proud, Holy, and Glorious Pharisee. He calls himself a Physician,
but not to them that be whole, Luke 18. Matthew. 9.
but to them that be sick, and have need of his Salve for their Sore. He
teaches us in our Prayers, to acknowledge ourselves Sinners, and to ask
Righteousness, and deliverance from all Evils, at our Heavenly Father's hand.
He declares, that the sins of our own Hearts do defile our ownselves. He
teaches, Matthew. 12.
that an evil Word or Thought deserves Condemnation, affirming, that We shall
give account for every idle word. Matthew. 15.
He says, He came not to save, but the sheep that were utterly lost and cast
away. Therefore, few of the Proud, Just, Learned, Wise, Perfect, and Holy
Pharisees were saved by him, because they justified themselves by their
counterfeit Holiness before Men. Wherefore, (good People,) let us beware of
such Hypocrisy, Vainglory, and Justifying of ourselves.

The Second Part of the SERMON of the Misery of Man.
FOrasmuch as the true knowledge of ourselves is very necessary to come to the
right knowledge of God; ye have heard in the last Reading, how Humbly all good
Men always have thought of themselves; and so to think and judge of themselves,
are taught of God their Creator, by his Holy Word. For of ourselves we be
Crab-trees, that can bring forth no Apples. We be of ourselves of such Earth,
as can but bring forth Weeds, Nettles, Brambles, Briers, Cockle and Darnel. Our
Fruits be declared in the 5th. Chapter to the Galatians. Gal. 5.
We have neither Faith, Charity, Hope, Patience, Chastity, nor any thing else
that good is, but of God, and therefore these Virtues be called there, The
fruits of the Holy Ghost, and not the fruits of Man. Let us therefore
acknowledge ourselves before God (as we be indeed,) miserable and wretched
Sinners. And let us earnestly Repent, and Humble ourselves heartily, and cry to
God for Mercy. Let us all Confess with Mouth and Heart, that we be full of
Imperfections: Let us know our own Works, of what imperfection they be, and
then we shall not stand foolishly and arrogantly in our own Conceits, nor
challenge any part of Justification by our Merits or Works. For truly there be
imperfections in our best Works: We do not love God so much as we are bound to
do, with all our Heart, Mind and Power: We do not fear God so much, as we ought
to do: We do not pray to God, but with great and many imperfections: We Give,
Forgive, Believe, Live, and Hope imperfectly: We Speak, Think, and Do
impefectly: We Fight against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh imperfectly:
Let us therefore not be ashamed to confess plainly our state of Imperfection:
Yea, let us not be ashamed to confess Imperfection, even in all our best Works.
Let none of us be ashamed to say with the Holy St. Peter, Luke 5. Psalm. 106.
I am a sinful man. Let us say with the Holy Prophet David, We have sinned with
our fathers, we have done amiss and dealt wickedly. Let us all make open
Confession with the Prodigal Son, to our Father, and say with him, We have
sinned against Heaven, Luke 14.
and before thee, (O Father,) we are not worthy to be called thy sons. Let us
all say with Holy Baruch, Baruch 2.
O Lord our God, to us is worthily ascribed shame and confusion, and to thee
righteousness: We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we have behaved ourselves
ungodlily in all thy Righteousness. Let us all say with the Holy Prophet
Daniel, Dan. 9.
O Lord, righteousness belongs to thee, unto us belongs confusion. We have
sinned, we have been naughty, we have offended, we have fled from thee, we have
gone back from all thy Precepts and Judgments. So we learn of all good Men in
Holy Scriptures, to Humble our selves, and to Exalt, Extol, Praise, Magnify,
and Glorify God.

Thus we have heard how evil we be of ourselves, how of ourselves, and by
ourselves, we have no Goodness, Help or Salvation; but contrariwise, Sin,
Damnation, and Death everlasting: Which if we deeply weigh and consider, we
shall the better understand the great Mercy of God, and how our Salvation
comes only by Christ. 2 Cor. 3.
For in ourselves (as of ourselves,) we find nothing, whereby we may be
delivered from this miserable Captivity, into the which we are cast, through
the envy of the Devil, by breaking of God's Commandment in our first Parent
Adam. Psalm. 50. Ephesians. 2.
We are all become unclean, but we all are not able to cleanse ourselves, nor
make one another of us clean. We are by nature the children of God's wrath, but
we are notable to make ourselves the Children and Inheritors of God's Glory. We
are Sheep that run astray, 1 Pet. 2.
but we cannot of our own power come again to the Sheepfold, so great is our
Imperfection and Weakness. In ourselves therefore may we not glory, which (of
ourselves,) are nothing but sinful; neither may we rejoice in any Works that we
do, all which be so Imperfect and Impure, that they are not able to stand
before the Righteous Judgment Seat of God as the Holy Prophet David says,
Psalm. 143.
Enter not into judgment with thy Servant (O Lord,) for no man that lives
shall be found righteous in thy sight. To God therefore must we flee, or else
shall we never find Peace, Rest, and Quietness of Conscience in our Hearts. For
he is the father of mercies, and God of all consolation. He is the Lord, with
whom is plenteous redemption: 2 Cor. 1.
He is the God, which of his own mercy saves us, Psalm. 130.
and sets out his Charity and exceeding Love toward us, in that of his own
voluntary Goodness, when we were Perishing, he Saved us, and provided an
everlasting Kingdom for us. And all these Heavenly Treasures are given us, not
for our own Deserts, Merits, or good Deeds (which of ourselves we have none,)
but of his mere Mercy freely. And for whose sake? Truly for Jesus Christ's
sake, that pure and undefiled Lamb of God. He is that dearly beloved Son, for
whose sake God is fully pacified, satisfied, and set at One with Man. He is the
Lamb of God, John 1.
which takes away the sins of the World, of whom only it may be truly spoken,
that he did all things well, 1 Pet. 2.
and in his mouth was found no craft nor subtilty. None but he alone may say,
The Prince of the World came, and in me he has nothing. And he alone may also
say, Which of you shall reprove me of any fault? John 8.
He is the high and everlasting Priest, Heb. 7.
which has offered himself once for all upon the Altar of the Cross, and with
that one oblation has made perfect for evermore them that are sanctified. 1
John 2.
He is the alone Mediator between God and Man, which paid our ransom to God
with his own blood, and with that has he cleansed us all from sin. He is the
Physician, which heals all our Diseases. He is that Savior, which saves
People from all their sins: To be short, Matthew. 1.
he is that flowing and most plentious Fountain, of whose fullness all we have
received: For in him alone are all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of
God hidden. And in him, and by him, have we from God the Father all good
things, pertaining either to the Body or to the Soul. O how much are we bound
to this our Heavenly Father for his great Mercies, which he has so plenteously
declared unto us in Christ Jesu our Lord and Savior! What Thanks worthy and
sufficient can we give to him? Let us all with one accord burst out with joyful
voice, ever Praising and Magnifying this Lord of Mercy, for his tender Kindness
showed unto us, in his dearly beloved Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Hitherto we have heard, what we are of ourselves; very sinful, wretched and
damnable. Again, we have heard how that of ourselves, and by ourselves, we are
not able either to think a good Thought, or work a good Deed, so that we can
find in ourselves no hope of Salvation, but rather whatsoever makes unto our
Destruction. Again, we have heard the tender Kindness and great Mercy of God
the Father toward us, and how beneficial he is to us for Christ's sake,
without our Merits or Deserts, even of his own mere Mercy and tender Goodness.
Now, how these exceeding great Mercies of God, set abroad in Christ Jesu for
us, be obtained, and how we be delivered from the captivity of Sin, Death, and
Hell, shall more at large (with God's help,) be declared in the next Sermon. In
the mean season, yea, and at all times let us learn to know ourselves, our
frailty and weakness, without any boasting or cracking of our own good Deeds
and Merits. Let us also acknowledge the exceeding Mercy of God toward us, and
confess, that as of ourselves comes all Evil and Damnation; so likewise of him
comes all Goodness and Salvation, Osee 13.
as God himself says by the Prophet Osee, O Israel, thy destruction comes of
thyself, but in me only is thy help and comfort. If we thus Humbly submit
ourselves in the sight of God, we may be sure, that in the time of his
Visitation, he will lift us up unto the Kingdom of his dearly beloved Son
Christ Jesu our Lord; to whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

A SERMON OF THE Salvation of Mankind, by only Christ our Savior, from Sin and
Death everlasting.
BEcause all Men be Sinners and Offenders against God, and Breakers of his Law
and Commandments, therefore can no Man by his own Acts, Works and Deeds (seem
they never so good,) be justified, and made righteous before God: But every Man
of necessity is constrained to seek for another Righteousness of Justification,
to be received at God's own hands, that is to say, the forgiveness of his Sins
and Trespasses, in such things as he has offended. And this Justification or
Righteousness, which we so receive of God's Mercy, and Christ's Merits,
embraced by Faith, is taken, accepted and allowed of God, for our perfect and
full Justification. For the more full understanding hereof, it is our Parts and
Duties ever to remember the great Mercy of God, how that (all the World being
wrapped in Sin by breaking of the Law,) God sent his only Son our Savior
Christ into this World, to fulfill the Law for us, and by shedding of his most
precious Blood, to make a sacrifice and satisfaction, or (as it may be called,)
amends to his Father for our sins, to assuage his Wrath and Indignation
conceived against us for the same.

The efficacy of Christ's Passion and Oblation.
Insomuch that Infants being Baptized, and dying in their Infancy, are by this
Sacrifice washed from their Sins, brought to God's Favor, and made his
Children, and Inheritors of his Kingdom of Heaven. And they which in Act or
Deed do sin after their Baptism, when they turn again to God unfeignedly; they
are likewise washed by this Sacrifice from their sins, in such sort, that there
remains not any spot of Sin, that shall be imputed to their Damnation. This
is that justification of Righteousness which St. Paul speaks of, when he
says, No man is Justified by the works of the Law, Gal. 2.
but freely by faith in Jesus Christ. And again he says, We believe in Jesus
Christ, that we be justified freely by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the Law, because that no Man shall be justified by the works of the
Law. And although this justification be free unto us, yet it comes not so
freely unto us, that there is no ransom paid therefore at all. But here may
Man's Reason be astonished, reasoning after this fashion: he showed unto us, in
delivering us from our former Captivity, without requiring of any Ransom to be
paid, or amends to be made upon our parts, which thing by us had been
impossible to be done. And whereas it lay not in us to do that, he provided a
Ransom for us, that was, the most precious Body and Blood of his own most dear
and best beloved Son Jesu Christ, who, besides this Ransom, fulfilled the Law
for us perfectly. And so the Justice of God and his Mercy did embrace together,
and fulfilled the Mystery of our Redemption. And of this Justice and Mercy of
God knit together, speaks St. Paul in the third Chap. to the Romans, Romans 3.
All have offended, and have need of the Glory of God, but are justified freely
by Grace; by Redemption which is in Jesu Christ, whom God has sent forth to us
for a Reconciler and Peacemaker, through Faith in his Blood, to show his
righteousness. And in the 10th. Chapter, Romans 10. Romans 8.
Christ is the end of the Law unto righteousness, to every man that believes,
And in the 8th. Chapter, That which was impossible by the Law, inasmuch as it
was weak by the flesh, God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, by sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, Three things must go together in our justification.
which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. In these foresaid places,
the Apostle touches specially three things, which must go together in our
justification. Upon God's part, his great Mercy and Grace; upon Christ's part,
Justice, that is, the satisfaction of God's Justice, or the price of our
Redemption, by the offering of his Body, and shedding of his Blood, with
fulfilling of the Law perfectly and thoroughly; and upon our part, true and
lively Faith in the Merits of Jesus Christ, which yet is not ours, but by God's
working in us: So that in our Justification, there is not only God's Mercy and
Grace, but also his Justice, which the Apostle calls the Justice of God, and
it consists in paying our Ransom, and fulfilling of the Law: And so the Grace
of God does not shut out the Justice of God in our Justification, but only
shuts out the Justice of Man, that is to say, the Justice of our Works, as
to be Merits of deserving our Justification. And therefore St. Paul declares
here nothing upon the behalf of Man concerning his Justification, but only a
true and lively Faith, which nevertheless is the Gift of God, and not Man's
only Work, without God: And yet that Faith does not shut out Repentance, Hope,
Love, Dread, and the Fear of God, to be joined with Faith in every Man that is
justified, but it shuts them out from the office of Justifying. How it is to
be understood, that Faith justifies without Works.
So that although they be all present together in him that is Justified, yet
they justify not altogether: Neither does Faith shut out the Justice of our
good Works, necessarily to be done afterward of Duty toward God (for we are
most bounden to serve God, in doing good Deeds, commanded by him in his Holy
Scripture, all the days of our Life:) But it excludes them, so that we may not
do them to this intent, to be made Just by doing of them. For all the good
Works that we can do be imperfect, and therefore not able to deserve our
Justification; but our Justification does come freely by the mere Mercy of God;
and of so great and free Mercy, that whereas all the World was not able of
themselves to pay any part toward their Ransom, it pleased our Heavenly Father
of his infinite Mercy, without any our desert or deserving, to prepare for us
the most precious Jewels of Christ's Body and Blood, whereby our Ransom might
be fully paid, the Law fulfilled, and his Justice fully satisfied. So that
Christ is now the Righteousness of all them that truly do believe in him. He
for them paid their Ransom by his Death. He for them fulfilled the Law in his
Life. So that now in him, and by him every true Christian Man may be called A
fulfiller of the Law, Forasmuch as that which their Infirmity lacked, Christ's
Justice has supplied.

The Second Part of the Sermon of Salvation.
YE have heard, of whom all Men ought to seek their Justification and
Righteousness; and how also this Righteousness comes unto Men by Christ's
Death and Merits: Ye heard also, how that three things are required to the
obtaining of our Righteousness, that is, God's Mercy, Christ's Justice, and a
true and lively Faith, out of the which Faith spring good Works. Also before
was declared at large, That no Man can be justified by his own good Works; that
no Man fulfilleth the Law, according to the strict rigor of the Law.

And St. Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians proves the same, saying thus,
Gal. 2.
If there had been any Law given which could have justified, verily
Righteousness should have been by the Law. And again he says, If righteousness
be by the Law, then Christ died in vain. And again he says; Ephesians. 2.
You that are justified by the Law, are fallen away from Grace. And
furthermore, he writes to the Ephesians on this wise, By Grace are ye saved
through Faith, and that not of yourselves, for it is the gift of God, and not
of Works, lest any Man should Glory. And to be short, the sum of all Paul's
Disputation is this; That if Justice come of Works, then it comes not of
Grace; and if it come of Grace, then it comes not of Works. And to this end
tend all the Prophets, as St. Peter says in the 10th of the Acts. Of Christ
all the Prophets (says St. Peter, Acts 10.
) do witness, that through his Name all they that believe in him, shall receive
the remission of sins. Faith only justifies, is the Doctrine of old Doctors.
And after this wise to be justified only by this true and lively Faith in
Christ, speak all the old and ancient Authors, both Greeks and Latins: Of whom
I will specially rehearse three, Hilary, Basil, and Ambrose. St. Hilary says
these Words plainly in the ninth Canon upon Matthew, Faith only justifies. And
St. Basil a Greek Author writes thus; This is a perfect and whole rejoicing in
God, when a Man advances not himself for his own Righteousness, but
acknowledges himself to lack true Justice and Righteousness, and to be
justified by the only Faith in Christ. And Paul (says he, Philip. 3.
) does glory in the contempt of his own Righteousness, and that he looks for
the Righteousness of God by Faith.

These be the very words of St. Basil, and St. Ambrose a Latin Author says
these words, This is the Ordinance of God, that they which believe in Christ,
should be saved without Works, by Faith only, freely receiving remission of
their sins. Consider diligently these words, Without works by Faith only,
freely we receive remission of our sins. What can be spoken more plainly, than
to say, That freely without Works, by Faith only, we obtain remission of our
sins? These and other like Sentences, that we be justified by Faith only,
freely, and without Works, we do read oft-times in the best and most ancient
Writers. As, beside Hilary, Basil, and St. Ambrose before rehearsed, we read
the same in Origin, St. Chrysostom, St. Cyprian, St. Augustine, Prosper,
Oecumenius, Proclus, Bernardus, Anselm, and many other Authors Greek and Latin.
Nevertheless, this Sentence, that we be justified by Faith only, is not so
meant of them, that the said justifying Faith is alone in Man, without true
Repentance, Hope, Charity, Dread, and the Fear of God, at any time and season.
Faith alone, how it is to be understood.
Nor, when they say, that we should be justified freely, do they mean, that we
should or might afterward be idle, and that nothing should be required on our
parts afterward: Neither do they mean, so to be justified without good Works,
that we should do no good Works at all; like as shall be more expressed at
large hereafter. But this saying, That we be justified by Faith only, freely,
and without Works, is spoken for to take away clearly all Merit of our Works,
as being unable to deserve our Justification at God's hands, and thereby most
plainly to express the Weakness of Man, and the Goodness of God, the great
infirmity of ourselves, and the Might and Power of God, the imperfection of our
own Works, and the most abundant Grace of our Savior Christ, and therefore
wholly to ascribe the merit and deserving of our Justification unto Christ
only, and his most precious Blood shedding. This Faith, the Holy Scripture
teaches us, The profit of the Doctrine of Faith only justifies.
is the strong Rock and Foundation of Christian Religion, this Doctrine all old
and ancient Authors of Christ's Church do approve, this Doctrine advances and
sets forth the true Glory of Christ, and beats down the Vainglory of Man;
this whosoever denies, is not to be accounted for a Christian Man, nor for a
setter forth of Christ's Glory, but for an adversary to Christ and his Gospel,
and for a setter forth of Men's Vainglory. What they be, that impugn the
Doctrine of Faith only justifies.
And although this Doctrine be never so true, (as it is most true indeed) that
we be justified freely, without all merit of our own good Works, (as St. Paul
does express it) and freely by this lively and perfect Faith in Christ only,
(as the ancient Authors use to speak it) yet this true Doctrine must be also
truly understood, and most plainly declared, lest carnal Men should take
unjustly occasion thereby to live carnally, after the Appetite and Will of the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil. A declaration of this Doctrine of Faith
without Works justifies.
And because no Man should err by mistaking of this Doctrine, I shall plainly
and shortly so declare the right understanding of the same, that no Man shall
justly think, that he may thereby take any occasion of carnal liberty, to
follow the desires of the flesh; or that thereby any kind of sin shall be
committed, or any ungodly living the more used.

First, you shall understand, that in our Justification by Christ, it is not
all one thing, the Office of God unto Man, and the Office of Man unto God.
Justification is not the Office of Man, but of God, for Man cannot make himself
Righteous by his own Works, neither in part nor in the whole, for that were the
greatest arrogance and presumption of Man, that Antichrist could set up against
God, to affirm, that a Man might by his own Works take away and purge his own
sins, and so justify himself. But Justification is the Office of God only,
Justification is the Office of God only.
and is not a thing which we render unto him, but which we receive of him: Not
which we give to him, but which we take of him, by his free Mercy, and by the
only Merits of his most dearly beloved Son, our only Redeemer, Savior and
Justifier, Jesus Christ: So that the true understanding of this Doctrine, We be
justified freely by Faith without Works; or, that we be justified by Faith in
Christ only, is not, that this our own act to Believe in Christ, or this our
Faith in Christ, which is within us, does justify us, and deserve our
Justification unto us, (for that were to count our selves to be justified by
some Act or Virtue that is within ourselves,) but the true understanding and
meaning thereof is, that although we hear God's Word, and believe it, although
we have Faith, Hope, Charity, Repentance, Dread, and Fear of God within us, and
do never so many Works thereunto: Yet we must renounce the merit of all our
said Virtues, of Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other Virtues and good Deeds,
which we either have done, shall do, or can do, as things that be far too weak
and insufficient, and imperfect, to deserve remission of our Sins, and our
Justification, and therefore we must trust only in God's Mercy, and that
Sacrifice which our High Priest and Savior Christ Jesus the Son of God once
offered for us upon the Cross, to obtain thereby God's Grace and Remission, as
well of our original Sin in Baptism, as of all actual Sin committed by us after
our Baptism, if we truly repent, and turn unfeignedly to him again. So that as
St. John Baptist, although he were never so Virtuous and Godly a Man, yet in
this matter of forgiving of Sin, he did put the People from him, and appointed
them unto Christ, saying thus unto them, Behold, yonder is the Lamb of God,
John 1.
which takes away the sins of the World: Even so, as Great and as Godly a
Virtue as the lively Faith is, yet it puts us from itself, and remitteth or
appoints us unto Christ, for to have only by him remission of our Sins, or
Justification. So that our Faith in Christ (as it were,) says unto us thus, It
is not I that takes away your Sins, but it is Christ only, and to him only I
send you for that purpose, forsaking therein all your good Virtues, Words,
Thoughts and Works, and only putting your Trust in Christ.

The Third Part of the Sermon of Salvation.
IT has been manifestly declared unto you, that no Man can fulfill the Law of
God, and therefore by the Law all Men are condemned: Whereupon it follows
necessarily, that some other thing should be required for our Salvation than
the Law: And that is, a true and a lively Faith in Christ bringing forth good
Works, and a Life according to God's Commandments. And also you heard the
ancient Authors Minds of this Saying, Faith in Christ only justifies Man, so
plainly declared, that you see, that the very true meaning of this Proposition
or Saying, We be justified by Faith in Christ only, (according to the meaning
of the old ancient Authors,) is this: We put our Faith in Christ, that we be
Justified by him only, that we be Justified by God's free Mercy, and the Merits
of our Savior Christ only, and by no Virtue or good Works of our own that is
in us, or that we can be able to have, or to do, for to deserve the same:
Christ himself only being the cause meritorious thereof.

Here you perceive many words to be used to avoid contention in Words with
them, that delight to brawl about Words; and also to show the true meaning to
avoid evil taking and misunderstanding, and yet peradventure all will not serve
with them that be contentious: But Contenders will ever forge matters of
Contention, even when they have none occasion thereto. Notwithstanding, such be
the less to be passed upon, so that the rest may profit, which will be more
desirous to know the Truth, than (when it is plain enough,) to contend about
it, and with contentious and captious Cavillation to obscure and darken it.
Truth it is, that our Works do not justify us, to speak properly of our
Justification, (that is to say,) our Works do not merit or deserve remission of
our Sins, and make us, of Unjust, Just before God: But God of his own Mercy,
through the only Merits and Deservings of his Son Jesus Christ does justify
us. Nevertheless, because Faith does directly send us to Christ for remission
of our Sins, and that by Faith given us of God, we embrace the Promise of God's
Mercy, and of the remission of our Sins, (which thing none other of our Virtues
of Works properly does,) therefore the Scripture uses to say, That Faith
without Works does justify. And forasmuch as it is all one Sentence in effect,
to say, Faith without Works, and only Faith, does justify us; therefore the
old ancient Fathers of the Church from time to time have uttered our
Justification with this Speech, Only Faith justifies us, meaning no other
thing than St. Paul meant, when he said, Faith without Works justifies us, And
because all this is brought to pass, through the only Merits and Deservings of
our Savior Christ, and not through our Merits, or through the Merit of any
Virtue that we have within us, or of any Work that comes from us: Therefore in
that respect of merit and deserving, we forsake, (as it were,) altogether again
Faith, Works, and all other Virtues. For our own Imperfection is so great,
through the corruption of Original Sin, that all is imperfect that is within
us, Faith, Charity, Hope, Dread, Thoughts, Words and Works, and therefore not
apt to Merit and Deserve any part of our Justification for us. And this form of
Speaking use we, in the humbling of ourselves to God, and to give all the Glory
to our Savior Christ, who is best worthy to have it.

Here you have heard the Office of God in our Justification, and how we receive
it of him freely, by his Mercy, without our deserts, through true and lively
Faith. Now you shall hear the Office and Duty of a Christian Man unto God; what
we ought on our part to render unto God again for his great Mercy and Goodness.
They that preach Faith only justifies, do not teach carnal liberty, or that we
should do no good Works.
Our Office is not to pass the time of this present Life unfruitfully and idly,
after that we are Baptized or Justified, not caring how few good Works we do,
to the Glory of God, and Profit of our Neighbors: Much less is it our Office,
after that we be once made Christ's Members, to live contrary to the same,
making ourselves Members of the Devil, walking after his enticements, and after
the suggestions of the World and the Flesh, whereby we know that we do serve
the World and the Devil, and not God. The Devils have Faith, but not the true
Faith.
For that Faith which brings forth (without Repentance,) either evil Works,
or no good Works, is not a right, pure, and lively Faith, but a dead,
devilish, counterfeit and feigned Faith, as St. Paul and St. James call it. For
even the Devils know and Believe, that Christ was Born of a Virgin, that he
Fasted forty Days and forty Nights without Meat and Drink; that he wrought all
kind of Miracles, declaring Himself very God: They Believe also, that Christ
for our sakes suffered a most painful Death, to redeem us from everlasting
Death; and that he rose again from Death the Third Day; They Believe, that he
ascended into Heaven, and that he Sits on the Right Hand of the Father, and
at she last end of this World shall come again, and judge both the Quick and
the Dead. These Articles of our Faith the Devils Believe, and so they Believe
all things that be written in the New and Old Testament, to be true: And yet
for all this Faith, they be but Devils, remaining still in their damnable
estate, lacking the very true Christian Faith. What is the true and justifying
Faith.
For the right and true Christian Faith is, not only to believe that Holy
Scripture, and all the foresaid Articles of our Faith are true; but also to
have a sure Trust and Confidence in God's merciful Promises, to be saved from
everlasting Damnation by Christ: Whereof does follow a loving Heart to obey his
Commandments. And this true Christian Faith, neither any Devil has, nor yet
any Man, which in the outward profession of his Mouth, and in his outward
receiving of the Sacraments, in coming to the Church, and in all other outward
appearances, seems to be a Christian Man, and yet in his Living and Deeds
shows the contrary. They that continue in evil living have not true Faith.
For how can a Man have this true Faith, sure Trust and Confidence in God, that
by the Merits of Christ his Sins be forgiven, and he reconciled to the Favor
of God, and to be partaker of the Kingdom of Heaven by Christ, when he lives
ungodlily, and denies Christ in his Deeds? Surely no such ungodly Man can have
this Faith and Trust in God. For as they know Christ to be the only Savior of
the World; so they know also, that Wicked Men shall not enjoy the Kingdom of
God. They know that God hates Unrighteousness, Psalm. 25.
that he will destroy all those that speak untruly, that those which have done
good Works (which cannot be done without a lively Faith in Christ,) shall come
forth into the Resurrection of Life; and those that have done Evil shall come
unto the Resurrection of Judgment: Very well they know also, that to them that
be Contentious, and to them that will not be Obedient unto the Truth, but will
obey Unrighteousness, shall come Indignation, Wrath, and Affliction, etc.
Therefore, to conclude, considering the infinite Benefits of God, showed and
given unto us mercifully without our Deserts, who has not only Created us of
Nothing; and from a piece of vile Clay, of his infinite Goodness, has exalted
us (as touching our Soul,) unto his own Similitude and Likeness: But also,
whereas we were condemned to Hell, and Death everlasting, has given his own
natural Son, being God Eternal, Immortal, and Equal unto Himself in Power and
Glory, to be incarnated, and to take our mortal Nature upon him, with the
infirmities of the same; and in the same nature to suffer most shameful and
painful Death for our Offenses, to the intent to justify us, and to restore us
to Life everlasting: So making us also his dear Children, Brethren unto his
only Son our Savior Christ, and Inheritors for ever with him of his Eternal
Kingdom of Heaven.

These great and merciful Benefits of God (if they be well considered,) do
neither minister unto us occasion to be idle, and to live without doing any
good Works, neither yet stir us up by any means to do evil things: But
contrariwise, if we be not desperate Persons, and our Hearts harder than
Stones, they move us to render ourselves unto God wholly, with all our Wills,
Hearts, Might, and Power to serve him in all good Deeds, obeying his
Commandments during our Lives, to seek in all things his Glory and Honor, not
our sensual Pleasures and Vainglory, evermore dreading willingly to offend
such a Merciful God and Loving Redeemer, in Word, Thought, or Deed. And the
said Benefits of God, deeply considered, move us for his sake also to be ever
ready to give ourselves to our Neighbors, and, as much as lies in us, to
study with all our endeavor, to do good to every Man. These be the fruits of
true Faith, to do good as much as lies in us to every Man, and, above all
things, and in all things to advance the Glory of God, of whom only we have our
Sanctification, Justification, Salvation, and Redemption: To whom be ever
Glory, Praise, and Honor, World without end. Amen.

A Short DECLARATION OF THE True, Lively, and Christian Faith.
Faith.
THE First coming unto God (good Christian People,) is through Faith, whereby
(as it is declared in the last Sermon,) we be Justified before God. And lest
any Man should be deceived, for lack of right Understanding thereof, it is
diligently to be noted, that Faith is taken in the Scripture two manner of
ways. A dead Faith.
There is one Faith, which in Scripture is called a Dead Faith, which brings
forth no good Works, but is idle, barren, and unfruitful. And this Faith, by
the Holy Apostle St. James, is compared to the Faith of Devils, James 2.
which believe God to be True and Just, and tremble for fear, yet they do
nothing well, but all evil. And such a manner of Faith have the wicked and
naughty Christian People, which confess God (as St. Paul says,) in their
mouths, Titus 6.
but deny him in their deeds, being abominable, and without the right Faith,
and to all good works reproveable.

And this Faith is a Persuasion and Belief in Man's Heart, whereby he knows
that there is a God, and agrees unto all Truths of God's most Holy Word,
contained in the Holy Scripture. So that it consists only in Believing in the
Word of God, that it is true. And this is not properly called Faith. But as he
that reads Caesar's Commentary, believing the same to be true, has thereby a
knowledge of Caesar's Life and notable Acts, because he believes the History
of Caesar: Yet it is not properly said, that he believes in Caesar, of whom he
looks for no help nor benefit. Even so, he that Believes that all that is
spoken of God in the Bible is true, and yet lives so ungodly, that he cannot
look to enjoy the Promises and Benefits of God: Although it may be said, that
such a Man has a Faith and Belief to the Words of God, yet it is not properly
said that he believes in God, or has such a Faith and Trust in God, whereby
he may surely look for Grace, Mercy, and everlasting Life at God's hand; but
rather for Indignation and Punishment, according to the Merits of his wicked
Life. For as it is written in a Book, Entitled to be of Didymus Alexandrinus;
Forasmuch as Faith without Works is dead, it is not now Faith, as a dead Man is
not a Man. This dead Faith therefore is not that sure and substantial Faith
which saves Sinners. Another Faith there is in Scripture, which is not (as the
aforesaid Faith,) idle, unfruitful, and dead, A lively Faith.
but works by charity (as St. Paul declares, Gal. 5.) Which as the other
vain Faith is called a dead Faith, so may this be called a quick or lively
Faith. And this is not only the common belief of the Articles of our Faith, but
it is also a true Trust and Confidence of the Mercy of God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, and a steadfast hope of all good things to be received at God's
hand: And that although we, through Infirmity or Temptation of our Ghostly
enemy, do fall from him by Sin, yet, if we return again unto him by true
Repentance, that he will forgive and forget our Offenses for his Sons sake our
Savior Jesus Christ, and will make us Inheritors with him of his everlasting
Kingdom, and that in the mean time until that Kingdom come, he will be our
Protector and Defender in all perils and dangers, whatsoever do chance: And
that though sometime he does send us sharp adversity, yet that evermore he will
be a loving Father unto us, correcting us for our Sin, but not withdrawing his
Mercy finally from us, if we trust in him, and commit our selves wholly unto
him, hang only upon him, and call upon him, ready to obey and serve him. This
is the true, lively, and unfeigned Christian Faith, and is not in the Mouth and
outward Profession only, but it lives, and stirs inwardly in the Heart. And
this Faith is not without Hope and Trust in God; nor without the Love of God,
and of our Neighbors, nor without the Fear of God, nor without the Desire to
hear God's Word, and to follow the same in eschewing Evil and doing gladly all
good Works.

Heb. 12.
Thus Faith (as St. Paul describes it,) is the sure ground and foundation of
the benefits which we ought to look for, and trust to receive of God; a
Certificate and sure looking for them, although they yet sensibly appear not
unto us. And after he says, He that comes to God must believe, both that he
is, and that he is a merciful rewarder of Well-doers. And nothing commends
good Men unto God, so much as this assured Faith and Trust in him. Of this
Faith, three things are specially to be noted.

Three things are to be noted of Faith.
First, that this Faith does not lie dead in the Heart, but is lively and
fruitful in bringing forth good Works. Secondly, that without it can no good
Works be done, that shall be acceptable and pleasant to God. Thirdly, what
manner of good Works they be, that this Faith does bring forth.

Faith is full of good Works.
For the First, That as the Light cannot be hid, but will show forth itself at
one place or other: So a true Faith cannot be kept secret, but, when occasion
is offered, it will break out, and show itself by good Works. And as the living
Body of a Man ever exercises such things as belong to a natural and living
Body, for nourishment and preservation of the same, as it has need,
opportunity, and occasion: Even so the Soul, that has a lively Faith in it,
will be doing always some good Work, which shall declare that it is living, and
will not be unoccupied. Therefore, when Men hear in the Scripture so high
commendations of Faith, that it makes us to please God, to live with God, and
to be the Children of God: If then they fancy, that they be set at liberty from
doing all good Works, and may live as they list, they trifle with God, and
deceive themselves. And it is a manifest token, that they be far from having
the true and lively Faith; and also far from Knowledge, what true Faith
means. For the very sure and lively Christian Faith is, not only to believe
all things of God which are contained in Holy Scripture, but also is an earnest
Trust and Confidence in God, that he does regard us, and that he is careful
over us, as the Father is over the Child whom he does love, and that he will be
merciful unto us for his only Sons sake, and that we have our Savior Christ
our perpetual Advocate, and Priest, in whose only Merits, Oblation, and
Suffering, we do trust that our Offenses be continually washed and purged,
whenever we (repenting truly,) do return to him with our whole Heart,
steadfastly determining with ourselves, through his Grace, to obey and serve him
in keeping his Commandments, and never to turn back again to Sin. Such is the
true Faith, that the Scripture does so much commend, the which when it sees
and considers what God has done for us, is also moved through continual
assistance of the Spirit of God, to serve and please him, to keep his Favor,
to fear his Displeasure, to continue his Obedient Children, showing Thakfulness
again by observing or keeping his Commandments, and that freely, for true Love
chiefly, and not for dread of Punishment, or love of temporal Reward,
considering how clearly; without deservings, we have received his Mercy and
Pardon freely.

This true Faith will show forth itself, and cannot long be idle: For as it is
written, Abac 2
The Just man does live by his Faith. He never sleeps, nor is idle, when he
would wake and be well occupied. And God by his Prophet Jeremy says, Jer. 17.
That he is a happy and blessed man, which has Faith and confidence in God.
For he is like a Tree set by the waterside, and spreads his roots abroad
toward the moisture, and fears not heat when it comes, his leaf will be
green, and will not cease to bring forth his Fruit: Even so, Faithful men
(putting away all fear of Adversity,) will show forth the fruit of their good
Works, as occasion is offered to do them.

The Second Part of the Sermon of Faith.
YE have heard in the First Part of this Sermon, that there be two kinds of
Faith, a dead and an unfruitful Faith, and a Faith lively that works by
Charity. The First to be unprofitable, the Second necessary for the obtaining
of our Salvation: The which Faith has Charity always joined unto it, and is
fruitful, and brings forth all good Works. Now as concerning the same matter,
you shall hear what follows. Eccles. 31.
The Wise Man says, He that believes in God will hearken unto his
Commandments. For if we do not show ourselves faithful in our Conversation, the
Faith which we pretend to have, is but a feigned Faith: Because the true
Christian Faith is manifestly showed by good Living, and not by Words only, as
St. Augustine says, Good Living cannot be separated from true Faith, which
works by Love. Libro de fide and operibus. cap. 2. Sermo. de lege and fide.
Heb. 11. Genesis 4. Genesis 6. Eccl. 44. Genesis 11.
And St. Chrysostom says, Faith of itself is full of good Works: As soon as
a Man does Believe, he shall be garnished with them. How plentiful this Faith
is of good Works, and how it makes the work of one Man more acceptable to
God, than of another, St. Paul teaches at large in the Eleventh Chapter to the
Hebrews, saying, That faith made the oblation of Abel better than the oblation
of Cain. This made Noah to build the Ark. This made Abraham to forsake his
Country and all his Friends, and go into a far Country, there to dwell among
Strangers. So did also Isaac and Jacob, depending or hanging only on the Help
and Trust that they had in God. And when they came to the Country which God
promised them, they would build no Cities, Towns, nor Houses, but lived like
Strangers in Tents, that might every day be removed. Their Trust was so much in
God, that they set but little by any worldly thing; for that God had prepared
better Dwelling-places for them in Heaven of his own Foundation and Building.
Genesis 22. Eccl. 13.
This Faith made Abraham ready, at God's Commandment, to offer his own Son and
Heir Isaac, whom he loved so well, and by whom he was promised to have
innumerable issue; among the which, One should be Born, in whom all Nations
should be blessed, trusting so much in God, that, though he were slain, yet
that God was able by his Omnipotent Power to raise him from Death, and perform
his Promise. He mistrusted not the promise of God, although unto his Reason
every thing seems contrary. He Believed verily, that God would not forsake
him in Dearth and Famine that was in the Country. And in all other dangers that
he was brought unto, he trusted ever that God should be his God, and his
Protector and Defender, whatsoever he saw to the contrary. This Faith wrought
so in the Heart of Moses, that he refused to be taken for King Pharaoh, Exodus 2.
his Daughters Son, and to have great inheritance in Egypt, thinking it better
with the people of God to have affliction and sorrow, than with naughty Men in
Sin to live pleasantly for a time. By faith, he cared not for the threatening of
King Pharaoh. For his Trust was so in God, that he passed not of the Felicity
of this World, but looked for the Reward to come in Heaven, setting his Heart
upon the invisible God, as if he had seen him ever present before his Eyes. By
faith, Exodus 14.
the children of Israel passed through the red Sea. By faith, the walls of
Jericho fell down without stroke, and many other wonderful Miracles have been
wrought. In all good Men that heretofore have been, Faith has brought forth
their good Works, Dan. 6.
and obtained the Promises of God. Faith has stopped the Lions Mouths: Faith
has quenched the force of fire: Faith has escaped the Swords edges: Dan. 3.
Faith has given weak men strength, victory in battle, overthrown the armies
of Infidels, Heb. 11.
raised the dead to life: Faith has made good Men to take adversity in good
part, some have been mocked and whipped, bound and cast in prison; some have
lost all their Goods, and lived in great Poverty; some have wandered in
Mountains, Hills and Wildernesses; some have been racked; some slain; some
stoned; some sawen; some rent in pieces; some beheaded; some burnt without
mercy, and would not be delivered, because they looked to rise again to a
better state.

All these Fathers, Martyrs, and other Holy Men; (whom St. Paul spoke of) had
their Faith surely fixed in God, when all the World was against them. They did
not only know God to be the Lord, Maker, and Governor of all Men in the World:
But also they had a special Confidence and Trust, that he was, and would be,
their God, their Comforter, Aider, Helper, Maintainer and Defender. This is the
Christian Faith which these Holy Men had, and we also ought to have. And
although they were not named Christian Men, yet was it a Christian Faith that
they had, for they looked for all Benefits of God the Father, through the
Merits of his Son Jesu Christ, as we now do. This difference is between them
and us, that they looked when Christ should come, and we be in the time when he
is come. Therefore says St. Augustine, In Johan. Tract. 45.
The Time is altered and changed, but not the Faith. For we have both one Faith
in one Christ. 1 Cor. 4
The same Holy Ghost also that we have, had they, says St. Paul. For as the
Holy Ghost does teach us to trust in God, and to call upon him as our Father:
E^ai. 4^.
So did he teach them to say, as it is written, Thou Lord art our Father and
Redeemer, and thy Name is without beginning and everlasting. God gave them then
Grace to be his Children, as he does us now. But now by the coming of our
Savior Christ, we have received more abundantly the Spirit of God in our
Hearts, whereby we may conceive a greater Faith, and a surer Trust than many of
them had. But in effect they and we be all one: We have the same Faith that
they had in God, and they the same that we have. And St. Paul so much extolleth
their Faith, because we should not less, but rather more, give our selves
wholly unto Christ, both in Profession and Living, now when Christ is come,
than the old Fathers did before his coming. And by all the Declaration of St.
Paul, it is evident, that the true, lively, and Christian Faith, is no dead,
vain, or unfruitful thing, but a thing of perfect Virtue, of wonderful
Operation or Working, and Strength, bringing forth all good Motions and good
Works.

All Holy Scripture agreeably bears witness, that a true lively Faith in
Christ does bring forth good Works: And therefore every Man must examine, and
try himself diligently, to know whether he have the same true lively Faith in
his Heart unfeignedly, or not, which he shall know by the fruits thereof. Many
that professed the Faith of Christ were in this error, that they thought they
knew God, and believed in him, when in their Life they declared the contrary;
Which error St. John in his First Epistle confuting, writes in this wise, 1
John 2.
Hereby we are certified, that we knew God, if we observe his Commandments. He
that says he knows God, and observes not his Commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him. And again he says, 1 John 3.
Whosoever sins does not see God, nor know him; let no man deceive you,
welbeloved children. And moreover he says, Hereby we know, that we be of the
truth, and so we shall persuade our hearts before him. 1 John 3.
For if our own hearts reprove us, God is above our hearts, and knows all
things. Welbeloved, if our hearts reprove us not, then have we confidence in
God, and shall have of him whatsoever we ask, because we keep his Commandments,
and do those things that please him. And yet further he says, Every man that
believes that Jesus is Christ, is born of God, and we know that whosoever is
born of God does not sin: But he that is begotten of God purges himself, and
the Devil does not touch him. And finally he concludes, and shows the cause
why he wrote this Epistle, 1 John 5.
saying, For this cause have I thus written unto you, that you may know that
you have everlasting life, which do believe in the Son of God. And in his third
Epistle, he confirms the whole matter of Faith and Works in few words, 3
John 1.
saying, He that does well is of God, and he that does evil knows not God.
And as St. John says, That as the lively Knowledge and Faith of God brings
forth good Works: So says he likewise of Hope and Charity, That they cannot
stand with evil living. Of Hope he writes thus, 1 John 3.
We know, that when God shall appear, we shall be like unto him, for we shall
see him, even as he is: And whosoever has this hope in him, does purify
himself, like as God is pure. And of Charity he says these words, 1 John 2. 1
John 5.
He that does keep God's word and Commandment, in him is truly the perfect love
of God. And again he says, This is the love of God, that we should keep his
Commandments. And St. John wrote not this as a subtle saying, devised of his
own fantasy, but as a most certain and necessary Truth, taught unto him by
Christ himself, the Eternal and infallible Verity, who in many places does most
clearly affirm, That Faith, Hope and Charity, cannot consist or stand without
Good and Godly Works. 1 John 5.
Of Faith, he says, He that believes in the Son has everlasting Life: But he
that believes not in the Son, John 3.
shall not see that life, but the wrath of God remains upon him. John 6.
And the same he confirms with a double Oath, saying, Verily, verily I say
unto you, he that believes in me has everlasting life. Now forasmuch as he
that believes in Christ has everlasting life it; must needs consequently
follow, that he that has this Faith, must have also good Works, and be
studious to observe God's Commandments obediently. For to them that have evil
Works, and lead their Life in Disobedience and Transgression, or breaking of
God's Commandments, without Repentance, pertains not everlasting Life, Matthew.
25.
but everlasting Death, as Christ himself says, They that do well shall go
into life eternal but they that do evil; shall go into everlasting Fire. And
again he says, Apoc. 21.
I am the first Letter and the last, the beginning and the ending: To him that
is athirst, I will give of the well of the water of life freely: He that has
the victory shall have all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my
Son: But they that be fearful, mistrusting God, and lacking Faith, they that be
cursed People and murderers, and fornicators, and sorcerers, and all liars,
shall have their portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death. And as Christ undoubtedly affirms, that true faith
brings forth good works: So does he say likewise of Charity, Charity brings
forth good Works. John 14. Eccles. 1. Eccles. 15.
Whosoever has my Commandments, and keeps them, that is he that loves me.
And after he says, He that loves me, will keep my word, and he that loves me
not, keeps not my words. And as the Love of God is tried by good Works, so is
the Fear of God also, as the Wise man says, The dread of God puts away sin.
And also he says, He that fears God will do good Works.

The Third Part of the Sermon of Faith.
YOu have heard in the Second Part of this Sermon, that no Man should think,
that he has that lively Faith which Scripture commands, when he lives not
obediently to God's Laws, for all good Works spring out of that Faith: And also
it has been declared unto you by examples, that Faith makes Men steadfast,
quiet and patient in all affliction. Now as concerning the same matter, you
shall hear what follows. A Man may soon deceive himself, and think in his own
fantasy, that he by Faith knows God, loves him, fears him, and belongs
to him, when in very deed he does nothing less. For the trial of all these
things is a very Godly and Christian Life. He that feels his Heart set to
seek God's Honor, and studieth to know the Will and Commandments of God, and
to frame himself thereunto, and leads not his Life after the desire of his
own flesh, to serve the Devil by Sin, but sets his Mind to serve God for his
own sake, and for his sake also to love all his Neighbors, whether they be
Friends or Adversaries, doing good to every Man, (as opportunity serves) and
willingly hurting no Man: Such a Man may well rejoice in God, perceiving by the
trade of his Life, that he unfeignedly has the right knowledge of God, a
lively Faith, a steadfast Hope, a true and unfeigned Love, and Fear of God. But
he that casts away the yoke of God's Commandments from his Neck, and gives
himself to live without true Repentance, after his own sensual Mind and
Pleasure, not regarding to know God's Word, and much less to live according
thereunto: Such a Man clearly deceives himself, and sees not his own Heart,
if he thinks that he either knows God, loves him, fears him, or trusts
in him. Some peradventure fancy in themselves, that they belong to God;
although they live in Sin, and so they come to the Church, and show themselves
as God's dear Children. But St. John says plainly, If we say, 1 John 1.
that we have any company with God, and walk in darkness, we do lie. Others do
vainly think, that they know and love God, although they pass not of the
Commandments. But St. John says clearly, 1 John 2.
He that says I know God, and keeps not his Commandments, he is a liar. Some
falsely persuade themselves, that they love God, when they hate their Neighbors.
But St. John says manifestly, If any man say I love God, 1 John 4. 1 John 2.
and yet hates his Brother, he is a liar. He that says, that he is in the
light, and hates his brother, he is still in darkness. He that loves his
brother dwells in the light, but he that hates his brother is in darkness,
and walks in darkness, and know h not whither he goes: For darkness has
blinded h s eyes. And moreover he says, 1 John 3.
Hereby we manif stly know the Children of God from the Children of the Devil.
He that does not righteously is not the child of God, nor he that hates his
Brother. Deceive not yourselves therefore, thinking that you have Faith in God,
or that you love God, or do trust in him, or do fear him, when you live in sin:
For then your ungodly and sinful Life declares the contrary, whatsoever you
say or think. It pertains to a Christian Man to have this true Christian
Faith, and to try himself whether he has it or no, and to know what belongs
to it, and how it does work in him. It is not the World that we can trust to,
the World, and all that is therein, is but vanity. It is God that must be our
Defense and Protection against all temptation of Wickedness and Sin, Errors,
Superstition, Idolatry, and all Evil. If all the World were on our side, and
God against us, What could the World avail us? Therefore let us set our whole
Faith and Trust in God, and neither the World, the Devil, nor all the power of
them shall prevail against us. Let us therefore (good Christian Poople,) try
and examine our Faith, what it is: Let us not flatter our selves, but look upon
our Works, and so judge of our Faith what it is. Christ himself speaks of
this matter, Luke 6.
and says, The tree is known by the fruit. Therefore let us do good Works, and
thereby declare our Faith to be the lively Christian Faith. Let us by such
Virtues as ought to spring out of Faith, show our election to be sure and
stable, as St. Peter teaches, 2 Pet. 1.
endeavor yourselves to make your calling and election certain by good Works.
And also he says, minister or declare in your faith virtue, in virtue
knowledge, in knowledge temperance, in temperance patience, in patience
godliness, in godliness brotherly charity, in brotherly charity love: So shall
we show indeed, that we have the very lively Christian Faith, and may so both
certify our Conscience the better that we be in the right Faith; and also by
these means confirm other Men. If these fruits do not follow, we do but mock
with God, deceive ourselves, and also other Men. Well may we bear the name of
Christian Men, but we do lack the true Faith that does belong thereunto, for
the true Faith does ever bring forth good Works, as St. James says, James 2.
Show me thy faith by thy deeds. Thy Deeds and Works must be an open
Testimonial of thy Faith: Otherwise thy Faith (being without good Works,) is
but the Devils Faith, the Faith of the wicked, a fantasy of Faith, and not a
true Christian Faith. And like as the Devils and evil People be nothing the
better for their counterfeit Faith, but it is unto them the more cause of
damnation: So they that be Christians and have received knowledge of God, and
of Christ's Merits, and yet of a set purpose do live idly, without good Works,
thinking the name of a naked Faith to be either sufficient for them, or else
setting their Minds upon vain pleasures of this World, do live in Sin without
Repentance, not uttering the fruits that do belong to such an high Profession;
upon such presumptious Persons, and wilful Sinners, must needs remain the great
vengeance of God, and eternal punishment in Hell, prepared for the unjust and
wicked Livers. Therefore as you profess the name of Christ, (good Christian
People,) let no such fantasy and imagination of Faith at any time beguile
you: But be sure of your Faith, try it by your living, look upon the fruits
that come of it, mark the increase of Love and Charity by it toward God and
your Neighbor, and so shall you perceive it to be a true lively Faith. If you
feel and perceive such a Faith in you, rejoice in it, and be diligent to
maintain it, and keep it still in you, let it be daily increasing, and more and
more by well-working, and so shall you be sure that you shall please God by
this Faith; and at the length (as other faithful Men have done before) so shall
you (when his Will is,) come to him, and receive the end and final reward of
your Faith, (as St. Peter names it,) the salvation of your Souls: 1 Pet. 1.
The which God Grant us, that has promised the same unto his Faithful; to whom
be all Honor and Glory, World without end, Amen.

A SERMON Of Good Works annexed unto Faith.
IN the last Sermon was declared unto you, what the lively and true Faith of a
Christian Man is, that it causes not a Man to be idle, but to be occupied in
bringing forth good Works, No good Works can be done without Faith. John 15.
as occasion serves.

Now by God's Grace shall be declared the Second thing that before was noted of
Faith, that without it can no good Work be done, accepted and pleasant unto
God. For as a branch cannot bear fruit of itself, (says our Savior Christ,)
except it abide in the Vine; so cannot you, except you abide in me. I am the
Vine, and you are the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, he
brings forth much fruit; for without me you can do nothing. And St. Paul
proves, that the Eunuch had Faith, because he pleased God. Heb. 11.
For without Faith (says he,) it is not possible to please God. And again to
the Romans he says, Romans 14.
Whatsoever work is done without faith, it is sin. Faith gives life to the
Soul, and they be as much dead to God that lack Faith, as they be to the World,
whose Bodies lack Souls. Without Faith all that is done of us is but dead
before God, although the work seem never so gay and glorious before Man. Even
as the Picture, graven or painted, is but a dead representation of the thing
itself, and is without life, or any manner of moving: So be the Works of all
unfaithful Persons before God. They do appear to be lively Works, and indeed
they be but dead, not availing to the everlasting life. They be but shadows and
shows of lively and good things, and not good and lively things indeed. For
true Faith does give life to the Works, and out of such Faith come good Works,
that be very good Works indeed, and without Faith no Work is good before God,
as says St. Augustine. In Praefat. Psalm. 13.
We must set no good Works before Faith, nor think that before Faith a Man may
do any good Works, for such Works, although they seem unto Men to be
praiseworthy, yet indeed they be but vain, and not allowed before God. They be
as the Course of an Horse that runs out of the way, which takes great
labor, but to no purpose. Let no Man therefore (says he,) reckon upon his
good Works before his Faith: Whereas Faith was not, good Works were not. The
intent (says he,) makes good Works, but Faith must guide and order the
intent of Man. And Christ says, Matthew. 6. In Praefat. Psalm. 31.
If thine eye be naught, thy whole body is full of darkness. The Eye does
signify the intent, (says St. Augustine,) wherewith a Man does a thing. So
that he which does not his good Works with a godly intent, and a true Faith,
that works by Love, the whole Body beside, (that is to say,) all the whole
number of his Works, is dark, and there is no light in them. For good Deeds be
not measured by the Facts themselves, and so discerned from Vices, but by the
ends and intents for the which they were done. If a Heathen Man cloth the
Naked, feed the Hungry, and do such other like Works; yet because he does them
not in Faith, for the Honor and Love of God, they be but dead, vain, and
fruitless Works to him. Faith it is, that does commend the Work to God: For (as
St. Augustine says,) whether thou will or no, that Work that comes not of
Faith is naught: Where the Faith of Christ is not the foundation, there is no
good Work, what Building soever we make. There is one Work, in the which be all
good Works, that is, Faith, which works by Charity: If thou have it, thou
have the ground of all good Works. For the virtues of Strength, Wisdom,
Temperance and Justice, be all referred unto this same Faith. Without this
Faith we have not them, but only the names and shadows of them, (as St.
Augustine says.) All the life of them that lack the true Faith, is Sin, and
nothing is Good without him that is the Author of Goodness: Where he is not,
there is but feigned Virtue, although it be in the best Works, And St.
Augustine, De vocatione Gentium lib. cap. 3.
declaring this Verse of the Psalm, The Turtle has found a nest where she may
keep her young Birds, says, that Jews, Heretics, and Pagans do good Works,
they cloth the Naked, feed the Poor, and do other good works of Mercy: But
because they be not done in the true Faith, therefore the Birds be lost. But if
they remain in Faith, then Faith is the nest and safeguard of their Birds, that
is to say, safeguard of their good Works, that the reward of them be not
utterly lost. And this matter (which St. Augustine at large in many Books
disputes) St. Ambrose concludes in few words, saying, He that by nature would
withstand Vice, either by natural Will or Reason, he does in vain garnish the
time of this Life, and attaineth not the very true Virtues: For without the
worshipping of the true God, that which seems to be Virtue is Vice. And yet
most plainly to this purpose writes St. Chrysostom in this wife; In Sermon
de side, lege, and spiritu Sancto.
You shall find many which have not the true Faith, that be not of the flock of
Christ, and yet (as it appears) they flourish in good works of Mercy: You
shall find them full of Pity, Compassion, and given to Justice; and yet for all
that, they have no fruit of their Works, because the chief Work lacks. For
when the Jews asked of Christ, what they should do to work good Works: He
answered, John 6.
This is the work of God, to believe in him whom he sent: So that he called
Faith the Work of God. And as soon as a Man has Faith, anon he shall flourish
in good Works: For Faith of itself is full of good Works, and nothing is good
without Faith. And for a similitude, he says, That they, which glister and
shine in good Works without Faith in God, be like dead Men, which have goodly
and precious Tombs, and yet it avails them nothing. Faith may not be naked
without good Works, for then it is no true Faith; And when it is adjoined to
Works, yet it is above the Works. For as Men that be very Men indeed, first
have life, and after be nourished: So must our Faith in Christ go before, and
after be nourished with good Works. And life may be without nourishment, but
nourishment cannot be without life. A Man must needs be nourished by good
Works, but first he must have Faith. He that does good Deeds, yet without
Faith, he has no Life. I can show a Man that by Faith without Works lived, and
came to Heaven: But without Faith, never Man had Life. The Thief that was
hanged, when Christ suffered, did Believe only, and the most merciful God
justified him. And because no Man shall say aagain, that he lacked time to do
good Works, for else he would have done them: Truth it is, and I will not
contend therein, but this I will surely affirm, That Faith only saved him. If
he had lived, and not regarded Faith, and the Works thereof, he should have
lost his Salvation again. But this is the effect that I say, That Faith by
itself saved him, but Works by themselves never justified any Man. Here ye have
heard the Mind of St. Chrysostom, whereby you may perceive, that neither Faith
is without Works, (having opportunity thereto,) nor Works can avail to
everlasting Life, without Faith.

The Seccond Part of the Sermon of Good Works.
OF three things which were, in the former Sermon, especially noted of lively
Faith, to be declared unto you; The First was, that Faith is never idle,
without Good Works when occasion serves. The Second, What Works they are that
spring out of Faith.
that good Works acceptable to God cannot be done without Faith. Now to go
forward to the Third Part, that is, What manner of Works they be which spring
out of true Faith, and lead faithful Men unto everlasting Life. This cannot be
known so well, as by our Savior Christ himself, who was asked of a certain
great Man the same Question, What Works shall I do, Matthew. 19.
(said a Prince,) to come to everlasting life? to whom Jesus answered, If thou will come to everlasting life, keep the Commandments. But the Prince not
satisfied herewith, asked farther, Which Commandments? The Scribes and Pharisees
had made so many of their own Laws and Traditions, to bring Men to Heaven,
besides God's Commandments, that this Man was in doubt whether he should come
to Heaven by those Laws and Traditions, or by the Law of God, and therefore he
asked Christ, which Commandments he meant. Whereunto Christ made him a plain
answer, rehearsing the Commandments of God, saying, Thou shall not kill; Thou
shall not commit adultery; Matthew. 19.
Thou shall not steal; Thou shall not bear false witness, Honor thy Father and
thy Mother, and love thy neighbor as thyself. By which words Christ declared,
The Works that lead to Heaven, be Works of God's Commandments. Man from his
first falling from God's Commandments has ever been ready to do the like, and
does devise works of his own fantasy to please God withal.
that the Laws of God be the very way that does lead to everlasting Life, and
not the Traditions and Laws of Men. So that this is to be taken for a most true
Lesson taught by Christ's own Mouth, That the works of the Moral Commandments
of God be the very true Works of Faith, which lead to the Blessed Life to come.
But the blindness and malice of Man, even from the beginning, has ever been
ready to fall from God's Commandments. As Adam the first Man, having but one
Commandment, That he should not eat of the Fruit forbidden; notwithstanding
God's Commandment, he gave credit unto the Woman, seduced by the subtle
persuasion of the Serpent, and so followed his own Will, and left God's
Commandment. And ever since that time, all that came of him have been so
blinded through original Sin, that they have been ever ready to fall from God
and his Law, and to invent a new way unto Salvation by Works of their own
device, so much, that almost all the World, forsaking the true Honor of the
only Eternal living God, wandered about their own fantasies, worshipping, some
the Sun, the Moon, The Devices and Idolatry of the Gentiles. The Devices and
Idolatries of the Israelites. Exodus 32.
the Stars, some Jupiter, Juno, Diana, Saturnus, Apollo, Neptunus, Ceres,
Bacchus, and other dead Men and Women. Some therewith not satisfied,
worshipping diverse kinds of Beasts, Birds, Fish, Fowl, and Serpents; every
Country, Town, and House in a manner being divided, and setting up Images of
such things as they liked, and worshipping the same. Such was the rudeness of
the People, after they fell to their own fantasies, and left the Eternal
living God and his Commandments, that they devised innumerable Images and Gods.
In which error and blindness they did remain, until such a time as Almighty
God, pitying the blindness of Man, sent his true Prophet Moses into the World,
to reprove and rebuke this extreme madness, and to teach the People to know the
only living God, and his true Honor and Worship. But the corrupt inclination
of Man was so much given to follow his own fantasy, and (as you would say,)
to favor his own Bird that he brought up himself, that all the Admonitions,
Exhortations, Benefits, and Threatenings of God, could not keep him from such
his Inventions. For notwithstanding all the Benefits of God showed unto the
People of Israel, yet when Moses went up into the Mountain to speak with
Almighty God, he had tarried there but a few days, when the People began to
invent new Gods. And as it came into their heads, they made a Calfe of Gold,
and kneeled down, and worshipped it. And after that they followed the Moabites,
and worshipped Beelphegor the Moabites God. Read the Book of Judges, the Book
of the Kings, and the Prophets, and there you shall find, how unstedfast the
People were, how full of inventions, and more ready to run after their own
fantasies, than God's most Holy Commandments. There shall you read of Baal,
Mol^ch, Chamos, Melchom, Baalpeor, Astaroth, Bell, the Dragon, Priapus, the
brazen Serpent, the twelve Signs, and many other, unto whose Images the People
with great Devotion invented Pilgrimages, precious decking and censing them,
kneeling down, and offering to them, thinking that an high merit before God,
and to be esteemed above the Precepts and Commandments of God. And where at
that time God commanded no Sacrifice to be made but in Jerusalem only; they did
clean contrary, making Altars and Sacrifices every where, in Hills, in Woods,
and in Houses, not regarding God's Commandments, but esteeming their own
Fantasies and Devotions to be better than they. And the error hereof was so
spread abroad, that not only the unlearned People, but also the Priests and
Teachers of the People, partly by Vainglory and Covetousness were corrupted,
and partly by Ignorance blindly deceived with the same abominations. So much,
that King Achab having but only Helias a true Teacher and Minister of God;
there were Four hundred and fifty Priests, that persuaded him to Honor Baal,
and to do Sacrifice in the Woods or Groves. And so continued that horrible
Error, until the three Noble Kings, as Josaphat, Ezechias, and Josias, God's
chosen Ministers, destroyed the same clearly, and brought again the People from
such their feigned Inventions, unto the very Commandments of God: For the which
thing, their immortal Reward and Glory, does, and shall remain with God for
ever. Religions and Sects among the Jews.
And beside the foresaid Inventions, the inclination of Man to have his own
Holy Devotions devised new Sects and Religions, called Pharisees, Sadduces, and
Scribes, with many Holy, and Godly Traditions and Ordinances, (as it seemed by
the outward appearance, and goodly glistering of the Works,) but in very deed
all tending to Idolatry, Superstition, and Hypocrisy: Their Hearts within
being full of Malice, Pride, Covetousness, and all Wickedness. Against which
Sects, and their pretended Holiness Christ cried out more vehemently, than he
did against any other Persons, saying, and often rehearsing these words, Mat h.
^^
Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, ye Hypocrites, for you make clean the
vessel without, but within ye be full of ravine and filthiness: Thou blind
Pharisee and Hypocrite, first make the inward part clean. For notwithstanding
all the goodly Traditions and outward shows of good Works, devised of their own
imagination, whereby they appeared to the World most Religious and Holy of all
Men; yet Christ (who saw their Hearts,) knew that they were inwardly in the
sight of God, most Unholy, most Abominable, and farthest from God of all Men.
Therefore said he unto them, Hypocrites, the Prophet Isaiah spoke full truly of
you, when he said, This People honor me with their lips, Matthew. 15. Isaiah 19.
but their Heart is far from me. They worship me in vain that teach Doctrines
and Commandments of men, for you leave the Commandments of God to keep your own
traditions.

And though Christ said, they worship God in vain, Man's Laws may be observed
and kept, but not as God's Laws.
that teach doctrines and commandments of Men; yet he meant not thereby to
overthrow all Men's Commandments, for he himself was ever obedient to the
Princes and their Laws, made for good Order and Governance of the People; But
he reproved the Laws and Traditions made by the Scribes and Pharisees; which
were not made only for good order of the People, (as the Civil Laws were,) but
they were set up so high, that they were made to be right and pure worshipping
of God, as they had been equal with God's Laws, or above them: For many of
God's Laws could not be kept, but were fain to give place unto them. This
arrogance God detested, that Man should so advance his Laws, to make them equal
with God's Laws, wherein the true honoring and right worshipping of God
stands, and to make his Laws for them to be left off. God has appointed his
Laws, whereby his pleasure is to be honored. His pleasure is also, That all
Men's Laws, not being contrary unto his Laws, shall be obeyed and kept, as good
and necessary for every Commonweal, but not as things wherein principally his
Honor rests: And all Civil and Man's Laws, either be, or should be made, to
bring Men the better to keep God's Laws, that consequently, or followingly, God
should be the better honored by them. Howbeit, the Scribes and Pharisees were
not content, that their Laws should be no higher esteemed than other positive
and Civil Laws; nor would they have them called by the name of other temporal
Laws, but called them Holy and Godly Traditions, Holy Traditions were esteemed
as God's Laws.
and would have them esteemed, not only for a right and true worshipping of
God, (as God's Laws be indeed,) but also for the most high honoring of God, to
the which the Commandments of God should give place. And for this cause did
Christ so vehemently speak against them, saying, Your Traditions, which Men
esteem so high, Holiness of Man's device, is commonly occasion that God is
offended. Matthew. 12.
be abomination before God. For commonly of such Traditions, follows the
transgression or breaking of God's Commandments, and a more Devotion in keeping
of such things, and a greater Conscience in breaking of them, than of the
Commandments of God. As the Scribes and Pharisees so superstitiously, and
scrupulously kept the Sabbath, that they were offended with Christ, because he
healed sick Men; and with his Apostles, because they being sore a hungry,
gathered the ears of Corn to eat upon that day; and because his Disciples
washed not their Hands so often as their Traditions required: The Scribes and
Pharisees quarrelled with Christ, Matthew. 15.
saying, Why do thy Disciples break the traditions of the Seigniours? But
Christ laid to their charge, that they, for to keep their own Traditions, did
teach Men to break the very Commandments of God. For they taught the People
such a Devotion, that they offered their Goods into the Treasure-house of the
Temple, under the pretense of God's Honor, leaving their Fathers and Mothers
(to whom they were chiefly bound,) unholpen, and so they brake the Commandments
of God, to keep their own Traditions. They esteemed more an Oath made by the
Gold, or Oblation in the Temple, than an Oath made in the Name of God himself,
or of the Temple. They were more studious to pay their Tithes of small things,
than to do the greater things commanded of God, as Works of Mercy, or to do
Justice, or to deal sincerely, uprightly, and faithfully with God and Man.
These (says Christ,) ought to be done, Matthew. 23.
and the other not left undone. And to be short, they were of so blind
Judgment, that they stumbled at a straw, and leaped over a block. They would
(as it were,) nicely take a Fly out of their Cup, and drink down a whole Camel.
And therefore Christ called them Blind guides, warning his Disciples from time
to time to eschew their Doctrine. For although they seemed to the World to be
most perfect Men, both in Living and Teaching, yet was their Life but
Hypocrisy, and their Doctrine but sower Leaven, mingled with Superstition,
Idolatry, and overthwart Judgment, setting up the Traditions and Ordinances of
Man, instead of God's Commandments.

The Third Part of the Sermon of Good Works.
THat all Men might rightly judge of Good Works, it has been declared in the
Second Part of this Sermon, what kind of Good Works they be, that God would
have his People to walk in, namely, such as he has commanded in his Holy
Scripture, and not such Works as Men have studied out of their own Brain, of a
blind Zeal and Devotion, without the Word of God: And by mistaking the nature
of good Works, Man has most highly displeased God, and has gone from his Will
and Commandments. So that thus you have heard how much the World from the
beginning, until Christ's time, was ever ready to fall from the Commandments of
God, and to seek other means to Honor and Serve him, after a Devotion found
out of their own Heads: And how they did set up their own Traditions, as high,
or above God's Commandments, which has happened also in our times, (the more it
is to be lamented,) no less than it did among the Jews, and that by the
corruption, or at least by the negligence of them that chiefly ought to have
preserved the Pure and Heavenly Doctrine left by Christ. What Man having any
Judgment or Learning, joined with a true Zeal unto God, does not see, and
lament, to have entered into Christ's Religion such false Doctrine,
Superstition, Idolatry, Hypocrisy, and other enormities and abuses, so as by
little and little, through the sower Leaven thereof, the sweet Bread of God's
Holy Word has been much hindered and laid apart? Neither had the Jews in their
most blindness so many Pilgrimages unto Images, nor used so much kneeling,
kissing, and censing of them, as has been used in our time: Sects and
Religions amongst Christian Men.
Sects and feigned Religions were neither the fortieth part so many among the
Jews, nor more superstitiously and ungodlily abused, than of late days they
have been among us. Which Sects and Religions had so many hypocritical and
feigned Works in their state of Religion, (as they arrogantly named it,) that
their Lamps (as they said) ran always over, able to satisfy, not only for
their own Sins, but also for all other their Benefactors, Brothers, and Sisters
of Religion, as most ungodlily and craftily they had persuaded the multitude of
ignorant People: Keeping in diverse places (as it were) Marts or Markets of
Merits, being full of their Holy Relics, Images, Shrines, and Works of
overflowing abundance ready to be sold, and all things which they had were
called Holy, Holy Cowls, Holy Girdles, Holy Pardons, Beads, Holy Shoes, Holy
Rules, and all full of Holiness. And what thing can be more foolish, more
superstitious, or ungodly, than that Men, Women, and Children, should wear a
Friars Coat, to deliver them from Agues, or Pestilence? Or when they Dye, or
when they be Buried, cause it to be cast upon them, in hope thereby to be
saved? Which Superstition, although (Thanks be to God,) it has been little
used in this Realm, yet in diverse other Realms it has been, and yet is used
among many, both learned and unlearned. But to pass over the innumerable
Superstitiousness that has been in strange Apparel, in Silence, in Dormitory,
in Cloister, in Chapter, in choice of meats and drinks, and in such like
things; let us consider, what enormities and abuses have been in the three
chief principal points, which they called the three Essentials, or three chief
Foundations, of Religion, that is to say, Obedience, Chastity, and wilful
Poverty.

First, The three chief vows of Religion.
under pretense or color of Obedience to their Father in Religion, (which
Obedience they made themselves,) they were made free by their Rule and Canons,
from the Obedience of their natural Father and Mother, and from the Obedience
of Emperor and King, and all temporal Power, whom, of very Duty by God's Laws
they were bound to obey. And so the profession of their Obedience not due was a
forsaking of their due Obedience. And how their profession of Chastity was
kept, it is more honesty to pass over in silence, and let the World judge of
that which is well known, than with unchaste Words, by expressing of their
unchaste Life, to offend Chaste and Godly Ears. And as for their wilful
Poverty, it was such, that when in Possessions, Jewels, Plate, and Riches, they
were equal, or above Merchants, Gentlemen, Barons, Earls, and Dukes: Yet by
this subtle sophistical term, Proprium in commune, that is to say, Proper in
common, they mocked the World, persuading, that notwithstanding all their
Possessions and Riches, yet they kept their Vow, and were in wilful Poverty.
But for all their Riches, they might neither help Father or Mother, nor other
that were indeed very needy and poor, without the License of their Father
Abbot, Prior, or Warden, and yet they might take of every Man, but they might
not give ought to any Man, no, not to them whom the Laws of God bound them to
help. And so through their Traditions and Rules, the Laws of God could bear no
rule with them. And therefore of them might be most truly said, that which
Christ spoke unto the Pharisees, Matthew. 15.
You break the Commandments of God by your Traditions: You honor God with your
lips, but your hearts be far from him. And the longer Prayers they used by day
and by night, under pretense or color of such Holiness, to get the favor of
Widows, and other simple folks, that they might sing Trentals and Service for
their Husbands and Friends, and admit, or receive them into their Prayers: The
more truly is verified of them the Saying of Christ, Matthew. 23.
Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you devour Widows houses,
under color of long Prayers, therefore your damnation shall be the greater.
Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you go about by Sea and by
Land to make more Novices, and new Brethren, and when they be let in, or
received of your Sect, you make them the children of Hell, worse than
yourselves be. Honor be to God, who did put light in the Heart of his faithful
and true Minister, of most famous Memory, King Henry the 8th. and gave him the
knowledge of his Word, and an earnest affection to seek his Glory, and to put
away all such Superstitions, and Pharisaical Sects by Antichrist invented, and
set up against the true Word of God, and Glory of his most Blessed Name, as he
gave the like Spirit unto the most Noble and Famous Princes, Josaphat, Josias,
and Ezechias. God grant all us the King's Highness faithful and true Subjects,
to feed of the sweet and savory Bread of God's own Word, and (as Christ
commanded,) to eschew all our Pharisaical and Papistical Leaven of Man's
feigned Religion. Which, although it were before God most abominable, and
contrary to God's Commandments and Christ's pure Religion; yet it was praised
to be a most Godly life, and highest state of perfection: As though a Man might
be more Godly, and more perfect, by keeping the Rules, Other Devices and
Superstitious.
Traditions, and Professions of Men, than by keeping the Holy Commandments of
God. And briefly to pass over the ungodly and counterfeit Religion; let us
rehearse some other kinds of Papistical Superstitions and Abuses, as of Beads,
of Lady Psalters, and Rosaries, of fifteen Oes, of St. Bernard's Verses, of St.
Agathe's Letters, of Purgatory, of Masses satisfactory, of Stations and
Jubilees, of feigned Relics, of hallowed Beads, Bells, Bread, Water, Psalms,
Candles, Fire, and such other: Of Superstitious Fastings, of Fraternities or
Brotherhoods, of Pardons, with such like Merchandise, which were so esteemed
and abused to the great prejudice of God's Glory and Commandments; that they
were made most High and most Holy things, whereby to attain to the everlasting
Life, or remission of Sin: Yea also, vain Inventions, unfruitful Ceremonies,
and ungodly Laws, Decrees, Decrees and Decretals.
and Councils of Rome, were in such wise advanced, that nothing was thought
comparable in Authority, Wisdom, Learning, and Godliness, unto them. So that
the Laws of Rome (as they said,) were to be received of all Men, as the four
Evangelists, to the which all Laws of Princes must give place. And the Laws of
God also partly were left off, and less esteemed, that the said Laws, Decrees
and Councils, with their Traditions and Ceremonies, might be more duly kept,
and had in greater reverence. Thus was the People, through ignorance, so
blinded, with the Godly show and appearance of those things, that they thought
the keeping of them to be a more Holiness, a more perfect Service and Honoring
of God, and more pleasing to God, than the keeping of God's Commandments. Such
has been the corrupt inclination of Man, ever Superstitiously given to make
new Honoring of God on his own Head, and then to have more Affection and
Devotion to keep that, than to search out God's Holy Commandments, and to keep
them. And furthermore, to take God's Commandments for Men's Commandments, and
Men's Commandments for God's Commandments; yea, and for the highest and most
Perfect and Holiest of all God's Commandments. And so was all confused, that
scant well learned Men, and but a small number of them knew, or, at the least,
would know, and durst affirm the Truth, to separate or sever God's Commandments
from the Commandments of Men. Whereupon did grow much Error, Superstition,
Idolatry, Vain-religion, Overthwart-iudgment, great Contention, with all
ungodly living.

An exhortation to the keeping of God's Commandments.
Wherefore, as you have any Zeal to the right and pure Honoring of God, as you
have any regard to your own Souls, and to the Life that is to come, which is
both without pain, and without end, apply yourselves chiefly above all things,
to read and hear God's Word, mark diligently therein, what his Will is you
shall do; and with all your endeavor apply your selves to follow the same. A
brief rehearsal of God's Commandments.
First, you must have an assured Faith in God, and give yourselves wholly unto
him; love him in prosperity and adversity, and dread to offend him evermore.
Then for his sake love all Men, Friends and Foes, because, they be his Creation
and Image, and redeemed by Christ, as ye are. Cast in your Minds, how you may
do good unto all Men, unto your Powers, and hurt no Man. Obey all your
Superiors and Governors, serve your Masters faithfully and diligently, as well
in their absence, as in their presence, not for dread of punishment only, but
for Conscience sake, knowing that you are bound so to do by God's Commandments.
Disobey not your Fathers and Mothers, but Honor them, Help them, and Please
them to your power. Oppress not, kill not, beat not, neither slander, nor hate
any Man: But love all Men, speak well of all Men, help and succor every Man, as
you may, yea, even your Enemies that hate you, that speak evil of you, and that
do hurt you. Take no Man's Goods, nor covet your neighbor's Goods wrongfully;
but content yourselves with that which ye get truly; and also bestow your own
Goods charitably, as Need and Case requires. Flee all Idolatry, Witchcraft,
and Perjury; commit no manner of Adultery, Fornication, or other Unchastness,
in Will, nor in Deed, with any other Man's Wife, Widow or Maid, or otherwise.
And traveling continually (during this life,) thus in keeping the Commandments
of God, (wherein stands the pure, principal, and right Honor of God, and
which wrought in Faith, God has ordained to be the right trade and pathway
unto Heaven,) you shall not fail, as Christ has promised, to come to that
blessed and everlasting life, where you shall live in Glory and Joy with God
for ever: To whom be Praise, Honor, and Empery, for ever and ever Amen.

A SERMON Of Christian Love and Charity.
OF all things that be good to be taught unto Christian People, there is
nothing more necessary to be spoken of, and daily called upon, than Charity: As
well for that all manner of works of Righteousness be contained in it; as also
that the decay thereof is the ruin or fall of the World, the banishment of
Virtue, and the cause of all Vice. And for so much as almost every Man makes and
frames to himself Charity after his own appetite; and how detestable soever
his life be, both unto God and Man, yet he persuadeth himself still that he
has Charity: Therefore you shall hear now a true and plain description, or
setting forth of Charity, not of Men's Imagination, but of the very words and
example of our Savior Jesus Christ. In which description, or setting forth,
every Man (as it were in a Glass,) may consider himself, and see plainly
without error, whether he be in the true Charity, or not.

Charity is, to love God with all our Heart, What Charity is. The love of God.
all our Soul, and all our Powers and strength. With all our Heart: that is to
say, That our Heart, Mind, and Study be set to believe his Word, to trust in
him, and to Love him above all other things, that we love best in Heaven or in
Earth. With all our Life: That is to say, that our chief joy and delight be set
upon Him and His Honor, and our whole Life given unto the Service of him above
all things, with him to live and dye, and to forsake all other things, rather
than him, For he that loves his father or mother, Matthew. 10.
son or daughter, house or land, more than me, (says Christ) is not worthy to
have me. With all our Power: That is to say, that with our Hands and Feet, with
our Eyes and Ears, our Mouths and Tongues, and with all our Parts and Powers,
both of Body and Soul, we should be given to the keeping and fulfilling of his
Commandments. The love of thy neighbor.
This is the First and Principal Part of Charity, but it is not the whole: For
Charity is also to love every Man, Good and Evil, Friend and Foe; and
whatsoever cause be given to the contrary, yet nevertheless to bear good Will
and Heart unto every Man, to use ourselves well unto them, as well in Words and
Countenances, as in all our outward Acts and Deeds: For so Christ himself
taught, and so also he performed indeed. Of the love of God he taught on this
wife unto a Doctor of the Law, that asked him, which was the great and chief
Commandment in the Law. Love thy Lord God, Matthew. 22.
(said Christ,) with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
And of the love that we ought to have among ourselves each to other, he
teaches us thus, You have heard it taught in times past, Matthew. 5. Matthew. 5.
Thou shall love thy friend, and have thy foe; But I tell you, love your
enemies, speak well of them that defame and speak evil of you, do well to them
that hate you, pray for them that vex and persecute you, that you may be the
children of your father that is in Heaven. For he makes his Sun to rise both
upon the evil and good, and sends rain to the just and unjust. For if you
love them that love you, What reward shall you have? Do not the Publicans
likewise? And if you speak well only of them that be your brethren, and dearly
beloved friends, what great matter is that? Do not the Heathen the same also?
These be the very words of our Savior Christ himself, touching the love of our
neighbor. And forasmuch as the Pharisees (with their most pestilent Traditions,
and false interpretations and glosses,) had corrupted, and almost clearly
stopped up this pure Well of God's lively Word, Teaching, that this Love and
Charity pertained only to a Man's Friends; and that it was sufficient for a Man
to love them which do love him, and hate his foes: Therefore Christ opened this
Well again, purged it, and scoured it, by giving unto his Godly Law of Charity,
a true and clear interpretation, which is this: That we ought to love every
Man, both Friend and Foe, adding thereto, what commodity we shall have thereby,
and what incommodity by doing the contrary. What thing can we wish so good for
us, as the Eternal Heavenly Father, to reckon and take us for his Children? And
this we shall be sure of, (says Christ,) if we love every Man without
exception. And if we do otherwise, (says he,) we be no better than the
Pharisees, Publicans and Heathen, and shall have our reward with them, that is,
to be shut out from the number of God's chosen Children, and from his
everlasting Inheritance in Heaven.

Thus of true Charity, Christ taught, that every Man is bound to love God above
all things, and to love every Man, Friend and Foe; and this likewise he did use
himself, exhorting his Adversaries, rebuking the Faults of his Adversaries, and
when he could not amend them, yet he prayed for them. First, he loved God his
Father above all things, so much, that he sought not his own Glory and Will,
but the Glory and Will of his Father. I seek not (said he, John 6.
) mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent me. Nor refused he to dye, to
satisfy his Fathers Will, saying, If it may be, let this cup of death pass
from me: Matthew. 26.
if not, thy Will be done, and not mine. He loved not only his Friends, but
also his Enemies, which (in their Hearts,) bore exceeding great hatred against
him, and with their Tongues spoke all evil of him, and in their Acts and Deeds
persued him with all their Might and Power, even unto Death; yet all this
notwithstanding, he withdrew not his Favor from them, but still loved them,
preached unto them of Love, rebuked their false Doctrine, their wicked Living,
and did good unto them, patiently taking whatsoever they spoke, or did against
him. When they gave him evil words, he gave none evil again. When they did
strike him, he did not smite them again: And when he suffered death, he did not
slay them, nor threaten them, but prayed for them, and did put all things to
his Fathers Will. And as a Sheep that is led unto the Shambles to be slain, and
as a Lamb that is shorn of his Fleece, makes no noise nor resistance, even so
he went to his death, without any repugnance, or opening of his Mouth to say
any evil. Thus have I set forth unto you what Charity is, as well by the
Doctrine, as by the Example of Christ himself; whereby also every Man may
without error know himself, what state and condition he stands in, whether he
be in Charity, (and so the Child of the Father in Heaven,) or not. For although
almost every Man persuadeth himself to be in Charity, yet let him examine none
other Man, but his own Heart, his Life and Conversation, and he shall not be
deceived, but truly discern and judge whether he be in perfect Charity or not.
For he that follows not his own Appetite and Will, but gives himself
earnestly to God, to do all his Will and Commandments, he may be sure that he
loves God above all things, and else surely he loves him not, whatsoever he
pretend: As Christ said, If ye love me, keep my Commandments. For, he that
knows my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is, (says Christ) that loves
me. And again he says, John 14.
He that loves me will keep my words, and and my Father will love him, and we
will both come to him, and dwell with him: And he that loves me not, will not
keep my words. And likewise he that bears a good Heart and Mind, and uses
well his Tongue and Deeds unto every man, Friend and Foe, he may know thereby
that he has Charity. And then he is sure, that Almighty God takes him for his
dearly beloved Son, as St. John says, Hereby manifestly are known the children
of God from the children of the Devil: For whosoever does not love his Brother,
1 John 3.
belongs not unto God.

The Second Part of the Sermon of Charity.
YOu have heard a plain and fruitful setting forth of Charity, and how
profitable and necessary a thing Charity is: How Charity stretches itself both
to God and Man, Friend and Foe, and that by the Doctrine and Example of Christ:
And also who may certify himself whether he be in perfect Charity, or not. Now
as concerning the same matter, it follows. The perverse Nature of Man,
Against carnal Men, that will not forgive their Enemies.
corrupt with Sin, and destitute of God's Word and Grace, thinks it against
all reason, that a Man should love his Enemy, and has many persuasions which
bring him to the contrary. Against all which Reasons, we ought as well to set
the Teaching, as the Living of our Savior Christ, who loving us (when we were
his Enemies,) does teach us to love our Enemies. He did patiently take for us
many reproaches, suffered Beating, and most cruel Death. Therefore we be no
Members of him, if we will not follow him. Christ (says St. Peter,) suffered
for us, leaving an Example that we should follow him.

Furthermore, we must consider, 1 Pet. 2.
that to love our Friends, is no more but that which Thieves, Adulterers,
Homicides, and all wicked Persons do: Insomuch that Jews, Turks, Infidels, and
all brute Beasts, do love them that be their Friends, of whom they have their
living, or any other benefits. But to love Enemies is the proper condition of
them, that be the Children of God, the Disciples and Followers of Christ.
Notwithstanding Man's froward and corrupt Nature weighs over-deeply many
times the offense and displeasure done unto him by Enemies, and thinks it a
burden intolerable, to be bound to love them that hate him. But the burden
should be easy enough, if (on the other side,) every Man would consider, what
displeasure he has done to his Enemy again, and what pleasure he has received
of his Enemy. And if we find no equal or even recompense, neither in receiving
pleasures of our Enemy, nor in requiting displeasures unto him again: Then let
us ponder the displeasures which we have done unto Almighty God, how often and
how grievously we have offended him, whereof if we will have of God
forgiveness, there is none other remedy, but to forgive the offenses done unto
us, which be very small in comparison of our offenses done against God. And if
we consider, that he, which has offended us, deserves not to be forgiven of
us, let us consider again, that we much less deserve to be forgiven of God. And
although our Enemy deserve not to be forgiven for his own sake, yet we ought to
forgive him for God's Love, considering how great and many benefits we have
received of him without our deserts, and that Christ has deserved of us, that
for his sake we should forgive them their trespasses committed against us. But
here may rise a necessary question to be dissolved. A Question.
If Charity require to think, speak, and do well unto every Man, both good and
evil: How can Magistrates execute Justice upon Malefactors or Evildoers with
Charity, How can they cast evil Men in prison, take away their Goods, and
sometimes their Lives, according to Laws; if Charity will not suffer them so to
do? Hereunto is a plain and a brief Answer, be executed. For Declaration
whereof, you shall understand, that Charity has two Offices, Charity has two
Offices.
the one contrary to the other, and yet both necessary to be used upon Men of
contrary sort and disposition. The one Office of Charity is, to cherish good
and harmless Men, not to oppress them with false Accusations, but to encourage
them with Rewards to do well, and to continue in well-doing, defending them
with the Sword from their Adversaries: As the Office of Bishops and Pastors is,
to praise Good Men for well-doing, that they may continue therein, and to
rebuke and correct, by the Word of God, the Offenses and Crimes of all
evil-disposed Persons. The other Office of Charity is, to rebuke, correct, and
punish Vice, without regard of Persons, and is to be used against them only
that be evil Men, and Malefactors or evildoers. And that it is as well the
Office of Charity to rebuke, punish, and correct them that be evil, as it is to
cherish and reward them that be good and harmless, St. Paul declares (writing
to the Romans,) saying, Romans 13.
That the high powers are ordained of God, not to be dreadful to them that do
well, but unto Malefactors, to draw the Sword to take vengeance of him that
commits the Sin. And St. Paul bids Timothy stoutly and earnestly to
rebuke Sin by the Word of God. 1 Timothy 13.
So that both Offices should be diligently executed, to fight against the
Kingdom of the Devil, the Preacher with the Word, and the Governors with the
Sword. Else they neither love God, nor them whom they Govern, if (for lack of
correction,) they wilfully suffer God to be offended, and them whom they
Govern, to perish. For as every loving Father corrects his Natural Son when
he does amiss, or else he loves him not: So all Governors of Realms,
Countries, Towns, and Houses, should lovingly correct them which be Offenders
under their Governance, and cherish them which live innocently, if they have
any respect either unto God and their Office, or love unto them of whom they
have Governance. And such rebukes and punishments of them that offend, must be
done in due time, lest by delay the offenders fall headlong into all manner of
mischief, and not only be evil themselves, but also do hurt unto many Men,
drawing others by their evil example, to sin and outrage after them. As one
Thief may both rob many Men, and also make many Thieves: And one seditious
Person may allure many, and annoy a whole Town or Country. And such evil
persons that be so great offenders to God and the Commonweal, Charity requires
to be cut from the Body of the Commonweal, lest they corrupt other good and
honest Persons: Like as a good Surgeon cutteth away a rotten and festered
Member, for love he has to the whole Body, lest it infect other Members
adjoining unto it. Thus it is declared unto you, what true Charity, or
Christian Love is, so plainly, that no Man need to be deceived. Which Love
whosoever keeps, not only toward God, (whom he is bound to love above all
things,) but also toward his Neighbor, as well Friend as Foe, it shall surely
keep him from all offense of God, and just offense of Man. Therefore bear well
away this one short lesson, That by true Christian Charity, God ought to be
loved, Good and Evil, Friend and Foe, and to all such we ought (as we may,) to
do good: Those that be good, of Love to encourage and cherish, because they be
good: And those that be evil, of Love, to procure and seek their correction,
and due punishment, that they may thereby either be brought to Goodness, or at
the least, that God and the Commonwealth may be less hurt and offended. And if
we thus direct our Life, by Christian Love and Charity, then Christ does
promise and assure us that he loves us, that we be the Children of our
Heavenly Father, reconciled to his Favor, very Members of Christ, and that
after this short time of this present and mortal Life, we shall have with him
everlasting Life in his everlasting Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore to Him, with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now and for ever, Amen.

A SERMON AGAINST Swearing and Perjury.
ALmighty God, to the intent his most Holy Name should be had in Honor, and
evermore be Magnified of the People, commands rhat no Man should take his
Name vainly in his Mouth, threatening punishment unto him that unreverently
abuses it by Swearing, Forswearing, and Blasphemy. To the intent therefore,
How and in what causes it is lawful to Swear.
that this Commandment may be the better known and kept, it shall be declared
unto you, both how it is lawful for Christian People to Swear, and also what
peril and danger it is, vainly to Swear, or to be Forsworn. First, when Judges
require Oaths of the People for declaration, or opening of the Truth, or for
execution of Justice, this manner of Swearing is lawful. Also when Men make
faithful Promises, with calling to witness of the Name of God, to keep
Covenants, honest Promises, Statutes, Laws, and good Customs, as Christian
Princes do in their conclusion of Peace, for conversation of Commonwealths; and
private Persons promise their Fidelity in Matrimony, or one to another in
Honesty and true Friendship: And all Men when they do Swear to keep common
Laws, and local Statuts, and good Customs, for due order to be had and
continued among Men; when Subjects do Swear to be true and faithful to their
King and Sovereign Lord, and when Judges, Magistrates, and Officers Swear truly
to execute their Offices; and when a Man would affirm the Truth to the setting
forth God's Glory, (for the Salvation of the People,) in open preaching of the
Gospel, or in giving of good Counsel privately for their Souls health: All
these manners of Swearing, for Causes necessary and honest, be lawful. But when
Men do Swear of custom, in reasoning, buying and selling, or other daily
communications, (as many be common and great Swearers,) such kind of Swearing
is ungodly, unlawful, and forbidden by the Commandment of God. For such
Swearing is nothing else, but taking of God's Holy Name in vain. And here is to
be noted, that lawful Swearing is not forbidden, but commanded by Almighty God.
For we have examples of Christ and Godly Men, in Holy Scripture, that did Swear
themselves, and required Oaths of others likewise, Deuteronomy. 6.
and God's Commandment is, Thou shall dread thy Lord God, and shall swear by
his Name. And Almighty God by his Prophet David says, Psalm. 63.
All Men shall be praised that swear by him.

Thus did our Savior Christ Swear diverse times, saying Verily, John 3.
Verily. And St. Paul Swears thus, I call God to witness. 2 Cor. 1.
And Abraham (waxing old,) required an Oath of his Servant, Genesis 24.
that he should procure a Wife for his Son Isaac, which should come of his own
kindred: And the Servant did Swear that he would perform his Masters Will.
Abraham also being required, Genesis 21.
did Swear unto Abimelech the King of Geraris, that he should not hurt him, nor
his posterity; and likewise did Abimelech Swear unto Abraham. And David did
Swear to be and continue a faithful Friend to Jonathan; and Jonathan did Swear
to become a faithful Friend unto David.

Also God once commanded, that if a thing were laid to pledge to any Man, or
left with him to keep, if the same thing were stolen, or lost, that the keeper
thereof should be Sworn before Judges, that he did not conveigh it away, nor
used any deceit in causing the same to be conveyed away, by his consent or
knowledge. Heb. 6.
And St. Paul says, That in all matters of controversy between two Persons,
whereas one says, Yea, and the other Nay, so as no due proof can be had of the
Truth; the end of every such Controversy must be an Oath ministered by a Judge.
And moreover, God by the Prophet Jeremy says, Thou shall swear, the Lord
lives in truth, Jer. 4.
in judgment, in righteousness. So that whosoever Swears, when he is required
of a Judge, let him be sure in his Conscience, that his Oath have three
Conditions, and he shall never need to be afraid of Perjury.

First, he that Swears may Swear truly, that is, What conditions an Oath
ought to have.
he must (setting apart all Favor and Affection to the Parties,) have the
Truth only before his Eyes, and for love thereof, say and speak that which he
knows to be Truth, and no further. The Second.
The Second is, he that takes an Oath, must do it with judgment, not rashly
and unadvisedly, but soberly, considering what an Oath is. The Third is, The
Third.
He that Swears, must Swear in Righteousness. That is, for the very Zeal and
Love which he bears to the defense of Innocence, to the maintenance of the
Truth, and of the Righteousness of the Matter or Cause; all Profit, Disprofit,
all Love and Favor unto the Person for Friendship or Kindred laid apart. Thus
an Oath (if it have with it these three Conditions,) is a part of God's Glory,
Why we be willed in Scripture to Swear by the Name of God.
which we are bound by his Commandments to give unto him. For he wills that
we shall Swear only by his Name, not that he has pleasure in Oaths; but like
as he commanded the Jews to offer Sacrifice unto him, not for any delight that
he had in them, but to keep the Jews from committing Idolatry: So he Commanding
us to Swear by his Holy Name, Isai. 42.
does not teach its that he delights in Swearing, but he thereby forbids
all Men to give his Glory to any Creature in Heaven, Earth, or Water. Hitherto
you see, that Oaths lawful are Commanded of God, used of Patriarchs and
Prophets, of Christ himself, and of his Apostle Pau^, Therefore Christian
People must think lawful Oaths, both Godly and necessary. Commodities had by
lawful Oaths made and observed.
For by lawful Promise and Covenants confirmed by Oaths, Princes and their
Countries are confirmed in common Tranquillity and Peace. By Holy Promises with
calling the name of God to witness, we be made lively Members of Christ, when
we profess his Religion receiving the Sacrament of Baptism. By like Holy
Promise the Sacrament of Matrimony knitteth Man and Wife in perpetual Love,
that they desire not to be separated for any displeasure or adversity that
shall after happen. By lawful Oaths, which Kings, Princes, Judges, and
Magistrates do Swear, Common Laws are kept inviolate, Justice is indifferently
ministered, harmless Persons, Fatherless Children, Widows, and poor Men are
defended from Murderers, Oppressors, and Thieves, that they suffer no wrong,
nor take any harm. By lawful Oaths, mutual Society, Amity, and good Order is
kept continually in all Communalties, as Boroughs, Cities, Towns, and Villages.
And by lawful Oaths, Malefactors are searched out, Wrong doers are punished,
and they which sustain wrong are restored to their right. Therefore lawful
Swearing cannot be evil, which brings unto us so many Godly, Vain Swearing is
forbidden.
Good, and necessary Commodities, Wherefore when Christ so earnestly forbade
Swearing, it may not be understood, as though he did forbid all manner of
Oaths: But he forbids all vain-Swearing, and forswearing, both by God, and
by his Creatures, as the common use of Swearing in Buying, Selling, and in our
daily Communication, to the intent every Christian Man's Word should be as well
regarded in such matters. as if he should confirm his Communication with an
Oath. For every Christian Man's Word (says St. Hierom,) should be so true,
that it should be regarded as an Oath. And Chrysostom witnessing the same,
says, It is not convenient to Swear: For what need we to Swear, when it is not
lawful for one of us to make a lie unto another? Peradventure some will say, An
Object.
I am compelled to Swear, or else Men that do commune with me, or do buy and
ell with me, will not believe me. An Answer.
To this answers St. Chrysostom, that he that thus says, shows himself to
be an unjust and a deceitful Person. For if he were a trusty Man, and his Deeds
taken to agree with his Words, he should not need to Swear at all. For he that
uses Truth and Plainness in his bargaining and communication, he shall have no
need by such vain Swearing, to bring himself in Credence with his Neighbors,
nor will his Neighbors mistrust his Sayings. And if his Credence be so much
lost indeed, that he thinks no Man will believe him without he swear, then he
may well think his Credence is clean gone. For Truth it is, (as Theophylactus
writes) that no Man is less trusted, than he that uses much to Swear. Eccles.
33.
And Almighty God by the Wise Man says, that Man which Swears much shall be
full of Sin, and the scourge of God shall not depart from his House.

But here some Men will say, Another Objection. An Answer.
for excusing of their many Oaths in their daily talk: Why should I not Swear,
when I Swear truly? To such Men it may be said, that though they Swear truly,
yet in Swearing often unadvisedly, for trifles, without necessity, and when
they should not Swear, they be not without fault, but do take God's most Holy
Name in vain. Much more ungodly and unwise Men are they, that abuse God's most
Holy Name, not only in buying and selling of small things daily in all places,
but also in eating, drinking, playing, communing and reasoning. As if none of
these things might be done, except in doing of them, the most Holy Name of God
be commonly used and abused, vainly and unreverently talked of, sworn by, and
forsworn, to the breaking of God's Commandment, and procurement of his
Indignation.

The Second Part of the Sermon of Swearing.
YOu have been taught in the First Part of this Sermon against Swearing and
Perjury, what great danger it is to use the Name of God in vain. And that all
kind of Swearing is not unlawful, neither against God's Commandment; and that
there be three things required in a lawful Oath. First, that it be made for the
maintenance of the Truth. Secondly, that it be made with Judgment, not rashly
and unadvisedly. Thirdly, for the zeal and love of Justice. Ye heard also, what
commodities come of lawful Oaths, and what danger comes of rash and unlawful
Oaths. Now as concerning the rest of the same matter, you shall understand,
that as well they use the Name of God in vain, that by an Oath make unlawful
promises of good and honest things, and perform them not: As they which do
promise evil and unlawful things, and do perform the same. Of such Men, Lawful
Oaths and Promises would be better regarded. Josh. 6.
that regard not their Godly Promises bound by an Oath, but wittingly and
wilfully break them; we do read in Holy Scripture two notable punishments.
First, Joshua and the people of Israel made a League and faithful Promise of
perpetual Amity and Friendship with the Gibeonites: Notwithstanding afterward
in the days of wicked Saul, many of these Gibeonites were murdered, contrary
to the said faithful Promise made. Wherewith Almighty God was sore displeased,
that he sent an universal Hunger upon the whole Country, which continued by the
space of three years. And God would not withdraw his punishment, until the said
Offense was revenged by the death of seven Sons, 2 King^ ^. Chap. 25.
or next kinsmen of King Saul. And whereas Z^dechias King of Jerusalem, had
promised Fidelity to the King of Chaldea; afterward when Zedechia^, contrary to
his Oath and Allegiance, did rebel against King Nebuchadonosor: This Heathen
King by God's permission and sufferance invading the Land of Jury, and
besieging the City of Jerusalem, compelled the said King Zedechias to flee, and
in fleeing took him prisoner, slew his Sons before his Face, and put out both
his Eyes; and binding him with chains, led him prisoner miserably into Babylon.

Thus does God show plainly, Unlawful Oaths and Promises are not to be kept.
how much he abhors breakers of honest Promises, bound by an Oath made in
his Name. And of them that make wicked Promises by an Oath, and will perform
the same, we have example in the Scriptures, chiefly of Herod, of the wicked
Jews, and of Jeptha. Matthew. 14.
Herod promised by an Oath unto the Damsel which danced before him, to give
unto her whatsoever she should ask: When she was instructed before of her
wicked Mother, to ask the Head of St. John Baptist. Herod, as he took a wicked
Oath, so he more wickedly performed the same, and cruelly slew the most Holy
Prophet. Likewise did the malicious Jews make an Oath, Acts 23. Judges 11.
cursing themselves if they did either eat or drink, until they had slain St.
Paul. And Jeptha, when God had given to him victory of the Children of Ammon,
promised (of a foolish Devotion) unto God, to offer for a Sacrifice unto him,
that Person which of his own House should first meet with him, after his return
home. By force of which fond and unadvised Oath, he did slay his own and only
Daughter, which came out of his House with Mirth and Joy to welcome him home.
Thus the Promise which he made (most foolishly) to God, against God's
everlasting Will, and the Law of Nature, most cruelly he performed, so
committing against God a double offense. Therefore, whosoever makes any
Promise, binding himself thereunto by an Oath, let him foresee, that the thing
which he promises be good and honest, and not against the Commandment of God;
and that it be in his own power to perform it justly. And such good Promises
must all Men keep evermore assuredly. But if a Man at any time shall, either of
Ignorance, or of Malice, Promise and Swear to do any thing which is either
against the Law of Almighty God, or not in his power to perform: Let him take
it for an unlawful and ungodly Oath.

Now something to speak of Perjury, to the intent you should know how great and
grievous an offense against God this wilful Perjury is; I will show you what it
is to take an Oath before a Judge upon a Book. Against Perjury.
First, when they laying their hands upon the Gospel Book, do Swear truly no
enquire, and to make a true presentment of things wherewith they be charged, An
Oath before a Judge.
and not to let from saying the Truth, and doing truly for favor, love, dread
or malice of any Person, as God may help them and the Holy Contents of that
Book: They must consider, that in that Book is contained God's everlasting
Truth, his most Holy and Eternal Word, whereby we have forgiveness of our Sins,
and be made inheritors of Heaven, to live for ever with God's Angels and
Saints, in Joy and Gladness. In the Gospel Book is contained also God's
terrible threats to obstinate sinners, that will not amend their lives, nor
believe the Truth of God's Holy Word, and the everlasting pain prepared in Hell
for Idolaters, Hypocrites, for false and vain Swearers, for perjured Men, for
False Witness-bearers, for False Condemners of innocent and guiltless Men, and
for them which for favor hide the crimes of evil doers, that they should not
be punished. So that whosoever wilfully forswear themselves upon Christ's Holy
Evangely, they utterly forsake God's Mercy, Goodness, and Truth, the Merits of
our Savior Christ's Nativity, Life, Passion, Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension, they refuse the forgiveness of Sins promised to all penitent
Sinners, the joys of Heaven, the company with Angels and Saints for ever. All
which Benefits and Comforts are promised unto true Christian Persons in the
Gospel. And they, so being forsworn upon the Gospel, do betake themselves to
the Devils Service, the Master of all Lies, Falsehood, Deceit, and Perjury,
provoking the great Indignation and Curse of God against them in this Life; and
the terrible Wrath and Judgment of our Savior Christ, at the great day of the
last Judgment, when he shall justly judge both the quick and the dead,
according to their Works. For whosoever forsakes the Truth, Though Perjury do
escape here unspied and unpunished, it shall not do so ever.
for love or displeasure of any Man, or for lucre and profit to himself, does
forsake Christ, and with Judas betray him. And although such perjured Men's
falsehood be now kept secret, yet it shall be opened at the last day, when the
secrets of all Men's Hearts shall be manifest to all the World. And then the
Truth shall appear, and accuse them; and their own Conscience, with all the
blessed company of Heaven, shall bear witness truly against them. And Christ
the Righteous Judge shall then justly condemn them to everlasting shame and
death. This sin of Perjury, Almighty God by the Prophet Malachy does threaten
to punish sore, saying unto the Jews, Malac. 3^
I will come to you in judgment, and I will be a swift witness, and a sharp
Judge upon Sorcerers, Adulterers, and Perjured persons. Which thing to the
Prophet Zachary God declares in a vision, wherein the Prophet saw a Book
flying, which was twenty Cubits long, and ten Cubits broad, God saying then
unto him, this is the curse, that shall go forth upon the face of the Earth,
for Falsehood, false Swearing and Perjury. And this Curse shall enter into the
House of the false Man, and into the House of the perjured Man, and it shall
remain in the midst of his House, consume him, and the timber and stones of his
House. Thus you see, how much God does hate Perjury, and what punishment God
has prepared for false Swearers and perjured Persons.

Thus you have heard how, and in what causes, it is lawful for a Christian Man
to Swear: Ye have heard, what properties and conditions a lawful Oath must
have; and also how such lawful Oaths are both Godly and necessary to be
observed: Ye have heard, that it is not lawful to Swear vainly, (that is,)
other ways than in such Causes, and after such sort as is declared. And
finally, ye have heard how damnable a thing it is, either to forswear
ourselves, or to keep an unlawful, and an unadvised Oath. Wherefore let us
earnestly call for Grace, that, all Vain-swearing and Perjury set apart, we may
only use such Oaths as be lawful and Godly, and that we may truly without all
fraud keep the same, according to God's Will and Pleasure. To whom with the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, Amen.

A SERMON How dangerous a thing it is to fall from God.
OF our going from God, the Wise Man says, that Pride was the first beginning;
for by it Man's Heart was turned from God his Maker. For Pride (says he, Eccl.
10.
) is the Fountain of all Sin: He that has it shall be full of Cursings, and at
the end it shall overthrow him. And as by Pride and Sin we go from God, so
shall God and all Goodness with him go from us. And the Prophet Osee does
plainly affirm, that they which go away still from God by vicious living, and
yet would go about to pacify him otherwise by Sacrifice, Osee 5.
and entertain him thereby, they labor in vain. For, notwithstanding all their
Sacrifice, yet he goes still away from them. For So Much, (says the Prophet,)
as they do not apply their Minds to return to God, although they go about with
whole Flocks and Herds to seek the Lord, yet they shall not find him for he is
gone away from them. But as touching our turning to God, or from God, you shall
understand, that it may be done diverse ways. Sometimes directly by Idolatry, as
Israel and Judah then did: Sometimes Men go from God by lack of Faith, and
mistrusting of God, whereof Isaiah speaks on this wise, Woe to them that go
down into Egypt to seek for help, trusting in Horses, and having confidence in
the number of Chariots, and puissance or power of Horsemen. Isai. 31.
They have no confidence in the Holy God of Israel, nor seek for the Lord. But
what follows, The Lord shall let his hand fall upon them, and down shall come
both the helper, and he that is helped; they shall be destroyed all together.
Sometimes Men go from God by the neglecting of his Commandments concerning their
Neighbors, which command them to express hearty Love toward every Man, as
Zachary said unto the People in God's behalf. Give true judgment, show mercy
and compassion every one to his brother, imagine no deceit toward Widows,
Zach. 7.
or children fatherless and motherless, toward strangers, or the poor, let no
man forge evil in his heart against his brother. But these things they passed
not of, they turned their backs and went their way, they stopped their Ears
that they might not hear, they hardened their Hearts as an Adamant stone, that
they might not listen to the Law, and the words that the Lord had sent through
his Holy Spirit, by his ancient Prophets. Wherefore the Lord showed his great
Indignation upon them. It came to pass, (says the Prophet,) even as I told
them: As they would not hear, so when they cried, they were not heard, but were
scattered into all Kingdoms which they never knew, and their land was made
desolate. Jer. 7.
And to be short, all they that may not abide the Word of God, but following
the persuasions and stubbornness of their own Hearts, go backward and not
forward, (as it is said in Jeremy,) They go and turn away from God. Insomuch
that Origin says, He that with Mind, with Study, with Deeds, with Thought and
Care, applies, Jer. 7.
and gives himself to God's Word, and thinks upon his Laws day and night,
gives himself wholly to God, and in his Precepts and Commandments is
exercised: This is he that is turned to God. And on the other part he says,
Whosoever is occupied with Fables and Tales, when the Word of God is rehearsed,
he is turned from God. Whosoever in time of reading God's Word, is careful in
his mind of Worldly business, of Money, or of Lucre, he is turned from God.
Whosoever is entangled with the cares of Possessions, filled with covetousness
of Riches; Whosoever studieth for the Glory and Honor of this World, he is
turned from God. So that after his Mind, whosoever has not a special mind to
that thing that is commanded or taught of God; he that does not listen unto it,
embrace, and imprint it in his Heart, to the intent that he may duly fashion
his life thereafter, he is plainly turned from God, although he do other things
of his own Devotion and Mind, which to him seem better, and more to God's
Honor. Which thing to be true, we be taught and admonished in the Holy
Scripture, by the example of King Saul, who being commanded of God by Samuel, 1
Kings 15.
that he should kill all the Amalekites, and destroy them clearly with their
Goods and Cattle: Yet he, being moved partly with pity, and partly (as he
thought,) with devotion unto God, saved Agag the King, and all the chief of
their Cattle, therewith to make Sacrifice unto God. Wherewithal God being
displeased highly, said unto the Prophet Samuel, I repent, that ever I made
Saul King, for he has forsaken me, and not followed my Words, and so he
commanded Samuel to show him, and when Samuel asked, wherefore (contrary to
God's Word,) he had saved the Cattle, he excused the matter, partly, by fear,
saying, he durst do no other, for that the People would have it so, partly, for
that they were goodly Beasts, he thought God would be content, seeing it was
done of a good intent and devotion, to honor God with the Sacrifice of them.

But Samuel, reproving all such intents and devotions (seem they never so much
to God's Honor, if they stand not with his Word, whereby we may be assured of
his pleasure,) said on this wise, Would God have Sacrifices and Offerings: Or
rather, that his Word should be obeyed? To obey him is better than offerings,
and to listen to him is better than to offer the fat of Rams: yea, to repugn
against his voice is as evil as the sin of soothsaying; and not to agree to it
is like abominable Idolatry. And now forasmuch as thou have cast away the word
of the Lord, he has cast away thee, that thou should not be King.

By all these examples of Holy Scripture, The turning of God from Man.
we may know, that as we forsake God, so shall he ever forsake us. And what
miserable state does consequently and necessarily follow thereupon, a Man may
easily consider by the terrible threatenings of God. And although he consider
not all the said misery to the uttermost, being so great that it passes any
Man's capacity in this life sufficiently to consider the same: Yet he shall
soon perceive so much thereof, that if his Heart be not more than stony, or
harder than the Adamant, he shall fear, tremble, and quake, to call the same to
his remembrance. First, the displeasure of God toward us is commonly expressed
in the Scripture by these two things: By showing his fearful Countenance upon
us, and by turning his Face, or hiding it from us. By showing his dreadful
Countenance, is signified his great wrath: But by turning his Face, or hiding
thereof, is many times more signified, that is to say, That he clearly
forsakes us, and gives us over. The which significations be taken of the
properties of Men's manners. For Men, toward them whom they favor, commonly
bear a good, a cheerful, and a loving Countenance: So that by the Face or
Countenance of a Man, it does commonly appear, what Will or Mind he bears
toward others. So when God does show his dreadful Countenance toward us, that
is to say, does send dreadful plagues of Sword, Famine, or Pestilence upon us;
it appears that he is greatly wroth with us. But when he withdraws from us
his Word, the right Doctrine of Christ, his Gracious assistance and aid, (which
is ever joined to his Word,) and leaves us to our own Wit, our own Will and
Strength: He declares then, that he begins to forsake us. For whereas God
has showed to all them that truly believe his Gospel, his Face of Mercy in
Jesus Christ, which does so lighten their Hearts, that they (if they behold it
as they ought to do,) be transformed to his Image, be made partakers of the
Heavenly Light, and of his Holy Spirit, and be fashioned to him in all Goodness
requisite to the Children of God: So, if they after do neglect the same; if
they be unthankful unto him, if they order not their lives according to his
Example and Doctrine, and to the setting forth of his Glory, he will take away
from them his Kingdom, his Holy Word, whereby he should reign in them, because
they bring not forth the fruit thereof that he looks for. Nevertheless, he is
so merciful, and of so long-sufferance, that he does not show upon us that
great wrath suddenly. But when we begin to shrink from his Word, not believing
it, or not expressing it in our livings: First, he does send his Messengers,
the true Preachers of his Word, to admonish and warn us of our Duty: That as he
for his part, for the great love he bare unto us, delivered his own Son to
suffer death, that we by his death might be delivered from death, and be
restored to the Life everlasting; evermore to dwell with him, and to be
partakers and inheritors with him of his everlasting Glory and Kingdom of
Heaven: So again, that we for our parts should walk in a Godly life, as
becomes his Children to do. And if this will not serve, but still we remain
disobedient to his Word and Will, not knowing him, nor loving him, nor fearing
him, nor putting our whole trust and confidence in him: And on the other side,
to Neighbors behaving our selves uncharitably, by Disdain, Envy, Malice, or by
committing Murder, Robbery, Adultery, Gluttony, Deceit, Lying, Swearing, or
other like detestable Works, Heb. 3.
and ungodly behavior, then he threatens us by terrible Comminations,
swearing in great Anger, Psalm. 15.
that whosoever does these Works, shall never enter into his Rest, 1 Cor. ^^
which is the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Second Part of the Sermon of Falling from God.
IN the former part of this Sermon, ye have learned how many manner of ways Men
fall from God: Some by Idolatry, some for lack of Faith, some by neglecting of
their Neighbors, some by not hearing of God's Word, some by the Pleasure they
take in the Vanities of worldly things. Ye have also learned, in what misery
that Man is, which is gone from God: And how that God, yet, of his infinite
Goodness, to call again Man from that his misery, uses first gentle
Admonitions by his Preachers, after, he lays on terrible Threatenings. Now, if
this gentle Monition and Threatening together do not serve, then God will show
his terrible Countenance upon us, he will pour intolerable Plagues upon our
Heads, and after, he will take away from us all his Aid and Assistance,
wherewith before, he did defend us from all such manner of Calamity. As the
Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, agreeing with Christ's Parable, Isaiah 5.
does teach us, saying, That God had made a goodly Vineyard for his beloved
Children, he hedged it, he walled it round about, he planted it with chosen
Vines, and made a Turret in the midst thereof, Matthew. 2^^
and therein also a Vine-press. And when he looked that it should bring forth
good Grapes, it brought forth wild Grapes: And after it follows, Now shall I
show you, (says God,) what I will do with my Vineyard: I will pluck down the
Hedges, that it may perish: I will break down the Walls, that it may be trodden
under foot: I will let it lie waste, it shall not be cut, it shall not be
dug, but Briars and Thorns shall overgrow it, and I shall command the
Clouds, that they shall no more rain upon it.

By these Threatenings we are monished and warned, that if we, which are the
chosen Vineyard of God, bring not forth good Grapes, that is to say, good Works
that may be delectable and pleasant in his sight, when he looks for them,
when he sends his Messengers to call upon us for them, but rather bring forth
wild Grapes, that is to say, sower Works, unsavory, and unfruitful: Then will
he pluck away all defense, and suffer grievous plagues of Famine, Battle,
Dearth, and Death, to light upon us. Finally, if these serve not, he will let
us lie waste, he will give us over, he will turn away from us, he will dig and
delve no more about us, he will let us alone, and suffer us to bring forth even
such Fruit as we will, to bring forth Brambles, Briars, and Thorns, all
Naughtiness, all Vice, and that so abundantly, that they shall clean overgrow
us, choke, strangle, and utterly destroy us. But they, that in this World live
not after God, but after their own Carnal liberty, perceive not this great
Wrath of God toward them, that he will not dig, nor delve any more about them,
that he does let them alone even to themselves. But they take this for a great
benefit of God, to have all their own Liberty: And so they live, as if Carnal
liberty were the true Liberty of the Gospel. But God forbid, (good People,)
that ever we should desire such Liberty. For although God suffer sometimes the
wicked to have their Pleasure in this World, yet the end of ungodly Living is,
at length, endless destruction. The murmuring Israelites had that they longed
for, Numb. 11.
they had Quails enough, yea, till they were weary of them. But what was the
end thereof? Their sweet Meat had sower Sauce: Even while the Meat was in their
Mouths, the plague of God lighted upon them, and suddenly they died. So, if we
live ungodlily, and God suffers us to follow our own Wills, to have our own
Delights and Pleasures, and corrects us not with some plague, it is no doubt
but he is almost utterly displeased with us. And although it be long ere he
strike, yet many times when he strikes such Persons, he strikes them at once
for ever. So that when he does not strike us, when he cease to afflict us, to
punish or beat us, and suffers us to run headlong into all Ungodliness, and
Pleasures of this World that we delight in, without Punishment and Adversity,
it is a dreadful token, that he loves us no longer, that he cares no longer
for us, but has given us over to our ownselves. As long as a Man does prune
his Vines, does dig at the Roots, and does lay fresh Earth to them, he has a
Mind to them, he perceives some token of Fruitfulness, that may be recovered
in them; but when he will bestow no more such Cost and Labor about them, then
it is a sign, that he thinks they will never be good. And the Father, as long
as he loves his Child, he looks angerly, he corrects him when he does
amiss: But when that serves not, and upon that he cease from correction of
him, and suffers him to do what he list himself, it is a sign that he
intends to disinherit him, and to cast him away for ever. So surely nothing
should pierce our heart so sore, and put us in such horrible fear, as when we
know in our Conscience, that we have grievously offended God, and do so
continue, and that yet he strikes not, but quietly suffers us in the
Naughtiness that we have delight in. Then specially it is time to cry, and to
cry again, as David did, Psalm. 51.
Cast me not away from thy Face, and take not away thy Holy Spirit from me.
Lord, turn not away thy Face from me, cast not thy Servant away in Displeasure.
Hide not thy Face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down to Hell. The
which lamentable Prayers of him, as they do certify us, what horrible danger
they be in, from whom God turns his Face, (for the time, and as long as he so
does:) So should they move and stir us to cry upon God with all our heart, that
we may not be brought into that State, which doubtless is so sorrowful, so
miserable, and so dreadful, as no Tongue can sufficiently express, nor any
Heart can think. For what deadly grief may a man suppose it is, to be under the
Wrath of God, to be forsaken of him, to have his Holy Spirit, the Author of all
Goodness, to be taken from him, to be brought to so vile a condition, that he
shall be left meet for no better purpose, than to be for ever condemned in
Hell? For not only such places of David do show, that upon the turning of God's
Face from any Persons, they shall be left bare from all Goodness, and far from
hope of remedy: But also the place, rehearsed last before, of Isaiah, does mean
the same, which shows, that God at length does so forsake his unfruitful
Vineyard, that he will not only suffer it to bring forth Weeds, Briars, and
Thorns, but also further to punish the unfruitfulness of it; he says, he will
not cut it, he will not delve it, and he will command the Clouds, that they
shall not rain upon it: Whereby is signified the teaching of his Holy Word,
which St. Paul, after a like manner, expressed by Planting and Watering,
meaning, that he will take that away from them, so that they shall be no longer
of his Kingdom, they shall be no longer governed by his Holy Spirit, they shall
be put from the Grace and Benefits that they had, and ever might have enjoyed,
through Christ, they shall be deprived of the Heavenly Light and Life which
they had in Christ, whilst they abode in him: They shall be (as they were
once,) as Men without God in this World, or rather, in worse taking. And to be
short, they shall be given into the Power of the Devil, which bears the Rule
in all them that be cast away from God, 1 Kings 15.
as he did in Saul and Judas, and generally in all such, as work after their
own Wills, the Children of mistrust and unbelief. Let us beware therefore,
(good Christian People,) lest that we, rejecting or casting away God's Word,
(by the which we obtain and retain true Faith in God,) be not at length cast
off so far, that we become as the Children of unbelief; which be of two sorts,
far diverse, yea, almost clean contrary, and yet both be very far from
returning to God; the one sort, only weighing their sinful and detestable
Living, with the right Judgment and Straitness of God's Righteousness, be so
without Counsel, and be so comfortless, (as they all must needs be, from whom
the Spirit of Counsel and Comfort is gone,) that they will not be persuaded in
their Hearts, but that either God cannot, or else that he will not take them
again to his Favor and Mercy. The other, hearing the loving and large Promises
of God's Mercy, and so not conceiving a right Faith thereof, make those
Promises larger than ever God did, trusting, that although they continue in
their sinful and detestable Living never so long, yet that God, at the end of
their Life, will show his Mercy upon them, and that then they will return. And
both these two sorts of Men be in a damnable state; and yet nevertheless, God
(who wills not the Death of the wicked, Ezekiel. 18. and 33.
) has showed means, whereby, both the same (if they take heed in season,) may
escape. The first, Against desperation.
as they do dread God's rightful Justice in punishing Sinners, (whereby they
should be dismayed, and should despair indeed, as touching any hope that may be
in themselves,) so, if they would constantly or steadfastly believe, that God's
Mercy is the Remedy appointed against such despair and distrust, not only for
them, but generally for all that be sorry and truly repentant, and will
therewithal stick to God's Mercy, they may be sure they shall obtain Mercy, and
enter into the Port or Haven of Safeguard, into the which whosoever does come,
be they beforetime never so wicked, they shall be out of danger of everlasting
damnation, Ezekiel. 3.
as God, by Ezekiel, says, What time soever a Sinner does return, and take
earnest and true Repentance, Against Presumption.
I will forget all his Wickedness. The other, as they be ready to believe God's
Promises, so they should be as ready to believe the Threatenings of God: As well
they should believe the Law, as the Gospel: As well that there is an Hell and
everlasting Fire, as that there is an Heaven, and everlasting Joy: As well they
should believe Damnation to be threatened to the wicked and evil doers, as
Salvation to be promised to the faithful in Word and Works: As well they should
believe God to be true in the one, as in the other. And the Sinners, that
continue in their wicked living, ought to think, that the Promises of God's
Mercy, and the Gospel, pertain not unto them being in that state, but only the
Law, and those Scriptures which contain the Wrath and Indignation of God, and
his Threatenings, which should certify them, that as they do over-boldly
presume of God's Mercy, and live dissolutely: So does God still more and more
withdraw his Mercy from them, and he is so provoked thereby to wrath at length,
that he destroys such Presumers many times suddenly. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
For of such St. Paul says thus, When they shall say, it is Peace, there is no
danger, then shall sudden destruction come upon them. Let us beware therefore
of such naughty boldness to Sin. For God, which has promised his Mercy to them
that be truly repentant, (although it be at the later end,) has not promised
to the presumptuous Sinner, either that he shall have long Life, or that he
shall have true Repentance at the last end. But for that purpose has he made
every Man's death uncertain, that he should not put his hope in the end, and in
the mean season (to God's high displeasure,) live ungodly. Wherefore, let us
follow the Counsel of the wise Man, let us make no tarrying to turn unto the
Lord: Let us not put off from day to day, for suddenly shall his Wrath come,
and in time of Vengeance he will destroy the wicked. Let us therefore turn
betimes, and when we turn, let us pray to God, Osee 14.
as Osee teaches, saying, Forgive all our Sins, receive us graciously. And if
we turn to him, with an humble and a very penitent Heart, he will receive us to
his Favor and Grace for his Holy Names sake, for his Promise sake, for his
Truth and Mercies sake, promised to all faithful Believers in Jesus Christ, his
only natural Son: To whom, the only Savior of the World, with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, and power, world without end. Amen.

AN EXHORTATION Against the Fear of Death.
IT is not to be marvelled, that worldly Men do fear to die. For death
depriveth them of all worldly Honors, Riches, and Possessions, in the fruition
whereof, the worldly Man counts himself happy, so long as he may enjoy them
at his own Pleasure, and otherwise, if he be dispossessed of the same, without
hope of recovery, then he can no otherwise think of himself, but that he is
unhappy, because he has lost his worldly Joy and Pleasure. Alas, thinks this
carnal Man, shall I now depart for ever from all my Honors, all my Treasure,
from my Country, Friends, Riches, Possessions, and worldly Pleasures, which are
my Joy and Heart's delight? Alas, that ever that day should come, when all
these I must bid farewell at once, and never enjoy any of them after. Wherefore
it is not without great cause spoken of the wise Man, O Death, Eccles. 41.
how bitter and sower is the remembrance of thee to a Man, that lives in Peace
and Prosperity in his Substance, to a Man living at ease, leading his Life
after his own Mind without trouble, and is therewithal well pampered and fed?
There be other Men, whom this World does not so greatly laugh upon, but rather
vex and oppress with Poverty, Sickness, or some other Adversity, yet they do
fear death, partly, because the Flesh abhors naturally it is own sorrowful
dissolution, which death does threaten to them; and partly, by reason of
Sicknesses and painful diseases, which be most strong Pangs and Agonies in the
Flesh, and use commonly to come to sick Men before death, or, at the least,
accompany death, whenever it comes.

Although these two Causes seem great and weighty to a worldly Man, whereupon
he is moved to fear death, yet there is another Cause much greater than any of
these before rehearsed, for which; indeed he has just cause to fear death, and
that is the state and condition whereunto at the last end death brings all
them, that have their Hearts fixed upon this World, without Repentance and
Amendment. This state and condition is called the second death, which unto all
such shall ensue after this bodily death. And this is that death which indeed
ought to be dreaded and feared: For it is an everlasting loss, without remedy
of the Grace and Favor of God, and of everlasting Joy, Pleasure, and Felicity.
And it is not only the loss for ever of all these eternal Pleasures, but also
it is the condemnation both of Body and Soul, (without either appellation, or
hope of redemption,) unto everlasting pains in Hell. Unto this state death sent
the unmerciful and ungodly rich Man, Luke 16.
(that Luke speaks of in his Gospel,) who living in all Wealth and Pleasure
in this World, and cherishing himself daily with dainty Fare, and gorgeous
Apparel, despised poor Lazarus that lay pitiful at his Gate, miserably plagued
and full of Sores, and also grievously pined with Hunger. Both these two were
arrested by death, which sent Lazarus the poor miserable Man, by Angels anon
unto Abraham's Bosom, a place of Rest, Pleasure, and Consolation: But the
unmerciful rich Man descended down into Hell, and being in Torments, he cried
for Comfort, complaining of the intolerable pain that he suffered in that flame
of Fire, but it was too late. So unto this place bodily death sends all them
that in this World have their Joy and Felicity, all them that in this World be
unfaithful unto God, and uncharitable unto their Neighbors, so dying without
Repentance and hope of God's Mercy. Wherefore it is no marvel, that the worldly
Man fears death, for he has much more cause so to do, than he himself does
consider. Thus we see three Causes why worldly Men fear death. One, The First.
because they shall lose thereby their worldly Honors, Riches, Possessions, and
all their Hearts desires: Another, Second.
because of the painful diseases, and bitter pangs, which commonly Men suffer,
either before, or at the time of death: Third.
But the chief cause above all other, is the dread of the miserable state of
eternal damnation both of Body and Soul, which they fear shall follow, after
their departing from the worldly Pleasures of this present Life.

For these Causes, be all mortal Men (which be given to the love of this
World,) both in fear, and state of death, through Sin, (as the Holy Apostle
says,) so long as they live here in this World: But, Heb. 10.
(everlasting thanks be to Almighty God for ever,) there is never a one of all
these Causes, no, nor yet them all together, that can make a true Christian man
afraid to die, (who is the very Member of Christ, 1 Cor. 3.
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, the Son of God, and the very Inheritor of the
everlasting Kingdom of Heaven;) but plainly contrary, he conceives great and
many Causes, undoubtedly grounded upon the infallible and everlasting truth of
the Word of God, which moves him not only to put away the fear of bodily
death, but also for the manifold Benefits and singular Commodities, which ensue
unto every faithful Person by reason of the same, to wish, desire, and long
heartily for it. For death shall be to him no death at all, but a very
deliverance from death, from all Pains, Cares, and Sorrows, Miseries, and
Wretchedness of this World, and the very entry into Rest, and a beginning of
everlasting Joy, a tasting of heavenly Pleasures, so great, that neither Tongue
is able to express, neither Eye to see, nor Ear to hear them; no, nor any
earthly Man's heart to conceive them. So exceeding great Benefits they be,
which God our heavenly Father by his mere Mercy, and for the Love of his Son
Jesus Christ, has laid up in store, and prepared for them that humbly submit
themselves to God's Will, and evermore unfeignedly love him from the bottom of
their Hearts. And we ought to believe, that death, being slain by Christ,
cannot keep any Man that steadfastly trusts in Christ, under his perpetual
Tyranny and Subjection: But that he shall rise from death again unto Glory at
the last day, appointed by Almighty God, like as Christ our Head did rise
again, according to God's appointment, the third day. For St. Augustine says,
The Head going before, the Members trust to follow and come after. And St. Paul
says, If Christ be risen from the dead, we shall rise also from the same. And
to comfort all Christian Persons herein, Holy Scripture calls this bodily
death a sleep, wherein Man's Senses be (as it were,) taken from him for a
season, and yet when he awaketh, he is more fresh than he was when he went to
Bed. So, although we have our Souls separated from our Bodies for a season, yet
at the general Resurrection we shall be more fresh, beautiful, and perfect than
we be now. For now we be mortal, then shall we be immortal: Now infected with
diverse Infirmities, then clearly void of all mortal Infirmities: Now we be
subject to all carnal desires, then we shall be all Spiritual, desiring nothing
but God's Glory, and things eternal. Thus is this bodily death a door or
entering unto Life, and therefore not so much dreadful (if it be rightly
considered,) as it is comfortable; not a mischief, but a Remedy for all
mischief; no Enemy, but a Friend; not a cruel Tyrant, but a gentle Guide,
leading us not to mortality, but to immortality; not to Sorrow and Pain, but to
Joy and Pleasure, and that to endure for ever, if it be thankfully taken and
accepted as God's Messenger, and patiently born of us for Christ's Love, that
suffered most painful death for our Love, to redeem us from death eternal.
Accordingly hereunto St. Paul says, Col. 3.
Our Life is hid with Christ in God: But when our Life shall appear, then shall
we also appear with him in Glory. Why then shall we fear to die, considering
the manifold and comfortable Promises of the Gospel, and of Holy Scriptures? 1
John 5.
God the Father has given us everlasting Life, (says St. John, 1 John 5.
) and this Life is in his Son. He that has the Son, has Life; and he that
has not the Son, has not Life. And this I write (says St. John,) to you that
believe in the Name of the Son of God, that you may know, that you have
everlasting Life, and that you do believe upon the Name of the Son of God. And
our Savior Christ says, John 5.
He that believes in me, has Life everlasting, and I will raise him from
Death to Life at the last day: St. Paul also says, 1 Cor. 1.
That Christ is ordained and made of God our Righteousness, or Holiness and
Redemption, to the intent that he which will glory should glory in the Lord.
St. Paul did contemn and set little by all other things, Phil. 3.
esteeming them as Dung, which before he had in very great price, that he might
be found in Christ, to have everlasting Life, true Holiness, Righteousness, and
Redemption. Finally, St. Paul makes a plain Argument on this wise, Romans 8.
If our heavenly Father would not spare his own natural Son, but did give him
to death for us; how can it it be, but that with him he should give us all
things? Therefore if we have Christ, then have we with him, and by him, all
good things whatsoever we can in our Hearts wish or desire, as Victory over
Death, Sin, and Hell: We have the Favor of God, Peace with him, Holiness,
Wisdom, Justice, Power, Life, and Redemption, we have by him perpetual Health,
Wealth, Joy, and Bliss everlasting.

The Second Part of the Sermon against the Fear of Death.
IT has been heretofore showed you, That there be three Causes wherefore Men
do commonly fear Death. First, the sorrowful departing from Worldly Goods and
Pleasures. The Second, the fear of the pangs and pains that come with Death.
The last and principal Cause is, The horrible fear of extreme Misery, and
perpetual Damnation in time to come. And yet none of these three Causes
troubles good Men, because they stay themselves by true Faith, perfect
Charity, and sure Hope of the endless Joy and Bliss everlasting.

All those therefore have great cause to be full of Joy, that be joined to
Christ with true Faith, steadfast Hope, and perfect Charity; and not to fear
death, nor everlasting Damnation. For Death cannot deprive them of Jesus
Christ, nor can any Sin condemn them that are grafted surely in him, which is
their only Joy, Treasure, and Life. Let us repent of our Sins, amend our Lives,
trust in his Mercy and Satisfaction; and Death, can neither take him from us,
nor us from him. For then, (as St. Paul says,) Whether we live or die, we be
the Lords own. And again he says, Christ did die, and rose again, because he
should be Lord both of the dead and quick. Then if we be the Lords own when we
be dead, it must needs follow, that such temporal death not only cannot harm
us, but also that it shall be much to our profit, and join us unto God more
perfectly. And thereof the Christian Heart may surely be certified by the
infallible or undeceivable Truth of Holy Scripture. It is God (says St. Paul,)
which has prepared us unto immortality, and the same is he which has given us
a^ earnest of the Spirit. Therefore let us he always of good Comfort, for we
know that so long as we be in tho Body, 2 Gal. 5.
we be (as it were) far from God in a strange Country, subject to many perils,
walking without perfect Sight and Knowledge of Almighty God, only seeing him by
Faith in Holy Scriptures. But we have a courage and desire rather to be at home
with God and our Savior Christ, far from the Body, where we may behold his
Godhead as he is, Face to Face, to our everlasting Comfort. These be St. Paul's
words in effect, whereby we may perceive, that the Life in this World is
resembled and likened to a Pilgrimage in a strange Country, far from God; and
that Death, delivering us from our Bodies, does send us strait home into our
own Country, and makes us to dwell presently with God for ever, in everlasting
Rest and Quietness: So that to die is no loss, but profit and winning, to all
true Christian People. What lost the Thief that died on the Cross with Christ,
by his Bodily death? Yea, how much did he gain by it? Did not our Savior say
unto him, Luke 16.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise? And Lazarus that pitiful Person,
that lay before the Rich Man's Gate, pained with Sores, and pined with Hunger,
did not death highly profit and promote him, which by the ministry of Angels
sent him unto Abraham's Bosom, a place of Rest, Joy, and Heavenly Consolation?
Let us think none other, (good Christian People,) but Christ has prepared, and
made ready before, the same Joy and Felicity for us, that he prepared for
Lazarus and the Thief. Wherefore, let us stick unto his Salvation, and Gracious
Redemption, and believe his Word; Serve him from our Hearts: Love and Obey him,
and whatsoever we have done heretofore contrary to his most Holy Will, now let
us Repent in time, and hereafter study to Correct our Life: and doubt not, but
we shall find him as merciful unto us, as he was either to Lazarus or to the
Thief, whose examples are written in Holy Scripture, for the comfo^t of them
that be sinners, and subject to sorrows, miseries, and calamities in this
World, that they should not despair in God's Mercy, but ever trust thereby to
have forgiveness of their Sins, and Life everlasting, as Lazarus and the Thief
had. Thus I trust every Christian Man perceives by the infallible or
undeceivable Word of God, that Bodily death cannot harm nor hinder them that
truly believe in Christ, but contrarily shall profit and promote the Christian
Souls, which being truly penitent for their offenses, depart hence in perfect
Charity, and in sure Trust, that God is merciful to them, forgiving their Sins,
for the Merits of Jesus Christ his only natural Son.

The Second Cause why some do fear death.
The Second Cause why some do fear death, is sore sickness, and grievous pains,
which partly come before death, and partly accompany, or come with, death,
whenever it comes. This fear, is the fear of the frail flesh, and a natural
passion belonging unto the nature of a mortal Man. But true Faith in God's
promises, and regard of the pains and pangs which Christ upon the Cross
suffered for us miserable sinners, with consideration of the Joy and
everlasting Life to come in Heaven, will mitigate those pains, and moderate
this fear, that it shall never be able to overthrow the hearty desire and
gladness, that the Christian Soul has to be separated from this corrupt Body,
that it may come to the Gracious Presence of our Savior Jesus Christ. If we
believe steadfastly the Word of God, we shall perceive that such bodily
sickness, pangs of death, or whatsoever dolorous pangs we suffer, either
before, or with death, be nothing else in Christian Men, but the rod of our
Heavenly and Loving Father, wherewith he mercifully corrects us, either to
try and declare the Faith of his patient Children, that they may be sound
Laudable, Glorious, and Honorable in his Sight, when Jesus Christ shall be
openly showed to be the Judge of all the World, or else to chastise and amend
in them whatsoever offends his Fatherly and Gracious Goodness, lest they
should perish everlastingly. And this his correcting rod is common to all Men
that be truly his. Therefore let us cast away the burden of Sin that lies too
heavy on our necks, and return unto God by true penance and amendment of our
lives; Let us with patience run this course that is appointed, suffering (for
his sake that dyed for our Salvation,) all sorrows and pangs of death, and
death itself joyfully, when God sends it to us, having our Eyes fixed and set
fast ever upon the Head and Captain of our Faith, Jesus Christ: Phil. 2.
Who (considering the Joy that he should come unto,) cared neither for the
shame nor pain of death, but willingly conforming and framing his Will to his
Fathers Will, most patiently suffered the most shameful and painful death of
the Cross, being innocent and harmless. And now therefore he is exalted in
Heaven, and everlastingly sits on the right hand of the Throne of God the
Father. Let us call to our remembrance therefore the Life and Joys of Heaven,
that are kept for all them that patiently do suffer here with Christ, and
consider that Christ suffered all his painful passion by sinners, and for
sinners: And then we shall with Patience, and the more easily, suffer such
sorrows and pains, when they come. Let us not set at light the chastising of
the Lord, nor grudge at him, nor fall from him, when of him we be corrected:
For the Lord loves them whom he does correct, and beats every one whom he
takes to be his Child. What Child is that, Heb. 12.
(says St. Paul,) whom the Father loves, and does not chastise? If ye be
without God's correction, (which all his welbeloved and true Children have,)
then be you but Bastards, smally regarded of God, and not his true Children.

Therefore seeing, that when we have on Earth our carnal Fathers to be our
correctors, we do fear them, and reverently take their correction; shall we not
much more be in Subjection to God our Spiritual Father, by whom we shall have
everlasting Life? and our Carnal Fathers sometimes correct us, even as it
pleases them, without cause: But this Father justly corrects us, either for
our Sin, to the intent we should amend, or for our Commodity and Wealth, to
make us thereby partakers of his Holiness. Furthermore, all Correction which
God sends us in this present time, seems to have no Joy and Comfort, but
Sorrow and Pain, yet it brings with it a taste of God's Mercy and Goodness,
toward them that be so corrected, and a sure hope of God's everlasting
Consolation in Heaven. If then these Sorrows, Diseases, and Sicknesses, and
also Death itself be nothing else but our Heavenly Father's Rod, whereby he
certifieth us of his Love and gracious Favor, whereby he tries and purifieth
us, whereby he gives unto us Holiness, and certifieth us, that we be his
Children, and he our merciful Father: Shall not we then with all humility, as
obedient and loving Children, joyfully kiss our Heavenly Father's Rod, and ever
say in our Heart, with our Savior Jesus Christ, Father, if this Anguish and
Sorrow which I feel, and Death which I see approach, may not pass, but that thy
will is that I must suffer them, Thy Will be done?

The Third Part of the Sermon against the Fear of Death.
IN this Sermon against the fear of Death, Two Causes were declared, which
commonly move worldly Men to be in much fear to die, and yet the same do
nothing trouble the faithful and good Livers when Death comes, but rather give
them occasion greatly to rejoice, considering that they shall be delivered from
the sorrow and misery of this World, and be brought to the great Joy and
Felicity of the Life to come. The Third Cause why Death is to be feared.
Now the Third and special Cause, why Death indeed is to be feared, is the
miserable State of the worldly and ungodly People, after their Death: But this
is no Cause at all, why the godly and faithful People should fear Death, but
rather contrariwise, their godly Conversation in this Life, and Belief in
Christ, cleaving continually to his Mercies, should make them to long sore
after that Life, that remains for them undoubtedly after this bodily Death.
Of this immortal State, (after this transitory Life,) where we shall live
evermore in the Presence of God, in Joy, and Rest, after Victory over all
Sickness, Sorrows, Sin, and Death: There be many plain places of Holy
Scripture, which confirm the weak Conscience against the fear of all such
Dolours, Sicknesses, Sin, and bodily Death, to assuage such trembling and
ungodly fear, and to encourage us with Comfort and hope of a blessed State
after this Life. Saint Paul wishes unto the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.
That God the Father of Glory, would give unto them the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, that the Eyes of their Hearts might give Light to know him, and to
perceive how great things he had called them unto, and how rich an Inheritance
he has prepared after this Life for them that pertain unto him. Phil. 1.
And St. Paul himself declares the desire of his Heart, which was to be
dissolved and loosed from his Body, and to be with Christ, which (as he said,)
was much better for him, although to them it was more necessary that he should
live, which he refused not for their sakes. Even like as St. Martin said, Good
Lord, if I be necessary for thy People to do good unto them, I will refuse no
Labor: But else for mine own self, I beseech thee to take my Soul.

Now the Holy Fathers of the Old Law, and all faithful and righteous Men, which
departed before our Savior Christ's Ascension into Heaven, did, by Death,
depart from Troubles unto Rest, from the hands of their Enemies, into the hands
of God, from Sorrows and Sicknesses, unto joyful refreshing in Abraham's bosom,
a place of all Comfort and Consolation, as the Scriptures do plainly by
manifest words testify. Wisdom 3.
The Book of Wisdom says, That the Righteous Men's Souls be in the hand of God,
and no torment shall touch them. They seemed to the eyes of foolish Men to die,
and their death was counted miserable, and their departing out of this World
wretched, but they be in Rest. And another place says, Wisd. 4.
That the Righteous shall live for ever, and their Reward is with the Lord, and
their Minds be with God, who is above all: Therefore they shall receive a
Glorious Kingdom, and a Beautiful Crown at the Lord's hand. And in another
place the same Book says, The Righteous, though he be prevented with sudden
Death, nevertheless he shall be there where he shall be refreshed. Of Abraham's
Bosom, Christ's words be so plain, that a Christian Man needs no more proof
of it. Now then, if this were the state of the Holy Fathers and Righteous Men,
before the coming of our Savior, and before he was Glorified: How much more
then ought all we to have a steadfast Faith, and a sure Hope of this blessed
state and condition, after our death? Seeing that our Savior now has
performed the whole Work of our Redemption, and is Gloriously ascended into
Heaven, to prepare our dwelling places with him, and said unto his Father,
Father, John 17.
I will that where I am, my servants shall be with me. And we know, that
whatsoever Christ Will, his Father Wills the same, wherefore it cannot be, but
if we be his Faithful Servants, our Souls shall be with him, after our
departure out of this present life. St. Stephen when he was stoned to death,
even in the midst of his torments, what was his Mind most upon? Acts 7.
When he was full of the Holy Ghost, (says Holy Scripture,) having his eyes
lifted up into Heaven, he saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right
hand of God. The which Truth, after he had confessed boldly before the enemies
of Christ, they drew him out of the City, and there they stoned him, who cried
unto God saying, Lord Jesu Christ, take my Spirit. And does not our Savior say
plainly in St. John's Gospel, Verily, John 5.
verily I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent
me, has everlasting life, and comes not into judgment, but shall pass from
death to life? Shall we not then think that death to be precious, by the which
we pass unto life?

Therefore it is a true saying of the Prophet, Psalm. 116.
The death of the Holy and Righteous Men is precious in the Lord's sight. Holy
Simeon, after that he had his Hearts desire in seeing our Savior, that he ever
longed for in his life, he embraced, and took him in his Arms, and said, Now
Lord, Luke 2.
let me depart in peace, for mine eyes have beholden that Savior which thou
have prepared for all Nations.

It is truth therefore, that the death of the Righteous is called Peace, and
the benefit of the Lord, as the Church says, in the name of the Righteous
departed out of this World: My soul, Psalm. 116.
turn thee to thy Rest, for the Lord both been good to thee, and rewarded thee.
And we see by Holy Scripture, and other ancient Histories of Martyrs, that the
Holy, Faithful, and Righteous, ever since Christ's Ascension, or going up, in
their death did not doubt, but that they went to Christ in Spirit, which is our
Life, Health, Wealth, and Salvation. Apoc. 14.
John in his Holy Revelation saw an hundred forty and four thousand Virgins and
Innocents, of whom he said, These follow the Lamb Jesu Christ wheresoever he
goes. And shortly after in the same place he says, I heard a voice from
Heaven saying unto me, Write, happy and blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord: From henceforth (surely says the Spirit,) they shall rest from their
pains and labors, for their works do follow them: So that then they shall reap
with joy and comfort, that which they sowed with labors and pains.

They that sow in the Spirit, of the Spirit shall reap everlasting Life. Let us
therefore never be weary of well-doing, for when the time of Reaping or Reward
comes, we shall reap, without any Weariness, everlasting Joy. Therefore while
we have time, (as St. Paul exhorts us, Gal 6. Matthew. 6.
) let us do good to all Men, and not lay up our Treasure in Earth, where Rust
and Moths corrupt it, which Rust (as St. James says,) shall bear Witness
against us at the great day, condemn us, and shall (like most burning Fire,)
torment our Flesh. Let us beware therefore, (as we tender our own Wealth,) that
we be not in the number of those miserable, covetous and wretched Men, James 5.
which St. James bids m^arn and lament for their greedy gathering and
ung^dly keeping of Goods. Let us be wise in time, and learn to follow the wise
Example of the wicked Steward. Let us so wisely order our Goods and
Possessions, committed unto us here by God for a season, that we may truly hear
and obey this Commandment of our Savior Christ: Luke 16.
I say unto you (says he,) make you Friends of the wicked Mammon, that they
may receive you into everlasting Tabernacles or Dwellings. Riches be called
wicked, because the World abuses them unto all Wickedness, which are otherwise
the good gifts of God, and the Instruments whereby God's Servants do truly
serve him in using of the same. He commanded them not to make them rich
Friends, to get high Dignities and worldly Promotions, to give great gifts to
rich Men that have no need thereof, but to make them Friends of poor and
miserable Men, unto whom, whatsoever they give, Christ takes it as given to
himself. And to these Friends, Christ in the Gospel gives so great Honor and
Preeminence, that he says, They shall receive them that do good unto them into
everlasting Houses: Not that Men shall be our Rewarders for our well-doing, but
that Christ will reward us, and and take it to be done unto himself, whatsoever
is done to such Friends.

Thus making poor Wretches our Friends, we make our Savior Christ our Friend,
whose Members they are: Whose misery as he takes for his own misery, so their
Relief, Succor, and Help, he takes for his Succor, Relief, and Help, and will
as much thank us, and reward us for our goodness showed to them, as if he
himself had received like Benefit at our hands, as he witnesses in the Gospel,
saying, Matthew 25.
Whatsoever ye have done to any of these simple Persons, which do believe in
me, that have you done to myself. Therefore let us diligently foresee, that our
Faith and Hope which we have conceived in Almighty God, and in our Savior
Christ, wax not faint; and that the love which we bear in hand to bear to him,
wax not cold: But let us study daily, and diligently, to show ourselves to be
the true Honorers and Lovers of God, by keeping of his Commandments, by doing
of good Deeds unto our needy Neighbors, relieving by all means that we can,
their Poverty with our Abundance and Plenty, their Ignorance with our Wisdom
and Learning, and comfort their Weakness with our Strength and Authority,
calling all Men back from evil-doing, by godly Counsel and good Example,
persevering still in well-doing, so long as we live: So shall we not need to
fear Death for any of those three Causes aforementioned, nor yet for any other
Cause that can be imagined: But contrarily, considering the manifold
Sicknesses, Troubles, and Sorrows of this present Life, the dangers of this
perilous Pilgrimage, and the great encumbrance which our Spirit has by this
sinful Flesh and frail Body, subject to Death: Considering also the manifold
Sorrows and dangerous Deceits of this World on every side, the intolerable
Pride, Covetousness, and Lechery, in time of Prosperity, the impatient
murmuring of them that be worldly, in time of Adversity, which cease not to
withdraw and pluck us from God, our Savior Christ, from our Life, Wealth, or
everlasting Joy and Salvation: Considering also the innumerable Assaults of our
Ghostly Enemy the Devil, with all his fiery Darts of Ambition, Pride, Lechery,
Vainglory, Envy, Malice, Detraction, or Backbiting, with other his innumerable
Deceits, 1 Pet. 5.
Engines and Snares, whereby he goes busily about to catch all Men under his
dominion, ever like a roaring Lion, by all means searching whom he may devour.
The faithful Christian-Man which considers all these Miseries, Perils, and
Incommodities, (whereunto he is subject so long as he here lives upon Earth,)
and on the other part, considers that blessed and comfortable state of the
Heavenly life to come, and the sweet condition of them that depart in the Lord,
how they are delivered from the continual encumbrances of their mortal and
sinful Body, from all the Malice, Crafts, and Deceits of this World, from all
the assaults of their Ghostly Enemy the Devil, to live in peace, rest, and
endless quietness; to live in the fellowship of innumerable Angels, and with
the congregation of perfect and just Men, as Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, and
Confessors; and finally, unto the Presence of Almighty God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. He that does consider all these things, and believes them
assuredly, as they are to be believed, even from the bottom of his Heart, being
established in God in this true Faith, having a quiet Conscience in Christ, a
firm Hope, and assured Trust in God's Mercy, through the Merits of Jesu Christ
to obtain this Quietness, Rest, and everlasting Joy, shall not only be without
fear of bodily Death, Phil. 1.
when it comes, but certainly, (as St. Paul did,) so shall he gladly,
(according to God's Will, and when it pleases God to call him out of this
life,) greatly desire in his heart, that he may be rid from all these occasions
of evil, and live ever to God's pleasure, in perfect obedience of his Will,
with our Savior Jesus Christ, to whose Gracious Presence the Lord of his
infinite Mercy and Grace bring us, to reign with him in life everlasting: To
whom with our Heavenly Father, and the Holy Ghost, be Glory in Worlds without
end, Amen.

AN EXHORTATION CONCERNING Good Order, and Obedience to Rulers and Magistrates.
ALmighty God has appointed and Created all things in Heaven, Earth, and
Waters, in a most excellent and perfect Order. In Heaven he has appointed
distinct and several Orders and States of Archangels and Angels. In Earth he
has assigned and appointed Kings, Princes, with other Governors under them, in
all good and necessary Order. The Water above is kept, and raineth down in due
time and season. The Sun, Moon, Stars, Rainbow, Thunder, Lightning, Clouds, and
all Birds of the Air, do keep their order. The Earth, Trees, Seeds, Plants,
Herbs, Corn, Grass, and all manner of Beasts, keep themselves in order. All the
parts of the whole year, as Winter, Summer, Months, Nights and Days, continue
in their order: All kinds of Fishes in the Sea, Rivers and Waters; with all
Fountains, Springs, yea, the Seas themselves keep their comely course and order:
And Man himself also has all his Parts, both within and without, as Soul,
Heart, Mind, Memory, Understanding, Reason, Speech, with all and singular
corporal Members of his Body, in a profitable, necessary, and pleasant Order:
Every degree of People in their Vocation, Calling, and Office, has appointed
to them their Duty and Order: Some are in high degree, some in low, some Kings
and Princes, some Inferiors and Subjects, Priests, and Laymen, Masters and
Servants, Fathers and Children, Husbands and Wi^es, Rich and Poor, and every
one have need of other, so that in all things is to be lauded and praised the
goodly order of God, without the which, no House, no City, no Commonwealth,
can continue and endure, or last. For where there is no right order, there
reigns all Abuse, Carnal liberty, Enormity, Sin, and Babylonical confusion.
Take away Kings, Princes, Rulers, Magistrates, Judges, and such Estates of
God's order, no Man shall ride or go by the way unrobbed, no Man shall sleep in
his own House or Bed unkilled, no Man shall keep his Wife, Children, and
Possessions in quietness, all things shall be common, and there must needs
follow all mischief and utter destruction, both of Souls, Bodies, Goods, and
Commonwealths. But blessed be God, that we, in this Realm of England, feel not
the horrible Calamities, Miseries, and Wretchedness, which all they undoubtedly
feel and suffer, that lack this godly order: And praised be God, that we know
the great excellent Benefit of God showed toward us in this behalf. God has
sent us his high gift, our most dear Sovereign King JAMES, with a godly, wife,
and honorable Council, with other Superiors and Inferiors, in a beautiful
order, and godly. Wherefore, let us Subjects do our bounden Duties, giving
hearty thanks to God, and praying for the preservation of this godly order. Let
us all obey, even from the bottom of our Hearts, all their godly Proceedings,
Laws, Statutes, Proclamations, and Injunctions, with all other godly orders.
Let us consider the Scriptures of the Holy Ghost, which persuade and command us
all obediently to be subject, first and chiefly to the King's Majesty, Supreme
Governor over all, and next to his honorable Council, and to all other Noble
Men, Magistrates and Officers, which by God's goodness be placed and ordered:
For Almighty God is the only Author and Provider for this forenamed State and
Order, as it is written of God in the Book of the Proverbs: Prove. 8.
Through me Kings do reign, through me Counselors make just Laws, through me
do Princes bear Rule, and all Judges of the Earth execute Judgment, I am
loving to them that love me. Here let us mark well, and remember, that the high
Power and Authority of Kings, with their making of Laws, Judgments and
Offices, are the Ordinances not of Man, but of God: And therefore is this Word
(through me,) so many times repeated. Here is also well to be considered and
remembered, that this good Order is appointed by God's Wisdom, Favor and Love,
especially for them that love God, and therefore he says, I love them that
love me. Wisd. 6.
Also in the Book of Wisdom we may evidently learn, that a King's Power,
Authority and Strength, is a great Benefit of God, given of his great Mercy, to
the comfort of our great Misery. For this we read there spoken to Kings, Hear,
O ye Kings, and understand, learn ye that be Judges of the ends of the Earth,
give ear, ye that Rule the Multitudes: For the Power is given you of the Lord,
and the Strength from the Highest. Let us learn also here by the Infallible and
undeceivable Word of God, That Kings, and other Supreme and higher Officers,
are ordained of God, who is most high: And therefore they are here taught
diligently to apply and give themselves to Knowledge and Wisdom, necessary for
the ordering of God's People to their governance committed, or whom to govern
they are charged of God. And they be here also taught by Almighty God, that
they should acknowledge themselves to have all their Power and Strength not
from Rome, but immediately of God most High. We read in the Book of
Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 33.
that all Punishment pertains to God, by this Sentence, Vengeance is mine,
and I will reward. But this Sentence, we must understand to pertain also unto
the Magistrates which do exercise God's room in Judgment, and punishing by
good and godly Laws here on Earth. And the places of Scripture which seem to
remove from among all Christian Men, Judgment, Punishment, or Killing, ought
to be understood, that no Man (of his own private Authority,) may be Judge over
others, may punish, or may kill. But we must refer all Judgment to God, to
Kings and Rulers, Judges under them which be God's Officers to execute Justice;
and by plain words of Scripture, have their Authority and Use of the Sword
Granted from God, as we are taught by St. Paul, that dear and chosen Apostle of
our Savior Christ, whom we ought diligently to obey even as we would obey our
Savior Christ if he were present. Thus St. Paul writes to the Romans, Let
every Soul submit himself unto the authority of the higher, Romans 13.
powers for there is no power but of God. The powers that be, be ordained of
God. Whosoever therefore withstandeth the Power, withstandeth the Ordinance of
God: But they that resist, or are against it, shall receive to themselves
damnation. For Rulers are not fearful to them that do good, but to them that do
evil. Will thou be without fear of the Power? Do well then, and so shall thou
be praised of the same, for he is the Minister of God, for thy wealth. But, and
if thou do that which is evil, then fear, for he bears not the Sword for
naught, for he is the Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil.
Wherefore ye must needs obey, not only for fear of vengeance, but also because
of conscience, and even for this cause pay ye tribute, for they are God's
Ministers, serving for the same purpose.

Here let us learn of St. Paul, the chosen Vessel of God, that all Persons
having Souls (he excepteth none, nor exempteth none, neither Priest, Apostle,
nor Prophet, says St. Chrysostom,) do owe of bounden Duty, and even in
Conscience, Obedience, Submission, and Subjection to the higher Powers which be
set in autho ty by God; forasmuch as they be God's Lieutenants, God's
Presidents, God's Officers, God's Commissioners, God's Judges, ordained of God
himself, of whom only they have all their Power, and all their Authority. And
the same St. Paul threatens no less pain than everlasting damnation to all
disobedient persons, to all resisters against this general and common
Authority, forasmuch as they resist not Man, but God, not Man's device and
invention, but God's Wisdom, God's Order, Power, and Authority.

The Second Part of the Sermon of Obedience.
FOrasmuch as God has created and disposed all things in a comely order, we
have been taught in the First Part of the Sermon, concerning good Order and
Obedience; that we ought also in all Commonweals, to observe and keep a due
order, and to be obedient to the Powers, their Ordinances and Laws, and that
all Rulers are appointed of God, for a goodly Order to be kept in the World:
And also how the Magistrates ought to learn how to Rule and Govern according to
God's Laws: And that all Subjects are bound to obey them as God's Ministers,
yea, although they be evil, not only for fear, but also for Conscience sake.
And here, good People, let us all mark diligently, that it is not lawful for
Inferiors and Subjects, in any case to resist and stand against the Superior
Powers: For S. Paul's words be plain, that whosoever withstandeth, shall get to
themselves damnation, for whosoever withstandeth, withstandeth the Ordinance of
God. Our Savior Christ himself, and his Apostles, received many and diverse
injuries of the unfaithful and wicked Men in Authority, yet we never read, that
they, or any of them caused any Sedition or Rebellion against Authority. We
read often, that they patiently suffered all troubles, vexations, slanders, pangs
and pains, and death itself obediently without tumult or resistance. They
committed their Cause to him that judges righteously, and prayed for their
Enemies heartily and earnestly. They knew, that the Authority of the Powers,
was God's Ordinance, and therefore both in their Words and Deeds, they taught
ever Obedience to it, and never taught nor did the contrary. The wicked Judge
Pilate said to Christ, Know thou not, that I have power to crucify thee,
and have power also to loose thee? Jesus answered, Thou could have no power
at all against me, except it were given thee from above. Whereby Christ taught
us plainly, that even the wicked Rulers have their Power and Authority from
God, and therefore it is not lawful for their Subjects to withstand them,
although they abuse their Power: Much less then is it lawful for Subjects, to
withstand their Godly and Christian Princes, which do not abuse their
Authority, but use the same to God's Glory, and to the Profit and Commodity of
God's People. 1. Pet. 2.
The Holy Apostle Peter commands Servants to be obedient to their Masters,
not only if they be good and gentle, but also if they be evil and froward:
Affirming, that the Vocation and Calling of God's People is to be Patient, and
of the suffering side. And there he brings in the Patience of our Savior
Christ, to persuade Obedience to Governors, yea, although they be wicked and
wrong-doers. But let us now hear St. Peter himself speak, for his words
certify best our Conscience, thus he utters them in his first Epistle,
Servants, 1 Pet. 2.
obey your Masters with fear, not only if they be good and gentle, but also if
they be froward. For it is thank-worthy, if a man for Conscience toward God,
endures grief, and suffer wrong undeserved: For what praise is it, when ye be
beaten for your faults; if ye take it patiently? But when ye do well, if you
then suffer wrong, and take it patiently, then is there cause to have thank of
God, for hereunto verily were ye called: For so did Christ suffer for us,
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. All these be the very
words of St. Peter. 1 Kings 1^, 19, 20.
Holy David also teaches us a good Lesson in this behalf, who was many times
most cruelly and wrongfully persecuted of King Saul, and many times also put in
jeopardy and danger of his Life by King Saul and his People; yet he neither
withstood, neither used any force or violence against King Saul, his mortal and
deadly enemy; but did ever to his Liege Lord and Master King Saul, most true,
most diligent, and most faithful Service. Insomuch, that when the Lord God had
given King Saul into David's hands in his own Cave, he would not hurt him, when
he might without all Bodily peril, easily have slain him; no, he would not
suffer one of his Servants once to lay their hand: upon King Saul, but prayed
to God on this wise, Lord, keep me from doing that thing upon my Master, the
Lord's Anointed; keep me that I lay not my hand upon him, seeing he is the
Anointed of the Lord: For as truly as the Lord lives, (except the Lord smite
him, or except his day come, or that he go down to War, and perish in Battle,)
the Lord be merciful unto me, that I lay not my hands upon the Lords Anointed.
And that David might have killed his Enemy King Saul, it is evidently proved in
the first Book of the Kings, both by the cutting off the lap of Readiness Garment,
and also by plain Confession of King Saul. Also another time, as is mentioned
in the same Book, when the most unmerciful, and most unkind, King Saul did
persecute poor David; God did again give Saul into David's hands, by casting of
King Saul and his whole Army into a dead sleep, so that David and one Abisai
with him came in the night into Readiness Host, where Saul lay sleeping, and his
Spear stuck in the ground at his Head: Then said Abisai unto David, God has
delivered thine Enemy into thine hands at this time, now therefore let me smite
him once with my spear to the earth, and I will not smite him again the second
time; meaning thereby to have killed him with one stroke, and to have made him
sure for ever. And David answered and said to Abisai, Destroy him not, for who
can lay his hands on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? And David said
furthermore, As sure as the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day
shall come to die, or he shall descend or go down into Battle, and there
perish, the Lord keep me from laying my hands upon the Lord's anointed. But
take thou now the spear that is at his head, and the cruse of Water, and let us
go: And so he did. Here is evidently proved, that we may not withstand, nor in
any ways hurt an anointed King, which is God's Lieutenant, Vicegerent, and
highest Minister in that Country where he is King, But peradventure some here
would say, that David in his own defense might have killed King Saul lawfully,
An Objection.
and with a safe Conscience. But holy David did know, than he might in no wise
withstand, An Answer.
hurt, or kill his Sovereign Lord and King: He did know, that he was but King
Readiness Subject, though he were in great favor with God, and his Enemy King
Saul out of God's favor. Therefore though he were never so much provoked, yet
he refused utterly to hurt the Lord's anointed. He durst not for offending God
and his own Conscience (although he had occasion and opportunity,) once lay his
hands upon God's high Officer the King, whom he did know to be a Person
reserved and kept (for his Office sake,) only to God's Punishment and Judgment,
therefore he prays so often, and so earnestly, that he lay not his hands upon
the Lord's anointed. And by these two Examples, Holy David (being named in
Scripture a Man after God's own Heart, Psalm. 88.
) gives a general Rule and Lesson to all Subjects in the World, not to
withstand their Liege Lord and King, not to take a Sword by their private
Authority against their King, God's anointed, who only bears the Sword by
God's Authority, for the Maintenance of the good, and for the Punishment of the
evil, who, only by God's Law, has the use of the Sword at his command, and
also has all Power, Jurisdiction, Regiment, Correction and Punishment, as
Supreme Governor of all his Realms and Dominions, and that even by the
Authority of God, and by God's Ordinances. Yet another notable Story and
Doctrine is in the second Book of the Kings, that makes also for this purpose.
When an Amalekite, 2 Kings 1.
by King Readiness own consent and Commandment, had killed King Saul; he went to
David, supposing to have had great Thanks for his Message, that he had killed
David's deadly Enemy, and therefore he made great haste to tell to David the
chance, bringing with him King Readiness Crown that was upon his Head, and his
Bracelet that was upon his Arm, to persuade his tidings to be true. But Godly
David was so far from rejoicing at this news, that immediately, and forthwith
he rent his Clothes off his Back, he Mourned and wept, and said to the
Messenger, How is it, that thou wast not afraid to lay thy hands on the Lords
anointed to destroy him? And by and by David made one of his Servants to kill
the Messenger, saying, Thy blood be on thine own head, for thine own mouth has
testified and witnessed against thee, granting that thou have slain the Lords
anointed. These examples being so manifest and evident, it is an intolerable
ignorance, madness, and wickedness for Subjects to make any Murmuring,
Rebellion, Resistance, or withstanding Commotion or Insurrection against their
most dear and most dread Sovereign Lord and King, ordained and appointed of
God's Goodness for their Commodity, Peace, and Quietness. Yet let us believe
undoubtedly, (good Christian People,) that we may not obey Kings, Magistrates,
or any other, (though they be our own Fathers,) if they would command us to do
any thing contrary to God's Commanments. In such a case we ought to say with
the Apostle, Acts 7.
We must rather obey God than man. But nevertheless in that case we may not in
any wise withstand violently, or rebel against Rulers, or make any
Insurrection, Sedition, or Tumults, either by force of Arms, (or otherwise,)
against the Anointed of the Lord, or any of his Officers: But we must in such
case patiently suffer all wrongs, and injuries, referring the Judgment of our
Cause only to God. Let us fear the terrible Punishment of Almighty God against
Traitors and rebellious Persons, by the Example of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram,
who repined and grudged against God's Magistrates and Officers, and therefore
the Earth opened and swallowed them up alive. Others for their wicked Murmuring
and Rebellion, were, by a sudden Fire sent down from God, utterly consumed.
Others for their froward behavior to their Rulers and Governors, God's
Ministers, were suddenly stricken with a foul Leprosy. Others were stinged to
death with wonderful strange fiery Serpents. Others were sore plagued, so that
there were killed in one day, 2 Kings 18.
the Number of Fourteen thousand and seven hundred, for Rebellion against them
whom God had appointed to be in Authority. Absalom also rebelling against his
Father King David, was punished with a strange and notable Death.

The Third Part of the Sermon of Obedience.
YE have heard before, in this Sermon of good Order and Obedience, manifestly
proved both by the Scriptures and Examples, that all Subjects are bound to obey
their Magistrates, and for no cause to resist, or withstand, or rebel, or make
any Sedition against them; yea, although they be wicked Men. And let no Man
think, that he can escape unpunished, that commits Treason, Conspiracy, or
Rebellion against his Sovereign Lord the King, though he commit the same never
so secretly, either in Thought, Word, or Deed, never so privily in his privy
Chamber by himself, or openly communicating and consulting with others. For
Treason will not be hid, Treason will out at length: God will have that most
detestable Vice both opened and punished, for that it is so directly against
his Ordinance, and against his high Principal Judge, and Anointed on Earth. The
Violence and Injury that is committed against Authority, is committed against
God, the Commonweal and the whole Realm, which God will have known, and
condignly, or worthily, punished one way or the other. For it is notably
written of the wise Man in Scripture, Eccl. 10.
in the Book called Ecclesiastes: Wish the King no evil in thy Thought, nor
speak no hurt of him in thy privy chamber: For the bird of the air shall betray
thy voice, and with her feathers shall bewray thy words. These Lessons and
Examples are written for our Learning. Therefore let us all fear the most
detestable vice of Rebellion, ever knowing and remembering, that he that
resists or withstandeth common Authority, resists or withstandeth God and
his Ordinance, as it may be proved by many other places of Holy Scripture. And
here let us take heed that we understand not these, or such other like places
(which so straightly command Obedience to Superiors, and so straightly punished
Rebellion, and Disobedience to the same,) to be meant in any condition of the
pretenced or colored Power of the Bishop of Rome. For truly the Scripture of
God allows no such Usurped Power, full of Enormities, Abusions, and
Blasphemies. But the true meaning of these and such places be, to extol and set
forth God's true Ordinance, and the Authority of God's Anointed Kings, and of
their Officers appointed under them. And concerning the Usurped Power of the
Bishop of Rome, which he most wrongfully challenges, as the successor of
Christ and Peter: We may easily perceive how false, feigned, and forged it is,
not only in that it has no sufficient ground in Holy Scripture, but also by
the Fruits and Doctrine thereof. For our Savior Christ and St. Peter teach
most earnestly and agreeably Obedience to Kings, as to the chief and Supreme
Rulers in this world, next under God: But the Bishop of Rome teaches, that
they that are under him, are free from all burdens and charges of the
Commonwealth, and Obedience toward their Prince, most clearly against Christ's
Doctrine and St. Peter's. He ought therefore rather to be called Antichrist, and
the Successor of the Scribes and Pharisees, than Christ's Vicar, and St. Peter's
Successor: Seeing that not only in this point, but also in other weighty
matters of Christian Religion, in matters of Remission and Forgiveness of Sins,
and of Salvation, he teaches so directly against both St. Peter, and against
our Savior Christ, who not only taught Obedience to Kings, but also practiced
Obedience in their Conversation and Living: For we read, that they both paid
Tribute to the King: And also we read that the Holy Virgin Mary, Matthew. 17.
Mother to our Savior Christ, and Joseph, who was taken for his Father, at the
Emperor's Commandment, went to the City of David, Luke 2.
named Bethlehem, to be taxed among other, and to declare their Obedience to
the Magistrates, for God's Ordinances sake. And here let us not forget the
blessed Virgin Mary's Obedience: For although she was highly in God's Favor,
and and Christ's natural Mother, and was also great with Child at the same time,
and so nigh her Travail, that she was delivered in her journey; yet she gladly,
without any excuse or grudging (for Conscience sake,) did take that cold and
foul Winter journey, being in the mean season so poor, that she lay in a
Stable, and there she was Delivered of Christ. And according to the same, Lo,
how St. Peter agrees, writing by express words in his first Epistle: 1 Pet. 2.
Submit your selves, and be Subject (says he,) unto Kings, as unto the chief
heads; and unto rulers, as unto them that are sent of him for the punishment of
evil-doors, and for the praise of them that do well, for so is the will of God.
I need not to expound these words, they be so plain of themselves. St. Peter
does not say, Submit your selves unto me, as Supreme Head of the Church:
Neither says he, Submit your selves from time to time to my Successors in
Rome: But he says, Submit your selves unto your King, your Supreme Head, and
unto those that he appoints in Authority under him; for that you shall so
show your Obedience, it is the Will of God, God will that you be in subjection
to your Head and King. This is God's Ordinance, God's Commandment, and God's
Will, that the whole Body of every Realm, and all the Members and Parts of the
same shall be subject to their Head, their King, and that (as St. Peter
writes,) for the Lords sake: 1 Pet. 2. Romans 13. Matthew. 22.
And (as St. Paul writes,) for conscience sake, and not for fear only. Thus we
learn by the word of God, to yield to our King that is due to our King; That
is, Honor, Obedience, payments of due Taxes, Customs, Tributes, Subsidies,
Love and Fear. Romans 13.
Thus we know partly our bounden Duties to common Authority; now let us learn
to accomplish the same. And let us most instantly and heartily pray to God, the
only Author of all Authority, for all them that be in Authority, according as
St. Paul wills, writing thus to Timothy in his first Epistle: 1 Timothy 2.
I exhort therefore, that, above all things, Prayers, Supplications,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be done for all Men; for Kings, and for all
that be in Authority, that we may live a quiet and a peaceable life, with all
godliness and Honesty: For that is good and accepted, or allowable in the sight
of God our Savior. Here St. Paul makes an earnest, and an especial
Exhortation, concerning Giving of Thanks, and Prayer for Kings and Rulers,
saying, Above all things, as he might say, in any wise principally and chiefly,
let prayer be made for Kings. Let us heartily thank God for his great and
excellent Benefit and Providence concerning the state of Kings. Let us pray for
them, that they may have God's Favor, and God's Protection. Let us pray that
they may ever in all things have God before their Eyes. Let us pray that they
may have Wisdom, Strength, Justice, Clemency, and Zeal to God's Glory, to God's
Verity, to Christian Souls, and to the Commonwealth. Let us pray that they may
rightly use their Sword and Authority, for the maintenance and defense of the
Catholic Faith contained in Holy Scripture, and of their good and honest
Subjects, for the fear and punishment of the evil and vicious People. Let us
pray that they may most faithfully follow the Kings and Captains in the Bible,
David, Ezekias, Josias, and Moses, with such other. And let us pray for
ourselves, that we may live Godlily, in Holy and Christian Conversation: So
shall we have God on our side, and then let us not fear what Man can do against
us: So we shall live in true Obedience, both to our most merciful King in
Heaven, and to our most Christian King on Earth: So shall we please God, and
have the exceeding Benefit, peace of Conscience, rest and quietness here in
this World, and after this life we shall enjoy a better Life, Rest, Peace, and
the everlasting Bliss of Heaven, which he grant us all, that was obedient for
us all, even to the death of the Cross, Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, both now and ever. Amen.

A SERMON Against Whoredom and Uncleanness.
ALthough there want not (good Christian People,) great swarms of Vices worthy
to be rebuked, (unto such decay is true Godliness and Virtuous living now
come:) Yet above other Vices, the outrageous Seas of Adultery, (or breaking of
Wedlock,) Whoredom, Fornication and Uncleanness, have not only burst in, but
also overflowed almost the whole World, unto the great dishonor of God, the
exceeding Infamy of the Name of Christ, the notable decay of true Religion, and
the utter destruction of the public Wealth; and that so abundantly, that,
through the customable use thereof, this Vice is grown unto such an height,
that in a manner among many, it is counted no sin at all, but rather a pastime,
a dalliance, and but a touch of youth: Not rebuked, but winked at: Not
punished, but laughed at. Wherefore it is necessary at this present, Exodus 20.
to treat of the sin of Whoredom and Fornication, declaring unto you the
greatness of this Sin, and how odious, hateful, and abominable it is, and has
always been reputed before God and all good Men, and how grievously it has been
punished both by the Law of God, and the Laws of diverse Princes. Again, to show
you certain remedies, whereby ye may (through the Grace of God,) eschew this
most detestable sin of Whoredom and Fornication, and lead your lives in all
Honesty and Cleanness, and that ye may perceive, that Fornication and Whoredom
are (in the sight of God,) most abominable Sins, ye shall call to remembrance
this Commandment of God, Thou shall not commit Adultery: By the which word,
Adultery, although it be properly understood of the unlawful commixtion or
joining together of a married Man with any Woman beside his Wife, or of a Wife
with any Man beside her Husband: Yet thereby is signified also, all unlawful
use of those Parts, which be ordained for Generation. And this one Commandment
(forbidding Adultery,) does sufficiently paint and set out before our Eyes the
greatness of this Sin of Whoredom, and manifestly declares how greatly it
ought to be abhorred of all honest and faithful Persons. And that none of us
all shall think himself excepted from this Commandment, whether he be old or
young, married or unmarried, Man or Woman, hear what God the Father says by
his most Excellent Prophet Moses: Deuteronomy. 23.
There shall be no Whore among the Daughters of Israel, nor no Whoremonger
among the Sons of Israel.

Here is Whoredom, Fornication, and all other uncleanness forbidden to all
kinds of People, all Degrees, and all Ages without exception. And that we shall
not doubt, but that this Precept or Commandment pertains to us indeed, hear
what Christ (the perfect Teacher of all Truth,) says in the Now Testament, Ye
have heard, (says Christ,) that it was said to them of old time, Matthew. 5.
Thou shall not commit Adultery: But I say unto you, Whosoever sees a Woman,
to have his Lust of her, has committed Adultery with her already in his Heart.
Here our Savior Christ does not only confirm and establish the Law against
Adultery, given in the Old Testament of God the Father, by his Servant M^ses,
and make it of full strength, continually to remain among the Professors of his
Name in the new Law: But he also (condemning the gross interpretation of the
Scribes and Pharisees, which taught that the foresaid Commandment only required
to abstain from the outward Adultery, and not from the filthy desires and
impure Lusts,) teaches us an exact and full perfection of Purity and Cleanness
of Life, both to keep our Bodies undefiled, and our Hearts pure and free from
all evil thoughts, carnal desires, and fleshly consents. How can we then be
free from this Commandment, where so great charge is laid upon us? May a
Servant do what he will in any thing, having Commandment of his Master to the
contrary? Is not Christ our Master? Are not we his Servants? How then may we
neglect our Master's Will and Pleasure, and follow our own Will and Fantasy?
John 15.
Ye are my Friends (says Christ,) if you keep those things that I command you.

Now has Christ our Master commanded us, that we should forsake all
uncleanness and filthiness both in Body and Spirit: This therefore must we do,
if we look to please God. Matthew. 15.
In the Gospel of S Matthew we read, that the Scribes and Pha^is^es were
grievously offended with Christ, because his Disciples did not keep the
traditions of the Forefathers, for they washed not their Hands when they went
to Dinner or Supper. And among other things, Christ answered and said, Hear and
understand; Not that thing which enters into the Mouth, d fileth the Man, but
that which comes out of the Mouth, defiles the Man. Matthew. 15.
For those things which proceed out of the Mouth, come forth from the Heart,
and they defile the Man. For out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders,
breaking of Wedlock, Whoredoms, Thefts, false Witness, B asphemies: These are
the things which d file a Man. Here may we see, that not only Murder, Theft,
false Witness, and Blasphemy, defile Men, but also evil Thoughts, breaking of
Wedlock, Fornication, and Whoredom. Who is now of so little Wit, that he will
esteem Whoredom and Fornication to be things of small importance, and of no
weight before God? Christ (who is the Truth, and cannot lie,) says, Mark 7.
That evil Thoughts, Titus 1
breaking of Wedlock, Whoredom, and Fornication defile a Man, that is to say,
corrupt both the Body and Soul of Man, and make them of the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, the filthy Dunghill, or Dungeon of all unclean Spirits; of the House of
God, the dwelling place of Satan.

John 8.
Again the Gospel of St. John, when the Woman taken in Adultery was brought unto
Christ, said not he unto her, Romans 6.
Go thy way and sin no more* Does not he here call Whoredom, Sin? And what is
the Reward of Sin, 1 John 3.
but everlasting Death? If Whoredom be Sin, then it is not lawful for us to
commit it. For St. John says, John 8.
He that commits Sin, is of the Devil. And our Savior says, Every one that
commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin. If Whoredom had not been Sin, surely St.
John Baptist would never have rebuked King Herod for taking his Brother's Wife,
Mark 6.
but he told him plainly, That it was not lawful for him to take his Brother's
Wife. He winked not at the Whoredom of Herod, although he were a King of Power,
but boldly reproved him for his wicked and abominable living, although for the
same he lost his Head. But he would rather suffer death, (than see God so
dishonored, by the breaking of his Holy Precept and Commandment,) than to
suffer Whoredom to be unrebuked, even in a King. If Whoredom had been but a
Pastime, a Dalliance, and not to be passed of, (as many count it now a days,)
truly John had been more than twice mad, if he would have had the displeasure
of a King, if he would have been cast in Prison, and lost his Head for a
trifle. But John new right well, how filthy, and stinking, and abominable the
Sin of Whoredom is in the sight of God, therefore would he not leave it
unrebuked, no not in a King. If Whoredom be not lawful in a King, neither is it
lawful in a Subject. If Whoredom be not lawful in a public or common Officer,
neither is it lawful in a private Person. If it be not lawful neither in King,
nor Subject, neither in common Officer, nor private Person, truly then it is
lawful in no Man nor Woman, of whatsoever Degree or Age they be. Furthermore in
the Acts of the Apostles we read, Acts 15.
That when the Apostles and Elders with the whole Congregation, were gathered
together to pacify the hearts of the faithful dwelling at Antioch, (which were
disquieted through the false Doctrine of several Jewish Preachers,) they sent
word to the Brethren, That it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to them, to
charge them with no more than with necessary things: Among others, they willed
them to abstain from Idolatry and Fornication, from which, (said they,) if you
keep your selves, ye shall do well. Note here, how these holy and blessed
Fathers of Christ's Church would charge the Congregation with no more things
than were necessary. Mark also, how among those things, from the which they
commanded the Brethren of Antioch to abstain, Fornication and Whoredom are
numbered. It is therefore necessary, by the determination and consent of the
Holy Ghost, and the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Congregation, that as
from Idolatry and Superstition, so likewise we must abstain from Fornication
and Whoredom. It is necessary unto Salvation, to abstain from Idolatry: So it
is to abstain from Whoredom. Is there any nigher way to lead unto damnation,
than to be an Idolater? No; even so, neither is there any nearer way to
damnation, than to be a Fornicator and a Whoremonger. Now where are those
People, which so lightly esteem breaking of Wedlock, Whoredom, Fornication, and
Adultery? It is necessary, says the Holy Ghost, the blessed Apostles, the
Elders, with the whole Congregation of Christ, it is necessary to Salvation,
(say they,) to abstain from Whoredom. If it be necessary unto Salvation, then
woe be to them, which, neglecting their Salvation, give their Minds to so
filthy and stinking a Sin, to so wicked Vice, and to such detestable
abomination.

The Second Part of the Sermon against Adultery.
YOU have been taught in the First Part of this Sermon against Adultery, how
that Vice at this day reigns most above all other Vices, and what is meant by
this word, (Adultery,) and how Holy Scripture dissuadeth, or discounselleth
from doing that filthy Sin, and finally, what corruption comes to Man's Soul
through the Sin of Adultery. Now to proceed further, let us hear what the
blessed Apostle St. Paul says to this matter, writing to the Romans he has
these words: Romans 13.
Let us cast away the Works of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light. Let us
walk honestly as it were in the day time, not in eating and drinking, neither
in chambering and wantonness, neither in strife and envying, but put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts of
it. Here the Holy Apostle exhorts us to cast away the Works of Darkness,
which (among other,) he calls gluttonous eating, drinking, chambering, and
wantonness, which are all Ministers unto that Vice, and preparations to induce
and bring in the filthy Sin of the Flesh. He calls them the Deeds and Works
of Darkness, not only because they are customably in Darkness, John 3 Matthew. 25.
or in the night time, (for every one that does evil, hates the Light, neither
comes he to the Light, lest his Works should be reproved,) but that they lead
the right way unto that utter Darkness, where weeping and gnashing of Teeth
shall be. Romans 8.
And he says in another place of the same Epistle, They that are in the Flesh,
cannot please God: We are Debtors, not to the Flesh, that we should live after
the Flesh, for if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die. 1. Cor. 6.
Again he says, Flee from Whoredom, for every Sin that a Man commits is
without his Body: But whosoever commits Whoredom, sins against his own
Body. Do ye not know, That your Members are the Temples of the Holy Ghost which
is in you, whom also ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are dearly
bought: Glorify God in your Bodies, etc. And a little before he says, Do ye
not know, That your Bodies are the Members of Christ? Shall I then take the
Members of Christ, and make them the Members of a Whore? God forbid. Do ye not
know, That he which cleaves to a Whore, is made one Body with her? There shall
be two in one Flesh, (says he,) but he that cleaves to the Lord, is one
Spirit. What godly Words does the blessed Apostle St. Paul bring forth here, to
dissuade and discounsel us from Whoredom and Uncleanness. Your Members (says
he,) are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which whosoever does defile, G^d will
destroy him, as says St. Paul. If we be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, how
unfitting then is it, to drive that Holy Spirit from us through Whoredom, and
in his place, to set the wicked Spirits of Uncleanness and Fornication, and to
be joined, and do Service to them? Ye are dearly bought, (says he, 1. Pet. 1.
) therefore glorify God in your Bodies. Christ, that innocent Lamb of God,
has bought us from the Servitude of the Devil, not with corruptible Gold and
Silver, Esaiah 38.
but with his most precious and dear heart blood. To what intent? That we
should fall again into our old Uncleanness and abominable Living? Luke 1.
Nay verily: But that we should serve him all the days of our Life, in Holiness
and Righteousness, that we should glorify him in our Bodies, by purity and
cleanness of Life. He declares also, That our Bodies are the Members of
Christ: How unseemly a thing is it then, to cease to be incorporate, or
imbodied and made one with Christ, and through Whoredom to be enjoined and made
all one with a Whore? What greater dishonor or injury can we do to Christ, than
to take away from him the Members of his Body, and to join them to Whores,
Devils, and wicked Spirits? And what more dishonor can we do to ourselves, than
through Uncleanness, to lose so excellent a Dignity and Freedom, and to become
Bondslaves and miserable Captives to the Spirits of Darkness? Let us therefore
consider First, the Glory of Christ, then our Estate, our Dignity, and Freedom,
wherein God has set us, by giving us his Holy Spirit, and let us valiantly
defend the same against Satan, and all his crafty Assaults, that Christ may be
honored, and that we lose not our Liberty or Freedom, but still remain in one
Spirit with him.

Ephesians. 5.
Moreover, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, the blessed Apostle wills us to be
so pure and free from Adultery, Fornication, and all Uncleanness, that we not
once name them among us, (as it becomes Saints,) nor Filthiness, nor foolish
Talking, nor Jesting, which are not comely, but rather giving of Thanks: For
this ye know, (says he,) that no Whoremonger, 1 Cor. 6.
neither unclean Person, or covetous Person, (which is an Idolater,) has any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. And that we should remember to
be holy, pure, and free from all Uncleanness; the holy Apostle calls us
Saints, because we are sanctified and made holy by the Blood of Christ, through
the Holy Ghost.

Now if we be Saints, what have we to do with the manners of the Heathen? 1
Pet. 1. Levit. 19.
Saint Peter says, As he which called you his Holy, even so be ye Holy also in
your Conversation, because it is written, Be ye Holy, for I am Holy. Hitherto
have we heard, how grievous a Sin Fornication and Whoredom is, and how greatly
God does abhor it throughout the whole Scripture: How can it any otherwise be
than a Sin of most abomination, seeing it may not once be named among the
Christians, much less may it in any point be committed. And surely, if we would
weigh the greatness of this Sin, and consider it in the right kind, we should
find the Sin of Whoredom, to be that most filthy Lake, foul Puddle, and
stinking Sink, whereunto all kinds of Sins and Evils flow, where also they have
their resting place and abiding.

For has not the Adulterer a pride in his Whoredom? As the Wise Man says,
They are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in things that are stark
naught. Is not the Adulterer also Idle, and delights in no Godly exercise,
but only in that his most filthy and beastly pleasure? Is not his Mind plucked,
and utterly drawn away from all virtuous Studies, and fruitful Labors, and
only given to carnal and fleshly imagination? Does not the Whoremonger give his
mind to Gluttony, that he may be the more apt to serve his Lusts, and carnal
Pleasures? Does not the Adulterer give his Mind to Covetousness, and to polling
and pilling of others, that he may be the more able to maintain his Harlots and
Whores, and to continue in his filthy and unlawful Love? Swells he not also
with Envy against others, fearing that his Prey should be allured, and taken
away from him? Again, is he not ireful, and replenished with Wrath and
Displeasure, even against his best beloved, if at any time his beastly and
devilish Request be let? What Sin, or kind of Sin is it, that is not joined
with Fornication and Whoredom? It is a Monster of many Heads: It receives all
kinds of Vices, and refuses all kinds of Virtues. If one several Sin brings
Damnation, what is to be thought of that Sin which is accompanied with all
Evils, and has waiting on it whatsoever is hateful to God, damnable to Man,
and pleasant to Satan?

Great is the Damnation that hangs over the Heads of Fornicators and
Adulterers. What shall I speak of other incommodities, which issue and flow out
of this stinking puddle of Whoredom? Is not that Treasure, which, before all
other, is most regarded of honest Persons, the good Fame and Name of Man and
Woman, lost through Whoredom? What Patrimony or Livelihood, What Substance,
What Goods, What Riches does Whoredom shortly consume, and bring to naught?
What Valiantness and Strength is many times made weak, and destroyed with
Whoredom? What Wit is so fine, that is not besotted and defaced through
Whoredom? What Beauty (although it were never so excellent,) is not disfigured
through Whoredom? Is not Whoredom an enemy to the pleasant Flower of Youth, and
brings it not gray Hairs and old Age before the time? What gift of Nature
(although it were never so precious,) is not corrupted with Whoredom? Come not
many foul and most loathsome Diseases of Whoredom? From whence come so many
Bastards, and misbegotten Children, to the high displeasure of God, and
dishonor of Holy Wedlock, but of Whoredom? How many consume all their
Substance and Goods, and at the last fall into such extreme poverty, that
afterward they steal, and so are hanged, through Whoredom? What Contention and
Man slaughter comes of Whoredom? How many Maidens be deflowred, How many Wives
corrupted, how many Widows defiled through Whoredom? How much is the Public
and Commonweal impoverished and troubled through Whoredom? How much is God's
Word contemned and depraved through Whoredom, and Whoremongers? Of this Vice
comes a great part of the Divorces, which (now adays,) be so commonly
accustomed and used by Men's private Authority, to the great displeasure of God,
and the breach of the most Holy knot and bond of Matrimony. For when this most
detestable Sin is once crept into the Breast of the Adulterer, so that he is
entangled with unlawful and unchaste Love; straightways his true and lawful Wife
is despised, her Presence is abhorred, her company stinketh, and is loathsome,
whatsoever she does is dispraised: There is no quietness in the House, so long
as she is in his sight: Therefore to make short work, she must away, for her
Husband can brook her no longer. Thus through Whoredom, is the honest and
harmless Wife put away, and an Harlot received in her stead: And in like sort,
it happens many times in the Wife toward her Husband. O Abomination! Christ
our Savior, very God and Man, coming to restore the Law of his Heavenly Father
unto the right sense, understanding, and meaning, (among other things,)
reformed the abuse of this Law of God. For whereas the Jews used a long
sufferance, by custom, to put away their Wives at their pleasure, for every
cause, Christ correcting that evil custom did teach, That if any Man put away
his Wife, and marries another, Matthew. 19.
for any cause, except only for Adultery, (which then was Death by the Law,) he
was an Adulterer, and forced also his Wife so divorced, to commit Adultery, if
she were joined to any other Man, and the Man also so joined with her, to
commit Adultery.

In what case then are these Adulterers, which, for the love of an Whore, put
away their true and lawful Wife, against all Law, right Reason, and Conscience?
O how Damnable is the state wherein they stand! Swift Destruction shall fall on
them, if they repent not, and amend not: For God will not suffer Holy Wedlock
thus to be dishonored, hated and despised. He will once punish this fleshly
and licentious manner of living, and cause that this holy Ordinance shall be
had in Reverence and Honor. For surely Wedlock (as the Apostle says,) is
honorable among all Men, and the Bed undefiled: Heb. ^.
But Whoremongers and Fornicators God will Judge, that is to say, punish and
condemn. But to what purpose is this labor taken to describe and set forth the
greatness of the Sin of Whoredom, and the Discommodities that issue and flow
out from it, seeing that breath and tongue shall sooner fail any Man, than he
shall or may be able to set it out according to the Abomination and Heinousness
thereof? Notwithstanding this is spoken to the intent that all Men should flee
Whoredom, and live in the fear of God: God grant that it may not be spoken in
vain.

The Third Part of the Sermon against Adultery.
IN the Second Part of this Sermon against Adultery that was last read, you
have learned how earnestly the Scripture warns us to avoid the sin of
Adultery, and to embrace cleanness of Life: And that through Adultery, we fall
into all kinds of Sin, and are made Bondslaves to the Devil: Through cleanness
of Life we are made members of Christ: And finally, how far Adultery brings a
Man from all Goodness, and drives him headlong into all Vices, Mischief, and
Misery. Now will I declare unto you in order, with what grievous punishments
God in times past plagued Adultery, and how certain worldly Princes also did
punish it; that ye may perceive, that Whoredom and Fornication be sins no less
detestable in the sight of God, and all good Men, than I have hitherto uttered.
In the First Book of Moses we read, That when Mankind began to be multiplied
upon the earth, the Men and W^men gave their minds so greatly to fleshly
delight and filthy pleasure, that they lived without all fear of God. God,
seeing this their beastly and abominable living, and perceiving that they
amended not, but rather increased daily more and more in their sinful and
unclean Manners, repented that he had ever made Man: And to show how greatly he
abhors Adultery, Whoredom, Fornication, and all Uncleanness; He made all the
Fountains of the deep Earth to burst out, and the sluices of Heaven to be
opened, so that the Rain came down upon the Earth by the space of forty Days,
and forty Nights, and by this means destroyed the whole World, and all Mankind,
eight Persons only excepted, that is to say, Noah the Preacher of
Righteousness, (as St. Peter calls him,) and his Wife, his three Sons, and
their Wives. O what a grievous Plague did God cast here upon all living
Creatures for the sin of Whoredom! For the which, God took vengeance, not only
of Man, but of all Beasts, Fowls, and all living Creatures. Genesis 4.
Manslaughter was committed before, yet was not the World destroyed for that:
But for Whoredom all the World (few only except,) was overflowed with Waters,
and so perished. An example worthy to be remembered, that ye may learn to fear
God.

We read again, Genesis 19.
That for the filthy sin of Uncleanness, Sodom and Gomorrha, and the other
Cities nigh unto them, were destroyed by Fire and Brimstone from Heaven; so
that there was neither Man, Woman, Child, nor Beast, nor yet any thing that
grew upon the Earth there, left undestroyed; whose Heart trembles not at the
hearing of this History? Who is so drowned in Whoredom and Uncleanness, that
will not now for ever after leave this abominable living; seeing that God so
grievously punishes uncleanness, to rain Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, to
destroy whole Cities, to kill Man, Woman, and Child, and all other living
Creatures there abiding, to consume with Fire all that ever grew? What can be
more manifest tokens of God's wrath and vengeance against Uncleanness and
impurity of Life? Mark this History (good People) and fear the vengeance of
God. Do you not read also, Genesis 12.
that God did smite Pharaoh and his House with great Plagues, because that he
ungodlily desired Sarah the Wife of Abraham? Genesis 20.
Likewise we read of Abimelech King of Gerar, although he touched her not by
carnal knowledge. These Plagues and Punishments did God cast upon filthy and
unclean Persons, before the Law was given, (the Law of Nature only reigning in
the Hearts of Men,) to declare how great love he had to Matrimony and Wedlock;
and again, how much he abhors Adultery, Fornication and all Uncleanness.
Lev. 22.
And when the Law, that forbad Whoredom, was given by Moses to the Jews, did
not God command that the breakers thereof should be put to death? The words of
the Law be these: Whosoever commits Adultery with any Man's Wife, shall die the
death, both the Man and the Woman, because he has broken Wedlock with his
Neighbor's Wife. In the Law also it was commanded, That a Damosel and a Man,
taken together in Whoredom, should be both st^ned to death. Numb. 25.
In another place we also read, that God commanded Moses to take all the
head-Rulers and Princes of the People, and to hang them upon Gibbets openly,
that every Man might see them, because they either committed, or did not punish
Whoredom. Again, did not God send such a Plague among the People for
Fornication and Uncleanness, that there died in one day Three and twenty
thousand? I pass over, for lack of time, many other Histories of the Holy
Bible, which declare the grievous vengeance, and heavy displeasure, of God,
against Whoremongers and Adulterers. Certes, this extreme Punishment appointed
of God shows evidently, how greatly God hates Whoredom. And let us not
doubt, but that God at this present abhors all manner of Uncleanness, no
less than he did in the Old Law, and will undoubtedly punish it, both in this
World, and in the World to come. For he is a God, Psalm. 5.
that can abide no Wickedness: Therefore ought it to be eschewed of all that
tender the Glory of God, and the Salvation of their own Souls.

1 Cor. 10.
Saint Paul says, All these things are written for our Example, and to teach us
the Fear of God, and the Obedience to his Holy Law. For if God spared not the
natural Branches, neither will he spare us that be but Grafts, if we commit the
like Offense. If God destroyed many thousands of People, many Cities, yea the
whole World for Whoredom, let us not flatter ourselves, and think we shall
escape free, and without Punishment. For he has promised in his Holy Law, to
send most grievous Plagues upon them that transgress, or break his Holy
Commandments. Thus have we heard how God punishes the Sin of Adultery: Let us
now hear certain Laws, which the Civil Magistrates devised in their Countries
for the Punishment thereof, that we may learn how Uncleanness has ever been
detested in all well-ordered Cities and Commonwealths, and among all honest
Persons. The Law among the Lepreians, was this, That when any were taken in
Adultery, Laws devised for the Punishment of Whoredom.
they were bound and carried three days through the City, and afterward, as
long as they lived, they were despised, and, with shame and confusion, counted
as Persons void of all honesty. Among the Locrensians, the Adulterers had both
their Eyes thrust out. The Romans in times past punished Whoredom, sometime by
Fire, sometime by Sword. If any Man among the Egyptians had been taken in
Adultery, the Law was, That he should openly, in the presence of all the
People, be scourged naked with Whips, unto the number of a thousand Stripes;
the Woman that was taken with him, had her Nose cut off, whereby she was known
ever after to be a Whore, and therefore to be abhorred of all Men. Among the
Arabians, they that were taken in Adultery had their Heads stricken from their
Bodies. The Athenians punished Whoredom with death, in like manner. So likewise
did the barbarous Tartarians. Among the Turks even at this day, they that be
taken in Adultery, both Man and Woman, are stoned straightway to death, without
mercy. Thus we see, what godly Acts were devised in times past of the high
Powers, for the putting away of Whoredom, and for the maintaining of Holy
Matrimony or Wedlock, and pure Conversation: And the Authors of these Acts were
no Christians, but the Heathen: Yet were they so enflamed with the love of
Honesty, and pureness of Life, that for the maintenance and conservation, or
keeping up, of that, they made godly Statutes, suffering neither Fornication or
Adultery to reign in their Realms unpunished. Christ said to the People, The
Ninevites shall rise at the Judgment with this Nation, (meaning the unfaithful
Jews,) and shall condemn them: For they repented at the Preaching of Jonas, but
behold, says he, a Greater than Jonas is here, Mat. 12.
(meaning himself,) and yet they repent not. Shall not (think you,) likewise
the Locrensians, Arabians, Athenians, with such other, rise up in the Judgment,
and condemn us, forasmuch as they ceased from their Whoredom at the Commandment
of Man, and we have the Law and manifest Precepts and Commandments of God, and
yet forsake we not our filthy Conversation? Truly, truly, it shall be easier at
the day of Judgment to these Heathens, than to us, except we repent and amend.
For though death of Body seems unto us a grievous Punishment in this World
for Whoredom: Yet is that pain nothing in comparison to the grievous Torments,
which Adulterers, Fornicators, and all unclean Persons, shall suffer after this
Life. For all such shall be excluded and shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, 1
Col. 6. Galat. 5. Ephesians. 5.
as Saint Paul says, Be not deceived, for neither Whoremongers nor Worshippers
of Images, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate Persons, nor Sodomites, nor Thieves,
nor covetous Persons, nor Drunkards, nor cursed Speakers, nor Revilers, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Apoc. 20.
And Saint John in his Revelation says, That Whoremongers shall have their
part with Murderers, Sorcerers, Enchanters, Liars, Idolaters, and such other,
in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second death.
The Punishment of the Body, although it be death, has an end: But the
Punishment of the Soul, which Saint John calls the second death, is
everlasting, there shall be Fire and Brimstone, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth, the Worm, Mat. 13. Mark 9.
that there shall gnaw the Conscience of the damned, shall never dye. O! whose
Heart destilleth not even drops of Blood, to hear and consider these things? If
we tremble and shake at the hearing and naming of these Pains, Oh what shall
they do that feel them, that shall suffer them, yea, and ever shall suffer,
Worlds without end: God have mercy upon us. Who is now so drowned in Sin, and
past all Godliness, that he will set more by filthy and stinking Pleasure,
(which soon passes away,) than by the loss of everlasting Glory? Again, who
will so give himself to the Lusts of the Flesh, that he fears nothing at all
the pain of Hell fire? But let us hear how we may eschew the Sin of Whoredom
and Adultery, that we may walk in the Fear of God, and be free from those most
grievous and intolerable Torments, which abide all unclean Persons. Now to
avoid Fornication, Adultery, Remedies whereby to avoid Fornication and Adultery.
and all Uncleanness, let us provide, that above all things we may keep our
Hearts pure and clean, from all evil Thoughts and carnal Lusts: For if that be
once infected and corrupt, we fall headlong into all kind of Ungodliness. This
shall we easily do, if, when we feel inwardly, that Satan our old Enemy
tempts us unto Whoredom, we by no means consent to his crafty Suggestions,
but valiantly resist and withstand him by strong Faith in the Word of God:
Alleging against him always in our Heart, this Commandment of God: Scriptum
est, non moechaberis. It is written, Thou shall not commit Whoredom. It shall
be good also for us, ever to live in the Fear of God, and to set before our
Eyes the grievous Threatenings of God against all ungodly Sinners, and to
consider in our mind, how filthy, beastly, and short that Pleasure is,
whereunto Satan continually stirs and moves us: And again, how the pain
appointed for that Sin is intolerable and everlasting. Moreover, to use a
temperance and sobriety in Eating and Drinking, to eschew unclean
Communication, to avoid all filthy Company, to flee Idleness, to delight in
reading the Holy Scriptures, to watch in Godly Prayers, and virtuous
Meditation, and at all times, to exercise some Godly Travels, shall help
greatly to the eschewing of Whoredom.

And here are all degrees to be monished, whether they be married or unmarried,
to love Chastity and Cleanness of Life. For the married are bound by the Law of
God so purely to love one another, that neither of them seek any strange Love.
The Man must only cleave to his Wife, and the Wife again only to her Husband:
They must so delight one in another's Company, that none of them covet any
other. And as they are bound thus to live together in all Godliness and
Honesty, so likewise it is their Duty, virtuously to bring up their Children,
and provide, that they fall not into Satan's Snare, nor into any Uncleanness,
but that they come pure and honest unto Holy Wedlock, when time requires. So
likewise ought all Masters and Rulers to provide, that no Whoredom, nor any
point of Uncleanness, be used among their Servants. And again, they that are
single, and feel in themselves, that they cannot live without the Company of a
Woman, let them get Wives of their own, and so live Godly together: For it is
better to marry than to burn.

1 Cor. 7.
And to avoid Fornication, says the Apoostle, let every Man have his own Wife,
and every Woman her own Husband. Finally, all such as feel in themselves a
sufficiency and ability (through the working of God's Spirit,) to lead a sole
and continent Life, let them praise God for his Gift, and seek all means
possible to maintain the same; as by reading of Holy Scriptures, by Godly
Meditations, by continual Prayers, and such other virtuous Exercises. If we all
on this wise will endeavor ourselves to eschew Fornication, Adultery, and all
Uncleanness, and lead our Lives in all Godliness and Honesty, serving God with
a pure and clean Heart, and glorifying him in our Bodies, by the leading an
innocent and harmless Life, we may be sure to be in the number of those of whom
our Savior Christ speaks in the Gospel, on this manner, Blessed are the pure
in Heart, Matthew. 5.
for they shall see God; to whom alone be all Glory, Honor, Rule, and Power,
World without End. Amen.

A SERMON AGAINST Contention and Brawling.
THIS day (good Christian People,) shall be declared unto you, the
unprofitableness and shameful unhonesty of Contention, Strife, and Debate; to
the intent, that when you shall see, as it were in a Table painted before your
Eyes, the Evil-Favouredness and Deformity of this most detestable Vice, your
Stomachs may be moved to rise against it, and to detest and abhor that Sin,
which is so much to be hated, and pernicious, and hurtful to all Men. But among
all kinds of Contention, none is more hurtful than is Contention in matters of
Religion. Eschew (says Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 2 Timothy 2.
) foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they breed Strife. It becomes
not the Servant of God to fight, or strive, but to be Meek toward all Men. This
Contention and Strife was in Saint Paul's time among the Corinthians, and is at
this time among us English Men. For too many there be, which, upon the
Ale-benches or other places, delight to set forth certain questions, not so
much pertaining to Edification, as to Vainglory, and showing forth of their
cunning, and so unsoberly to reason and dispute, that when neither part will
give place to other, they fall to Chiding and Contention, and sometime from hot
Words to further Inconvenience. Saint Paul could not abide to hear among the
Corinthians, these words of Discord or Dissension, 1 Cor. 3.
I hold of Paul, I of Cephas, and I of Apollo, What would he then say, if he
heard these words of Contention, (which be now almost in every Man's Mouth?) He
is a Pharisee, he is a Gospeller, he is of the new sort, he is of the Old
Faith, he is a new-broched Brother, he is a good Catholic Father, he is a
Papist, he is an Heretic. O how the Church is divided? O how the Cities be cut
and mangled? O how the Coat of Christ, that was without Seam, is all to rent
and torn? O Body Mystical of Christ, where is that holy and happy unity, out of
the which whosoever is, he is not in Christ? If one Member be pulled from
another, where is the Body? If the Body be drawn from the Head, where is the
Life of the Body? We cannot be joined to Christ our Head, except we be glued
with Concord and Charity one to another. For he that is not of this Unity, is
not of the Church of Christ, which is a Congregation or Unity together, and not
a Division. 1 Cor. 3.
Saint Paul says, That as long as Emulation or Envying, Contention, and
Factions or Sects be among us, we be carnal, and walk according to the fleshly
Man. James 3.
And Saint James says, If ye have bitter Emulation or Envying, and Contention
in your Hearts, glory not of it; for where Contention is, there is
Vnstedfastness and all Evil Deeds. And why do we not hear Saint Paul, which
prays us, 1 Cor. 1.
whereas he might command us, saying, I beseech you in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that you will speak all one thing, and that there be no
dissension among you, but that you will be one whole Body, of one mind, and of
one opinion in the Truth. If his desire be reasonable and honest, why do we not
grant it? If his request be for our profit, why do we refuse it? And if we list
not to hear his Petition of Prayer, yet let us hear his Exhortation, where he
says, Ephesians. 4.
I exhort you that you walk as it becomes the Vocation in which you be called,
with all Submission and Meekness, with Lenity and Softness of Mind, bearing
with one another in Charity, studying to keep the Unity of the Spirit by the
Bond of Peace: For there is one Body, one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism. There
is (says he,) but one Body, of the which he can be no lively Member, that is
at variance with the other Members. There is one Spirit, which joyneth and
knitteth all things in one. And how can this one Spirit reign in us, when we
among ourselves be divided? There is but one Faith, and how can we then say, He
is of the Old Faith, and he is of the New Faith? There is but one Baptism, and
then shall not all they, which be Baptized, be one? Contention causes
Division, wherefore it ought not to be among Christians, whom one Faith and
Baptism joyneth in an Unity. But if we contemn Saint Paul's request and
exhortation, yet at the least let us regard his earnest entreating, in the
which he does very earnestly charge us, and (as I may so speak,) conjure us in
this form and manner, If there be any Consolation in Christ, Phil. 2.
if there be any Comfort of Love, if you have any Fellowship of the Spirit, if
you have any Bowels of Pity and Compassion, fulfill my Joy, being all like
affected, having one Charity, being of one Mind, of one Opinion, that nothing
be done by Contention, or Vainglory. Who is he, that has any Bowels of Pity,
that will not be moved with these Words, so pithy? Whose Heart is so stony,
that the Sword of these Words (which be more sharp than any two edged Sword,)
may not cut and break asunder? Wherefore let us endeavor ourselves to fulfill
Saint Paul's Joy here in this place, which shall be at length to our great Joy
in another place. How we should read the Scripture.
Let us so read the Scripture, that by reading thereof, we may be made the
better Liver^, rather than the more Contentious Disputers. If any thing be
necessary to be Taught, Reasoned, or Disputed, let us do it with all Meekness,
Softness, and Lenity. If any thing shall chance to be spoken uncomely, let one
bear another Frailty. He, that is faulty, let him rather amend, than defend
that which he has spoken amiss, lest he fall by Contention from a foolish
Error into an obstinate Heresy. For it is better to give place meekly, than
to win the Victory with the breach of Charity, which chances when every Man
will defend his Opinion obstinately. If we be the Christian Men, why do we not
follow Christ, who says, Matthew. 11.
Learn of me, for I am Meek, and Lowly in Heart? A Disciple must learn the
Lesson of his Schoolmaster, and a Servant must obey the Commandment of his
Master, James 3.
He that is Wise and Learned, (says Saint James,) let him show his Goodness by
his Good Conversation and Soberness of his Wisdom. For where there is Envy and
Contention, that Wisdom comes not from God, but is wordly Wisdom, Man's
Wisdom, and devilish Wisdom. For the Wisdom that comes from above, from the
Spirit of God, is Chaste and Pure, corrupted with no Evil Affections; it is
Quiet, Meek, and Peaceable, abhorring all desire of Contention; it is
Tractable, Obedient, not Grudging to learn, and to give place to them that
teach better for the Reformation. For there shall never be an end of Striving
and Contention, if we contend, who in Contention shall be Master, and have the
over-hand: We shall heap Error upon Error, if we continue to defend that
obstinately, which was spoken unadvisedly. For Truth it is, that Stiffness in
maintaining an Opinion, breeds Contention, Brawling, and Chiding, which is a
Vice among all other most pernicious and pestilent to common Peace and
Quietness. And as it stands betwixt two Persons and Parties, (for no Man
commonly does chide with himself,) so it comprehends two most detestable
Vices; the one is picking of Quarrels, with sharp and contentious words; the
other stands in froward answering, and multiplying evil Words again. The
first is so abominable that Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 5.
If any that is called a Brother, be a Worshipper of Idols, a Brawler, a picker
of Quarrels, a Thief, or an Extortioner, with him that is such a Man, see that
you eat not. Now here consider, that St. Paul numbreth a Scolder, a Brawler,
Against Quarrel-picking.
or a picker of Quarrels, among Thieves and Idolaters, and many times there
comes less hurt of a Thief, than of a Railing Tongue: For the one takes away
a Man's good Name, the other takes but his Riches, which is of much less Value
and Estimation than is his good Name. And a Thief hurts but him from whom he
steals: But he that has an evil Tongue, troubles all the Town where he
dwells, and sometime the whole Country. And a Railing Tongue is a Pestilence
so full of Contagiousness, that Saint Paul wills Christian Men to forbear the
Company of such, 1 Cor. 1.
and neither to eat nor drink with them. And whereas he will not, that a
Christian Woman should forsake her Husband, although he be an Infidel, or that
a Christian Servant should depart from his Master, which is an Infidel and
Heathen, and so suffers a Christian Man to keep Company with an Infidel: Yet
he forbids us to eat or drink with a Scolder, or Quarrel-picker. And also in
the Sixth Chapter to the Corinthians, he says thus, Be not deceived, for
neither Fornicators, 1 Cor. 6.
neither Worshippers of Idols, neither Thieves, nor Drunkards, nor cursed
Speakers, shall dwell in the Kingdom of Heaven. It must needs be a great fault,
that does move and cause the Father to disinherit his Natural Son. And how can
it otherwise be, Against froward answering. Matthew. 5.
but that this cursed Speaking must needs be a most damnable Sin, the which
does cause God, our most Merciful and Loving Father, to deprive us of his most
blessed Kingdom of Heaven? Against the other Sin that stands in requiting
Taunt for Taunt, speaks Christ, himself, saying, I say unto you, resist not
evil, but love your Enemies, and say well by them, that say evil by you, do
well unto them that do evil unto you, and pray for them that do hurt and
persecute you, that you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven,
who suffers his Sun to rise both upon good and evil, and sends his rain
both upon the just and unjust. To this Doctrine of Christ agrees very well the
teaching of St. Paul, that chosen vessel of God, who cease not to exhort and
call upon us, Romans 12.
saying, Bless them that curse you, bless, I say, and curse not, recompense to
no man evil for evil, if it be possible (as much as lies in you,) live
peaceably with all men.

The Second Part of the Sermon against Contention.
IT has been declared unto you in this Sermon against Strife and Brawling,
what great inconvenience comes thereby, specially of such Contention as
grows in matters of Religion: And how, when as no Man will give place to
another, there is no end of contention and discord; and that unity, which God
requires of Christians, is utterly thereby neglected and broken: And that this
contention stands chiefly in two points, as in picking of quarrels, and
making of froward Answers. Now ye shall hear St. Paul's words, Romans 12.
saying, Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto
wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will revenge, says the
Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him drink;
be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with goodness. All these be the
words of St. Paul, but they that be full of Stomach, and set so much by
themselves, that they may not abide so much as one evil word to be spoken of
them, peradventure will say, If I be reviled, An Objection.
shall I stand still like a Goose, or a Fool, with my Finger in my Mouth? Shall
I be such an Idiot and Dizard, to suffer every Man to speak upon me what they
list, to rail what they list, to spew out all their venom against me at their
pleasures? Is it not convenient, that he that speaks evil should be answered
accordingly? If I shall use this lenity and softness, I shall both increase
mine enemies frowardness, and provoke others to do the like. Such reasons make
they, that can suffer nothing, for the defense of their impatience. And yet, An
Answer.
if by froward answering to a froward person, there were hope to remedy his
frowardness, he should less offend that so should answer, doing the same not of
ire or malice, but only of that intent, that he, that is so froward or
malicious, may be reformed. But he that cannot amend another man's fault, or
cannot amend it without his own fault, better it were that one should perish
than two. Then if he cannot quiet him with gentle words, at the least, let him
not follow him in wicked and uncharitable words. If he can pacify him with
suffering, let him suffer; and if not, it is better to suffer evil, than to do
evil, to say well, than to say evil. For to speak well against evil, comes of
the Spirit of God: But to render evil for evil, comes of the contrary Spirit.
And he that cannot temper, nor rule, his own anger, is but weak and feeble; and
rather more like a Woman or a Child, than a strong Man. For the true strength
and manliness is to overcome wrath, and to despise injuries, and other men's
foolishness. And besides this, he that shall despise the wrong done unto him by
his enemy, every man shall perceive that it was spoken or done without cause:
Whereas contrarily, he that does fume and chafe at it, shall help the cause of
his adversary, giving suspicion that the thing is true. And in so going about
to revenge evil, we show our selves to be evil; and while we punish and revenge
another Man's folly, we double and augment our own folly. But many pretenses
find they that be wilful, to color their impatience. Mine Enemy, say they, is
not worthy to have gentle words or deeds, being so full of malice or
frowardness. Theless he is worthy, the more art thou therefore allowed of God,
and the more art thou commended of Christ, for whose sake thou should render
good for evil, because he has commanded thee, and also deserved that thou
should so do. Thy neighbor has peradventure with a word offended thee; call
thou to thy remembrance, with how many words and deeds, how grievously thou
have offended thy Lord God. What was Man, when Christ died for him? Was he not
his enemy, and unworthy to have his Favor and Mercy? Even so, with what
gentleness and patience does he forbear, and tolerate, and suffer thee,
although he is daily offended by thee? Forgive therefore a light Trespass to
thy neighbor, that Christ may forgive thee many thousands of Trespasses, which
art every day an offender. For if thou forgive thy Brother, being to thee a
trespasser, then have thou a sure sign and token, that God will forgive thee,
to whom all Men be debtors and trespassers. How would thou have God merciful
to thee, if thou will be cruel unto thy Brother? Can thou not find in thy
heart to do that toward another that is thy fellow, which God has done to
thee, that art but his servant? Ought not one sinner to forgive another, seeing
that Christ which was no sinner, did pray to his Father for them that, without
mercy, and despitefully put him to death? 1 Pet. 2.
Who, when he was reviled, he did not use reviling words again; and when he
suffered wrongfully, he did not threaten, but gave all vengeance to the
judgment of his Father which judges rightfully. And what crackest thou of thy
Head, if thou labor not to be in the Body? Thou can be no member of Christ,
if thou follow not the steps of Christ: Isai. 53. Luke 23. Acts 7.
Who (as the Prophet says,) was led to death like a Lamb, not opening his
mouth to reviling, but opening his Mouth to praying for them that crucified
him, saying, Father forgive them, for they cannot tell what they do. The which
example, anon after Christ, St. Stephen did follow, and after, St. Paul: We be
evil spoken of, (says he,) and we speak well: We suffer persecution, and take
it patiently: Men curse us, and we gently entreat. 1 Cor. 4.
Thus Saint Paul taught that he did, and he did that he taught. Bless you
(says he,) them that persecute you; bless you, and curse not. Is it a great
thing to speak well to thine Adversary, to whom Christ does command thee to do
well? David, when Shimes did call him all to naught, did not chide again, but
said patiently, Suffer him to speak evil, if perchance the Lord will have Mercy
on me. Histories be full of Examples of Heathen Men, that took very meekly both
opprobrious and reproachful Words, and injurious or wrongful Deeds. And shall
those Heathen excel in Patience us that profess Christ, the Teacher and Example
of all Patience? Lysander, when one did rage against him, in reviling of him,
he was nothing moved, but said, Go to, go to, speak against me as much, and as
often as thou will, and leave out nothing, if perchance by this means thou may
discharge thee of those naughty things, with the which it seems that thou art
full laden. Many Men speak evil of all Men, because they can speak well of no
Man. After this sort, this Wise Man avoideth from him the reproachful Words
spoken unto him, imputing and laying them to the Natural Sickness of his
Adversary. Pericles, when a certain Scolder or railing Fellow did revile him,
he answered not a word again, but went into a Gallery, and after, toward
Night, when he went home, this Scolder followed him, raging still more and
more, because he saw the other to set nothing by him: And after that he came to
his Gate, (being dark Night,) Pericles commanded one of his Servants to light a
Torch, and to bring the Scolder home to his own House. He did not only with
quietness suffer this Brawler patiently, but also recompensed an evil Turn with
a good Turn, and that to his Enemy. Is it not a shame for us that profess
Christ, to be worse than Heathen People, in a thing chiefly pertaining to
Christ's Religion? Shall Philosophy persuade them, more than Gods Word shall
persuade us? Shall Natural Reason prevail more with them, than Religion shall
with us? Shall Man's Wisdom lead them to those things, whereunto the Heavenly
Doctrine cannot lead us? What blindness, wilfulness, or rather madness is this?
Pericles, being provoked to anger with many villainous words, answered not a
word: But we, stirred but with one little word, what foul work do we make? How
do we fume, rage, stamp, and stare like Mad Men? Many Men, of every trifle will
make a great matter, and of a spark, of a little word, will kindle a great
fire, taking all things in the worst part. But how much better is it, Reasons
to move Men from quarrel-picking.
and more like to the Example and Doctrine of Christ, to make rather a greater
fault, in our Neighbor, a small fault, reasoning with ourselves after this
sort; He spoke these words, but it was in a sudden heat; or the Drink spoke
them, and not he; or he spoke them at the motion of some other; or he spoke
them being ignorant of the truth, he spoke them not against me, but against him
whom he thought me to be. But as touching evil speaking, he that is ready to
speak evil against other Men, first let him examine himself, whether he be
faultless and clear of the fault which he finds in another. For it is a shame
when he that blames another for any fault, is guilty himself, either in the
same fault, or in a greater. It is a shame for him that is blind to call
another Man blind, and it is more shame for him that is whole blind to call him
blinkard that is but purblind: For this is to see a straw in another Man's Eye,
when a Man has a block in his own Eye.

Then let him consider, that he that uses to speak evil shall commonly be evil
spoken of again. And he that speaks what he will for his pleasure, shall be
compelled to hear what he would not, to his displeasure. Moreover, let him
remember that saying, That we shall give an account for every idle Word. Mat.
12.
How much more then shall we make reckoning for our sharp, bitter, brawling and
chiding Words, which provoke our Brother to be angry, and so to the breach of
his Charity? And as touching evil answering, although we be never so much
provoked by other Men's evil speaking, yet we shall not follow their frowardness
by evil answering, if we consider, that anger is a kind of madness, and that he
which is angry, is (as it were for the time;) in a frenzy. Wherefore let him
beware, Reasons to move Men from froward answering.
lest in his fury he speak any thing, whereof afterward he may have just cause
to be sorry. And he that will defend, that anger is not fury, but that he has
reason, even when he is most angry; then let him reason thus with himself, when
he is angry; Now I am so moved and chafed, that within a little while after I
shall be otherwise minded; wherefore then should I now speak any thing in mine
anger, which hereafter, when I would fainest, cannot be changed? Wherefore
shall I do any thing, now, being (as it were,) out of my Wit, for the which,
when I shall come to my self again, I shall be very sad? Why does not Reason,
why does not Godliness, yea, why does not Christ obtain that thing now of me,
which hereafter Time shall obtain of me? If a Man be called an Adulterer,
Usurer, Drunkard, or by any other shameful Name, let him consider earnestly,
whether he be so called truly or falsely; if truly, let him amend his fault,
that his Adversary may not after worthily charge him with such Offenses: If
these things be laid against him falsely, yet let him consider, whether he has
given any occasion to be suspected of such things, and so he may both cut off
that suspicion, whereof this slander did arise, and in other things shall live
more warily. And thus using ourselves, we may take no hurt, but rather much
good, by the rebukes and slanders of our Enemy. For the reproach of an Enemy
may be to many men a quicker spur to the amendment of their life, than the
gentle monition of a Friend. Philippus the King of Macedonia, when he was evil
spoken of by the chief Rulers of the City of Athens, he did thank them
heartily, because by them he was made better, both in his Words and Deeds: For
I study (says he,) both by my Sayings and Doings to prove them Liars.

The Third Part of the Sermon against Contention.
YE heard in the last Lesson of the Sermon against Strife and Brawling, how we
may answer them which maintain their froward sayings in Contention, and that
will revenge with words such evil as other Men do them, and finally how we may,
according to God's Will, order ourselves, and what to consider toward them
when w^ are provoked to Contention and Strife with railing Words. Now to
proceed in the same matter, you shall know the right way how to disprove and
overcome your Adversary and Enemy. This is the best way to disprove a Man's
Adversary, so to live, that all which shall know his Honesty, may bear witness
that he is slandered unworthily. If the fault, whereof he is slandered, be
such, that for the defense of his Honesty, he must needs make answer, let him
answer quietly and softly, on this fashion, That those faults be laid against
him falsely. For it is truth that the Wise Man says, A soft answer asswageth
anger, Prove. 15.
and a hard and sharp answer does stir up rage and fury. The sharp answer of
Nabal provoked David to cruel Vengeance; 1 King 25.
but the gentle words of Abigail quenched the fire again that was all in a
flame. And a special remedy against malicious Tongues, is to arm ourselves with
patience, meekness, and silence, lest with multiplying words with the Enemy, we
be made as evil as he. But they, An Objection. Prove. 26.
that cannot bear one evil word, peradventure, for their own excuse, will
allege that which is written, He that despises his g^od Name is cruel. Also
we read, Answer a Fool according to his foolishness. And our Lord Jesus Christ
did hold his peace at certain evil sayings; but to some he answered diligently.
He heard Men call him a Samaritan, a Carpenters Son, a Wine-Drinker, and he
held his peace: But when he heard them say, Thou have the Devil within thee, he
answered to that earnestly. answer a Fool according to his foolishness, lest he
should seem in his own conceit to be wise. And sometime it is not profitable to
answer a Fool according to his foolishness, lest the Wise Man be made like to
the Fool. When our Infamy, or the Reproach that is done unto us, is joined with
the peril of many, then it is necessary, in answering, to be quick and ready.
For we read that many holy Men, of good Zeal, have sharply and fiercely both
spoken and answered Tyrants and evil Men; which sharp words came not of Anger,
Rancor or Malice, or desire of Vengeance, but of a fervent desire to bring them
to the true knowledge of God, and from ungodly living, by an earnest and sharp
rebuke and chiding. In this Zeal, Saint John Baptist called the Pharisees,
Adders brood: Matthew. 3. Gal. 3. Titus 1.
And Saint Paul called the Galatians, Fools: And the Men of Crete he called
Liars, evil Beasts, and sluggish Bellies: And the false Apostles he called
Dogs, and crafty Workmen. Phil. 3.
And his Zeal is godly, and to be allowed, as it is plainly proved by the
example of Christ, who although he were the Fountain and Spring of all
Meekness, Gentleness and Softness, Matthew. 23.
yet he called the obstinate Scribes and Pharisees, Blind Guides, Fools,
painted Graves, Hypocrites, Serpents, Adders brood, a corrupt and wicked
Generation. Also he rebukes Peter eagerly, saying, Go behind me, Satan. Matthew.
16.
Likewise Saint Paul reproves Elymas, saying, Acts 13.
O thou full of all Craft and Guile, Enemy to all Justice, thou ceasest not to
destroy the right ways of God: And now lo, the Hand of the Lord is upon thee,
and thou shall be blind, and not see for a time. And Saint Peter reprehendeth
Ananias very sharply, saying, Ananias, Acts 5.
how is it that Satan has filled thy Heart, that thou should lie unto the
Holy Ghost? This Zeal has been so servent in many good Men, that it has
stirred them, not only to speak bitter and eager words, but also to do things,
which might seem to some to be cruel, but indeed they be very just, charitable,
and godly, because they were not done of Ire, Malice, or contentious Mind, but
of a fervent Mind, to the Glory of God, and the correction of Sin, executed by
Men called to that Office. For in this Zeal our Lord Jesus Christ did drive
with a Whip the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. John 2.
In this Zeal Moses brake the two Tables which he had received at Gods Hand,
Exodus 32.
when he saw the Israelites dancing about the Calf, and caused to be killed
twenty four thousand of his own People. Numb. 25. But these Examples are not to
be followed of every body, but as Men be called to Office, and set in
Authority. Prove. 20.
In this Zeal Phineas the Son of Eleazer, did thrust through with his Sword
Zimri and Cosby, whom he found together joined in the act of Uncleanness.
Wherefore now to return again to contentious Words, and specially in Matters of
Religion, and Gods Word, (which would be used with all Modesty, Soberness and
Chastity,) the words of Saint James ought to be well marked, and born in
memory, where he says, That of Contention rises all Evil. And the wise King
Solomon says, Honor is due to a Man that keeps himself from Contention, and
all that mingle themselves therewith be Fools. And because this Vice is so much
hurtful to the Society of a Commonwealth, in all well-ordered Cities, these
common Brawlers and Scolders be punished with a notable kind of pain, as to be
set on the Cucking-stool, Pillory, or such like. And they be unworthy to live
in a Commonwealth, the which do as much as lies in them, with Brawling and
Scolding, to disturb the Quietness and Peace of the same. And whereof comes
this Contention, Strife, and Variance, but of Pride and Vainglory? Let us
therefore humble ourselves under the mighty Hand of God, 1 Pet. 5. Luke 1.
which has promised to rest upon them that be humble and low in Spirit. If we
be good and quiet Christian Men, let it appear in our Speech and Tongues. If we
have forsaken the Devil, let us use no more Devilish Tongues: He that has been
a railing Scolder, now let him be a sober Counselor. He that has been a
malicious Slanderer, now let him be a loving Comforter. He that has been a
vain Railer, now let him be a ghostly Teacher. He that has abused his Tongue
in Cursing, now let him use it in Blessing. He that has abused his Tongue in
evil-speaking, now let him use it in speaking well. All Bitterness, Anger,
Railing and Blasphemy, let it be avoided from you. If you may, and if it be
possible, in no wise be angry. But if you may not be clean void of this
passion, yet then so temper and bridle it, that it stir you not to Contention
and Brawling. If you be provoked with evil-speaking, arm yourself with
Patience, Lenity, and Silence, either speaking nothing, or else being very
soft, meek, and gentle in answering. Overcome thine Adversary with Benefits and
Gentleness. And above all things, keep Peace and Unity: Be no Peace-breakers,
but Peacemakers. And then there is no doubt, but that God, the Author of
Comfort and Peace, will grant us Peace of Conscience, and such Concord and
Agreement, that with one Mouth and Mind, we may glorify God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be all Glory, now and for ever. AMEN.

HEreafter shall follow Sermons of Fasting, Prayer, Alms-Deeds, of the
Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior Christ: Of the
due Receiving of his Blessed Body and Blood, under the form of Bread and Wine:
Against Idleness, against Gluttony and Drunkenness, against Covetousness,
against Envy, Ire, and Malice, with many other matters, as well fruitful as
necessary to the edifying of Christian People, and the increase of Godly
Living.

GOD Save the KING.
THE Second PART OF THE HOMILIES.

LONDON: Printed for George Wells at the Sun, Abel Swall at the Unicorn, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and George Pawlett at the Bible in Chancery Lane. 1687.

AN ADMONITION TO ALL Ministers Ecclesiastical.
FOR that the Lord does require of his Servant, whom he has set over his
Household, to show both Faithfulness and Prudence in his Office: It shall be
necessary that ye above all other do behave yourselves most faithfully and
diligently in your so high a Function: That is, aptly, plainly, and distinctly
to Read the Sacred Scriptures, diligently to instruct the Youth in their
Catechism, gravely and reverently to Minister his most Holy Sacraments,
prudently also to choose out such Homilies as be most meet for the time, and
for the more agreeable Instruction of the People committed to your charge, with
such discretion, that where the Homily may appear too long for one Reading, to
divide the same to be Read part in the Forenoon, and part in the Afternoon. And
where it may so chance some one or other Chapter of the Old Testament to fall
in order to be Read upon the Sundays or Holydays, which were better to be
changed with some other of the New Testament of more Edification, it shall be
well done to spend your time to consider well of such Chapters beforehand,
whereby your Prudence and diligence in your Office may appear, so that your
People may have cause to glorify God for you, and be the readier to embrace
your Labors, to your better Commendation, to the discharge of your Consciences
and their own

THE TABLE OF Homilies ensuing.
I. OF the Right Use of the Church. Page 93 II. Against Peril of Idolatry. Page
102 III. For Repairing and keeping Clean the Church. Page 282 IV. Of Good
Works. And first of Fasting. Page 289 V. Against Gluttony and Drunkenness. Page
309 VI. Against excess of Apparel. Page 322 VII. An Homily of Prayer. Page 334
VIII. Of the Place and Time of Prayer. Page 356 IX. Of Common Prayer and
Sacraments. Page 370 X. An Information of them which take Offense at certain
places of Holy Scripture. Page 385 XI. Of Alms-Deeds. Page 402 XII. Of the
Nativity. Page 421 XIII. Of the Passion, for Good Friday. Page 434, 443 XIV. Of
the Resurrection, for Easter Day. Page 455 XV. Of the Worthy Receiving of the
Sacrament. Page 467 XVI. An Homily concerning the coming down of the Holy
Ghost, for Whitsunday. Page 480 XVII. An Homily for Rogation-Week. Page 497
XVIII. Of the State of Matrimony. Page 539 XIX. Against Idleness. Page 540 XX.
Of Repentance and true Reconciliation unto God. Page 556 XXI. An Homily against
Disobedience and wilful Rebellion. Page 583
AN HOMILY OF THE Right Use of the Church or Temple of GOD, and of the
Reverence due unto the same.
The First Chapter.
WHereas there appears in these days great slackness and negligence of a
great sort of People, in resorting to the Church, there to serve God their
Heavenly Father, according to their most bounden duty, as also much Uncomely
and Unreverent behavior of many Persons in the same when they be there
assembled, and thereby may just fear arise of the Wrath of God, and his
dreadful Plagues hanging over Head for our grievous Offenses in this behalf,
amongst other many and great Sins which we daily and hourly commit before the
Lord. Therefore for the discharge of all our Consciences, and for the avoiding
of the common Peril and Plague hanging over us, let us consider what may be
said out of Gods Holy Book concerning this matter, whereunto I pray you give
good Audience, for that it is of great weight, and concerns you all. Although
the Eternal and Incomprehensible Majesty of God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
whose seat is Heaven, and the Earth his Footstool, cannot be enclosed in
Temples or Houses made with Man's Hand, as in dwelling places able to receive or
contain his Majesty, according as is evidently declared by the Prophet Isaiah,
Isaiah 66. Act. 7.17. 3 Reg. 8. 2 Par. 2. and 6.
and by the Doctrine of St. Stephen, and St. Paul in the Acts of the Apostles.
And where King Solomon (who builded unto the Lord the most glorious Temple that
ever was made,) says, Who shall be able to build a meet or worthy House for
him? If Heaven, and the Heaven above all Heavens cannot contain him, how much
less can that which I have builded? And further confesses; What am I that I
should be able to build thee an House, O Lord? But yet for this purpose only it
is made, that thou may regard the Prayer of thy Servant, and his Humble
Supplication. Much less then be our Churches meet dwelling places to receive
the Incomprehensible Majesty of God. And indeed, the chief and special Temples
of God, wherein he has greatest pleasure, and most delights to dwell and
continue in, are the Bodies and Minds of true Christians, and the chosen People
of God, according to the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture, declared in the First
Epistle to the Corinthians. Know ye not (says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.
) that ye be the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If
any Man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy. For the Temple of God
is Holy, which ye are. And again in the same Epistle: Know ye not that your
body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost dwelling in you, whom ye have given you of
God, 1 Cor. 6.
and that ye be not your own? For ye are dearly bought. Glorify ye now
therefore God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are Gods. And therefore
as our Savior Christ teaches in the Gospel of Saint John, John 4.
they that worship God the Father in Spirit and Truth, in what place soever
they do it, worship him aright: For such Worshippers does God the Father look
for. For God is a Spirit, and those that Worship him, must Worship him in
Spirit and Truth, says our Savior Christ. Yet all this notwithstanding, the
material Church or Temple is a place appointed as well by the usage and
continual Examples expressed in the Old Testament, as in the New, for the
People of God to resort together unto, there to hear Gods Holy Word, to call
upon his Holy Name, to give him thanks for his innumerable and unspeakable
benefits bestowed upon us, and duly and truly to celebrate his Holy Sacraments,
(in the unfeigned doing and accomplishing of the which, stands that True and
Right Worshipping of God aforementioned,) and the same Church or Temple, is by
the Holy Scriptures, both of the Old Testament and New, called the House and
Temple of the Lord, for the peculiar service there done to his Majesty by his
People, and for the effectuous presence of his Heavenly Grace, wherewith he by
his said Holy Word endueth his People so there assembled. And to the said House
or Temple of God, at all times, by common order appointed, are all People that
be godly indeed, bound with all diligence to resort, unless by sickness, or
other most urgent causes they be let therefore. And all the same so
resorting thither, ought with all quietness and reverence there to behave
themselves, in doing their bounden duty and service to Almighty God, in the
Congregation of his Saints. All which things are evident to be proved by God's
Holy Word, as hereafter shall plainly appear.

And first of all, I will declare by the Scriptures, that it is called, (as it
is indeed,) the House of God, and Temple of the Lord. He that Swears by the
Temple, (says our Savior Christ, John 2. Matthew. 23. John 2.
) Swears by it, and him that dwells therein, meaning God the Father, which
he also expresses plainly in the Gospel of Saint John, saying: Do not make the
House of my Father the House of Merchandise. And in the Book of the Psalms,
Psalm. 5.
the Prophet David says, I will enter into thine House, I will Worship in thy
Holy Temple, in thy Fear. And it is almost in infinite places of the Scripture,
especially in the Prophets and Book of Psalms, called the House of God, or
House of the Lord. Sometimes it is named the Tabernacle of the Lord, Exodus 25.
and sometimes the Sanctuary, that is to say, the Holy Place or House of the
Lord. And it is likewise called the House of Prayer, Levit. 19. 3 Reg. 8 2 Par.
6.
as Solomon, who builded the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem, does often call it
the House of the Lord, in the which the Lords Name should be called upon.
Isaiah 56. Matthew. 12. Matthew. 21. Mark 11. Luke 19. Luke 18. Luke 2.
And Isaiah in the Fifty sixth Chapter, My House shall be called the House of
Prayer amongst all Nations. Which Text our Savior Christ alleges in the New
Testament, as does appear in Three of the Evangelists, and in the Parable of
the Pharisee and the Publican which went to pray, in which Parable our Savior
Christ says, They went up into the Temple to pray. And Anna the Holy Widow and
Prophetess, served the Lord in Fasting and Prayer in the Temple, Night and Day.
And in the Story of the Acts it is mentioned, Acts 3.
how that Peter and John went up into the Temple at the Hour of Prayer. And
Saint Paul praying in the Temple at Jerusalem, was wrapped in the Spirit, and did
see Jesus speaking unto him. And as in all convenient places, Prayer may be
used of the Godly privately: So it is most certain, that the Church or Temple
is the due and appointed place for common and public Prayer. Now that it is
likewise the place of Thanksgiving unto the Lord for his innumerable and
unspeakable benefits bestowed upon us, appears notably at the latter end of
the Gospel of Saint Luke, Luke 24. Acts 22.
and the beginning of the Story of the Acts, where it is written, that the
Apostles and Disciples after the Ascension of the Lord, continued with one
accord daily in the Temple, always praising and blessing God. And it is
likewise declared in the First Epistle to the Corinthians, Cor. 11.
that the Church is the due place appointed for the use of the Sacraments. It
remains now to be declared, that the Church or Temple is the place where the
lively Word of God (and not Man's Inventions,) ought to be Read and Taught, and
that the People are bound thither with all diligence to resort: And this proof
likewise to be made by the Scriptures, as hereafter shall appear.

In the Story of the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 13.
we read that Paul and Barnabas Preached the Word of God in the Temples of the
Jews at Salamine. And when they came to Antiochia, they entered on the
Sabbath Day into the Synagogue or Church, and sat down, and after the Lesson
or Reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Ruler of the Temple sent unto them,
saying; Ye Men and Brethren, if any of you have any Exhortation to make unto
the People, say it. And so Paul standing up, and making silence with his Hand,
said, Ye Men that be Israelites, and ye that fear God, give Ear, etc. Preaching
to them a Sermon out of the Scriptures, as there at large appears. And in the
same Story of the Acts, the Seventeenth Chapter, is testified, how Paul
preached Christ out of the Scriptures at Thessalonica. And in the Fifteenth
Chapter, James the Apostle in that Holy Council and Assembly of his Fellow
Apostles says, Acts 15.
Moses of old time has in every City certain that preach him in the Synagogues
or Temples, where he is read every Sabbath Day. By these places ye may see the
usage of Reading the Scriptures of the the Old Testament, among the Jews in
their Synagogues every Sabbath Day, and Sermons usually made upon the same. How
much more then is it convenient that the Scriptures of God, and specially the
Gospel of our Savior Christ should be Read and Expounded unto us that be
Christians in our Churches, specially our Savior Christ and his Apostles
allowing this most godly and necessary usage, and by their Examples confirming
the same?

It is written in the Stories of the Gospel in diverse places, that Jesus went
round about all Galilee, Matthew. 4. Mark 1. Luke 4. Matthew. 13.20. Mark 6. Luke
13. Luke 4.
teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom: In
which places is his great diligence in continual Preaching and Teaching of the
People most evidently set forth.

In Luke ye read, how Jesus according to his accustomed use came into the
Temple, and how the Book of Isaiah the Prophet was delivered him, how he read a
Text therein, and made a Sermon upon the same.

Luke 19.
And in the Nineteenth is expressed how he Taught daily in the Temple. And it is
thus written in the Eighth of John: John 8. John 18.
Jesus came again early in the Morning into the Temple, and all the People came
unto him, and he sat down and Taught them. And in the Eighteenth of John, our
Savior testifies before Pilate, that he spoke openly unto the World, and that
he always Taught in the Synagogue and in the Temple, whither all the Jews
resorted, and that secretly he spoke nothing. Luke 21.
And in Saint Luke: Jesus Taught in the Temple, and all the People came early
in the Morning unto him, that they might hear him in the Temple.

Here ye see as well the diligence of our Savior in teaching the Word of God
in the Temple daily, and specially on the Sabbath Days, as also the readiness
of the People resorting all together, and that early in the Morning, into the
Temple to hear him.

The same Example of diligence in preaching the Word of God in the Temple,
shall ye find in the Apostles, and the People resorting unto them, Acts the
Fifth. Where the Apostles, although they had been whipped and scourged the day
before, and by the High Priest commanded that they should preach no more in the
Name of Jesus, yet the day following they entered early in the Morning into the
Temple, and did not cease to teach and declare Jesus Christ. And in sundry
other places of the Story of the Acts, Acts 13.15.17.
ye shall find like diligence both in the Apostles in Teaching, and in the
People in coming to the Temple to hear Gods Word. And it is testified in the
First of Luke, that when Zachary the Holy Priest, Luke 1.
and Father to John Baptist, did Sacrifice within the Temple, all the People
stood without a long time praying, such was their zeal and fervency at that
time. And in the Second of Luke appears what great Journeys Men, Luke 2.
Women, yea, and Children took, to come to the Temple on the Feast Day, there
to serve the Lord, and specially the Example of Joseph, the Blessed Virgin
Mary, Mother to our Savior Jesus Christ, and of our Savior Christ himself,
being yet but a Child, whose Examples are worthy for us to follow. So that if
we would compare our negligence in resorting to the House of the Lord, there to
serve him, with the diligence of the Jews, in coming daily very early, sometimes
by great Journeys to their Temple, and when the multitude could not be received
within the Temple, the fervent zeal that they had, was declared in standing
long without and Praying: We may justly in this Comparison condemn our
slothfulness and negligence, yea, plain contempt, in coming to the Lord's
House, standing so near unto us, so seldom, and scarcely at any time.

So far is it from a great many of us to come early in the Morning, or give
attendance without, who disdain to come into the Temple: And yet we abhor the
very Name of the Jews when we hear it, as of a most wicked and ungodly People.

But it is to be feared, that in this point we be far worse than the Jews, and
that they shall rise at the day of Judgment, to our Condemnation, who in
Comparison to them, show such slackness and contempt in resorting to the House
of the Lord, there to serve him, according as we are of duty most bound.

And besides this most horrible dread of God's just Judgment in the great day,
we shall not in this Life escape his heavy Hand and Vengeance for this contempt
of the House of the Lord, and his due service in the same, according as the
Lord himself threatens in the First Chapter of the Prophet Aggeus, after this
sort: Agge 1.
Because you have left my House desert, and without Company (says the Lord,)
and ye have made haste every Man to his own House, for this cause are the
Heavens stayed over you, that they should give no Dew, and the Earth is
forbidden that it should bring forth her Fruit, and I have called Drought upon
the Earth, and upon the Mountains, and upon corn, and upon wine, and upon oil,
and upon all things that the earth brings forth, and upon men, and upon
beasts, and upon all things that men's hands labor for. Behold, if we be such
worldlings that we care not for the Eternal Judgments of God, (which yet of all
other are most dreadful, and horrible,) we shall not escape the punishment of
God in this World by drought and famine, and the taking away of all worldly
commodities, which we as worldlings seem only to regard and care for. Whereas,
on the contrary part, if we would amend this fault, or neglignce, slothfulness
and contempt of the House of the Lord, and his due service there, and with
diligence resort thither together, to serve the Lord with one accord and
consent, in all Holiness and Righteousness before him, we have promises of
benefits, Matthew. 18.
both Heavenly and Worldly. Wheresoever two or three be gathered in my Name
(says our Savior Christ,) there am I in the midst of them. And what can be
more blessed, than to have our Savior Christ among us? Or what again can be
more unhappy, or mischievous, than to drive our Savior Christ from amongst us,
to leave a place for his, and our most ancient and mortal Enemy the old Dragon
and Serpent, Satan the Devil, in the midst of us?

In the Second of Luke it is written, how that the mother of Christ and Joseph,
when they had long sought Christ, whom they had lost, and could find him no
where, Luke 2.
that at the last, they found him in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the
Doctors, So if we lack Jesus Christ, that is to say, the Savior of our Souls
and Bodies, we shall not find him in the Marketplace, or in the Guild Hall,
much less in the Alehouse or Tavern, amongst good Fellows, (as they call
them,) so soon as we shall find him in the Temple, the Lords House, amongst the
Teachers, and Preachers of his Word, where indeed he is to be found. And as
concerning Worldly commodities, we have a sure promise of our Savior Christ:
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall withal be given unto you. And thus we have in the First Part of
this Homily declared by God's Word, that the Temple or Church is the House of
the Lord, for that the Service of the Lord (as Teaching and Hearing of his Holy
Word, calling upon his Holy Name, giving Thanks to him for his great and
innumerable Benefits, and due ministering of his Sacraments,) is there used. And
it is likewise declared by the Scriptures, how all Godly and Christian Men and
Women ought at times appointed, with diligence to resort unto the House of the
Lord, there to serve him, and to glorify him, as he is most worthy, and we
most bound, to whom be all Glory and Honor, World without end, Amen.

The Second Part of the Homily of the right Use of the Church.
IT was declared in the First Part of this Homily, by God's Word, that the
Temple, or Church is the House of the Lord, for that the Service of the Lord,
(as Teaching and Hearing his Holy Word, calling upon his Holy Name, giving
Thanks to him for his great and innumerable Benefits, and due ministering of the
Sacraments,) is there used. And it is likewise already declared by the
Scriptures, how all Godly and Christian Men and Women, ought at times
appointed, with diligence to resort unto the House of the Lord, there to Serve
him, and to Glorify him, as he is most worthy, and we most bounden.

Now it remains in this Second Part of the Homily, concerning the right use
of the Temple of God, to be likewise declared by God's Word, with what
quietness, silence, and reverence, those that resort to the House of the Lord,
ought there to use and behave themselves.

It may teach us sufficiently how well it does become us Christian Men
reverently to use the Church and Holy House of our Prayers, by considering in
how great reverence and veneration the Jews in the old Law had their Temple,
which appeared by sundry places, whereof I will note unto you certain. In the
26th of Matthew, it is laid to our Savior Christ's charge before a Temporal
Judge, as a matter worthy death, by the two false witnesses, that he had said,
He could destroy the Temple of God, and in three days build it again, not
doubting, but if they might make Men to believe, that he had said any thing
against the Honor and Majesty of the Temple, he should seem to all Men most
worthy of death. Acts 21.
And in the 21st of the Acts, when the Jews found Paul in the Temple, They laid
hands upon him, crying, Ye Men Israelites help, this is that Man who teaches
all Men every where against the People and the Law, and against this place:
Besides that, he has brought the Gentiles into the Temple, and has profaned
this holy place. Behold, how they took it for a like offense to speak against
the Temple of God, as to speak against the Law of God, and how they judged it
convenient, that none but Godly Persons, and the true worshippers of God,
should enter into the Temple of God. And the same fault is laid to Paul's
charge by Tertullus, an eloquent Man, and by the Jews in the 24th of the Acts,
Acts 24.
before a Temporal Judge, as a matter worthy of death, that he went about to
p^llute the Temple of God. And in the 27th of Matthew, Matthew. 27.
when the chief Priests had received again the pieces of Silver at Judas's
Hand, they said, It is not lawful to put them into Corban, (which was the
Treasure-House of the Temple,) because it is the price of Blood. So that they
could not abide that not only any unclean Person, but also any other dead thing
that was judged unclean, should once come into the Temple or any place thereto
belonging. And to this end is Saint Paul's saying in the Second Epistle to the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.
the Sixth Chapter to be applied. What Fellowship is there betwixt
Righteousness and Unrighteousness? Or what Communion between Light and
Darkness? Or what Concord between Christ and Belial? Or what part can the
Faithful have with the Unfaithful? Or what agreement can there be between the
Temple of God and Images? Which sentence, although it be chiefly referred to
the Temple of the Mind of the Godly; yet seeing that the Similitude and Pith of
the argument is taken from the material Temple, it enforces, that no
Ungodliness, specially of Images or Idols, may be suffered in the Temple of
God, which is the place of worshipping God: And therefore can no more be
suffered to stand there, than Light can agree with Darkness, or Christ with
Belial: For that the true worshipping of God, and the worshipping of Images,
are most contrary. And the setting of them up in the place of Worshipping, may
give great occasion to the Worshipping of them. But to turn to the Reverence
that the Jews had to their Temple: You will say, that they Honored it
Superstitiously, and a great deal too much, crying out, The Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.
being notwithstanding most wicked in Life, and be therefore must justly
reproved of Jeremiah, the Prophet of the Lord. Truth it is, that they were
Superstitiously given to the Honoring of their Temple. But I would we were not
as far too short from the due Reverence of the Lord's House, as they overshot
themselves therein. And if the Prophet justly reprehended them, hearken also
what the Lord requires at our Hands, that we may know whether we be
blameworthy or no.

It is written in Ecclesiastes the Fourth Chapter, Eccles. ^
When thou do enter into the House of God, (says he,) take heed to thy Feet,
draw near that thou must hear: For Obedience is much more worth than the
Sacrifice of Fools, which know not what evil they do. Speak nothing r^shly
there, neither let th^ne Heart be swift to utter words before God. For God is
in Heaven, and thou art upon the Earth, therefore let thy words be few. Note
(welbeloved,) what quietness in gesture and behavior, what silence in talk and
words, is required in the House of God; for so he calls it. See whether they
take heed to their Feet, as they be here warned, which never cease from
uncomely walking and jetting up and down and overthwart the Church, showing an
evident signification of notable contempt, both of God, and all good Men there
present: And what heed they take to their Tongues and Speech, which do not only
speak words swiftly and rashly before the Lord, (which they be here forbidden,)
but also oftentimes speak Filthily, Covetously, and Ungodlily, talking of
matters scarce honest or fit for the Alehouse or Tavern, in the House of the
Lord, little considering that they speak before God, who dwells in Heaven,
(as is here declared,) when they be but Vermin here creeping upon the Earth,
in comparison to his Eternal Majesty; and less regarding, that they must give
an account at the great day of every idle word wheresoever it be spoken, Matthew.
12.
much more of filthy, unclean, or wicked words spoken in the Lords House, to
the great dishonor of his Majesty, and offense of all that hear them. And
indeed concerning the People and Multitude, the Temple is prepared for them to
be Hearers, rather than Speakers, considering that as well the Word of God is
there Read and Taught, whereunto they are bound to give diligent Ear, with all
Reverence and Silence, as also that Common Prayer and Thanksgiving are
Rehearsed and said by the Public Minister in the Name of the People and the
whole multitude present, whereunto they, giving their ready Audience, should
assent and say, Cor. 14.
Amen, as Saint Paul teaches in the first Epistle to the Corinthians. And in
another place, Glorifying God with one Spirit and Mouth: Which cannot be when
every Man and Woman in several pretenses of Devotion prays privately, one
Asking, another giving Thanks, another reading Doctrine, and not regarding to
hear the Common Prayer of the Minister. And peculiarly, what due Reverence is
to be used in the Ministering of the Sacraments in the Temple, the same Saint
Paul teaches to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.
rebuking such as did Unreverently use themselves in that behalf. Have ye not
Houses to eat and drink in, (says he?) Do ye despise the Church or
Congregation of God? What shall I say unto you? Shall I praise you? In this I
praise you not. And God requires not only this outward Reverence of Behavior
and silence in his House, but all inward Reverence in cleansing of the Thoughts
of our Hearts, Osee 9.
threatening by his Prophet Osee in the Ninth Chapter, that for the Malice of
the Inventions and Devices of the People, he will cast them out of his House:
Whereby is also signified the Eternal casting of them out of his Heavenly House
and Kingdom, which is most horrible. And therefore in the Ninteenth of
Leviticus, God says, Levit. 19. Psalm. 5.
Fear you with Reverence my Sanctuary, for I am the Lord. And according to the
same the Prophet David says, I will enter into thine House, I will Worship in
thy Holy Temple, in thy Fear: Showing, what inward Reverence and Humbleness of
Mind the godly Man ought to have in the House of the Lord. And to allege
somewhat concerning this matter out of the New Testament, in what Honor God
would have his House or Temple kept, and that by the Example of our Savior
Christ, whose Authority ought of good reason with all true Christians to be of
most Weight and Estimation. It is written of all the four Evangelists, as a
Notable Act, Matthew. 21. Mar. 11. Luke 19. John 11.
and worthy to be testified by many Holy Witnesses, how that our Savior Jesus
Christ, that Merciful and Mild Lord, compared for his Meekness to a Sheep,
suffering with silence his Fleece to be shorn from him, Isaiah 53. Acts 8.
Isaiah 50. Matthew. 5.
and to a Lamb led without resistance to the Slaughter, which gave his Body to
them that did smite him, answered not him that reviled, nor turned away his
Face from them that did reproach him and spit upon him, and, according to his
own Example, gave Precepts of Mildness and Sufferance to his Disciples: Yet
when he sees the Temple and Holy House of his Heavenly Father misordered,
polluted, and profaned, uses great severity and sharpness, overturneth the
Tables of the Exchangers, subverted the Seats of them that sold Doves, makes a
whip of Cords, and scourges out those wicked abusers and profaners of the
Temple of God, saying, My House shall be called the House of Prayer, but ye
have made it a Den of Thieves. John 2.
And in the Second of John, Do not ye make the House of my Father, the House of
Merchandise? For as it is the House of God, when Gods service is duly done in
it: So when we wickedly abuse it with wicked talk, or covetous bargaining, we
make it a Den of Thieves, or an House of Merchandise. Mark 11
Yea, and such Reverence would Christ should be therein, that he would not
suffer any Vessel to be carried through the Temple. And whereas our Savior
Christ (as is before mentioned out of Saint Luke,) could be found no where
(when he was sought,) but only in the Temple amongst the Doctors, and now again
he exercises his Authority and Jurisdiction, not in Castles and Princely
Palaces, amongst Soldiers, but in the Temple: Ye may hereby understand, in
what place his spiritual Kingdom (which he denies to be of this World,) is
soonest to be found, and best to be known of all places in this World. And
according to this Example of our Savior Christ in the Primitive Church, which
was most Holy and Godly, and in the which due discipline with severity was used
against the wicked, open Offenders were not suffered once to enter into the
House of the Lord, nor admitted to Common Prayer, and the use of the Holy
Sacraments with other true Christians, until they had done open Penance before
the whole Church. And this was practiced, not only upon mean Persons, but also
upon the Rich, Noble, and Mighty Persons; yea, upon Theodosius, that Puissant
and Mighty Emperor, whom, for committing The Peoples fault was most grievous:
The sentence executed otherwise and more cruel than it should.
a grievous and wilful Murder, Saint Ambrose Bishop of Milain reproved sharply,
and did also Excommunicate the said Emperor, and brought him to open Penance.
And they, that were so justly exempted and banished (as it were,) from the
House of the Lord, were taken (as they be indeed,) for Men divided and
separated from Christ's Church, and in most dangerous estate, yea, as Saint Paul
says, 1 Cor. 5
even given unto Satan, He was only dehorted from receiving the Sacrament until
by Repentance he might be better prepared Chrysostom.
the Devil for a time, and their company was shunned and avoided of all Godly
Men and Women, until such time, as they by Repentance and public Penance were
Reconciled. Such was the Honor of the Lords House in Men's Hearts, and outward
Reverence also at that time, and so horrible a thing was it to be shut out of
the Church and House of the Lord in those days, when Religion was most pure,
and nothing so corrupt as it has been of late days. And yet we willingly,
either by absenting ourselves from the House of the Lord, do (as it were,)
Excommunicate ourselves from the Church and and Fellowship of the Saints of
God, or else coming thither, by uncomely and unreverent behavior there, by
hasty, rash, yea, unclean and wicked Thoughts and Words before the Lord our
God, horribly dishonor his Holy House the Church of God, and his Holy Name and
Majesty, to the great danger of our Souls, yea, and certain Damnation also, if
we do not speedily and earnestly Repent us of this Wickedness.

Thus ye have heard (dearly beloved,) out of Gods Word, what Reverence is due
to the Holy House of the Lord, how all Godly Persons ought with diligence at
times appointed thither to repair, how they ought to behave themselves there,
with Reverence and Dread before the Lord, what Plagues and Punishments, as well
Temporal as Eternal, the Lord in his Holy Word threatens, as well to such as
neglect to come to his Holy House, as also to such, who coming thither, do
unreverently by gesture or talk there behave themselves. Wherefore if we desire
to have seasonable Weather, and thereby to enjoy the good Fruits of the Earth,
if we will avoid Drought and Barrenness, Thirst and Hunger, which are Plagues
threatened unto such as make haste to go to their own Houses, to Alehouses and
Taverns, and leave the House of the Lord empty and desolate, if we abhor to be
scourged, not with Whips made of Cords, out of the material Temple only (as our
Savior Christ served the Desilers of the House of God in Jerusalem,) but also
to be beaten and driven out of the Eternal Temple and House of the Lord (which
is his Heavenly Kingdom, Ephesians. 3.
) with the Iron Rod of Everlasting Damnation, and cast into utter Darkness,
where is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, if we Fear, Dread, and abhor this, (I
say,) as we have most just cause to do: Then let us amend this our negligence
and contempt in coming to the House of the Lord, this our unreverent behavior
in the House of the Lord, and resorting thither diligently together, let us
there with Reverent hearing of the Lords Holy Word, calling on the Lords Holy
Name, giving of hearty Thanks unto the Lord for his manifold and inestimable
benefits daily and hourly bestowed upon us, celebrating also Reverently the
Lords Holy Sacraments, serve the Lord in his Holy House, as becomes the
Servants of the Lord, in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of
our Life; and then we shall be assured, after this Life, to rest in his Holy
Hill, and to dwell in his Tabernacle, there to Praise and Magnify his Holy
Name in the Congregation of his Saints, in the Holy House of his Eternal
Kingdom of Heaven, which he has purchased for us, by the Death and Shedding of
the precious Blood of his Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, one Immortal God, be all Honor, Glory, Praise, and
Thanksgiving, world without end. Amen.

AN HOMILY AGAINST Peril of Idolatry, and superfluous Decking of Churches.
The First Part.
IN what points the true Ornaments of the Church or Temple of God do consist
and stand, has been declared in the two last Homilies, treating of the Right
Use of the Temple or House of God, and of the due Reverence that all true
Christian People are bound to give unto the same. The Sum whereof is, that the
Church or House of God is a place appointed by the Holy Scriptures, where the
lively Word of God ought to be Read, Taught, and Heard, the Lords Holy Name
called upon by public Prayer, hearty Thanks given to his Majesty for his
infinite and unspeakable benefits bestowed upon us, his Holy Sacraments duly
and reverently ministered, and that therefore all that be Godly indeed, ought
both with diligence at times appointed, to repair together to the said Church,
and there with all Reverence to use and behave themselves before the Lord. And
that the said Church thus godly used by the Servants of the Lord, in the Lords
true Service, for the effectual presence of Gods Grace, wherewith he does by
his holy Word and Promises endue his people there present and assembled, to the
attainment as well of Commodities worldly, necessary for us, as also of all
heavenly Gifts, and Life everlasting, is called by the Word of God (as it is
indeed,) the Temple of the Lord, and the House of God, and that therefore the
due Reverence thereof is stirred up in the Hearts of the Godly, by the
Consideration of these true Ornaments of the said House of God, and not by any
outward Ceremonies, or costly and glorious decking of the said House, or Temple
of the Lord, contrary to the which most manifest Doctrine of the Scriptures,
and contrary to the usage of the Primitive Chruch, which was pure and
incorrupt, and contrary to the Sentences and Judgments of the most ancient,
learned and godly Doctors of the Church, (as hereafter shall appear,) the
Corruption of these later days has brought into the Church infinite multitudes
of Images, and the same, with other parts of the Temple also, have decked with
Gold and Silver, painted with Colors, set them with Stone and Pearl, clothed
them with Silks and precious Vestures, fancying untruly that to be the chief
Decking and Adorning of the Temple or the House of God, and that all People
should be the more moved to the due Reverence of the same, if all Corners
thereof were glorious, and glistering with Gold and precious Stones. Whereas
indeed, they, by the said Images, and such Glorious decking of the Temple, have
nothing at all profited such as were Wise and Understanding: But have thereby
greatly hurt the Simple and Unwise, occasioning them thereby to commit horrible
Idolatry. And the covetous Persons, by the same occasion, seeming to worship,
and peradventure worshipping indeed, not only the Images, but also the matter
of them, Gold and Silver, as that Vice is of all others in the Scriptures
peculiarly called Idolatry, Ephesians 5. Coloss. 3.
or worshipping of Images. Against the which foul Abuses and great Enormities
shall be alleged unto you: First, the Authority of Gods holy Word, as well out
of the Old Testament, as of the New. And secondly, the Testimonies of the holy
and ancient learned Fathers and Doctors, out of their own Works and ancient
Histories Ecclesiastical, both that you may at once know their Judgments, and
withal understand what manner of Ornaments were in the Temples in the Primitive
Church, in those times which were most pure and sincere. Thirdly, the Reasons
and Arguments made for the defense of Images or Idols, and the outrageous
decking of Temples and Churches, with Gold, Silver, Pearl, and precious Stones,
shall be confuted, and so this whole matter concluded. But lest any should take
occasion by the way, of doubting by Words or Names, it is thought good here to
note first of all, that although in common speech we use to call the likeness
or similitudes of Men or other things, Images, and not Idols; yet the
Scriptures use the said two words ( Idols and Images,) indifferently for one
thing always. They be words of diverse Tongues and Sounds, but one in Sense and
Signification in the Scriptures. The one is taken of the Greek word (...), an
Idol, and the other of the Latin word Imago, an Image, and so both used as
English terms in the translating of Scriptures indifferently, according as the
Septuaginta have in their Translation in Greek (...), and Saint Jerome in his
Translation of the same places in Latin has Simulachra, in English, Images.
And in the New Testament, 1 John 5*
that which Saint John calls (...), Saint Jerome likewise translateth
Simulachrum, as in all other like places of Scripture usually he does so
translate. And Tertullian, a most ancient Doctor, and well learned in both the
Tongues, Greek and Latin, interpreting this place of Saint John, Beware of
Idols, that is to say, Lib. de corona militis.
(says Tertullian,) of the Images themselves: The Latin words which he uses,
be Effigies and Imago, that is to say, an Image. And therefore it skilleth not,
whether in this process we use the one term or the other, or both together,
seeing they both (though not in common English Speech, yet in Scripture,)
signify one thing. And though some, to blind Men's Eyes, have heretofore
craftily gone about to make them to be taken for words of diverse Significations
in Matters of Religion, and have therefore usually named the likeness or
similitude of a thing set up amongst the Heathen in their Temples, or other
places to be worshipped, an Idol.

But the like similitude with us, set up in the Church, the place of
Worshipping, they call an Image, as though these two words ( Idol and Image,)
in Scripture, did differ in property and sense, which (as is aforesaid,) differ
only in Sound and Language, and in meaning be indeed all one, especially in the
Scriptures and matters of Religion. And our Images also have been, and be, and,
if they be publicly suffered in Churches and Temples, ever will be also
worshipped, and so Idolatry committed to them, as in the last part of this
Homily shall at large be declared and proved. Wherefore our Images in Temples
and Churches be indeed none other but Idols, as unto the which Idolatry has
been, is, and ever will be committed.

And first of all, the Scriptures of the Old Testament, condemning and
abhorring as well all Idolatry or worshipping of Images, as also the very Idols
or Images themselves, especially in Temples, are so many and plentiful, that it
were almost an infinite Work, and to be contained in no small Volume, to record
all the places concerning the same. For when God had chosen to himself a
peculiar and special People from amongst all other Nations that knew not God,
but worshipped Idols and false Gods, he gave unto them certain Ordinances and
Laws to be kept and observed of his said People. But concerning none other
matter did he give either more, or more earnest and express Laws to his said
People, than those that concerned the true Worshipping of him, and the avoiding
and fleeing of Idols, and Images, and Idolatry: For that, both the said
Idolatry is most repugnant to the right worshipping of him, and his true Glory,
above all other Vices; and that he knew the proneness and inclination of Man's
corrupt Kind and Nature, to that most odious and abominable Vice. Of the which
the Ordinances and Laws, so given by the Lord to his People concerning this
matter, I will rehearse and allege some that be most special for this purpose,
that you, by them, may judge of the rest.

In the fourth Chapter of the Book named Deuteronomy, is a notable place, Deuteronomy.
4. Numb. 22.
and most worthy with all diligence to be marked, which begins thus:

And now, Israel, hear the Commandments and Judgments which I teach thee,
(says the Lord,) that thou doing them, may li^e, and enter and possess the
Land which the Lord God of your Fathers will give you. Ye shall put nothing to
the word which I speak to you, neither shall ye take any thing from it. Keep ye
the Commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you.

And by and by after he repeateth the same Sentence three or four times, before
he come to the matter that he would specially warn them of, as it were for a
Preface, to make them to take the better heed unto it.

Take heed to thy self, (says he,) and to thy Soul, with all carefulness, lest
thou forgettest the things which thine Eyes have seen, and that they go not out
of thine Heart all the days of thy Life, thou shall teach them to thy Children
and Nephews, or Posterity.

And shortly after, The Lord spoke unto you out of the middle of Fire, but ye
heard the Voice or sound of his Words, but you did see no form or shape at all.

And by and by follows, Take heed therefore diligently unto your Souls, you
saw no manner of Image in the day in the which the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb, out of the midst of the Fire, lest peradventure, you being deceived
should make to your selves any graven Image, or likeness of Man or Woman, or
the likeness of any Beast which is upon the Earth, or of the Birds that fly
under Heaven, or of any creeping thing that is moved on the Earth, or of the
Fishes that do continue in the Waters: Lest peradventure thou lifting up thine
Eyes to Heaven, do see the Sun and the Moon, and the Stars of Heaven, and so
thou, being deceived by error, should honor and worship them, which the
Lord thy God has created to serve all Nations that be under Heaven.

And again, Beware that thou forget not the Covenant of the Lord thy God, which
he made with thee, and so make to thy self any carved Image of them which the
Lord has forbidden to be made: For the Lord thy God is a consuming Fire, and a
jealous God. If you have Children and Nephews, and do tarry in the Land, and
being deceived do make to your selves any similitude, doing evil before the
Lord your God, and provoke him to anger: I do this day call upon Heaven and
Earth to witness, that ye shall quickly perish out of the Land which you shall
possess, you shall not dwell in it any long time, but the Lord will destroy
you, and will scatter you amongst all Nations, and ye shall remain but a very
few amongst the Nations, whither the Lord will lead you away, and then shall
you serve Gods which are made with Man's Hands, of Wood and Stone, which see
not, and hear not, neither eat nor smell, and so forth.

This is a notable Chapter, and treats almost altogether of this matter. But
because it is too long to write out the whole, I have noted you certain
principal points out of it.

First, how earnestly and often he calls upon them to mark and to take heed,
and that upon the peril of their Souls, to the charge which he gives them.

Then how he forbids by a solemn and long rehearsal of all things in Heaven,
in Earth, and in the Water, any Image or likeness of any thing at all to be
made.

Thirdly, what Penalty and horrible Destruction, he solemnly, with Invocation
of Heaven and Earth, for record, denounces and threatens to them, their
Children and Posterity, if they, contrary to this Commandment, do make or
worship any Images or Similitude, which he so strictly has forbidden.

And when they, this notwithstanding, partly by Inclination of Man's corrupt
Nature, most prone to Idolatry, and partly occasioned by the Gentiles and
Heathen People dwelling about them, who were Idolaters, did fall to the making
and worshipping of Images; God, according to his Word, brought upon them all
those Plagues which he threatened them with, as appears in the Books of the
Kings and the Chronicles, in sundry places at large. And agreeable hereunto are
many other notable places in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy 27. Cursed be he
that makes a carved Image, or a cast or molten Image, which is abomination
before the Lord, the Work of the Artificers Hand, and sets it up in a secret
corner; and all the People shall say, Amen.

Read the thirteeenth and fourteenth Chapters of the Book of Wisdom, concerning
Idols or Images, how they be made, set up, called upon, and offered unto, and
how he praises the Tree whereof the Gibbet is made, as happy, in comparison to
the Tree that an Image or Idol is made of, even by these very words, Happy is
the Tree where through Righteousness comes, (meaning the Gibbet,) but cursed
is the Idol that is made with hands, yea, both it, and he that made it, and so
forth. And by and by he shows, how that the things which were the good
Creatures of God before, (as Trees or Stones,) when they be once altered and
fashioned into Images to be worshipped, become abomination, a temptation unto
the Souls of Men, and a snare for the feet of the unwise. And why? The seeking
out of Images is the beginning of Whoredom, says he, (and the bringing up of
them, is the destruction of Life: For they were not from the beginning, neither
shall they continue for ever. The wealthy idleness of Men has found them out
upon Earth, therefore shall they come shortly to an end: And so forth to the
end of the Chapter, containing these Points, How Idols or Images were first
invented, and offered unto, how by an ungracious custom they were established,
how Tyrants compel Men to worship them, how the ignorant and the common People
are deceived by the cunning of the Workman, and the beauty of the Image, to do
honor unto it, and to err from the knowledge of God, and of other great and
many Mischiefs, that come hy Images. And for a conclusion, he says, That the
honoring of abominable Images is the cause, the beginning, and end, of all
evil, and that the Worshippers of them be either mad, or most wicked. See and
view the whole Chapter with diligence, for it is worthy to be well considered,
specially that is written of the deceiving of the simple and unwise common
People by Idols and Images, and repeated twice or thrice, Sap. 15.
lest it should be forgotten. And in the Chapter following, be these words: The
painting of the Picture and carved Image with diverse Colors enticeth the
ignorant so, that he honoreth and loves the Picture of a dead Image that has
no Soul. Nevertheless, they that love such evil things, they that trust in
them, they that make them, they that favor them, and they that honor them, are
all worthy of death, and so forth. Psalm. 115.


In the Book of Psalms, the Prophet curses the Image-honorers in diverse
places. Confounded be all they that worship carved Images, and that delight, or
glory in them. Psalm. 135.
Like be they unto the Images that make them, and all they that put their trust
in them.

And in the Prophet Isaiah, says the Lord: Isai. 42.
Even I am the Lord, and this is my Name, and my Glory will I give to none
other, neither mine Honor to graven Images. And by and by; Let them be
confounded with shame that trust in Idols or Images, or say to them, you are
our Gods: And in the xl. Chapter, Isai. 40.
after he has set forth the incomprehensible Majesty of God, he asks, To
whom then will ye make God like? Or what similitude will ye set up unto him?
Shall the Carver make him a carved Image? And shall the Goldsmith cover him
with Gold, and cast him into a form of Silver Plates? And for the poor Man,
shall the Image-maker frame an Image of Timber, that he may have somewhat to set
up also? And after this he cries out: O Wretches, heard ye never of this? Has
it not been preached unto you since the beginning, and so forth, how by the
Creation of the World, and the greatness of the Work, They might understand the
Majesty of God, the Creator and Maker of all, to be greater than that it should
be expressed, or set forth in any Image or bodily Similitude? And besides this
Preaching, even in the Law of God, written with his own Finger, (as the
Scripture speaks,) and that in the first Table, Exo. 20.
and the beginning thereof, is this Doctrine aforesaid against Images, (not
briefly touched,) but at large set forth and preached, and that with
denunciation of destruction to the Contemners and Breakers of this Law, and
their Posterity after them. And lest it should not yet be marked, or not
remembered, the same is written and reported not in one, but in sundry places of
the Word of God, that by often hearing and reading of it, we might once learn and
remember it, as you also hear daily read in the Church, God spoke these Words,
and said, I am the Lord thy God. Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Exo.
20. Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 5.
Thou shall not make to thyself any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, nor in the Earth beneath, nor in the Water under the
Earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: For I the Lord thy
God am a jealous God, and visit the Sin of the Fathers upon the Children, unto
the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me, and show Mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments. All this
notwithstanding, neither could the notableness of the place, being the very
beginning of the very loving Lord's Law, make us to mark it, nor the plain
declaration by recounting of all kind of similitudes cause us to understand it,
nor the often repeating and reporting of it in diverse and sundry Places, the often
reading and hearing of it, could cause us to remember it, nor the dread of the
horrible penalty to ourselves, our Children and Posterity after us, fright us
from transgressing of it, nor the greatness of the reward to us, and our
Children after us,, move us any thing to Obedience, and the observing of this
the Lord's Great Law: But as though it had been written in some corner, and not
at large expressed, but briefly and obscurely touched, as though no penalty to
the Transgressors, nor reward to the Obedient, had been adjoined unto it, like
blind Men without all knowledge and understanding, like unreasonable Beasts,
without dread of Punishment, or respect of Reward, have diminished and
dishonored the high Majesty of the Living God, by the baseness and vileness of
sundry and diverse Images of dead Stocks, Stones and Metals. And as the Majesty
of God, whom we have left, forsaken, and dishonored; and therefore the
greatness of our Sin and Offense against his Majesty cannot be expressed: So is
the weakness, vileness, and foolishness, in device of the Images (whereby we
have dishonored him,) expressed at large in the Scriptures, namely the Psalms,
the Book of Wisdom, the Prophet Isaiah, Places of the Scripture against Idols
or Images.
Ezekiel and Baruch, especially in these places and Chapters of them: Psalm
115. and 134. Isaiah 40. and 44. Ezekiel the 6th. Wisdom 13, 14.15. Baruch 6.
The which places, as I exhort you often and diligently to read, so are they too
long at this present to be rehearsed in an Homily. Notwithstanding, I will make
you certain brief or short Notes out of them, what they say of these Idols or
Images. First, that they be made but of small pieces of Wood, Stone, or Metal,
and therefore they cannot be any similitudes of the great Majesty of God, whose
Seat is Heaven, and the Earth his Footstool. Secondly, that they be dead, have
Eyes, and see not, Hands, and feel not, Feet, and cannot go, etc. and therefore
they cannot be fit Similitudes of the living God. Thirdly, that they have no
power to do good nor harm to others, though some of them have an Ax, some a
Sword, some a Spear in their hands; yet do Thieves come into their Temples and
rob them, and they cannot once stir to defend themselves from the Thieves: Nay,
if the Temple or Church be set a fire, that their Priests can run away and save
themselves, but they cannot once move, but tarry still like blocks as they are,
and be burned, and therefore they can be no meet Figures of the Puissant and
Mighty God, who alone is able both to save his Servants, and to destroy his
Enemies everlastingly. They be trimly decked in Gold, Silver, and Stone, as well
the Images of Men as of Women, like wanton wenches (says the Prophet Baruch,)
that love Paramours, Baruch 6.
and therefore can they not teach us, nor our Wives and Daughters any
Soberness, Modesty, and Chastity. And therefore although it is now commonly
said, that they be the Laymens Books, yet we see they teach no good Lesson,
neither of God, nor Godliness, but all Error and Wickedness. Therefore God by
his Word, as he fordiddeth any Idols or Images to be made or set up, so does he
command such as we find made and set up to be pulled down, broken, and
destroyed.

Numb. 23.
And it is written in the Book of Numbers, the 23 Chapter, that there was no
Idol in Jacob, nor there was no Image seen in Israel, and that the Lord God was
with the People. Where note, that the true Israelites, that is, the People of
God, have no Images among them, but that God was with them, and that therefore
their Enemies cannot hurt them, as appears in the Process of that Chapter.
And as concerning Images already set up, thus says the Lord in Deuteronomy:
Deuteronomy. 7. and 12.
Overturn their Altars, and break them to pieces, cut down their Groves, burn
their Images; for thou art an holy People unto the Lord. And the same is
repeated more vehemently again in the twelfth Chapter of the same Book. Here
note, what the People of God ought to do to Images, where they find them. But
lest any private persons, upon color of destroying Images, should make any
stir or disturbance in the Commonwealth, it must always be remembered, that the
redress of such public Enormities pertains to the Magistrates, and such as
be in Authority only, and not to private Persons; and therefore the good Kings
of Juda, Asa, Ezechias, Josaphat, and Josias, are highly commended for the
breaking down and destroying of the Altars, Idols, and Images. And the
Scriptures declare, that they, specially in that point, did that which was
right before the Lord. And contrariwise, 1 Kings 16. 2 Chronicles. 14.15.31
Jeroboam, Achab, Joas, and other Princes, which either set up, or suffered
such Altars or Images undestroyed, are by the word of God reported to have done
evil before the Lord. And if any, contrary to the Commandment of the Lord, will
needs set up such Altars or Images, or suffer them undestroyed amongst them;
The Lord himself threatens in the first Chapter of the Book of Numbers, and by
his Holy Prophets Ezekiel, Micheas, and Abakuk, that he will come himself and
pull them down. And how he will handle, punish, and destroy the People that so
set up, or suffer such Altars, Images, or Idols undestroyed, he denounces by
his Prophet Ezekiel on this manner: I my self (says the Lord,) will bring a
sword over you, Numb. 1. Ezekiel 6.
to destroy your high places, I will cast down your Altars, and break down your
Images, your slain Men will I lay before your gods, and the dead Carcasses of
the Children of Israel will I cast before their Idols, your bones will I strew
round about your Altars, and dwelling places: your Cities shall be desolate,
the hill Chapels laid waste, your Altars destroyed and broken, your gods cast
down and taken away, your Temples laid even with the ground, your own works
clean rooted out, your slain shall lie amongst you, that ye may learn to know
how that I am the Lord, and so forth to the Chapters end, worthy with diligence
to be read: That they that be near, shall perish with the Sword, they that be
far off, with the pestilence, they that flee into holds or wilderness, with
hunger: And if any be yet left, that they shall be carried away prisoners to
servitude and bondage. So that if either the multitude, or plainness of the
places might make us to understand, or the earnest charge that God gives in
the said places move us to regard, or the horrible plagues, punishments, and
dreadful destruction, threatened to such worshippers of Images or Idols, setters
up, or maintainers of them, might engender any fear in our Hearts, we would
once leave and forsake this wickedness, being in the Lord's sight so great an
offense and abomination. Infinite places almost might be brought out of the
Scriptures of the Old Testaments concerning this matter; but these few at this
time shall serve for all.

You will say, peradventure, these things pertain to the Jews, what have we to
do with them? Indeed they pertain no less to us Christians, than to them. For
if we be the people of God, how can the Word and Law of God not appertain to
us? St. Paul alleging one Text out of the old Testament concludes generally
for other Scriptures of the old Testament as well as that, Romans 15.
saying, Whatsoever is written before (meaning in the Old Testament,) is
written for our instruction: Which Sentence is most specially true of such
writings of the Old Testament, as contain the immutable Law and Ordinances of
God, in no age or time to be altered; nor of any persons of any nations or age
to be disobeyed, such as the above rehearsed places be. Notwithstanding, for
your further satisfying herein, according to my promise, I will, out of the
Scriptures of the New Testament, or Gospel of our Savior Christ, likewise make
a Confirmation of the said Doctrine against Idols or Images, and of our Duty
concerning the same. First, the Scriptures of the New Testament do in sundry
places make mention with rejoicing, as for a most excellent benefit and gift of
God, that they, which received the Faith of Christ, were turned from their dumb
and dead Images, unto the true and living God, who is to be blessed for ever:
Namely in these places, the 14, and 17 of the Acts of the Apostles, the 11 to
the Romans, and the First Epistle to the Corinthians, the Twelfth Chapter, to
the Galatians, the 4th and the 1st to the Thessalonians, the First Chapter.

And likewise the said Idols, Images, and Worshipping of them, are in the
Scriptures of the New Testament by the Spirit of God much abhorred and
detested, and earnestly forbidden, as appears both in the forenamed places,
and also many other besides, as in the seventh, and Fifteenth of the Acts of
the Apostles, the First to the Romans, where is set forth the horrible plague
of Idolaters, given over by God unto a reprobate Sense to work all wickedness
and abominations not to be spoken, as usually spiritual and carnal Fornication
go together.

In the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the Fifth Chapter, we are forbidden
once to keep Company, or to eat and drink with such as be called Brethren or
Christians, that do Worship Images. In the Fifth to the Galatians, the
Worshipping of Images is numbered amongst the Works of the Flesh: And in the
First to the Corinthians, the Tenth, it is called the service of Devils, and
that such as use it shall be destroyed. And in the Sixth Chapter of the said
Epistle, and the Fifth to the Galatians, is denounced, that such
Image-Worshippers shall never come into the inheritance of the Kingdom of
Heaven. And in sundry other places is threatened, that the wrath of God shall
come upon all such. And therefore Saint John in his Epistle, 1 John 5. 1 Cor.
10.
exhorts us as his dear Children, to beware of Images. And Saint Paul warns
us to flee from the Worshipping of them, if we be wise, that is to say, if we
care for Health, and fear Destruction, if we regard the Kingdom of God, and
Life Everlasting, and dread the Wrath of God, and Everlasting Damnation. For it
is not possible, that we should be Worshippers of Images, and the true Servants
of God also, as Saint Paul teaches, in the Second to the Corinthians, the
Sixth Chapter, affirming expressly that there can be no more consent or
agreement between the Temple of God (which all true Christians be,) and Images,
than between Righteousness and Unrighteousness, between Light and Darkness,
between the Faithful and the Unfaithful, or between Christ and the Devil. Which
place enforces, both that we should not Worship Images, and that we should not
have Images in the Temple, for fear and occasion of Worshipping them, though
they be of themselves things indifferent: For the Christian is the Holy Temple
and lively Image of God, as the place well declares, to such as will read and
weigh it. And whereas all Godly Men did ever abhor that any Kneeling and
Worshipping or Offering should be used to themselves when they were alive (for
that it was the Honor due to God only, Acts 10. Acts 14.
) as appears in the Acts of the Apostles by Saint Peter forbidding it to
Cornelius, and by Saint Paul and Barnabas forbidding the same to the Citizens
in Lystra: Yet we like Mad Men fall down before the dead Idols or Images of
Peter and Paul, and give that Honor to Stocks and Stones, which they thought
abominable to be given to themselves being alive. And the good Angel of God, as
appears in the Book of Saint John's Revelation, refused to be Kneeled unto,
when that Honor was offered him of John: Beware (says the Angel,) that thou
do it not, for I am thy Fellow Servants. But the evil Angel, Satan, desires
nothing so much as to be kneeled unto, and thereby at once both to rob God of
his due Honor, and to work the Damnation of such as make him so low courtesy,
as in the Story of the Gospel appears in sundry places. Yea, and he offered
our Savior Christ all Earthly goods, on the condition that he would kneel down
and Worship him. But our Savior repelleth Satan by the Scriptures, Matthew. 4
Luke 2.
saying, It is written, thou shall Worship thy Lord thy God, and him alone
shall thou serve. But we by not Worshipping and serving God alone, (as the
Scriptures teach us,) and by Worshipping of Images, contrary to the Scriptures,
pluck Satan to us, and are ready without reward to follow his desire: Yea,
rather than fail, we will offer him Gifts and Oblations to receive our service.
But let us, Brethren, rather follow the Counsel of the good Angel of God, than
the suggestion of subtle Satan, that wicked Angel and old Serpent; who,
according to the Pride whereby he first fell, attempteth always by such
Sacrilege to deprive God (whom he envieth,) of his due Honor: And (because
his own Face is horrible and ugly,) to convey it to himself by the Mediation of
gilt Stocks and Stones, and withal to make us the Enemies of God, and his own
Suppliants and Slaves, and in the end to procure us for a Reward, Everlasting
Destruction and Damnation. Therefore above all things, if we take our selves to
be Christians indeed, (as we be named,) let us credit the Word, obey the Law,
and follow the Doctrine and Example of our Savior and Master Christ, repelling
Satan's Suggestion to Idolatry and Worshipping of Images, according to the Truth
alleged and taught out of the Testament and Gospel of our said Heavenly Doctor
and Schoolmaster Jesus Christ, who is God to be blessed for ever. Amen.

The Second Part of the Homily against Peril of Idolatry.
YOU have heard (welbeloved,) in the first part of this Homily, the Doctrine of
the word of God against Idols and Images, against Idolatry, and Worshipping of
Images, taken out of the Scriptures of the Old Testament and the New, and
confirmed by the Examples as well of the Apostles as of our Savior Christ
himself. Now although our Savior Christ takes not, or needs, not any
Testimony of Men, and that which is once confirmed by the certainty of his
Eternal Truth has no more need of the Confirmation of Man's Doctrine and
Writings, than the bright Sun at Noontide has need of the light of a little
Candle to put away Darkness, and to increase his Light: Yet for your further
content, it shall in this Second Part be declared, (as in the beginning of the
First Part was promised,) that this Truth and Doctrine concerning the
forbidding of Images and Worshipping of them, taken out of the Holy Scriptures,
as well of the Old Testament as the New, was believed and taught of the old
Holy Fathers, and most ancient Learned Doctors, and received in the Old
Primitive Church, which was most incorrupt and pure. And this Declaration shall
be made out of the said Holy Doctors own Writings, and out of the ancient
Histories Ecclesiastical to the same belonging.

Tertullian, a most ancient Writer and Doctor of the Church, who lived about
One Hundred and Threescore years after the Death of our Savior Christ, both in
sundry other places of his Works, and specially in his Book Written against The
manner of Crowning, Lib. contra coronandi morem.
and in another little Treatise, Entitled, Of the Soldiers Crown or Garland,
does most sharply and vehemently write and inveigh against Images or Idols. And
upon Saint John's words, the First Epistle and Fifth Chapter, says thus, Saint
John (says he,) deeply considering the matter, says, My little Children, 1
John 5.
keep yourselves from Images or Idols. He says not now, keep yourselves from
Idolatry, as it were from the Service and Worshipping of them; But from the
Images or Idols themselves, that is, from the very shape and likeness of them.
For it were an unworthy thing, that the Image of the living God should become
the Image of a dead Idol. Do you not think, those Persons, which place Images
and Idols in Churches and Temples, yea, shrine them even over the Lords Table,
even as it were of purpose to the Worshipping and Honoring of them, take good
heed either to Saint John's Counsel, or Tertullian's? For so to place Images
and Idols, is it to keep themselves from them, or else to receive and embrace
them?

Origin, in his Book against Celsus, says thus: Christian Men and Jews, when
they hear these words of the Law, (Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and shall
not make any Image,) do not only abhor the Temples, Altars, and Images of the
Gods, but if need be, will rather die than they should defile themselves with
any impiety. And shortly after he says: In the Commonwealth of the Jews, the
Carver of Idols and Image-maker, was cast far off and forbidden, lest they
should have any occasion to make Images, which might pluck certain foolish
Persons from God, and turn the Eyes of their Souls to the Contemplation of
Earthly Things. And in another place of the same Book; It is not only (says
he,) a Mad and Frantic part to Worship Images, but also once to dissemble or
wink at it. And a Man may know God and his only Son, and those which have had
such Honor given them by God, that they be called Gods: But it is not possible
that any should, by Worshipping of Images, get any knowledge of God.

Athanasius in his Book against the Gentiles, has these Words: Let them tell,
I pray you, how God may be known by an Image. If it be by the matter of an
Image, then there needs no shape or form, seeing that God has appeared in
all material Creatures which do testify his Glory. Now if they say, he is
known by the form or fashion, Is he not better to be known by the living things
themselves, whose fashions the Images express? For of surety, the glory of God
should be more evidently known, if it were declared by reasonable and living
Creatures, rather than by dead and unmovable Images. Therefore when ye do
Grave or Paint Images, to the end to know God thereby, surely ye do an unworthy
and unfit thing. And in another place of the same Book he says, The invention
of Images came of no good, but of evil, and whatsoever has an evil beginning
can never in any thing be judged good, seeing it is altogether naught. Thus far
Athanasius, a very Ancient, Holy, and Learned Bishop and Doctor, who judges
both the first beginning and the end, and altogether of Images or Idols, to be
naught.

Laclantius likewise, an Old and Learned Writer, in his Book of The Original of
E rour, has these words; God is above Man, and is not placed beneath, but is
to be sought in the highest Region. Wherefore there is no doubt, but that no
Religion is in that place wheresoever any Image is: For if Religion stand in
godly things (and there is no godliness but in heavenly things,) then be Images
without Religion. Lib. 2. c. 16.
These be Lactantius his words, who was above Thirteen Hundred years ago, and
within Three Hundred years after our Savior Christ.

Cyrillus, an Old and Holy Doctor, upon the Gospel of Saint John, has these
words; Many have left the Creator, and have Worshipped the Creature, neither
have they been abashed to say unto a Stock, Thou art my Father; and to a Stone,
Thou begottest me. For many, yea, almost all (alas for Sorrow,) are fallen unto
such folly, that they have given the Glory of Deity or Godhead, to things
without Sense or Feeling.

Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, a very Holy and Learned Man, who
lived in Theodosius the Emperors time, about Three Hundred and Ninety years
after our Savior Christ's Ascension, writes thus, to John Patriarch of
Jerusalem; I entered (says Epiphanius,) into a certain Church to pray, I found
there a Linen Cloth hanging in the Church Door, Painted, and having in it the
Image of Christ, as it were, or of some other Saint (for I remember not well
whose Image it was,) therefore when I did see the Image of a Man hanging in the
Church of Christ, contrary to the Authority of the S^^^ptures, I did tear it,
and gave Counsel to the (...) of the Church, that they should wind a (...) that
was Dead, in the said Cloth, and (...)

And (...) same Epiphanius sending another (...), for that Painted one which
(...) ^ad (...) said Patriarch, writes thus, I pray you (...) Elders of that
place to receive this Cloth which (...) sent by this bearer, and Command them
(...) from henceforth no such Painted Cloths, contrary to our Religion, be
hanged in the Church of Christ. For it becomes your goodness rather to have
this care, that you take away such scrupulosity, which is unfitting for the
Church of Christ, and offensive to the People committed to your charge. And
this Epistle, as Worthy to be Read of many, did Saint Jerome himself Translate
into the Latin Tongue. And that ye may know that Saint Jerome had this Holy and
Learned Bishop Epiphanius in most high Estimation, and therefore did Translate
this Epistle, as a Writing of Authority, hear what a Testimony the said Saint
Jerome gives him in another place, in his Treatise against the Errors of John
Bishop of Jerusalem, where he has these words: All notable Bishops were then
called Popes.
Thou have (says Saint Jerome,) Pope Epiphanius, which does openly in his
Letters call thee an Heretic. Surely thou art not to be preferred before him,
neither for Age, nor Learning, nor Godliness of Life, nor by the Testimony of
the whole World. And shortly after in the same Treatise, says Saint Jerome,
Bishop Epiphanius was ever of so great Veneration and Estimation, that Valens
the Emperor, who was a great Persecutor, did not once touch him. For Heretics,
being Princes, thought it their shame if they should persecute such a notable
Man. And in the Tripartite Ecclesiastical History, the Ninth Book, and Forty
Eighth Chapter, is testified, That Epiphanius being yet alive, did work
Miracles, and that after his Death, Devils, Lib. 9. c. 48.
being expelled at his Grave or Tomb, did roar. Thus you see what Authority
Saint Jerome, and that most ancient History, give unto the Holy and Learned
Bishop Epiphanius, whose judgment of Images in Churches and Temples, then
beginning by stealth to creep in, is worthy to be noted.

First, he judged it contrary to Christian Religion and the Authority of the
Scriptures, to have any Images in Christ's Church. Secondly, he rejected not
only Carved, Graven, and Molten Images, but also painted Images out of Christ's
Church. Thirdly, that he regarded not whether it were the Image of Christ, or
of any other Saint, but being an Image would not suffer it in the Church.
Fourthly, that he did not only remove it out of the Church, but with a vehement
zeal tare it in sunder, and exhorted that a Corse should be wrapped and buried
in it, judging it meet for nothing but to rot in the Earth, following herein
the Example of the good King Ezechias, who brake the brazen Serpent to pieces,
and burned it to Ashes, for that Idolatry was committed to it. Last of all,
that Epiphanius thinks it the duty of Vigilant Bishops, to be careful that no
Images be permitted in the Church, for that they be occasion of scruple and
offense to the people committed to their charge. Now whereas neither S. Jerome,
who did translate the same Epistle, nor the Authors of that most ancient
History Ecclesiastical Tripartite, (who do most highly commend Epiphanius, as
is aforesaid,) nor any other godly or learned Bishop at that time, or shortly
after, have written any thing against Epiphanius his Judgment concerning
Images: It is an evident proof, that in those days, which were about four
hundred years after our Savior Christ, there were no Images publicly used and
received in the Church of Christ, which was then much less corrupt, and more
pure than now it is.

And whereas Images began at that time secretly and by stealth to creep out of
private Men's Houses into the Churches, and that first in painted Cloths and
Walls, such Bishops as were godly and vigilant, when they spyed them, removed
them away, as unlawful and contrary to Christian Religion, as did here
Epiphanius, to whose Judgment you have not only Saint Jerome, the Translator of
his Epistle, and the Writer of the History Tripartite, but also all the learned
and godly Clerks, yea, and the whole Church of that Age, and so upward to our
Savior Christ's time, by the space of about four hundred years, consenting and
agreeing. This is written the more largely of Epiphanius, for that our
Image-maintainers now adays, seeing themselves so pressed with this most plain
and earnest act and writing of Epiphanius, a Bishop and Doctor of such
Antiquity and Authority, labor by all means, (but in vain against the Truth,)
either to prove, that this Epistle was neither of Epiphanius's Writing, nor
Saint Jerome's Translation: Either if it be, say they, it is of no great force:
For this Epiphanius, say they, was a Jew, and being converted to the Christian
Faith, and made a Bishop, retained the hatred which Jews have to Images, still
in his mind, and so did and wrote against them as a Jew, rather than as a
Christian. O Jewish Impudency and Malice of such Devisers, it should be proved,
and not said only, that Epiphanius was a Jew. Furthermore, concerning the
reason they make, I would admit it gladly. For if Epiphanius his Judgment
against Images is not to be admitted, for that he was born of a Jew, an Enemy
to Images, which be Gods Enemies, converted to Christ's Religion, then likewise
follows it, that no Sentence in the Old Doctors and Fathers, sounding for
Images, ought to be of any Authority, for that in the Primitive Church, the
most part of Learned Writers, as Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Austin, and
infinite others more, were, of Gentiles, (which be Favorers and Worshippers of
Images,) converted to the Christian Faith, and so let somewhat slip out of their
Pens, sounding for Images, rather as Gentiles than Christians, as Eusebius in
his History Ecclesiastical, and Saint Jerome says plainly, That Images came
first from the Gentiles to us Christians. And much more does it follow, that
the opinion of all the Rablement of the Popish Church, maintaining Images,
ought to be esteemed of small or no Authority, for that it is no marvel that
they, which have from their Childhood been brought up amongst Images and Idols,
and have drunk in Idolatry almost with their Mothers Milk, hold with Images and
Idols, and speak and write for them. But indeed it would not be so much marked
whether he were of a Jew or a Gentile converted unto Christ's Religion, that
writes, as how agreeable or contrary to Gods word he does write, and so to
credit or discredit him. Now what Gods word says of Idols and Images, and the
Worshipping of them, you heard at large in the First part of this Homily.

Saint Ambrose in his Treatise of the Death of Theodosius the Emperor, says,
Helene found the Cross and the Title on it. She Worshipped the King, and not
the Wood surely, (for that is an Heathenish Error, and the Vanity of the
wicked,) but she Worshipped him that hanged on the Cross, and whose Name was
Written in the Title, and so forth. See both the godly Empress her fact, and
Saint Ambrose's "Judgment at once: They thought it had been an Heathenish
Error and Vanity of the Wicked, to have Worshipped the Cross itself which was
embrued with our Savior Christ's own precious Blood. And we fall down before
every Cross piece of Timber, which is but an Image of that Cross.

Saint Augustine, the best Learned of all ancient Doctors, in his Forty fourth
Epistle to Maximus, says, Know thou, that none of the Dead, nor any thing that
is made of God, is Worshipped as God of the Catholic Christians, of whom there
is a Church also in your Town. Note, that by Saint Augustine, such as
Worshipped the Dead, or Creatures, be not Catholic Christians.

The same Saint Augustine teaches in the Twelfth Book of the City of God, the
Tenth Chapter, That neither Temples or Churches ought to be builded or made for
Martyrs or Saints, but to God alone: And that there ought no Priests to be
appointed for Martyr or Saint, but to God only. The same Saint Augustine in his
Book of The Manners of the Catholic Church, has these words; I know that many
be Worshippers of Tombs and Pictures, I know that there be many that Banquet
most riotously over the Graves of the Dead, and giving Meat to Dead Carcasses,
do bury themselves upon the buried, and attribute their Gluttony and
Drunkenness to Religion. See, he esteems Worshipping of Saints Tombs and
Pictures, as good Religion as Gluttony and Drunkenness, and no better at all.
Saint Augustine greatly allows Marcus Varro, affirming, That Religion is most
pure without Images; and says himself, Images be of more force to crooken an
unhappy Soul, than to teach and instruct it. And says further, Every Child,
yea, every Beast knows that it is not God that they see. Wherefore then does
the Holy Ghost so often admonish us of that which all Men know? Whereunto Saint
Augustine himself answers thus? For (says he, Lib. de (...) Dei cap 43. In
Psalm 36. and 113
) when Images are placed in Temples, and set in Honorable Sublimity, and begin
once to be Worshipped, forthwith breeds the most vile affection of Error.
This is Saint Augustine's Judgment of Images in Churches, that by and by they
breed Error and Idolatry. It would be tedious to rehearse all other places,
which might be brought out of the Ancient Doctors against Images and Idolatry.
Wherefore we shall hold ourselves contented with these few at this present. Now
as concerning Histories Ecclesiastical, touching this matter, that ye may know
why and when, and by whom Images were first used privately, and afterward not
only received into Christian Churches and Temples, but in conclusion Worshipped
also, and how the same was gain said, resisted, and forbidden, as well by godly
Bishops and Learned Doctors, as also by sundry Christian Princes. I will
briefly collect into a Compen^^^s History, that which is at large, and
^^^^ssari^y places Written by diverse ancient Writers and Historiographers
concerning this matter.

As the Jews, having a most plain and express Commandment of God, that they
should neither make nor Worship any Image (as it is at large before declared,)
did notwithstanding, by the Example of the Gentiles or Heathen People that
dwelt about them, fall to the Making of Images, and Worshipping of them, and so
to the committing of most abominable Idolatry, for the which God by his Holy
Prophets does most sharply reprove and threaten them, and afterward did
accomplish his said threatenings by extreme punishing of them, (as is also above
specified:) Even so some of the Christians in old time, which were converted,
from Worshipping of Idols and false Gods, unto the true living God, and to our
Savior Jesus Christ, did of a certain blind zeal (as Men long accustomed to
Images,) Paint or Carve Images of our Savior Christ, his Mother Mary, and of
the Apostles, thinking that this was a point of Gratitude and Kindness toward
those, by whom they had received the true knowledge of God, and the Doctrine of
the Gospel. But these Pictures or Images came not yet into Churches, nor were
yet Worshipped of a long time after. And lest you should think that I do say
this of mine own Head only, without Authority, I allege for me Eusebius Bishop
of Caesarea, and the most Ancient Author of the Ecclesiastical History, who
lived about the Three Hundred and Thirtieth year of our Lord in Constantius
Magnus his days, and his Son Constantius, Emperors, in the Seventh Book of his
History Ecclesiastical, the Fourteenth Chapter, and Saint Jerome upon the Tenth
Chapter of the Prophet Jeremiah, who both expressly say, That the Errors of
Images (for so Saint Jerome calls it,) have come in and passed to the
Christians from the Gentiles, by an Heathenish Use and Custom. The cause and
means Eusebius shows, saying, It is no marvel if they which being Gentiles
before, and did believe, seemed to offer this, as a gift to our Savior, for
the benefits which they had received of him, yea, and we do see now, that
Images of Peter and Paul, and of our Savior himself be made, and Tables to be
Painted, which I think to have been observed and kept indifferently by an
Heathenish Custom. For the Heathen are wont so to Honor them whom they judged
Honour-Worthy, for that some tokens of old Men should be kept. For the
Remembrance of Posterity is a token of their Honor that were before, and the
Love of those that come after.

Thus far I have rehearsed Eusebius his Words. Where note ye, that both Saint
Jerome and He agree herein, that these Images came in amongst Christian Men by
such as were Gentiles, and accustomed to Idols, and being converted to the
Faith of Christ retained yet some Remnants of Gentility not thoroughly purged:
For Saint Jerome calls it an Error manifestly. And the like Example we see
in the Acts of the Apostles, of the Jews, who, when they were converted to
Christ, would have brought in their Circumcision (whereunto they were so long
accustomed,) with them, into Christ's Religion. With whom the Apostles (namely
Saint Paul, Act 15.
) had much ado for the staying of that matter. But of Circumcision was less
marvail, for that it came first in by Gods Ordinance and Commandment. A Man may
most justly wonder of Images so directly against Gods Holy Word and strict
Commandment, how they should enter in. But Images were not yet Worshipped in
Eusebius his time, nor publicly set up in Churches and Temples, and they who
privately had them, did err of a certain Zeal, and not by Malice: But
afterward they crept out of private Houses into Churches, and so bred first
Superstition, and last of all Idolatry amongst Christians, as hereafter shall
appear.

In the time of Theodosius and Martain, Emperors, who reigned about the year of
our Lord 460. and 1117. years ago, when the People of the City of Nola once a
year did celebrate the Birth day of Saint Foelix in the Temple, and used to
banquet there sumptuously, Pontius Paulinus Bishop of Nola, caused the Walls of
the Temple to be painted with Stories taken out of the Old Testament, that the
People, beholding and considering those Pictures, might the better abstain from
too much surfeiting and riot. And about the same time Aurelius Prudentius, a
very learned and Christian Poet, declares how he did see painted in a Church,
the History of the Passion of S. Cassian, a Schoolmaster and Martyr, whom his
own Scholars, at the Commandment of the Tyrant, tormented with the pricking or
stabbing in of their Pointels, or Brazen Pens into his Body, and so by a
thousand Wounds and more (as says Prudentius,) most cruelly slew him. And
these were the first Paintings in Churches that were notable of Antiquity. And
so by this example came in Painting, and afterward Images of Timber and Stone,
and other matter, into the Churches of Christians. Now, if ye well consider
this beginning, Men are not so ready to worship a Picture on a Wall, or in a
Window, as an embossed and gilt Image, set with Pearl and Stone. And a process
of a Story, painted with the Gestures and Actions of many Persons, and commonly
the sum of the Story written withal, has another use in it, than one dumb Idol
or Image standing by itself. But from learning by painted Stories, it came by
little and little to Idolatry. Which when godly Men (as well Emperors and
learned Bishops, as others,) perceived, they commanded that such Pictures,
Images or Idols, should be used no more. And I will for a Declaration thereof,
begin with the Decree of the ancient Christian Emperors, Valens and Theodosius
the second, who reigned about four hundred years after our Savior Christ's
Ascension, who forbad that any Images should be made or painted privately: For
certain it is, that there were none in Temples publicly in their time. These
Emperors did write unto the Captain of the Army attending on the Emperors,
after this sort: Valens and Theodosius Emperors, unto the Captain of the Army;
Whereas we have a diligent care to maintain the Religion of God above, in all
things, we will grant to no Man to set forth, grave, carve, or paint the Image
of our Savior Christ in Colors, Stone, or any other matter, but in what place
soever it shall be found, we command that it be taken away, and that all such
as shall attempt any thing contrary to our Decrees or Commandments herein,
shall be most sharply punished. This Decree is written in the Books named Libri
Augustales, the Imperial Books, gathered by Tribonianus, Basilides, Theophilus,
Dioscorus, and Satira, Men of great Authority and Learning, at the Commandment
of the Emperor Justinian, and is alleged by Petrus Crinitus, a notable learned
Man, in the Ninth Book and Ninth Chapter of his Work, entitled, De honesta
Disciplina, that is to say, Of honest Learning. Here you see, what Christian
Princes of most ancient times decreed against Images, which then began to creep
in amongst the Christians. For it is certain, that by the space of three
hundred years and more, after the death of our Savior Christ, and before these
godly Emperors reigned, there were no Images publicly in Churches or Temples.
How would the Idolaters glory, if they had so much Antiquity and Authority for
them, as is here against them?

Now shortly after these days, the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other barbarous
and wicked Nations, burst into Italy, and all parts of the West Countries of
Europe, with huge and mighty Armies, spoiled all places, destroyed Cities, and
burned Libraries, so that Learning and true Religion went to wrack, and decayed
incredibly. And so the Bishops of those later days, being of less Learning, and
in the midst of the Wars, taking less heed also than did the Bishops before, by
ignorance of Gods Word, and negligence of Bishops, and especially barbarous
Princes, not rightly instructed in true Religion, bearing the Rule, Images came
into the Church of Christ in the said West parts, where these barbarous People
ruled, not now in painted Cloth only, but embossed in Stone, Timber, Metal, and
other like matter, and were not only set up, but began to be worshipped also.
And therefore Serenus, Bishop of Massile, the head Town of Gallia Narbonensis,
(now called the Province,) a godly and learned Man, who was about six hundred
years after our Savior Christ, seeing the People, by occasion of Images, fall
to most abominable Idolatry, brake to pieces all the Images of Christ and
Saints which were in that City, and was therefore complained upon to Gregory
the first of that Name, Bishop of Rome, who was the first learned Bishop that
did allow the open having of Images in Churches, that can be known by any
Writing or History of Antiquity. And upon this Gregory do all Image-worshippers
at this day ground their Defense. But as all things that be amiss, have from a
tolerable beginning grown worse and worse, till they at the last became
intolerable: So did this matter of Images. First, Men used privately Stories
painted in Tables, Cloths, and Walls. Afterward, gross and embossed Images
privately in their own Houses. Then afterward, Pictures first, and after them
embossed Images began to creep into Churches, learned and godly Men ever
speaking against them. Then by use it was openly maintained, That they might be
in Churches, but yet forbidden that they should be worshipped. Of which Opinion
was Gregory, as by the said Gregory's Epistle to the forenamed Serenus, Bishop
of Massile, plainly appears. Which Epistle is to be found in the Book of
Epistles of Gregory, or Register, in the tenth part of the fourth Epistle,
where he has these words; That thou did forbid Images to be worshipped, we
praise altogether; but that thou did break them, we blame. For it is one
thing to worship the Picture, and another thing by the Picture of the Story, to
learn what is to be worshipped. For that which Scripture is to them that read,
the same does Picture perform unto Idiots, or the unlearned beholding, and so
forth. And after a few words; Therefore it should not have been broken, which
was set up, not to be worshipped in Churches, but only to instruct the Minds of
the ignorant. And a little after, "Thus thou should have said, If you will
have Images in the Church for that instruction wherefore they were made in old
time, I do permit that they may be made, and that you may have them, and show
them, that not the sight of the Story, which is opened by the Picture, but that
worshipping which was inconveniently given to the Pictures, did mislike you.
And if any would make Images, not to forbid them, but avoid by all means to
worship any Image. By these Sentences taken here and there out of Gregory's
Epistle to Serenus, (for it were too long to rehearse the whole,) ye may
understand whereunto the matter was now come six hundred years after Christ:
That the having of Images or Pictures, in the Churches, were then maintained in
the West part of the World, (for they were not so forward yet in the East
Church,) but the worshipping of them was utterly forbidden. And you may withal
note, That seeing there is no ground for worshipping of Images in Gregory's
Writing, but a plain condemnation thereof, that such as do worship Images do
unjustly allege Gregory for them. And further, if Images in the Church do not
teach Men according to Gregory's Mind, but rather blind them: It follows,
that Images should not be in the Church by his sentence, who only would they
should be placed there, to the end that they might teach the ignorant.
Wherefore, if it be declared that Images have been, and be worshipped, and also
that they teach nothing but Errors and Lies, (which shall, by God's Grace,
hereafter be done,) I trust that then by Gregory's own Determination, all
Images and Image-worshippers shall be overthrown. But in the mean season,
Gregory's Authority was so great in all the West-Church, that by his
Encouragement Men set up Images in all places: But their Judgment was not so
good to consider why he would have them set up, but they fell all on heaps to
manifest Idolatry by worshipping of them, which Bishop Serenus (not without
just cause,) feared would come to pass. Now if Serenus his Judgment, thinking
it meet that Images, whereunto Idolatry was committed, should be destroyed, had
taken place, Idolatry had been overthrown: For to that which is not, no Man
commits Idolatry. But of Gregory's Opinion, thinking that Images might be
suffered in Churches, so it were taught that they should not be worshipped:
What ruin of Religion, and what mischief ensued afterward to all Christendom,
Experience has, to our great hurt and sorrow, proved.

First, By the Schism rising between the East and the West Church about the
said Images.

Next, By the Division of the Empire into two parts by the same occasion of
Images, to the great weakening of all Christendom, whereby last of all, has
followed the utter overthrow of the Christian Religion and Noble Empire in
Greece, and all the East parts of the World, and the increase of Mahomet's
false Religion, and the cruel Dominion and Tyranny of the Saracens and Turks,
who do now hang over our Necks also that dwell in the West parts of the World,
ready at all occasions to overrun us. And all this do we owe unto our Idols and
Images, and our Idolatry in worshipping of them.

Eutrop. lib. de rebus To. 23.
But now give you ear a little to the process of the History, wherein I do much
follow the Histories of Paulus Diaconus, and others joined with Eutropius an
old Writer. For though some of the Authors were Favorers of Images; yet do
they most plainly and at large prosecute the Histories of those times, Platina
in vitis Constantini and Greg. 2.
whom Baptist Platina also in his History of Popes, as in the Lives of
Constantine and Gregory the second, Bishops of Rome, and other places (where he
treats of this matter,) does chiefly follow. After Gregory's time,
Constantine Bishop of Rome assembled a Council of Bishops in the West Church,
and did condemn Philippicus then Emperor, and John Bishop of Constantinople of
the Heresy of the Monothelites, not without a cause indeed, but very justly.
When he had so done, by the consent of the learned about him, the said
Constantine Bishop of Rome caused the Images of the ancient Fathers, which had
been at those six Councils which were allowed and received of all Men, to be
painted in the entry of Saint Peter's Church at Rome. When the Greeks had
knowledge hereof, they began to dispute and reason the matter of Images with
the Latins, and held this Opinion, That Images could have no place in Christ's
Church, and the Latins held the contrary, and took part with the Images. So the
East and West Churches, which agreed well before, upon this contention about
Images fell to utter enmity, which was never well reconciled yet. But in the
mean season Philippicus and Arthemius, or Anastasius Emperors, commanded Images
and Pictures to be pulled down, and rased out in every place of their Dominion.

After them came Theodosius the Third, he commanded the defaced Images to be
painted again in their places: But this Theodosius reigned but one year.

Leo, the third of that Name, succeeded him, who was a Syrian born, a very
wise, godly, merciful, and valiant Prince. This Leo by Proclamation commanded,
That all Images, set up in Churches to be worshipped, should be plucked down
and defaced: And required specially the Bishop of Rome that he should do the
same; and himself in the mean season caused all Images that were in the
Imperial City Constantinople, to be gathered on an heap in the midst of the
City, and there publicly burned them to ashes, and whited over, and rased out
all Pictures painted upon the Walls of the Temples, and punished sharply diverse
maintainers of Images. And when some did therefore report him to be a Tyrant,
he answered. That such of all other were most justly punished, who neither
Worshipped God aright, nor regarded the Imperial Majesty and Authority, but
maliciously rebelled against wholesome and profitable Laws. When Gregorius, the
Third of that Name, Bishop of Rome, heard of the Emperors doings in Greece
concerning the Images, he assembled a Council of Italian Bishops against him,
and there made Decrees for Images, and that more Reverence and Honor should
yet be given to them than was before, and stirred up the Italians against the
Emperor, first at Ravenna, and moved them to Rebellion. Treason and Rebellion
for the defense of Images.
And as Vspurgensis and Anthonius, Bishops of Florence, testify in their
Chronicles, he caused Rome and all Italy, at the least, to refuse Obedience,
and the payment of any more Tribute to the Emperor: And so by Treason and
Rebellion maintained their Idolatry. Which Example, other Bishops of Rome have
continually followed, and gone through withal most stoutly.

After this Leo, who Reigned Thirty four years, succeeded his Son Constantine
the Fifth, who after his Fathers example, kept Images out of the Temples, and
being moved with the Council which Gregory had assembled in Italy for Images
against his Father: He also assembled a Council of all the Learned Men and
Bishops of Asia and Greece, although some Writers place this Council in Leo
Isauricus, A Council against Images.
his Fathers later days. In this great Assembly they sat in Council from the
Fourth of the Idus of February, to the sixth of the Idus of August, and made
concerning the use of Images, this Decree. It is not lawful for them that
believe in God through Jesus Christ, to have any Images, neither of the
Creator, nor of any Creatures, set up in Temples to be Worshipped; but rather
that all things by the Law of God, and for the avoiding of Offense, ought to be
taken out of the Churches. And this Decree was executed in all places where any
Images were found in Asia or Greece. And the Emperor sent the Determination of
this Council holden at Constantinople, to Paul then Bishop of Rome, and
commanded him to cast all Images out of the Churches: Which he (trusting in the
Friendship of Pipine a Mighty Prince,) refused to do. And both he and his
Successor Stephanus the Third, (who assembled another Council in Italy for
Images,) condemned the Emperor and the Council of Constantinople of Heresy,
and made a Decree, That the Holy Images, (for so they called them,) of Christ,
the Blessed Virgin, and other Saints, were indeed worthy Honor and
Worshipping. When Constantine was dead, Leo the Fourth his Son Reigned after
him, who Married a Woman of the City of Athens, named Theodora, who also was
called Irene, Or Eirene.
by whom he had a Son, named Constantine the Sixth, and, dying whilst his Son
was yet young, left the Regiment of the Empire, and Governance of his young Son
to his Wife Irene. These things were done in the Church about the year of our
Lord 760. Note here I pray you in this process of the Story, that in the
Churches of Asia and Greece, there were no Images publicly by the space of
almost Seven Hundred years. And there is no doubt but the Primitive Church next
the Apostles time was most pure. Note also, that when the Contention began
about Images, how of Six Christian Emperors, who were the chief Magistrates by
Gods Law to be obeyed, only one, which was Theodosius, who Reigned but one
year, held with Images. All the other Emperors, and all the Learned Men and
Bishops of the East Church, and that in assembled Councils, condemned them,
besides the two Emperors before mentioned, Valens and Theodosius the Second,
who were long before these times, who strictly forbad that any Images should be
made. And universally after this time, all the Emperors of Greece (only
Theodosius excepted,) destroyed continually all Images. Now on the contrary
part, note ye, that the Bishops of Rome, being no ordinary Magistrates
appointed of God, out of their Diocese, but Usurpers of Princes Authority,
contrary to Gods Word, were the Maintainers of Images against Gods Word, and
Stirrers up of Sedition and Rebellion, and Workers of continual Treason against
their Sovereign Lords, contrary to Gods Law, and the Ordinances of all Human
Laws, being not only Enemies to God, but also Rebels and Traitors against their
Princes. These be the first bringers in of Images openly into Churches, These
be the maintainers of them in the Churches, and these be the means whereby they
have maintained them: To wit, Conspiracy, Treason, and Rebellion against God
and their Princes.

Now to proceed in the History, most worthy to be known. In the Nonage of
Constantine the Sixth, the Empress Irene his Mother, in whose Hands the
Regiment of the Empire remained, was governed much by the advice of Theodore
Bishop, and Tharasius Patriarch of Constantinople, who practiced and held with
the Bishop of Rome in maintaining of Images most earnestly. By whose Counsel
and entreaty, the Empress first most wickedly dug up the Body of her Father
in Law Constantine the Fifth, and commanded it to be openly burned, and the
Ashes to be thrown into the Sea. Which Example (as the constant report goes,)
had like to have been put in practice with Princes Corses in our days, had the
Authority of the Holy Father continued but a little longer. The cause, why the
Empress Irene thus used her Father in Law, was, for that he, when he was alive,
had destroyed Images, and had taken away the sumptuous Ornaments of Churches,
saying, That Christ, whose Temples they were, allowed Poverty, and not Pearls
and precious Stones. Afterward the said Irene at the persuasion of Adrian
Bishop of Rome, and Paul the Patriarch of Constantinople and his Successor
Tharasius assembled a Council of the Bishops of Asia and Greece, at the City
Nicea, where the Bishop of Rome's Legates, being Presidents of the Council, and
ordering all things as they listed, the Council which was assembled before
under the Emperor Constantine the Fifth, and had decreed that all Images should
be destroyed, was Condemned as an Heretical Council and Assembly: And a Decree
was made, That Images should be put up in all the Churches of Greece, and that
Honor and Worship also should be given unto the said Images. And so the
Empress, sparing no diligence in setting up of Images, A Decree that Images
should be Worshipped.
nor cost in decking them in all Churches, made Constantinople within a short
time altogether like Rome itself. And now you may see that come to pass, which
Bishop Serenus feared, and Gregory the First forbad in vain; to wit, that
Images should in no wise be Worshipped. For now not only the Simple and Unwise,
(unto whom Images, as the Scriptures teach, be specially a snare,) but the
Bishops and Learned Men also, fall to Idolatry by occasion of Images, yea, and
make Decrees and Laws for the maintenance of the same. So hard is it, and
indeed impossible any long time to have Images publicly in Churches and
Temples without Idolatry, as by the space of little more than One Hundred years
betwixt Gregory the First, forbidding most strictly the Worshipping of Images,
and Gregory the Third, Paul, and Leo the Third, Bishops of Rome, with this
Council, Commanding and Decreeing that Images should be Worshipped, most
evidently appears.

Now when Constantine the young Emperor came to the Age of Twenty years, he was
daily in less and less estimation. For such as were about his Mother persuaded
her, that it was Gods Determination that she should Reign alone, and not her
Son with her. The Ambitious Woman, believing the same, deprived her Son of all
Imperial Dignity, and compelled all the Men of War, with their Captains, to
Swear to her that they would not suffer her Son Constantine to Reign during her
Life. With which Indignity the young Prince being moved, recovered the Regimen
of the Empire unto himself by force, and being brought up in true Religion in
his Father's time, seeing the Superstition of his Mother Irene and the Idolatry
committed by Images, cast down, brake, and burned all the Idols and Images that
his Mother had set up. But within a few years after, Irene the Empress, taken
again into her Son's Favor, after she had persuaded him to put out Nicephorus
his Uncle's Eyes, and to cut out the Tongues of his four other Uncles, and to
forsake his Wife, and by such means to bring him into hatred with all his
Subjects; now further to declare, that she was no Changeling, but the same
Woman that had before dug up and burned her Father-in-Law's Body, and that
she would be as natural a Mother, as she had been a kind Daughter, seeing the
Images, which she loved so well, and had with so great cost set up, daily
destroyed by her own Son the Emperor, by the help of certain good Companions,
deprived her Son of the Empire: And first, like a kind and loving Mother, put
out both his Eyes, and laid him in Prison, where after long and many Torments
she at the last most cruelly slew him.

In this History, joined to Eutropius, it is written, That the Sun was darkened
by the space of xvij days most strangely and dreadfully, and that all Men said,
that for the horribleness of that cruel and unnatural Fact of Irene, and the
putting out of the Emperor's Eyes, the Sun had lost his light. But indeed, God
would signify by the darkness of the Sun, into what darkness and blindness of
Ignorance and Idolatry, Christendom should fall by the occasion of Images. The
bright Sun of his eternal Truth, and light of his Holy Word, by the mists and
black Clouds of Men's Traditions, being blemished and darkened, as by sundry most
terrible Earthquakes that happened about the same time; God signified, that the
quiet estate of true Religion, should by such Idolatry be most horribly tossed
and turmoiled. And here may you see, what a gracious and virtuous Lady this
Irene was, how loving a Niece to her Husband's Uncles, how kind a Mother-in-Law
to her Son's Wife, how loving a Daughter to her Father-in-Law, how natural a
Mother to her own Son, and what a stout and valiant Captain the Bishops of Rome
had of her, for the setting up and maintenance of their Idols or Images.
Surely, they could not have found a meeter Patron for the maintenance of such a
matter, than this Irene, whose Ambition and desire of Rule was insatiable,
whose Treason, continually studied and wrought, was most abominable, whose
wicked and unnatural cruelty passed M^dea and Progne, whose detestable
Parricides have ministered matter to Poets, to write their horrible Tragedies.

And yet certain Historiographers, who do put in writing all these her horrible
Wickednesses, for love they had to Images, which she maintained, do praise her
as a Godly Empress, and as sent from God. Such is the blindness of false
Superstition, if it once take Possession in a Man's Mind, that it will both
declare the Vices of wicked Princes, and also commend them. But not long after,
the said Irene being suspected, to the Princes and Lords of Greece, of Treason,
in alienating the Empire to Charles King of the Francons, and for practicing a
secret Marriage between herself and the said King, and being convicted of the
same was by the said Lords deposed and deprived again of the Empire, and
carried into exile into the Island Lesbos, where she ended her lewd Life.

While these Tragedies about Images were thus working in Greece, Another
Council against Images.
the same question of the use of Images in Churches began to be moved in Spain
also. And at Eliberi, a notable City, now called Granate, was a Council of
Spanish Bishops, and other learned Men assembled, and there, after long
deliberation and debating of the matter, it was concluded at length by the
whole Council, after this sort, in the 36. Article.

Doctors of the Council against Images.
We think, that Pictures ought not to be in Churches, lest that which is honored
or worshipped be painted on Walls. And in the xlj. Canon of that Council, it is
thus writtten; We thought good to admonish the faithful, that, as much as in
them lies, they suffer no Images to be in their Houses, but if they fear any
violence of their Servants, at the least let them keep themselves clean and
pure from Images, if they do not so, let them be accounted as none of the
Church.

Note here, I pray you, how a whole and great Country in the West and South
Parts of Europe, nearer to Rome a great deal than to Greece in situation of
place, do agree with the Greeks against Images, and do not only forbid them in
Churches, but also in private Houses, and do excommunicate them that do the
contrary: Yet another Council against-Images.
And another Council of the learned Men of all Spain also, called Concilium
Toletanum Duodecimum, decreed and determined likewise against Images and
Image-worshippers. But when these Decrees of the Spanish Council at Eliberi
came to the knowledge of the Bishop of Rome and his Adherents, they, fearing
lest all Germany also would decree against Images and forsake them, thought to
prevent the matter, and by the consent and help of the Prince of Francons,
(whose Power was then most great in the West Parts of the World,) assembled a
Council of Germans at Frankford, and there procured the Spanish Council against
Images aforementioned to be condemned by the Name of the Foelician Heresy,
(for that Foelix Bishop of Aquitania was chief in that Council,) and obtained
that the Acts of the second Nicone Council, assembled by Irene, (the holy
Empress whom ye heard of before,) and the sentence of the Bishop of Rome for
Images, might be received.

For much after this sort do the Papists report of the History of the Council
of Frankford. Notwithstanding the Book of Carolus Magnus his own writing, as
the Title shows, which is now put in print, and commonly in Men's hands,
shows the Judgment of that Prince, and of the whole Council of Frankford
also, to be against Images, and against the second Council of Nice, assembled
by Irene for Images, and calls it an arrogant, foolish, and ungodly Council,
and declares the assembly of the Council of Frankford, to have been directly
made and gathered against the Nicene Council, and the errors of the same. So
that it must needs follow, that either there were in one Princes time two
Councils assembled at Frankford, one contrary to the other, which by no History
does appear; or else, that, after their custom, the Popes and Papists have most
shamefully corrupted the Council, as their manner is to handle, not only
Councils, but also all Histories and Writings of the old Doctors, falsifying
and corrupting them for the maintenance of their wicked and ungodly purposes,
as has in times of late come to light, and does in our days more and more
continually appear most evidently. Let the forged gift of Constantine, The
forged gift of Constantine, etc.
and the notable attempt to falsify the first Nicene Council for the Pope's
Supremacy, practiced by Popes in St. Augustine's time, be a Witness hereof:
Which practice indeed had then taken effect, had not the diligence and wisdom
of St. Augustine, and other learned and godly Bishops in Afric, by their great
labor and charges also, resisted and stopped the same. Nicene Council like to
be falsified.
Now to come toward an end of this History, and to show you the principal
point that came to pass by the maintenance of Images. Whereas from Constantinus
Magnus time, until this day, all Authority Imperial and princely Dominion of
the Empire of Rome remained continually in the right and Possession of the
Emperors, who had their continuance and Seat Imperial at Constantinople the
City Royal.

Leo the Third, then Bishop of Rome, seeing the Greek Emperors so bent against
his Gods of Gold and Silver, Timber and Stone, and having the King of the
Francons or Frenchmen, named Charles, whose Power was exceeding great in the
West-Countries, very applyable to his mind, for causes hereafter appearing,
under the pretense that they of Constantinople were for that matter of Images
under the Pope's Ban and Curse, and therefore unworthy to be Emperors, or to
bear Rule, and for that the Emperors of Greece, being far off, were not ready
at a beck to defend the Pope against the Lombards his enemies, and others with
whom he had variance: This Leo the Third, I say, attempted a thing exceeding
strange and unheard of before, and of incredible boldness and presumption: For
he by his Papal Authority does translate the Government of the Empire, and the
Crown and name Imperial from the Greeks, and gives it unto Charles the Great,
King of the Francons, not without the consent of the forenamed Irene, Empress
of Greece, who also sought to be joined in Marriage with the said Charles.

These things were done about the 803 year of our Lord.
For the which cause the said Irene was by the Lords of Greece deposed and
banished, as one that had betrayed the Empire, as ye before have heard.

And the said Princes of Greece did, after the deprivation of the said Irene,
by common consent, elect and create (as they always had done,) an Emperor named
Nicephorus, whom the Bishop of Rome, and they of the West, would not acknowledge
for their Emperor; for they had already created them another: And so there
became two Emperors.

And the Empire, which was before one, was divided into two Parts, upon
occasion of Idols and Images, and the worshipping of them: Even as the Kingdom
of the Israelites was in old time, for the like cause of Idolatry, divided in
King Rehoboham's time. And so the Bishop of Rome, having the Favor of Charles
the Great by this means assured to him, was wondrously enhanced in Power and
Authority, and did in all the West Church (especially in Italy) what he list,
where Images were set up, garnished, and worshipped of all sorts of Men, But
Images were not so fast set up, and so much honored in Italy and the West, but
Nicephorus, Emperor of Constantinople, and his Successors Scauratius, the two
Michaels, Leo, Or, Staurtius.
Theophorus, and other Emperors their Successors in the Empire of Greece,
continually pulled them down, brake them, burned them, and destroyed them as
fast. And when Theodorus the Emperor, would at the Council of Lions have agreed
with the Bishop of Rome, and have set up Images: He was by the Nobles of the
Empire of Greece deprived, and another chosen in his place, and so rose a
jealousy, suspicion, grudge, hatred, and enmity between the Christians, and
Empires of the East Countries and West, which could never be quenched nor
pacified. So that when the Sarazens first, and afterward the Turks, invaded the
Christians, the one part of Christendom would not help the other. By reason
whereof at the last, the Noble Empire of Greece, and the City Imperial,
Constantinople, was lost, and is come into the hands of the Infidels, who now
have overrun almost all Christendom, and possessing past the middle of Hungary,
which is part of the West Empire, do hang over all our heads, to the utter
danger of all Christendom.

Thus we see what a sea of mischiefs the maintenance of Images has brought
with it, what an horrible Schism between the East and the West Church, what an
hatred between one Christian and another, Councils against Councils, Church
against Church, Christians against Christians, Princes against Princes,
Rebellions, Treasons, unnatural and most cruel Murders, the Daughter digging
up, and burning her Father the Emperor's Body; the Mother, for love of Idols,
most abominably murdering of her own Son, being an Emperor; at the last, the
tearing in sunder of Christendom and the Empire into two pieces, till the
Infidels, Sarazens and Turks, common Enemies to both parts, have most cruelly
vanquished, destroyed and subdued the one part, the whole Empire of Greece,
Asia the less, Thracia, Macedonia, Epirus, and many other great and goodly
Countries and Provinces, and have won a great piece of the other Empire, and
put the whole in dreadful fear, and most horrible danger. For it is not without
a just and great cause to be dreaded, lest as the Empire of Rome was even for
the like cause of Images, and the worshipping of them, torn in pieces and
divided, as was for Idolatry the Kingdom of Israel in old time divided; so like
punishment, as for the like offense fell upon the Jews, will also light upon
us: that is, lest the cruel Tyrant, and Enemy of our Commonwealth and Religion,
the Turk, by God's just vengeance, should likewise partly Murder, and partly
lead away into Captivity us Christians, as did the Assyrian and Babylonian
Kings Murder, and lead away the Israelites; and lest the Empire of Rome and
Christian Religion be so utte^ly brought under foot, as was then the Kingdom of
Israel, and true Religion of God, whereunto the matter already (as I have
declared,) shrewdly inclines on our part, the greater part of Christendom,
within less than three hundred years space, being brought into Captivity and
most miserable thraldom under the Turk, and the Noble Empire of Greece clean
everted. Whereas, if the Christians, divided by these Image matters, had holden
together, no Infidels and Miscreants could thus have prevailed against
Christendom. And all this mischief and misery, which we have hitherto fallen
into, do we owe to our mighty gods of Gold and Silver, Stock and Stone, in
whose help and defense (where they cannot help themselves,) we have trusted so
long, until our enemies the Infidels have overcome, and overrun us almost
altogether. A just reward for those that have left the mighty living God, the
Lord of Hosts, and have stooped, and given the Honor due to him, to dead
blocks and stocks, who have Eyes and see not, Feet and cannot go, and so forth,
and are cursed of God, and all they that make them, and that put their trust in
them.

Thus you understand (well-beloved in our Savior Christ,) by the judgment of
the old Learned and Godly Doctors of the Church, and by ancient Histories
Ecclesiastical, agreeing to the verity of God's Word, alleged out of the Old
Testament and the New, that Images and Image-worshipping were in the Primitive
Church (which was most pure and incorrupt,) abhorred and detested, as
abominable, and contrary to true Christian Religion. And that when Images began
to creep into the Church, they were not only spoken and written against by
Godly and Learned Bishops, Doctors, and Clerks, but also condemned by whole
Councils of Bishops, and learned Men assembled together, yea, the said Images
by many Christian Emperors and Bishops were defaced, broken, and destroyed; and
that above seven hundred, and eight hundred years ago; and that therefore it is
not of late days, (as some would bear you in hand,) that Images and
Image-worshipping have been spoken, and written against. Finally, you have
heard what mischief and misery has, by the occasion of the said Images, fallen
upon whole Christendom, besides the loss of infinite Souls, which is most
horrible of all. Wherefore let us beseech God, that we, being warned by his
Holy Word, forbidding all Idolatry; and by the Writing of old Godly Doctors,
and Ecclesiastical Histories written, and preserved by God's Ordinance for our
admonition and warning, may flee from all Idolatry, and so escape the horrible
punishment and plagues, as well worldly, as everlasting, threatened for the
same, which God our Heavenly Father Grant us, for our only Savior and
Mediator, Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

The Third Part of the Homily against Images, and the worshipping of them,
containing the confutation of the principal Arguments which are used to be made
for the maintenance of Images. Which part may serve to instruct the Curates
themselves, or Men of good understanding.
NOw ye have heard how plainly, how vehemently, and that in many places, the
Word of God speaks against, not only Idolatry, and worshipping of Images, but
also against Idols and Images themselves: (I mean always thus herein, in that
we be stirred and provoked by them to worship them, and not as though they were
simply forbidden by the New Testament, without such occasion and danger.) And
ye have heard likewise out of Histories Ecclesiastical, the beginning,
proceeding, and success of Idolatry by Images, and the great contention in the
Church of Christ about them, to the great trouble and decay of Christendom: And
withal, ye have heard the Sentences of old Ancient Fathers, and Godly Learned
Doctors and Bishops, against Images and Idolatry, taken out of their own
Writings. It remains, that such reasons as be made for the maintenance of
Images, and excessive Painting, Gilding, and Decking, as well of them, as of
the Temples or Churches, also be answered and confuted, partly by application
of some places before alleged, to their Reasons, and partly by otherwise
answering the same. Which part has the last place in this Treatise, for that
it cannot be well understood of the meaner sort, nor the arguments of
Image-maintainers can without prolixity too much tedious, be answered without
the knowledge of the Treatise going before. And although diverse things
beforementioned, be here rehearsed again; yet this repetition is not
superfluous, but in a manner necessary, for that the simple sort cannot else
understand how the foresaid places are to be applied to the Arguments of such
as do maintain Images, wherewith otherwise they might be abused.

First, it is alleged by them that maintain Images, that all Laws,
Prohibitions, and Curses, noted by us out of the Holy Scripture, and Sentences
of the Doctors also by us alleged, against Images, and the worshipping of
them, appertain to the Idols of the Gentiles or Pagans, as the Idol of Jupiter,
Mars, Mercury, etc. and not to our Images of God, of Christ and his Saints. But
it shall be declared both by God's Word, and the Sentences of the ancient
Doctors, and Judgment of the Primitive Church, that all Images, as well ours as
the Idols of the Gentiles, be forbidden and unlawful, namely in Churches and
Temples. And first, this is to be replied out of God's Word, that the Images of
God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, either severally, or the Images of
the Trinity, which we had in every Church, be by the Scriptures expressly and
directly forbidden, and condemned, Deuteronomy. 4.
as appears by these places: the Lord spoke unto you out of the middle of
Fire, you heard the voice or sound of his words, but you did see no form or
shape at all, left peradventure you being deceived, should make to your self
any graven Image, or likeness, and so forth, as is at large rehearsed in the
First Part of this Treatise against Images. And therefore in the Old Law, the
middle of the propitiatory, which represented God's Seat, was empty, lest any
should take occasion to make any similitude or likeness of him. Isaiah, Isaiah
40
after he has set forth the incomprehensible Majesty of God, he asks, To
whom then will ye make God like? or what similitude will ye set up unto him?
Shall the Carver make him a Carved Image? And shall the Goldsmith cover him
with Gold, or cast him into a form of Silver Plates? And for the poor man,
shall the image-maker frame an image of timber, that he may have somewhat to
set up also? And after this he cries out: O wretches, heard ye never of this?
Has it not been preached to you since the beginning, how by the Creation of
the World, and the greatness of the Work, they might understand the Majesty of
God, the Maker and Creator of all, to be greater than that it could be
expressed or set forth in any Image or B^dily Similitude? Thus far the Prophet
Isaiah, who, from the Forty fourth Chapter to the Forty ninth, treats in a
manner of no other thing. And Saint Paul, Acts 17.
in the Acts of the Apostles, evidently teaches the same, that no Similitude
can be made unto God, in Gold, Silver, Stone, or any other matter. By these and
many other places of Scripture it is evident, that no Image either ought, or
can be made unto God. For how can God, a most pure Spirit, whom Man never saw,
be expressed by a gross bodily, and visible Similitude? How can the infinite
Majesty and Greatness of God, incomprehensible to Man's Mind, much more not
able to be compassed with the Sense, be expressed in a small and little Image?
How can a Dead and Dumb Image express the Living God? What can an Image, which
when it is fallen, cannot rise up again, which can neither help his Friends,
nor hurt his Enemies, express of the most Puissant and Mighty God, who alone is
able to reward his Friends, and to destroy his Enemies Everlastingly? A Man
might justly cry with the Prophet Habakkuk, Habak. 2.
Shall such Images instruct or teach any thing right of God? Or shall they
become Doctors? Wherefore Men that have made an Image of God, whereby to Honor
him, have thereby dishonored him most highly, diminished his Majesty,
blemished his Glory, and falsified his Truth. Romans ^.
And therefore Saint Paul says, that such as have framed any Similitude or
Image of God like a mortal Man, or any other likeness, in Timber, Stone, or
other matter; have changed his Truth into a Lie. For both they thought it to be
no longer that which it was, a Stock or Stone, and took it to be that which it
was not, as God, or an Image of God. Wherefore an Image of God is not only a
Lie, but a double Lie also. But the Devil is a Liar, John 8.
and the Father of Lies: Wherefore the lying Images, which be made of God, to
his great dishonor, and horrible danger of his People, came from the Devil.

Wherefore they be convict of foolishness and wickedness in making of Images of
God, or the Trinity, for that no Image of God ought, or can be made, as by the
Scriptures and good Reason evidently appears, Yea, and once to desire an
Image of God, comes of Infidelity, thinking not God to be present, except they
might see some sign or image of him, as appears by the Hebrews in the
wilderness, willing Aaron to make them gods whom they might see go before them.
Where they object, that seeing Isaiah and Daniel, by certain descriptions of
God, as sitting on a high seat, etc. Why may not a Painter likewise set him
forth in colors to be seen, as it were a Judge sitting on a Throne, as well as
he is described in Writing by the Prophets, seeing that Scripture or Writing,
and Picture differ but a little? First, it is to be answered, that things
forbidden by Gods Word, as Painting of Images of God, and things permitted of
God, as such descriptions used of the Prophets, be not all one: Neither ought,
nor can Man's Reason (although it show never so goodly,) prevail any thing
against God's express Word, and plain Statute Law, as I may well term it.
Furthermore, the Scripture, although it have certain descriptions of God, yet
if you read forward, it expounds it self, declaring that God is a pure
Spirit, Infinite, who replenisheth Heaven and Earth, which the Picture does
not, nor expounds it self, but rather when it has set God forth in a bodily
similitude, leaves a Man there, and will easily bring one into the Heresy of
the Anthropomorphites, thinking God to have Hands and Feet, and to sit as a Man
does: which they that do (says St. Augustine,) in his Book De fide and
symbolo, cap. 7.) fall into that Sacrilege which the Apostle detesteth in
those, who have changed the Glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude
of a corruptible Man. For it is wickedness for a Christian to erect such an
Image to God in a Temple, and much more wickedness to erect such an one in his
Heart, by believing of it. But to this they reply, that, this reason
notwithstanding, Images of Christ may be made, for that he took upon him flesh,
and became Man. It were well that they would first grant, that they have
hitherto done most wickedly, in making and maintaining of Images of God, and of
the Trinity in every place, whereof they are by force of God's Word, and good
Reason convicted; and then to descend to the Trial for other Images.

Now concerning their Objection, that an Image of Christ may be made, the
Answer is easy: For in God's Word and Religion it is not only required whether
a thing may be done, or no: But also, whether it be lawful and agreeable to
God's Word to be done, or no. For all wickedness may be, and is daily done,
which yet ought not to be done. And the words of the reasons above alleged out
of the Scriptures are, that Images neither ought, nor can be made unto God.
Wherefore to reply, that Images of Christ may be made, except withal it be
proved that it is lawful for them to be made, is, rather than to hold ones
peace to say somewhat, but nothing to the purpose. And yet it appears that no
Image can be made of Christ, but a lying Image (as the Scripture peculiarly
calls Images, lies,) for Christ is God and Man. Seeing therefore, Romans 1.
that for the Godhead, which is the most excellent part, no Images can be made,
it is falsely called the Image of Christ. Wherefore Images of Christ be not only
defects, but also lies. Which reason serves also for the Images of Saints,
whose Souls, the most excellent parts of them, can by no Images be presented
and expressed. Wherefore, they be no Images of Saints, whose Souls reign in joy
with God, but of the Bodies of Saints, which as yet lie putrefied in the
Graves. Furthermore, no true Image can be made of Christ's Body, for it is
unknown now of what Form and Countenance he was. And there be in Greece and at
Rome, and in other places, diverse Images of Christ, and none of them like to
other, and yet every of them affirms, that theirs is the true and lively
Image of Christ, which cannot possibly be. Wherefore, as soon as an Image of
Christ is made, by and by is a Lie made of him, which by God's Word is
forbidden. Which also is true of the Images of any Saints of Antiquity, for
that it is unknown of what Form and Countenance they were. Wherefore, seeing
that Religion ought to be grounded upon Truth, Images, which cannot be without
Lies, ought not to be made, or put to any use of Religion, or to be placed in
Churches and Temples, places peculiarly appointed to true Religion and Service
of God. And thus much, that no true Image of God, our Savior Christ, or his
Saints can be made: Wherewithal is also confuted that their allegation, that
Images be the Laymens Books. For it is evident by that which is
afore-rehearsed, that they teach no things of God, of our Savior Christ, and
of his Saints, but Lies and Errors. Wherefore, either they be no Books, or if
they be, they be false and lying Books, the teachers of all Error.

And now if it should be admitted and granted, that an Image of Christ could
truly be made, yet it is unlawful that it should be made; yea, or that tho
Image of any Saint should be made, specially to be set up in Temples, to the
great and unavoidable danger of Idolatry, as hereafter shall be proved.

And first, concerning the Image of Christ, that though it might be had truly,
yet it were unlawful to have it in Churches publicly, it is a notable place in
Irenaeus, Lib. 1. c. 24.
who reproved the Heretics called Gnostici, for that they carried about the
Image of Christ, made truly after his own proportion in Pilate's time, (as they
said,) and therefore more to be esteemed than those lying Images of him which
we now have. The which Gnostici also used to set Garlands upon the Head of the
said Image, to show their affection to it. But to go to Gods word. Be not, I
pray you, the words of the Scriptures plain? Beware lest thou being deceived,
Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 5. Sculptile. Fusile. Similitudo. Deuteronomy. 27.
make to thy self (to say, to any use of Religion,) any graven Image, or any
Similitude of any thing, etc. And Cursed be the Man that makes a Graven or
Molten Image, abomination before the Lord, etc. Be not our Images such? Be not
our Images of Christ and his Saints, either Carved or Molten, or Cast, or
Similitudes of Men and Women? It is happy that we have not followed the
Gentiles in making of Images of Beasts, Fishes, and Vermines also.
Notwithstanding, the Image of an Horse, as also the Image of the Ass that
Christ rode on, have in diverse places been brought into the Church and Temple
of God. And is not that which is written in the beginning of the Lords most
Holy Law, and daily read unto you, most evident also? Thou shall not make any
likeness of any thing in Heaven above, in Earth beneath, or in the Water under
the Earth, etc. Could any more be forbidden, and said, than this? Either of the
kinds of Images, which be either Carved, Molten, or otherwise Similitudes? Or
of things whereof Images are forbidden to be made? Are not all things either in
Heaven, Earth, or Water, under the Earth? Exodus 20.
And be not our Images of Christ and his Saints, likenesses of things in
Heaven, Earth, or in the Water? If they continue in their former answer, that
th^^^ prohibitions concern the Idols of the Gentiles and not ou^ Images: First,
that answer is already confuted, concerning the Images of God and the Trinity,
at large, and concerning the Images of Christ also, by Irenaeus.

And that the Law of God is likewise to be understood against all our Images,
as well of Christ, as his Saints, in Temples and Churches, appears further by
the Judgment of the old Doctors, and Primitive Church. Epiphanius's renting a
painted Cloth, wherein was the Picture of Christ, or of some Saint, affirming
it to be against our Religion, that any such Image should be had in the Temple
or Church, (as is before at large declared,) judged, that not only Idols of the
Gentiles, but that all Images of Christ and his Saints also, were forbidden by
Gods Word and our Religion. Lactantius affirming it to be certain, that no true
Religion can be, where any Image or Picture is, (as is before declared,)
judged, that as well all Images and Pictures, as the Idols of the Gentiles were
forbidden, else would he not so generally have spoken and pronounced of them.
And S. Augustine (as is before alleged, Lib. 4. c. 3. de Civ. Dei in Ps 36.
and 113.
) greatly allows M. Varro, affirming that Religion is most pure without
Images; and says himself, Images be of more force to crook an unhappy Soul,
than to teach and instruct it. And he says further, Every Child, yea, every
Beast, knows that it is not God that they see. Wherefore then does the Holy
Ghost so often admonish us of that which all Men know? Whereunto S. Augustine
answers us. For (says he,) when Images are placed in Temples, and set in
Honorable Sublimity, and begin once to be Worshipped, forthwith breeds the
most vile affection of Error. This is S. Augustine's Judgment of Images in
Churches, that by and by they breed Error and Idolatry. The Christian
Emperors, the Learned Bishops, all the Learned Men of Asia, Greece, and Spain,
assembled in Councils at Constantinople and in Spain, Seven and Eight Hundred
years ago, and more, condemning and destroying all Images as well of Christ, as
of the Saints, set up by the Christians (as is before at large declared,)
testify, that they understood Gods Word so, that it forbad our Images, as well
as the Idols of the Gentiles. Sap. 1^. Origin. cont. Celsum. l. ^. and 8.
Cyprianus contra Demetrium.
And as it is written, Sap. 14. that Images were not from the beginning,
neither shall they continue to the end: So were they not in the beginning in
the Primitive Church, God grant they may in the end be destroyed. For all
Christians in the Primitive Church, as Origin against Celsus, Cyprian also and
Arnobius do testify, were sore charged and complained on, that they had no
Altars nor Images. Wherefore did they not (I pray you,) conform themselves to
the Gentiles in making of Images, but, for lack of them, sustained their heavy
displeasure, if they had taken it to be lawful by Gods Word to have Images? It
is evident therefore, that they took all Images to be unlawful in the Church or
Temple of God, and therefore had none, (though the Gentiles therefore were most
highly displeased,) following this rule, Acts 5.
We must obey God rather than Men. And Zephyrus, in his Notes upon the Apology
of Tertullian, gathers, that all his vehement persuasion should be but cold,
except we know this once for all, that Christian Men in his time did most hate
Images, with their Ornaments. And Irenaeus (as is above declared,) reproves
the Heretics called Gnostici, for that they carried about the Image of Christ.

And therefore the Primitive Church, which is specially to be followed as most
incorrupt and pure, had publicly in Churches neither Idols of the Gentiles,
nor any other Images, as things directly forbidden by Gods Word. And thus it is
declared by Gods Word, the Sentences of the Doctors, and the Judgment of the
Primitive Church, which was most pure and sincere, that all Images, as well
ours, as the Idols of the Gentiles, be by Gods Word forbidden, and therefore
unlawful, specially in Temples and Churches.

Now if they (as their custom is,) flee to this answer, that Gods word
forbids not absolutely all Images to be made, but that they should not be
made to be Worshipped, and that therefore we may have Images, so we worship
them not, for that they be things indifferent, which may be abused, or well
used. Which seems also to be the Judgment of Damascene and Gregory the first,
as is above declared. And this is one of their chief Allegations for the
maintenance of Images, Damas. l. 4. de fide orth. c. 17. Greg. in Epist. ad
Serenum Massil.
which have been alleged since Gregory the First his time.

Well then, we be come to their Second Allegation, which in part we would not
stick to grant them. For we are not so Superstitious or Scrupulous, that we do
ahhor either Flowers wrought in Carpets, Hangings, and other Arras, either
Images of Princes, Printed or Stamped in their Coins, which when Christ did see
in a Roman Coin, we read not that he reprehended it, neither do we condemn the
Arts of Painting and Image-making, as wicked of themselves. But we would admit
and grant them, that Images used for no Religion, or Superstition rather, we
mean Images of none Worshipped, nor in danger to be Worshipped of any, may be
suffered. But Images, placed publicly in Temples, cannot possibly be without
danger of Worshipping and Idolatry, wherefore they are not publicly to be had
or suffered in Temples and Churches. The Jews, to whom this Law was first
given, Origin. cont. Celsum l. 4. Joseph. antiq. l. 17. c. 8. l. 18. c. 5. l.
^8. c. 15.
(and yet being a Moral Commandment, and not Ceremonial, as all Doctors
interpret it, it binds us as well as them,) the Jews, I say, who should have
the true sense and meaning of Gods Law, so peculiarly given unto them, neither
had in the beginning any Images publicly in their Temple, (as Origin and
Josephus at large declare,) neither after the restitution of the Temple, would
by any means consent to Herod, Pilate, or Petronius, that Images should be
placed only in the Temple at Jerusalem, although no Worshipping of Images was
required at their Hands; but rather offered themselves to the Death, than to
assent that Images should once be placed in the Temple of God, neither would
they suffer any Image-maker among them. And Origin added this cause, lest their
Minds should be plucked from GOD to the Contemplation of Earthly Things. And
they are much commended for this earnest zeal, in maintaining of GOD'S Honor
and true Religion. And Truth it is, that the Jews and Turks, who abhor Images
and Idols as directly forbidden by GOD'S Word, will never come to the Truth of
our Religion, whilst the stumbling blocks of Images remain amongst us, and lie
in their way. If they object yet the brazen Serpent which Moses did set up, or
the Images of the Cherubims, or any other Images which the Jews had in their
Temple, the answer is easy: We must in Religion obey Gods General Law, which
binds all Men, and not follow Examples of particular Dispensation, which be
no warrants for us: Else we may by the same reason resume Circumcision and
Sacrificing of Beasts, and other Rites permitted to the Jews. Neither can those
Images of Cherubims, set in secret where no Man might come, nor behold, be any
example for our public setting up of Images in Churches and Temples. But to
let the Jews go. Where they say, that Images, so they be not Worshipped, as
things indifferent may be tolerable in Temples and Churches; we infer and say
for the adversative, that all our Images of God, our Savior Christ, and his
Saints, publicly set up in Temples and Churches, places peculiarly appointed
to the true Worshipping of God, be not things indifferent, nor tolerable; but
against Gods Law and Commandment, taking their own Interpretation and
Exposition of it.

First, for that all Images, so set up publicly, have been Worshipped of the
Unlearned and Simple sort shortly after they have been publicly so set up, and
in conclusion, of the Wise and Learned also.

Secondly, for that they are Worshipped in sundry places now in our time also.

And Thirdly, for that it is impossible that Images of God, Christ, or his
Saints, can be suffered (especially in Temples and Churches,) any while or
space, without Worshipping of them: And that Idolatry, which is most abominable
before God, cannot possibly be escaped and avoided, without the abolishing and
destruction of Images and Pictures in Temples and Churches, for that Idolatry
is to Images, specially in Temples and Churches, an inseparable accident (as
they term it,) so that Images in Churches and Idolatry go always both together,
and that therefore the one cannot be avoided, except the other (specially in
all public places,) be destroyed. Wherefore, to make the Images, and publicly
to set them up in the Temples and Churches, places appointed peculiarly to the
service of God, is to make Images to the use of Religion, and not only against
this Precept, Thou shall make no manner of Images; but against this also, Thou
shall not bow down to them, nor Worship them.

For they being set up, have been, be, and ever will be Worshipped.

And the full proof of that which in the beginning of the first part of this
Treatise was touched, is here to be made and performed: To wit, that our
Images, and Idols of the Gentiles be all one, as well in the things themselves,
as also in that our Images have been before, be now, and ever will be
Worshipped, in like form and manner, as the Idols of the Gentiles were
Worshipped, so long as they be suffered in Churches and Temples.

Whereupon it follows, that our Images in Churches have been, be, and ever
will be none other but abominable Idols, and be therefore no things
indifferent. And every of these parts shall be proved in order, as hereafter
follows.

Simulachra gentium, Argentum and aurum. Fusile, Similitudo, Sculptile,
Simulachrum opera manuum hominum.
And first, that our Images and the Idols of the Gentiles, be all one concerning
themselves, is most evident, the matter of them being Gold, Silver, or other
Metal, Stone, Wood, Clay, or Plaster, as were the Idols of the Gentiles, and
so being either molten or cast, either carved, graven, hewn, or otherwise
formed and fashioned after the similitude and likeness of Man or Woman, be dead
and dumb Works of Man's hands, having Mouths and speak not, Eyes and see not,
Hands and feel not, Feet and go not; and so, as well in form as matter, be
altogether like the Idols of the Gentiles. Insomuch, that all the Titles, which
be given to the Idols in the Scriptures, may be verified of our Images,
Wherefore, no doubt but the like Curses, which are men-in the Scriptures, will
light upon the Makers and Worshippers of them both. Secondly, that they have
been and be worshipped in our time, in like form and manner as were the Idols
of the Gentiles, is now to be proved. And for that Idolatry stands chiefly in
the mind, it shall in this part first be proved, that our Image-maintainers
have had, and have the same Opinions and Judgment of Saints, whose Images they
have made and worshipped, as the Gentiles Idolaters had of their Gods. And
afterward shall be declared, that our Image-maintainers and Worshippers, have
used, and used the same outward Rites and manner of honoring and worshipping
their Images, as the Gentiles did use before their Idols, and that therefore
they commit Idolatry, as well inwardly and outwardly, as did the wicked
Gentiles, Idolaters.

And concerning the first part of the idolatrous Opinions of our
Image-maintainers. What, I pray you, be such Saints with us, to whom we
attribute the defense of certain Countries, spoiling God of his due honor
herein, but Dij Tutelares of the Gentiles Idolaters? Dij Tutelares.
Such as were Belus to the Babylonians and Assyrians, Osiris and Isis to the
Egyptians, Vulcan to the Lemnians, and to such other. What be such Saints to
whom the safeguard of certain Cities are appointed, but Dij Praesides with the
Gentiles Idolaters? Such as were at Delphos, Apollo; at Athens, Minerva; at
Carthage, Juno; at Rome, Quirinus, etc. What be such Saints, to whom, contrary
to the use of the Primitive Church, Temples and Churches be builded, and Altars
erected, but Dij Patroni, of the Gentiles Idolaters? Such as were in the
Capitol, Jupiter; in Paphus Temple, Venus; in Ephesus Temple, Diana; and such
like. Alas, we seem in thus thinking and doing to have Learned our Religion,
not out of Gods Word, but out of the Pagan Poets, who say, Excessere omnes,
adytis arisque relictis, Dij quibus imperium hoc steterat, etc. That is to say,
All the Gods by whose defense this Empire stood, are gone out of the Temples,
and have forsaken their Altars. And where one Saint has Images in diverse
places, the same Saint has diverse Names thereof, most like to the Gentiles.
When you hear of our Lady of Walsingham, our Lady of Ipswich, our Lady of
Wilsdon, and such others; what is it but an imitation of the Gentiles
Idolaters? Diana Agr^tera, Diana Coriphea, Diana Ephesia, etc. Venus Cypria,
Venus Paphia, Venus Gnidia. Whereby is evidently meant, that the Saint for the
Image sake, should in those places, yea, in the Images themselves, have a
dwelling, which is the ground of their Idolatry. For where no Images be, they
have no such means. Terentius Varro shows, that there were Three Hundred
Jupiters in his time; there were no fewer Veneres and Diana's; we had no fewer
Christophers, Ladies, and Mary Magdalens, and other Saints, Oenomaus, and
Hesiodus show, that in their time there were Thirty Thousand Gods. I think we
had no fewer Saints, to whom we gave the Honor due to God. And they have not
only spoiled the true living God of his due Honor in Temples, Cities,
Countries, and Lands, by such devices and inventions as the Gentiles Idolaters
have done before them: But the Sea and Waters have as well special Saints with
them, as they had Gods with the Gentiles, Neptune, Triton, Nereus, Castor and
Pollux, Venus, and such other: In whose places be come Saint Christopher, Saint
Clement, and diverse other, and specially our Lady, to whom Shipmen Sing Ave,
maris stella. Neither has the Fire escaped the Idolatrous inventions. For
instead of Vulcan and Vesta, the Gentiles Gods of the Fire, our Men have placed
Saint Agatha, and make Letters on her day for to quench Fire with. Every
Artificer and Profession has his special Saint, as a peculiar God. As for
Example, Scholars have Saint Nicholas and Saint Gregory; Painters, Saint Luke;
neither lack Soldiers their Mars, nor Lovers their Venus, amongst Christians.
All Diseases have their special Saints, as Gods the curers of them, the Pox
Saint Roche, the Falling-evil Saint Cornelis, the Toothache Saint Apollin, etc.
Neither do Beasts nor Cattle lack their Gods with us, for Saint Loy is the
Horsleach, and Saint Anthony the Swineheard, etc. Where is Gods Providence and
due Honor in the mean season? Who says, The Heavens be mine, and the Earth is
mine, the whole World and all that in it is: I do give Victory, and I put to
Flight: Of me be all Counsels and Help, etc. Except I keep the City, in vain
does he watch that keeps it, thou Lord shall save both Men and Beasts. But we
have left him neither Heaven, nor Earth, nor Water, nor Country, nor City,
Peace nor War to Rule and Govern, neither Men, nor Beasts, nor their Diseases
to Cure; that a godly Man might justly for Zealous Indignation cry out, O
Heaven, O Earth, and Seas, what Madness and Wickedness against God are Men
fallen into! What dishonor do the Creatures to their Creator and Maker! And if
we remember God sometimes, yet because we doubt of his ability or will to help,
we join to him another Helper, as if he were a Noun Adjective, using these
sayings; such as learn, God and Saint Nicholas be my speed: Such as neese, God
help and Saint John: To the Horse, God and Saint Loy save thee. Thus are we
become like Horses and Mules, which have no Understanding. For, is there not
one God only, who by his Power and Wisdom made all things, and by his
Providence governs the same? And by his Goodness maintains and saves them?
Be not all things of him, by him, and through him? Why do thou turn from the
Creator to the Creatures? This is the manner of the Gentiles Idolaters: But
thou art a Christian, and therefore by Christ alone have access to God the
Father, and help of him only. These things are not written to any reproach of
the Saints themselves, who were the true Servants of God, and did give all
honor to him, taking none unto themselves, and are blessed Souls with God; but
against our Foolishness and Wickedness, making of the true Servants of God,
false Gods, by attributing to them the Power and Honor which is Gods, and due
to him only. And for that we have such Opinions of the power and ready help of
Saints, all our Legends, Hymns, Sequences, and Masses, did contain Stories,
Lauds, and Praises of them, and Prayers to them; yea, and Sermons also
altogether of them, and to their Praises, Gods Word being clean laid aside. And
this we do altogether agreeable to the Saints, as did the Gentiles Idolaters to
their false Gods. For these Opinions which Men have had of mortal Persons, were
they never so holy, the old most godly and learned Christians have written
against the feigned Gods of the Gentiles, and Christian Princes have destroyed
their Images; who, if they were now living, would doubtless likewise both write
against our false Opinions of Saints, and also destroy their Images. For it is
evident, that our Image-maintainers have the same Opinion of Saints which the
Gentiles had of their false Gods, and thereby are moved to make them Images as
the Gentiles did. If answer be made, that they make Saints but Intercessors to
God, and means for such things as they would obtain of God: That is, even after
the Gentiles Idolatrous usage, to make them of Saints, Gods, Medioximi Dii.
called Dii Medioximi, to be mean Intercessors and Helpers to God, as though he
did not hear, or should be weary if he did all alone. So did the Gentiles
teach, that there was one chief Power working by other, as means, and so they
made all Gods subject to Fate or Destiny; as Lucian, in his Dialogues, feigneth
that Neptune made suit to Mercury, that he might speak with Jupiter. And
therefore in this also, it is most evident, that our Image-maintainers be all
one in Opinion with the Gentiles Idolaters.

Now remains the third part, that their Rites and Ceremonies in honoring and
worshipping of the Images or Saints be all one with the Rites which the
Gentiles Idolaters used in honoring their Idols. First, what means it, that
Christians, after the example of the Gentiles Idolaters, go on pilgrimage to
visit Images, where they have the like at home, but that they have a greater
Opinion of Holiness and Virtue in some Images, than other some, like as the
Gentiles Idolaters had? which is the readiest way to bring them to Idolatry by
worshipping of them, and directly against Gods Word, who says, Seek me, Amos 5.
and ye shall live, and do not seek Bethel, enter not into Gilgal, neither go
to Beersheba. And against such as had any Superstition in the Holiness of the
place, as though they should be heard for the places sake, saying, Our Fathers
worshipped in this Mountain, and ye say, that at Jerusalem is the place where
Men should worship; our Savior Christ pronounces, John 4.
Be^ieve me, the hour comes when you shall worship the Father, neither in this
Mountain, nor at Jerusalem, but true Worshippers shall worship the Father in
Spirit and Truth. But it is too well known, that by such pilgrimage-going, Lady
Venus and her Son Cupid were rather worshipped wantonly in the Flesh, than God
the Father, and our Savior Christ his Son, truly worshipped in the Spirit.

And it was very agreeable, Romans 1.
(as Saint Paul teaches,) that they which fell to Idolatry, which is Spiritual
Fornication, should also fall into Carnal Fornication, and all Uncleanness, by
the just Judgments of God, delivering them over to abominable Concupiscences.

What means it, that Christian Men, after the use of the Gentiles Idolaters,
cap and kneel before Images? which, if they had any Sense and Gratitude, would
kneel before Men, Carpenters, Masons, Plaisterers, Founders, and Goldsmiths,
their Makers and Framers, by whose means they have attained this Honor, which
else should have been evil-favoured and rude Lumps of Clay, or Plaster, pieces
of Timber, Stone, or Metal, without Shape or Fashion, and so without all
Estimation and Honor, as that Idol in the Pagan Poet confesses, saying,
Horatius.
I was once a vile Block, but now I am become a God, etc. What a fond thing is
it for Man, Adorare.
who has Life and Reason, to bow himself to a dead and insensible Image, the
Work of his own Hand? Genesis 23. and 33.
Is not this stooping and kneeling before them, Adoration of them, which is
forbidden so earnestly by Gods Word? Let such as so fall down before Images of
Saints, know and confess that they exhibit that Honor to dead Stocks and
Stones, 3 Reg. 1. Acts 10. and 14. Apoc. 19.
which the Saints themselves, Peter, Paul, and Barnabas would not to be given
them being alive; which the Angel of God forbids to be given to him. And if
they say, they exhibit such Honor not to the Image, but to the Saint whom it
represents, they are convicted of folly, to believe that they please Saints
with that Honor, which they abhor as a spoil of Gods Honor: For they be no
Changelings; but now both having greater Understanding, and more fervent Love
of God, do more abhor to deprive him of his due Honor: And being now like unto
the Angels of God, do with Angels flee to take unto them by Sacrilege the
Honor due to God: And herewithal is confuted their lewd Distinction of Latria
and Dulia, where it is evident, that the Saints of God cannot abide, that as
much as any outward worshipping be done or exhibited to them. But Satan, Gods
Enemy, desiring to rob God of his Honor, desires exceedingly that such Honor
might be given to him. Matthew. 4.
Wherefore those which give the Honor, due to the Creator, to any Creature, do
service acceptable to no Saints, who be the Friends of God, but unto Satan, God
and Man's mortal and sworn Enemy. And to attribute such desire of Divine Honor
to Saints, is to blot them with a most odious and devilish Ignominy and
Villainy, and indeed of Saints to make them Satan's and very Devils, whose
property is to challenge to themselves the Honor which is due to God only.

And furthermore, in that they say, that they do not worship the Images, as the
Gentiles did their Idols, but God and the Saints whom the Images do represent,
and therefore that their doings before Images be not like the Idolatry of the
Gentiles before their Idols; Saint Augustine, Lactantius, and Clemens, do prove
evidently, that by this their answer, they be all one with the Gentiles
Idolaters. The Gentiles (says Saint Augustine, August. Psalm. 135.
) which seem to be of the purer Religion, say, We worship not the Images, but
by the corporal Image, we do behold the signs of the things which we ought to
worship.

And Lactantius says, The Gentiles say, We fear not the Images, but them after
whose likeness the Images be made, Lactan. l. 2. inst.
and to whose Names they be consecrated. Thus far Lactantius.

And Clemens says, That Serpent, the Devil, utters these words by the Mouth
of certain Men, We, to the Honor of the invisible God, worship visible Images:
Which surely is most false. See how in using the same excuses which the
Gentiles Idolaters pretended, they show themselves to join with them in
Idolatry. For notwithstanding this excuse, Saint Augustine, Clemens, and
Lactantius prove them Idolaters. And Clemens says, That the Serpent, the
Devil, puts such excuses in the Mouth of Idolaters. And the Scriptures say,
They worship the Stocks and Stones (notwithstanding this excuse,) even as our
Image-maintainers do. And Ezekiel therefore calls the Gods of the Assyrians,
Stocks and Stones, although they were but Images of their Gods. So are our
Images of God and the Saints named by the Names of God and his Saints, after
the use of the Gentiles.

And the same Clemens says thus in the same Book, They dare not give the Name
of the Emperor to any other, for he punishes his Offender and Traitor by and
by: But they dare give the Name of God to others, because he for Repentance
suffers his Offenders. And even so do our Image-worshippers give both Names
of God and the Saints, and also the Honor due to God, to their Images, even as
did the Gentiles Idolaters to their Idols. What should it mean that they,
according as did the Gentiles Idolaters, light Candles at Noon-time, or at
Midnight, before them, but therewith to honor them? For other use is there
none in so doing. For in the Day it needs not, but was ever a Proverb of
foolishness, to light a Candle at Noon-time. And in the Night, it avails not
to light a Candle before the blind, and God has neither use nor honor
thereof. And concerning this Candle-lighting, it is notable that Lactantius
above a thousand years ago has written, after this manner; Lib. 6. Instit.
cap. 2.
If they would behold the heavenly Light of the Sun, then should they perceive
that God has no need of their Candles, who for the use of Man has made so
goodly a Light. And whereas in so little a Circle of the Sun, which, for the
great distance, seems to be no greater than a Man's Head, there is so great
brightness, that the sight of Man's Eye is not able to behold it, but if one
steadfastly look upon it a while, his Eyes will be dulled and blinded with
darkness How great Light, how great Clearness may we think to be with God, with
whom is no Night nor Darkness? and so forth.

And by and by he says, Seems he therefore to be in his right mind, who
offers up to the Giver of Light, the Light of a Wax-Candle for a Gift? He
requires another Light of us, which is not smoaky, but bright and clear, even
the Light of the Mind and Understanding.

And shortly after he says, But their Gods, because they be Earthy, have need
of Light, lest they remain in Darkness, whose Worshippers, because they
understand no Heavenly thing, do draw Religion, which they use, down to the
Earth, in the which, being dark of nature, is need of Light. Wherefore they
give to their Gods no Heavenly, but the Earthly Understanding of Mortal Men.
And therefore they believe those things to be necessary and pleasant unto them,
which are so to us, who have need either of Meat when we be hungry, or Drink
when we be thirsty, or Clothing when we be a cold, or when the Sun is set,
Candlelight, that we may see. Thus far Lactantius, and much more, too long
here to write, of Candle-lighting in Temples before Images and Idols for
Religion: Whereby appears both the foolishness thereof, and also that in
Opinion and Act, we do agree altogether in our Candle-Religion with the
Gentiles Idolaters. What means it that they, after the example of the
Gentiles Idolaters, burn Incense, offer up Gold to Images, hang up Crutches,
Chains, and Ships, Legs, Arms, and whole Men and Women of Wax, before Images,
as though by them, or Saints, (as they say,) they were delivered from Lameness,
Sickness, Captivity or Shipwreck? Is not this colere imagines, to worship
Images, so earnestly forbidden in Gods Word? If they deny it, let them read the
Ninth Chapter of Daniel the Prophet, who says of Antichrist, He shall worship
God whom his Fathers knew not, with gold, silver, and with p^ecious stone, and
other things of pleasure: in which place the Latin word is Colet. C^l^re.
And in the second of Paralipomenon the xxix. Chapter, all the outward Rites
and Ceremonies, as burning of Incense, and such other, wherewith God in the
Temple was honored, Cultus.
is called Cultus (to say) worshipping, which is forbidden strictly by Gods
Word to be given to Images. Do not all Stories Ecclesiastical declare, that our
Holy Martyrs, rather than they would bow and kneel, or offer up one crumb of
Incense before an Image or Idol, have suffered a thousand kinds of most
horrible and dreadful death? And what excuses soever they make, yet that all
this running on Pilgrimage, burning of Incense and Candles, hanging up of
Crutchets, Chains, Ships, Arms, Legs, and whole Men and Women of Wax, kneeling
and holding up of hands, is done to the Images, appears by this, that where
no Images be, or where they have been, and be taken away, they do no such
things at all. But all the places frequented when the Images were there, now
they be taken away, be forsaken and left desert; nay, now they hate and abhor
the place deadly; which is an evident proof, that that which they did before,
was done in respect of the Images. Wherefore, when we see Men and Women on
heaps go on Pilgrimage to Images, kneel before them, hold up their hands before
them, set up Candles, burn Incense before them, offer up Gold and Silver unto
them, hang up Ships, Crutchets, Chains, Men and Women of Wax before them,
attributing health and safeguard, the gifts of God, to them, or the Saints whom
they represent, as they rather would have it; who, I say, who can doubt, but
that our Image-maintainers, agreeing in all idolatrous Opinions, outward Rites
and Ceremonies with the Gentiles Idolaters, agree also with them in committing
most abominable Idolatry: And to increase this madness, wicked men which have
the keeping of such Images, for their greater lucre and advantage, after the
example of the Gentiles Idolaters, have reported and spread abroad, as well by
lying tales, as written fables, diverse Miracles of Images. As that such an
Image miraculously was sent from Heaven, even like the Palladium, or Magna
Diana Ephesiorum. Such another was as miraculously found in the Earth, as the
Man's Head was in the Capitol, or the Horse head in Capua. Such an Image was
brought by Angels. Such an one came it self far from the East to the West, as
Dame Fortune fled to Rome. Such an Image of our Lady was painted by St. Luke,
whom of a Physician they have made a Painter for that purpose. Such an one an
hundred yokes of Oxen could not move, like Bona Dea, whom the Ship could not
carry; or Jupiter Olympius, which laughed the Artificers to scorn that went
about to remove him to Rome. Some Images, though they were hard and stony, yet
for tender heart and pity, wept. Some, like Castor and Pollux, helping their
Friends in Battle, sweat, as Marble Pillars do in dampish weather. Some speak
more monstrously than ever did Balaam's Ass, who had life and breath in him.
Such a Cripple came and saluted this Saint of Oak, and by and by he was made
whole, and lo, here hangs his Crutch. Such an one in a Tempest vowed to St.
Christopher, and escaped, and behold, here is his Ship of Wax. Such an one by
St. Leonard's help brake out of Prison, and see where his Fetters hang. And
infinite thousands more Miracles, by like or more shameless lies were reported.
Thus do our Image-maintainers in earnest apply to their Images, all such
Miracles, as the Gentiles have feigned of their Idols. And if it were to be
admitted, that some miraculous acts were by illusion of the Devil done where
Images be: (For it is evident that the most part were feigned lies, and crafty
juglings of men) yet follows it not therefore, that such Images are either to
be honored, or suffered to remain, no more than Ezechias left the brazen
Serpent undestroyed, when it was worshipped, although it were both set up by
Gods Commandment, and also approved by a great and true Miracle; for as many as
beheld it, were by and by healed: neither ought Miracles to persuade us to do
contrary to Gods Word. For the Scriptures have for a warning hereof foreshewed,
that the Kingdom of Antichrist shall be mighty in Miracles and Wonders, to the
strong illusion of all the Reprobate. But in this they pass the folly and
wickedness of the Gentiles, that they honor and worship the Relics and Bones
of our Saints, which prove that they be mortal men and dead, and therefore no
gods to be worshipped, which the Gentiles would never confess of their gods for
very shame. But the Relics we must kiss and offer unto, specially on
Relique-Sunday. And while we Offer (that we should not be weary, or repent us
of our cost) the Music and Minstrelsie goes merrily all the Offertory time,
with praising and calling upon those Saints, whose Relics be then in
presence. Yea, and the Water also wherein those Relics have been dipped, must
with great reverence be reserved, as very Holy and effectual. Is this agreeable
to St. Chrysostom, Homilia de septem Macchabaeis.
who writes thus of Relics? Do not regard the Ashes of the Saints bodies,
nor the Relics of their flesh and bones, consumed with time: but open the
eyes of thy Faith, and behold them clothed with Heavenly virtue, and the grace
of the Holy Ghost, and shining with the brightness of the Heavenly light. But
our Idolaters found too much vantage of Relics and Relique-water, to follow
St. Chrysostom's counsel. And because Relics were so gainful, few places
there were but they had Relics provided for them. And for more plenty of
Relics, some one Saint had many Heads, one in one place, and another in
another place. Some had six Arms, and twenty six Fingers. And where our Lord
bare his Cross alone, if all the pieces of the Relics thereof were gathered
together, the greatest Ship in England would scarcely bear them, and yet the
greatest part of it, they say, does yet rem^^n in the hands of the Infidels,
for the which they pray on their Beads bidding, that they may get it also in
their hands, for such godly use and purpose. And not only the Bones of the
Saints, but every thing appertaining to them was an Holy Relic. In some place
they offer a Sword, in some the Scabbard; in some a Shoe, in some a Saddle that
had been set upon some holy Horse; in some the Coals wherewith St. Laurence was
roasted; in some places the Tail of the Ass which our Lord Jesus Christ sat
on, to be kissed and offered unto for a Relic. For rather than they would
lack a Relic, they would offer you a Horse-bone, instead of a Virgins Arm, or
the Tail of the Ass to be kissed and offered unto for Relics. O wicked,
impudent, most shameless men, the devisers of these things! O silly, foolish,
and dastardly Daws, and more beastly than the Ass whose Tail they kissed, that
believe such things. Now God be merciful to such miserable and silly
Christians, who by the fraud and falsehood of those which should have taught
them the way of truth and life, have been made not only more wicked than the
Gentiles Idolaters, but also no wiser than Asses, Horses, and Mules, which have
no Understanding

Of these things already rehearsed, it is evident, that our Image-maintainers
have not only made Images, and set them up in Temples, as did the Gentiles
Idolaters their Idols: but also that they have had the same Idolatrous Opinions
of the Saints, to whom they have made Images, which the Gentiles Idolaters had
of their false gods; and have not only worshipped their Images with the same
Rites, Ceremonies, Superstition, and all Circumstances, as did the Gentiles
Idolaters their Idols, but in many points also have far exceeded them in all
wickedness, foolishness, and madness. And if this be not sufficient to prove
them Image-worshippers, that is to say, Idolaters: lo, you shall hear their own
open confession; I mean, not only the Decrees of the second Nicene Council
under Irene, the Roman Council under Gregory the Third, in which, as they teach
that Images are to be honored and worshipped, as is before declared: so yet do
they it warily and fearfully, in comparison to the blasphemous bold blazing of
manifest Idolatry to be done to Images, set forth of late, even in these our
days, the light of Gods Truth so shining, that above other abominable doings
and writings, a man would marvel most at their impudent, shameless, and most
shameful blustering boldness, who would not at the least have chosen them a time
of more darkness, as meeter to utter their horrible Blasphemies in: but have
now taken an Harlots face, not purposed to blush in setting abroad the
furniture of their Spiritual Whoredom. And here the plain Blasphemy of the
Reverend Father in God, James Naclantus, Bishop of Clugi^n, written in his
Exposition of St. Pa^l's Epistle to the Romans, and the first Chapter, and put
in Pri^t now of late at Venice, may stand instead of all; whose words of
Image-worshipping be these in Latin as he did write them, not one syllable
altered.

Ergo non solum fatendum est, sideles in Ecclesi^ adorare coram imagine (ut
nonnulli ad caut^lam f^^t^ loquuntur) sed and adorare imaginem, sine quo
^olueris scrupulo, quin and eo illam venerantur cultu, quo and prototypon ejus
propter quod si illud ha^^t adorare latria, and illa latria: si dulia, vel
hyperdulia, and illa pariter ejusmodi cultu adoranda est.

The sense whereof in English is this: Therefore it is not only to be
confessed, that the Faithful in the Church do worship before an Image (as some
peradventure do warily speak) but also do worship the Image it self, without
any scruple or doubt at all: Yea, and they worship the Image with the same kind
of worship, wherewith they worship the copy of the Image, or the thing
whereafter the Image is made. Wherefore if the Copy it self is to be worshipped
with Divine Honor (as is God the Father, Christ, and the Holy Ghost) the Image
of them is also to be worshipped with divine honor. If the copy ought to be
worshipped with inferior Honor, or higher Worship; the Image also is to be
worshipped with the same honor and worship. Thus far has Naclantus, whose
Blasphemies let Pope Gregorius the First confute, Gregor.
and by his Authority damn them to Hell, as his Successors have horribly
thundered. Epist. ad Serenum ^^^^sil.
For although Gregory permits Images to be had, yet he forbids them by
any means to be worshipped, and praises much Bishop S^renas, for the
forbidding the worshipping of them, and wills him to teach the People to
avoid by all means to worship any Image. But Naclantus blows forth his
Blasphemous Idolatry, willing Images to be worshipped with the highest kind of
Adoration and Worship: and lest such wholesome Doctrine should lack Authority,
he groundeth it upon Aristotle in his Book de somno and vigilia, that is, of
sleeping and waking, as by his printed Book noted in the Margin, is to be seen:
whose impudent wickedness and idolatrous judgment, I have therefore more
largely set forth, Of Image-worshipping.
that ye may (as Virgil speaks of Simon) of one know all these
Image-worshippers and Idolaters, and understand to what point in conclusion the
public having of Images in Temples and Churches has brought us; comparing the
times and writings of Gregory the First, with our days, the Blasphemies of such
Idolaters, as this Instrument of Belial, named Naclantus, is. Wherefore, now it
is by the testimony of the Old godly Fathers and Doctors, by the open
confession of Bishops assembled in Councils, by most evident signs and
arguments, opinions, idolatrous acts, deeds, and worshipping done to their
Images, and by their own open Confession and Doctrine set forth in their Books,
declared and showed, that their Images have been, and be commonly worshipped,
yea, and that they ought so to be: I will out of Gods Word make this general
Argument against all such makers, setters up, and maintainers of Images in
public places. And first of all I will begin with the words of our Savior
Christ. Mat. 18.
Woe be to that man by whom an offense is given, woe be to him that offends one
of these little ones, or weak ones: better were it for him, that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the middle of the Sea, and
drowned, Deuteronomy. 2^.
than he should assend one of these little ones, or weak ones. And in
Deuteronomy, God himself denounces him accursed that makes the blind to
wander in his way. And in Leviticus, Lev. 19.
Thou shall not lay a stumbling block or stone before the blind. But Images in
Churches and Temples have been, and be, and (as afterward shall be proved) ever
will be offenses and stumbling blocks, specially to the weak, simple, and blind
common People, deceiving their hearts by the cunning of the Artificer (as the
Scripture expressly in sundry places does testify) and so bringing them to
Idolatry. Sap. 13.12.
Therefore woe be to the erecter, setter up, and maintainer of Images in
Churches and Temples, for a greater penalty remains for him than the death of
the Body.

If answer be yet made, that this offense may be taken away by diligent and
sincere Doctrine and Preaching of Gods Word, as by other means: and that Images
in Churches and Temples therefore be not things absolutely evil to all men,
although dangerous to some: and therefore that it were to be holden, that the
public having of them in Churches and Temples, is not expedient, as a thing
perilous, rather than unlawful, and a thing utterly wicked. Then follows the
third Article to be proved, which is this: That it is not possible, if Images
be suffered in Churches and Temples, either by preaching of Gods Word, or by
any other means, to keep the People from worshipping of them, and so to avoid
Idolatry. And first, concerning Preaching. If it should be admitted, that
although Images were suffered in Churches, yet might Idolatry by diligent and
sincere preaching of Gods Word be avoided: It should follow of necessity, that
sincere Doctrine might always be had and continue, as well as Images, and so
that wheresoever, to offense, were exected an Image, there also, of reason, a
godly and sincere Preacher should and might be continually maintained. For it
is reason, that the warning be as common as the stumbling block, the remedy as
large as is the offense, the medicine as general as the poison: but that is not
possible, as both reason and experience teaches. Wherefore Preaching cannot
stay Idola^ry, Images being publicly suffered. For an ^ma^e, which will last
for many hundred years, may for a little be bought: but a good Preacher cannot
without much be continually maintained. (...), if the Prince will suffer it,
there will be by and by many, yea, infinite Images: but sincere Preach^rs were,
and ever shall be but a few in respect of the multitude to be taught. For our
Savior Christ says, The harvest is plentiful, but the workmen be but few:
which has been hitherto continually true, and will be to the Worlds end: And
in our time, and here in our Country so true, that every Shire should scarcely
have one good Preacher, if they were divided.

Now, Images will continually to the beholders preach their Doctrine, that is,
the worshipping of Images and Idolatry, to the which Preaching mankind is
exceeding prone, and inclined to give ear and credit: as experience of all
Nations and Ages does too much prove. But a true Preacher to stay this
mischief, is in very many places scarcely heard once in a whole year, and
somewhere not once in seven years, as is evident to be proved. And that evil
Opinion which has been long rooted in men's hearts, cannot suddenly by one
Sermon be rooted out clean. And as few are inclined to credit sound Doctrine;
as many, and almost all, be prone to Superstition and Idolatry. So that herein
appears not only a difficulty, but also an impossibility of the Remedy.
Further, it appears not by any story of credit, that true and sincere
Preaching has endured in any one place above one hundred years: But it is
evident that Images, Superstition, and worshipping of Images, and Idolatry have
continued many hundred years. For all Writings and Experience do testify, that
good things do by little and little ever decay, until they be clean banished:
and contrariwise, evil things do more and more increase, till they come to a
full perfection of wickedness. Neither need we to seek examples far off for a
proof hereof, our present matter is an example. For preaching of Gods Word most
sincere (in the beginning) by process of time waxed less and less pure, and
after corrupt, and last of all, altogether laid down and left off, and other
inventions of men crept in place of it. And on the other part, Images among
Christian men were first painted, and that in whole stories together, which had
some signification in them: Afterward, they were embossed, and made of Timber,
Stone, Plaster, and Metal. And first, they were only kept privately in private
men's houses: And then after, they crept into Churches and Temples, but first by
painting, and after by embossing; and yet were they no where at the first
worshipped. But shortly after, they began to be worshipped of the ignorant sort
of men, as appears by the Epistle that Gregory the first of that name, Bishop
of Rome, did write to Serenus, Bishop of Marselles. Of the which two Bishops,
Serenus for Idolatry committed to Images, brake them, and burned them. Gregory,
although be thought it tolerable to let them stand, yet he judged it abominable
that they should be worshipped, and thought (as is now alleged) that the
worshipping of them might be stayed, by teaching of Gods Word, according as he
exhorts Serenus to teach the People, as in the same Epistle appears. But
whether Gregory's Opinion, or Serenus's judgment were better herein, consider
ye, I pray you, for Experience by and by confuteth Gregory's Opinion. For
notwithstanding Gregory's writing, and the preaching of others, Images being
once publicly set up in Temples and Churches, simple Men and Women shortly
after fell on heaps to worshipping of them: And at the last, the learned also
were carried away with the public Error, as with a violent stream or flood.
And at the second Council Nicene, the Bishops and Clergy decreed, that Images
should be worshipped: and so by occasion of these stumbling blocks, not only
the unlearned and simple, but the learned and wise; not the People only, but
the Bishops; not the Sheep, but also the Shepherds themselves (who should have
been guides in the right way, and lights to shine in darkness) being blinded by
the bewitching of Images, as blind guides of the blind, fell both into the Pit
of damnable Idolatry. In the which all the World, as it were drowned, continued
until our Age, by the space of above eight hundred years, unspoken against in a
manner. And this success had Gregory's Order, which mischief had never come to
pass, had Bishop Serenus his way been taken, and all Idols and Images been
utterly destroyed and abolished: for no man worshippeth that that is not. And
thus you see, how from having of Images privately, it came to public setting
of them up in Churches and Temples, although without harm at the first, as was
then of some wise and learned men judged: and from simple having them there, it
came at the last to worshipping of them. First, by the rude People, who
specially (as the Scripture teaches) S^p. 13 14*
are in danger of Superstition and Idolatry, and afterward by the Bishops, the
learned, and by the whole Clergy. So that Laity and Clergy, Learned and
Unlearned, all Ages, Sects, and Degrees of Men, Women, and Children, of whole
Christendom (an horrible and most dreadful thing to think) have been at once
drowned in abominable Idolatry, of all other vices most detested of God, and
most damnable to man, and that by the space of eight hundred years and more.
And to this end is come that beginning of setting up of Images in Churches,
then judged harmless, in experience proved not only harmful, but exitious and
pestilent, and to the destruction and subversion of all good Religion
universally. So that I conclude, as it may be possible in some one City or
little Country, to have Images set up in Temples and Churches, and yet
Idolatry by earnest and continual preaching of Gods true Word, and the sincere
Gospel of our Savior Christ, may be kept away for a short time: So it is
impossible, that (Images once set up and suffered in Temples and Churches) any
great Countries, much less the whole World, can any long time be kept from
Idolatry. And the godly will respect, not only their own City, Country, and
Time, and the Health of Men of their Age: but be careful for all places and
times, and the Salvation of men of all Ages. At the least, they will not lay
such stumbling blocks and snares for the feet of other Countrymen and Ages,
which experience has already proved to have been the ruin of the World.
Wherefore I make a general conclusion of all that I have hitherto said: If the
stumbling blocks and poisons of men's Souls, by setting up of Images, will be
many, yea, infinite if they be suffered, and the warnings of the same
stumbling blocks, and remedies for the said poisons by preaching but few, as is
already declared: if the stumbling blocks be easy to be laid, the poisons soon
provided, and the warnings and remedies hard to know or come by: if the
stumbling blocks lie continually in the way, and poison be ready at hand every
where, and warnings and remedies but seldom given: and if all men be more ready
of themselves to stumble and be offended, than to be warned, all men more ready
to drink of the poison, than to taste of the remedy (as is before partly, and
shall hereafter more fully be declared) and so in fine, the poison continually
and deeply drunk of many, the remedy seldom and faintly tasted of by a few: How
can it be but that infinite of the weak and infirm shall be offended, infinite
by ruin shall break their necks, infinite by deadly venom be poisoned in their
souls? And how is the charity of God, or love of our Neighbors in our hearts
then, if when we may remove such dangerous stumbling blocks, such pestilent
poisons, we will not remove them? What shall I say of them which will lay
stumbling blocks, where before there was none, and set snares for the feet,
nay, for the souls of weak and simple ones, and work the danger of their
everlasting destruction, for whom our Savior Christ shed his most precious
Blood, where better it were that the Arts of Painting, Plaistering, Carving,
Graving, and Founding, had never been found nor used, than one of them, whose
souls in the sight of God are so precious, should by occasion of Image or
Picture, perish and be lost. And thus is it declared that preaching cannot
possibly stay Idolatry, if Images be set up publicly in Temples and Churches.
And as true is it, that no other remedy, as writing against Idolatry, Councils
assembled, Decrees made against it, severe Laws likewise, and Proclamations of
Princes and Emperors, neither extreme Punishments and Penalties, nor any other
remedy could or can be possibly devised for the avoiding of Idolatry, if Images
be publicly set up and suffered. For concerning writing against Images, and
Idolatry to them committed, there has been alleged unto you in the Second
Part of this Treatise a great many places out of Tertullian, Origin,
Lactantius, S. Augustine, Epiphanius, S. Ambrose, Clemens, and diverse other
learned and holy Bishops and Doctors of the Church. And besides these, all
Histories Ecclesiastical, and Books of other godly and learned Bishops and
Doctors are full of notable examples and sentences against Images and the
worshipping of them. And as they have most earnestly written, so did they
sincerely and most diligently in their time teach and preach, according to
their writings and examples. For they were then preaching Bishops, and more
often seen in Pulpits, than in Princes Palaces, more often occupied in his
Legacy, who said, Go ye into the whole world, and preach the Gospel to all men,
than in Embassages and Affairs of Princes in this World. And as they were most
zealous and diligent, so were they of excellent learning and godliness of life,
and by both of great Authority and Credit with the People, and so of more force
and likelihood to persuade the People, and the People more like to believe and
follow their Doctrine. But if their Preachings could not help, much less could
their Writings, which do but come to the knowledge of a few that be learned, in
comparison to continual Preaching, whereof the whole multitude is partaker.
Neither did the Old Fathers, Bishops, and Doctors, severally only by Preaching
and Writing, but also together, great numbers of them assembled in Synods and
Councils, make Decrees and Ecclesiastical Laws against Images, and the
worshipping of them; neither did they so once or twice, but diverse times, and
in diverse Ages and Countries, assembled Synods and Councils, and made severe
Decrees against Images, and worshipping of them, as has been at large in the
Second Part of this Homily before declared. But all their Writing, Preaching,
assembling in Councils, decreeing and making of Laws Ecclesiastical, could
nothing help, either to pull down Images, to whom Idolatry was committed, or
against Idolatry whilst Images stood. For those blind Books, and dumb
Schoolmasters, I mean Images and Idols (for they call them Laymens Books and
Schoolmasters) by their carved and painted Writings, teaching and preaching
Idolatry, prevailed against all their written Books, and preaching with lively
voice, as they call it. Well, if Preaching and Writing could not keep men from
worshipping of Images and Idolatry, if Pen and Words could not do it, you would
think that Penalty and Sword might do it; I mean, that Princes by severe Laws
and Punishments might stay this unbridled affection of all men to Idolatry,
though Images were set up and suffered. But experience proves, that this can
no more help against Idolatry, than Writing and Preaching. For Christian
Emperors (whose Authority ought of reason, and by Gods Law, to be greatest)
above eight in number, and six of them successively reigning one after another
(as is in the Histories before rehearsed) making most severe Laws and
Proclamations against Idols and Idolatry, Images and the worshipping of Images;
and executing most grievous punishments, yea, the penalty of Death, upon the
maintainers of Images, and upon Idolaters and Image-worshippers: could not
bring to pass, that either Images once set up, might thoroughly be destroyed, or
that men should refrain from the worshipping of them, being set up. And what
think you then will come to pass, if men of learning should teach the People to
make them, and should maintain the setting up of them, as things necessary in
Religion? To conclude, it appears evidently by all stories and writings, and
experience in times past, that neither Preaching, neither Writing, neither the
consent of the Learned, nor authority of the Godly, nor the decrees of
Councils, neither the Laws of Princes, nor extreme punishments of the Offenders
in that behalf, nor any other remedy or means, can help against Idolatry, if
Images be suffered publicly. And it is truly said, that times past are
Schoolmasters of Wisdom to us that follow and live after. Therefore if in
times past, the most virtuous and best learned, the most diligent also, and in
number almost infinite, ancient Fathers, Bishops, and Doctors with their
Writing, Preaching, Industry, Earnestness, Authority, Assemblies, and Councils
could do nothing against Images and Idolatry, to Images once set up: what can
we, neither in learning, nor holiness of life, neither in diligence, neither in
authority, to be compared with them, but men in contempt, and of no estimation
(as the World goes now) few also in number, in so great a multitude and malice
of men. What can we do, I say, or bring to pass to the stay of Idolatry or
worshipping of Images, if they be allowed to stand publicly in Temp^es and
Churches? And if so many, so mighty Emperors, by so severe Laws and
Proclamations, so rigorous and extreme Punishments and Executions could not
stay the People from setting up and worshipping of Images: what will ensue,
think you, when men shall commend them as necessary Books of the Laymen? Let us
therefore of these latter days learn this Lesson of the Experience of ancient
Antiquity, that Idolatry cannot possibly be separated from Images any long
time: but that as an unseparable accident, or as a shadow follows the body
when the Sun shines, so Idolatry follows and cleaves to the public having
of Images in Temples and Churches. And finally, as Idolatry is to be abhorred
and avoided, so are Images (which cannot be long without Idolatry) to be put
away and destroyed. Besides the which experiments and proof of time before, the
very nature and origin of Images themselves draws to Idolatry most
violently; and men's nature and inclination also is bent to Idolatry so
vehemently, that it is not possible to sever or part Images, nor to keep men
from Idolatry, if Images be suffered publicly. That I speak of the nature and
origin of Images, is this: Even as the first invention of them is naught, and
no good can come of that which had an evil beginning, for they be altogether
naught, as Athanasius in his Book against the Gentiles declares; and St.
Jerome also upon the Prophet Jeremy, the sixth Chapter; and Eusebius in the
Seventh Book of his Ecclesiastical History, the xviij. testifies, that as they
first came from the Gentiles, which were Idolaters and worshippers of Images,
unto us; and as the invention of them was the beginning of Spiritual
Fornication, as the Word of God testifies, Sap. 14. So will they naturally (as
it were of necessity) turn to their origin from whence they came, and draw us
with them most violently to Idolatry, abominable to God and all godly men. For
if the origin of Images, and worshipping of them, as it is recorded in the
eighth Chapter of the Book of Wisdom, began of a blind love of a fond Father,
framing for his comfort an Image of his Son, being dead, and so at the last men
fell to the worshipping of the Image of him whom they did know to be dead: How
much more will Men and Women fall to the worshipping of the Images of God, our
Savior Christ, and his Saints, if they be suffered to stand in Churches and
Temples publicly? For the greater the opinion is of the Majesty and Holiness
of the Person to whom an Image is made, the sooner will the People fall to the
worshipping of the said Image. Wherefore the Images God, our Savior Christ,
the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Apostles, Martyrs, and others of notable Holiness,
are of all other Images most dangerous for the peril of Idolatry, and therefore
greatest heed to be taken that none of them be suffered to stand publicly in
Churches and Temples. For there is no great dread lest any should fall to the
worshipping of the Images of Annas, Caiaphas, Pilate, or Judas the Traitor, if
they were set up. But to the other, it is already at full proved, that Idolatry
has been, is, and is most like continually to be committed. Now, as was before
touched, and is here most largely to be declared, the nature of man is none
otherwise bent to worshipping of Images (if he may have them, and see them)
than it is bent to Whoredom and Adultery in the company of Harlots. And as unto
a man given to the lust of the flesh, seeing a wanton Harlot, sitting by her,
and embracing her, it profits little for one to say, 1 Cor. 6. 1 Cor. 4. Heb.
13.
Beware of Fornication, God will condemn Fornicators and Adulterers: for
neither will he, being overcome with greater inticements of the Strumpet, give
ear or take heed to such godly admonitions; and when he is left afterward
alone with the Harlot, nothing can follow but wickedness: even so, suffer
Images to be set in the Churches and Temples, ye shall in vain bid them beware
of Images, as St. John does, 1 John 5.
and flee Idolatry as all the Scriptures warn us; ye shall in vain preach and
teach them against Idolatry. For a number will notwithstanding fall headlong
unto it, what by the nature of Images, and what by the inclination of their own
corrupt nature.

Wherefore as for a man given to Lust, to sit down by a Strumpet, is to tempt
God; so is it likewise to erect an Idol in this proneness of man's nature to
Idolatry, nothing but a tempting. Now, if any will say that this similitude
proves nothing; yet I pray them let the Word of God, out of the which the
similitude is taken, prove something. Lev. 17. and 20. Numb. 25. Deuteronomy. 31.
Baruch 6.
Does not the Word of God call Idolary, spiritual Fornication? Does it not call
a gilt or painted Idol or Image, a Strumpet with a painted Face? Be not the
spiritual wickednesses of an Idols enticing like the flatteries of a wanton
Harlot? Be not Men and Women as prone to spiritual Fornication (I mean
Idolatry) as to carnal Fornication? If this be denied, let all the Nations upon
the Earth which have been Idolaters (as by all stories appears) prove it
true. Let the Jews and the People of God, which were so often and so earnestly
warned, so dreadfully threatened concerning Images and Idolatry, and so
extremely punished therefore (and yet fell into it) prove it to be true; as in
almost all the Books of the Old Testament, namely, the Kings and the
Chronicles, and the Prophets, it appears most evidently. Let all Ages and
Times, and Men of all Ages and Times, of all Degrees and Conditions, Wise men,
Learned men, Princes, Idiots, Unlearned, and Commonalty, prove it to be true.
If you require Examples: For Wise Men, ye have the Egyptians, and the Indian
Gymnosophists; for wisest men of the World, you have Solomon the wisest of all
other. For Learned men, the Greeks, and namely, the Athenians, exceeding all
other Nations in Superstition and Idolatry, as in the History of the Acts of
the Apostles St. Paul charge them. Acts 17. Romans 1.
For Princes and Governors, you have the Romans, the rulers of the roast (as
they say) you have the same forenamed King Solomon, and all the Kings of Israel
and Judah after him, saving David, Ezechias, and Josias, and one or two more.
All these (I say) and infinite others, wise, learned Princes and Governors,
being all Idolaters, have you for examples and a proof of men's inclination to
Idolatry. That I may pass over with silence in the mean time, infinite
multitudes and millions of Idiots and unlearned, Psalm. 23.
the ignorant and gross People, like unto Horses and Mules, in whom is no
understanding, whose peril and danger to fall on heaps to Idolatry by occasion
of Images, Sap. 13.14.
the Scriptures specially foreshew and give warning of. And indeed how should
the unlearned, simple, and foolish escape the Nets and Snares of Idols and
Images, in the which the wisest and the best learned have been so entangled,
trapped, and wrapped? Wherefore the Argument holds this ground sure, That men
be as inclined of their corrupt Nature to spiritual Fornication, as to carnal;
which the wisdom of God foreseeing, to the general prohibition, that none
should make to themselves any Image or similitude, adds a cause, depending of
man's corrupt Nature. Lest (says God) thou being deceived with error, Deuteronomy. 4.
honor and worship them. And of this ground of man's corrupt inclination, as
well to spiritual Fornication, as to carnal, it must needs follow, That as it
is the duty of the godly Magistrate, loving Honesty, and hating Whoredom, to
remove all Strumpets and Harlots, specially out of places notoriously
suspected, or resorted unto of naughty packs, for the avoiding of carnal
Fornication: so it is the duty of the same godly Magistrate, after the examples
of the godly Kings, Ezechias and Josias, to drive away all spiritual Harlots (I
mean Idols and Images) especially out of suspected places, Churches and
Temples, dangerous for Idolatry to be committed to Images placed there, as it
were in the appointed place and height of Honor and Worship (as St. Augustine
says) where the living God only (and not dead stones and stocks) is to be
worshipped: Augustine. in Psalm. 36. and 113. and lib. 4. cap. 3. de civit. Dei.
It is (I say) the office of godly Magistrates likewise to avoid Images and
Idols out of Churches and Temples, as spiritual Harlots out of suspected places
for the avoiding of Idolatry, which is spiritual Fornication. And as he were
the Enemy of all Honesty, that should bring Strumpets and Harlots out of their
secret corners into the Public Marketplace, there freely to dwell and
practice their filthy Merchandise: So is he the Enemy of the true worshipping
of God, that brings Idols and Images into the Temple and Church, the House of
God, there openly to be worshipped, and to rob the zealous God of his Honor,
who will not give it to any other, nor his Glory to carved Images, who is as
much forsaken, and the bond of love between man and him as much broken by
Idolatry, which is spiritual Fornication, as is the knot and bond of Marriage
broken by carnal Fornication. Let all this be taken as a lie, if the Word of
God enforce it not to be true. Deuteronomy. 27.
Cursed be the man (says God in Deuteronomy) that makes a carved or molten
Image, and places it in a secret corner: and all the people shall say, Amen.
Thus says God, for at that time no man durst have or worship Images openly,
but in corners only: and the whole World being the great Temple of God, he that
in any corner thereof robs God of his glory, and gives it to stocks and
stones, is pronounced by Gods Word accursed. Now, he that will bring these
spiritual Harlots out of their lurking corners, into public Churches and
Temples, that spiritual Fornication may there openly of all Men and Women
without shame be committed with them, no doubt that Person is cursed of God,
and twice cursed, and all good and godly Men and Women will say, Amen, and
their Amen will take effect also. Yea, and furthermore the madness of all men
professing the Religion of Christ, now by the space of a sort of hundred years,
and yet even in our time in so great light of the Gospel, very many running on
heaps by Sea and Land, to the great loss of their time, expense and waste of
their Goods, destitution of their Wives, Children, and Families, and danger of
their own Bodies and Lives, to Compostella, Rome, Jerusalem, and other far
Countries, to visit dumb and dead stocks and stones, does sufficiently prove
the proneness of man's corrupt nature to the seeking of Idols once set up, and
the worshipping of them. And thus as well by the origin and nature of Idols
and Images themselves, as by the proneness and inclination of man's corrupt
nature to Idolatry, it is evident, that neither Images, if they be publicly
set up, can be separated, nor men, if they see Images in Temples and Churches,
can be slaid and kept from Idolatry. Now, whereas they yet allege, that
howsoever the People, Princes, Learned, and Wise, of Old time, have fallen into
Idolatry by occasion of Images, that yet in our time the most part, specially
the learned and wise, of any Authority, take no hurt nor offense by Idols and
Images, neither do run into far Countries to them, and worship them: And that
they know well what an Idol or Image is, and how to be used, and that therefore
it follows, Images in Churches and Temples to be an indifferent thing, as the
which of some is not abused; and that therefore they may justly hold (as was in
the beginning of this part by them alleged) that it is not unlawful or wicked
absolutely to have Images in Churches and Temples, though it may for the danger
of the simple sort seem to be not altogether expedient.

Whereunto may be well replied, that Solomon also, the wisest of all men, did
well know what an Idol or Image was, neither took any harm thereof a great
while himself, and also with his godly writings armed others against the danger
of them. But yet afterward the same Solomon suffering his wanton Paramours to
bring their Idols into his Court and Palace, was by carnal Harlots persuaded,
Sap. 13.14.
and brought at the last to the committing of Spiritual Fornication with Idols,
and of the wisest and godliest Prince, became the most foolish and wicked also.
Wherefore it is better even for the wisest to regard this warning, He that
loves danger, Eccl. 3. and 13. 1 Cor. 10.
shall perish therein: and Let him that stands beware lest he fall, rather
than wittingly and willingly to lay such a stumbling block for his own feet and
others, that may perhaps bring him at last to break neck. The good King
Ezechias did know well enough, 4 Reg. 18.
that the brazen Serpent was but a dead Image, and therefore he took no hurt
himself thereby through Idolatry to it: Did he therefore let it stand, because
himself took no hurt thereof? No, not so: but being a good King, and therefore
regarding the health of his silly Subjects, deceived by that Image, and
committing Idolatry thereto, he did not only take it down, but also brake it to
pieces; and this he did to that Image that was set up by the Commandment of
God, in the presence whereof great Miracles were wrought, as that which was a
figure of our Savior Christ to come, who should deliver us from the mortal
sting of the Old Serpent, Satan. Neither did he spare it in respect of the
ancientness or antiquity of it, which had continued above seven hundred years;
nor for that it had been suffered, and preserved by so many godly Kings before
his time. How (think you) would that godly Prince (if he were now living)
handle our Idols, set up against Gods Commandment directly, and being figures
of nothing but folly, and for Fools to gaze on, till they become as wise as the
blocks themselves which they stare on, and so fall down as dared Larks in that
gaze, and being themselves alive, worship a dead stock or stone, gold or
silver, and so become Idolaters, abominable and cursed before the living God,
giving the honor due unto him which made them when they were nothing, and to
our Savior Christ, who redeemed them being lost, to the dead and dumb Idol,
the work of man's hand, which never did, nor can do any thing for them; no, is
not able to stir, nor once to move, and therefore worse than a vile Worm which
can move and creep? The excellent King Josias also did take himself no hurt of
Images and Idols, for he did know well what they were: did he therefore,
because of his own knowledge, let Idols and Images stand? much less did he set
any up: Or rather did he not by his knowledge and authority also succor the
ignorance of such as did not know what they were, by utter taking away of all
such stumbling blocks as might be occasion of ruin to his People and Subjects?
Will they, because a few took no hurt by Images or Idols, break the General Law
of God, Thou shall make to thee no similitude, etc? They might as well, because
Moses was not seduced by Jethro's Daughter, nor Boaz by Ruth, being strangers,
reason, that all the Jews might break the general Law of God, forbidding his
People to join their Children in Marriage with strangers, lest they seduce
their Children that they should not follow God. Wherefore they which thus
reason, though it be not expedient, yet it is lawful to have Images publicly,
and do prove that lawfulness by a few picked and chosen men: if they object
that indifferently to all men, which a very few can have without hurt and
offense, they seem to take the multitude for vile souls (as he says in Virgil)
of whose loss and safeguard no reputation is to be had, for whom yet Christ
paid as dearly as for the mightiest Prince, or the wisest and best learned in
the Earth. And they that will have it generally to be taken for indifferent,
that a very few take no hurt of it, though infinite multitudes besides perish
thereby, show that they put little difference between the multitudes of
Christians and brute Beasts, whose danger they do so little esteem. Besides
this, if they be Bishops or Parsons, or otherwise having charge of men's
Consciences that thus reason, It is lawful to have Images publicly, though it
be not expedient; what manner of Pastors show they themselves to be to their
Flock, which thrust unto them that which they themselves confess not to be
expedient for them, but to the utter mine of the souls committed to their
charge, for whom they shall give a strict account before the Prince of Pastors
at the last day? For indeed to object to the weak, and ready to fall of
themselves, such stumbling blocks, is a thing not only not expedient, but
unlawful, yea, and most wicked also. Wherefore it is to be wondered how they can
call Images, set up in Churches and Temples to no profit or benefit of any, and
to so great peril and danger, yea, hurt and destruction of many, or rather
infinite, things indifferent. Is not the public setting up of them rather a
snare for all men, and the tempting of God? I beseech these reasoners to call
to mind their own accustomed Ordinance and Decree, whereby they determined that
the Scripture, though by God himself commanded to be known of all Men, Women,
and Children, should not be read of the simple, nor had in the vulgar Tongue,
for that (as they said) it was dangerous, by bringing the simple People into
Errors. Deuteronomy. 31.
And will they not forbid Images to be set up in Churches and Temples, which
are not commanded, but forbidden most strictly by God, but let them still be
there, yea, and maintain them also, seeing the People are brought, not into
danger only, but indeed into most abominable Errors and detestable Idolatry
thereby? Shall Gods Word, by God commanded to be read unto all, and known of
all, for danger of Heresy (as they say) be shut up? and Idols and Images,
notwithstanding they be forbidden by God, and notwithstanding the danger of
Idolatry by them, shall they yet be set up, suffered, and maintained in
Churches and Temples? O worldly and fleshly wisdom, even bent to maintain the
inventions and traditions of men by carnal Reason, and by the same to disanul
or deface the Holy Ordinances, Laws, and Honor of the Eternal God, who is to
be honored and praised for ever. Amen.

Now, it remains for the conclusion of this Treatise, to declare as well the
abuse of Churches and Temples, by too costly and sumptuous decking and adorning
of them, as also the lewd painting, gilding, and clothing of Idols and Images,
and so to conclude the whole Treatise.

Tertul. Apol. cap. 39.
In Tertullian's time, an hundred and threescore years after Christ, Christians
had none other Temples but common Houses, whither they for the most part
secretly resorted. And so far off was it that they had before his time any
goodly or gorgeous decked Temples, Eusebius. lib. 5. Eccl. Hist.
that Laws were made in Antonius, Verus, and Commodus the Emperors times, that
no Christians should dwell in Houses, come in public baths, or be seen in
Streets, or any where abroad, and that if they were once accused to be
Christians, they should by no means be suffered to escape. As was practiced on
Apollonius, a Noble Senator of Rome, who being accused of his own Bondsman and
Slave that he was a Christian, could neither by his defense and apology,
Hieronymus.
learnedly and eloquently written and read publicly in the Senate, nor in
respect that he was a Citizen, nor for the dignity of his Order, nor for the
vileness and unlawfulness of his accuser, being his own Slave, by likelihood of
malice moved to forge lies against his Lord, nor for other respect or help, be
delivered from death. So that Christians were then driven to dwell in Caves and
Dens: so far off was it that they had any public Temples adorned and decked as
they now be, which is here rehearsed to the confutation of those, which report
such glorious glossed Fables of the goodly and gorgeous Temple, that St. Peter,
Linus, Cletus, and those thirty Bishops their Successors had at Rome, until the
time of the Emperor Constantine, and which St. Policarp should have in Asia, or
Irenaeus in France, by such lies, contrary to all true Histories, to maintain
the superfluous gilding and decking of Temples now adays, wherein they put
almost the whole sum and pith of our Religion. But in those times the World was
won to Christendom, not by gorgeous, gilded, and painted Temples of Christians,
which had scarcely Houses to dwell in: but by the godly, and, as it were,
golden minds, and firm faith of such as in all Adversity and Persecution
professed the truth of our Religion. And after these times in Maximinian and
Constantius the Emperors Proclamation, the places where Christians resorted to
public Prayer, were called Conventicles. And in Galerius Maximinus the
Emperor's Epistle, they are called Oratories and Dominicae, to say, places
dedicated to the service of the Lord. And here by the way it is to be noted,
that at that time there was no Churches or Temples erected unto any Saint,
Eusebius. l b. 8. Cap. 19. and lib. 9. cap. 9 De ci^itate lib. 8. cap. 1.
but to God only, as St. Augustine also records, saying, We build no Temples
unto our Martyrs. And Eusebius himself calls Churches, Houses of Prayer, and
shows that in Constantine the Emperors time, all men rejoiced, seeing instead
of low Conventicles, which Tyrants had destroyed, high Temples to be builded.
Lo, unto the time of Constantine, by the space of above three hundred years
after our Savior Christ, when Christian Religion was most pure, and indeed
golden, Christians had but low and poor Conventicles, and simple Oratories,
yea, Cryptae.
Caves under the ground, called Cryptae, where they for fear of Persecution
assembled secretly together. A figure whereof remains in the Vaults which yet
are builded under great Churches, to put us in remembrance of the Old state of
the Primitive Church before Constantine. Whereas in Constantine's time, and
after him, were builded great and goodly Temples for Christians, Basilicae.
called Basilicae, either for that the Greeks used to call all great and goodly
places Basilicas, or for that the high and everlasting King, God and our
Savior Christ was served in them. But although Constantine, and other Princes,
of good zeal to our Religion, did sumptuously deck and adorn Christians
Temples, yet did they dedicate at that time all Churches and Temples to God, or
our Savior Christ, and to no Saint, Novel. constit. 3. and 47.
for that abuse began long after in Justinian's time. And that gorgeousness
then used, as it was born with, as rising of a good zeal: so was it signified
of the godly learned even at that time, that such cost might otherwise have
been better bestowed. Let St. Jerome (although otherwise too great a liker and
allower of external and outward things) be a proof hereof, who has these words
in his Epistle to Demetriades, Let others (says St. Jerome) build Churches,
cover Walls with Tables of Marble, carry together huge Pillars, and gild their
tops or heads, which do not feel or understand their precious decking and
adorning; let them deck the doors with Ivory and Silver, and set the golden
Altars with precious stones, I blame it not; let every man abound in his own
sense, and better is it so to do, than carefully to keep their Riches laid up
in store. But thou have another way appointed thee, to clothe Christ in the
Poor, to visit him in the sick, seed him in the hungry, lodge him in those who
do lack harbor, and especially such as be of the household of Faith.

And the same St. Jerome, touches the same matter somewhat more freely in his
Treatise of the Life of Clerks to Nepotian, saying thus, Many build Walls, and
erect Pillars of Churches, the smooth Marbles do glister, the Roof shines with
Gold, the Altar is set with precious Stones: But of the Ministers of Christ,
there is no election or choice. Neither let any man object and allege against
me the rich Temple that was in Jewry, the Table, Candlesticks, Incense, Ships,
Platters, Cups, Mortars, and other things all of Gold. Then were these things
allowed of the Lord, when the Priests offered Sacrifices, and the blood of
Beasts was accounted the redemption of sins. Howbeit, all these things went
before in figure; and they were written for us, upon whom the end of the World
is come. And now when that our Lord being poor, has dedicated the poverty of
his House, let us remember his Cross, and we shall esteem Riches as Mire and
Dung. What do we marvel at that which Christ calls wicked Mammon? Whereto we
do so highly esteem and love that which St. Peter does for a glory testify
that he had not? Hitherto St. Jerome.

Thus you see how St. Jerome teaches the sumptuousness amongst the Jews to be
a figure to signify, and not an example to follow; and that those outward
things were suffered for a time, until Christ our Lord came, who turned all
those outward things into Spirit, Faith, and Truth. And the same St. Jerome
upon the seventh Chapter of Jeremy, says, God commands both the Jews at that
time; and now us who are placed in the Church, that we have no trust in the
goodliness of Building and gilt Roofs, and in Walls covered with Tables of
Marble, and say, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. For that is
the Temple of the Lord, wherein dwells true Faith, godly Conversation, and
the company of all Virtues. And upon the Prophet Agge, he describes the true
and right decking or ornaments of the Temple after this sort: I (says St.
Jerome) do think the Silver wherewith the House of God is decked, to be the
Doctrine of the Scriptures, of the which it is spoken, The Doctrine of the Lord
is a pure Doctrine, Silver tried in the fire, purged from dross, purified seven
times. And I do take Gold to be that which remains in the hid sense of the
Saints and the secret of the heart, and shines with the true light of God.
Which is evident that the Apostle also meant of the Saints that build upon the
Foundation of Christ, some Silver, some Gold, some precious Stones: that by the
Gold, the hid sense; by Silver, godly utterance; by precious Stones, works
which please God, might be signified. With these Metals, the Church of our
Savior is made more goodly and gorgeous, than was the Synagogue in old time.
With these lively stones, is the Church and House of Christ builded, and Peace
is given to it for ever. All these be St. Jerome's sayings. No more did the old
godly Bishops and Doctors of the Church allow the over-sumptuous Furniture of
Temples and Churches, with Plate, Vessels of Gold, Silver, and precious
Vestments. St. Chrysostom says, in the ministry of the Holy Sacraments, there
is no need of golden Vessels, 2 Offi. capu^ 28.
but of golden Minds. And St. Ambrose says, Christ sent his Apostles without
Gold, and gathered his Church without Gold. The Church has Gold, not to keep
it, but to bestow it on the necessities of the Poor. The Sacraments look for no
Gold, neither do they please God for the commendation of Gold, which are not
bought for Gold. The adorning and decking of the Sacraments, is the Redemption
of Captives. Thus much says St. Ambrose.

St. Jerome commends Exuperius Bishop of Tolose, that he carried the
Sacrament of the Lords Body in a wicker Basket, and the Sacrament of his Blood
in a Glass, and so cast Covetousness out of the Church. And Bonifacius, Tit. de
consecra. can. Triburien.
Bishop and Martyr, as is recorded in the Decrees, testifies, that in Old time
the Ministers used wooden, and not golden Vessels. And Zephyrinus, the
sixteenth Bishop of Rome, made a Decree, that they should use Vessels of Glass.
Likewise were the Vestures used in the Church in Old time very plain and
single, and nothing costly. Lib. 1 Inst. cap. 14.
And Rabanus at large declares, that this costly and manifold Furniture of
Vestments of late used in the Church, was fetched from the Jewish usage, and
agrees with Aaron's apparelling almost altogether. For the maintenance of the
which Innocentius the Pope pronounces boldly, that all the customs of the Old
Law be not abolished, that we might in such Apparel, of Christians the more
willingly become Jewish. This is noted, not against Churches and Temples, which
are most necessary, and ought to have their due use and honor, as is in
another Homily for that purpose declared, nor against the convenient cleanness
and ornaments thereof: but against the sumptuousness and abuses of the Temples
and Churches. For it is a Church or Temple also that glittereth with no Marble,
shines with no Gold nor Silver, glistereth with no Pearls nor precious Stones:
but with plainness and frugality, signifies no proud Doctrine nor People, but
humble, frugal, and nothing esteeming earthly and outward things, but
gloriously decked with inward Ornaments, according as the Prophet declares,
saying, The Kings Daughter is altogether glorious inwardly.

Now, concerning excessive decking of Images and Idols, with Painting, gilding,
adorning, with precious Vestures, Pearl, and Stone, what is it else, but for
the further povocation and enticement to spiritual Fornication, to deck
spiritual Harlots most costly and wantonly, which the Idolatrous Church
understands well enough. For she being indeed not only an Harlot (as the
Scripture calls her) but also a foul, filthy, old, withered Harlot (for she
is indeed of ancient years) and understanding her lack of natural and true
Beauty, and great loathsomness which of her self she has, does (after the
custom of such Harlots) paint her self, and deck and tire her self with Gold,
Pearl, Stone, and all kind of precious Jewels, that she shining with the
outward beauty and glory of them, may please the foolish fantasy of fond
Lovers, and so entice them to spiritual Fornication with her. Who, if they saw
her (I will not say naked) but in simple Apparel, would abhor her, as the
foulest and filthiest Harlot that ever was seen: According as appears by the
description of the garnishing of the great Strumpet of all strumpets, the
Mother of Whoredom, Apoc. 17.
set forth by St. John in his Revelation, who by her glory provoked the Princes
of the Earth to commit Whoredom with her. Whereas on the contrary part, the
true Church of God, as a chaste Matron, espoused (as the Scripture teaches) to
one Husband, our Savior Jesus Christ, whom alone she is content only to please
and serve, and looks not to delight the eyes or fantasies of any other
strange Lovers or Wooers, is content with her natural Ornaments, not doubting,
by such sincere simplicity best to please him, who can well skill of the
difference between a painted Visage, and true natural Beauty. And concerning
such glorious gildings and decking of Images, both Gods Word, written in the
tenth Chapter of the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 10.
and St. Hierom's Commentaries upon the same, are most worthy to be noted.
First, the words of the Scripture be these, The workman with his Ax hewed the
timber out of the wood with the work of his hands, he decked it with gold and
silver, he joined it with nails and pins, and the stroke of an hammer, that it
might hold together. They be made smooth as the Palm, and they cannot speak: if
they be born they remove, for they cannot go. Fear ye them not, for they can
neither do evil nor good: Thus says the Prophet. Upon which Text, St. Hierome
has these words, This is the description of Idols, which the Gentiles worship,
their matter is vile and corruptible. And whereas the Artificer is mortal, the
things he makes must needs be corruptible: he decketh it with Silver and Gold,
that with the glittering or shining of both Metals, he may deceive the simple.
Which Error indeed has passed over from the Gentiles, that we should judge
Religion to stand in Riches. And by and by after he says, They have the beauty
of Metals, and be beautified by the Art of Painting, but good or profit is
there none in them. And shortly after again, They make great promises, and
devise an Image of vain worshipping of their own fantasies, they make great
brags to deceive every simple body, they dull and amaze the Understanding of
the unlearned, as it were with golden sentences, and eloquence, shining with
the brightness of Silver. And of their own devisers and makers are these Images
advanced and magnified, in the which is no utility nor profit at all, and the
worshipping of the which properly pertains to the Gentiles and Heathen, and
such as know not God.

Thus far of St. Jerome's words. Whereupon you may note as well his judgment of
Images themselves, as also of the painting, gilding, and decking of them: that
it is an Error which came from the Gentiles, that it persuades Religion to
remain in Riches, that it amazeth and deceives the simple and unlearned with
golden sentences, and silvershining eloquence, and that it appertains
properly to the Gentiles and Heathens, and such as know not God. Wherefore the
having, painting, gilding, and decking of Images, by St. Jerome's judgment, is
erroneous, seducing, and bringing into Error (specially the simple and
unlearned) heathenish, and void of the knowledge of God.

Surely the Prophet Daniel in the eleventh Chapter, declares such sumptuous
decking of Images with Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, to be a token of
Antichrists Kingdom, who (as the Prophet fore-sheweth) shall worship God with
such gorgeous things. Now usually such excessive adorning and decking of
Images, has risen and been maintained, either of Offerings provoked by
Superstition and given in Idolatry, or of Spoils, Robberies, Usury, or Goods
otherwise unjustly gotten, whereof wicked men have given part to the Images or
Saints (as they call them) that they might be pardoned of the whole: as of
diverse Writings and old Monuments concerning the cause and end of certain great
gifts, may well appear. And indeed such Money so wickedly gotten, is most meet
to be put to so wicked a use. And that which they take to be amends for the
whole before God, is more abominable in his sight, than both the wicked
getting, and the more wicked spending of all the rest. For how the Lord
allows such gifts, he declares evidently in the Prophet Isaiah, saying, I
(says the Lord) do love judgment, and I hate spoil and raveny offered in
Sacrifice: which the very Gentiles understood. Dialog. de legib. 10.
For Plato shows, That such men as suppose that God does pardon wicked men,
if they give part of their spoils and rapine to him, take him to be like a Dog,
that would be entreated and hired with part of the Prey, to suffer the Wolves
to worry the Sheep. And in case the Goods wherewith Images be decked, were
justly gotten, Lib. 2. inst. cap. 4.
yet it is extreme madness, so foolishly and wickedly to bestow Goods purchased
by Wisdom and Truth. Of such lewdness Lactantius writes thus, Men do in vain
deck Images of the gods with Gold, Ivory, and precious Stone, as though they
could take any pleasure in those things. For what use have they of precious
Gifts, which understand nor feel nothing? Even the same that dead men have. For
with like reason do they bury dead bodies, farced with Spices and Odours, and
clothed with precious Vestures, and deck Images, which neither felt nor knew
when they were made, nor understand when they be honored, for they get no
sense and understanding by their consecration. Thus far Lactantius, and much
more, too long here to rehearse, declaring, that as little Girls play with
little Puppets, so be these decked Images, great Puppets for Old Fools to play
with. And that we may know what, not only men of our Religion, but Ethnicks
also, judge of such decking of dead Images, it is not unprofitable to hear what
Seneca, a wise and excellent learned Senator of Rome, and Philosopher, says
concerning the foolishness of ancient and grave men, used in his time in
worshipping and decking of Images: We (says Seneca) be not twice Children (as
the common saying is) but always Children: but this is the difference, that we
being elder, play the Children: and in these Plays they bring in before great
and well decked Puppets (for so he calls Images) Ointments, Incense, and
Odours. To these Puppets they offer up Sacrifice, which have a Mouth, but not
the use of Teeth. Upon these they put attiring and precious Apparel, which have
no use of Clothes. To these they give Gold and Silver, which they who receive
it (meaning the Images) lack, as well as they that have given it from them. And
Seneca much commends Dionysius, King of Sicily, for his merry robbing of such
decked and jewelled Puppets. But you will ask, what does this appertain to our
Images, which is written against the Idols of the Gentiles? Altogether surely.
For what use or pleasure have our Images of their decking and precious
Ornaments? Did our Images understand when they were made? or know, when they be
so trimmed and decked? Be not these things bestowed upon them, as much in vain,
as upon dead men which have no sense? Wherefore it follows, that there is
like foolishness and lewdness in decking of our Images as great Puppets for old
Fools, like Children, to play the wicked play of Idolatry, as was before among
the Ethnicks and Gentiles. Our Churches stand full of such great Puppets,
wondrously decked and adorned; Garlands and Coronets be set on their heads,
precious Pearls hanging about their necks, their fingers shine with Rings, set
with precious Stones, their dead and stiff bodies are clothed with Garments
stiff with Gold. You would believe that the Images of our Men-saints were some
Princes of Persia Land with their proud Apparel, and the Idols of our
Women-saints, were nice and well-trimmed Harlots, tempting their Paramours to
wantonness: whereby the Saints of God are not honored, but most dishonored,
and their godliness, soberness, chastity, contempt of riches, and of the vanity
of the World, defaced and brought in doubt by such monstrous decking, most
differing from their sober and godly lives. And because the whole Pageant must
through^^ be played, it is not enough thus to deck Idols, but at last come in
the Priests themselves, likewise decked with Gold and Pearl, that they may be
meet Servants for such Lords and Ladies, and fit worshippers of such gods and
goddesses. And with a solemn pace they pass forth before these golden Puppets,
and fall down to the ground on their Marrow-bones before these honorable
Idols, and then rising up again, offer up Odours and Incense unto them, to give
the People an example of double Idolatry, by worshipping not only the Idol, but
the Gold also, and Riches wherewith it is garnished. Which things, the most
part of our Old Martyrs, rather than they would do, or once kneel, or offer up
one crumb of Incense before an Image, suffered most cruel and terrible deaths,
as the Histories of them at large do declare. And here again their allegation
out of Gregory the First and Damascen, Greg. Epist. ad S^enum Massil. Damas. de
fide ortho. l. 4. c. 17.
that Images be the Laymens Books, and that Pictures are the Scripture of
Idiots and simple Persons, is worthy to be considered. For as it has been
touched in diverse places before, how they be Books teaching nothing but lies,
as by St. Paul in the first Chapter to the Romans evidently appears, of the
Images of God: So what manner of Books and Scripture these painted and gilt
Images of Saints be unto the common People, note well, I pray you. For after
that our Preachers shall have instructed and exhorted the People to the
following of the virtues of the Saints, as contempt of this World, Poverty,
Soberness, Chastity, and such like virtues, which undoubtedly were in the
Saints: Think you, as soon as they turn their faces from the Preacher, and look
upon the graven Books, and painted Scripture of the glorious gilt Images and
Idols, all shining and glittering with Metal and Stone, and covered with
precious Vestures, or else with Choerea in Terence, behold a painted Table,
wherein is set forth by the Art of the Painter, an Image with a nice and wanton
Apparel and Countenance, more like to Venus or Flora, than Mary Magdalen, or if
like to Mary Magdalen, it is when she played the Harlot, rather than when she
wept for her sins. When, I say, they turn about from the Preacher, to these
Books and Schoolmasters and painted Scriptures: shall they not find them lying
Books? teaching other manner of Lessons, of esteeming of Riches, of Pride, and
vanity in Apparel, of niceness and wantonness, and peradventure of Whoredom, as
Choerea of like Pictures was taught. And in Lucian, one learned of Venus Gnidia
a Lesson, too abominable here to be remembered. Be not these, think you, pretty
Books and Scriptures for simple People, and especially for Wives and young
Maidens to look in, read on, and learn such lessons of? What will they think
either of the Preacher, who taught them contrary Lessons of the Saints, and
therefore by these carved Doctors, are charged with a lie, or of the Saints
themselves, if they believe these graven Books and painted Scriptures of them,
who make the Saints, now reigning in Heaven with God, to their great dishonor,
Schoolmasters of such Vanity, which they in their lifetime most abhorred? For
what Lessons of contempt of Riches, and vanity of this World, can such Books,
so besmeared with Gold, set with precious Stones, covered with Silks, teach?
What Lessons of Soberness and Chastity, can our Women learn of these pictured
Scriptures, with their nice Apparel and wanton Looks? But away for shame with
these colored cloaks of Idolatry, of the Books and Scriptures of Images and
Pictures, to teach Idiots, nay, to make Idiots and stark Fools and Beasts of
Christians. Do men, I pray you, when they have the same Books at home with
them, run on Pilgrimage to seek like Books at Rome, Compostella, or Jerusalem,
to be taught by them, when they have the like to learn at home? Do men
reverence some Books, and despise and set light by other of the same sort? Do
men kneel before their Books, light Candles at Noon-time, burn Incense, offer
up Gold and Silver, and other Gifts to their Books? Do men either feign or
believe Miracles to be wrought by their Books? I am sure that the New Testament
of our Savior Jesus Christ, containing the Word of Life, is a more lively,
express, and true Image of our Savior, than all carved, graven, molten, and
painted Images in the World be, and yet none of all these things be done to
that Book or Scripture of the Gospel of our Savior, which be done to Images or
Pictures, the Books and Scriptures of Laymen and Idiots, as they call them.
Wherefore call them what they list, it is most evident by their deeds, that
they make of them no other Books nor Scripture, than such as teach most filthy
and horrible Idolatry, as the users of such Books daily prove by continual
practicing the same. O Books and Scriptures, in the which the devilish
Schoolmaster, Satan, has penned the lewd Lessons of wicked Idolatry, for his
dastardly Disciples and Scholars to behold, read, and learn, to Gods most high
dishonor, and their most horrible Damnation. Have not we been much bound,
think you, to those which should have taught us the truth out of Gods Book and
his Holy Scripture, that they have shut up that Book and Scripture from us, and
none of us so bold as once to open it, or read in it? and instead thereof, to
spread us abroad these goodly, carved, and gilded Books and painted Scriptures,
to teach us such good and godly Lessons? Have not they done well, after they
ceased to stand in Pulpits themselves, and to teach the People committed to
their instruction, keeping silence of Gods Word, and become dumb Dogs (as the
Prophet calls them) to set up in their stead, on every pillar and corner of
the Church, such goodly Doctors, as dumb, but more wicked than themselves be?
We need not to complain of the lack of one dumb Parson, having so many dumb
devilish Vicars (I mean these Idols and painted Puppets) to teach in their
stead. Now in the mean season, whilst the dumb and dead Idols stand thus decked
and clothed, contrary to Gods Law and Commandment, the poor Christian People,
the lively Images of God, commended to us so tenderly by our Savior Christ, as
most dear to him, stand naked, shivering for cold, and their Teeth chattering
in their heads, and no man covers them, are pined with Hunger and Thirst, and
no man gives them a penny to refresh them, whereas pounds be ready at all
times (contrary to Gods will) to deck and trim dead stocks and stones, which
neither feel Cold, Hunger, nor Thirst.

Clemens has a notable sentence concerning this matter, saying thus: That
Serpent the Devil, does by the mouth of certain men utter these words, We for
the honor of the invisible God, do worship visible Images: which doubtless is
most false. For if you will truly honor the Image of God, you shall by doing
well to man, honor the true Image of God, in him. For the Image of God is in
every man: But the likeness of God is not in every one, but in those only which
have a godly Heart and pure Mind. If you will therefore truly honor the Image
of God, we do declare to you the truth, that ye do well to man, who is made
after the Image of God, that you give honor and reverence to him, and refresh
the hungry with meat, the thirsty with drink, the naked with clothes, the sick
with attendance, the stranger harbourless with lodging, the Prisoners with
necessaries: and this shall be accounted as truly bestowed upon God. And these
things are so directly appertaining to Gods Honor, that whosoever does not
this, shall seem to have reproached and done villainy to the Image of God. For
what honor of God is this, to run to Images of stock and stone, and to honor
vain and dead figures of God, and to despise man, in whom is the true Image of
God? And by and by after, he says, Understand ye therefore that this is the
suggestion of the Serpent Satan, lurking within you, which persuades you that
you are godly, when you honor insensible and dead Images, and that you be not
ungodly, when you hurt or leave unsuccoured the lively and reasonable
Creatures. All these be the words of Clemens.

Note, I pray you, how this most ancient and learned Doctor, within one hundred
years of our Savior Christ's time, most plainly teaches, that no service of
God, or Religion acceptable to him, can be in honoring of dead Images; but in
succouring of the Poor, the lively Images of God, according to St. James, who
says, This is the pure and true Religion before God the Father, to succor
fatherless and motherless Children, and Widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself undefiled from this World.

True Religion then, and pleasing of God, stands not in making, setting up,
painting, gilding, clothing, and decking of dumb and dead Images (which be but
great Puppets and Babies for Old Fools in dotage, and wicked Idolatry, to dally
and play with) nor in kissing of them, capping, kneeling, offering to them,
incensing of them, setting up of Candles, hanging up of Legs, Arms, or whole
Bodies of Wax before them, or praying, and asking of them, or of Saints, things
belonging only to God to give. But all these things be vain and abominable, and
most damnable before God. Wherefore all such do not only bestow their money and
labor in vain; but with their pains and cost purchase to themselves Gods wrath
and utter indignation, and everlasting damnation both of Body and Soul. For ye
have heard it evidently proved in these Homilies against Idolatry, by Gods
Word, the Doctors of the Church, Ecclesiastical Histories, Reason, and
Experience, that Images have been and be Worshipped, and so Idolatry committed
to them by infinite multitudes, to the great offense of Gods Majesty, and the
danger of infinite Souls, and that Idolatry cannot possibly be separated from
Images set up in Churches and Temples, gilded and decked gloriously, and that
therefore our Images be indeed very Idols, and so all the Prohibitions, Laws,
Curses, Threatenings of horrible Plagues, as well temporal as eternal, contained
in the Holy Scripture, concerning Idols, and the Makers and Maintainers, and
Worshippers of them, appertain also to our Images set up in Churches and
Temples, and to the Makers, Maintainers, and Worshippers of them. And all those
names of abomination, which Gods Word in the Holy Scriptures gives to the
Idols of the Gentiles, appertain to our Images, being Idols like to them, and
having like Idolatry committed unto them. And Gods own mouth in the Holy
Scriptures calls them Vanities, Lies, Deceits, Uncleanness, Filthiness, Dung,
Mischief, and Abomination before the Lord. Wherefore Gods horrible wrath, and
our most dreadful danger cannot be avoided, without the destruction and utter
abolishing of all Images and Idols our of the Church and Temple of God, which
to accomplish, God put in the minds of all Christian Princes. And in the mean
time, let us take heed and be wise, O ye beloved of the Lord, and let us have
no strange gods, but one only God, who made us when we were nothing, the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, John 17.
who redeemed us when we were lost, and with his Holy Spirit does sanctify us.
For this is life everlasting, to know him to be the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom he has sent. Let us honor and worship for Religions sake none
but him, and him let us worship and honor as he will himself, and has
declared by his Word, that he will be honored and worshipped, not in, nor by
Images or Idols, which he has most strictly forbidden, neither in kneeling,
lighting of Candles, burning of Incense, offering up of Gifts unto Images and
Idols, to believe that we shall please him, for all these be abomination before
God: But let us honor and worship God in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.
fearing and loving him above all things, trusting in him only, calling upon
him, and praying to him only, praising and lauding of him only, and all other
in him, and for him. For such worshippers does our Heavenly Father love, who is
a most pure Spirit, and therefore will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth.
And such worshippers were Abraham, Moses, David, Elias, Peter, Paul, John, and
all other the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all true Saints
of God, who all, as the true Friends of God, were enemies and destroyers of
Images and Idols, as the Enemies of God and his true Religion. Wherefore take
heed and be wise, O ye beloved of the Lord, and that which others, contrary to
Gods Word, bestow wickedly, and to their damnation, upon dead stocks and stones
(no Images, but Enemies of God and his Saints) that bestow ye, as the faithful
Servants of God, according to Gods Word, mercifully upon poor Men and Women,
Fatherless Children, Widows, sick Persons, Strangers, Prisoners, and such
others that be in any necessity, that ye may at that great day of the Lord,
hear that most blessed and comfortable saying of our Savior Christ: Come ye
blessed into the Kingdom of my Father, prepared for you before the beginning of
the World. For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat, thirsty, and ye gave me
drink, naked, and ye clothed me, harbourless, and ye lodged me, in Prison, and
ye visited me, sick, and ye comforted me. For whatsoever ye have done for the
poor and needy in my name, and for my sake, that have ye done for me. To the
which his Heavenly Kingdom, God the Father of Mercies bring us, for Jesus
Christ's sake our only Savior, Mediator, and Advocate, to whom with the Holy
Ghost, one immortal, invisible, and most glorious God, be all Honor and
Thanksgiving, and Glory, World without end. Amen.

AN HOMILY FOR Repairing and keeping clean, and comely adorning of Churches.
IT is a common custom used of all men, when they intend to have their Friends
or Neighbors to come to their Houses to eat or drink with them, or to have any
Solemn Assembly to treat and talk of any matter, they will have their Houses,
which they keep in continual reparations, to be clean and fine, lest they
should be counted sluttish, or little to regard their Friends and Neighbors.
How much more then ought the House of God, which we commonly call the Church,
to be sufficiently repaired in all places, and to be honorably adorned and
garnished, and to be kept clean and sweet, to the comfort of the People that
shall resort thereunto.

It appears in the Holy Scripture, how Gods House, which was called his Holy
Temple, and was the Mother Church of all Jewry, fell sometimes into decay, and
was oftentimes profaned and defiled, through the negligence and ungodliness of
such as had the charge thereof. But when godly Kings and Governors were in
place, then Commandment was given forthwith, that the Church and Temple of God
should be repaired, and the Devotion of the People to be gathered for the
reparation of the same. We read in the fourth Book of the Kings, 4 Kings 12.
how that King Joas, being a godly Prince, gave commandment to the Priests, to
convert certain Offerings of the People toward the reparation and amendment of
Gods Temple.

Like commandment gave that most godly King Josias, 4 Kings 22.
concerning the reparation and re-edification of Gods Temple, which in his time
he found in sore decay. It has pleased Almighty God, that these Histories
touching the re-edifying and repairing of his Holy Temple, should be written at
large, to the end we should be taught thereby: First, that God is well pleased
that his People should have a convenient place to resort unto, and to come
together, to praise and magnify Gods Holy Name. And seco^d^^ he is highly
pleased with all those, which diligen^ly and zealously go about to amend and
restore such places as are appointed for the Congregation of Gods People to
resort unto, and wherein they humbly and jointly render thanks to God for his
benefits, and with one heart and voice praise his Holy Name. Thirdly, God was
sore displeased with his People, because they builded, decked, and trimmed up
their own Houses, and suffered Gods House to be in ruin and decay, to lie
uncomely and fulsomly. Wherefore God was sore grieved with them, and plagued
them, as appears in the Prophet Aggeus. Thus says the Lord: Agge 1.
Is it time for you to dwell in your cieled Houses, and the Lords House not
regarded? Ye have sowed much, and gathered in but little; your meat and your
clothes have neither filled you, nor made you warm, and he that had his wages,
put it in a bottomless purse. By these Plagues which God laid upon his People
for neglecting of his Temple, it may evidently appear that God will have his
Temple, his Church, the place where his Congregation shall resort to magnify
him, well edified, well repaired, and well maintained. Some neither regarding
godliness, nor the place of godly exercise, will say, The Temple in the Old Law
was commanded to be built and repaired by God himself, because it had great
Promises annexed unto it, and because it was a figure, a Sacrament, or a
signification of Christ, and also of his Church. To this may be easily
answered: First, that our Churches are not destitute of Promises, forasmuch as
our Savior Christ says, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the midst among them. A great number therefore coming to Church
together in the name of Christ, have there, that is to say in the Church, their
God and Savior Jesus Christ present among the Congregation of his faithful
People, by his grace, by his favor and godly assistance, according to his most
assured and comfortable promises. Why then ought not Christian People to build
them Temples and Churches, having as great promises of the presence of God, as
ever had Solomon for the material Temple which he did build? As touching the
other point, that Solomon's Temple was a figure of Christ: we know that now in
the time of the clear light Christ Jesus the Son of God, all shadows, figures,
and significations are utterly gone, all vain and unprofitable Ceremonies, both
Jewish and Heathenish, fully abolished. And therefore our Churches are not set
up for figures and significations of Messiah and Christ to come, but for other
godly and necessary purposes; that is to say, That like as every man has his
own House to abide in, to refresh himself in, to rest in, with such like
commodities: So Almighty God will have his House and Place whither the whole
Parish and Congregation shall resort, which is called the Church and Temple of
God, for that the Church, which is the company of Gods People, does there
assemble and come together to serve him. Not meaning hereby, that the Lord,
whom the Heaven of heavens is not able to hold or comprise, does dwell in the
Church of Lime and Stone, made with man's hands, as wholly and only contained
there within, and no where else, for so he never dwelt in Solomon's Temple.
Moreover, the Church or Temple is counted and called Holy, yet not of it self,
but because Gods People resorting thereunto are Holy, and exercise themselves
in Holy and Heavenly things. And to the intent ye may understand further, why
Churches were built among Christian People, this was the greatest
consideration; that God might have his place, and that God might have his time,
duly to be honored and served of the whole multitude in the Parish. First,
there to hear and learn the blessed Word and Will of the everlasting God.
Secondly, that there the blessed Sacraments, which our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus has ordained and appointed, should be duly, reverently, and decently
ministered. Thirdly, that there the whole multitude of Gods People in the
Parish, should with one voice and heart call upon the Name of God, magnify and
praise the Name of God, render earnest and hearty thanks to our Heavenly Father
for his heap of benefits daily and plentifully poured upon us, not forgetting
to bestow our Alms upon Gods Poor, to the intent God may bless us the more
richly. Thus ye may well perceive and understand wherefore Churches were built
and set up amongst Christian People, and dedicated and appointed to these godly
uses, and wholly exempted from all filthy, profane, and worldly uses. Wherefore
all they that have little mind or devotion to repair and build Gods Temple, are
to be counted People of much ungodliness, spurning against good Order in
Christ's Church, despising the true honor of God, with evil examples, offending
and hindering their Neighbors otherwise well and godlily disposed. The World
thinks it but a trifle to see their Church in ruin and decay. But whosoever does
not lay to their helping hands, they sin against God and his Holy Congregation.
For if it had not been sin to neglect and slightly regard the re-edifying and
building up again of his Temple, God would not have been so much grieved, and
so soon have plagued his People, because they builded and decked their own
Houses so gorgeously, and despised the House of God their Lord. It is sin and
shame to see so many Churches, so ruinous, and so foully decayed, almost in
every corner. If a man's private House wherein he dwells, be decayed, he will
never cease till it be restored up again. Yea, if his Barn where he keeps his
Corn be out of reparations, what diligence uses he to make it in perfect state
again? If his Stable for his Horse, yea, the Stie for his Swine, be not able to
hold out Water and Wind, how careful is he to do cost thereon? And shall we be
so mindful of our common base Houses, deputed to so vile employment, and be
forgetful toward the House of God, wherein be treated the words of our eternal
Salvation, wherein be ministered the Sacraments and Mysteries of our Redemption?
The Fountain of our Regeneration is there presented unto us, the partaking of
the Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, is there offered unto us: And shall
we not esteem the place where so Heavenly things are handled? Wherefore, if ye
have any reverence to the service of God, if ye have any common honesty, if ye
have any conscience in keeping of necessary and godly ordinances, keep your
Churches in good repair, whereby ye shall not only please God, and deserve his
manifold Blessings, but also deserve the good report of all godly People.

The second point which appertains to the maintenance of Gods House, is to
have it well adorned, and comely and clean kept. Which things may be the more
easily reformed, when the Church is well repaired. For like as men are well
refreshed and comforted, when they find their Houses having all things in good
Order, and all corners clean and sweet: so when Gods House, the Church, is well
adorned, with places convenient to sit in, with the Pulpit for the Preacher,
with the Lords Table for the Ministration of his Holy Supper, with the Font to
Christen in, and also is kept clean, comely, and sweetly, the People are more
desirous, and the more comforted to resort thither, and to tarry there the
whole time appointed them. With what earnestness, with what vehement zeal did
our Savior Christ drive the buyers and sellers out of the Temple of God, Mat.
21.
and hurled down the Tables of the changers of Money, and the Seats of the
Dove-sellers, and could not abide any man to carry a Vessel through the Temple?
He told them that they had made his Fathers House a Den of Thieves, partly
through their Superstition, Hypocrisy, false Worship, false Doctrine, and
insatiable Covetousness, and partly through Contempt, abusing that place with
walking and talking, with worldly matters without all fear of God, and due
reverence to that place. What dens of Thieves the Churches of England have been
made by the blasphemous buying and selling the most precious Body and Blood of
Christ in the Mass, as the World was made to believe, as Diriges, at Months
minds, at Trentals, in Abbeys and Chantries, besides other horrible abuses
(Gods Holy Name be blessed for ever) which we now see and understand. All these
abominations, they that supply the room of Christ, have cleansed and purged the
Churches of England of, taking away all such fulsomness and filthiness, as
through blind Devotion and Ignorance has crept into the Church these many
hundred years. Wherefore, O ye good Christian People, ye dearly beloved in
Christ Jesus, ye that glory not in worldly and vain Religion, in fantastical
adorning and decking, but rejoice in heart to see the glory of God truly set
forth, and the Churches restored to their ancient and godly use, render your
hearty thanks to the goodness of Almighty God, who has in our days stirred up
the hearts not only of his godly Preachers and Ministers, but also of his
faithful and most Christian Magistrates and Governors, to bring such godly
things to pass.

And forasmuch as your Churches are scoured and swept from the sinful and
superstitious filthiness wherewith they were defiled and disfigured: Do ye your
parts, good People, to keep your Churches comely and clean, suffer them not to
be defiled with Rain and Weather, with dung of Doves, and Owls, Stares, and
Choughs, and other filthiness, as it is foul and lamentable to behold in many
places of this Country. It is the House of Prayer, not the House of talking, of
walking, of brawling, of minstrelsie, of Hawks, and Dogs. Provoke not the
displeasure and plagues of God, for despising and abusing his Holy House, as
the wicked Jews did. But have God in your heart, be obedient to his blessed
Will, bind your selves every Man and Woman, to your power, toward the
reparations and clean keeping of the Church, to the intent that ye may be
partakers of Gods manifold Blessings, and that ye may be the better encouraged
to resort to your Parish Church, there to learn your Duty toward God and your
Neighbor, there to be present and partakers of Christ's Holy Sacraments, there
to render thanks to your Heavenly Father for the manifold benefits which he
daily pours upon you, there to pray together, and to call upon Gods Holy
Name, which be blessed World without end. Amen.

AN HOMILY OF Good Works. And first, of Fasting.
THE life which we live in this World (good Christian People) is of the free
benefit of God lent us, yet not to use it at our pleasure, after our own
fleshly will: but to trade over the same in those Works which are beseeming
them that are become new Creatures in Christ. These works the Apostle calls
good works, saying, We are Gods workmanship, Ephesians. 2.
created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God has ordained that we should
walk in them. And yet his meaning is not by these words, to induce us, to have
any affiance, or to put any confidence in our works, as by the merit and
deserving of them, to purchase to our selves and others remission of sin, and
so consequently everlasting life, for that were mere Blasphemy against Gods
mercy, and great derogation to the bloodshedding of our Savior Jesus Christ.
For it is of the free grace and mercy of God, by the mediation of the Blood of
his Son Jesus Christ, without merit or deserving on our part, that our sins are
forgiven us, that we are reconciled and brought again into his favor, and are
made Heirs of his Heavenly Kingdom. Grace (says Aug. de d^ver. quaest. ad
S^mpl. lib. 1. Quaest. 28.
St. Augustine) belonging to God, who does call us, and then has he good
works, whosoever receives grace. Good works then bring not forth grace; but
are brought forth by grace. The Wheel (says he) turns round, not to the end
that it may be made round, but because it is first made round, therefore it
turns round. So, no man does good works, to receive grace by his good works:
but because he has first received grace, therefore consequently he does good
works. Aug. de fide and operibus. cap. 4.
And in another place he says, Good works go not before in him which shall
afterward be justified, but good works do follow after when a man is first
justified. St. Paul therefore teaches, that we must do good works for diverse
respects: First, to show our selves obedient Children unto our Heavenly Father,
who has ordained them, that we should walk in them. Secondly, for that they
are good declarations and testimonies of our justification. Thirdly, that
others seeing our good works, may the rather by them be stirred up and excited
to glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Let us not therefore be slack to do
good works, seeing it is the will of God that we should walk in them, assuring
our selves that at the last day, every man shall receive of God for his labor
done in true Faith, a greater reward than his works have deserved. And because
somewhat shall now be spoken of one particular good work, whose commendation is
both in the Law and in the Gospel: Thus much is said in the beginning generally
of all good works. First, to remove out of the way of the simple and unlearned,
this dangerous stumbling block, that any man should go about to purchase or buy
Heaven with his works. Secondly, to take away (so much as may be) from envious
minds, and slanderous tongues, all just occasion of slanderous speaking, as
though good works were rejected. This good work which now shall be treated of,
is Fasting, which is found in the Scriptures to be of two sorts. The one
outward, pertaining to the Body; the other inward, in the Heart and Mind. This
outward Fast, is an abstinence from meat, drink, and all natural food, yea,
from all delicious pleasures and delectations worldly. When this outward Fast
pertains to one particular man, or to a few, and not the whole number of the
People, for causes which hereafter shall be declared, then it is called a
private Fast: But when the whole multitude of Men, Women, and Children, in a
Township or City, yea, through a whole Country, do fast, it is called a public
Fast. Such was that Fast which the whole multitude of the Children of Israel
were commanded to keep the tenth day of the seventh month, because Almighty God
appointed that day to be a cleansing day, a day of atonement, a time of
reconciliation, a day wherein the People were cleansed from their sins. The
order and manner how it was done, is written in the xvi. and xxiii. Lev. 16.
and 23.
Chapters of Leviticus. That day the People did lament, mourn, weep, and bewail
their former sins. And whosoever upon that day did not humble his Soul,
bewailing his sins, as is said, abstaining from all bodily food, until the
Evening, that soul (says Almighty God) should be destroyed from among his
people. We do not read that Moses ordained, by order of Law, any days of
public Fast throughout the whole year, more than that one day. The Jews
notwithstanding had more times of common Fasting, which the Prophet Zachary
recites to be the fast of the fourth, the fast of the fifth, Zach. 8.
the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth Month. But for that it
appears not in the Law when they were instituted, it is to be judged, that
those other times of Fasting, more than the Fast of the seventh month, were
ordained among the Jews by the appointment of their Governors, rather of
Devotion, than by an express Commandment given from God. Upon the Ordinance of
this general Fast, good men took occasion to appoint to themselves private
Fasts, at such times as they did either earnestly lament and bewail their
sinful lives, or did addict themselves to more fervent Prayer, that it might
please God to turn his wrath from them, when either they were admonished and
brought to the consideration thereof by the preaching of the Prophets, or
otherwise when they saw present danger to hang over their heads. This
sorrowfulness of Heart, joined with Fasting, they uttered sometimes by their
outward behavior and gesture of Body, putting on Sackcloth, sprinkling
themselves with ashes and dust, and sitting or lying upon the Earth. For when
good men feel in themselves the heavy burden of sin, see damnation to be the
reward of it, and behold with the eye of their mind the horror of Hell, they
tremble, they quake, and are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart for
their offenses, and cannot but accuse themselves, and open this their grief
unto Almighty God, and call unto him for mercy. This being done seriously,
their mind is so occupied, partly with sorrow and heaviness, partly with an
earnest desire to be delivered from this danger of Hell and Damnation, that all
desire of meat and drink is laid apart, and loathsomness of all worldly things
and pleasure comes in place, so that nothing then likes them more, than to
weep, to lament, to mourn, and both with words and behavior of body, to show
themselves weary of this life. Thus did David fast, when he made intercession
to Almighty God for the Child's life, begotten in Adultery of Bathshtba, Vriah's
Wife. King Ahab fasted after this sort, when it repented him of murdering of
Naboth, bewailing his own sinful doings. Such was the Ninevites Fast, brought
to repentance by Jonas preaching. When forty thousand of the Israelites were
slain in Battle against the Benjamites, the Scripture says, All the Children
of Israel, and the whole multitude of the People went to Bethel, and sat there
weeping before the Lord, and fasted all that day till night. Judges 20.
So did Daniel, Hester, Nehemias, and many others in the Old Testament fast.
But if any man will say, it is true, so they fasted indeed, but we are not now
under the yoke of the Law, we are set at liberty by the freedom of the Gospel:
therefore those Rites and Customs of the old Law bind not us, except it can be
showed by the Scriptures of the New Testament, or by examples out of the same,
that fasting now under the Gospel, is a restraint of meat, drink, and all
bodily food and pleasures from (...). First, that (...), is a truth more
manifest, than that it should here need to be proved, the Scriptures which
teach the same, are evident. The doubt therefore is, whether when we Fast, we
ought to withhold from our bodies all meat and drink during the time of our
Fast, or no? That we ought so to do, may be well gathered upon a Question moved
by the Pharisees to Christ, and by his answer again to the same. Why (say they)
do John's Disciples fast often, Luke ^.
and pray, and we likewise? but thy Disciples eat and drink, and fast not at
all. In this smooth Question, they couch up subtly this Argument or Reason:
Whosoever fasteth not, that man is not of God. For Fasting and Prayer are works
both commended and commanded of God in the Scriptures; and all good men, from
Moses till this time, as well the Prophets as others, have exercised themselves
in these works. John also and his Disciples at this day do fast often, and pray
much and so do we the Pharisees in like manner: But thy Disciples fast not at
all, which if thou will deny, we can easily prove it. For whosoever eats and
drinks, fasteth not. Thy Disciples eat and drink, therefore they fast not. Of
this we conclude (say they) necessarily, that neither art thou, nor yet thy
Disciples, of God. Christ makes answer, saying, Can ye make that the children
of the wedding shall fast, while the Bridegroom is with them? The days shall
come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them: In those days shall they
fast. Our Savior Christ, like a good Master, defends the Innocence of his
Disciples against the malice of the arrogant Pharisees, and proves that his
Disciples are not guilty of transgressing any jot of Gods Law, although as then
they fasted, and in his answer reproves the Pharisees of Superstition and
Ignorance. Superstition, because they put a Religion in their doings, and
ascribed holiness to the outward work wrought, not regarding to what end
Fasting is ordained. Of Ignorance, for that they could not discern between time
and (...) They knew not that there is a time of rejoicing and mirth, and (...)
^tation and mourning, which both he teaches in his answer, as shall be touched
more largely hereafter, when we shall show what time is most fit to fast in.

But here, beloved, let us note, that our Savior Christ, in making his answer
to their question, denied not, but confessed that his Disciples fasted not, and
therefore agrees to the Pharisees in this, as unto a manifest truth; that
whosoever eats and drinks, fasteth not. Fasting then even by Christ's assent, is
a withholding of meat, drink, and all natural food from the Body, for the
determined time of Fasting. And that it was used in the Primitive Church,
appears most evidently by the Chalcedon Council, one of the four first
General Councils. The Fathers assembled there, to the number of 630.
considering with themselves how acceptable a thing Fasting is to God, when it
is used according to his word: Again, having before their eyes also the great
abuses of the same crept into the Church at those days, through the negligence
of them which should have taught the People the right use thereof, and by vain
glosses, devised of men: to reform the said abuses, and to restore this so good
and godly a work, to the true use thereof, decreed in that Council, that every
Person as well in his private as public Fast, should continue all the day
without meat and drink, till after the Evening Prayer. And whosoever did eat or
drink before the Evening Prayer was ended, should be accounted and reputed not
to consider the purity of his Fast. This Canon teaches so evidently how
Fasting was used in the Primitive Church, as by words it cannot be more plainly
expressed.

Fasting then, by the Decree of those six hundred and thirty Fathers, grounding
their determination in this matter upon the Sacred Scriptures, and long
continued usage or practice, both of the Prophets and other godly Persons,
before the coming of Christ, and also of the Apostles and other devout men in
the New Testament, is a withholding of meat, drink, and all natural Food from
the Body, for the determined time of Fasting. Thus much is spoken hitherto, to
make plain unto you what Fasting is. Now hereafter shall be showed the true and
right use of Fasting.

Good works are not all of one sort. For some are of themselves, and of their
own proper nature always good: as to love God above all things, to love thy
Neighbor as thy self, to honor thy Father and Mother, to honor the higher
Powers, to give to every man that which is his due, and such like. Other works
there be, which considered in themselves, without further respect, are of their
own nature merely indifferent, that is, neither good nor evil, but take their
denomination of the use or end whereunto they serve. Which works having a good
end, are called good works, and are so indeed: but yet that comes not of
themselves, but of the good end whereunto they are referred. On the other side,
if the end that they serve unto, be evil, it cannot then otherwise be, but that
they must needs be evil also. Of this sort of works, is Fasting, which of it
self is a thing merely indifferent: but it is made better or worse by the end
that it serves unto. For when it repecteth a good end, it is a good work; but
the end being evil, the work it self is also evil. To Fast then with this
persuasion of mind, that our Fasting, and our Good Works, can make us perfect
and just men, and finally, bring us to Heaven, is a devilish persuasion, and
that Fast is so far off from pleasing of God, that it refuses his mercy, and
is altogether derogatory to the merits of Christ's death, and his precious
bloodshedding. This does the Parable of the Pharisee and the Publican teach.
Luke 18.
Two men (says Christ) went up together into the Temple to pray, the one a
Pharisee, the other a Publican: the Pharisee stood and prayed thus with
himself, I thank thee, O God, that I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, and as this Publican is; I fast twice in the week, I give
tithes of all that I possess. The Publican stood afar off, and would not lift
up his eyes to Heaven, but smote his breast, and said, God be merciful to me a
sinner. In the Person of this Pharisee, our Savior Christ sets out to the
eye, and to the judgment of the World, a perfect, just, and righteous man, such
a one as i^ not spotted with those vices that men commonly are infected with,
Extortion, Bribery, polling and pilling their Neighbor, robbers and spoilers
of Common-weals, crafty, and subtle in chopping and changing, using false
Weights, and detestable Perjury in their buying and selling, Fornicators,
Adulterers, and vicious Livers. The Pharisee was no such man, neither faulty in
any such like notorious Crime. But where other transgressed by leaving things
undone, which yet the Law required: this man did more than was requisite by the
Law. For he fasted twice in the week, and gave Tithes of all that he had. What
could the World then justly blame in this man? yea, what outward thing more
could be desired to be in him, to make him a more perfect, and a more just man?
Truly, nothing by man's judgment: And yet our Savior Christ prefers the poor
Publican without Fasting, before him with his Fast. The cause why he does so,
is manifest. For the Publican having no good works at all to trust unto,
yielded up himself unto God, confessing his sins, and hoped certainly to be
saved by Gods free mercy only. The Pharisee gloried, and trusted so much to his
works, that he thought himself sure enough without mercy, and that he should
come to Heaven by his Fasting, and other deeds. To this end serves that
Parable. For it is spoken to them that trusted in themselves, that they were
righteous, and despised others. Now, because the Pharisee directs his works
to an evil end, seeking by them justification, which indeed is the proper work
of God without our merits, his Fasting twice in the week, and all his other
works, though they were never so many, and seemed to the World never so good
and Holy, yet in very deed before God they are altogether evil and abominable.
The mark also that the Hypocrites shoot at with their Fast, is, to appear Holy
in the eye of the World, and so to win commendation and praise of men. But our
Savior Christ says of them, Mat. 6.
they have their reward; that is, they have praise and commendation of Men, but
of God they have none at all. For whatsoever tends to an evil end, is it
self, by that evil end, made evil also. Again, so long as we keep ungodliness
in our hearts, and suffer wicked thoughts to tarry there, though we Fast as often
as did either St. Paul or John Baptist, and keep it as strictly as did the
Ninevites: yet shall it be not only unprofitable to us, but also a thing that
greatly displeases Almighty God. For he says, that his soul abhors and
hates such Fastings, Isai 1.
yea, they are a burden unto him, and he is weary of bearing them. And
therefore he inveigheth most sharply against them, saying by the mouth of the
Prophet Isaiah, Behold, when you fast, Isai 58.
your lust remains still, for ye do no less violence to your debtors. Lo, ye
fast to strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. Now ye
shall not fast thus, that you may make your voice to be heard above. Think ye
this fast pleases me, that a man should chasten himself for a day? Should that
be called a fasting, or a day that pleases the Lord? Now dearly beloved,
seeing that Almighty God allows not our Fast for the works sake, but chiefly
respects our heart, how it is affected, and then esteems our Fast either
good or evil, by the end that it serves for: it is our part to rent our
Hearts, and not our Garments, Joel 2.
as we are advertised by the Prophet Joel; that is, our sorrow and mourning
must be inward in heart, and not in outward show only; yea, it is requisite
that first before all things, we cleanse our hearts from sin, and then direct
our Fast to such an end as God will allow to be good.

There be three ends whereunto if our Fast be directed, it is then a work
profitable to us, and accepted of God.

The first is, to chastise the Flesh, that it be not too wanton, 1 Cor. 9.
but tamed and brought in subjection to the Spirit. This respect had St. Paul
in his Fast, when he said, I chastise my body, and bring it into subjection,
lest by any means it comes to pass, that when I have preached to others, I my
self be found a castaway.

Acts 13.
The second, that the Spirit may be more earnest and fervent to Prayer. To this
end fasted the Prophets and Teachers that were at Antioch, before they sent
forth Paul and Barnabas to preach the Gospel. The same two Apostles fasted for
the like purpose, when they commended to God, by their earnest Prayers, the
Congregations that were at Antioch, Acts 14.
Pisidia, Iconium, and Lystra, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles.

The third, that our Fast be a Testimony and Witness with us before God, of our
humble submission to his high Majesty, when we confess and acknowledge our sins
unto him, and are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart, bewailing the
same in the affliction of our Bodies. These are the three ends, or right uses
of Fasting. The first belongs most properly to private Fasts: the other two
are common, as well to public Fasts, as to private: and thus much for the use
of Fasting. Lord have mercy upon us, and give us grace, that while we live in
this miserable World, we may through thy help bring forth this, and such other
fruits of the Spirit, commended and commanded in thy Holy Word, to the glory of
thy Name, and to our comforts, that after the race of this wretched life, we
may live everlastingly with thee in thy Heavenly Kingdom, not for the merits
and worthiness of our works, but for thy mercies sake, and the merits of thy
dear Son, Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all Laud,
Honor, and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Second Part of the Homily of FASTING.
IN the former Homily (beloved) was showed, that among the People of the Jews,
Fasting as it was commanded them from God by Moses, was to abstain the whole
day, from Morning till Night, from Meat, Drink, and all manner of Food, that
nourishes the Body, and that whosoever tasted ought before the Evening, on the day
appointed to Fasting, was accounted among them a breaker of his Fast. Which
Order, though it seem strange to some in these our days, because it has not
been so generally used in this Realm of many years past: yet that it was so
among Gods People (I mean the Jews) whom before the coming of our Savior
Christ, God did vouchsafe to choose unto himself, a peculiar People above all
other Nations of the Earth, and that our Savior Christ so understood it, and
the Apostles after Christ's Ascension did so use it, was there sufficiently
proved by the Testimonies and Examples of the Holy Scriptures, as well of the
New Testament, as of the Old. The true use of Fasting was there also showed. In
this Second Part of this Homily shall be showed, that no Constitution or Law
made by Man, for things which of their own proper nature be mere and
indifferent, can bind the Conscience of Christian men to a perpetual
observation and keeping thereof, but that the Higher Powers have full liberty
to alter and change every such Law and Ordinance, either Ecclesiastical or
Political, when time and place shall require. But first an Answer shall be made
to a Question that some may make, demanding what judgment we ought to have of
such abstinences as are appointed by public Order and Laws made by Princes,
and by the Authority of the Magistrates, upon Policy, not respecting any
Religion at all in the same. As when any Realm in consideration of the
maintaining of Fisher-Towns bordering upon the Seas, and for the increase of
Fishermen, of whom do spring Mariners to go upon the Sea, to the furnishing of
the Navy of the Realm, whereby not only Commodities of other Countries may be
transported, but also may be a necessary defense to resist the Invasion of the
Adversary.

For the better understanding of this Question, it is necessary that we make a
difference between the Policies of Princes, made for the ordering of their
Commonweals, in provision of things serving to the most sure defense of their
Subjects and Countries, and between Ecclesiastical Policies, in prescribing
such works, by which, as by secondary means, Gods wrath may be pacified, and
his mercy purchased. Positive Laws made by Princes, for conservation of their
Policy, not repugnant unto Gods Law, ought of all Christian Subjects with
reverence of the Magistrate to be obeyed, not only for fear of Punishment, but
also (as the Apostle says) for conscience sake. Conscience, I say, not of the
thing which of its own nature is indifferent, but of our Obedience, which by
the Law of God we owe unto the Magistrate, as unto Gods Minister. By which
positive Laws, though we Subjects for certain times and days appointed, be
restrained from some kinds of Meats and Drink, which God by his Holy Word has
left free to be taken and used of all men with thanksgiving in all places, and
at all times: yet for that such Laws of Princes and other Magistrates are not
made to put Holiness in one kind of Meat and Drink more than another, to make
one day more holy than another, but are grounded merely upon Policy, all
Subjects are bound in Conscience to keep them by Gods Commandment, who by the
Apostle wills all without exception, to submit themselves unto the Authority
of the Higher Powers. And in this point concerning our Duties which be here
dwelling in England, environed with the Sea, as we be, we have great occasion
in reason to take the Commodities of the Water, which Almighty God by his
Divine Providence has laid so nigh unto us, whereby the increase of Victuals
upon the Land may the better be spared and cherished, to the sooner reducing of
Victuals to a more moderate price, to the better sustenance of the Poor. And
doubtless he seems to be too dainty an Englishman, who considering the great
Commodities which may ensue, will not forbear some piece of his licentious
Appetite upon the Ordinance of his Prince, with the consent of the Wise of the
Realm. What good English heart would not wish that the old ancient glory should
return to the Realm, wherein it has with great commendations excelled before
our days, in the furniture of the Navy of the same? What will more daunt the
Hearts of the Adversaries, than to see us well fenced and armed on the Sea, as
we be reported to be on the Land? If the Prince requested our obedience to
forbear one day from flesh more than we do, and to be be contented with one
meal in the same day, should not our own Commodity thereby persuade us to
subjection? But now that two meals be permitted on that day to be used, which
sometime our Elders in very great numbers in the Realm did use with one only
spare meal, and that in Fish only: shall we think it so great a burden that is
prescribed?

Furthermore, consider the decay of the Towns nigh the Seas, which should be
most ready by the number of the People there to repulse the Enemy, and we which
dwell further off upon the Land, having them as our Buckler to defend us,
should be the more in safety. If they be our Neighbors, why should we not wish
them to prosper? If they be our defense as nighest at hand to repel the Enemy,
to keep out the rage of the Seas, which else would break in upon our fair
Pastures, why should we not cherish them? Neither do we urge that in the
Ecclesiastical Policy, prescribing a form of Fasting, to humble our selves in
the sight of Almighty God, that that Order which was used among the Jews, and
practiced by Christ's Apostles after his ascension, is of such force and
necessity, that that only ought to be used among Christians, and none other,
for that were to bind Gods People unto the yoke and burden of Moses his
Policy; yea, it were the very way to bring us which are set at liberty by the
freedom of Christ's Gospel, into the bondage of the Law again, which God forbid
that any man should attempt or purpose. But to this end it serves, to show how
far the order of Fasting now used in the Church at this day, differs from
that which was then used. Gods Church ought not, neither may it be so tied to
that or any other Order now made, or hereafter to be made and devised by the
Authority of Man, but that it may lawfully, for just causes, alter, change, or
mitigate those Ecclesiastical Decrees and Orders, yea, recede wholly from them;
and break them, when they tend either to Superstition, or to Impiety, when they
draw the People from God, rather than work any edification in them. This
Authority Christ himself used, and left it to his Church. He used it, I say,
for the Order or Decree made by the Elders for washing often times, which was
diligently observed of the Jews; yet tending to Superstition, our Savior
Christ altered and changed the same in his Church, into a profitable Sacrament,
the Sacrament of our Regeneration or New Birth. This Authority to mitigate Laws
and Decrees Ecclesiastical, the Apostles practiced, when they, writing from
Jerusalem unto the Congregation that was at Antioch, Acts 15.
signified unto them that they would not lay any further burden upon them, but
these necessaries: that is, that they should abstain from things offered unto
Idols, from blood, from that which is strangled, and from fornication,
notwithstanding that Moses Law required many other observances. This Authority
to change the Orders, Decrees, and Constitutions of the Church, was after the
Apostles time used of the Fathers about the manner of Fasting, as it appears
in the Tripartite History, Tripart. hist. l. 9. c. 38.
where it is thus written, Touching Fasting, we find that it was diversely used
in diverse places by diverse men. For they at Rome fast three weeks together
before Easter, saving upon the Saturdays and Sundays, which Fast they call
Lent. And after a few lines in the same place, it follows: They have not all
one uniform Order in Fasting. For some do fast and abstain both from fish and
flesh. Some when they fast, eat nothing but fish. Others there are, which when
they Fast, eat of all water-fowls, as well as of fish, grounding themselves
upon Moses, that such Fowls have their substance of the Water, as the Fishes
have. Some others when they Fast, will neither eat Herbs nor Eggs. Some fasters
there are, that eat nothing but dry bread. Others when they Fast, eat nothing
at all; no, not so much as dry bread. Some fast from all manner of food till
Night, and then eat, without making any choice or difference of meats. And a
thousand such like diverse kinds of Fasting may be found in diverse places of the
World, of diverse men diversely used. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24.
And for all this great diversity in Fasting, yet Charity the very true bond of
Christian Peace was not broken, neither did the diversity of Fasting break at
any time their agreement and concord in Faith. To abstain sometimes from
certain meats, not because the meats are evil, but because they are not
necessary; this abstinence (says St. Augustine) is not evil. Dogma Ecclesiast.
c. 66.
And to restrain the use of meats when necessity and time shall require, this
(says he) does properly pertain to Christian men.

Thus ye have heard, good People, first, that Christian Subjects are bound even
in Conscience to obey Princes Laws, which are not repugnant to the Laws of God.
Ye have also heard that Christ's Church is not so bound to observe any Order,
Law, or Decree made by Man, to prescribe a form in Religion: but that the
Church has full Power and Authority from God, to change and alter the same,
when need shall require, which has been showed you by the example of our
Savior Christ, by the practice of the Apostles, and of the Fathers since that
time.

Now shall be showed briefly what time is meet for Fasting, for all times serve
not for all things: but as the Wise man says, Eccles. 3.
All things have their times. There is a time to weep, and a time again to
laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to rejoice, etc. Our Savior Christ excused
his Disciples, and reproved the Pharisees, because they neither regarded the
use of Fasting, nor considered what time was meet for the same. Which both he
teaches in his answer, Mat. 9.
saying, The children of the marriage cannot mourn, while the bridegroom is
with them. Their question was of Fasting, his answer is of Mourning, signifying
unto them plainly, that the outward Fast of the Body, is no Fast before God,
except it be accompanied with the inward Fast, which is a mourning and a
lamentation of the Heart, as is before declared. Concerning the time of
Fasting, he says, The days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from
them, in those days they shall fast. By this it is manifest, that it is no time
of Fasting while the Marriage lasts, and the Bridegroom is there present. But
when the Marriage is ended, Luke 5. Mat. 6.
and the Bridegroom gone, then is it a meet time to Fast. Now, to make plain
unto you what is the sense and meaning of these words, We are at the marriage;
and again, The bridegroom is taken from us: Ye shall note, that so long as God
reveals his mercy unto us, and gives us of his benefits, either Spiritual or
Corporal, we are said to be with the Bridegroom at the Marriage. So was that
good Old Father Jacob at the Marriage, when he understood that his Son Joseph
was alive, and Ruled all Egypt under King Pharaoh. So was David in the Marriage
with the Bridegroom when he had gotten the Victory of great Goliath, and had
smitten off his Head. Judith, and all the People of Bethulia, were the Children
of the Wedding, and had the Bridegroom with them, when God had by the Hand of a
Woman slain Holofernes, the grand Captain of the Assyrians Host, and
discomfited all their Enemies. Thus were the Apostles the Children of the
Marriage, while Christ was corporally present with them, and defended them from
all dangers, both spiritual and corporal. But the Marriage is said then to be
ended, and the Bridegroom to be gone, when Almighty God smites us with
Affliction, and seems to leave us in the midst of a number of Adversities. So
God sometimes strikes private men privately with sundry adversities, as
trouble of Mind, loss of Friends, loss of Goods, long and dangerous Sicknesses,
etc. then is it a fit time for that man to humble himself to Almighty God by
Fasting, and to mourn and bewail his sins with a sorrowful heart, and to Pray
unfeignedly, saying with the Prophet David, Turn away thy face, Psalm. 51.
O Lord, from my sins, and blot out of thy remembrance all mine offenses.
Again, when God shall afflict a whole Region or Country with Wars, with Famine,
with Pestilence, with strange Diseases and unknown Sicknesses, and other such
like Calamities: then it is time for all states and sorts of People, high and
low, Men, Women, and Children, to humble themselves by Fasting, and bewail
their sinful living before God, and Pray with one common voice, saying thus, or
some other such like Prayer. Be favorable, O Lord, be favorable unto thy
People, which turn unto thee, in weeping, fasting, and praying, spare thy
people whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, and suffer not thine
inheritance to be destroyed and brought to confusion. Fasting thus used with
Prayer, is of great efficacy, and weighs much with God. So the Angel Raphael
told Tobias. It also appears by that which our Savior Christ answered to his
Disciples, demanding of him why they could not cast forth the evil Spirit out
of him that was brought unto them. This kind (says he) is not cast out but by
fasting and prayer. How available Fasting is, how much it weighs with God,
and what it is able to obtain at his hand, cannot better be set forth, than by
opening unto you, and laying before you some of those notable things that have
been brought to pass by it. Fasting was one of the means whereby Almighty God
was occasioned to alter the thing which he had purposed concerning Ahab, for
murdering the innocent man Naboth, to possess his Vineyard. God spoke unto
Elijah, 3 Kings 21.
saying, Go thy way and say unto Ahab, Have thou killed, and also gotten
possession? Thus says the Lord, In the place where Dogs licked the blood of
Naboth, shall Dogs even lick thy blood also. Behold, I will bring evil upon
thee, and will take away thy Posterity: Yea, the Dogs shall eat him of Ahab's
stock that dies in the City, and him that dies in the Field shall the fowls
of the air eat. This Punishment had Almighty God determined for Ahab in this
World, and to destroy all the Male-kind that was begotten of Ahab's Body,
besides that punishment which should have happened unto him in the World to
come. When Ahab heard this, he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon him,
and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went barefooted. Then the word of the
Lord came to Elijah, saying, See thou how Ahab is humbled before me? Because
he submits himself before me, I will not bring that evil in his days, but in
his sons days will I bring it upon his House. Although Ahab, through the wicked
counsel of Jezabel his Wife, had committed shameful Murder, and against all
right disinherited and dispossessed for ever Naboth's stock (...) upon his
humo^^ (...) in heart unto God, which he declared outwardly by putting on
sackcloth and fasting, God changed his sentence, so that the Punishment which
he had determined, fell not upon Ahab's House in his time, but was deferred
unto the days of Joram his Son. Here we may see of what force our outward Fast
is, when it is accompanied with the inward Fast of the Mind, which is (as is
said) a sorrowfulness of Heart, detesting and bewailing our sinful doings. The
like is to be seen in the Ninevites: For when God had determined to destroy the
whole City of Nineve, and the time which he had appointed, was even now at
hand, he set the Prophet Jonas to say unto them, Yet forty days, Jonas 3.
and Nineve shall be overthrown. The people by and by believed God, and gave
themselves to fasting, yea, the King, by the advice of his Counsel, caused to
be proclaimed, saying, Let neither man nor beast, bullock nor sheep taste any
thing, neither feed nor drink water: But let man and beast put on sackcloth,
and cry mightily unto God, yea, let every man turn from his evil way, and from
the wickedness that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? And upon this
their hearty Repentance, thus declared outwardly with Fasting, renting of their
clothes, putting on sackcloth, and sprinkling themselves with dust and ashes,
the Scripture says, God saw their works that they turned from their evil ways,
and God repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them, and he did
it not. Now beloved, ye have heard first what Fasting is, as well that which is
outward in the Body, as that which is inward in the Heart. Ye have heard also
that there are three ends or purposes, whereunto if our outward Fast be
directed, it is a good work that God is pleased with. Thirdly, has been
declared, what time is most meet for to Fast, either privately or publicly.
Last of (...) what things Fasting has ob^^^^^ of God, by the exampl^^ (...)
Ninevites. Let us therefore, dearly beloved, seeing there are many more causes
of fasting and mourning in these our days, than have been of many years
heretofore in any one Age, endeavor our selves both inwardly in our hearts,
and also outwardly with our bodies, diligently to exercise this godly exercise
of Fasting, in such sort and manner, as the Holy Prophets, the Apostles, and
diverse other devout Persons for their time used the same. God is now the same
God that he was then, God that loves righteousness, and that hates iniquity,
God which wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his
wickedness and live, God that has promised to turn to us, if we refuse not to
turn to him: yea, if we turn our evil works from before his eyes, cease to do
evil, learn to do well, seek to do right, relieve the oppressed, be a right
Judge to the Fatherless, defend the Widow, break our bread to the hungry, bring
the poor that wander into our House, clothe the naked, and despise not our
Brother which is our own flesh: Then shall thou call (says the Prophet) and
the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here am I: Yea, God
which heard Ahab and the Ninevites, and spared them, will also hear our
Prayers, and spare us so, that we after their example, will unfeignedly turn
unto him: yea, he will bless us, with his heavenly benedictions the time that
we have to tarry in this World, and after the race of this mortal life, he will
bring us to his heavenly Kingdom, where we shall reign in everlasting
blessedness with our Savior Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

AN HOMILY AGAINST GLUTTONY AND DRUNKENNESS.
YE have heard in the former Sermon, well-beloved, the description and the
virtue of Fasting, with the true use of the same. Now ye shall hear how foul a
thing Gluttony and Drunkenness is before God, the rather to move you to use
Fasting the more diligently. Understand ye therefore, Titus 2.
that Almighty God (to the end that we might keep our selves undefiled, and
serve him in Holiness and Righteousness, according to his word) has charged in
his Scriptures so many as look for the glorious appearing of our Savior
Christ, to lead their lives in all Sobriety, Modesty, Tit^s ^
and Temperance. Whereby we may learn how necessary it is for every Christian
that will not be found unready at the coming of our Savior Christ, to live
sober-minded in this present World, forasmuch as otherwise being unready, he
cannot enter with Christ into Glory: and being unarmed in this behalf, he must
needs be in continual danger of that cruel Adversary the roaring Lion, against
whom the Apostle Peter warns us to prepare our selves in continual sobriety,
1 Pet. 5.
that we may resist, being steadfast in Faith. To the intent therefore that this
soberness may be used in all our behavior, it shall be expedient for us to
declare unto you how much all kind of excess offends the Majesty of Almighty
God, and how grievously he punishes the immoderate abuse of those his
creatures which he ordains to the maintenance of this our needy life, as
Meats, Drinks, and Apparel. And again, to show the noysom Diseases and great
mischiefs that commonly do follow them that inordinately give up themselves to
be carried headlong with such pleasures as are joined either with dainty and
over-large fare, or else with costly and sumptuous Apparel.

And first, that ye may perceive how detestable and hateful all excess in
eating and drinking is before the face of Almighty God, ye shall call to mind
what is written by St. Paul to the Galatians, Galat. 5.
where he numbreth Gluttony and Drunkenness among those horrible Crimes, with
the which (as he says) no man should inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. He
reckons them among the deeds of the flesh, and coupleth them with Idolatry,
Whoredom, and Murder, which are the greatest offenses that can be named among
men. For the first spoileth God of his Honor, the second defiles his Holy
Temple, that is to wit, our own Bodies; the third makes us companions of Cain
in the slaughter of our brethren; and whosoever commits them, as St. Paul says,
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. Certainly, that sin is very odious and
lothsom before the face of God, which causes him to turn his favorable
countenance so far from us, that he should clean bar us out of the doors, and
disinherit us of his Heavenly Kingdom. But he so much abhors all beastly
Banqueting, that by his Son our Savior Christ in the Gospel, he declares his
terrible indignation against all belly-gods, in that he pronounces them
accursed, saying, Luke 6.
Woe be to you that are full, for ye shall hunger. And by the Prophet Isaiah he
cries out, Esai. 5.
Woe be to you that rise up early to give your selves to drunkenness, and set
all your mind so on drinking, that you sit swilling thereat until it be night.
The Harp, the Lute, the Shalm, and plenty of Wine are at your Feasts, but the
works of the Lord ye do not behold, neither consider the works of his hands. Woe
be unto you that are strong to drink wine, and are mighty to advance
drunkenness. Here the Prophet plainly teaches, that Feasting and Banqueting
make men forgetful of their Duty toward God, when they give themselves to all
kinds of pleasures, not considering nor regarding the works of the Lord, who
has created meats and drinks, as St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 4.
to be received thankfully of them that believe and know the truth. So that the
very beholding of these Creatures (being the handy work of Almighty God) might
teach us to use them thankfully as God has ordained. Therefore they are
without excuse before God, which either filthily feed themselves, not
respecting the sanctification which is by the Word of God and Prayer, or else
unthankfully abuse the good Creatures of God by surfeiting and drunkenness,
forasmuch as Gods Ordinances in his Creatures plainly forbids it. They that
give themselves therefore to bibbing and banqueting, being without all
consideration of Gods Judgments, are suddenly oppressed in the day of
vengeance. Therefore Christ says to his Disciples, Luke 21.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcome with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of his world, and so that day come on you
unawares. Whosoever then will take warning at Christ, let him take heed to
himself, lest his heart being overwhelmed by surfeiting, and drowned in
drunkenness, he be taken unawares with that unthrifty Servant, which, thinking
not on his Masters coming, began to smite his fellow servants, and to eat, and
to drink, and to be drunken, and being suddenly taken, has his just Reward
with unbelieving Hypocrites, they that use to drink deeply, and to feed at full
(wallowing themselves in all kind of wickedness) are brought asleep in that
slumbring forgetfulness of Gods Holy Will and Commandments. Therefore Almighty
God cries by the Prophet Joel: Joel 1.
Awake ye drunkards, weep and howl all ye drinkers of wine, because the new
wine shall be pulled from your mouth. Here the Lord terribly threatens to
withdraw his benefits from such as abuse them, and to pull the Cup from the
mouth of Drunkards. Here we may learn, not to sleep in Drunkenness and
Surfeiting, lest God deprive us of the use of his Creatures, when we unkindly
abuse them. For certainly the Lord our God will not only take away his benefits
when they are unthankfully abused: but also in his wrath and heavy displeasure
take vengeance on such as immoderately abuse them. Genesis 3.
If our first Parents Adam and Eve had not obeyed their greedy Appetite in
eating the forbidden Fruit, neither had they lost the fruition of Gods benefits
which they then enjoyed in Paradise, neither had they brought so many mischiefs
both to themselves, and to all their Posterity. But when they passed the bounds
that God appointed them, as unworthy of Gods benefits, they are expelled and
driven out of Paradise, they may no longer eat the Fruits of that Garden, which
by excess they had so much abused. As transgressors of Gods Commandment, they
and their Posterity are brought to a perpetual shame and confusion, and as
accursed of God, they must now sweat for their living, which before had
abundance at their pleasure. Even so, if we in eating and drinking exceed, when
God of his large liberality sends plenty, he will soon change plenty into
scarceness. And whereas we gloried in fullness, he will make us empty, and
confound us with penury, yea, we shall be compelled to labor and travel with
pains, in seeking for that which we sometime enjoyed at ease. Thus the Lord
will not leave them unpunished, who not regarding his works, follow the lusts
and appetites of their own hearts. The Patriarch Noah, 2 Pet. 2. Noah.
whom the Apostle calls the Preacher of Righteousness, a man exceedingly in
Gods favor, is in Holy Scripture made an Example, whereby we may learn to
avoid Drunkenness. For when he had poured in Wine more than was convenient, in
filthy manner he lay naked in his Tent, his Privities discovered. And whereas
sometime he was so much esteemed, he is now become a laughing stock to his
wicked Son Cham, no small grief to Sem and Japhet his other two Sons, which
were ashamed of their Fathers beastly behavior. Here we may note that
Drunkenness brings with it shame and derision, so that it never escapes
unpunished. Lot in like manner, Lot.
being overcome with Wine, committed abominable Incest with his own Daughters.
So will Almighty God give over Drunkards to the shameful lusts of their own
hearts. Here is Lot by drinking fallen so far beside himself, that he knows
not his own Daughters. Who would have thought that an Old man in that heavy
case, having lost his Wife and all that he had, which had seen even now Gods
vengeance in fearful manner declared on the five Cities for their vicious
living, should be so far past the remembrance of his Duty? But men overcome
with drink, are altogether mad, as Seneca says. Epist. 84.
He was deceived by his Daughters: but now many deceive themselves, never
thinking that God by his terrible punishments will be avenged on them that
offend by excess. It is no small Plague that Let purchased by his Drunkenness.
For he had copulation most filthily with his own Daughters, which conceived
thereby, so that the matter is brought to light, it can no longer be hid. Two
incestuous Children are born, Ammon and Moab, of whom came two Nations, the
Ammonites and Moabites, abhorred of God, and cruel Adversaries to his People
the Israelites. Lo, Lot has gotten to himself by drinking, sorrow, and care,
with perpetual infamy and reproach unto the worlds end. If God spared not his
Servant Lot, being otherwise a godly man, Nephew unto Abraham, one that
entertained the Angels of God: What will he do to these beastly belly-slaves,
which void of all godliness or virtuous behavior, not once, but continually
day and night, give themselves wholly to bibbing and banqueting? But let us yet
further behold the terrible examples of Gods indignation against such as
greedily follow their unsatiable lusts. 2 Samuel 13. Amnon.
Amnon the Son of David, feasting himself with his Brother Absalom, is cruelly
murdered of his own Brother. Holofernes, Judith 13.
a valiant and mighty Captain, being overwhelmed with Wine, had his Head
stricken from his shoulders by that silly Woman Judith. Simon the High Priest,
and his two Sons, Mattathias and Judas, being entertained of Ptolomy the Son of
Abobus, who had before married Simon's Daughter, after much eating and
drinking, were traitorously murdered of their own Kinsman. Exodus 3^.
If the Israelites had not given themselves to belly-chear, they had never so
often fallen to Idolatry. Neither would we at this day be so addicted to
Superstition, were it not that we so much esteemed the filling of our bellies.
The Israelites, when they served Idols, sat down to eat and drink, 1 Cor. 10.
and rose again to play, as the Scripture reports. Therefore seeking to serve
their bellies, they forsook the service of the Lord their God. So are we drawn
to consent unto wickedness, when our hearts are overwhelmed by Drunkenness and
Feasting. So Herod setting his mind on Banqueting, was content to grant, that
the Holy Man of God, John Baptist, Mat. 14.
should be beheaded at the request of his Whores Daughter. Had not the Rich
Glutton been so greedily given to the pampering of his belly, he would never
have been so unmerciful to the poor Lazarus, Luke 16.
neither had he felt the torments of the unquenchable fire. What was the cause
that God so horribly punished Sodom and Gomorrha? Ezekiel. 16.
was it not their proud banqueting and continual idleness which caused them to
be so lewd of life, and so unmerciful toward the Poor? What shall we now think
of the horrible excess, whereby so many have perished, and been brought to
destruction? The great Alexander, Alexander.
after that he had conquered the whole World, was himself overcome by
Drunkenness, insomuch that being drunken, he slew his faithful Friend Clitus,
whereof when he was sober, he was so much ashamed, that for anguish of heart,
he wished death. Yet notwithstanding, after this he left not his banqueting,
but in one Night swilled in so much Wine, that he fell into a Fever; and when
as by no means he would abstain from Wine, within few days after in miserable
sort he ended his life. The Conqueror of the whole World is made a Slave by
excess, and becomes so mad, that he murdereth his dear Friend, he is plagued
with sorrow, shame, and grief of heart for his intemperance, yet can he not
leave it, he is kept in captivity, and he which sometime had subdued many, is
become a subject to the vile belly. So are Drunkards and Gluttons altogether
without power of themselves, and the more they drink, the dryer they wax, one
Banquet provokes another, they study to fill their greedy stomachs. Therefore
it is commonly said, A drunken man is always dry, and A glutton's gut is never
filled. Unsatiable truly are the affections and lusts of man's heart, and
therefore we must learn to bridle them with the fear of God, so that we yield
not to our own lusts, lest we kindle Gods indignation against our selves, when
we seek to satisfy our beastly Appetite. St. Paul teaches us, 1 Cor. 10.
Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, to do all to the glory of God.
Where he appoints, as it were, by a measure, how much a man may eat and
drink: that is to wit, so much that the mind be not made sluggish by cramming
in meat, and pouring in drink, so that it cannot lift up it self to the glory
and prase of God. Whosoever he be then, that by eating and drinking makes
himself unfit to serve God, let him not think to escape unpunished.

Ye have heard how much Almighty God detesteth the abuse of his Creatures, as
he himself declares, as well by his Holy Word, as also by the fearful examples
of his just judgment. Now, if neither the Word of God can restrain our raging
lusts and greedy appetites, neither the manifest examples of Gods vengeance
fear us from riotous and excessive eating and drinking, let us yet consider the
manifold mischiefs that proceed thereof, so shall we know the Tree by the
Fruits. It hurts the Body, it infecteth the Mind, it wastes the Substance,
and is noysom to the Neighbors. But who is able to express the manifold
dangers and inconveniences that follow of intemperate Diet? Often comes sudden
Death by banqueting, sometimes the Members are dissolved, and so the whole Body
is brought into a miserable state. He that eats and drinks immeasurably,
kindles often times such an unnatural heat in his body, that his appetite is
provoked thereby to desire more than it should, or else it overcomes his
stomach, and fills all the Body full of sluggishness, makes it unable and
unfit to serve either God or Man, not nourishing the Body, but hurting it; and
last of all, bringing many kinds of incurable Diseases, whereof ensues
sometimes desperate Death. But what should I need to say any more in this
behalf? For except God bless our Meats, and give them strength to feed us;
again, except God give strength to Nature to digest, so that we may take profit
by them, either shall we filthily vomit them up again, or else shall they lie
stinking in our bodies, as in a lothsom sink and channel, and so diversely
infect the whole Body. And surely the blessing of God is so far from such as
use riotous banqueting, that in their faces be sometimes seen the express
tokens of this intemperancy; as Solomon notes in his Proverbs. To whom is woe
(says he) to whom is sorrow? Prove. 23.
to whom is strife? to whom is brawling? to whom are wounds without cause? and
for whom is the redness of eyes? even to them that tarry long at the wine. Mark
(I beseech you) the terrible tokens of Gods indignation: Woe, and sorrow,
strife, and brawling, wounds without cause, disfigured face, and redness of
eyes are to be looked for, when men set themselves to excess and gormandise,
devising all means to increase their greedy appetites by tempering the Wine,
and sawcing it in such sort, that it may be more delectable and pleasant unto
them. It were expedient that such delicate Persons should be ruled by Solomon,
who in consideration of the aforesaid inconveniences, forbids the very
sight of Wine. Look not upon the wine (says he) when it is red, and when it
shows his color in the cup, or goes down pleasantly: for in the end thereof
it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice. Thine eyes shall look
upon strange women, and thine heart shall speak lewd things, and thou shall be
as one that sleeps in the midst of the Sea, and as he that sleeps on the
top of the Mast. They have stricken me (thou shall say) but I was not sick,
they have beaten me, but I felt it not, P^ov. 23.
therefore will I seek it yet still. Certainly that must needs be very hurtful
which biteth and infecteth like a poisoned Serpent, whereby men are brought to
filthy Fornication, which causes the heart to devise mischief. He doubtless is
in great danger that sleeps in the midst of the Sea, for soon he is
overwhelmed with waves. He is like to fall suddenly that sleeps on the top of
the Mast. And surely he has lost his senses that cannot feel when he is
stricken, that knows not when he is beaten. So, surfeiting and drunkenness
bites by the belly, and causes continual gnawing in the stomach, brings men to
Whordom and lewdness of heart, with dangers unspeakable: so that men are
bereaved and robbed of their senses, and are altogether without power of
themselves. Who sees not now the miserable estate whereinto men are brought,
by these foul filthy Monsters, Gluttony and Drunkenness? The body is so much
disquieted by them, that as Jesus the Son of Syrach affirms, Ecclus. 31.
the insatiable feeder never sleeps quietly, such an unmeasurable heat is
kindled, whereof ensues continual ach and pain to the whole body. And no less
truly the mind is also annoyed by surfeiting banquets: For sometimes men are
stricken with frenzy of mind, and are brought in like manner to mere madness;
some wax so brutish and blockish, that they become altogether void of
Understanding. It is an horrible thing that any man should maim himself in any
Member: but for a man of his own accord to bereave himself of his Wits, is a
mischief intolerable. The Prophet Osee in the fourth Chapter, Osee 4.
says, that wine and drunkenness take away the heart. Alas then, that any man
should yield unto that, whereby he might bereave himself of the possession of
his own Heart. Wine and women lead wise men out of the way, and bring men of
understanding to reproof and shame, Ecc^u^. 19.
says Jesus the Son of Syrach. Yea, he asks what is the life of man that is
overcome with drunkenness. Ecclus. 31.
Wine drunken with excess, makes bitterness of mind, and causes brawling and
strife. In Magistrates it causes Cruelty instead of Justice, as that wise
Philosopher Plato perceived right-well, when he affirmed, that a drunken man
has a tyrannous heart, and therefore will Rule at his pleasure, contrary to
Right and Reason. And certainly drunkenness makes men forget both Law and
Equity, Prove. 31.
which caused King Solomon so strictly to charge that no Wine should be given
unto Rulers, lest peradventure by drinking, they forget what the Law appoints
them, and so change the judgment of all the Children of the Poor. Therefore
among all sorts of men, excessive drinking is most intolerable in a Magistrate
or man of Authority, as Plato says: De repub. lib. 3.
For a Drunkard knows not where he is himself. If then a man of Authority
should be a Drunkard, alas, how might he be a guide unto other men, standing in
need of a Governor himself! Besides this, a drunken man can keep nothing
secret: many fond, foolish, and filthy words are spoken when men are at their
Banquets. Drunkenness (as Seneca affirms) discovers all wickedness, and
brings it to light, it removes all shamefastness, and increases all
mischief. The proud man being drunken, utters his pride, the cruel man his
cruelty, and the envious man his envy, so that no Vice can lie hid in a
Drunkard. Moreover, in that he knows not himself, he fumbleth and stammereth
in his speech, staggereth to and fro in his going, beholding nothing steadfastly
with his staring eyes, believes that the House runs round about him. It is
evident that the mind is brought clean out of frame by excessive drinking; so
that whosoever is deceived by wine or strong drink, becomes, as Solomon says,
a mocker, or madman, Prove. 20
so that he can never be wise. If any man think that he may drink much Wine,
and yet be well in his wits, he may as well suppose, as Seneca says, that when
he has drunken Poison, he shall not die. For wheresoever excessive drinking
is, there must needs follow perturbation of mind, and where the belly is
stuffed with dainty fare, there the mind is oppressed with slothful
sluggishness. A full belly makes a gross understanding, says St. Bernard, Ad
sororem, ser. 24.
and much meat makes a weary mind. But alas, now adays men pass little either
for body or mind: so they have worldly wealth and riches abundant to satisfy
their unmeasurable lusts, they care not what they do. They are not ashamed to
show their drunken faces, and to play the madmen openly. They think themselves
in good case, and that all is well with them if they be not pinched by lack and
poverty. Lest any of us therefore might take occasion to flatter himself in
this beastly kind of excess, by the abundance of Riches, let us call to mind
what Solomon writes in the xxi. Prove. 21.
of his Proverbs, He that loves wine and fat fare, shall never be rich, says
he. And in the xxiii. Prove. 23.
Chapter, he makes a vehement exhortation on this wise, Keep not company with
drunkards and gluttons, for the glutton and drunkard shall come to poverty.

He that draws his Patrimony through his throat, and eats and drinks more
in one hour, or in one day, than he is able to earn in a whole week, must needs
be an unthrift, and come to beggary. But some will say, what need any to find
fault with this? He hurts no man but himself, he is no man's foe but his own.
Indeed I know this is commonly spoken in defense of these beastly belly-gods,
but it is easy to see how hurtful they are, not only to themselves, but also
to the Commonwealth by their example. Every one that meets them is troubled
with brawling and contentious language, and ofttimes raging in beastly lusts,
like high-fed Horses, they neigh on their neighbors wives, as Jeremy says,
and defile their children and daughters. Their example is evil to them among
whom they dwell, they are an occasion of offense to many, and whilst they wast
their substance in banqueting, their own household is not provided of things
necessary, their Wives and their Children are evilly treated, they have not
wherewith to relieve their poor Neighbors in time of necessity, as they might
have, if they lived soberly. They are unprofitable to the Commonwealth. For a
drunkard is neither fit to Rule, nor to be ruled. They are a slander to the
Church or Congregation of Christ, and therefore St. Paul does excommunicate
them among Whoremongers, 1 Cor. 5.
Idolaters, Covetous Persons, and Extortioners, forbidding Christians to eat
with any such. Let us therefore, good People, eschew every one of us, all
intemperancy, let us love sobriety, and moderate diet, often give our selves to
abstinency and fasting, whereby the mind of man is more lifted up to God, more
ready to all godly exercises, as Prayer, hearing and reading Gods Word, to his
spiritual comfort. Finally, whosoever regards the health and safety of his
own Body, or wishes always to be well in his wits, or desires quietness of
mind, and abhors fury and madness, he that would be rich, and escape
poverty, he that is willing to live without the hurt of his Neighbor, a
profitable member of the Commonwealth, a Christian without slander of Christ
and his Church, let him avoid all riotous and excessive banqueting, let him
learn to keep such measure as behooves him that professes true godliness, let
him follow St. Paul's Rule, and so eat and drink, to the glory and praise of
God, who has created all things to be soberly used with Thanksgiving, to whom
be all Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

AN HOMILY AGAINST Excess of Apparel.
WHereas ye have heretofore been excited and stirred to use temperance of meats
and drinks, and to avoid the excess thereof, many ways hurtful to the state of
the Commonwealth, and so odious before Almighty God, being the author and giver
of such Creatures, to comfort and stablish our frail Nature with thanks unto
him, and not by abusing of them to provoke his liberality to severe punishing
of that disorder. In like manner it is convenient, that ye be admonished of
another foul and chargeable excess: I mean of Apparel, at these days so
gorgeous, that neither Almighty God by his Word can stay our proud curiosity in
the same, neither yet godly and necessary Laws, made by our Princes, and often
repeated with the Penalties, can bridle this detestable abuse, whereby b^th God
is openly contemned, and the Princes Laws manifestly disobeyed, to the great
peril of the Realm. Wherefore, that sobriety also in this excess may be espied
among us, I shall declare unto you, both the moderate use of Apparel, approved
by God in his Holy Word, and also the abuses thereof, which he forbids and
disalloweth, as it may appear by the inconveniences which daily increase, by
the just judgment of God, where that measure is not kept, which he himself has
appointed. If we consider the end and purpose whereunto Almighty God has
ordained his Creatures, we shall easily perceive that he allows us Apparel,
not only for necessities sake, but also for an honest comeliness. Even as in
Herbs, Trees, and sundry Fruits, we have not only diverse necessary uses, but
also the pleasant sight and sweet smell, to delight us withal, wherein we may
behold the singular love of God toward mankind, in that he has provided both
to relieve our necessities, and also to refresh our senses with an honest and
moderate recreation. Therefore David in the hundred and fourth Psalm, Psalm. 104.
confessing Gods careful Providence, shows that God not only provideth things
necessary for men, as Herbs and other meats, but also such things as may
rejoice and comfort, as wine to make glad the heart, oils and ointments to make
the face to shine. So that they are altogether past the limits of humanity, who
yielding only to necessity, forbid the lawful fruition of Gods benefits. With
whose traditions we may not be led, if we give ear to St. Paul, writing to the
Colossians, Coloss. 2.
willing them not to hearken unto such men as shall say, Touch not, Taste not,
Handle not; superstitiously bereaving them of the fruition of Gods Creatures.
And no less truly ought we to beware, lest under pretense of Christian Liberty,
we take License to do what we list, advancing our selves in sumptuous Apparel,
and despising others, preparing our selves in fine bravery, to wanton, lewd,
and unchaste behavior. To the avoiding whereof, it behooves us to be mindful
of four Lessons, 4 L ssons,
taught in Holy Scripture, whereby we shall learn to temper our selves, and to
restrain our immoderate affections, to that meas^re which God has appointed.
The first Romans 13.
to accomplish the lusts thereof, with costly Apparel, as that Harlot did, of
whom Solomon speaks, Proverbs the seventh, Prove. 7.
which perfumed her bed, and decked it with costly ornaments of Egypt, to the
fulfilling of her lewd lust: but rather ought we by moderate temperance to cut
off all occasions, whereby the Paul, 1 Cor. 7.
in the seventh Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinths, where he teaches
us to use this World, as though we used it not. Whereby he cutteth away not
only all Ambition, Pride, and vain pomp in Apparel; but also all inordinate
care and affection, which withdraws us from the contemplation of Heavenly
things, and consideration of our Duty toward God. They that are much occupied
in caring for things pertaining to the Body, are most commonly negligent and
careless in matters concerning the Soul. Mat. 6.
Therefore our Savior Christ wills us not to take thought what we shall eat,
or what we shall drink, or wherewith we shall be clothed, but rather to seek
the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. Whereby we may learn to
beware, lest we use those things to our hindrance, which God has ordained for
our comfort and furtherance toward Paul both to use plenty, Phi^. 4.
and also to suffer penury, remembering that we must yield accounts of those
things which we have received unto him who abhors all excess, pride,
ostentation, and vanity; who also utterly condemns and disalloweth whatsoever
draws us from our Duty toward God, or diminishes our Charity toward our
Neighbors and Children, whom we ought to love as our selves. The the limits
whereof it behooves him to keep himself. Therefore all may not look to wear
like Apparel, but every one according to his degree, as God has placed him.
Which, if it were observed, many one doubtless should be compelled to wear a
russet-coat, which now ruffleth in Silks and Velvets, spending more by the Year
in sumptuous Apparel, than their Fathers received for the whole Revenue of
their Lands. But alas, now adays how many may we behold occupied wholly in
pampering the flesh, taking no care at all, but only how to deck themselves,
setting their affection altogether on worldly bravery, abusing Gods goodness
when he sends plenty, to satisfy their wanton lusts, having no regard to the
degree wherein God has placed them. Deuteronomy. 29.
The Israelites were contented with such Apparel as God gave them, although it
were base and simple. And God so blessed them, that their shoes and clothes
lasted them forty years; yea, and those clothes which their Fathers had worn,
their Children were contented to use afterward. But we are never contented,
and therefore we prosper not; so that most commonly he that ruffleth in his
Sables, in his fine furred Gown, corked Slippers, trim Buskins, and warm
Mittons, is more ready to chill for cold, than the poor laboring man, which
can abide in the Field all the day long, when the North Wind blows, with a few
beggarly clouts about him. We are loath to wear such as our Fathers have left
us, we think not that sufficient or good enough for us. We must have one Gown
for the day, another for the night; one long, another short; one for Winter,
another for Summer; one through-furred, another but faced; one for the
working-day, another for the holy day; one of this color, another of that
color; one of Cloth, another of Silk or Damask. We must have change of
Apparel, one before Dinner, and another after; one of the Spanish fashion,
another Turkey: and to be brief, never content with sufficient. Mat. 10.
Our Savior Christ bade his Disciples they should not have two Coats: but the
most men, far unlike to his Scholars, have their presses so full of Apparel,
that many know not how many sorts they have. Which thing caused St. James to
pronounce this terrible curse against such wealthy Worldlings, James 5.
Go to ye rich men, weep and howl on your wretchedness that shall come upon
you, your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth-eaten, ye have lived
in pleasure on the Earth, and in wantonness, ye have nourished your hearts, as
in the day of slaughter. Mark, I beseech you, St. James calls them miserable,
notwithstanding their Riches and plenty of Apparel, forasmuch as they pamper
their Bodies to their own destruction. What was the rich Glutton the better for
his fine fare and costly apparel? Luke 16.
Did not he nourish himself to be tormented in Hellfire? Let us learn
therefore to content our selves, having Food and Raiment, as St. Paul teaches,
1 Tm. 6.
lest desiring to be enriched with abundance, we fall into temptations, snares,
and many noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction. Certainly,
such as delight in gorgeous Apparel, are commonly puffed up with Pride, and
filled with diverse Vanities. So were the Daughters of Sion, and People of
Jerusalem, whom Isaiah the Prophet threatens, Isai. 3.
because they walked with stretched-out necks and wandering eyes, mincing as
they went, and nicely treading with their feet, that Almighty God would make
their heads ba^d, and discover their secret shame. In that day, says he, shall
the Lord take away the ornament of the slippers, and the ca^ls, and the round
attires, and the sweet balls, and the bracelets, and the attires of the head,
and the slops, and the head-bands, and the tablets, and the earrings, the
rings, and the mufflers, the costly apparel, and the vails, and wimples, and
the crispingpins, and the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the
lawns. So that Almighty God would not suffer his benefits to be vainly and
wantonly abused, no not of that People whom he most tenderly loved, and had
chosen to himself before all other. No less truly is the vanity that is used
among us in these days. For the proud and haughty stomachs of the Daughters of
England, are so maintained with diverse disguised sorts of costly Apparel,
Apolog. Con. gentes. c. 6.
that as Tertullian, an ancient Father, says, there is left no difference in
Apparel between an honest Matron and a common Strumpet. Yea, many men are
become so effeminate, that they care not what they spend in disguising
themselves, ever desiring new Toys, and inventing new Fashions. Therefore a
certain man that would picture every Countryman in his accustomed Apparel,
when he had painted other Nations, he pictured the Englishman all naked, and
gave him Cloth under his Arm, and bade him make it himself as he thought best,
for he changed his Fashion so often, that he knew not how to make it. Thus with
our fantastical devices, we make our selves laughing-stocks to other Nations;
while one spends his Patrimony upon pounces and cuts, another bestows more
on a dancing shirt, than might suffice to buy him honest and comely Apparel for
his whole Body. Some hang their Revenues about their necks, ruffling in their
Ruffs, and many a one jeopardeth his best joint, to maintain himself in
sumptuous Raiment. And every man, nothing considering his Estate and Condition,
seeks to excel other in costly attire. Whereby it comes to pass, that in
abundance and plenty of all things, we yet complain of want and penury, while
one man spends that which might serve a multitude, and no man distributeth of
the abundance which he has received, and all men excessively waste that which
should serve to supply the necessities of other. There has been very good
provision made against such abuses, by diverse good and wholesome Laws, which if
they were practiced as they ought to be of all true Subjects, they might in
some part serve to diminish this raging and riotous excess in Apparel. But
alas, there appears amongst us little fear and obedience, either of God, or
Man. Therefore must we needs look for Gods fearful vengeance from Heaven, to
overthrow our presumption and pride, Acts 12.
as he overthrew Herod, who in his Royal Apparel, forgetting God, was smitten
of an Angel, and eaten up of Worms. By which terrible Example, God has taught
us, that we are but Worms meat, although we pamper our selves never so much in
gorgeous Apparel.

Ecclus 1.
Here we may learn that which Jesus the Son of Syrach teaches, not to be proud
of clothing and raiment, neither to exalt our selves in the day of honor,
because the works of the Lord are wonderful, and glorious, secret, and unknown,
teaching us with humbleness of mind, every one to be mindful of the Vocation
whereunto God has called him. Let Christians therefore endeavor themselves to
quench the care of pleasing the flesh, let us use the benefits of God in this
World, in such wise, that we be not too much occupied in providing for the
Body. Let us content our selves quietly with that which God sends, be it
never so little. And if it please him to send plenty, let us not wax proud
thereof, but let us use it moderately, as well to our own comfort, as to the
relief of such as stand in necessity. He that in abundance, and plenty of
apparel hides his face from him that is naked, despises his own flesh, as
Isaiah the Prophet says. Isai 58.
Let us learn to know our selves, and not to despise others; let us remember
that we stand all before the Majesty of Almighty God, who shall judge us by his
Holy Word, wherein he forbids excess, not only to Men, but also to Women. So
that none can excuse themselves, of what estate or condition soever they be.
Let us therefore present our selves before his Throne, as Tertullian exhorts,
with the Ornaments which the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 6.
Ephesians the sixth Chapter, having our loins girt about with verity, having
the breast plate of righteousness, and shod with shoes prepared by the Gospel
of peace. Mat. 11.
Let us take unto us simplicity, chastity, and comeliness, submitting our necks
to the sweet yoke of Christ. Let Women be subject to their Husbands, and they
are sufficiently attired, says Tertullian. The Wife of one Philo, an Heathen
Philosopher, being demanded why she wore no Gold? She answered, that she
thought her Husbands Virtues sufficient Ornaments. How much more ought
Christian Women, instructed by the Word of God, to content themselves in their
Husbands? yea, how much more ought every Christian to content himself in our
Savior Christ, thinking himself sufficiently garnished with his heavenly
virtues? But it will be hear objected and said of some nice and vain Women,
that all which we do in painting our faces, in dying our hair, in embalming our
bodies, in decking us with gay apparel, is to please our Husbands, to delight
his eyes, and to retain his love toward us. O vain excuse, and most shameful
answer, to the reproach of thy Husband. What could thou more say to set out
his foolishness, than to charge him to be pleased and delighted with the Devils
attire? Who can paint her face, and curle her hair, and change it into an
unnatural color, but therein does work reproof to her maker, who made her? As
though she could make her self more comely than God has appointed the measure
of her beauty. What do these Women, but go about to reform that which God has
made? not knowing that all things natural are the work of God, and things
disguised and unnatural are the works of the Devil. And as though a wise and
Christian Husband should delight to see his Wife in such painted and flourished
visages, which common Harlots most do use, to train therewith their Lovers to
naughtiness; or, as though an honest Woman could delight to be like an Harlot
for pleasing of her Husband. Nay, nay, these be but vain excuses of such as go
about to please rather others than their Husbands. And such attires be but to
provoke her to show her self abroad, to entice others: a worthy matter. She
must keep (...) her ^usband to maintain such Apparel, whereby she is the worse
Housewife, the seldomer at home to see her charge, and so neglect his thrift,
by giving great provocation to her household to waste and wantonness, while she
must wander abroad to show her own vanity, and her Husbands foolishness. By
which her Pride, she stirs up much envy of others which be as vainly
delighted as she is. She does but deserve mocks and scorns, to set out all her
commendation in Jewish and Ethnic Apparel, and yet brag of her Christianity.
She does but waste superfluously her Husbands stock by such sumptuousness, and
sometimes she is the cause of much bribery, extortion, and deceit in her
Husbands dealings, that she may be the more gorgeously set out to the sight of
the vain World, to please the Devils eyes, and not Gods, who gives to every
Creature sufficient and moderate comeliness, wherewith we should be contented
if we were of God. What other thing do thou by those means, but provokest
others to tempt thee, to deceive thy Soul, by the bait of thy pomp and pride?
What else do thou, but set out thy Pride, and make of the undecent
apparel of thy Body, the Devils Net, to catch the souls of them which behold
thee? O thou Woman, not a Christian, but worse than a Paynim, thou Minister of
the Devil: Why pamperest thou that carrion flesh so high, which sometimes does
stink and rot on the Earth as thou go? Howsoever thou perfumest thy self,
yet cannot thy beastliness be hidden or overcome with thy smells and savours,
which do rather deform and mis-shape thee, than beautify thee. What meant
Solomon to say, of such trimming of vain Women, Prove. 11.
when he said, A fair woman, without good manners and conditions, is like a Sow
which has a ring of gold upon her snout? but that the more thou garnish thy
self with these outward blasings, the less thou carest for the inward
garnishing of thy mind, and so do but deform thy self by such array, and not
beautify thy self. Hear, hear, what Christ's holy Apostles do write. Let not
the outward apparel of women (says St. Peter) be decked with the braiding of
hair, 1 Pet. 3.
with wrapping on of gold, or goodly clothing: but let the mind and the
conscience, which is not seen with the eyes, be pure and clean, that is, says
he, an acceptable and an excellent thing before God: For so the old ancient
women attired themselves, and were obedient to their husbands. And St. Paul
says, 1 Timothy 2.
that women should apparel themselves with shamefacedness and soberness, and
not with braids of their hair, or gold, or pearl, or precious clothes, but as
women should do, which will express godliness by their good outward works. If
ye will not keep the Apostles Precepts, at the least let us hear what Pagans,
which were ignorant of Christ, have said in this matter: Democrates says, The
Ornament of a Woman stands in scarcity of speech and apparel. Sophocles says
of such apparel thus, It is not an Ornament, O thou Fool, but a shame and a
manifest show of thy Folly. Socrates says, That that is a garnishing to a
Woman, which declares out her Honesty. The Grecians use it in a Proverb, It is
not Gold or Pearl which is a beauty to a Woman, but good Conditions.

And Aristotle bids that a Woman should use less Apparel than the Law does
suffer. For it is not the goodliness of Apparel, nor the excellency of Beauty,
nor the abundance of Gold, that makes a Woman to be esteemed, but Modesty and
Diligence to live honestly in all things. This outrageous vanity is now grown
so far, that there is no shame taken of it. We read in Histories, that when
King Dionysius sent to the Women of Lacedaemon rich Robes, they answered and
said, that they shall do us more shame than honor; and therefore refused them.
The Women in Rome in old time abhorred that gay Apparel which King Pyrrhus sent
to them, and none were so greedy and vain to accept them. And a Law was openly
made of the Senate, and a long time observed, that no Woman should wear over
half an Ounce of Gold, nor should wear clothes of diverse colors. But perchance
some dainty Dame will say and answer me, That they must do something to show
their Birth and Blood, to show their Husbands Riches: as though Nobility were
chiefly seen by these things, which be common to those which be most vile, as
though thy Husbands Riches were not better bestowed than in such superfluities,
as though when thou wast christened, thou did not renounce the pride of this
World, and the pomp of the Flesh. I speak not against convenient Apparel for
every state agreeable; but against the superfluity, against the vain delight to
covet such Vanities, to devise new Fashions to feed thy Pride with, to spend so
much upon thy Carcass, that thou and thy Husband are compelled to rob the Poor,
to maintain thy costliness. Hear how that Noble, Holy Woman Queen Hester,
sets out these goodly Ornaments (as they be called) when (in respect of
saving Gods People) she was compelled to put on such glorious Apparel, knowing
that it was a fit stale to blind the Eyes of carnal Fools. Thus she prayed,
Thou know, O Lord, the necessity which I am driven to, to put on this
apparel, and that I abhor this sign of Pride, and of this glory which I bear on
my head, and that I defy it as a filthy cloth, and that I wear it not when I
am alone. Again, by what means was Holophernes deceived by the glittering show
of Apparel, which that Holy Woman Judith did put on her, not as delighting in
them, nor seeking vain voluptuous pleasure by them? But she ware it of pure
necessity by Gods dispensation, using this vanity to overcome the vain eyes of
Gods Enemy. Such desire was in those Noble Women, being very loath and unwilling
otherwise to wear such sumptuous Apparel, by the which others should be caused
to forget themselves. These be commended in Scripture for abhorring such
vanities, which by constraint and great necessity, against their hearts desire,
they were compelled to wear them for a time. And shall such Women be worthy
commendations, which neither be comparable with these Women aforesaid in
Nobility, nor comparable to them in their good zeal to God and his People,
whose daily delight and seeking is to flourish in such gay shifts and changes,
never satisfied, nor regarding who smarteth for their Apparel, so they may come
by it? O vain men, which be subjects to their Wives in these inordinate
affections! O vain Women, to procure so much hurt to themselves, by the which
they come the sooner to misery in this World, and in the mean time be abhorred
of God, hated and scorned of wise men, and in the end, like to be joined with
such, who in Hell, too late repenting themselves, shall openly complain with
these words: What has our Pride profited us? or what profit has the pomp of
Riches brought us? All these things are passed away like a shadow. As for
Virtue, we did never show any sign thereof: And thus we are consumed in our
wickedness. If thou say that the Custom is to be followed, and the use of the
World does compel thee to such curiosity: then I ask of thee, whose custom
should be followed? Wise Folks manners, or Fools? If thou say the Wise: then
I say, follow them: For Fools Customs, who should follow but Fools? Consider
that the Consent of Wise men ought to be alleged for a Custom. Now, if any
lewd Custom be used, be thou the first to break it, labor to diminish it and
lay it down: and more laud before God, and more commendation shall thou win by
it, than by all the glory of such superfluity.

Thus ye have heard declared unto you, what God requires by his Word
concerning the moderate use of his Creatures. Let us learn to use them
moderately as he has appointed. Almighty God has taught us, to what end and
purpose we should use our Apparel. Let us therefore learn so to behave our
selves in the use thereof, as becomes Christians, always showing our selves
thankful to our Heavenly Father for his great and merciful benefits, who gives
unto us our daily Bread, that is to say, all things necessary for this our
needy life: unto whom we shall render accounts for all his benefits, at the
glorious appearing of our Savior Christ: To whom with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

AN HOMILY OR SERMON CONCERNING PRAYER.
THere is nothing in all man's Life (wellbeloved in our Savior Christ) so
needful to be spoken of, and daily to be called upon, as hearty, zealous, and
Devout Prayer, the necessity whereof is so great, that without it nothing may
be well obtained at Gods hand. For as the Apostle James says, Every good and
perfect gift comes from above, Romans 10.
and proceeds from the Father of Lights; who is also said to be rich and
liberal toward all them that call upon him, not because he either will not, or
cannot give without asking, but because he has appointed Prayer as an ordinary
means between him and us. Mat. 6.
There is no doubt but he always knows what we have need of, and is always
most ready to give abundance of those things that we lack.

Yet to the intent we might acknowledge him to be the Giver of all good things,
and behave our selves thankfully toward him in that behalf, loving, fearing,
and worshipping him sincerely, and truly, as we ought to do, he has profitably
and wisely ordained, that in time of necessity we should humble our selves in
his sight, pour out the secrets of our heart before him, and crave help at his
hands, with continual, earnest, and devout Prayer. By the mouth of his Holy
Prophet David, he says on this wise: Call upon me in the day^ of thy trouble,
Psalm. 50. Mat. 7.
and I will deliver thee. Likewise in the Gospel by the mouth of his
well-beloved Son Christ, he says, Ask, and it shall be given you; knock, and
it shall be opened: for whosoever asks, receives; whosoever seeks,
finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. 1 Timothy 2. Phil. 4. Col.
5. James 1.
St. Paul also most agreeably consenting hereunto, wills men to pray every
where, and to continue therein with thanksgiving. Neither does the blessed
Apostle St. James in this point any thing dissent, but earnestly exhorting all
men to diligent Prayer, says, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God,
which gives liberally to all men, and reproacheth no man. Also in another
place, James 5.
Pray one for another (says he) that ye may be healed: For the righteous man's
prayer avails much, if it be fervent. What other thing are we taught by these
and such other places, but only this, that Almighty God, notwithstanding his
Heavenly Wisdom and foreknowledge, will be prayed unto, that he will be called
upon, that he will have us no less willing on our part to ask, than he on his
part is willing to give? Therefore most fond and foolish is the Opinion and
Reason of those men, which therefore think all Prayer to be superfluous and
vain, because God searches the Heart and the Reins, and knows the meaning of
the Spirit before we ask. For if this fleshly and carnal Reason were sufficient
to disanul Prayer, then why did our Savior Christ so often cry to his
Disciples, Luke 22.
Watch and Pray? Why did he prescribe them a Form of Prayer, saying, When ye
pray, Mat. 6. Acts 1.
pray after this sort, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Why did he Pray so
often and so earnestly himself before his Passion? Finally, why did the
Apostles immediately after his Ascension, gather themselves together into one
several place, and there continue a long time in Prayer? Either they must
condemn Christ and his Apostles of extreme folly, or else they must needs
grant, that Prayer is a thing most necessary for all men, at all times, and in
all places. Sure it is, that there is nothing more expedient or needful for
mankind in all the World than Prayer. Pray always (says St. Paul) with all
manner of prayer and supplication, Ephesians. 6.
and watch therefore with all diligence. Also in another place he wills us to
pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
without any intermission or ceasing; meaning thereby, that we ought never to
slack or faint in Prayer, but to continue therein to our lives end. A number of
other such places might here be alleged of like effect, I mean, to declare the
great necessity and use of Prayer: but what need many proofs in a plain matter?
seeing there is no man so ignorant but he knows, no man so blind but he
sees, that Prayer is a thing most needful in all estates and degrees of men.
For only by the help hereof, we attain to those heavenly and everlasting
Treasures, which God our Heavenly Father has reserved and laid up for his
Children in his dear and well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, John 16.
with his Covenant and Promise most assuredly confirmed and sealed unto us,
that if we ask, we shall receive.

Now, the great necessity of Prayer being sufficiently known, that our minds
and hearts may be the more provoked and stirred thereunto, let us briefly
consider what wonderful strength and power it has to bring strange and mighty
things to pass. We read in the Book of Exodus, Exodus 1.
that Josua fighting against the Amalekites, did conquer and overcome them, not
so much by virtue of his own strength, as by the earnest and continual Prayer
of Moses, who, as long as he held up his hands to God, so long did Israel
prevail; but when he fainted, and let his hands down, then did Amalek and his
People prevail: Insomuch that Aaron and Hur, being in the Mount with him, were
fain to stay up his hands until the going down of the Sun, otherwise had the
People of God that day been utterly discomfited, and put to flight. Also we
read in another place of Josua himself, Josua 10.
how he at the besieging of Gibeon, making his humble Petition to Almighty God,
caused the Sun and the Moon to stay their course, and to stand still in the
midst of Heaven for the space of a whole day, until such time as the People
were sufficienly avenged upon their Enemies.

And was not Jehosaphat's Prayer of great force and strength, 2 Par. 26.
when God at his request caused his Enemies to fall out among themselves, and
wilfully to destroy one another? Who can marvel enough at the effect and virtue
of Elias Prayer? 1 Kings 18.
He being a man subject to affections as we are, prayed to the Lord that it
might not rain, and there fell no rain upon the Earth for the space of three
years and six months. Again, he prayed that it might rain, and there fell great
plenty, so that the Earth brought forth her increase most abundantly.

It were too long to tell of Judith, Esther, Susanna, and of diverse other godly
Men and Women, how greatly they prevailed in all their doings, by giving their
minds earnestly and devoutly to Prayer. Let it be sufficient at this time to
conclude with the sayings of Augustine and Chrysostom, Aug. Ser. 26. de temp.
Chrysostom. sup. Mat. 22.
whereof the one calls Prayer the Key of Heaven, the other plainly affirms,
that there is nothing in all the World more strong than a man that gives
himself to fervent Prayer.

Now then, dearly Beloved, seeing Prayer is so needful a thing, and of so great
strength before God, let us, according as we are taught by the example of
Christ and his Apostles, be earnest and diligent in calling on the Name of the
Lord. Let us never faint, never slack, never give over, but let us daily and
hourly, early and late, in season and out of season, be occupied in Godly
Meditations and Prayers: What if we obtain not our Petitions at the first? yet
let us not be discouraged, yet let us continually cry and call upon God: he
will surely hear us at length, if for no other cause, yet for very
importunities sake. Luke 18.
Remember the Parable of the unrighteous Judge and the poor Widow, how she by
her importunate means caused him to do her Justice against her Adversary,
although otherwise he feared neither God nor man. Shall not God much more
avenge his Elect (says our Savior Christ) which cry unto him day and night?
Thus he taught his Disciples, and in them all other true Christian men, to Pray
always, and never to faint or shrink. Remember also the example of the Woman of
Canaan, Mat 15.
how she was rejected of Christ, and called Dog, as one most unworthy of any
benefit at his hands: yet she gave not over, but followed him still, crying and
calling upon him to be good and merciful unto her Daughter. And at length, by
very importunity, she obtained her request. O let us learn by these examples,
to be earnest and fervent in Prayer, assuring our selves, that whatsoever we
ask of God the Father in the Name of his Son Christ, John 16.
and according to his will, he will undoubtedly grant it. He is truth it self,
and as truly as he has promised it, so truly will he perform it. God for his
great mercies sake, so work in our hearts by his Holy Spirit, that we may
always make our humble Prayers unto him, as we ought to do, and always obtain
the thing which we ask, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, World without end. Amen.

The Second Part of the Homily concerning PRAYER.
IN the First Part of this Sermon, ye heard the great necessity, and also the
great force of devout and earnest Prayer declared and proved unto you, both by
diverse weighty Testimonies, and also by sundry good Examples of Holy Scripture.
Now shall you learn whom you ought to call upon, and to whom you ought always
to direct your Prayers. We are evidently taught in Gods Holy Testament, that
Almighty God is the only Fountain and Wellspring of all Goodness; and that
whatsoever we have in this World, we receive it only at his hands: to this
effect serves the place of St. James, James 1.
Every good and perfect gift, says he, comes from above, and proceeds from
the Father of Lights. To this effect also serves the Testimony of Paul, in
diverse places of his Epistles, witnessing that the Spirit of Wisdom, the Spirit
of Knowledge and Revelation, yea, every good and heavenly gift, as Faith, Hope,
Charity, Grace, and Peace, comes only and solely of God. In consideration
whereof, he bursteth out into a sudden Passion, and says, O man, 1 Cor. 4.
what thing have thou, which thou have not received? Therefore, whenever we
need or lack any thing, pertaining either to the Body, or to the Soul, it
behooves us to run only unto God, who is the only giver of all good things. Our
Savior Christ in the Gospel teaching his Disciples how they should Pray,
sends them to the Father in his Name, saying, Verily, verily, John 16. Matt.
6. Luke 11.
I say unto you, whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it unto
you. And in another place, When ye Pray, pray after this sort: Our Father,
which art in Heaven, etc. And does not God himself, Psalm. 50. Acts 1.
by the mouth of his Prophet David, will and command us to call upon him? The
Apostle wishes Grace and Peace to all them that call on the Name of the Lord,
and of his Son Jesus Christ, Joel 2.
as does also the Prophet Joel, saying, And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.

Thus then it is plain by the infallible word of Truth and Life, that in all
our necessities we must flee unto God, direct our Prayers unto him, call upon
his Holy Name, desire help at his hands, and at none others; whereof if we will
yet have further reason, mark that which follows. There are certain
conditions most requisite to be found in every such a one as must be called
upon, which if they be not found in him unto whom we pray, then does our Prayer
avail us nothing, but is altogether in vain.

The first is this, that he to whom we make our Prayers, be able to help us.
The second is, that he will help us. The third is, that he be such a one as may
hear our Prayers. The fourth is, that he understand better than we our selves
what we lack, and how far we have need of help. If these things be to be found
in any other saving only God, then may we lawfully call upon some other besides
God. But what man is so gross, but he well understands that these things are
only proper to him which is Omnipotent, and knows all things, even the very
secrets of the Heart? that is to say, only and to God alone; whereof it
follows, that we must call neither upon Angel, nor yet upon Saint, but only
and solely upon God, Romans 10.
as St. Paul does write. How shall men call upon him in whom they have not
believed? So that Invocation or Prayer, may not be made without Faith in him on
whom they call; but that we must first believe in him, before we can make our
Prayer unto him, whereupon we must only and solely Pray unto God. For to say
that we should believe either in Angel or Saint, or in any other living
Creature, were mere horrible Blasphemy against God and his Holy Word; neither
ought this Fancy to enter into the Heart of any Christian man, because we are
expressly taught in the Word of the Lord only to repose our Faith in the Blessed
Trinity, in whose only Name we are also Baptized, according to the express
Commandment of our Savior Jesus Christ, Mat. 28.
in the last of St. Matthew.

But that the truth hereof may the better appear, even to them that be most
simple and unlearned, let us consider what Prayer is. De spi. and lit. cap. 50.
De summo bono, cap. 8. lib. 3.
St. Augustine calls it a lifting up of the mind to God; that is to say, an
humble and lowly pouring out of the Heart to God. Isidorus says, that it is an
affection of the Heart, and not a labor of the Lips. So that by these places,
true Prayer does consist not so much in the outward sound and voice of words,
as in the inward groaning and crying of the Heart to God.

Now then, is there any Angel, any Virgin, any Patriarch or Prophet among the
dead, that can understand, or know the meaning of the Heart? The Scripture
says, Psalm. 7. Apoc. 2. Jer. 17. 2 Par. 6.
It is God that searches the Heart and the Reins, and that he only knows the
Hearts of the children of men. As for the Saints, they have so little knowledge
of the secrets of the Heart, that many of the ancient Fathers greatly doubt
whether they know any thing at all, that is commonly done on Earth. And albeit
some think they do, yet St. Augustine, Lib. de cura pro mort. agenda, c. 13. De
vera R^l. cap. 22. Esaias 63. Lib. 22. de civit. Dei, cap. 10.
a Doctor of great Authority and also Antiquity, has this Opinion of them;
That they know no more what we do on Earth, than we know what they do in
Heaven. For Proof whereof, he alleges the words of Esaias the Prophet, where it
is said, Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not. His mind
therefore is this, not that we should put any Religion in worshipping of them,
or praying unto them; but that we should honor them by following their
virtuous and godly Life. For as he witnesses in another place, the Martyrs,
and Holy Men in times past, were wont after their death to be remembered and
named of the Priest at Divine Service: but never to be invocated or called
upon. And why so? because the Priest (says he) is Gods Priest, and not theirs:
whereby he is bound to call upon God, and not upon them.

John 5.
Thus you see, that the Authority both of the Scripture, and also of Augustine,
does not permit, that we should pray unto them. O that all men would studiously
read and search the Scriptures, then should they not be drowned in Ignorance,
but should easily perceive the Truth, as well of this Point of Doctrine, as of
all the rest. For there does the Holy Ghost plainly teach us, that Christ is
our only Mediator and Intercessor with God, and that we must not seek and run
to another. 1 John 2.
If any man sins, says St. John, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our sins. 1 Timothy 2.
St. Paul also says, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man,
even the man Jesus Christ. Whereunto agrees the Testimony of our Savior
himself, John 14.
witnessing that no man comes to the Father, but only by him, who is the Way,
John 10.
the Truth, the Life, yea, and the only Door whereby we must enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, because God is pleased in no other but in him. For which
cause also he cries, and calls unto us that we should come unto him, Matt.
11.
saying, Come unto me all ye that labor and be heavy laden, and I shall
refresh you. Would Christ have us so necessarily come unto him? and shall we
most unthankfully leave him, and run unto other? This is even that which God so
greatly complains of by his Prophet Jeremy, saying, My People have committed
two great offenses, they have forsaken me the Fountain of the Waters of Life,
and have dug to themselves broken Pits, that can hold no Water. Is not that
man, think you, unwise that will run for Water to a little Brook, when he may
as well go to the head-spring? Even so may his Wisdom be justly suspected, that
will flee unto Saints in time of necessity, when he may boldly and without fear
declare his grief, and direct his Prayer unto the Lord himself. If God were
strange, or dangerous to be talked withal, then might we justly draw back and
seek to some other. Psalm. 145. Judith 9.
But the Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him in Faith and Truth. And
the Prayer of the humble and meek has always pleased him. What if we be
sinners, shall we not therefore pray unto God? or shall we despair to obtain
any thing at his hands? Why did Christ then teach us to ask forgiveness of our
sins, saying, And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us? Shall we think that the Saints are more merciful in hearing
sinners, than God? David says, Psalm. 103. Ephesians. 2.
that the Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great
kindness. St. Paul says, that he is rich in mercy toward all them that call
upon him. And he himself, by the mouth of his Prophet Esaias, says, Esaias 51.
For a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I
gather thee: For a moment in mine anger I have hid my face from thee, but with
everlasting mercy I have had compassion upon thee. Therefore the sins of any
man ought not to withhold him from Praying unto the Lord his God. But if he be
truly penitent and steadfast in Faith, let him assure himself that the Lord will
be merciful unto him, and hear his Prayers. O but I dare not (will some man
say) trouble God at all times with my Prayers: We see that in Kings Houses, and
Courts of Princes, men cannot be admitted, unless they first use the help and
means of some special Nobleman, to come to the speech of the King, and to
obtain the thing that they would have. To this reason does St. Ambrose answer
very well, Ambros. supper cap. 1 Romans
writing upon the first Chapter to the Romans. Therefore (says he) we use to
go unto the King by Officers and Noblemen, because the King is a Mortal man,
and knows not to whom he may commit the Government of the Commonwealth. But
to have God our Friend, from whom nothing is hid, we need not any helper, that
should further us with his good word, but only a devout and godly mind. And if
it be so, that we need one to entreat for us, why may we not content our selves
with that one Mediator, Heb. 7.
which is at the right hand of God the Father, and there lives for ever to
make Intercession for us? As the Blood of Christ did Redeem us on the Cross,
and cleanse us from our sins; even so it is now able to save all them that come
unto God by it. For Christ sitting in Heaven, has an everlasting Priesthood,
and always prays to his Father for them that be Penitent, obtaining by virtue
of his Wounds, which are evermore in the sight of God, not only perfect
remission of our sins, but also all other necessaries that we lack in this
World; so that this only Mediator is sufficient in Heaven, and needs no
others to help him. Matt. 6. James 5. Coloss. 4. 1 Timothy 2.
Why then do we Pray one for another in this Life, some man perchance will here
demand? Forsooth, we are willed so to do, by the express Commandment both of
Christ and his Disciples, to declare therein as well the Faith that we have in
Christ toward God, as also the mutual Charity that we bear one toward
another, in that we pity our Brothers case, and make our Humble Petition to God
for him. But that we should Pray unto Saints, neither have we any Commandment
in all the Scripture, nor yet Example which we may safely follow. So that being
done without Authority of Gods Word, it lacks the ground of Faith, and
therefore cannot be acceptable before God. Hebr. 11. Romans 14. Romans 10.
For whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. And the Apostle says, that Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Yet thou will object
further, that the Saints in Heaven do pray for us, and that their Prayer
proceeds of an earnest Charity that they have toward their Brethren on
Earth. Whereto it may be well answered; First, that no man knows whether they
do Pray for us, or no. And if any will go about to prove it by the nature of
Charity, concluding, that because they did pray for men on Earth, therefore
they do much more the same now in Heaven. Then may it be said by the same
reason, that as often as we do weep on Earth, they do also weep in Heaven,
because while they lived in this World, it is most certain and sure they did
so. And for that place which is written in the Apocalypse, namely, that the
Angel did offer up the Prayers of the Saints upon the golden Altar: it is
properly to be understood of those Saints that are yet living on Earth, and not
of them that are dead, otherwise what need were it that the Angel should offer
up their Prayers, being now in Heaven before the face of Almighty God? But
admit the Saints do Pray for us, yet do we not know how, whether specially for
them which call upon them, or else generally for all men, wishing well to every
man alike. If they Pray specially for them which call upon them, then it is
like they hear our Prayers, and also know our hearts desire. Which thing to be
false, it is already proved, both by the Scriptures, and also by the Authority
of Augustine. Let us not therefore put our trust or confidence in the Saints or
Martyrs that be dead. Let us not call upon them, nor desire help at their
hands: but let us always lift up our Hearts to God, in the name of his dear Son
Christ, for whose sake as God has promised to hear our Prayer, so he will
truly perform it. Invocation is a thing proper unto God, which if we attribute
unto the Saints, it sounds to their reproach, neither can they well bear it
at our hands. When Paul had healed a certain lame man, Acts 14.
which was impotent in his Feet at Lystra, the People would have done Sacrifice
unto him and Barnabas; who rending their clothes, refused it, and exhorted them
to worship the true God. Likewise in the Revelation, Apoc. 19.
when St. John fell before the Angel's feet to worship him, the Angel would not
permit him to do it, but commanded him that he should worship God. Which
Examples declare unto us, that the Saints and Angels in Heaven will not have us
to do any Honor unto them, that is due and proper unto God. He only is our
Father, he only is Omnipotent, he only knows and understands all things, he
only can help us at all times, and in all places, he suffers the Sun to shine
upon the good and the bad, he feeds the young Ravens that cry unto him, he
saves both Man and Beast, he will not that any one hair of our Head shall
perish; but is always ready to help and preserve all them that put their trust
in him, according as he has promised, Isai 65.
saying, Before they call, I will answer, and whilst they speak, I will hear.
Let us not therefore any thing mistrust his goodness, let us not fear to come
before the Throne of his Mercy, let us not seek the aid and help of Saints, but
let us come boldly our selves, nothing doubting but God for Christ's sake, in
whom he is well pleased, will hear us without a Spokes-man, and accomplish our
desire in all such things as shall be agreeable to his most Holy Will.
Chrysostom. 6 hom. de profectu. Evang.
So says Chrysostom, an ancient Doctor of the Church, and so must we
steadfastly believe, not because he says it, but much more because it is the
Doctrine of our Savior Christ himself, who has promised, that if we Pray to
the Father in his name, we shall certainly be heard, both to the relief of our
Necessities, and also to the Salvation of our Souls, which he has purchased
unto us, not with Gold or Silver, but with his precious Blood, shed once for
all upon the Cross.

To him therefore, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three Persons and one
God, be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Third Part of the Homily concerning PRAYER.
YE were taught in the other part of this Sermon, unto whom ye ought to direct
your Prayers in time of need and necessity, that is to wit, not unto Angels or
Saints, but unto the eternal and everliving God, who because he is merciful, is
always ready to hear us when we call upon him in true and perfect Faith. And
because he is Omnipotent, he can easily perform, and bring to pass the thing
that we request to have at his hands. To doubt of his Power, it were a plain
point of Infidelity, and clean against the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost, which
teaches us that he is all in all. And as touching his good will in this
behalf, we have express Testimonies in Scripture, Psalm. 50.
how that he will help us, and also deliver us, if we call upon him in time of
trouble. So that in both these respects, we ought rather to call upon him than
upon any other. Neither ought any man therefore to doubt to come boldly unto
God, because he is a sinner. For the Lord (as the Prophet David says) is
gracious and merciful, yea, Psalm. 107. 1 Timothy 1.
his mercy and goodness endures for ever. He that sent his own Son into the
World to save sinners, will he not also hear sinners, if with a true penitent
Heart and a steadfast Faith they Pray unto him? Yea, 1 John 1.
if we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, as we are plainly taught by the
Examples of David, Peter, Mary Magdalen, the Publican, and diverse others. And
whereas we must needs use the help of some Mediator and Intercessor, let us
content our selves with him that is the true and only Mediator of the New
Testament, namely, the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For as St. John says, If
any man sin, 1 John 2.
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the
Propitiation for our sins. And St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.
in his first Epistle to Timothy, says, There is one God, and one Mediator
between God and man, even the man Jesus Christ, who gave himself a ransom for
all men, to be a testimony in due time.

Now after this Doctrine established, you shall be instructed for what kind of
things, and what kind of persons ye ought to make your Prayers unto God. It
greatly behooves all men, when they Pray, to consider well and diligently with
themselves what they ask and require at Gods hands, lest if they desire that
thing which they ought not, their Petitions be made void, and of none effect.
There came on a time unto Agesilaus the King, a certain importunate suitor, who
requested him in a matter earnestly, saying, Sir, and it please your Grace, you
did once promise me. Truth, quoth the King, if it be just that thou requirest,
then I promised thee, otherwise I did only speak it, and not promise it. The
man would not be so answered at the King's hand, but still urging him more and
more, said, It becomes a King to perform the least word he has spoken, yea,
if he should only beck with his Head. No more, says the King, than it behooves
one that comes to a King, to speak and ask those things which are rightful and
honest. Thus the King cast off this unreasonable and importunate suitor.

Now, if so great consideration be to be had, when we kneel before an Earthly
King, how much more ought to be had, when we kneel before the Heavenly King,
who is only delighted with Justice and Equity, neither will admit any vain,
foolish, or unjust Petition? Therefore it shall be good and profitable,
thoroughly to consider and determine with our selves, what things we may
lawfully ask of God, without fear of repulse, and also what kind of Persons we
are bound to commend unto God in our daily Prayers. Two things are chiefly to
be respected in every good and godly man's Prayer: His own necessity, and the
glory of Almighty God. Necessity belongs either outwardly to the Body, or
else inwardly to the Soul. Which part of man, because it is much more precious
and excellent than the other, therefore we ought first of all, to crave such
things as properly belong to the salvation thereof: as the gift of Repentance,
the gift of Faith, the gift of Charity and Good Works, Remission and
Forgiveness of Sins, Patience in Adversity, Lowliness in Prosperity, Gal. 5.
and such other like fruits of the Spirit; as Hope, Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, and Temperance; which things
God requires of all them that profess themselves to be his Children, saying
unto them in this wise, Matt. 5.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. And in another place also he says,
Matt. 6.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and then all other
things shall be given unto you. Wherein he puts us in mind, that our chief
and greatest care ought to be for those things which pertain to the health and
safeguard of the Soul, Hebr. 13.
because we have here (as the Apostle says) no continuing City, but we seek
after another in the World to come.

Now, when we have sufficiently prayed for things belonging to the Soul, then
may we lawfully, and with safe Conscience, Pray also for our bodily
Necessities; as Meat, Drink, Clothing, Health of Body, deliverance out of
Prison, good luck in our daily Affairs, and so forth, according as we shall
have need. Whereof, Matt. 6. Luke 11.
what better Example can we desire to have, than of Christ himself, who taught
his Disciples, and all other Christian men, first to pray for Heavenly things,
and afterward for Earthly things, as is to be seen in that Prayer which he left
unto his Church, commonly called the Lords Prayer? In the third Book of Kings,
and third Chapter, it is written, That God appeared by night in a dream unto
Solomon the King, saying, Ask of me whatsoever thou will, and I will give it
thee. Solomon made his Humble Prayer, and asked a wise and prudent Heart, that
might judge and understand what were good, and what were ill; what were godly,
and what were ungodly; what were righteous, and what were unrighteous in the
sight of the Lord. It pleased God wondrously, that he had asked this thing, And
God said unto him, Because thou have requested this word, and have not desired
many days, and long years upon the Earth, neither abundance of Riches and
Goods, nor yet the life of thine Enemies which hate thee, but have desired
Wisdom to sit in Judgment; behold, I have done unto thee according to thy
words; I have given thee a wise heart, full of knowledge and understanding, so
that there was never any like thee before time, neither shall be in time to
come. Moreover, I have besides this, given thee that which thou have not
required, namely, worldly wealth and riches, Princely honor and glory, so that
thou shall therein also pass all Kings that ever were. Note this Example, how
Solomon being put to his choice to ask of God whatsoever he would, requested
not vain and transitory things, but the high and Heavenly Treasures of Wisdom;
and that in so doing, he obtains as it were in recompense, both Riches and
Honor. Wherein is given us to understand, that in our daily Prayers, we should
chiefly and principally ask those things which concern the Kingdom of God, and
the Salvation of our own Souls, nothing doubting but all other things shall
(according to the promise of Christ) be given unto us. But here we must take
heed that we forget not that other end whereof mention was made before, namely,
the Glory of God. Which unless we mind, and set before our Eyes in making our
Prayers, we may not look to be heard, or to receive any thing of the Lord. In
the xx. Chapter of Matthew, the Mother of the two Sons of Zebedee came unto
Jesus, worshipping him, and saying, Grant that my two Sons may sit in thy
Kingdom, the one on thy right hand, and the other at thy left hand. In this
Petition she did not respect the Glory of God, but plainly declared the
ambition and vainglory of her own mind, for which cause she was also most
worthily repelled, and rebuked at the Lords hand. In like manner we read in the
Acts, of one Simon Magus, Acts 8.
a Sorcerer, how that he perceiving that through laying on of the Apostles
hands the Holy Ghost was given, offered them money, saying, Give me also this
power, that on whomsoever I lay my hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost. In
making this Request, he sought not the Honor and Glory of God, but his own
private Gain and Lucre, thinking to get great store of Money by this feat, and
therefore it was justly said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou
think that the gift of God may be obtained with money. By these and such
other Examples we are taught, whenever we make our Prayers unto God, chiefly
to respect the Honor and Glory of his Name. Whereof we have this general
Precept in the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 10. Coloss. 3. Mat. 26. Luke 22.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, look that ye do it to the glory
of God. Which thing we shall best of all do, if we follow the example of our
Savior Christ, who praying that the bitter Cup of Death might pass from him,
would not therein have his own will fulfilled, but referred the whole matter to
the good will and pleasure of his Father.

And hitherto concerning those things, that we may lawfully and boldly ask of
God.

Now it follows, that we declare what kind of Persons we are bound in
Conscience to pray for. St. Paul writing to Timothy, 1 Timothy ^
exhorts him to make Prayers and Supplications for all men, exempting none,
of what degree or state soever they be. In which place he makes mention by
name of Kings and Rulers which are in Authority, putting us thereby to
acknowledge how greatly it concerns the profit of the Commonwealth, to pray
diligently for the Higher Powers. Neither is it without good cause, that he
does so often in all his Epistles crave the Prayers of Gods People for himself.
Colos. 4. Romans 15. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
For in so doing, he declares to the World how expedient and needful it is
daily to call upon God for the Ministers of his Holy Word and Sacraments, that
they may have the door of utterance oppened unto them, Ephesians. 6.
that they may truly understand the Scriptures, that they may effectually
Preach the same unto the People, and bring forth the true Fruits thereof, to
the Example of all other.

After this sort did the Congregation continually Pray for Peter at Jerusalem,
Acts 12.
and for Paul among the Gentiles, to the great increase and furtherance of
Christ's Gospel. And if we, following their good Example herein, will study to
do the like, doubtless it cannot be expressed how greatly we shall both help
our selves, and also please God.

To discourse and run through all degrees of Persons it were too long.
Therefore ye shall briefly take this one conclusion for all; Whomsoever we are
bound by express Commandment to love, for those also are we bound in Conscience
to pray. But we are bound by express Commandment to love all men as our selves:
therefore we are also bound to Pray for all men, even as well as if it were for
our selves, notwithstanding we know them to be our extreme and deadly Enemies:
For so does our Savior Christ plainly teach us in his Gospel, saying, Love
your enemies, Matt. 5.
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them that
persecute you, that ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven.
And as he taught his Disciples, so did he practice himself in his lifetime,
Luke 23.
praying for his Enemies upon the Cross, and desiring his Father to forgive
them, because they knew not what they did. As did also that Holy and blessed
Martyr Stephen, Acts 7.
when he was cruelly stoned to death of the stubborn and stiff-necked Jews; to
the example of all them that will truly and unfeignedly follow their Lord and
Master Christ in this miserable and mortal life.

Now, to entreat of that Question, whether we ought to pray for them that are
departed out of this World, or no? Wherein, if we will cleave only unto the
Word of God, then must we needs grant, that we have no Commandment so to do.
For the Scripture does acknowledge but two places after this life. The one
proper to the Elect and Blessed of God, the other to the Reprobate and Damned
Souls, as may be well gathered by the Parable of Lazarus and the Rich man: Luke
16. Lib. 2. Evang. quaest. 1. cap. 38.
which place St. Augustine expounding, says in this wise; That which Abraham
speaks unto the Rich man in Lukes Gospel, namely, that the Just cannot go
into those places where the Wicked are tormented: what other thing does it
signify, but only this, that the just, by reason of Gods Judgment, which may
not be revoked, can show no deed of Mercy in helping them which after this life
are cast into Prison, until they pay the uttermost farthing? These words, as
they confound the Opinion of helping the dead by Prayer, so they do clean
confute and take away the vain Error of Purgatory, which is grounded upon the
saying of the Gospel, Thou shall not depart thence, until thou have paid the
uttermost farthing. Now does St. Augustine say, that those men which are cast
into Prison after this life, on that condition, may in no wise be helped,
though we would help them never so much. And why? Because the Sentence of God
is unchangeable, and cannot be revoked again. Therefore let us not deceive our
selves, thinking that either we may help other, or other may help us by their
good and charitable Prayers in time to come. For as the Preacher says, When
the tree falls, whether it be toward the South, Eccles. 11.
or toward the North, in what place soever the tree falls, there it lies:
meaning thereby, that every mortal man dies either in the state of Salvation
or Damnation, according as the words of the Evangelist John do also plainly
import, saying, John 3.
He that believes on the Son of God, has eternal life: But he that believes
not on the Son, shall never see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him.
Where is then the third place, which they call Purgatory? or where shall our
Prayers help and profit the dead? Lib. 5. Hypogno. Chrysostom. in Heb. 2. Homil.
5. in Cyprian. contra Demetrianum.
St. Augustine does only acknowledge two places after this life, Heaven and
Hell. As for the third place, he does plainly deny that there is any such to be
found in all Scripture. Chrysostom likewise is of this mind, that unless we
wash away our sins in this present World, we shall find no comfort afterward.
And St. Cyprian says, that after death, Repentance and Sorrow of pain shall be
without fruit, Weeping also shall be in vain, and Prayer shall be to no
purpose. Therefore he counsels all men to make provision for themselves
while they may, because when they are once departed out of this life, there is
no place for Repentance, nor yet for satisfaction.

Let these and such other places be sufficient to take away the gross Error of
Purgatory out of our Heads, neither let us dream any more, that the Souls of
the dead are any thing at all helped by our Prayers: But as the Scripture
teaches us, let us think that the Soul of man passing out of the Body, goes
straightways either to Heaven, or else to Hell, whereof the one needs no
Prayer, the other is without Redemption. The only Purgatory wherein we must
trust to be saved, is the death and blood of Christ, which if we apprehend with
a true and steadfast Faith, it purges and cleanses us from all our sins, even
as well as if he were now hanging upon the Cross. The blood of Christ, 1 John
1. Heb. 9.
says St. John, has cleansed us from all sin. The blood of Christ, says St.
Paul, has purged our Consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.
Heb. 10.
Also in another place he says, We be sanctified and made holy by the offering
up of the body of Jesus Christ done once for all. Yea, he adds more, bidem.
saying, With the one oblation of his blessed Body and precious Blood, he has
made perfect for ever and ever, all them that are sanctified. This then is that
Purgatory, wherein all Christian men put their whole trust and confidence,
nothing doubting, but if they truly repent them of their sins, and die in
perfect Faith, that then they shall forthwith pass from death to life. If this
kind of purgation will not serve them, let them never hope to be released by
other men's Prayers, though they should continue therein unto the Worlds end. He
that cannot be saved by Faith in Christ's Blood, how shall he look to be
delivered by man's Intercessions? Has God more respect to man on Earth, than he
has to Christ in Heaven? 1 John 2.
If any man sin (says St. John) we have an Advocate with the Father, even
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. But we
must take heed that we call upon this Advocate while we have space given us in
this life, lest when we are once dead, there be no hope of Salvation left unto
us. For as every man sleeps with his own cause, so every man shall rise again
with his own cause. And look in what state he dies, in the same state he shall
be also judged, whether it be to Salvation or Damnation. Let us not therefore
dream either of Purgatory, or of Prayer for the Souls of them that be dead: but
let us earnestly and diligently pray for them which are expressly commanded in
Holy Scripture, namely, for Kings and Rulers, for Ministers of Gods Holy Word
and Sacraments, for the Saints of this World, otherwise called the Faithful: to
be short, for all men living, be they never so great Enemies to God and his
People, as Jews, Turks, Pagans, Infidels, Heretics, etc. Then shall we truly
fulfill the Commandment of God in that behalf, and plainly declare our selves to
be the true Children of our Heavenly Father, who suffers the Sun to shine
upon the good and the bad, and the rain to fall upon the just and the unjust.
For which, and all other benefits most abundantly bestowed upon mankind from
the beginning, let us give him hearty thanks, as we are most bound, and praise
his Name for ever and ever. Amen.

AN HOMILY OF THE Place and Time OF PRAYER.
GOD through his Almighty Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, created in the beginning
Heaven and Earth, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Fowls of the Air, the
Beasts of the Earth, the Fishes in the Sea, and all other Creatures, for the
use and commodity of Man, whom also he had created to his own image and
likeness, and given him the use and government over them all; to the end he
should use them in such sort as he had given him in charge and commandment; and
also that he should declare himself thankful and kind for all those benefits,
so liberally, and so graciously bestowed upon him, utterly without any
deserving on his behalf. And although we ought at all times, and in all places
to have in remembrance, and to be thankful to our gracious Lord, according as
it is written, Psalm. 103.
I will magnify the Lord at all times. And again, Wheresoever the Lord bears
rule, O my Soul praise the Lord: Yet it appears to be Gods good will and
pleasure, that we should at special times, and in special places, gather our
selves together, to the intent his Name might be renowned, and his glory set
forth in the Congregation and Assembly of his Saints. As concerning the time
which Almighty God has appointed his People to assemble together solemnly, it
does appear by the fourth Commandment of God: Remember, says God, that thou
keep holy the Sabbath Day. Upon the which day, as is plain in the Acts of the
Apostles, Acts 13.
the People accustomably resorted together, and heard diligently the Law and
the Prophets read among them. And albeit this Commandment of God does not bind
Christian People so straightly to observe and keep the utter Ceremonies of the
Sabbath day, as it was given unto the Jews, as touching the forbearing of work
and labor in time of great necessity, and as touching the precise keeping of
the Seventh day, after the manner of the Jews. For we keep now the First day,
which is our Sunday, and make that our Sabbath, that is, our day of Rest, in
the honor of our Savior Christ, who as upon that day rose from death,
conquering the same most triumphantly: Yet notwithstanding, whatsoever is found
in the Commandment appertaining to the Law of Nature, as a thing most godly,
most just, and needful for the setting forth of Gods glory, it ought to be
retained and kept of all good Christian People. And therefore by this
Commandment, we ought to have a time, as one day in the Week, wherein we ought
to rest, yea, from our lawful and needful works. For like as it appears by
this Commandment, that no man in the six days ought to be slothful or idle, but
diligently to labor in that state wherein God has set him: Even so, God has
given express charge to all men, that upon the Sabbath day, which is now our
Sunday, they should cease from all weekly and work-day labor, to the intent
that like as God himself wrought six days, and rested the seventh, and blessed,
and sanctified it, and consecrated it to quietness and rest from labor: even
so Gods obedient People should use the Sunday holily, and rest from their
common and daily business, and also give themselves wholly to Heavenly
Exercises of Gods true Religion and Service. So that God does not only command
the observation of this Holy Day, but also by his own example does stir and
provoke us to the diligent keeping of the same. Good natural Children will not
only become obedient to the Commandment of their Parents, but also have a
diligent Eye to their doings, and gladly follow the same. So if we will be the
Children of our Heavenly Father, we must be careful to keep the Christian
Sabbath day, which is the Sunday, not only for that it is Gods express
Commandment, but also to declare our selves to be loving Children, in following
the example of our gracious Lord and Father.

Thus it may plainly appear, that Gods Will and Commandment was to have a
solemn time and standing day in the Week, wherein the People should come
together and have in remembrance his wonderful benefits, and to render him
thanks for them, as appertains to loving, kind, and obedient People. This
Example and Commandment of God, the godly Christian People began to follow
immediately after the Ascension of our Lord Christ, and began to choose them a
standing day of the Week to come together in: Yet not the seventh day, which
the Jews kept; but the Lords day, the day of the Lords Resurrection, the day
after the seventh day, which is the first day of the Week. Of the which day
mention is made by St. Paul on this wise. 1 Cor. 16.
In the first day of the Sabbath, let every man lay up what he thinks good;
meaning for the Poor. By the first day of the Sabbath, is meant our Sunday,
which is the first day after the Jews seventh day. And in the Apocalypse it is
more plain, whereas St. John says, I was in the Spirit upon the Lords day.
Apoc. 1.
Sithence which time Gods People has always, in all Ages, without any
gainsaying, used to come together upon the Sunday, Numb. 15.
to celebrate and honor the Lords blessed Name, and carefully to keep that day
in Holy rest and quietness, both Man, Woman, Child, Servant, and Stranger. For
the transgression and breach of which day, God has declared himself much to be
grieved, as it may appear by him, who for gathering of sticks on the Sabbath
day, was stoned to death. But alas, all these notwithstanding, it is lamentable
to see the wicked boldness of those that will be counted Gods People, who pass
nothing at all of keeping and hallowing the Sunday. And these People are of two
sorts. The one sort, if they have any business to do, though there be no
extreme need, they must not spare for the Sunday, they must ride and journey on
the Sunday, they must drive and carry on the Sunday; they must row and ferry on
the Sunday, they must buy and sell on the Sunday, they must keep Markets and
Fairs on the Sunday: finally, they use all days alike, Work-days and Holy Days
all are one. The other sort is worse. For although they will not Travel nor
Labor on the Sunday as they do on the Weekday, yet they will not rest in
Holiness, as God commands; but they rest in ungodliness and filthiness,
prancing in their Pride, pranking and pricking, pointing and painting
themselves to be gorgeous and gay: they rest in excess and superfluity, in
gluttony and drunkenness, like Rats and Swine: they rest in brawling and
railing, in quarrelling and fighting: they rest in wantonness, in toyish
talking, in filthy fleshliness, so that it does too evidently appear that God
is more dishonored, and the Devil better served on the Sunday than upon all
the days in the Week besides And I assure you, the Beasts which are commanded
to rest on the Sunday, honor God better than this kind of People: For they
offend not God, they break not their Holydays. Wherefore, O ye People of God,
lay your hands upon your hearts, repent and amend this grievous and dangerous
wickedness, stand in awe of the Commandment of God, gladly follow the example
of God himself, be not disobedient to the godly Order of Christ's Church, used
and kept from the Apostles time until this day. Fear the displeasure and just
Plagues of Almighty God, if ye be negligent and forbear not laboring and
traveling on the Sabbath day or Sunday, and do not resort together to
celebrate and magnify Gods blessed Name, in quiet Holiness and godly Reverence.

Now concerning the Place where the People of God ought to resort together, and
where especially they ought to celebrate and sanctify the Sabbath day, that
is, the Sunday, the day of Holy Rest. That Place is called Gods Temple, or the
Church, because the Company and Congregation of Gods People (which is properly
called the Church) does there assemble themselves on the days appointed for
such Assemblies and Meetings. And forasmuch as Almighty God has appointed a
special time to be honored in, it is very meet, godly, and also necessary that
there should be a Place appointed where these People should meet and resort, to
serve their gracious God and merciful Father. Truth it is, the Holy Patriarchs,
for a great number of years, had neither Temple nor Church to resort unto. The
cause was, they were not staid in any place, but were in a continual
peregrination and wandering, that they could not conveniently build any Church.
But so soon as God had delivered his People from their Enemies, and set them in
some liberty in the Wilderness, he set them up a costly and a curious
Tabernacle, which was as it were the Parish Church, a place to resort unto of
the whole multitude, a place to have his Sacrifices made in, and other
Observances and Rites to be used in. Furthermore, after that God, according to
the truth of his Promise, had placed and quietly settled his People in the Land
of Canaan, now called Jury, he commanded a great and magnificent Temple to be
built by King Solomon, as seldom the like has been seen: a Temple so decked
and adorned, so gorgeously garnished, as was meet and expedient for People of
that time, which would be allured and stirred with nothing so much, as with
such outward goodly gay things. This was now the Temple of God, endued also
with many gifts and sundry promises. This was the public Church, and the
Mother Church of all Jury. Here was God honored and served. Hither was the
whole Realm of all the Israelites bound to come at three Solemn Feasts in the
Year, to serve their Lord God here. But let us proceed further. In the time of
Christ and his Apostles, there were yet no Temples nor Churches for Christian
men. For why? they were always for the most part in persecution, vexation, and
trouble, so that there could be no liberty nor license obtained for that
purpose. Yet God delighted much that they should often resort together in a
place, and therefore after his ascension they remained together, in an Upper
Chamber, sometime they entered into the Temple, sometime into the Synagogues,
sometimes they were in Prison, sometimes in their Houses, sometimes in the
Fields, etc. And this continued so long till the Faith of Christ Jesus began to
multiply in a great part of the World. Now, when diverse Realms were established
in Gods true Religion, and God had given them peace and quietness, then began
Kings, Noblemen, and the People also, stirred up with a godly zeal and
ferventness, to build up Temples and Churches, whither the People might resort,
the better to do their Duty toward God, and to keep Holy their Sabbath day,
the day of Rest. And to these Temples have the Christians customably used to
resort from time to time, as unto meet places where they might with common
consent praise and magnify Gods name, yielding him thanks for the benefits
that he daily pours upon them, both mercifully and abundantly, where they
might also hear his Holy Word read, expounded, and preached sincerely; and
receive his Holy Sacraments ministered unto them duly and purely. True it is,
that the chief and special Temples of God, wherein he has greatest pleasure,
and most delights to dwell, are the bodies and minds of true Christians, and
the chosen People of God, according to the Doctrine of Holy Scriptures,
declared by St. Paul. Know ye not (says he) that ye be the Temple of God, 1
Cor. 3.
and that the Spirit of God does dwell in you? The Temple of God is Holy, which
ye are. And again in the same Epistle, 1 Cor. 6.
Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost dwelling in you,
whom you have given you of God, and that ye be not your own? Yet this
notwithstanding, God does allow the material Temple made with Lime and Stone
(so often as his People come together into it, to praise his Holy Name) to be his
House, and the place where he has promised to be present, and where he will
hear the Prayers of them that call upon him. The which thing both Christ and
his Apostles, with all the rest of the Holy Fathers, do sufficiently declare by
this: That albeit they certainly knew that their Prayers were heard in what
place soever they made them, though it were in Caves, in Woods, and in Deserts,
yet (so often as they could conveniently) they resorted to the material Temples,
there with the rest of the Congregation, to join in Prayer and true Worship.

Wherefore (dearly beloved) you that profess your selves to be Christians, and
glory in that name, disdain not to follow the example of your Master Christ,
whose Scholars you say you be, show you to be like them whose School-mates you
take upon you to be; that is, the Apostles and Disciples of Christ. Lift up
pure hands, with clean hearts, in all places, and at all times. But do the same
in the Temples and Churches upon the Sabbath days also. Our godly Predecessors,
and the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, spared not their Goods to
build Churches; no, they spared not their Lives in time of Persecution, and to
hazard their Blood, that they might assemble themselves together in Churches.
And shall we spare a little labor to come to Churches? Shall neither their
Example, nor our Duty, nor the Commodities (that thereby should come unto us)
move us? If we will declare our selves to have the fear of God, if we will show
our selves true Christians, if we will be the followers of Christ our Master,
and of those godly Fathers that have lived before us, and now have received the
Reward of true and faithful Christians, we must both willingly, earnestly, and
reverently come unto the material Churches and Temples to Pray, as unto fit
places appointed for that use, and that upon the Sabbath day, as at most
convenient time for Gods People, to cease from bodily and worldly business, to
give themselves to Holy Rest, and Godly Contemplation pertaining to the Service
of Almighty God: Whereby we may reconcile our selves to God, be partakers of
his Holy Sacraments, and be devout hearers of his Holy Word, so to be
established in Faith to Godward, in Hope against all Adversity, and in Charity
toward our Neighbors. And thus running our course as good Christian People, we
may at the last attain the Reward of everlasting Glory, through the Merits of
our Savior Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor and Glory. Amen.

The Second Part of the Homily of the Place and Time of PRAYER.
IT has been declared unto you (good Christian People) in the former Sermon
read unto you, at what Time, and into what Place ye shall come together to
praise God. Now I intend to set before your Eyes, First, how zealous and
desirous ye ought to be to come to your Church. Secondly, how sore God is
grieved with them that do despise, or little regard to come to the Church upon
the Holy restful Day. It may well appear by the Scriptures, that many of the
godly Israelites, being now in Captivity for their sins among the Babylonians,
full often wished and desired to be again at Jerusalem. And at their return,
through Gods goodness (though many of the People were negligent) yet the
Fathers were mavelous devout to build up the Temple, that Gods People might
repair thither, to honor him. And King David, when he was a banished man out
of his Country, out of Jerusalem the Holy City, from the Sanctuary, from the
Holy place, and from the Tabernacle of God: What desire, what ferventness was
in him toward that Holy place? what wishings and prayers made he to God to be a
Dweller in the House of the Lord? One thing (says he) have I asked of the
Lord, and this will I still crave, that I may resort and have my dwelling in
the House of the Lord, so long as I live. Again, O how I joyed when I heard
these words? We shall go into the Lords House. Psalm. 122.
And in other places of the Psalms he declares for what intent and purpose he
has such a fervent desire to enter into the Temple and Church of the Lord: I
will fall down (says he) and worship in the holy Temple of the Lord. Again,
Psalm. 63.
I have appeared in thy holy place, that I might behold thy might and power,
that I might behold thy glory and magnificence. Finally, he says, I will show
forth thy name to my brethren, I will praise thee in the midst of the
Congregation. Why then had David such an earnest desire to the House of God?
First, because there he would worship and honor God. Secondly, there he would
have a contemplation and a sight of the Power and Glory of God. Thirdly, there
he would praise the Name of God, with all the Congregation and Company of the
People. These considerations of this blessed Prophet of God ought to stir up,
and kindle in us the like earnest desire to resort to the Church, especially
upon the holy restful days, there to do our Duties, and to serve God, there to
call to remembrance how God, even of his mere mercy, and for the glory of his
Name sake, works mightily to conserve us in Health, Wealth, and Godliness,
and mightily preserves us from the assaults and rages of our fierce and cruel
Enemies, and there joyfully in the number of his faithful People to praise and
magnify the Lords Holy Name.

Set before your Eyes also that Ancient Father Simeon, of whom the Scripture
speaks thus, to his great commendation, and an encouragement for us to do the
like. There was a man at Jerusalem, Luke 2.
named Simeon, a just man, fearing God: he came by the spirit of God into the
Temple, and was told by the same spirit, that he should not die before he saw
the anointed of the Lord. In the Temple his Promise was fulfilled, in the
Temple he saw Christ, and took him in his Arms, in the Temple he brake out into
the mighty praise of God his Lord. Anna a Prophetess, an old Widow, departed
out of the Temple, giving her self to Prayer and Fasting day and night: And she
coming about the same time, was likewise inspired, and confessed, and spoke of
the Lord to all them that looked for the Redemption of Israel. This blessed
Man, and this blessed Woman were not disappointed of wonderful Fruit,
Commodity, and Comfort, which God sent them, by their diligent resorting to
Gods Holy Temple. Now ye shall hear how grievously God has been offended with
his People, for that they passed so little upon his Holy Temple, and foulely
either despised or abused the same. Which thing may plainly appear by the
notable Plagues and Punishments which God has laid upon his People; especially
in this, that he stirred up their Adversaries horribly to beat down, and
utterly to destroy his Holy Temple with a perpetual desolation. Alas, how many
Churches, Countries, and Kingdoms of Christian People, have of late years been
plucked down, and overrun, and left waste, with grievous and intolerable
Tyranny and Cruelty of the Enemy of our Lord Christ, the Great Turk, who has
so universally scourged the Christians, that never the like was heard or read
of? Above thirty years past, the Great Turk had overrun, conquered, and
brought into his Dominion and Subjection, twenty Christian Kingdoms, turning
away the People from the Faith of Christ, poisoning them with the devilish
Religion of wicked Mahomet; and either destroying their Churches utterly, or
filthily abusing them with their wicked and detestable Errors. And now this
Great Turk, this bitter and sharp Scourge of Gods Vengeance, is even at hand in
this part of Christendom, in Europe, at the Borders of Italy, at the Borders of
Germany, greedily gaping to devour us, to overrun our Country, to destroy our
Churches also, unless we repent our sinful life, and resort more diligently to
the Church to honor God, to learn his blessed Will, and to fulfill the same.
The Jews in their time provoked justly the vengeance of God, for that partly
they abused his Holy Temple with the detestable Idolatry of the Heathen, and
superstitious Vanities of their own Inventions, contrary to Gods Commandment,
partly they resorted unto it as Hypocrites, spotted, imbrued, and foulely
defiled with all kind of wickedness and sinful life, partly many of them passed
little upon the Holy Temple, and cared not whether they came thither or no. And
have not the Christians of late days, and even in our days also, in like manner
provoked the displeasure and indignation of Almighty God? partly because they
have profaned and defiled their Churches with Heathenish and Jewish abuses,
with Images and Idols, with numbers of Altars, too too superstitiously and
intolerably abused, with gross abusing and filthy corrupting of the Lords Holy
Supper, the blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood, with an infinite number of
toys and trifles of their own devices, to make a goodly outward show, and to
deface the plain, simple, and sincere Religion of Christ Jesus; partly, they
resort to the Church like Hypocrites, full of all iniquity and sinful life,
having a vain and dangerous fancy and persuasion, that if they come to the
Church, besprinkle them with Holy Water, hear a Mass, and be blessed with the
Chalice, though they understand not one word of the whole Service, nor feel one
motion of Repentance in their Hearts, all is well, all is sure. Fie upon such
mocking and blaspheming of Gods Holy Ordinance. Churches were made for another
purpose, that is, to resort thither, and to serve God truly, there to learn his
blessed Will, there to call upon his mighty Name, there to use the Holy
Sacraments, there to travel how to be in Charity with thy Neighbor, there to
have thy poor and needy Neighbor in remembrance; from thence to depart better
and more godly than thou came thither. Finally, Gods vengeance has been, and
is daily provoked, because much wicked People pass nothing to resort to the
Church, either for that they are so sore blinded, that they understand nothing
of God and godliness, and care not with devilish example to offend their
Neighbors, or else for that they see the Church altogether scoured of such gay
gazing sights, as their gross fantasy was greatly delighted with, because
they see the false Religion abandoned, and the true restored, which seems an
unsavory thing to their unsavory taste; as may appear by this that a Woman
said to her Neighbor: Alas, Gossip, what shall we do at Church, since all the
Saints are taken away, since all the goodly Sights we were wont to have, are
gone; since we cannot hear the like piping, singing, chaunting, and playing
upon the Organs, that we could before. But (Dearly Beloved) we ought greatly to
rejoice and give God thanks, that our Churches are delivered out of all those
things which displeased God so sore, and filthily defiled his Holy House and
his Place of Prayer, for the which he has justly destroyed many Nations,
according to the saying of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.
If any man defile the Temple of God, God will him destroy. And this ought we
greatly to praise God for, that such Superstitious and Idolatrous manners as
were utterly naught, and defaced Gods glory, are utterly abolished, as they
most justly deserved: and yet those things that either God was honored with,
or his People edified, are decently retained, and in our Churches comely
practiced. But now forasmuch (...) ye perceive it is Gods determinate pleasure
ye should resort unto your Churches upon the day of Holy Rest, seeing ye hear
what displeasure God conceives, what Plagues he pours upon his disobedient
People, seeing ye understand what Blessings of God are given, what Heavenly
Commodities come to such People as desirously and zealously use to resort unto
their Churches, seeing also ye are now friendly bidden, and jointly called,
beware that ye slack not your Duty, take heed that you suffer nothing to let
you hereafter to come to the Church at such times as you are ordinarily
appointed and commanded. Our Savior Christ tells in a Parable, that a great
Supper was prepared, Guests were bidden, many excused themselves, and would not
come: I tell you (says Christ) none of them that were called shall taste of my
Supper. This great Supper, is the true Religion of Almighty God, wherewith he
will be worshipped in the due receiving of his Sacraments, and sincere
preaching and hearing of his Holy Word, and practicing the same by godly
conversation. This Feast is now prepared in Gods Banqueting House the Church,
you are thereunto called and jointly bidden; if you refuse to come, and make
your excuses, the same will be answered to you that was unto them. Now come
therefore (Dearly Beloved) without delay, and cheerfully enter into Gods
Feasting-house, and become partakers of the Benefits provided and prepared for
you. But see that ye come thither with your Holy Day Garment, not like
Hypocrites, not of a custom and for manners sake, not with lothsomness, as
though ye had rather not come than come, if ye were at your liberty. For God
hates and punishes such counterfeit Hypocrites, as appears by Christ's
former Parable. My Friend (says God) how came thou in without a
Wedding Garment? And therefore commanded his servants to bind him hand and
foot, and to cast him into utter darkness, where shall be weeping, and wailing,
and gnashing of teeth. To the intent that ye may avoid the like danger at Gods
hand, come to the Church on the Holy Day, and come in your Holy Day Garment;
that is to say, come with a cheerful and a godly Mind, come to seek Gods glory,
and to be thankful unto him, come to be at one with thy Neighbor, and to enter
in Friendship and Charity with him. Consider that all thy doings stink before
the face of God, if thou be not in Charity with thy Neighbor. Come with an
Heart sifted and cleansed from worldly and carnal affections and desires, shake
off all vain thoughts which may hinder thee from Gods true Service. The Bird,
when she will fly, shakes her Wings: Shake and prepare thy self to fly
higher than all the Birds in the Air, that after thy Duty duly done in this
earthly Temple and Church, thou may fly up, and be received into the
glorious Temple of God in Heaven, through Christ Jesus our Lord: To whom, with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Glory and Honor. Amen.

AN HOMILY, Wherein is declared, That Common Prayer and Sacraments ought to be
ministered in a Tongue that is understood of the Hearers.
AMong the manifold Exercises of Gods People (dear Christians) there is none
more necessary for all estates, and at all times, than is public Prayer, and
the due use of Sacraments. For in the first, we beg at Gods hands all such
things, as otherwise we cannot obtain. And in the other, he embraces us, and
offers himself to be embraced of us. Knowing therefore that these two
Exercises are so necessary for us, let us not think it unmeet to consider,
first, what Prayer is, and what a Sacrament is; and then how many sorts of
Prayers there be, and how many Sacraments; so shall we the better understand
how to use them aright. August. de Spiritu and An ma.
To know what they be, St. Augustine teaches us in his Book entitled, Of the
Spirit and the Soul, he says thus of Prayer; Prayer is (says he) the Devotion
of the Mind: that is to say, the returning to God, through a godly and humble
affection, which affection is a certain, willing, and sweet inclining of the
Mind it self toward God. And in the Second Book against the Adversary of the
Law and the Prophets, August. lib. 2 contra Adversari^s Legis and Proph.
August. ad Bonifacium.
he calls Sacraments Holy signs. And writing to Bonifacius of the Baptism of
Infants, he says, If Sacraments had not a certain similitude of those things
whereof they be Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments at all. And of this
similitude they do for the most part receive the self-same things they
signify. By these words of St. Augustine it appears, that he allows the
common description of a Sacrament, which is, that it is a visible sign of an
invisible Grace: that is to say, that sets out to the Eyes and other outward
Senses, the inward working of Gods free Mercy, and does (as it were) seal in
our hearts the promises of God. And so was Circumcision a Sacrament, which
preached unto the outward senses, the inward cutting away of the foreskin of
the Heart, and sealed and made sure in the hearts of the Circumcised to promise
of God touching the promised Seed that they looked for. Now let us see how many
sorts of Prayer, and how many Sacraments there be. In the Scriptures we read of
three sorts of Prayer, whereof two are private, and the third is common. The
first is that which St. Paul speaks of in his Epistle to Timothy, saying, 1 Timothy 1.
I will that men pray in every place, lifting up pure hands, without wrath or
striving. And it is the devout lifting up of the mind to God, without the
uttering of the hearts grief or desire by open voice. Of this Prayer we have
example in the first Book of the Kings, in Anna, 1 Kings 1.
the Mother of Samuel, when in the heaviness of her Heart she prayed in the
Temple, desiring to be made fruitful. She prayed in her heart (says the Text)
but there was no voice heard. After this sort must all Christians pray, not
once in a week, or once in a day only; 1 Thessalonians. 3.
but as St. Paul writes to the Thessalonians, without ceasing. And as St.
James writes, James 5.
The continual Prayer of a just man is of much force. The second sort of Prayer
is spoken of in the Gospel of Matthew, Matt. 6.
where it is said, When thou prayest, enter into thy secret Closet, and when
thou have shut the door to thee, pray unto thy Father in secret, and thy Father
which sees in secret shall reward thee. Of this sort of Prayer there be sundry
examples in the Scriptures, but it shall suffice to rehearse one, which is
written in the Acts of the Apostles.

Acts 10.
Cornelius, a devout man, a Captain of the Italian Army, says to Peter, that
being in his House in Prayer at the ninth hour, there appeared to him one in a
white Garment, etc. This man prayed unto God in secret, and was rewarded
openly. These be the two private sorts of Prayer. The one mental, that is to
say, the devout lifting up of the mind to God: And the other vocal, that is to
say, the secret uttering of the griefs and desires of the Heart with words, but
yet in a secret Closet, or some solitary place. The third sort of Prayer is
public or common. Of this Prayer speaks our Savior Christ, Mat. 18.
when he says, If two of you shall agree upon Earth upon any thing, whatsoever
ye shall ask, my Father which is in Heaven shall do it for you, for wheresoever
two or three be gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
Although God has promised to hear us when we pray privately, so it be done
faithfully and devoutly (for he says, Psalm. 50.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear thee. And Elias being
but a mortal man, James 5.
says St. James, prayed, and Heaven was shut three Years and six Months; and
again he pray^d, and the Heaven gave rain:) Yet by the Histories of the Bible
it appears, that public and common Prayer is most available before God, and
therefore is much to be lamented that it is no better esteemed among us which
profess to be but one body in Christ. When the City of Niniveh was threatened to
be destroyed Jonas 3.
within forty days, the Prince and the People joined themselves together in
public Prayer and Fasting, and were preserved. In the Prophet Joel, God
commanded a Fasting to be proclaimed, Joel 2.
and the People to be gathered together, young and old, man and woman, and are
taught to say with one voice, Spare us, O Lord, spare thy People, and let not
thine Inheritance be brought to confusion. When the Jews should have been
destroyed all in one day, through the malice of Haman, Hester 4.
at the Commandment of Hester, they Fasted and Prayed, and were preserved.
Judith 8.
When Holophernes besieged Bethulia, by the advice of Judith they Fasted and
Prayed, and were delivered. Acts 12.
When Peter was in Prison, the Congregation joined themselves together in
Prayer, and Peter was wonderfully delivered. By these Histories it appears,
that common or public Prayer is of great force to obtain mercy and deliverance
at our Heavenly Fathers hand.

Therefore, Brethren, I beseech you, even for the tender mercies of God, let us
no longer be negligent in this behalf: but as the People willing to receive at
Gods hand such good things as in the Common Prayer of the Church are craved,
let us join our selves together in the Place of Common Prayer, and with one
voice, and one heart, beg at our Heavenly Father all those things which he
knows to be necessary for us. I forbid you not private Prayer, but I exhort
you to esteem Common Prayer as it is worthy. And before all things, be sure
that in all these three sorts of Prayer, your minds be devoutly lifted up to
God, else are your Prayers to no purpose; and this saying shall be verified in
you, This people honors me with their lips, Esaias 29. Matt. 15.
but their heart is far from me. Thus much for the three sorts of Prayer,
whereof we read in the Scriptures. Now with like, or rather more brevity, you
shall hear how many Sacraments there be, that were instituted by our Savior
Christ, and are to be continued, and received of every Christian in due time
and order, and for such purpose as our Savior Christ willed them to be
received. And as for the number of them, if they should be considered according
to the exact signification of a Sacrament, namely, for the visible signs,
expressly commanded in the New Testament, whereunto is annexed the promise of
free forgiveness of our sins, and of our holiness and joining in Christ, there
be but two; namely, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. For although
Absolution has the promise of forgiveness of sin, yet by the express word of
the New Testament, it has not this promise annexed and tied to the visible
sign, which is imposition of hands. For this visible sign (I mean laying on of
hands) is not expressly commanded in the New Testament to be used in Absolution,
as the visible signs in Baptism and the Lords Supper are: and therefore
Absolution is no such Sacrament as Baptism and the Communion are. And though
the ordering of Ministers has this visible sign and promise, yet it lacks the
promise of remission of sin, as all other Sacraments besides the two
abovenamed do. Therefore neither it, nor any other Sacrament else, be such
Sacraments as Baptism and the Communion are. But in a general acception, the
name of a Sacrament may be attributed to any thing whereby an holy thing is
signified. In which understanding of the Word, the ancient Writers have given
this name, not only to the other five, commonly of late years taken and used
for supplying the number of the seven Sacraments: but also to diverse and sundry
other Ceremonies, as to Oil, washing of Feet, and such like; not meaning
thereby to repute them as Sacraments, in the same signification that the two
forenamed Sacraments are And therefore St. Augustine weighing the true
signification, Dionysius, Bernard. de caena Domini, and ablut. pedum.
and the exact meaning of the word, writing to Januarius, and also in the third
Book of Christian Doctrine, affirms, that the Sacraments of the Christians,
as they are most excellent in signification, so are they most few in number;
and in both places makes mention expressly of two, the Sacrament of Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord. And although there are retained by the Order of the
Church of England, besides these two, certain other Rites and Ceremonies about
the institutions of Ministers in the Church, Matrimony, Confirmation of the
Children, by examining them of their knowledge in the Articles of the Faith,
and joining thereto the Prayers of the Church for them, and likewise for the
Visitation of the Sick: yet no man ought to take these for Sacraments, in such
signification and meaning as the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper
are: but either for godly states of life, necessary in Christ's Church, and
therefore worthy to be set forth by public action and solemnity, by the
Ministry of the Church, or else judged to be such Ordinances, as may make for
the Instruction, Comfort, and Edification of Christ's Church.

Now, understanding sufficiently what Prayer is, and what a Sacrament is also;
and how many sorts of Prayers there be, and how many Sacraments of our Savior
Christ's institution: let us see whether the Scriptures and examples of the
Primitive Church will allow any vocal Prayer, that is, when the mouth utters
the Petitions with voice, or any manner of Sacrament, or other public or
common Rite or Action, pertaining to the profit and edifying of the unlearned,
to be ministered in a Tongue unknown, or not understood of the Minister or
People: yea, and whether any Person may privately use any Vocal Prayer, in a
Language that he himself understands not. To this question we must answer,
No. And first of Common Prayer and Administration of Sacraments. Although
Reason, if it might Rule, would soon persuade us to have our Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments in a known Tongue, both for that to pray
commonly, is for a multitude to ask one and the self-same thing with one voice,
and one consent of mind; and to administer a Sacrament, is by the outward Word
and Element, to preach to the receiver the inward and invisible grace of God,
and also for that both these Exercises were first instituted, and are still
continued, to the end, that the Congregation of Christ might from time to time
be put in remembrance of their Unity in Christ, and that as Members all of one
Body, they ought both in Prayers and otherwise, to seek and desire one another
commodity, and not their own without others: Yet shall we not need to flee to
Reasons and Proofs in this matter, since we have both the plain and manifest
words of the Scripture; and also the consent of the most learned and ancient
Writers, to commend the Prayers of the Congregation in a known Tongue. First,
Paul to the Corinthians says, 1 Cor. 14.
Let all things be done to edifying. Which cannot be, unless Common Prayers and
Administration of Sacraments be in a Tongue known to the People. For where the
Prayers spoken by the Minister, and the words in the Administration of the
Sacraments be not understood of them that be present, they cannot thereby be
edified. For, as when the Trumpet that is blown in the Field gives an
uncertain sound, no man is thereby stirred up to prepare himself to the Fight.
And as when an Instrument of Music makes no distinct sound, no man can tell
what is piped: Even so when Prayers, or Administration of Sacraments shall be
in a Tongue unknown to the hearers, which of them shall be thereby stirred up
to lift up his mind to God, and to beg with the Minister at Gods hand, those
things which in the words of his Prayers the Minister asks? Or who shall in
the ministration of the Sacraments understand what invisible grace is to be
craved of the Hearer, to be wrought in the inward man? Truly no man at all. For
(says St. Paul) He that speaks in a Tongue unknown, shall be to the Hearer
an Aliant, which in a Christian Congregation is a great absurdity.

For we are not strangers one to another, Ephesians. 2. 1 Cor. 10. and 12.
but we are the Citizens of the Saints, and of the household of God, yea, and
members of one body. And therefore whiles our Minister is in rehearsing the
Prayer that is made in the name of us all, we must give diligent ears to the
words spoken by him, and in heart beg at Gods hand those things that he beggeth
in words. And to signify that we do so, we say, Amen, at the end of the Prayer
that he makes in the name of us all. And this thing can we not do for
edification, unless we understand what is spoken. Therefore it is required of
necessity, that the Common Prayer be had in a Tongue that the Hearers do
understand. If ever it had been tolerable to use strange Tongues in the
Congregations, the same might have been in the time of Paul and the other
Apostles, when they were miraculously endued with gifts of Tongues. For it
might then have persuaded some to embrace the Gospel, when they had heard men
that were Hebrews born and unlearned, speak the Greek, the Latin, and other
Languages. But Paul thought it not tolerable then: And shall we use it now,
when no man comes by that knowledge of Tongues, otherwise than by diligent and
earnest study? God forbid. For we should by that means bring all our
Church-exercises to frivolous Superstition, and make them altogether
unfruitful. Luke writes, Acts 4.
that when Peter and John were discharged by the Princes and Highpriests of
Jerusalem, they came to their fellows, and told them all that the Princes of
the Priests and Elders had spoken to them. Which when they heard, they lifted
up their voice together to God with one assent, and said, Lord, thou art he
that have made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all things that are in them, etc.
Thus could they not have done, if they had prayed in a strange Tongue, that
they had not understood. And no doubt of it, they did not all speak with
several voices, but some one of them spoke in the name of them all, and the
rest giving diligent ear to his words, consented thereunto; and therefore it is
said, that they lifted up their voice together. St. Luke says not, Their
voices, as many; but their voice, as one. That one voice therefore was in such
Language as they all understood, otherwise they could not have lifted it up
with the consent of their hearts. For no man can give consent of the thing that
he knows not. As touching the Times before the coming of Christ, there was
never man yet that would affirm, that either the People of God, or other had
their Prayers or Administrations of the Sacraments, or Sacrifices, in a Tongue
that they themselves understood not. As for the time since Christ, till that
usurped Power of Rome began to spread it self, and to enforce all the Nations
of Europe to have the Romish Language in admiration, it appears by the
consent of the most Ancient and Learned Writers, that there was no strange or
unknown Tongue used in the Congregation of Christians.

Justinus Apol. 2.
Justinus Martyr, who lived about 160 years after Christ, says thus of the
Administration of the Lords Supper in his time: Upon the Sunday Assemblies are
made, both of them that dwell in Cities, and of them that dwell in the Country
also. Amongst whom, as much as may be, the Writings of the Apostles and
Prophets were read. Afterward when the Reader does cease, the chief Minister
makes an Exhortation, exhorting them to follow honest things. After this, we
rise all together and offer Prayers, which being ended (as we have said) Bread,
and Wine, and Water are brought forth: Then the head Minister offers Prayers
and Thanksgiving with all his power, and the People answer, Amen. These words,
with their circumstances, being duly considered, do declare plainly that not
only the Scriptures were read in a known Tongue; but also that Prayer was made
in the same in the Congregations of Justin's time. Basilius Magnus, and
Johannes Chrysostomus did in their time prescribe public Orders of public
Administration, which they call Liturgies; and in them they appointed the
People to answer to the Prayers of the Minister, sometime, Amen; sometime, Lord
have mercy upon us; sometime, And with thy Spirit, and We have our hearts
lifted up unto the Lord, etc. Which answers the People could not have made in
due time, if the Prayers had not been in a Tongue that they understood. The
same Basil, writing to the Clergy of Neocaesarea, Epist. 63.
says thus of his usage in Common Prayer, appointing one to begin the Song,
the rest follow: and so with diverse Songs and Prayers, passing over the Night,
at the dawning of the Day, all together (even as it were with one Mouth, and
one Heart) they sing unto the Lord a Song of Confession, every man framing unto
himself meet words of Repentance. In another place he says, If the Sea be
fair, how is not the Assembly of the Congregation much more fair, in which a
joined sound of Men, Women, and Children, (as it were of the waves beating on
the shore) is sent forth in our Prayers unto our God? Mark his words: B^sil.
Romans 4.
A joined sound (says he) of Men, Women, and Children. Which cannot be, unless
they all understand the Tongue wherein the Prayer is said. And Chrysostom upon
the words of Paul, says, So soon as the People hear these words, World without
end, 1 Cor. 14.
they all do forthwith answer, Amen. This could they not do, unless they
understood the word spoken by the Priest. Dionysius says, Dionys. Cyprian.
Ser. 6. de orat. dominica.
that Hymns were said of the whole multitude of People in the Administration of
the Communion. Cyprian says, The Priest does prepare the minds of the
Brethren, with a Preface before the Prayer, saying, Lift up your hearts: That
whiles the People does answer, We have our hearts lifted up to the Lord, they
be admonished that they ought to think on none other thing than the Lord. St.
Ambrose, writing upon the words of St. Paul, says, This is it that he says, 1
Cor. 14.
because he which speaks in an unknown Tongue, speaks to God, for he
knows all things; but men know not, and therefore there is no profit of this
thing. And again, upon these words: If thou bless, or give thanks with the
spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy
giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say? This is (says
Ambrose) if thou speak the praise of God in a Tongue unknown to the Hearers.
For the unlearned hearing that which he understands not, knows not the end
of the Prayer, and answers not Amen: which word is as much to say, as truth,
that the blessing of thanksgiving may be confirmed. For the confirmation of the
Prayer is fulfilled by them that do answer, Amen, that all things spoken might
be confirmed in the minds of the Hearers, through the testimony of the truth.
And after many weighty words, to the same end he says, The conclusion is this,
that nothing should be done in the Church in vain, and that this thing ought
chiefly to be labored for, that the unlearned also might take profit, lest any
part of the Body should be dark through Ignorance. And lest any man should
think all this to be meant of Preaching, and not of Prayer, he takes occasion
of these words of St. Paul, (If there be not an Interpreter, let him keep
silence in the Church) to say, as follows: Let him Pray secretly, or speak to
God, who hears all things that be dumb: For in the Church must he speak that
may profit all Persons. St. Hierom, writing upon these words of St. Paul, 1
Cor. 14.
How shall he that supplieth the place of the unlearned, etc. says, It is the
Layman whom Paul understands here to be in the place of the ignorant man,
which has no Ecclesiastical Office: How shall he answer Amen to the prayer
that he understands not? And a little after, upon the words of St Paul, For
if I should pray in a Tongue, etc. he says thus: This is Paul's meaning: If
any man speak in strange and unknown Tongues, his mind is made unfruitful, not
to himself, but to the Hearer: For whatsoever is spoken, he knows it not.
Psalm. 18.
St. Augustine, writing upon the xviii Psalm, says, What this should be, we
ought to understand, that we may sing with reason of Man, and not with
chattering of Birds. For Owls, Popinjays, Ravens, Pies, and other such like
Birds, are taught by men to prate they know not what: but to sing with
understanding, is given by Gods Holy Will to the Nature of Man. Again, the same
Augustine says, De Magist.
There needs no speech when we Pray, saving perhaps as the Priests do, for to
declare their meaning, not that God, but that Men may hear them. And so being
put in remembrance by consenting with the Priest, they may ^ang upon God. Thus
are we taught both by the Scripture and Ancient Doctors, that in the
Administration of Common Prayer and Sacraments, no Tongue unknown to the
Hearers ought to be used. So that for the satisfying of a Christian man's
Conscience we need to spend no more time in this matter. But yet to stop the
mouths of the Adversaries, which stay themselves much upon General Decrees, it
shall be good to add to these Testimonies of Scriptures and Doctors, one
Constitution made by Justinian the Emperor, who lived five hundred twenty and
seven years after Christ, and was Emperor of Rome. The Constitution is this:
No^el. constit. 23.
We command that all Bishops and Priests do celebrate the Holy Oblation, and
the Prayers used in Holy Baptism, not speaking low; but with a clear or loud
voice, which may be heard of the people, that thereby the mind of the Hearers
may be stirred up with great Devotion, in uttering the Prayers of the Lord God;
for so the Holy Apostle teaches in his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
saying, Truly, if thou only bless or give thanks in spirit, how does he that
occupies the place of the unlearned, say Amen at thy giving thanks unto God,
for he understands not what thou say? Thou verily give thanks well, but
the other is not edified. And again, in the Epistle to the Romans, he says,
With the heart a man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation. Therefore for these causes it is convenient
that among other Prayers, those things also which are spoken in the Holy
Oblation, be uttered, and spoken of the most Religious Bishops and Priests,
unto our Lord Jesus Christ our God, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, with a
loud voice. And let the most Religious Priests know this, that if they neglect
any of these things, that they shall give an account for them in the dreadful
judgment of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. Neither will we, when
we know it, rest and leave it unrevenged.

This Emperor (as Sabellicus writes) favored the Bishop of Rome, and yet we
see how plain a Decree he makes, for Praying and Administering of Sacraments in
a known Tongue, that the Devotion of the Hearers might be stirred up by
knowledge, contrary to the judgment of them that would have Ignorance to make
Devotion. He makes it also a matter of Damnation, to do these things in a
Tongue that the Hearers understand not. Let us therefore conclude with God and
all good men's assent, that no Common Prayer or Sacraments ought to be ministered
in a Tongue that is not understood of the Hearers. Now, a word or two of
private Prayer in an unknown Tongue. We took in hand where we began to speak of
this matter, not only to prove that no Common Prayer, or Administration of
Sacraments, ought to be in a Tongue unknown to the Hearers, but also that no
Person ought to Pray privately in that Tongue that he himself understands
not. Which thing shall not be hard to prove, if we forget not what Prayer is.
For if Prayer be that Devotion of the Mind which enforces the Heart to lift up
it self to God; how should it be said, that that Person prays, that
understands not the words that his Tongue speaks in Prayer? Yea, how can it
be said, that he speaks? For to speak, is by voice to utter the thought of
the mind. And the voice that a man utters in speaking, is nothing else but
the Messenger of the mind to bring abroad the knowledge of that which otherwise
lies secret in the heart, and cannot be known, according to that which St.
Paul writes; 1 Cor. 2.
What man (says he) knows the things that appertain to man, saving only the
spirit of man, which is in man? He therefore that does not understand the
voices that his Tongue does utter, cannot properly be said to speak, but rather
to counterfeit, as Parats, and such other Birds use to counterfeit men's voices.
No man therefore that fears to provoke the wrath of God against himself, will
be so bold to speak of God unadvisedly, without regard, of reverent
understanding, in his presence, but he will prepare his Heart before he presume
to speak unto God. And therefore in our Common Prayer the Minister does
oftentimes say, Let us pray, meaning thereby to admonish the People that they
should prepare their Ears to hear what he should crave at Gods hand, and their
Hearts to consent to the same, and their Tongues to say Amen at the end
thereof. On this sort did the Prophet David prepare his Heart, when he said,
Psalm. 57.
My heart is ready (O my God) my heart is ready, I will sing and declare a
Psalm. The Jews also, when in the time of Judith they did with all their heart
pray God to visit his People of Israel, had so prepared their hearts before
they began to pray. 2 Par. 3.
After this sort had Manasses prepared his heart before he prayed, and said,
And now (O Lord) do I bow the knees of my heart, asking of thee part of thy
merciful kindness. When the Heart is thus prepared, the voice uttered from the
Heart, is harmonious in the ears of God: otherwise he regards it not to
accept it. But forasmuch as the Person that so bableth his words without sense
in the presence of God, shows himself not to regard the Majesty of him that
he speaks to: He takes him as a contemner of his Almighty Majesty, and
gives ^im ^is Reward among Hypocrites, which make an outward show of Holiness,
but their hearts are full of abominable thoughts, even in the time of their
Prayers. For it is the Heart that the Lord looks upon, 1 Reg. 16.
as it is written in the History of Kings. If we therefore will that our
Prayers be not abominable before God, let us so prepare our hearts before we
pray, and so understand the things that we ask when we pray, that both our
hearts and voices may together sound in the ears of Gods Majesty, and then we
shall not fail to receive at his hand the things that we ask, as good men which
have been before us did, and so have from time to time received that which for
their Souls health they did at any time desire. De Catechi^^ndis rudibus.
St. Augustine seems to bear in this matter: For he says thus of them, which
being brought up in Grammar and Rhetoric, are converted to Christ, and so must
be instructed in Christian Religion: Let them know also (says he) that it is
not the voice, but the affection of the mind that comes to the ears of God.
And so shall it come to pass, that if happily they shall mark that some Bishops
or Ministers in the Church do call upon God, either with barbarous words, or
with words disordered, or that they understand not, or do disorderly divide the
words that they pronounce, they shall not laugh them to scorn. Hitherto he
seems to bear with Praying in an unknown Tongue. But in the next sentence he
opens his mind thus: Not for that these things ought not to be amended, that
the People may say Amen, to that which they do plainly understand But yet these
godly things must be born withal of these Catechists, or Instructors of the
Faith, that they may learn, that as in the Common Place where matters are
pleaded, the goodness of an Oration consists in sound, so in the Church it
consists in Devotion. So that he allows not the praying in a Tongue not
understood of him that prays: But he instructs the skilful Orator, to bear
with the rude Tongue of the devout simple Minister. To conclude, If the lack of
understanding the words that are spoken in the Congregation, do make them
unfruitful to the Hearers, how should not the same make the words read,
unfruitful to the Reader? The merciful goodness of God, grant us his grace to
call upon him as we ought to do, to his glory and our endless felicity; which
we shall do, if we humble our selves in his sight, and in all our Prayers, both
common and private, have our minds fully fixed upon him. Ecclus. 35.
For the prayer of them that humble themselves, shall pierce through the
Clouds, and till it draw nigh unto God, it will not be answered; and till the
Most High do regard it, it will not depart. And the Lord will not be slack, but
he will deliver the Just, and execute Judgment. To him therefore be all Honor
and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

AN INFORMATION For them which take Offense at certain places of the Holy
Scripture.
The First Part.
THE great utility and profit that Christian Men and Women may take (if they
will) by hearing and reading the Holy Scriptures (Dearly beloved) no heart can
sufficiently conceive, much less is my tongue able with words to express.
Wherefore Satan our Enemy, seeing the Scriptures to be the very mean and right
way to bring the People to the true knowledge of God, and that Christian
Religion is greatly furthered by diligent hearing and reading of them, he also
perceiving what an hindrance and let they be to him and his Kingdom, does what
he can to drive the reading of them out of Gods Church. And for that end he
has always stirred up, in one place or other, cruel Tyrants, sharp
Persecutors, and extreme Enemies unto God, and his Infallible Truth, to pull
with violence the Holy Bibles out of the Peoples hands, and have most
spitefully destroyed and consumed the same to Ashes in the Fire; pretending
most untruly, that the much hearing and reading of Gods Word is an occasion of
Heresy and carnal Liberty, and the overthrow of all good Order in all well
ordered Common-weals. If to know God aright be an occasion of evil, then we
must needs grant, that the hearing and reading of the Holy Scriptures, is the
cause of Heresy, carnal Liberty, and the subversion of all good Orders. But
the knowledge of God and of our selves, is so far from being an occasion of
evil, that it is the readiest, yea, the only means to bridle carnal Liberty,
and to kill all our fleshly Affections. And the ordinary way to attain this
knowledge, is with diligence to hear and read the Holy Scriptures. For the
whole Scriptures (says St. Paul) were given by the inspiration of God. 2 Timothy
3.
And shall we Christian men think to learn the knowledge of God and of our
selves, in any earthly man's work or Writing, sooner or better than in the Holy
Scriptures, written by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost? The Scriptures were
not brought unto us by the will of man: but holy men of God (as witnesses St.
Peter) spoke as they were moved by the holy spirit of God. ^ Pet. 1.
The Holy Ghost is the Schoolmaster of Truth, which leads his Scholars (as
our Savior says of him) into all Truth. John 16.
And whosoever is not led and taught by this Schoolmaster, cannot but fall into
deep Error, how godly soever his pretense is, what Knowledge and Learning
soever he has of all other Works and Writings, or how fair soever a show or
face of truth he has in the estimation and judgment of the World. If some man
will say, I would have a true pattern and a perfect description of an upright
life, approved in the sight of God: can we find (think ye) any better or any
such again, as Christ Jesus is, and his Doctrine is? whose virtuous
conversation and godly life, the Scripture so lively painteth and sets forth
before our Eyes, that we beholding that Pattern, might shape and frame our
lives, as nigh as may be, agreeable to the perfection of the same. 1 Cor. 11. 1
John 2.
Follow you me (says St. Paul) as I follow Christ. And St. John in his Epistle
says, Whosoever abides in Christ, must walk even so as he has walked before him.
And where shall we learn the order of Christ's life, but in the Scripture?
Another would have a Medicine to all Diseases and Maladies of the Mind. Can
this be found or gotten otherwhere than out of Gods own Book, his sacred
Scriptures? Christ taught so much when he said to the obstinate Jews, Search
the Scriptures, John 5.
for in them ye think to have eternal life. If the Scriptures contain in them
Everlasting Life, it must needs follow, that they have also present remedy
against all that is an hindrance and let unto eternal life. If we desire the
knowledge of Heavenly Wisdom, why had we rather learn the same of man than of
God himself, James 1. Mat. 28.
who (as St. James says) is the giver of wisdom? Yea, why will we not learn it
at Christ's own mouth, who promising to be present with his Church till the
Worlds end, does perform his promise, in that he is not only with us by his
grace and tender pity: but also in this, that he speaks presently unto us in
the Holy Scriptures, to the great and endless comfort of all them that have any
feeling of God at all in them? Yea, he speaks now in the Scriptures more
profitably to us, than he did by word of mouth to the carnal Jews when he lived
with them here upon Earth. For they (I mean the Jews) could neither hear nor
see those things which we may now both hear and see, if we will bring with us
those Ears and Eyes that Christ is heard and seen with; that is, diligence to
hear and read his Holy Scriptures, and true Faith to believe his most
comfortable Promises. If one could show but the print of Christ's Foot, a great
number I think would fall down and worship it: But to the Holy Scriptures,
where we may see daily (if we will) I will not say the print of his Feet only,
but the whole shape and lively Image of him, alas, we give little reverence, or
none at all.

If any could let us see Christ's Coat, a sort of us would make hard shift
except we might come nigh to gaze upon it, yea, and kiss it too. And yet all
the Clothes that ever he did wear, can nothing so truly, nor so lively express
him unto us, as do the Scriptures. Christ's Images made in Wood, Stone, or
Metal, some men for the love they bear to Christ, do garnish and beautify the
same with Pearl, Gold, and Precious Stones: And should we not (good Brethren)
much rather embrace and reverence Gods Holy Books, the sacred Bible, which do
represent Christ unto us more truly than can any Image. The Image can but
express the form or shape of his Body, if it can do so much: But the Scriptures
do in such sort set forth Christ, that we may see both God and man; we may see
him (I say) speaking unto us, healing our Infirmities, dying for our sins,
rising from death for our Justification. And to be short, we may in the
Scriptures so perfectly see whole Christ with the Eye of Faith, as we, lacking
Faith, could not with these bodily Eyes see him, though he stood now present
here before us. Let every Man, Woman, and Child, therefore with all their
Hearts thirst and desire Gods Holy Scriptures, love them, embrace them, have
their delight and pleasure in hearing and reading them, so as at length we may
be transformed and changed into them. For the Holy Scriptures are Gods
Treasure-House, wherein are found all things needful for us to see, to hear, to
learn, and to believe necessary for the attaining of Eternal Life. Thus much is
spoken, only to give you a taste of some of the Commodities which ye may take
by hearing and reading the Holy Scriptures. For as I said in the beginning, no
Tongue is able to declare and utter all. And although it is more clear than the
noon day, that to be ignorant of the Scriptures, is the cause of Error, as
Christ says to the Sadduces, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures; Mat. 22.
and that Error does hold back, and pluck men away from the knowledge of God.
And as St. Jerome says, Not to know the Scriptures, is to be ignorant of
Christ. Yet this notwithstanding, some there be that think it not meet for all
sorts of men to read the Scriptures, because they are, as they think, in sundry
places stumbling blocks to the unlearned. First, for that the phrase of the
Scripture is sometime so simple, gross, and plain, that it offends the fine
and delicate Wits of some Courtiers. Furthermore, for that the Scripture also
reports, even of them that have their commendation to be the Children of God,
that they did diverse acts, whereof some are contrary to the Law of Nature, some
repugnant to the Law written, and other some seem to fight manifestly against
public Honesty. All which things (say they) are unto the simple an occasion of
great offense, and cause many to think evil of the Scriptures, and to discredit
their Authority. Some are offended at the hearing and reading of the diversity
of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Sacrifices and Oblations of the Law. And
some worldly witted men think it great decay to the quiet and prudent governing
of their Common-weals, to give ear to the simple and plain Rules and Precepts
of our Savior Christ in his Gospel, as being offended that a man should be
ready to turn his right Ear to him that struck him on the left; and to him
which would take away his Coat, to offer him also his Cloak; with such other
sayings of perfection in Christ's meaning. For Carnal Reason, being always an
Enemy to God, and not perceiving the things of Gods Spirit, does abhor such
Precepts, which yet rightly understood, infringeth no Judicial Policies, nor
Christian men's Governments. And some there be, which hearing the Scriptures to
bid us to live without carefulness, without study or fore-casting, to deride
the simplicities of them. Therefore to remove and put away occasions of offense
so much as may be, I will answer orderly to these Objections. First, I shall
rehearse some of those places that men are offended at, for the simplicity and
grosness of speech, and will show the meaning of them. In the Book of
Deuteronomy it is written, That Almighty God made a Law, if a man died without
issue, his brother or next kinsman should marry his Widow, and the child that
was first born between them, should be called his child that was dead, that the
dead man's name might not be put out in Israel: And if the Brother or next
Kinsman would not marry the Widow, then she before the Magistrates of the City
should pull off his shoe, and spit in his face, saying, So be it done to that
man that will not build his brothers house. Here (Dearly beloved) the pulling
off his shoe, and spitting in his face, were Ceremonies, to signify unto all
the People of that City, that the Woman was not now in fault that Gods Law in
that point was broken, but the whole shame and blame thereof, did now redound
to that man, which openly before the Magistrates refused to marry her. And it
was not a reproach to him alone, but to all his Posterity also: For they were
called ever after, The House of him whose shoe is pulled off. Another place out
of the Psalms: Psalm. 75.
I will break (says David) the horns of the ungodly, and the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted. By an Horn, in the Scripture, is understood Power,
Might, Strength, and sometime Rule and Government. The Prophet then saying, I
will break the horns of the ungodly, means, that all the Power, Strength, and
Might of Gods Enemies, shall not only be weakened and made feeble, but shall at
length also be clean broken and destroyed, though for a time, for the better
trial of his People, God suffers the Enemies to prevail and have the upper
hand. In the 132 Psalm, it is said, Psalm. 132.
I will make David 's horn to flourish. Here David's Horn signifies his
Kingdom. Almighty God therefore by this manner of speaking, promises to give
David Victory over all his Enemies, and to stablish him in his Kingdom, spite
of all his Enemies. And in the threescore Psalm it is written, Moab is my
wash-pot, Psalm. 60.
and over Edom will I cast out my shoe, etc. In that place the Prophet shows
how graciously God has dealt with his People the Children of Israel, giving
them great Victories upon their Enemies on every side. For the Moabites and
Idumeans being two great Nations, proud People, stout and mighty, God brought
them under, and made them Servants to the Israelites; Servants, I say, to stoop
down, to pull off their shoes, and wash their feet. Then Moab is my wash-pot,
and over Edom will I cast out my shoe, is, as if he had said, The Moabites and
the Idumeans, for all their stoutness against us in the Wilderness, are now
made our Subjects, ou^ Servants, yea, Underlings to pull off our shoes, and
wash our feet. Now I pray you, what uncomely manner of speech is this, so used
in common phrase among the Hebrews? It is a shame that Christian men should be
so light headed, to toy as Ruffians do with such manner of speeches, uttered in
good grave signification by the Holy Ghost. More reasonable it were for vain
men to learn to reverence the form of Gods Words, than to sport at them to
their Damnation. Some again are offended to hear that the godly Fathers had
many Wives and Concubines, although after the phrase of the Scripture, a
Concubine is an honest name; for every Concubine is a Lawful Wife, but every
Wife is not a Concubine. And that ye may the better understand this to be true,
ye shall note that it was permitted to the Fathers of the Old Testament to have
at one time more Wives than one, for what purpose ye shall afterward hear. Of
which Wives some were Free-women born, some were Bond-women and Servants. She
that was Freeborn had a Prerogative above those that were Servants and
Bond-women. The Freeborn Woman was by Marriage made the Ruler of the House
under her Husband, and is called the Mother of the Household, the Mistress or
the Dame of the House, after our manner of speaking, and had by her Marriage an
Interest, a Right, and an Ownership of his Goods unto whom she was married.
Other Servants and Bond-women were given by the Owners of them, as the manner
was then, I will not say always, but for the most part, unto their Daughters at
the day of their Marriage, to be Handmaidens unto them. After such a sort did
Pharaoh King of Egypt give unto Sarah, Ge^. 29.
Abraham's Wife, Agar the Egyptian to be her Maid. So did Laban give unto his
Daughter Lea, at the day of her Marriage, Zilpha to be her Handmaid. And to his
other Daughter Rachel, he gave another Bondmaid, named Bilha. And the Wives
that were the owners of their Handmaidens, gave them in Marriage to their
Husbands, upon diverse occasions. Sarah gave her Maid Agar in Marriage to
Abraham, Genesis 16.
Lea gave in like manner her Maid Zilpha to her Husband Jacob. So did Rachel
his other Wife give him Bilha her Maid, Genesis 30.
saying unto him, Go in unto her, and she shall bear upon my knees: which is,
as if she had said, Take her to Wife, and the Children that she shall bear,
will I take upon my lap, and make of them as if they were mine own. These
Hand-maidens or Bond-women, although by Marriage they were made Wives, yet they
had not this Prerogative to Rule in the House, but were still Underlings, and
in such subjection to their Masters, and were never called Mothers of the
Household, Mistresses, or Dames of the House, but are called sometimes Wives,
sometimes Concubines. The plurality of Wives was by a special Prerogative
suffered to the Fathers of the Old Testament, not for satisfying their carnal
and fleshly Lusts, but to have many Children, because every one of them hoped,
and begged oft-times of God in their Prayers, that that Blessed Seed, which God
promised should come into the World to break the Serpents Head, might come and
be born of this stock and kindred.

Now of those which take occasion of carnality and evil life, by hearing and
reading in Gods Book, what God had suffered, even in those men whose
commendation is praised in the Scripture: As that Noe, 2 Pet. 2. Genesis 9.
whom St. Peter calls the eighth Preacher of Righteousness, was so drunk with
Wine, that in his sleep he uncovered his own Privities. Genesis 19.
The just man Lot, was in like manner drunken, and in his drunkenness lay with
his own Daughters, contrary to the Law of Nature. Abraham, Genesis 17.
whose Faith was so great, that for the same he deserved to be called of Gods
own mouth, a Father of many Nations, Romans 4.
the Father of all Believers, besides with Sarah his Wife, had also carnal
company with Agar, Sarah's Handmaid. Genesis 29.
The Patriarch Jacob had to his Wives two Sisters at one time. The Prophet
David, and King Solomon his Son, had many Wives and Concubines, etc. Which
things we see plainly to be forbidden us by the Law of God, and are now
repugnant to all public Honesty. These and such like in Gods Book (good
People) are not written that we should or may do the like following their
examples, or that we ought to think that God did allow every of these things in
those men: But we ought rather to believe and to judge that Noe in his
drunkenness offended God highly. Lot lying with his Daughters, committed
horrible Incest. We ought then to learn by them this profitable Lesson, that if
so godly men as they were, which otherwise felt inwardly Gods Holy Spirit
inflaming their hearts with the fear and love of God, could not by their own
strength keep themselves from committing horrible sin, but did so grievously
fall, that without Gods great Mercy they had perished everlastingly: How much
more ought we then, miserable wretches, which have no feeling of God within us
at all, continually to fear, not only that we may fall as they did, but also be
overcome and drowned in sin, which they were not? And so by considering their
fall, take the better occasion to acknowledge our own Infirmity and weakness,
and therefore more earnestly to call unto Almighty God with hearty Prayer
incessantly, for his grace to strengthen us, and to defend us from all evil.
And though through Infirmity we chance at any time to fall, yet we may by
hearty Repentance, and true Faith speedily rise again, and not sleep and
continue in sin, as the wicked does.

Thus, good People, should we understand such matters expressed in the Divine
Scriptures, that this Holy Table of Gods Word be not turned to us to be a
snare, a trap, and a stumbling stone, to take hurt by the abuse of our
Understanding: But let us esteem them in a reverent Humility, that we may find
our necessary Food therein, to strengthen us, to comfort us, to instruct us (as
God of his great Mercy has appointed them) in all necessary works, so that we
may be perfect before him in the whole course of our life: Which he grant, who
has Redeemed us, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory for evermore. Amen.

The Second Part of the Information for them which take Offense at certain
places of the Holy Scripture.
YE have heard (good People) in the Homily last read unto you, the great
Commodity of Holy Scriptures; ye have heard how ignorant men, void of godly
Understanding, seek Quarrels to discredit them: Some of their Reasons have ye
heard answered. Now we will proceed and speak of such politic wise men which
be offended, for that Christ's Precepts should seem to destroy all Order in
Governance; as they do allege for example, such as these be. If any man strike
thee on the right cheek, Mat. 5^.
turn the other unto him also. If any man will contend to take thy coat from
thee, let him have cloak and all. Let not thy lest hand know what thy right
hand does. If thine eye, thine hand, Mat. 18.
or thy foot offend thee, pull out thine eye, cut off thine hand, or thy foot,
and cast it from thee. Romans 12.
If thine enemy (says St. Paul) be an hungered, give him meat; if he be
thirsty, give him drink: so doing, thou shall heap hot burning coals upon his
head. These sentences (good People) unto a natural man seem mere absurdities,
contrary to all Reason. 1 Cor. 2.
For a natural man (as St. Paul says) understands not the things that belong
to God, neither can he so long as old Adam dwells in him. Christ therefore
means, that he would have his faithful servants so far from vengeance and
resisting wrong, that he would rather have him ready to suffer another wrong,
than by resisting to break Charity, and to be out of Patience. He would have
our good deeds so far from all carnal respects, that he would not have our
nighest Friends know of our well-doing, to win vainglory. And though our
Friends and Kinsfolks be as dear as our right Eyes and our right Hands: yet if
they would p^^^ us from God, we ought to renounce them, and forsake them.

Thus if ye will be profitable Hearers and Readers of the Holy Scriptures, ye
must first deny your selves, and keep under your Carnal Senses, taken by the
outward words, and search the inward meaning: Reason must give place to Gods
Holy Spirit, you must submit your Worldly Wisdom and Judgment unto his Divine
Wisdom and Judgment. Consider that the Scripture, in what strange form soever
it be pronounced, is the Word of the living God. Let that always come to your
remembrance, which is so often repeated of the Prophet Esaias, The mouth of the
Lord (says he) has spoken it, and Almighty and everlasting God, who with his
only word created Heaven and Earth, has decreed it, the Lord of Hosts, whose
ways are in the Seas, whose paths are in the deep Waters, that Lord and God by
whose word all things in Heaven and in Earth are created, governed, and
preserved, has so provided it. The God of gods, and Lord of all lords; yea,
God that is God alone, incomprehensible, almighty, and everlasting, he has
spoken it, it is his Word. It cannot therefore be but truth, which proceeds
from the God of all Truth: it cannot be but wisely and prudently commanded,
what Almighty God has devised, how vainly soever, through want of grace, we
miserable wretches do imagine and judge of his most Holy Word. The Prophet
David, describing an happy man, Psalm. 1.
says, Blessed is the man that has not walked after the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful.
There are three sorts of People, whose Company the Prophet would have him to
flee and avoid, which shall be an happy man, and partaker of Gods Blessing.
First, he may not walk after the counsel of the ungodly. Secondly, he may not
stand in the way of sinners. Thirdly, he must not sit in the seat of the
scornful. By these three sorts of People, ungodly m^n, sinners, and scorners,
all Impiety is signified, and fully expressed. By the ungodly, he understands
those which have no regard of Almighty God, being void of all Faith, whose
hearts and minds are so set upon the World, that they study only how to
accomplish their worldly practices, their carnal imaginations, their filthy
lust and desire, without any fear of God. The second sort he calls sinners,
not such as do fall through Ignorance, or of frailness, for then who should be
found free? What man ever lived upon Earth (Christ only excepted) but he has
sinned? Prove. 24.
The just man falls seven times, and rises again. Though the godly do fall,
yet they walk not on purposely in sin, they stand not still to continue and
tarry in sin, they sit not down like careless men, without all fear of Gods
just punishment for sin; but defying sin, through Gods great grace and infinite
mercy, they rise again, and fight against sin. The Prophet then calls them
sinners, whose hearts are clean turned from God, and whose whole conversation
of life is nothing but sin, they delight so much in the same, that they choose
continually to abide and dwell in sin. The third sort he calls scorners; that
is, a sort of men whose hearts are so stuffed with Malice, that they are not
contented to dwell in sin, and to lead their lives in all kind of wickedness:
but also they do contemn and scorn in other all Godliness, true Religion, all
Honesty and Virtue. Of the two first sorts of men, I will not say but they may
take Repentance, and be converted unto God. Of the third sort, I think I may
without danger of Gods judgment, pronounce, that never any yet converted unto
God by Repentance, but continued still in their abominable wickedness, heaping
up to themselves damnation, against the day of Gods inevitable Judgment.
Examples of such scorners, we read in the Second Book of Chronicles: 2 Par. 30.
When the good King Ezechias in the beginning of his Reign, had destroyed
Idolatry, purged the Temple, and reformed Religion in his Realm, he sent
Messengers into every City, to gather the People unto Jerusalem, to solemnize
the Feast of Easter, in such sort as God had appointed. The Posts went from
City to City, through the Land of Ephraim and Manasses, even unto Zabulon. And
what did the People, think ye? Did they land and praise the Name of the Lord
which had given them so good a King, so zealous a Prince to abolish Idolatry,
and to restore again Gods true Religion? No, no. The Scripture says, The
people laughed them to scorn, and mocked the Kings Messengers. And in the last
Chapter of the same Book it is written, That Almighty God, having compassion
upon his people, sent his Messengers the Prophets unto them, to call them from
their abominable Idolatry and wicked kind of living. But they mocked his
Messengers, they despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath
of the Lord arose against his people, and till there was no remedy: For he gave
them up into the hands of their enemies, even unto Nabuchodonosor King of
Babylon, who spoiled them of their Goods, burnt their City, and led them, their
Wives, and their Children, Captives unto Babylon. The wicked People that were
in the days of Noe, made but a mock at the Word of God, when Noe told them,
that God would take vengeance upon them for their sins. The Flood therefore
came suddenly upon them, and drowned them, with the whole World. Lot Preached
to the Sodomites, that except they repented, both they and their City should be
destroyed. They thought his sayings impossible to be true, they scorned and
mocked his Admonition, and reputed him as an old doting Fool. But when God by
his Holy Angels had taken Lot, his Wife, and two Daughters from among them, he
rained down Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, and burnt up those scorners and
mockers of his Holy Word. And what estimation had Christ's Doctrine among the
Scribes and Pharisees? What Reward had he among them? The Gospel reports
thus: The Pharisees, which were covetous, did scorn him in his Doctrine. O then
ye see that worldly rich men scorn the Doctrine of their Salvation. The worldly
wise men scorn the Doctrine of Christ, as foolishness to their Understanding.
These scorners have ever been, and ever shall be to the Worlds end. 2 Pet. 3.
For St. Peter Prophesied, that such scorners should be in the world before the
latter day. Take heed therefore (my Brethren) take heed, be ye not scorners of
Gods most Holy Word, provoke him not to pour out his wrath now upon you, as he
did then upon those Gybers and Mockers. Be not wilful murderers of your own
Souls. Turn unto God while there is yet time of Mercy, ye shall else repent it
in the World to come, when it shall be too late, for there shall be Judgment
without Mercy. This might suffice to admonish us, and cause us henceforth to
reverence Gods Holy Scriptures, but all men have not Faith. This therefore
shall not satisfy and content all men's minds: but as some are carnal, so they
will still continue, and abuse the Scriptures carnally, to their greater
damnation. 2 Pet. 3.
The unlearned and unstable (says St. Peter) pervert the holy Scriptures to
their own destruction. 1 Cor. 1.
Jesus Christ (as St. Paul says) is to the Jews an offense, to the Gentiles
foolishness; But to Gods children, as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles, he
is the power and wisdom of God. The holy man Simeon says, Luke 2.
that he is set forth for the fall and rising again of many in Israel. As
Christ Jesus is a fall to the Reprobate, which yet perish through their own
default; so is his Word, yea, the whole Book of God, a cause of damnation unto
them, through their incredulity. And as he is a rising up to none other than
those which are Gods Children by adoption, so is his Word, yea, the whole
Scripture, the power of God to Salvation to them only that do believe it.
Christ himself, the Prophets before him, the Apostles after him, all the true
Ministers of Gods Holy Word, yea, every word in Gods Book, is unto the
Reprobate the savor of death unto death.

Christ Jesus, the Prophets, the Apostles, and all the true Ministers of his
Word, yea, every jot and tittle in the Holy Scripture, have been, is, and shall
be for evermore, the savor of life unto eternal life, unto all those whose
hearts God has purified by true Faith. Let us earnestly take heed that we make
no jesting-stock of the Books of Holy Scriptures. The more obscure and dark the
sayings be to our Understanding, the further let us think our selves to be from
God, and his Holy Spirit, who was the Author of them. Let us with more
reverence endeavor our selves to search out the wisdom hidden in the outward
Bark of the Scripture. If we cannot understand the sense and the reason of the
saying, yet let us not be scorners, jesters, and deriders, for that is the
uttermost token and show of a Reprobate, of a plain Enemy to God and his
wisdom. They be not idle Fables to jest at, which God does seriously pronounce,
and for serious matters let us esteem them. And though in sundry places of the
Scriptures be set out diverse Rites and Ceremonies, Oblations and Sacrifices;
let us not think strange of them, but refer them to the Times and People for
whom they served, although yet to learned men they be not unprofitable to be
considered, but to be expounded as figures and shadows of things and persons,
afterward openly revealed in the New Testament. Though the rehearsal of the
Genealogies and Pedegrees of the Fathers be not to much edification of the
plain ignorant people; yet is there nothing so impertinently uttered in all the
whole Book of the Bible, but may serve to spiritual purpose in some respect, to
all such as will bestow their labors to search out the meanings. These may not
be condemned, because they serve not to our Understanding, nor make to our
Edification. But let us turn our labor to understand, and to carry away such
sentences and stories as be more fit for our Capacity and Instruction.

And whereas we read in diverse Psalms, how David did wish to the Adversaries of
God sometimes shame, rebuke, and confusion; sometime the decay of their
Offspring and Issue, sometime that they might perish and come suddenly to
destruction; as he did wish to the Captains of the Philistines. Cast forth
(says he) thy lightning, and tear them; shoot out thine arrows and consume
them: with such other manner of Imprecations. Yet ought we not to be offended
at such Prayers of David, being a Prophet as he was, singularly beloved of God,
and wrapped in spirit, with an ardent zeal to Gods glory. He spoke not of a
private hatred, and in a stomach against their Persons: but wished spiritually
the destruction of such corrupt Errors and Vices, which reigned in all devilish
Persons, set against God. He was of like mind as St. Paul was, when he did
deliver Hymeneus and Alexander, with the notorious Fornicator, to Satan, to
their Temporal confusion, that their Spirit might be saved against the day of
the Lord. And when David did profess in some places that he hated the wicked;
yet in other places of his Psalms he professes, that he hated them with a
perfect hate, not with a malicious hate, to the hurt of the Soul. Which
perfection of spirit, because it cannot be performed in us, so corrupted in
affections as we be, we ought not to use in our private causes the like words
in form, for that we cannot fulfill the like words in sense. Let us not
therefore be offended, but search out the reason of such words before we be
offended, that we may the more reverently judge of such sayings, though strange
to our carnal Understandings, yet to them that be spiritually minded, judged to
be zealously and godly pronounced. God therefore for his mercies sake,
vouchsafe to purify our minds through Faith in his Son Jesus Christ, and to
instill the Heavenly drops of his grace into our hard stony hearts, to supple
the same, that we be not contemners and deriders of his Infallible Word: but
that with all humbleness of mind and Christian reverence, we may endeavor our
selves to hear, and to read his sacred Scriptures, and inwardly so to digest
them, as shall be to the comfort of our Souls, sanctification of his Holy Name:
To whom with the Son and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one living God, be
all Land, Honor, and Praise, for ever and ever. Amen.

AN HOMILY OF Alms-Deeds, and Mercifulness toward the Poor and Needy.
AMongst the manifold Duties that Almighty God requires of his Faithful
Servants the true Christians, by the which he would that both his Name should
be glorified, and the certainty of their Vocation declared, there is none that
is either more acceptable unto him, or more profitable for them, than are the
Works of Mercy and Pity showed upon the Poor, which be afflicted with any kind
of misery. And yet this notwithstanding (such is the slothful sluggishness of
our dull Nature, to that which is good and godly) that we are almost in nothing
more negligent and less careful than we are therein. It is therefore a very
ncessary thing, that Gods People should awake their sleepy minds, and consider
their Duty on this behalf. And meet it is, that all true Christians should
desirously seek and learn what God by his Holy Word does herein require of
them: that first knowing their Duty (whereof many by their slackness seem to be
very ignorant) they may afterward diligently endeavor to perform the same. By
the which both the godly charitable Persons may be encouraged to go forwards
and continue in their merciful Deeds of Almsgiving to the Poor, and also such
as hitherto have either neglected, or contemned it, may yet now at length (when
they shall hear how much it appertains to them) advisedly consider it, and
virtuously apply themselves thereunto.

And to the intent that every one of you may the better understand that which
is taught, and also easilier bear away, and so take more fruit of that shall be
said, when several matters are severally handled: I mind particularly, and in
this order, to speak and entreat of these points.

First, I will show how earnestly Almighty God in his Holy Word, does exact the
doing of Alms-Deeds of us, and how acceptable they be unto him.

Secondly, how profitable it is for us to use them, and what commodity and
fruit they will bring unto us.

Thirdly and lastly, I will show out of Gods Word, that whosoever is liberal to the
Poor, and relieveth them plenteously, shall notwithstanding have sufficient for
himself, and evermore be without danger of penury and scarcity.

Concerning the first, which is the acceptance and dignity, or price of
Alms-Deeds before God: Know this, that to help and succor the Poor in their
need and misery, pleases God so much, that as the Holy Scripture in sundry
places records, nothing can be more thankfully taken or accepted of God. For
first we read, that Almighty God does account that to be given and to be
bestowed upon himself, that that is bestowed upon the Poor: For so does the
Holy Ghost testify unto us by the Wise Man, saying, He that has pity upon the
Poor, Prove. 19.
lends unto the Lord himself. And Christ in the Gospel avoucheth, and as a
most certain truth, binds it with an Oath, that the Alms bestowed upon the
Poor, was bestowed upon him, and so shall be reckoned at the last day. For thus
he says to the charitable Alms-givers, when he sits as Judge in the doom,
to give sentence of every man according to his deserts: Mat. 25.
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever good and merciful deed you did upon any of
the least of these my brethren, ye did the same unto me. In relieving their
hunger, ye relieved mine; in quenching their thirst, ye quenched mine; in
clothing them, ye clothed me; and when ye harbored them, ye lodged me also;
when ye visited them being sick in Prison, ye visited me. For as he that has
received a Princes Ambassadors, and entertaineth them well, does honor the
Prince from whom those Ambassadors do come: So he that receives the Poor and
Needy, and helps them in their affliction and distress, does thereby receive
and honor Christ their Master, who as he was poor and needy himself whilst he
lived here amongst us, to work the Mystery of our Salvation, at his departure
hence he promised in his stead to send unto us those that were Poor, by whose
means his absence should be supplied: and therefore that we would do unto him,
we must do unto them. And for this cause does the Almighty God say unto Moses,
The Land wherein you dwell, Deuteronomy. 15.
shall never be without poor men: because he would have continual trial of his
People, whether they loved him or no, that in showing themselves obedient unto
his will, they might certainly assure themselves of his love and favor toward
them, and nothing doubt, but that as his Law and Ordinance (wherein he
commanded them that they should open their hand unto their brethren that were
poor and needy in the Land) were accepted of them, and willingly performed: So
he would on his part lovingly accept them, and truly perform his promises that
he had made unto them.

The Holy Apostles and Disciples of Christ, who by reason of his daily
conversation, saw by his Deeds, and heard in his Doctrine, how much he tendered
the Poor: the godly Fathers also, that were both before and since Christ,
endued without doubt with the Holy Ghost, and most certainly certified of Gods
Holy Will: they both do most earnestly exhort us, and in all their writings
almost continually admonish us, that we would remember the Poor, and bestow our
charitable Alms upon them. St. Paul cries unto us after this sort, Comfort the
feeble minded, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
lift up the weak, and be charitable toward all men. And again, To do good to
the poor, Hebr. 13.
and to distribute alms gladly, see that thou do not forget, for with such
sacrifices God is pleased. Esaias 58.
Esaias the Prophet teaches on this wise. Deal thy bread to the hungry, and
bring the poor wandering home to thy house. When thou see the naked, see thou
clothe him, and hide not thy face from thy poor neighbor, neither despise thou
thine own flesh. And the Holy Father Toby gives this counsel, Tob. 4.
Give alms (says he) of thine own goods, and turn never thy face from the
poor; eat thy bread with the hungry, and cover the naked with thy clothes. And
the learned and godly Doctor Chrysostom gives admonition. Ad pop. A^tioch.
Hom. 35.
Let merciful Alms be always with us as a Garment; that is, as mindful as we
will be to put our garments upon us, to cover our nakedness, to defend us from
the cold, and to show our selves comely: So mindful let us be at all times and
seasons, that we give Alms to the Poor, and show our selves merciful toward
them. But what mean these often admonitions and earnest exhortations of the
Prophets, Apostles, Fathers, and holy Doctors? Surely, as they were faithful to
Godward, and therefore discharged their Duty truly, in telling us what was Gods
Will: so of a singular love to usward, they labored not only to inform us,
but also to persuade us, that to give Alms, and to succor the poor and needy,
was a very acceptable thing, and an high Sacrifice to God, wherein he greatly
delighted, and had a singular pleasure. For so does the Wise Man, the Son of
Syrach, teach us, saying, Ecclus. 33.
Whosoever is merciful and gives alms, he offers the right thank-offering. And
he adds thereunto: The right thank-offering makes the Altar fat, and a sweet
smell it is before the Highest, it is acceptable before God, and shall never be
forgotten.

And the truth of this Doctrine is verified by the examples of those holy and
charitable Fathers, of whom we read in the Scriptures, that they were given to
merciful compassion toward the Poor, and charitable relieving of their
necessities. Such a one was Abraham, in whom God had so great pleasure, that he
vouchsafed to come unto him in form of an Angel, and to be entertained of him
at his House. Such was his kinsman Lot, whom God so favored for receiving his
Messengers into his House, which otherwise should have lien in the street, that
he saved him with his whole Family, from the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha.
Such were the Holy Fathers, Job and Toby, with many others, who felt most
sensible proofs of Gods special love toward them. And as all these by their
mercifulness and tender compassion which they showed to the miserable afflicted
Members of Christ, in the relieving, helping, and succouring them with their
Temporal Goods in this life, obtained Gods favor, and were dear, acceptable,
and pleasant in his sight: so now they themselves take pleasure in the fruition
of God, in the pleasant joys of Heaven, and are also in Gods eternal Word set
before us, as perfect examples ever before our eyes, both how we shall please
God in this mortal life, and also how we may come to live in joy with them in
everlasting pleasure and felicity. For most true is that saying which Augustine
has, that the giving of Alms, and relieving of the Poor, is the right way to
Heaven. Via Coeli pauper est. The Poor man (says he) is the way to Heaven.
They used in times past, to set in Highways sides the Picture of Mercury,
pointing with his finger which was the right way to the Town. And we use in
cross-ways to set up a wooden or stone Cross, to admonish the traveling man
which way he must turn when he comes thither, to direct his Journey aright.
But Gods Word (as St. Augustine says) has set in the way to Heaven the Poor
Man and his House, so that whosoever will go aright thither, and not turn out of
the way, must go by the poor. The poor man is that Mercury that shall set us
the ready way: and if we look well to this mark, we shall not wander much out
of the right path. The manner of wise worldly men amongst us is, that if they
know a man of a meaner Estate than themselves to be in favor with the Prince,
or any other Nobleman, whom they either fear or love, such a one they will be
glad to benefit and pleasure, that when they have need they may become their
Spokesman, either to obtain a commodity, or to escape a displeasure. Now surely
it ought to be a shame to us, that worldly men for temporal things, that last
but for a season, should be more wise and provident in procuring them, than we
in heavenly. Our Savior Christ testifies of poor men, that they are dear unto
him, and that he loves them especially: For he calls them his little ones,
by a name of tender love: he says they be his brethren. And St. James says,
that God has chosen them to be the Heirs of his Kingdom. James ^.
Has not God (says he) chosen the poor of this World to himself, to make them
hereafter the rich heirs of that Kingdom which he has promised to them that
love him? And we know that the Prayer which they make for us, shall be
acceptable and regarded of God, their complaint shall be heard also. Thereof
does Jesus the Son of Syrach certainly assure us, saying, Ecclus. 4.
If the poor complain of thee in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall
be heard, even he that made him shall hear him. Be courteous therefore unto the
Poor. We know also, that he who acknowledges himself to be their Master and
Patron, and refuses not to take them for his Servants, is both able to
pleasure and displeasure us, and that we stand every hour in need of his help.
Why should we then be either negligent or unwilling to procure their friendship
and favor, by the which also we may be assured to get his favor, that is both
able and willing to do us all pleasures that are for our commodity and wealth?
Christ does declare by this, how much he accepts our charitable affection
toward the Poor, in that he promises a reward unto them that give but a cup of
cold water in his name to them that have need thereof, and that reward is the
Kingdom of Heaven. No doubt is it therefore that God regards highly, that
which he rewards so liberally. For he that promises a Princely recompense
for a beggarly benevolence, declares that he is more delighted with the
giving, than with the gift, and that he as much esteems the doing of the
thing, as the fruit and commodity that comes of it. Whosoever therefore has
hitherto neglected to give Alms, let him know that God now requires it of him;
and he that has been liberal to the Poor, let him know that his godly doings
are accepted, and thankfully taken at Gods hands, which he will requite with
double and treble. For so says the Wise man: He which shows mercy to the
poor, does lay his money in bank to the Lord, for a large interest and gain:
the gain being chiefly the possession of the life everlasting, through the
merits of our Savior Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
be all Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

The Second Part of the Sermon of Alms-deeds.
YE have heard before (Dearly Beloved) that to give Alms unto the Poor, and to
help them in time of necessity, is so acceptable unto our Savior Christ, that
he counts that to be done to himself, that we do for his sake unto them. Ye
have heard also how earnestly both the Apostles, Prophets, Holy Fathers, and
Doctors, do exhort us unto the same. And ye see how wel-beloved and dear unto
God they were, whom the Scriptures report unto us to have been good Alms-men.
Wherefore if either their good examples, or the wholesome counsel of godly
Fathers, or the love of Christ, whose especial favor we may be assured by this
means to obtain, may move us, or do any thing at all with us: let us provide
us, that from henceforth we show unto Godward this thankful service, to be
mindful and ready to help them that be poor and in misery.

Now will I this second time that I entreat of Alms-deeds, show unto you how
profitable it is for us to exercise them, and what fruit thereby shall arise
unto us, if we do them faithfully. Our Savior Christ in the Gospel teaches
us, that it profits a man nothing to have in possession all the riches of the
whole World, and the wealth or glory thereof, if in the mean season he lose his
Soul, or do that thing whereby it should become captive unto death, sin, and
hellfire. By the which saying, he not only instructs us, how much the souls
health is to be preferred before worldly commodities; but it also serves to
stir up our minds, and to prick us forwards to seek diligently, and learn by
what means we may preserve and keep our souls ever in safety: that is, how we
may recover our health if it be lost or impaired, and how it may be defended
and maintained if once we have it. Yea, he teaches us also thereby to esteem
that as a precious Medicine, and an inestimable Jewel that has such strength
and virtue in it, that can either procure or preserve so incomparable a
treasure. For if we greatly regard that Medicine or Salve that is able to heal
sundry and grievous Diseases of the Body, much more will we esteem that which
has like power over the Soul. And because we might be better assured both to
know and to have in readiness that so profitable a Remedy: he, as a most
faithful and loving Teacher, shows himself both what it is, and where we may
find it, and how we may use and apply it. For when both he and his Disciples
were grievously accused of the Pharisees, to have defiled their souls in
breaking the constitutions of the Elders, because they went to meat, and washed
not their hands before, according to the custom of the Jews: Christ answering
their superstitious complaint, teaches them an especial remedy how to keep
clean their souls, notwithstanding the breach of such superstitious Orders:
Luke 11.
Give Alms (says he) and behold all things are clean unto you. He teaches
them, that to be merciful and charitable in helping the Poor, is the means to
keep the Soul pure and clean in the sight of God. We are taught therefore by
this, that merciful Alms-dealing is profitable to purge the Soul from the
infection and filthy spots of sin. The same Lesson does the Holy Ghost also
teach in sundry places of the Scripture, Tobit. 4.
saying, Mercifulness and Almsgiving purges from all sins, and delivers
from death, and suffers not the soul to come into darkness. A great
confidence may they have before the high God, that show mercy and compassion to
them that are afflicted. The wise Preacher, the Son of Syrach, confimeth the
same, Ecclus 5.
when he says, That as water quenches burning fire, even so mercy and alms
resists and reconcileth sins. And sure it is, that mercifulness quaileth the
heat of sin so much, that they shall not take hold upon man to hurt him; or if
ye have by any infirmity or weakness been touched and annoyed with them,
straightways shall mercifulness wipe and wash away, as salves and remedies to
heal their sores and grievous diseases. And thereupon that Holy Father Cyprian
takes good occasion to exhort earnestly to the merciful works of giving Alms
and helping the Poor, and there he admonishes to consider how wholesome and
profitable it is to relieve the needy, and help the afflicted, by the which we
may purge our sins, and heal our wounded souls.

But yet some will say unto me, If Almsgiving, and our charitable works
toward the Poor, be able to wash away sins, to reconcile us to God, to deliver
us from the peril of damnation, and makes us the Sons and Heirs of Gods
Kingdom: then are Christ's merits defaced, and his blood shed in vain; then are
we justified by Works, and by our Deeds may we merit Heaven; then do we in vain
believe that Christ died for to put away our sins, and that he rose for our
justification, as St. Paul teaches. But ye shall understand (Dearly Beloved)
that neither those places of the Scripture before alleged, neither the
Doctrine of the blessed Martyr Cyprian, neither any other godly and learned
man, when they, in extolling the dignity, profit, fruit, and effect of virtuous
and liberal Alms, do say that it washes away sins, and brings us to the
favor of God, do mean, that our work and charitable deed, is the original
cause of our acception before God; or that for the digninity or worthiness
thereof, our sins may be washed away, and we purged and cleansed of all the
spots of our iniquity; for that were indeed to deface Christ, and to defraud
him of his glory. But they mean this, and this is the understanding of those
and such like sayings, that God of his mercy and special favor toward them
whom he has appointed to everlasting salvation, has so offered his grace
especially, and they have so received it fruitfully, that although by reason of
their sinful living outwardly, they seemed before to have been the Children of
Wrath and Perdition, yet now the Spirit of God mightily working in them, unto
obedience to Gods Will and Commandments, they declare by their outward deeds
and life, in the showing of mercy and charity (which cannot come but of the
Spirit of God, and his especial grace) that they are the undoubted Children of
God, appointed to everlasting life. And so, as by their wickedness and ungodly
living, they showed themselves according to the judgment of men, which follow
the outward appearance, to be Reprobates and Cast-aways: So now by their
Obedience unto Gods Holy Will, and by their mercifulness and tender pity
(wherein they show themselves to be like unto God, who is the Fountain and
Spring of all mercy) they declare openly and manifestly unto the sight of men,
that they are the Sons of God, and elect of him unto salvation. For as the good
fruit is not the cause that the Tree is good, but the Tree must first be good
before it can bring forth good fruit: so the good deeds of Man are not the
cause that makes Man good, but he is first made good by the spirit and grace
of God that effectually works in him, and afterward he brings forth good
fruits. And then as the good fruit does argue the goodness of the Tree, so does
the good and merciful deed of the man, argue and certainly prove the goodness
of him that does it, according to Christ's sayings: Ye shall know them by their
fruits. And if any man will object, that evil and naughty men do sometimes by
their deeds appear to be very godly and virtuous: I will answer, so does the
Crab and Choak-Pear seem outwardly to have sometime as fair a red, and as
mellow a color as the Fruit that is good indeed. But he that will bite and
take a taste, shall easily judge betwixt the sour bitterness of the one, and
the sweet savouriness of the other. And as the true Christian man, in
thankfulness of his heart, for the redemption of his Soul purchased by Christ's
death, shows kindly by the fruit of his Faith, his obedience to God: so the
other, as a Merchant with God, does all for his own gain, thinking to win
Heaven by the merit of his Works, and so defaceth and obscureth the price of
Christ's Blodd, who only wrought our purgation. The meaning then of these
sayings in the Scriptures and other Holy Writings: Alms-deeds do wash away our
sins, and mercy to the Poor does blot out our offenses, is, that we doing these
things according to Gods Will and our Duty, have our sins indeed washed away,
and our offenses blotted out: not for the worthiness of them, but by the grace
of God which works all in all, and that for the promise that God has made to
them that are obedient unto his Commandment, that he which is the truth, might
be justified in performing the truth due to his promise. Alms-deeds do wash
away our sins, because God does vouchsafe then to repute us as clean and pure,
when we do them for his sake, and not because they deserve or merit our
purging, or for that they have any such strength and virtue in themselves* I
know that some men, too much addict to the advancing of their works, will not
be contented with this answer; and no marvel, for such men can no answer
content or suffice. Wherefore leaving them to their own wilful sense, we will
rather have regard to the reasonable and godly, who as they most certainly know
and persuade themselves, that all goodness, all bounty, all mercy, all
benefits, all forgiveness of sins, and whatsoever can be named good and
profitable, either for the Body, or for the Soul, do come only of Gods mercy
and mere favor, and not of themselves: So though they do never so many and so
excellent good deeds, yet are they never puffed up with the vain confidence of
them. And though they hear and read in Gods Word, and other-where in godly men's
Works, that Alms-deeds, Mercy, and Charitableness, does wash away sin, and blot
out iniquity: yet do they not arrogantly and proudly stick and trust unto them,
or brag themselves of them, as the proud Pharisee did, lest with the Pharisee
they should be condemned: but rather with the humble and poor Publican, confess
themselves sinful wretches, unworthy to look up to Heaven, calling and craving
for mercy, that with the Publican they may be pronounced of Christ to be
justified. The godly do learn, that when the Scriptures say, that by good and
merciful works, we are reconciled to Gods favor: we are taught then to know
what Christ by his intercession and mediation obtains for us of his Father,
when we be obedient to his Will; yea, they learn in such manner of speaking a
comfortable argument of Gods singular favor and love, that attributes that
unto us and to our doings, that he by his Spirit works in us, and through his
grace procures for us. And yet this notwithstanding, they cry out with St.
Paul, O wretches that we are: and acknowledge (as Christ teaches) that when
they have all done, they are but unprofitable servants: and with the blessed
King David, in respect of the just judgments of God, they do tremble, and say,
Who shall be able to abide it, Lord, if thou will give sentence according to
our deserts? Thus they humble themselves, and are exalted of God: they count
themselves vile, and of God are counted pure and clean: they condemn
themselves, and are justified of God: they think themselves unworthy of the
Earth, and of God are thought worthy of Heaven. Thus by Gods Word are they
truly taught how to think rightly of merciful dealing of Alms, and of Gods
especial mercy and goodness are made partakers of those fruits that his Word
has promised. Let us then follow their examples, and both show obediently in
our lives those works of mercy that we are commanded, and have that right
opinion and judgment of them that we are taught, and we shall in like manner,
as they, be made partakers, and feel the fruits and rewards that follow such
godly living, so shall we know by proof what profit and commodity does come of
giving of Alms, and succouring of the Poor.

The Third Part of the Sermon of Alms-Deeds.
YE have already heard two Parts of this Treatise of Alms-Deeds. The first, how
pleasant and acceptable before God the doing of them is; the second, how much
it behooves us, and how profitable it is to apply our selves unto them. Now in
the third Part will I take away that let that hinders many from doing them.
There be many that when they hear how acceptable a thing in the sight of God
the giving of Alms is, and how much God extends his favor toward them that
are merciful, and what fruits and commodities does come to them by it, they
wish very gladly with themselves that they also might obtain these benefits,
and be counted such of God as whom he would love or do for. But yet these men
are with greedy Covetousness so pulled back, that they will not bestow one
Halfpenny, or one piece of Bread, that they might be thought worthy of Gods
benefits, and so to come into his favor. For they are evermore fearful, and
doubting, lest by often giving, although it were but a little at a time, they
should consume their Goods, and so impoverish themselves, that even themselves
at the length should not be able to live, but should be driven to beg, and live
of other men's Alms. And thus they seek excuses to withhold themselves from the
favor of God, and choose with pinching Covetousness, rather to lean unto the
Devil, than by charitable Mercifulness, either to come unto Christ, or to
suffer Christ to come unto them. O that we had some cunning and skilful
Physician that were able to purge them of this so pestilent an humor, that so
sore infecteth, not their bodies, but their minds, and so by corrupting their
Souls, brings their bodies and souls into danger of Hellfire. Now, lest
there be any such among us (Dearly Beloved) let us diligently search for that
Physician, which is Jesus Christ, and earnestly labor that of his Mercy he
will truly instruct us, and give us a present Remedy against so perilous a
Disease. Hearken then, whosoever thou art that fear lest by giving to the
Poor, thou should bring thy self to beggary. That which thou take from thy
self to bestow upon Christ can never be consumed and wasted away. Wherein thou
shall not believe me, but if thou have Faith, and be a true Christian, believe
the Holy Ghost, give credit to the Authority of Gods Word that thus teaches.
For thus says the Holy Ghost by Solomon, He that gives unto the Poor, shall
never want. Men suppose that by hoording and laying up still, they shall at
length be Rich, and that by distributing and laying out, although it be for
most necessary and godly uses, they shall be brought to Poverty. But the Holy
Ghost, which knows all truth, teaches us another Lesson, contrary to this.
He teaches us that there is a kind of dispending that shall never diminish the
stock, and a kind of saving that shall bring a man to extreme poverty. For
where he says, that the good Alms-man shall never have scarcity, he adds,
But he that turns away his eyes from such as be in necessity, shall suffer
great poverty himself. How far different then is the judgment of man from the
judgment of the Holy Ghost? 1 Cor. 9.
The Holy Apostle Paul, a man full of the Holy Ghost, and made privy even of
the secret Will of God, teaches, that the liberal Alms-giver shall not thereby
be impoverished. He that ministers (says he) seed unto the sower, will
minister also bread unto you for food, yea, he will multiply your seed, and
increase the fruits of your righteousness. He is not content to advertise them
that they shall not lack, but he shows them also in what sort God will
provide for them. Even as he provided seed for the sower in multiplying it, and
giving great increase; so he will multiply their Goods and increase them, that
there shall be great abundance. And lest we should think his sayings to be but
words, and not truth, we have an example thereof in the third Book of Kings,
which does confirm and seal it up as a most certain truth. The poor Widow that
received the banished Prophet of God, Elias, when as she had but a handful of
Meal in a Vessel, and a little Oil in a Cruise, whereof she would make a Cake
for her self and her Son, that after they had eaten that, they might die,
because in that great Famine there was no more food to be gotten: yet when she
gave part thereof to Elias, and defrauded her own hungry belly mercifully to
relieve him, she was so blessed of God, that neither the Meal nor the Oil was
consumed all the time while that Famine did last, but thereof both the Prophet
Elias, she, and her Son, were sufficiently nourished and had enough.

Oh consider this Example, ye unbelieving and faithless covetous Persons, who
discredit Gods Word, and think his Power diminished! This poor Woman, in the
time of an extreme and long Dearth had but one handful of Meal, and a little
cruse of Oil, her only Son was ready to perish before her face for hunger, and
she her self like to pine away: and yet when the poor Prophet came and asked
part, she was so mindful of mercifulness, that she forgot her own misery; and
rather than she would omit the occasion given to give Alms, and work a work of
Righteousness, she was content presently to hazard her own and her Sons life.
And you, who have great plenty of Meats and Drinks, great store of Moth-eaten
Apparel, yea, many of you great heaps of Gold and Silver, and he that has
least has more than sufficient, now in this time, when (thanks be to God) no
great Famine does oppress you, your Children being well clothed, and well fed,
and no danger of death for Famine to be feared, will rather cast doubts and
perils of unlikely Penury, than you will part with any piece of your
superfluities, to help and succor the poor, hungry, and naked Christ, that
comes to your doors a begging. This poor and silly Widow never cast doubts in
all her misery what wants she her self should have, she never distrusted the
promise that God made to her by the Prophet, but straightway went about to
relieve the hungry Prophet of God, yea, preferring his necessity before her
own. But we, like unbelieving wretches, before we will give one Mite, we will
cast a thousand doubts of danger, whether that will stand us in any stead, that
we give to the Poor; whether we should not have need of it at any other time,
and whether here it would not have been more profitably bestowed. So that it is
more hard to wrench a strong Nail (as the Proverb says) out of a Post, than to
wring a farthing out of our fingers. There is neither the fear nor the love of
God before our eyes; we will more esteem a Mite, than we either desire Gods
Kingdom, or fear the Devils Dungeon. Hearken therefore, ye merciless Misers,
what will be the end of this your unmerciful dealing. As certainly as God
nourished this poor Widow in the Time of Famine, and increased her little
store, so that she had enough, and felt no penury, when other pined away: so
certainly shall God plague you with Poverty in the midst of Plenty. Then when
other have abundance, and be fed at full, you shall utterly waste and consume
away your selves; your store shall be destroyed, your goods plucked from you,
all your glory and wealth shall perish: and that which when you had you might
have enjoyed your selves in peace, and might have bestowed upon other most
godly, ye shall seek with sorrow and sighs, and no where shall find it. For
your unmercifulness toward other, ye shall find no man that will show mercy
toward you. You that had stony hearts toward other, shall find all the
Creatures of God, to you ward as hard as Brass and Iron. Alas, what fury and
madness does possess our minds, that in a matter of truth and certainty, we
will not give credit to the truth, testifying unto that which is most certain.
Christ says, That if we will first seek the Kingdom of God, and do the works
of righteousness thereof, we shall not be left destitute, all other things
shall be given to us plenteously. Nay, say we, I will first look that I be able
to live my self, and be sure that I have enough for me and mine, and if I have
any thing over, I will bestow it to get Gods favor, and the Poor shall then
have part with me.

See, I pray you, the perverse judgment of men, we have more care to nourish
the Carcass, than we have fear to see our Soul perish. Sermon. de Eleemosyna.
And as Cyprian says, whilst we stand in doubt lest our Goods fail, in being
over-liberal, we put it out of doubt, that our life and health fails, in not
being liberal at all. Whiles we are careful for diminishing of our stock, we
are altogether careless to diminish our selves. We love Mammon and lose our
Souls. We fear lest our Patrimony should perish from us, but we fear not lest
we should perish for it. Thus do we perversely love that which we should hate,
and hate that which we should love; we be negligent where we should be careful,
and careful where we need not Thus vain fear to lack our selves, if we give to
the Poor, is much like the fear of Children and Fools, which when they see the
bright glimmering of a Glass, they do imagine straightway that it is the
Lightning, and yet the brightness of a Glass never was the Lightning. Even so,
when we imagine that by spending upon the Poor, a man may come to Poverty, we
are cast into a vain fear, for we never heard or knew, that by that means any
man came to misery, and was left destitute, and not considered of God. Nay, we
read to the contrary in the Scripture (as I have before showed, and as by
infinite Testimonies and Examples may be proved) that whosoever serves God
faithfully and unfeignedly in any Vocation, God will not suffer him to decay,
much less to perish. The Holy Ghost teaches us by Solomon, Prove. 17.
that the Lord will not suffer the Soul of the righteous to perish for hunger.
And therefore David says unto all them that are merciful, O fear the Lord ye
that be his Saints, for they that fear him lack nothing, The Lions do lack and
suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord, shall want no manner of thing that
is good. When Elias was in the Desert, 3 Kings 17.
God fed him by the ministry of a Raven, that Evening and Morning brought him
sufficient Victuals. When Daniel was shut up in the Lions Den, God prepared
Meat for him, and sent it thither to him And there was the saying of David
fulfilled, The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord
shall want no good thing. For while the Lions, which should have been fed with
his flesh, rored for hunger and desire of their Prey, whereof they had no
power, although it were present before them, he in the mean time was fresh fed
from God, that should with his flesh have filled the Lions. So mightily does
God work to preserve and maintain those whom he loves; so careful is he also
to feed them who in any state or vocation do unfeignedly serve him. And shall
we now think that he will be unmindful of us, if we be obedient to his Word,
and according to his Will have pity on the Poor? He gives us all wealth before
we do any service for it: and will he see us lack necessaries when we do him
true service? Can a man think that he that feeds Christ, can be forsaken of
Christ, and left without food? Or will Christ deny earthly things unto them
whom he promises Heavenly things for his true service? It cannot be therefore
(Dear Brethren) that by giving of Alms, we should at any time want our selves;
or that we which relieve other men's need, should our selves be oppressed with
penury. It is contrary to Gods Word, it repugneth with his Promise, it is
against Christ's property and nature to suffer it, it is the crafty surmise of
the Devil to persuade us it. Wherefore stick not to give Alms freely, and trust
notwithstanding, that Gods goodness will minister unto us sufficiency and
plenty, so long as we shall live in this transitory life, and after our days
here well spent in his service, and the love of our brethren, we shall be
crowned with everlasting glory, to reign with Christ our Savior, in Heaven: to
whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

AN HOMILY OR SERMON CONCERNING The Nativity and Birth of our Savior Jesus
Christ.
AMong all the Creatures that God made in the beginning of the World most
excellent and wonderful in their kind, there was none (as the Scripture bears
witness) to be compared almost in any point unto Man, who as well in Body as
Soul exceeded all other, no less than the Sun in brightness and light exceeds
every small and little Star in the Firmament. He was made according to the
Image and similitude of God, he was endued with all kind of Heavenly gifts, he
had no spot of uncleanness in him, he was sound and perfect in all parts, both
outwardly and inwardly, his Reason was incorrupt, his Understanding was pure
and good, his Will was obedient and godly, he was made altogether like unto
God, in Righteousness, and Holiness, in Wisdom, in Truth; to be short, in all
kind of perfection.

When he was thus created and made, Almighty God, in token of his great love
toward him, chose out a special place of the Earth for him, namely, Paradise,
where he lived in all tranquillity and pleasure, having great abundance of
worldly goods, and lacking nothing that he might justly require or desire to
have. For as it is said, God made him Lord and Ruler over all the Works of his
hands, that he should have under his feet all Sheep and Oxen, Psalm. 2.
all Beasts of the Field, all Fowls of the Air, all Fishes of the Sea, and use
them always at his own pleasure, according as be should have need. Was not this
a mirror of perfection? Was not this a full, perfect, and blessed estate?
Could any thing else be well added hereunto, or greater felicity desired in
this World? But as the common nature of all men is, in time of Prosperity and
Wealth, to forget not only themselves, but also God: Even so did this first man
Adam, who having but one Commandment at Gods hand; namely, that he should not
eat of the Fruit of Knowledge of Good and Ill, did notwithstanding, most
unmindfully, or rather most wilfully break it, in forgetting the straight
charge of his Maker, and giving ear to the crafty suggestion of that wicked
Serpent the Devil. Whereby it came to pass, that as before he was blessed, so
now he was accursed; as before he was loved, so now he was abhorred; as before
he was most beautiful and precious, so now he was most vile and wretched in the
sight of his Lord and Maker: Instead of the Image of God, he was now become the
Image of the Devil; instead of the Citizen of Heaven, he was become the
bond-slave of Hell, having in himself no one part of his former purity and
cleanness, but being altogether spotted and defiled; insomuch that now he
seemed to be nothing else but a lump of sin, and th^r^fore by the just judgment
of God, was condemned to everlasting death. This so great and miserable a
Plague, if it had only rested on Adam, who first offended, it had been so much
the easier, and might the better have been born. But it fell not only on him,
but also on his Posterity and Children for ever, so that the whole brood of
Adam's flesh should sustain the self-same fall and punishment, which their
forefather by his offense most justly had deserved. St. Paul, in the fifth
Chapter to the Romans says, By the offense of only Adam, the fault came upon
all men to condemnation, and by one man's disobedience many were made sinners.
By which words we are taught, that as in Adam all men universally sinned, so in
Adam all men universally received the reward of sin; that is to say, became
mortal, and subject unto death, having in themselves nothing but everlasting
damnation both of Body and Soul. They became (as David says) corrupt and
abominable, they went all out of the way, there was none that did good, no not
one. O what a miserable and woeful state was this, that the sin of one man
should destroy and condemn all men, that nothing in all the World might be
looked for, but only pangs of death, and pains of Hell? Had it been any marvel
if mankind had been utterly driven to desperation, being thus fallen from life
to death, from salvation to destruction, from Heaven to Hell? But behold the
great goodness and tender mercy of God in his behalf: albeit man's wickedness
and sinful behavior was such, that it deserved not in any part to be forgiven;
yet to the intent he might not be clean destitute of all hope and comfort in
time to come, he ordained a new Covenant, and made a sure Promise thereof,
namely, that he would send a Messiah or Mediator into the World, which should
make intercession, and put himself as a stay between both Parties, to pacify
the wrath and indignation conceived against sin, and to deliver man out of the
miserable curse and cursed misery, whereinto he was fallen headlong by
disobeying the Will and Commandment of the only Lord and Maker. This Covenant
and Promise was first made unto Adam himself immediately after his Fall, as we
read in the third of Genesis, where God said to the Serpent on this wise, I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed. He
shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

Afterward the self-same Covenant was also more amply and plainly renewed unto
Abraham, where God promised him, that in his seed all Nations and Families of
the Earth should be blessed. Again, it was continued and confirmed unto Isaac
in the same form of words, Genesis 26.
as it was before unto his Father. And to the intent that mankind might not
despair, but always live in hope, Almighty God never ceased to publish, repeat,
confirm, and continue the same, by diverse and sundry testimonies of his
Prophets; who for the better persuasion of the thing, prophesied the time, the
place, the manner and circumstance of his Birth, the affliction of his Life,
the kind of his Death, the glory of his Resurrection, the receiving of his
Kingdom, the deliverance of his People, with all other circumstances belonging
thereunto. Isaiah prophesied that he should be born of a Virgin, and called
Emanuel. Micheas prophesied that he should be born in Bethlehem, a place of
Jury. Ezekiel prophesied that he should come of the stock and lineage of David.
Daniel prophesied that all Nations and Languages should serve him. Zachary
prophesied that he should come in poverty, riding upon an Ass. Malachy
prophesied that he should send Elias before him, which was John the Baptist.
Jeremy prophesied that he should be sold for Thirty Pieces of Silver, etc. And
all this was done, that the Promise and Covenant of God, made unto Abraham and
his Posterity concerning the Redemption of the World, might be credited and
fully believed. Now, as the Apostle Paul says, when the fullness of time was
come, that is, the perfection and course of years, appointed from the
beginning, th^n God according to his former Covenant and Promise, sent a
Messiah, otherwise called a Mediator, unto the World; not such a one as Moses
was, not such a one as Josua, Saul, or David was, but such a one as should
deliver mankind from the bitter curse of the Law, and make perfect satisfaction
by his death, for the sins of all people; namely, he sent his dear and only Son
Jesus Christ, born (as the Apostle says) of a Woman, and made under the Law,
that he might redeem them that were in bondage of the Law, and make them the
Children of God by adoption. Was not this a wonderful great love toward us
that were his professed and open Enemies, toward us that were by Nature the
Children of Wrath, and firebrarnds of Hellfire? In this (says St. John)
appeared the great love of God, that he sent his only begotten Son into the
World to save us, when we were his extreme enemies. Herein is love, not that we
loved him, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a reconciliation for
our sins. St. Paul also says, Christ, Romans 5.
when we were yet of no strength, died for us being ungodly. Doubtless a man
will scarce die for a righteous man. Peradventure some one durst die for him of
whom they have received good. But God sets out his love toward us, in that
he sent Christ to die for us, when we were yet void of all goodness. This and
such other comparisons does the Apostle use, to amplify and set forth the
tender mercy and great goodness of God, declar^d toward mankind, in sending
down a Savior from Heaven, even Christ the Lord. Which one benefit among all
other is so great and wonderful, that neither Tongue can well express it,
neither Heart think it, much less give sufficient thanks to God for it. But
here is a great controversy between us and the Jews, whether the saine Jesus
which was born of the Virgin Mary, be the true Messiah, and true Savior of the
World, so long promised and prophesied of before. They, as they are, and have
been always proud and stiff-necked, would never acknowledge him until this day,
but have looked and waited for another to come. They have this fond imagination
in their heads, That the Messiah shall come, not as Christ did, like a poor
Pilgrim and meek soul riding upon an Ass; but like a valiant and mighty King in
great Royalty and Honor. Not as Christ did, with a few Fishermen, and men of
small estimation in the World: but with a great Army of strong men, with a
great train of Wise and Noble men, as Knights, Lords, Earls, Dukes, Princes,
and so forth. Neither do they think that their Messiah shall slanderously
suffer death, as Christ did: but that he shall stoutly conquer, and manfully
subdue all his Enemies, and finally obtain such a Kingdom on Earth, as never
was seen from the beginning. While they feign unto themselves after this sort a
Messiah of their own brain, they deceive themselves, and account Christ as an
abject and scorn of the World. Therefore Christ crucified (as St. Paul says)
is unto the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness, because
they think it an absurd thing, and contrary to all reason, that a Redeemer and
Savior of the whole World, should be handled after such a sort as he was;
namely, scorned, reviled, scourged, condemned, and last of all cruelly hanged.
This, I say, seemed in their eyes strange, and most absurd, and therefore
neither they would at that time, neither will they as yet, acknowledge Christ
to be their Messi^s and Savior. But we (dearly beloved) that hope and look to
be saved, must both steadfastly believe, and also boldly confess, that the same
Jesus, which was born of the Virgin Mary, was the true Messiah and Mediator
between God and Man, promised and prophesied of so long before. For as the
Apostle writes, With the heart man believes unto righteousness, Romans 10.
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Again in the same place,
Whosoever believes in him, shall never be ashamed nor confounded. Whereto also
agrees the testimony of St. John, written in the fourth Chapter of his first
general Epistle, on this wise: Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of
God, he dwells in God, and God in him.

There is no doubt, but in this point all Christian men are fully and perfectly
persuaded. Yet shall it not be a lost labor to instruct and furnish you with a
few places concerning this matter, that ye may be able to stop the blasphemous
mouths of all them that most Jewishly, or rather devilishly, shall at any time
go about to teach or maintain the contrary. First, ye have the witness and
testimony of the Angel Gabriel, declared as well to Zachary the High Priest, as
also to the blessed Virgin. Secondly, ye have the witness and testimony of John
the Baptist, pointing unto Christ, and saying, Behold the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the World. Thirdly, ye have the witness and testimony
of God the Father, who thundered from Heaven, and said, This is my dearly
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Fourthly, ye have the witness
and testimony of the Holy Ghost, which came down from Heaven in manner of a
Dove, and lighted upon him in time of his Baptism. To these might be added a
great number more, namely, the witness and testimony of the Wise Men that came
to Herod, the witness and testimony of Simeon and Anna, the witness and
testimony of Andrew and Philip, Nathaniel and Peter, Nicodemus and Martha, with
diverse other: But it were too long to repeat all, and a few places are
sufficient in so plain a matter, specially among them that are already
persuaded. Therefore if the privy Imps of Antichrist, and crafty Instruments of
the Devil, shall attempt or go about to withdraw you from this true Messiah,
and persuade you to look for another that is not yet come; let them not in any
case seduce you, but confirm your selves with these and such other testimonies
of Holy Scripture, which are so sure and certain, that all the Devils in Hell
shall never be able to withstand them. For as truly as God lives, so truly was
Jesus Christ the true Messiah and Savior of the World, even the same Jesus
which as this day was born of the Virgin Mary, without all help of man, only by
the power and operation of the Holy Ghost.

Concerning whose nature and substance, because diverse and sundry Heresies are
risen in these our days, through the motion and suggestion of Satan: therefore
it shall be needful and profitable for your instruction, to speak a word or two
also of this part. We are evidently taught in the Scripture, that our Lord and
Savior Christ consists of two several natures, of his manhood, being thereby
perfect man; and of his Godhead, being thereby perfect God. John 1. Romans 8.
It is written, The Word, that is to say, the second Person in Trinity, became
flesh. God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, fulfilled
those things which the Law could not. Phil. 2.
Christ being in form of God, took on him the form of a servant, and was made
like unto man, being found in shape as a man. 1 Timothy 3.
God was showed in Flesh, justified in Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the
Gentiles, believed on in the World, and received up in glory. Also in another
place: There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, even the Man
Jesus Christ. These be plain places for the proof and declaration of both
Natures, united and knit together in one Christ. Let us diligently consider and
weigh the works that he did whiles he lived on Earth, and we shall thereby also
perceive the selfsame thing to be most true. In that he did hunger and thirst,
eat and drink, sleep and wake, in that he preached his Gospel to the People, in
that he wept and sorrowed for Jerusalem, in that he paid Tribute for himself
and Peter, in that he died and suffered death: what other things did he else
declare, but only this, that he was perfect man as we are? For which cause he
is called in Holy Scripture sometime the Son of David, sometime the Son of Man,
sometime the Son of Mary, sometime the Son of Joseph, and so forth. Now, in
that he forgave Sins, in that he wrought Miracles, in that he did cast out
Devils, in that he healed men with his only Word, in that he knew the thoughts
of men's Hearts, in that he had the Seas at his Commandment, in that he walked
on the Water, in that he rose from Death to Life, in that he ascended into
Heaven, and so forth. What other thing did he show therein but only that he was
perfect God, coequal with the Father as touching his Deity? Therefore he says,
The Father and I are all one, which is to be understood of his Godhead. For as
touching his Manhood, he says, The Father is greater than I am. Where are now
those Marcionites, that deny Christ to have been born in the flesh, or to have
been perfect man? Where are now those Arians, which deny Christ to have been
perfect God, of equal substance with the Father? If there be any such, we may
easily reprove them with these testimonies of Gods Word and such other.
Whereunto I am most sure, they shall never be able to answer. For the necessity
of our Salvation did require such a Mediator and Savior, as under one Person
should be a partaker of both Natures: It was requisite he should be Man, it was
also requisite he should be God. For as the transgression came by man, so was
it meet the satisfaction should be made by man. And because death, according to
St. Paul, is the just stipend and reward of sin, therefore to appease the wrath
of God, and to satisfy his Justice, it was expedient that our Mediator should
be such a one, as might take upon him the sins of mankind, and sustain the due
punishment thereof, namely, Death. Moreover, he came in flesh, and in the
self-same flesh ascended into Heaven, to declare and testify unto us, that all
faithful People which steadfastly believe in him, shall likewise come unto the
same Mansion-place, whereunto he being our chief Captain, is gone before. Last
of all, he became man, that we thereby might receive the greater comfort, as
well in our Prayers, as also in our Adversity, considering with our selves,
that we have a Mediator that is true man as we are, who also is touched with
our Infirmities, and was tempted even in like sort as we are. For these and
sundry other causes, it was most needful he should come, as he did in the flesh.

But because no creature, in that he is only a creature, has or may have power
to destroy death, and give life; to overcome Hell, and purchase Heaven; to
remit Sins, and give Righteousness: therefore it was needful, that our Messiah,
whose proper Duty and Office that was, should be not only full and perfect Man,
but also full and perfect God, to the intent he might more fully and perfectly
make satisfaction for mankind. Mat. 3.
God says, This is my wel-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. By which
place we learn, that Christ appeased and quenched the wrath of his Father, not
in that he was only the Son of Man: But much more in that he was the Son of God.

Thus ye have heard declared out of the Scriptures, that Jesus Christ was the
true Messiah and Savior of the World, that he was by Nature and Substance
perfect God and perfect Man; and for what cause it was expedient it should be
so. Now, that we may be the more mindful and thankful unto God in this behalf,
let us briefly consider, and call to mind the manifold and great benefits that
we have received by the Nativity and Birth of this our Messiah and Savior.

Before Christ coming into the World, all men universally in Adam, were nothing
else but a wicked and crooked Generation, rotten and corrupt Trees, stony
Ground, full of Brambles and Briers, lost Sheep, Prodigal Sons, naughty
unprofitable Servants, unrighteous Stewards, workers of Iniquity, the brood of
Adders, blind Guides, sitting in Darkness and in the shadow of Death: to be
short, nothing else but Children of Perdition, and inheritors of Hellfire. To
this does St. Paul bear witness in diverse places of his Epistles, and Christ
also himself in sundry places of his Gospel. But after he was once come down
from Heaven, and had taken our frail Nature upon him, he made all them that
would receive him truly, and believe his word, good Trees, and good Ground,
fruitful and pleasant Branches, Children of Light, Citizens of Heaven, Sheep of
his Fold, Members of his Body, Heirs of his Kingdom, his true Friends and
Brethren, sweet and lively Bread, the elect and chosen People of God. For as
St. Peter says in his first Epistle, and second Chapter: He bare our sins in
his body upon the Cross, he healed us, and made us whole by his stripes: and
whereas before we were sheep going astray, he by his coming brought us home
again to the true Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, making us a chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a particular People of God, in
that he died for our Offenses, and rose for our Justification. St. Paul to
Timothy the third Chapter, We were (says he) in times past, unwise,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in hatred,
envy, maliciousness, and so forth.

But after the loving kindness of God our Savior appeared toward mankind, not
according to the Righteousness that we had done, but according to his great
Mercy, he saved us by the Fountain of the new Birth, and by the renewing of the
Holy Ghost, which he poured upon us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our
Savior, that we being once Justified by his grace, should be Heirs of Eternal
Life, through hope and faith in his blood.

In these and such other places, is set out before our Eyes, as it were in a
Glass, Mat. 2. Mat. 5. John 18. Luke 4. John 8. Mat. 9. Mat. 11. John 12.
Coloss. 1.
the abundant grace of God, received in Christ Jesu, which is so much the more
wonderful, because it came not of any desert of ours, but of his mere and
tender mercy, even then when we were his extreme Enemies: But for the better
understanding and consideration of this thing, let us behold the end of his
coming, so shall we perceive what great commodity and profit his Nativity has
brought unto us miserable and sinful creatures. Heb. 10. Romans 3.
The end of his coming, was to save and deliver his People, to fulfill the Law
for us, to bear witness unto the Truth, to teach and preach the words of his
Father, to give light unto the World, to call sinners to Repentance, to refresh
them that labor and be heavy laden, to cast out the Prince of this World, to
reconcile us in the body of his flesh, to dissolve the works of the Devil; last
of all, to become a Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole World.

These were the chief ends wherefore Christ became man, not for any profit that
should come to himself thereby, but only for our sakes, that we might
understand the Will of God, be partakers of his Heavenly Light, be delivered
out of the Devils claws, released from the burden of sin, justified through
faith in his blood, and finally, received up into everlasting glory, there to
reign with him for ever. Was not this a great and singular love of Christ
toward mankind, that being the express and lively Image of God, he would
notwithstanding humble himself, and take upon him the form of a Servant, and
that only to save and redeem us? O how much are we bound to the goodness of God
in this behalf? how many thanks and praises do we owe unto him for this our
Salvation wrought by his dear and only Son Christ? who became a Pilgrim in
Earth to make us Citizens in Heaven; who became the Son of man to make us the
Sons of God; who became obedient to the Law, to deliver us from the curse of
the Law; who became poor, to make us rich; vile, to make us precious; subject
to death, to make us live for ever. What greater love could we silly Creatures
desire or wish to have at Gods hands?

Therefore (Dearly Beloved) let us not forget this exceeding love of our Lord
and Savior, let us not show our selves unmindful or unthankful toward him: but
let us love him, fear him, obey him, and serve him. Let us confess him with our
Mouths, praise him with our Tongues, believe on him with our Hearts, and
glorify him with our good Works. Christ is the light, let us receive the
light. Christ is the truth, let us believe the truth. Christ is the way, let us
follow the way. And because he is our only Master, our only Teacher, our only
Shepherd, and chief Captain; therefore let us become his Servants, his
Scholars, his Sheep, and his Soldiers. As for Sin, the Flesh, the World, and
the Devil, whose Servants and Bondslaves we were before Christ's coming, let us
utterly cast them off, and defy them, as the chief and only Enemies of our
Soul. And seeing we are once delivered from their cruel Tyranny by Christ, let
us never fall into their hands again, lest we chance to be in a worse case than
ever we were before. Happy are they, says the Scripture, that continue to the
end. Be faithful (says God) until death, and I will give thee a crown of life.
Again, he says in another place, He that puts his hand unto the Plough, and
looks back, is not meet for the Kingdom of God. Therefore let us be strong,
steadfast, and unmovable, abounding always in the works of the Lord. Let us
receive Christ, not for a time, but for ever; let us believe his Word, not for
a time, but for ever; let us become his Servants, not for a time, but for ever;
in consideration that he has redeemed and saved us, not for a time, but for
ever; and will receive us into his Heavenly Kingdom, there to reign with him,
not for a time, but for ever. To him therefore with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

AN HOMILY FOR Good Friday, concerning the Death and Passion of our Savior
Jesus Christ.
IT should not become us (well-beloved in Christ) being that People which he
redeemed from the Devil, from Sin and Death, and from everlasting Damnation, by
Christ, to suffer this time to pass forth without any meditation and
remembrance of that excellent Work of our Redemption, wrought as about this
time, through the great mercy and charity of our Savior Jesus Christ, for us
wretched Sinners, and his mortal Enemies. For if a mortal man's deed, done to
the behoof of the Commonwealth, be had in remembrance of us, with thanks for
the benefit and profit which we receive thereby: how much more readily should
we have in memory this excellent act and benefit of Christ's death? whereby he
has purchased for us the undoubted pardon and forgiveness of our sins, whereby
he made at one the Father of Heaven with us, in such wise, that he takes us
now for his loving Children, and for the true inheritors, with Christ his
Natural Son, of the Kingdom of Heaven. And verily so much more does Christ's
kindness appear unto us, in that it pleased him to deliver himself of all his
goodly Honor, which he was equally in with his Father in Heaven, and to come
down into this vale of misery, to be made mortal man, and to be in the state of
a most low Servant, serving us for our wealth and profit; us, I say, which were
his sworn Enemies, which had renounced his holy Law and Commandments, and
followed the lusts and sinful pleasures of our corrupt Nature. And yet, I say,
Coloss. 2.
did Christ put himself between Gods deserved wrath, and our sin; and rent that
Obligation wherein we were in danger to God, and paid our debt. Our debt was a
great deal too great for us to have paid. And without payment, God the Father
could never be at one with us. Neither was it possible to be loosed from this
debt by our own ability. It pleased him therefore to be the payer thereof, and
to discharge us quite.

Who can now consider the grievous debt of sin, which could none otherwise be
paid, but by the death of an Innocent, and will not hate sin in his heart? If
God hates sin so much, that he would allow neither man nor Angel for the
Redemption thereof, but only the death of his only and well-beloved Son: who
will not stand in fear thereof? If we (my Friends) consider this, that for our
sins this most innocent Lamb was driven to death, we shall have much more cause
to bewail our selves that we were the cause of his death, than to cry out of
the malice and cruelty of the Jews, which pursued him to his death. We did the
deeds wherefore he was thus stricken and wounded, they were only the ministers
of our wickedness. It is meet then that we should step low down into our
hearts, and bewail our own wretchedness and sinful living. Let us know for a
certainty, that if the most dearly beloved Son of God was thus punished and
stricken for the sin which he had not done himself: how much more ought we sore
to be stricken for our daily and manifold sins which we commit against God, if
we earnestly repent us not, and be not sorry for them? No man can love sin,
which God hates so much, and be in his favor. No man can say that he loves
Christ truly, and have his great Enemy (sin I mean, the author of his death)
familiar and in friendship with him. So much do we love God and Christ, as we
hate sin. We ought therefore to take great heed, that we be not favorers
thereof, lest we be found Enemies to God, and Traitors to Christ. For not only
they which nailed Christ upon the Cross, are his tormentors and crucifiers:
Heb. 6.
But all they (says St. Paul) crucify again the Son of God, as much as is in
them, who do commit vice and sin, which brought him to his death. Romans 6.
If the wages of sin be death, and death everlasting; surely it is no small
danger to be in service thereof. Romans 8. Romans 8.
If we live after the flesh, and after the sinful lusts thereof, St Paul
threatens, yea, Almighty God in St. Paul threatens, that we shall surely die.
We can none otherwise live to God, but by dying to sin. If Christ be in us,
then is sin dead in us: and if the Spirit of God be in us, which raised Christ
from death to life, so shall the same Spirit raise us to the resurrection of
everlasting life. Romans 1.
But if sin rule and reign in us, then is God, which is the fountain of all
Grace and Virtue, departed from us: then has the Devil, and his ungracious
spirit, rule and dominion in us. And surely if in such miserable state we die,
we shall not rise to life, but fall down to death and damnation, and that
without end. Christ ha^h not redeemed from us sin, that we should live an sin.
For Christ has not so redeemed us from sin, that we may safely return thereto
again: but he has redeemed us, that we should forsake the motions thereof, and
live to righteousness. Yea, we be therefore washed in our Baptism from the
filthiness of sin, that we should live afterward in the pureness of life. In
Baptism we promised to renounce the Devil and his suggestions, we promised to
be (as obedient Children) always following Gods will and pleasure. Then if he
be our Father indeed, let us give him his due Honor. If we be his Children,
let us show him our Obedience, like as Christ openly declared his obedience to
his Father, which (as St. Paul writes) was obedient even to the very death,
Phil. 2.
the death of the Cross. And this he did for us all that believe in him. For
himself he was not punished, for he was pure and undefiled of all manner of
sin. He was wounded (says Esaias) for our wickedness, Esaias 53.
and stripped for our sins: he suffered the penalty of them himself, to deliver
us from danger: He bare (says Esaias) all our sores and infirmities upon his own
back. No pain did he refuse to suffer in his own body, that he might deliver us
from pain everlasting. His pleasure it was thus to do for us, we deserved it
not. Wherefore the more we see our selves bound unto him, the more he ought to
be thanked of us, yea, and the more hope may we take, that we shall receive all
other good things of his hand, in that we have received the gift of his only
Son, through his liberality. R m. 8.
For if God (says St. Paul) has not spared his own Son from pain and
punishment, but delivered him for us all unto the death: how should he not give
us all other things with him? If we want any thing, John 1.
either for body or soul, we may lawfully and boldly approach to God as to our
merciful Father, to ask that we desire, and we shall obtain it. For such power
is given to us, to be the Children of God, so many as believe in Christ's Name.
Mat. 11.
In his Name whatsoever we ask, we shall have it granted us. For so well
pleased is the Father Almighty God, with Christ his Son, that for his sake he
favors us, and will deny us nothing. So pleasant was this Sacrifice and
Oblation of his Sons death, which he so obediently and innocently suffered,
that we should take it for the only and full amends for all the sins of the
World. And such favor did he purchase by his death, of his Heavenly Father for
us, that for the merit thereof (if we be true Christians in deed, and not in
word only) we be now fully in Gods grace again, and clearly discharged from our
sin. No ^ongue surely is able to express the worthiness of this so precious a
death. For in this stands the continual pardon of our daily offenses, in this
rests our justification, in this we be allowed, in this is purchased the
everlasting health of all our souls. Acts 4.
Yea, there is none other thing that can be named under Heaven to save our
souls, but this only work of Christ's precious offering of his Body upon the
Altar of the Cross. Certes there can be no work of any mortal man (be he never
so holy) that shall be coupled in merits with Christ's most holy act. For no
doubt, all our thoughts and deeds were of no value, if they were nor allowed in
the merits of Christ's death. All our righteousness is far unperfect, if it be
be compared with Christ's righteousness. For in his acts and deeds, there was no
spot of sin, or of any unperfectness. Our deeds be full of imperfection.
And for this cause they were the more able to be the true amends of our
righteousness, where our acts and deeds be full of imperfection and
infirmities, and therefore nothing worthy of themselves to stir God to any
favor, much less to challenge that glory that is due to Christ's act and merit.
Psalm. 115.
For not to us (says David) not to us, but to thy Name give the glory, O Lord.
Let us therefore (good Friends) with all reverence glorify his Name, let us
magnify and praise him for ever. For he has dealt with us according to his
great mercy, by himself has he purchased our Redemption. Heb. 1.
He thought it not enough to spare himself, and to send his Angel to do this
deed, but he would do it himself, that he might do it the better, and make it
the more perfect Redemption. He was nothing moved with the intolerable pains
that he suffered in the whole course of his long Passion, to repent him thus to
do good to his Enemies: but he opened his heart for us, and bestowed himself
wholly for the ransoming of us. Let us therefore now open our hearts again to
him, and study in our lives to be thankful to such a Lord, and evermore to be
mindful of so great a benefit; Acts 17.
yea, let us take up our Cross with Christ, and follow him. His Passion is not
only the ransom and whole amends for our sin, but it is also a most perfect
example of all patience and sufferance. For if it behoved Christ thus to
suffer, and to enter into the glory of his Father: why should it not become us
to bear patiently our small crosses of adversity, and the troubles of this
World? For surely (as says St. Peter) Christ therefore suffered, 1 Pet. 2. 1 Timothy 2. Romans 8. Mat. 5. Heb. 11.
to leave us an example to follow his steps. And if we suffer with him, we
shall be sure also to reign with him in Heaven. Not that the sufferance of this
transitory life should be worthy of that glory to come, but gladly should we be
contented to suffer, to be like Christ in our life, that so by our works we may
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. And as it is painful and grievous to
bear the Cross of Christ in the griefs and displeasures of this life; so it
brings forth the joyful fruit of Hope, James 5.
in all them that be exercised therewith. Let us not so much behold the pain,
as the reward that shall follow that labor. Nay, let us rather endeavor our
selves in our sufferance, to endure innocently and guiltless, as our Savior
Christ did. For if we suffer for our deservings, 1 Pet. 2.
then has not patience his perfect work in us: but if undeservedly we suffer
loss of goods and life, if we suffer to be evil spoken of for the love of
Christ, this is thankful before God; for so did Christ suffer. The patience of
Christ.
He never did sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth. Yea, when he was
reviled with taunts, he reviled not again. When he was wrongfully dealt with,
he threatened not again, nor revenged his quarrel, but delivered his cause to
him that judges rightly.

Perfect patience cares not what, Perfect patience.
nor how much it suffers, nor of whom it suffers, whether of Friend or Foe;
but studieth to suffer innocently, and without deserving. Yea, he in whom
perfect Charity is, cares so little to revenge, Mat. 5.
that he rather studieth to do good for evil, to bless and say well of them
that curse him, to pray for them that pursue him, according to the example of
our Savior Christ, The meekness of Christ.
who is the most perfect example and pattern of all meekness and sufferance,
which hanging upon the Cross, in most fervent anguish bleeding in every part of
his blessed Body, being set in the midst of his enemies and crucifiers: and he
notwithstanding the intolerable pains which they saw him in, being of them
mocked and scorned despitefully without all favor and compassion, had yet
toward them such compassion in heart, that he prayed to his Father of Heaven
for them, Luke 15.
and said, O Father, forgive them, for they wot not what they do. What patience
was it also which he showed, when one of his own Apostles and Servants which
was put in trust of him, came to betray him unto his Enemies to the death? He
said nothing worse to him, Mat. 15.
but, Friend, wherefore at thou come? Thus (good People) should we call to mind
the great examples of Charity which Christ showed in his Passion, if we will
fruitfully remember his Passion. Such charity and love should we bear one to
another, if we will be the true Servants of Christ. For if we love but them
that love and say well by us, Mat. 5.
what great thing is it that we do, says Christ? Do not the Paynims and open
sinners so? We must be more perfect in our Charity than thus, even as our
Father in Heaven is perfect, which makes the light of his Sun to rise upon the
good and the bad, and sends his rain upon the kind and unkind. After this
manner should we show our Charity indifferently, as well to one as to another,
as well to friend as foe, like obedient Children, after the example of our
Father in Heaven. For if Christ was obedient to his Father even to the death,
and that the most shameful death (as the Jews esteemed it) the death of the
Cross: why should we not be obedient to God in lower points of Charity and
Patience? Ecclus. 28. Mat. 28.
Let us forgive then our Neighbors their small faults, as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven us our great.

It is not meet that we should crave forgiveness of our great offenses at Gods
hands, and yet will not forgive the small trespasses of our Neighbors against
us. We do call for mercy in vain, if we will not show mercy to our Neighbors.
For if we will not put wrath and displeasure forth of our hearts to our
Christian Brother, no more will God forgive the displeasure and wrath that our
sins have deserved before him. For under this condition does God forgive us, if
we forgive other. It becomes not Christian men to be hard one to another, nor
yet to think their Neighbor unworthy to be forgiven. For howsoever unworthy he
is, yet is Christ worthy to have thee do thus much for his sake, he has
deserved it of thee, that thou should forgive thy Neighbor. And God is also
to be obeyed, which commands us to forgive, if we will have any part of the
Pardon which our Savior Christ purchased once of God the Father, by shedding
of his precious Blood. Nothing becomes Christ's Servants so much, as mercy and
compassion. Let us then be favorable one to another, James 5.
and pray we one for another, that we may be healed from all frailties of our
life, the less to offend one the other; and that we may be of one mind, Ephesians.
5.
and one spirit, agreeing together in brotherly love and concord, even like the
dear Children of God. By these means shall we move God to be merciful unto our
sins, yea, and we shall be hereby the more ready to receive our Savior and
Maker in his blessed Sacrament, to our everlasting comfort, and health of Soul.
Christ delights to enter and dwell in that Soul where Love and Charity
rules, and where Peace and Concord is seen. For thus writes St. John, 1 John
4. 1 John 2.
God is charity, he that abides in charity, abides in God, and God in him.
And by this (says he) we shall know that we be of God, if we love our
brethren. Yea, and by this shall we know, that we be delivered from death to
life, if we love one another. 1 John 2.
But he which hates his brother (says the same Apostle) abides in death,
even in the danger of everlas^^ng death, and is moreover the child of damnation
an^ (...) the Devil, cursed of God, and hated (so long as (...) so remains)
of God and all his heavenly company. For as Peace and Charity make us the
blessed Children of Almighty God: so does hatred and envy make us the cursed
Children of the Devil. Romans 8.
God give us all grace to follow Christ's examples in Peace, and in Charity, in
Patience and Sufferance, that we now may have him our guest to enter and dwell
within us, so as we may be in full surety, having such a pledge of our
Salvation. If we have him and his favor, we may be sure we have the favor of
God by his means. For he sits on the right hand of God his Father, as our
Proctor and Attorney, pleading and suing for us in all our needs and
necessities. Wherefore, if we we want any gift of godly wisdom, we may ask it
of God for Christ's sake, and we shall have it. Let us consider and examine our
selves, in what want we be concerning this virtue of Charity and Patience. If
we see that our hearts be nothing inclined thereunto, in forgiving them that
have offended against us, then let us knowledge our want, and wish to God to
have it. But if we want it, and see in our selves no desire thereunto, verily
we be in a dangerous case before God, and have need to make much earnest Prayer
to God, that we may have such an heart changed, to the grafting in of a new.
For unless we forgive other, we shall never be forgiven of God. No, not all the
prayers and good works of other, can pacify God unto us, unless we be at
peace, and at one with our Neighbor. Nor all our deeds and good works can move
God to forgive us our debts to him, except we forgive to other. He sets more
by Mercy, than by Sacrifice. Mercy moved our Savior Christ to suffer for his
Enemies: it becomes us then to follow his example. For it shall little avail
us to have in meditation the fruits and price of his Passion, to magnify them,
and to delight or trust in them, except we have in mind his examples in passion
to follow them. If we thus therefore cons^^er Christ's death, and will stick
thereto with fast ^^th for the merit and deserving thereof, and wi^^ ^o frame
our selves in such wise to bestow our selves, and all that we have by Charity,
to the behoof of our Neighbor, as Christ spent himself wholly for our profit,
then do we truly remember Christ's death: and being thus followers of Christ's
steps, we shall be sure to follow him thither where he sits now with the
Father and the Holy Ghost: To whom be all Honor and Glory. Amen.

THE SECOND HOMILY CONCERNING The Death and Passion of our Savior Christ.
THAT we may the better conceive the great mercy and goodness of our Savior
Christ, in suffering death universally for all men, it behooves us to descend
into the bottom of our Conscience, and deeply to consider the first and
principal cause wherefore he was compelled so to do. When our great Grandfather
Adam had broken Gods Commandment, Genesis ^.
in eating the Apple forbidden him in Paradise, at the motion and suggestion of
his Wife, he purchased thereby, not only to himself, but also to his Posterity
for ever, the just wrath and indignation of God, who according to his former
sentence pronounced at the giving of the Commandment, condemned both him, and
all his, to everlasting death, both of Body and Soul. For it was said unto him,
Genesis 2.
Thou shall eat freely of every Tree in the Garden: but as touching the Tree of
knowledge of good and ill, thou shall in no wise eat of it: For in what hour
soever thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death. Now as the Lord had
spoken, so it came to pass. Adam took upon him to eat thereof, and in so doing
he died the death; that is to say, he became mortal, he lost the favor of God,
he was cast out of Paradise, he was no longer a Citizen of Heaven; but a
Firebrand of Hell, and a Bondslave to the Devil. To this does our Savior bear
witness in the Gospel, Luke 15.
calling us lost Sheep, which have gone astray, and wandered from the true
Shepherd of our souls. To this also does St. Paul bear witness, Romans 5.
saying, That by the offense only of Adam, death came upon all men to
condemnation. So that now neither he, or any of his, had any right or interest
at all in the Kingdom of Heaven; but were become plain Reprobates and
Cast-aways, being perpetually damned to the everlasting pains of Hellfire. In
this so great misery and wretchedness, if mankind could have recovered himself
again, and obtained forgiveness at Gods hands, then had his case been somewhat
tolerable, because he might have attempted some way how to deliver himself from
eternal death. But there was no way left unto him, he could do nothing that
might pacify Gods wrath, he was altogether unprofitable in that behalf. There
was not one that did good, no not one. And how then could he work his own
Salvation? Should he go about to pacify Gods heavy displeasure by offering up
burnt-sacrifices, Heb. 9.
according as it was ordained in the old Law? by offering up the blood of Oxen,
the blood of Calves, the blood of Goats, the blood of Lambs, and so forth? O
these things were of no force nor strength to take away sins, they could not
put away the anger of God, they could not cool the heat of his wrath nor yet
bring mankind into favor again, they were but only figures and shadows of
things to come, Heb. 10.
and nothing else. Read the Epistle to the Hebrews, there shall you find this
matter largely discussed, there shall you learn in most plain words, that the
bloody Sacrifice of the old Law was unperfect, and not able to deliver man from
the state of damnation by any means: so that mankind in trusting thereunto,
should trust to a broken staff, and in the end deceive himself. What should he
then do? Should he go about to serve and keep the Law of God divided into two
Tables, and so purchase to himself eternal life? Indeed, if Adam and his
Posterity had been able to satisfy and fulfill the Law perfectly, in loving God
above all things, and their Neighbor as themselves; then should they have
easily quenched the Lords wrath, and escaped the terrible sentence of eternal
death pronounced against them by the mouth of Almighty God. For it is written,
Do thus, and thou shall live; that is to say, Luke 10.
fulfill my Commandments, keep thy self upright and perfect in them according to
my Will, then shall thou live, and not die. Here is eternal life promised with
this condition, and so, that they keep and observe the Law. But such was the
frailty of mankind after his Fall, such was his weakness and imbecility, that
he could not walk uprightly in Gods Commandments, though he would never so
fain: but daily and hourly fell from his bounden duty, offending the Lord his
God diverse ways, to the great increase of his condemnation, insomuch that the
Prophet David cries out on this wise: All have gone astray, Psalm. 5.
all are become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. In this
case what profit could he have by the Law? None at all. For as St. James says,
James 2.
He that shall observe the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, is become
guilty of all. And in the Book of Deuteronomy it is written, Deuteronomy. 27.
Cursed be he (says God) which abides not in all things that are written in
the Book of the Law, to do them.

Behold, the Law brings a curse with it, and makes it guilty, not because it
is of it self naught or unholy, (God forbid we should so think) but because the
frailty of our sinful flesh is such, that we can never fulfill it, according to
the perfection that the Lord requires. Could Adam then (think you) hope or
trust to be saved by the Law? No, he could not. But the more he looked on the
Law, the more he saw his own damnation set before his eyes, as it were in a
clear glass. So that now of himself he was most wretched and miserable,
destitute of all hope, and never able to pacify Gods heavy displeasure, nor
yet to escape the terrible judgment of God, whereunto he and all his Posterity
were fallen, by disobeying the strait Commandment of the Lord their God. But O
the abundant riches of Gods great mercy! Romans 11.
O the unspeakable goodness of his heavenly Wisdom! When all hope of
righteousness was past on our part, when we had nothing in our selves, whereby
we might quench his burning wrath, and work the salvation of our own Souls, and
rise out of the miserable estate wherein we lay: Then, even then did Christ the
Son of God, by the appointment of his Father, come down from Heaven, to be
wounded for our sakes, to be reputed with the wicked, to be condemned unto
death, to take upon him the reward of our sins, and to give his Body to be
broken on the Cross for our offenses. He (says the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 55.
meaning Christ) has born our infirmities, and has carried our sorrows, the
chastisements of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we were made whole.
2 Cor. 5.
St. Paul likewise says, God made him a sacrifice for our sins, which knew not
sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God by him. And St. Peter most
agreeably writing in this behalf, says, Christ has once died and suffered for
our sins, the just for the unjust, etc. To these might be added an infinite
number of other places to the same effect: but these few shall be sufficient
for this time.

Now then (as it was said in the beginning) let us ponder and weigh the cause
of his death, that thereby we may be the more moved to glorify him in our
whole life. Which if you will have comprehended briefly in one word, it was
nothing else on our part but only the transgression and sin of mankind. When
the Angel came to warn Joseph that he should not fear to take Mary to his Wife:
Did he not therefore will the Child's Name to be called Jesus, because he should
save his People from their sins? When John the Baptist preached Christ, and
showed him to the People with his finger: Did he not plainly say unto them,
John 1.
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the World? When the Woman
of Canaan besought Christ to help her Daughter, which was possessed with a Devil:
Mat. 15.
Did he not openly confess, that he was sent to save the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, by giving his life for their sins? It was sin then, O man,
even thy sin that caused Christ the only Son of God to be crucified in the
flesh, and to suffer the most vile and slanderous death of the Cross. If thou
had kept thy self upright, if thou had observed the Commandments, if thou
had not presumed to transgress the will of God in thy first Father Adam, then
Christ, Romans 5.
being in form of God, needed not to have taken upon him the shape of a
Servant: being immortal in Heaven, he needed not to become mortal on Earth:
being the true Bread of the Soul, he needed not to hunger: being the healthful
Water of Life, he needed not to thirst: being life it self, he needed not to
have suffered death. But to these and many other such extremities, was he
driven by thy sin, which was so manifold and great, that God could be only
pleased in him, and none other. Can thou think of this, O sinful man, and not
tremble within thy self? Can thou hear it quietly without remorse of
Conscience, and sorrow of Heart? Did Christ suffer his Passion for thee, and
will thou show no compassion toward him? While Christ was ye^ hanging on the
Cross, and yielding up the Ghost, the Scripture witnesses that the veil of the
Temple did rent in twain, Mat. 27.
and the Earth did quake, that the stones clave asunder, that the Graves did
open, and the dead bodies rise; and shall the Heart of man be nothing moved to
remember how grievously and cruelly he was handled of the Jews for our sins?
Shall man show himself to be more hard hearted than stones, to have less
compassion than dead Bodies? Call to mind, O sinful Creature, and set before
thine eyes Christ crucified. Think thou see his Body stretched out in length
upon the Cross, his Head crowned with sharp Thorns, and his Hands and his Feet
pierced with Nails, his Heart opened with a long Spear, his Flesh rent and torn
with Whips, his Brows sweating Water and Blood. Think thou hear him now
crying in an intolerable agony to his Father, and saying, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Could thou behold this woeful sight, or hear this
mournful voice, without Tears, considering that he suffered all this, not for
any desert of his own, but only for the grievousness of thy sins? O that
mankind should put the everlasting Son of God to such pains! O that we should
be the occasion of his death, and the only cause of his condemnation! May we
not justly cry, woe worth the time that ever we sinned? O my Brethren, let this
Image of Christ crucified, be always printed in our hearts, let it stir us up
to the hatred of sin, and provoke our minds to the earnest love of Almighty
God. For why? is not sin, think you, a grievous thing in his sight, seeing for
the transgressing of Gods Precept in eating of one Apple, he condemned all the
W^^ld to perpetual death, and would not be pacified, but only with the blood of
his own Son? True, yea, most true is that saying of David: Psalm. 5.
Thou, O Lord, hate all them that work iniquity, neither shall the wicked and
evil man dwell with thee By the mouth of his holy Prophet Esaias, Esaias 5.
he cried mainly out against sinners, and says, Woe be unto you that draw
iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with cart-ropes.

Did he not give a plain token how greatly he hated and abhorred sin, Genesis 7.
when he drowned all the World, save only eight Persons; when he destroyed
Sodom and Gomorrah with Fire and Brimstone; Genesis 19. 1 Kings 26.
when in three days space he killed with Pestilence threescore and ten thousand
for David's offense; when he drowned Pharaoh and all his Host in the Red Sea;
Exodus 14. Daniel 4.
when he turned Nabuchodonosor the King into the form of a brute Beast,
creeping upon all four; 2 Kings 27. Acts 1.
when he suffered Achitophel and Judas to hang themselves upon the remorse of
sin, which was so terrible to their eyes? A thousand such examples are to be
found in Scripture, if a man would stand to seek them out. But what need we?
This one example which we have now in hand, is of more force, and ought more to
move us, than all the rest. Christ being the Son of God, and perfect God
himself, who never committed sin, was compelled to come down from Heaven, to
give his Body to be bruised and broken on the Cross for our sins. Was not this
a manifest token of Gods great wrath and displeasure toward sin, that he could
be pacified by no other means, but only by the sweet and precious Blood of his
dear Son? O sin, sin, that ever thou should drive Christ to such extremity!
Woe worth the time that ever thou came into the World. But what booteth it now
to bewail? Sin is come, and so come that it cannot be avoided. There is no man
living, Prove. 24.
no not the justest man on the Earth but he falls seven times a day, as
Solomon says. And our Savior Christ, although he has delivered us from sin,
yet not so, that we shall be free from committing sin; but so, that it shall
not be imputed to our condemnation. He has taken upon him the just reward of
sin, Romans 6.
which was death, and by death has overthrown death; that we believing in him,
might live for ever and not die. Ought not this to engender extreme hatred of
sin in us, to consider that it did violently, as it were, pluck God out of
Heaven, to make him feel the horrors and pains of Death? O that we would
sometimes consider this in the midst of our pomps and pleasures: it would
bridle the outragiousness of the flesh, it would abate and assuage our carnal
affections, it would restrain our fleshly appetites, that we should not run at
random, as we commonly do. To commit sin wilfully and desperately, without fear
of God, is nothing else but to crucify Christ anew, as we are expressly taught
in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 6.
Which thing if it were deeply printed in all men's hearts, then should not sin
reign every where so much as it does, to the great grief and torment of Christ
now sitting in Heaven.

Let us therefore remember, and always bear in mind Christ crucified, that
thereby we may be inwardly moved both to abhor sin thoroughly, and also with an
earnest and zealous heart to love God. For this is another fruit which the
memorial of Christ's death ought to work in us, an earnest and unfeigned love
toward God. So God loved the World (says St. John) that he gave his only
begotten Son, John 3.
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting.
If God declared so great love toward us his silly Creatures, how can we of
right but love him again? Was not this a sure Pledge of his Love, to give us
his own Son from Heaven? He might have given us an Angel if he would, or some
other Creature, and yet should his love have been far above our deserts. Now,
he gave us not an Angel, but his Son. And what Son? His only Son, his natural
Son, his well-beloved Son, even that Son whom he had made Lord and Ruler of all
things. Was not this a singular token of great love? But to whom did he give
him? He gave him to the whole World; that it to say, to Adam, and all that
should come after him. O Lord, what had Adam, or any other man deserved at Gods
hands, that he should give us his own Son? We are all miserable Persons, sinful
Persons, damnable Persons, justly driven out of Paradise, justly excluded from
Heaven, justly condemned to Hellfire: And yet (see a wonderful token of Gods
love) he gave us his only begotten Son; us, I say, that were his extreme and
deadly Enemies, that we by virtue of his Blood shed upon the Cross, might be
clean purged from our sins, and made righteous again in his sight. Who can
choose but marvel, to hear that God should show such unspeakable love toward
us, that were his deadly Enemies? Indeed, O mortal man, thou ought of right
to marvel at it, and to acknowledge therein Gods great goodness and mercy
toward mankind, which is so wonderful, that no flesh, be it never so worldly
wise, may well conceive it, or express it. For as St. Paul testifies, Romans 5.
God greatly commends and sets out his love toward us, in that he sent
his Son Christ to die for us, when we were yet sinners, and open enemies of his
Name. If we had in any manner of wise deserved it at his hands, then had it
been no marvel at all; but there was no desert on our part wherefore he should
do it. Therefore thou sinful Creature, when thou hear that God gave his Son
to die for the sins of the World, think not he did it for any desert or
goodness that was in thee, for thou wast then the Bond-slave of the Devil: But
fall down upon thy knees, and cry with the Prophet David, Psalm. 8.
O Lord, what is man, that thou art so mindful of him? or the son of man, that
thou so regardest him? And seeing he has so greatly loved thee, endeavor thy
self to love him again, with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy
Strength, that therein thou may appear not to be unworthy of his love. I
report me to thine own Conscience, whether thou would not think thy love ill
bestowed upon him, that could not find in his heart to love thee again? If this
be true, (as it is most true) then think how greatly it behooves thee in Duty
to love God, which has so greatly loved thee, that he has not spared his own
only Son from so cruel and shameful a death for thy sake. And hitherto
concerning the cause of Christ's Death and Passion, which as it was on our part
most horrible and grievous sin, so on the other side it was the free gift of
God, proceeding of his mere and tender love toward mankind, without any merit
or desert of our part. The Lord for his mercies sake grant that we never forget
this great benefit of our Salvation in Christ Jesu, but that we always show our
selves thankful for it, abhorring all kind of wickedness and sin, and applying
our minds wholly to the service of God, and the diligent keeping of his
Commandments.

Now it remains that I show unto you, how to apply Christ's death and Passion
to our comfort, as a Medicine to our Wounds, so that it may work the same
effect in us wherefore it was given; namely, the health and salvation of our
souls. For as it profits a man nothing to have salve, unless it be well
applied to the part infected: So the death of Christ shall stand us in no
force, unless we apply it to our selves in such sort as God has appointed.
Almighty God commonly works by means, and in this thing he has also ordained
a certain mean, whereby we may take fruit and profit to our souls health.

What mean is that? forsooth it is Faith. Not an unconstant and wavering Faith;
but a sure, steadfast, grounded, and unfeigned Faith. God sent his Son into the
World (says St. John. John 3.
) To what end? That whosoever believes in him should not perish, b^t have life
everlasting. Mark these words. That whosoever believes in him. Here is the
mean whereby we must apply the fruits of Christ's death unto our deadly Wound.
Here is the mean whereby we must obtain eternal life; namely, Faith. For (as
St. Paul teaches in his Epistle to the Romans) with the heart man believes
unto righteo sness, Romans 10.
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Paul being demanded of
the Keeper of the Prison, what he should do to be saved? Acts 16.
made this Answer: Believe in the Lord Jesus, so shall thou and thine house
both be saved. After the Evangelist h^d described and set forth unto us at
large, the life and the death of the Lord Jesus, in the end he concludes with
these words: John 20.
These things are written, that we may believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of
God, and through Faith obtain eternal life. To conclude with the words of St
Paul, Romans 10.
which are these: Christ is the end of the Law unto salvation, for every one
that does believe. By this then, you may well perceive, that the only mean and
instrument of Salvation required of our parts, is Faith; that is to say, a sure
trust and confidence in the mercies of God: whereby we persuade our selves,
that God both has, and will forgive our sins, that he has accepted us again
into his favor, that he has released us from the bonds of damnation, and
received us again into the number of his elect People, not for our merits or
deserts, but only and solely for the merits of Christ's Death and Passion, who
became man for our sakes, and humbled himself to sustain the reproach of the
Cross, that we thereby might be saved, and made inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven. This Faith is required at our hands. And this if we keep steadfastly at
our hearts, there is no doubt, but we shall obtain Salvation at Gods hands, as
did Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of whom the Scripture says, Genesis 15. Romans 7.
that they believed, and it was imputed unto them for righteousness. Was it
imputed unto them only? and shall it not be imputed unto us also? Yes, if we
have the same Faith as they had, it shall be as truly imputed unto us for
righteousness, as it was unto them. For it is one Faith that must save both us
and them, even a sure and steadfast Faith in Christ Jesus; who, as ye have
heard, came into the World for this end, that whosoever believe in him, should
not perish, John 3.
but have life everlasting. But here we must take heed that we do not halt with
God through an unconstant and wavering Faith, but that it be strong and
steadfast to our lives end. He that wavereth (says St. James) is like a wave of
the Sea; James 1.
neither let that man think that he shall obtain any thing at Gods hands. Peter
coming to Christ upon the Water, Mat. 14.
because he fainted in Faith, was in danger of drowning. So we, if we begin to
waver or doubt, it is to be feared lest we shall sink as Peter did: not into
the Water, but into the bottomless Pit of Hellfire. Therefore I say unto you,
that we must apprehend the Merits of Christ's death and Passion by Faith, and
that with a strong and steadfast Faith, nothing doubting, but that Christ by his
own Oblation, and once offering of himself upon the Cross, has taken away our
sins, and has restored us again into Gods favor, so fully and perfectly, that
no other sacrifice for sin, shall hereafter be requisite or needful in all the
World.

Thus have you heard in few words, the mean whereby we must apply the fruits
and merits of Christ's death unto us, so that it may work the Salvation of our
Souls: namely, a sure, steadfast, perfect, and grounded Faith. Numb. 21. John 3.
For as all they which beheld steadfastly the Brazen Serpent, were healed and
delivered at the very sight thereof, from their corporal diseases and bodily
stings: even so all they which behold Christ crucified with a true and lively
Faith, shall undoubtedly be delivered from the grievous wounds of the Soul, be
they never so deadly or many in number. Therefore (dearly beloved) if we chance
at any time through frailty of the flesh, to fall into sin (as it cannot be
chosen, but we must needs fall often) and if we feel the heavy burden thereof
to press our souls, tormenting us with the fear of Death, Hell, and Damnation;
let us then use that mean which God has appointed in his Word, to wit, the
mean of Faith, which is the only instrument of Salvation now left unto us. Let
us steadfastly behold Christ crucified, with the eyes of our heart. Let us only
trust to be saved by his Death and Passion, and to have our sins clean washed
away through his most precious Blood, that in the end of the World, when he
shall come again to judge both the quick and the dead, he may receive us into
his Heavenly Kingdom, and place us in the number of his Elect and chosen
People, there to be partakers of that immortal and everlasting life, which he
has purchased unto us by virtue of his bloody Wounds: To him therefore, with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, World without end.
Amen.

AN HOMILY OF THE Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ. For Easter Day.
IF ever at any time the greatness or excellency of any matter Spiritual or
Temporal, has stirred up your minds to give diligent ear (good Christian
People, and well-beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) I doubt not but
that I shall have you now at this present season, most diligent and ready
Hearers of the matter which I have at this time to open unto you. For I come to
declare that great and most comfortable Article of our Christian Religion and
Faith, the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus. So great surely is the matter of
this Article, and of so great weight and importance, that it was thought worthy
to keep our said Savior still on Earth forty days after he was risen from
death to life, to the confirmation and establishment thereof in the hearts of
his Disciples. So that (as Luke clearly testifies in the first Chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles) he was conversant with his Disciples by the space of
forty days continually together, to the intent he would in his person, being
now glorified, teach and instruct them, which should be the teachers of other,
fully and in most absolute and perfect-wise the truth of this most Christian
Article, which is the ground and foundation of our whole Religion, before he
would ascend up to his Father into the Heavens, there to receive the glory of
his most triumphant Conquest and Victory. Assuredly, so highly comfortable is
this Article to our Consciences, that it is even the very Lock and Key of all
our Christian Religion and Faith. 1 Cor. 15.
If it were not true (says the Holy Apostle Paul) that Christ rose again, then
our Preaching were in vain, your Faith which you have received, were but void,
ye were yet in the danger of your sins. If Christ be not risen again (says the
Apostle) then are they in very ill case, and utterly perished, that be entered
their sleep in Christ, then are we the most miserable of all men, which have
our hope fixed in Christ, if he be yet under the power of death, and as yet not
restored to his bliss again. But now he is risen again from death (says the
Apostle Paul) to be the first fruits of them that be asleep, to the intent to
raise them to everlasting life again: Yea, if it were not true that Christ is
risen again, then were it neither true that he is ascended up to Heaven, nor
that he sent down from Heaven unto us the Holy Ghost, nor that he sits on
the right hand of his Heavenly Father, having the Rule of Heaven and Earth,
Psalm. 17.
reigning (as the Prophet says) from Sea to Sea; nor that he should after this
World, be the Judge as well of the living as of the dead, to give reward to the
good, and judgment to the evil. That these Links therefore of our Faith should
all hang together in steadfast establishment and confirmation, it pleased our
Savior not straitway to withdraw himself from the bodily presence and sight of
his Disciples, but he chose out forty days, wherein he would declare unto them,
by manifold and most strong arguments and tokens, that he had conquered Death,
and that he was also truly risen again to life. He began (says Luke) at Moses
and all the Prophets, Luke 24.
and expounded unto them the Prophesies that were written in all the Scriptures
of him, to the intent to confirm the truth of his Resurrection, long before
spoken of: which he verified indeed, as it is declared very apparently and
manifestly, by his often appearance to sundry Persons at sundry times. First, Mat
28.
he sent his Angels to the Sepulcher, who did show unto certain Women the empty
Grave, saying, that the burial-linen remained therein. And by these signs were
these Women fully instructed, that he was risen again, and so did they testify
it openly. After this, Jesus himself appeared to Mary Magdalen, John 20.
and after that to certain other Women, and strait afterward he appeared to
Peter, then to the two Disciples, which were going to Emmaus. 1 Cor. 15.
He appeared to the Disciples also, as they were gathered together, for fear of
the Jews, the door shut. Luke 24. John 21.
At another time he was seen at the Sea of Tiberias of Peter and Thomas, and of
other Disciples, when they were fishing. He was seen of more than five hundred
brethren in the Mount of Galilee, where Jesus appointed them to be by his
Angel, when he said, Behold, he shall go before you into Galilee, there shall
ye see him, as he has said unto you. After this, he appeared unto James, and
last of all, he was visibly seen of all the Apostles, Acts 1.
at such time as he was taken up into Heaven. Thus at sundry times he showed
himself after he was risen again, to confirm and stablish this Article. And in
these revelations sometime he showed them his Hands, his Feet, and his Side,
and bad them touch him, that they should not take him for a Ghost or a Spirit.
Sometime he also did eat with them, but ever he was talking with them of the
everlasting Kingdom of God, to assure the truth of his Resurrection. Luke 24.
For then be opened their understanding, that they might perceive the
Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ
to suffer, and to ris^ from death the third day, and that there should be
preached openly in his name pardon and remission of sins to all the Nations of
the World. Ye see (good Christian People) how necessary this Article of our
Faith is, seeing it was proved of Christ himself by such evident reasons and
tokens, by so long time and space. Now therefore as our Savior was diligent
for our comfort and instruction to declare it: so let us be as ready in our
belief to receive it to our comfort and instruction. As he died not for
himself, no more did he rise again for himself. ^ Cor. 15.
He was dead (says St. Paul) for our sins, and rose again for our
justification. O most comfortable word, evermore to be born in remembrance! He
died (says he) to put away sin, he rose again to endow us with righteousness.
His death took away sin and malediction, his death was the Ransom of them both;
his death destroyed death, and overcame the Devil, which had the power of death
in his subjection; his death destroyed Hell, with all the damnation thereof.
Thus is Death swallowed up by Christ's Victory, thus is Hell spoiled for ever.
If any man doubt of this Victory, let Christ's glorious Resurrection declare him
the thing. If Death could not keep Christ under his dominion and power, but
that he rose again, it is manifest that his power was overcome. If Death be
conquered, then must it follow that sin, wherefore death was appointed as the
wages, must be also destroyed. If Death and Sin be vanished away, then is the
Devil's Tyranny vanished, which had the power of Death, and was the author and
brewer of sin, and the ruler of Hell. If Christ had the victory of them all by
the power of his death, and openly proved it by his most victorious and valiant
Resurrection (as it was not possible for his great might to be subdued of them)
and it is true, that Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: Why may not we, that be his Members by true Faith, rejoice, and
boldly say with the Prophet Hosea and the Apostle Paul, Where is thy Dart, O
Death? Where is thy Victory, O Hell? Thanks be unto God, say they, which has
given us the Victory by our Lord Jesus Christ.

This mighty Conquest of his Resurrection, was not only signified before by
diverse figures of the Old Testament, as by Samson when he slew the Lion, out of
whose mouth came sweetness and honey; and as David bare his figure when he
delivered the Lamb out of the Lions mouth, 1 Reg. 17.
and when he overcame and slew the great Giant Goliath; and as when Jonas was
swallowed up in the Whales mouth, Jonas 1.
and cast up again on land alive: but was also most clearly prophesied by the
Prophets of the Old Testament, and in the New also confirmed by the Apostles.
He has spoiled, says St. Paul, Rule and Power, Col. 2.
and all the Dominion of our spiritual enemies. He has made a show of them
openly, and has triumphed over them in his own person. This is the mighty
power of the Lord, whom we believe on. By his Death has he wrought for us this
Victory, and by his Resurrection has he purchased Everlasting Life and
Righteousness for us. It had not been enough to be delivered by his Death from
sin, except by his Resurrection we had been endowed with righteousness. And it
should not avail us to be delivered from death, except he had risen again, to
open for us the Gates of Heaven, to enter into life everlasting. And therefore
St. Peter thanketh God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for his abundant
mercy, 1 Pet. 1.
because he has begotten us (says he) unto a lively hope by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from death, to enjoy an inheritance immortal, that never shall
perish, which is laid up in Heaven for them that be kept by the power of God
through Faith. Thus has his Resurrection wrought for us life and
righteousness. He passed through Death and Hell, to the intent to put us in
good hope, that by his strength we shall do the same. He paid the Ransom of
sin, that it should not be laid to our charge. He destroyed the Devil and all
his Tyranny, and openly triumphed over him, and took away from him all his
Captives, and has raised and set them with himself among the Heavenly Citizens
above. Ephesians. 2.
He died to destroy the rule of the Devil in us, and he rose again, to send
down his Holy Spirit to rule in our hearts, to endow us with perfect
Righteousness. Thus it is true that David sung, Psalm. 84. Ephesians. 4. Captivam
duxit captivitatem. Luke 2.
Veritas de terra orta est, and justitia de coelo prospexit. The truth of Gods
promise is in Earth to man declared, or from the Earth is the everlasting
Verity Gods Son risen to life, and the true righteousness of the Holy Ghost
looking out of Heaven, and in most liberal largess dealt upon all the World.
Thus is glory and praise rebounded upwards to God above, for his mercy and
truth. And thus is Peace come down from Heaven to men of good and faithful
hearts. Psalm. 48. Misericordia and veritas obviaverunt sibi.
Thus is mercy and truth, as David writes, together met, thus is peace and
righteousness embracing and kissing each other. If thou doubtest of so great
wealth and felicity that is wrought for thee, O man, call to thy mind that
therefore have thou received into thine own possession the everlasting Verity
our Savior Jesus Christ, to confirm to thy Conscience the truth of all this
matter. Thou have received him, if in true faith and repentance of Heart thou
have received him: If in purpose of amendment, thou have received him for an
everlasting gage or pledge of thy Salvation. Thou have received his Body which
was once broken, and his Blood which was shed for the remission of thy sin.
Thou have received his Body, to have within thee the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, for to dwell with thee, to endow thee with grace, to strengthen
thee against thine Enemies, and to comfort thee with their presence. Thou have
received his Body to endow thee with everlasting righteousness, to assure thee
of everlasting bliss, Ephesians. 5.
and life of thy Soul. For with Christ by true Faith art thou quickened again
(says St. Paul) from death of sin, to life of grace, and in hope translated
from corporal and everlasting death, to the everlasting life and glory in
Heaven, where now thy conversation should be, and thy heart and desire set.
Doubt not of the truth of this matter, how great and high soever these things
be. It becomes God to do no small deeds, how impossible soever they seem to
thee. Pray to God that thou may have Faith to perceive this great Mystery of
Christ's Resurrection: that by Faith thou may certainly believe nothing to be
impossible with God. Luke 18.
Only bring thou Faith to Christ's Holy Word and Sacrament. Let thy Repentance
show thy Faith, let thy purpose of amendment and obedience of thy heart to Gods
Law, hereafter declare thy true belief. Endeavor thy self to say with St.
Paul, Phil. 4.
From henceforth our conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for a
Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile bodies, that
they may be fashioned like his glorious body, which he shall do by the same
power whereby he rose from death, and whereby he shall be able to subdue all
things unto himself. Thus (good Christian People) forasmuch as ye have heard
these so great and excellent benefits of Christ's mighty and glorious
Resurrection, as how that he has ransomed Sin, overcome the Devil, Death, and
Hell, and has victoriously gotten the better hand of them all, to make us free
and safe from them, and knowing that we be by this benefit of his Resurrection
risen with him by our Faith, unto life everlasting, being in full surety of our
hope, that we shall have our bodies likewise raised again from death, to have
them glorified in immortality, and joined to his glorious body, having in the
mean while his holy Spirit within our hearts as a Seal and Pledge of our
everlasting Inheritance. By whose assistance we be replenished with all
righteousness, by whose power we shall be able to subdue all our evil
affections, rising against the pleasure of God. These things, I say, well
considered, let us now in the rest of our life declare our Faith that we have
in this most fruitful Article, by framing our selves thereunto, in rising daily
from sin to righteousness and holiness of life. For what shall it avail us
(says St. Peter) to be 2 Pet. 2.
escaped and delivered from the filthiness of the World, through the knowledge
of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, if we be entangled again therewith, and
be overcome again? Certainly it had been better (says he) never to have known
the way of righteousness, then after it is known and received, to turn back
again from the holy Commandment of God given unto us. For so shall the Proverb
have place in us, where it is said, The Dog is returned to his vomit again, and
the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire again. What a shame were
it for us, being thus so clearly and freely washed from our sin, to return to
the filthiness thereof again? What a folly were it, thus endowed with
righteousness, to lose it again? What madness were it to lose the Inheritance
that we be now set in, for the vile and transitory pleasure of sin? And what an
unkindness should it be, where our Savior Christ of his mercy is come to us,
to dwell with us as our Guest, to drive him from us, and to banish him
violently out of our souls, and instead of him in whom is all grace and virtue,
to receive the ungracious spirit of the Devil the founder of all naughtiness
and mischief. How can we find in our hearts to show such extreme unkindness to
Christ, which has now so gently called us to mercy, and offered himself unto
us, and he now entered within us? Yea, how dare we be so bold to renounce the
presence of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost? (For where one is, there
is God all whole in Majesty, together with all his power, wisdom, and goodness)
and fear not, I say, the danger and peril of so traitorous a defiance and
departure? Good Christian Brethren and Sisters, advise your selves, consider
the dignity that ye be now set in, let no Folly lose the thing that Grace has
so preciously offered and purchased; let not wilfulness and blindness put out
so great light that is now showed unto you. Ephesians. 6.
Only take good hearts unto you, and put upon you all the Armor of God, that
ye may stand against your Enemies, which would again subdue you, and bring you
into their thraldom. Remember ye be bought from your vain conversation, 1 Pet.
1^
and that your freedom is purchased neither with gold nor silver, but with the
price of the precious blood of that innocent Lamb Jesus Christ, which was
ordained to the same purpose before the World was made. But he was so declared
in the latter time of grace for your sakes which by him have your Faith in God,
who has raised him from death, and has given him glory, that you should have
your faith and hope toward God. Therefore as you have hitherto followed the
vain lusts of your minds, and so displeased God, to the danger of your souls:
So now, like obedient Children thus purified by Faith, 1 Pet. 1.
give your selves to walk that way which God moves you to, that ye may receive
the end of your Faith, the Salvation of your Souls. And as you have given your
bodies to unrighteousness, to sin after sin: so now give your selves to
righteousness, to be sanctified therein. If ye delight in this Article of our
Faith, that Christ is risen again from death to life: then follow you the
example of his Resurrection, as St. Paul exhorts us, saying, Romans 6.
As we be buried with Christ by our Baptism into death, so let us daily die to
sin, mortifying and killing the evil desires and motions thereof. And as Christ
was raised up from death by the glory of the Father, so let us rise to a new
life, and walk continually therein, that we may likewise as natural children
live a conversation to move men to glorify our Father which is in Heaven.
Matthew. 5.
If we then be risen with Christ by our faith to the hope of everlasting life:
let us rise also with Christ, after his example, to a new life, and leave our
old: We shall then be truly risen, if we seek for things that be heavenly, if
we have our affection on things that be above, and not on things that be on the
earth. If ye desire to know what these earthly things be which ye should put
off, and what be the heavenly things above, that ye should seek and ensue, St.
Paul in the Epistle to the Colossians declares, when he exhorts us thus:
Mortify your earthly members, Col. 3.
and old affection of sin, as fornication, uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness, which is worshipping of Idols, for the which
things, the wrath of God is wont to fall on the children of unbelief, in which
things once ye walked, when ye lived in them. But now put ye also away from
you, wrath, fierceness, maliciousness, cursed speaking, filthy speaking, out of
your mouths. Lie not one to another, that the old man with his works be put
off, and the new be put on. These be the earthly things which St. Paul moved
you to cast from you, and to pluck your hearts from them. For in following
these, ye declare your selves earthly and worldly. These be the fruits of the
earthly Adam. These should you daily kill, by good diligence, in withstanding
the desires of them, that ye might rise to righteousness. Let your affection
from henceforth be set on heavenly things, sue and search for mercy, kindness,
meekness, patience, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another. If any
man have a quarrel to another, as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. If these
and such other heavenly virtues ye ensue in the residue of your life, ye shall
show plainly that ye be risen with Christ, and that ye be the heavenly Children
of your Father in Heaven; from whom, as from the giver, James 1.
comes these graces and gifts. Ye shall prove by this manner, that your
conversation is in Heaven, where your hope is: and not on Earth, following the
beastly appetites of the flesh. Phil. 3.
Ye must consider that ye be therefore cleansed and renewed, that ye should
from henceforth serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days of your
lives, that ye may reign with him in everlasting life. If ye refuse so great
grace, whereto ye be called, what other thing do ye, Luke 1.
than heap to you damnation more and more, and so provoke God to cast his
displeasure upon you, and to revenge this mockage of his Holy Sacraments in so
great abusing of them? Apply your selves (good Friends) to live in Christ, that
Christ may still live in you, whose favor and assistance, if ye have, then
have ye everlasting life already within you, then can nothing hurt you.
Whatsoever is hitherto done and committed, John 5.
Christ ye see has offered you pardon, and clearly received you to his favor
again again, in full surety whereof ye have him now inhabiting and dwelling
within you. Only show your selves thankful in your lives, Col. 3.
determine with your selves to refuse and avoid all such things in your
conversations as should offend his eyes of mercy. Endeavor your selves that
way to rise up again, which way ye fell into the Well or Pit of sin. If by your
Tongue you have offended, now thereby rise again, and glorify God therewith,
accustom it to land and praise the Name of God, as ye have therewith
dishonored it. And as ye have hurt the name of your Neighbor, or otherwise
hindered him, so now intend to restore it to him again. For without Restitution,
Restitution
God accepts not your Confession, nor yet your Repentance. It is not enough
to forsake evil, except you set your courage to do good. By what occasion
soever you have offended, turn now the occasion to the honoring of God, and
profit of your Neighbor. Psalm. 36.
Truth it is that sin is strong, and affections unruly. Hard it is to subdue
and resist our Nature, so corrupt and leavened with the sour bitterness of the
Poison which we received by the inheritance of our old Father Adam. But yet
take good courage, says our Savior Christ, Matthew. 6.
for I have overcome the World, and all other Enemies for you. Sin shall not
have power over you, for ye be now under grace, says St. Paul. Romans 6. Romans 8.
Though your power be weak, yet Christ is risen again to strengthen you in your
Battle, his Holy Spirit shall help your Infirmities. In trust of his mercy, 1
Cor. 5.
take you in hand to purge this old leaven of sin, that corrupts and soureth
the sweetness of our life before God; that ye may be as new and fresh dough,
void of all sour leaven of wickedness; so shall ye show your selves to be sweet
bread to God, that he may have his delight in you. I say, kill and offer you up
the worldly and earthly affections of your bodies. For Christ our Easter Lamb
is offered up for us, to slay the power of sin, to deliver us from the danger
thereof, and to give us example to die to sin in our lives. As the Jews did eat
their Easter Lamb, and keep their Feast in remembrance of their deliverance out
of Egypt: Even so let us keep our Easter Feast in the thankful remembrance of
Christ's benefits, which he has plentifully wrought for us by his Resurrection
and passing to his Father, whereby we are delivered from the captivity and
thraldom of all our Enemies. Let us in like manner pass over the affections of
our old conversation, that we may be delivered from the bondage thereof, Exodus
7.
and rise with Christ. The Jews kept their Feast in abstaining from leavened
bread, by the space of seven days. Let us Christian folk keep our Holy Day in
spiritual manner; that is, in abstaining, not from material leavened bread, but
from the old leaven of sin, the leaven of maliciousness and wickedness. Let us
cast from us the leaven of corrupt Doctrine, that will infect our Souls. Let us
keep our Feast the whole term of our life, with eating the bread of pureness of
godly life, and truth of Christ's Doctrine. Thus shall we declare that Christ's
gifts and graces have their effect in us, and that we have the right belief and
knowledge of his holy Resurrection: where truly, if we apply our Faith to the
virtue thereof in our life, and conform us to the example and signification
meant thereby, we shall be sure to rise hereafter to everlasting glory, by the
goodness and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be all Glory, Thanksgiving, and Praise, in infinita seculorum
secula. Amen.

AN HOMILY OF THE Worthy Receiving and reverend Esteeming of the Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ.
THE great love of our Savior Christ toward mankind (good Christian People)
does not only appear in that dear-bought benefit of our Redemption and
Salvation by his Death and Passion, but also in that he so kindly provided,
that the same most merciful work might be had in continual remembrance, to take
some place in us, and not be frustrate of his end and purpose. For as tender
Parents are not content to procure for their Children costly Possessions and
Livelihood, but take order that the same may be conserved and come to their
use: So our Lord and Savior thought it not sufficient to purchase for us his
Fathers favor again (which is that deep Fountain of all goodness and eternal
life) but also invented the ways most wisely, whereby they might redound to our
commodity and profit. Amongst the which means, is the public celebration of
the memory of his precious Death, at the Lords Table. Which although it seem of
small virtue to some, yet being righly done by the Faithful, it does not only
help their weakness (who by their poisoned Nature readier to remember injuries
than benefits) but strengthens and comfort their inward man with peace and
gladness, and makes them thankful to their Redeemer, with diligent care and
godly conversation. Exodus 12.
And as of old time God decreed his wondrous benefits of the deliverance of his
People, to be kept in memory by the eating of the Passover, with his Rites and
Ceremonies: So our loving Savior has ordained and established the remembrance
of his great mercy expressed in his Passion, in the institution of his Heavenly
Supper, Mat. 26. 1 Cor. 11.
where every one of us must be Guests and not Gazers, Eaters and not Lookers,
feeding our selves, and not hiring others to feed for us; that we may live by
our own meat, Luke 11.
and not to perish for hunger, whiles other devour all. To this, his
Commandment forces us, 1 Cor. 6. Mat. 26.
saying, Do ye this, drink ye all of this. To this his Promise enticeth, This
is my Body which is given for you, This is my Blood which is shed for you. So
then of necessity we must be our selves partakers of this Table, and not
beholders of other: So we must address our selves to frequent the same in
reverent and comely manner, lest as Physic provided for the Body, being
misused, more hurts than profits: so this comfortable Medicine of the Soul
undecently received, tends to our greater harm and sorrow. 1 Cor. 11.
And St. Paul says, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation. Wherefore, that it be not said to us, as it was to
the Guest of that great Supper, Mat. 22.
Friend, how came thou in, not having the marriage-garment? And that we may
fruitfully use St. Paul's counsel, Let a man prove himself, 1 Cor. 11.
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup: we must certainly
know, that three things be requisite in him which would seemly, as becomes
such high Mysteries, resort to the Lords Table. That is, First, a right and
worthy estimation and understanding of this Mystery. Secondly, to come in a
sure Faith. And Thirdly, to have newness or pureness of life to succeed the
receiving of the same.

But before all other things, this we must be sure of especially, that this
Supper be in such wise done and ministered, as our Lord and Savior did, and
commanded to be done, as his holy Apostles used it, and the good Fathers in the
Primitive Church frequented it. For (as that worthy man St. Ambrose says) he
is unworthy of the Lord, that otherwise does celebrate that Mystery, than it
was delivered by him. Neither can he be devout, that otherwise does presume
than it was given by the Author. We must then take heed, lest of the Memory, it
be made a Sacrifice; lest of a Communion, it be made a private eating; lest of
two parts, we have but one; lest applying it for the dead, we lose the fruit
that be alive. Let us rather in these matters follow the advice of Cyprian in
the like cases; that is, cleave fast to the first beginning, hold fast the
Lords tradition, do that in the Lords commemoration which he himself did, he
himself commanded, and his Apostles confirmed. This caution or foresight if we
use, then may we see those things that be requisite in the worthy receiver,
whereof this was the first, that we have a right understanding of the thing it
self. As concerning which thing, this we may assuredly persuade our selves,
that the ignorant man can neither worthily esteem, nor effectually use those
mavelous graces and benefits offered and exhibited in that Supper: but either
will lightly regard them, to no small offense, or utterly condemn them, to his
utter destruction. So that by his negligence he deserves the Plagues of God to
fall upon him, and by contempt he deserves everlasting Perdition. To avoid
then these harms, use the advice of the Wise man, Prove. 23.
who wills thee when thou sit at an earthly Kings Table, to take diligent
heed what things are set before thee. So now much more at the King of Kings
Table, thou must carefully search and know what dainties are provided for thy
Soul, whither thou art come, not to feed thy senses and belly to corruption,
but thy inward man to immortality and life, nor to consider the earthly
creatures which thou see, but the heavenly graces which thy Faith beholds.
For this Table is not (says Chrysostom) for chattering Jays, but for Eagles,
who fly thither where the dead body lies. And if this advertisement of man
cannot persuade us to resort to the Lords Table with understanding, see the
counsel of God in the like matter, who charged his People to teach their
Posterity, not only the Rites and Ceremonies of the Passover, but the cause and
end thereof: Whence we may learn, that both more perfect knowledge is required
at this time at our hands, and that the ignorant cannot with fruit and profit,
exercise himself in the Lords Sacraments.

But to come nigher to the matter: St. Paul blaming the Corinthians for the
profaning of the Lords Supper, concludes that ignorance both of the thing it
self, and the signification thereof, was the cause of their abuse: for they
came thither unreverently, not discerning the Lords Body. Ought not we then by
the motion of the Wise man, by the wisdom of God, by the fearful example of the
Corinthians, to take advised heed, that we thrust not our selves to this Table
with rude and unreverent ignorance the smart whereof Christ's Church has rued
and lamented these many days and years? For what has been the cause of the
ruin of Gods Religion, but the ignorance hereof? What has been the cause of
this gross Idolatry, but the ignorance hereof? What has been the cause of this
mummish Massing, but the ignorance hereof? Yea, what has been, and what is at
this day the cause of this want of love and charity, but the ignorance hereof?
Let us therefore so travel to understand the Lords Supper, that we be no cause
of the decay of Gods Worship, of no Idolatry, of no dumb Massing, of no hate
and malice: so may we the boldier have access thither to our comfort. Acts 1.
Neither, need we to think that such exact knowledge is required of every man,
Matthew. 26.
that he be able to discuss all high points in the Doctrine thereof: But thus
much we must be sure to hold, that in the Supper of the Lord, there is no vain
Ceremony, no bare sign, no untrue figure of a thing absent: 1 Cor. 11.
But (as the Scripture says) the Table of the Lord, the Bread and Cup of the
Lord, the memory of Christ, the Annunciation of his death, yea, the Communion
of the Body and Blood of the Lord, in a mavelous incorporation, which by the
operation of the Holy Ghost (the very bond of our conjunction with Christ) is
through faith wrought in the souls of the faithful, whereby not only their
souls live to eternal life, but they surely trust to win their bodies a
resurrection to immortality. The true understanding of this fruition and union,
which is betwixt the Body and the Head, betwixt the true Believers and Christ;
Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34. Igna. Epist. ad Ephesians. Dionysius. Origin. Optat. Cyp. de
caena Domini. Atha. de pec. inspir. sanct.
the ancient Catholic Fathers both perceiving themselves, and commending to
their People, were not afraid to call this Supper, some of them, the Salve of
Immortality, and Sovereign Preservative against Death: other a Deifical
Communion: other, the sweet dainties of our Savior, the pledge of eternal
health, the defense of Faith, the hope of the Resurrection: other, the food of
Immortality, the healthful Grace, and the Conservatory to everlasting life. All
which sayings both of the Holy Scripture and godly men, truly attributed to
this celestial Banquet and Feast, if we would often call to mind, O how would
they inflame our hearts to desire the participation of these Mysteries, and
oftentimes to covet after this bread, continually to thirst for this food? Not
as especially regarding the terrene and earthly Creatures which remain: but
always holding fast, and cleaving by Faith to the Rock whence we may suck the
sweetness of everlasting Salvation? And to be brief, thus much more the
Faithful see, hear, and know the favorable mercies of God sealed, the
satisfaction by Christ toward us confirmed, and the remission of sin
established. Here they may feel wrought the tranquillity of Conscience, the
increase of Faith, the strengthening of Hope, the large spreading abroad of
brotherly kindness, with many other sundry graces of God. The taste whereof
they cannot attain unto, who be drowned in the deep dirty lake of blindness and
ignorance. From the which (O beloved) wash your selves with the living Waters
of Gods Word, whence you may perceive and know, both the spiritual food of this
costly Supper, and the happy trustings and effects that the same does bring
with it.

Now it follows to have with this knowledge a sure and constant Faith, not
only that the death of Christ is available for the redemption of all the World,
for the remission of sins, and reconciliation with God the Father: but also
that he has made upon his Cross a full and sufficient Sacrifice for thee, a
perfect cleansing of thy sins, so that thou acknowledgest no other Savior,
Redeemer, Mediator, Advocate, Intercessor, but Christ only, and that thou
may say with the Apostle, that he loved thee, and gave himself for thee. For
this is to stick fast to Christ's promise made in his Institution, to make
Christ thine own, and to apply his merits unto thy self. Herein thou need no
other man's help, no other Sacrifice or Oblation, no sacrificing Priest, no Mass
no means established by man's invention. That Faith is a necessary instrument in
all these holy Ceremonies, we may thus assure our selves, for that, as St. Paul
says, without Faith it is unpossible to please God. Heb. 11. In Johan. Hom. 6.
When a great number of the Israelites were overthrown in the Wilderness,
Moses, Aaron, and Phineas did eat Manna, and pleased God, for that they
understood (says St. Augustine) the visible meat spiritually. Spiritually they
hungered it, spiritually they tasted it, that they might be spiritually
satisfied. And truly as the bodily meat cannot feed the outward man, unless it
be let into the stomach to be digested, which is healthful and sound: no more
can the inward man be fed, except his meat be received into his soul and heart,
De Caena Domini.
sound and whole in Faith. Therefore (says Cyprian) when we do these things,
we need not to whet our teeth: but with sincere Faith we break and divide that
whole bread. It is well known that the meat we seek for in this Supper, is
spiritual food, the nourishment of our soul, a heavenly refection, and not
earthly; and invisible meat, and not bodily; a ghostly substance, and not
carnal; so that to think that without Faith we may enjoy the eating and
drinking thereof, or that that is the fruition of it, is but to dream a gross
carnal feeding, basely objecting and binding our selves to the Elements and
Creatures. Whereas by the advice of the Council of Nicene, Concilium Nicen.
we ought to lift up our minds by Faith, and leaving these inferior and
earthly things, there seek it, where the Sun of Righteousness ever shines.
Take then this Lesson (O thou that art desirous of this Table) of Emissenus a
godly Father, Eusebius. Emiserem. de Euchar.
that when thou go up to the reverend Communion to be satisfied with
spiritual meats, thou look up with Faith upon the Holy Body and Blood of thy
God, thou marvel with reverence, thou touch it with the mind, thou receive it
with the hand of thy heart, and thou take it fully with thy inward man.

Thus we see (Beloved) that resorting to this Table, we must pluck up all the
roots of infidelity, all distrust in Gods promises, that we make our selves
living Members of Christ's Body. For the unbelievers and faithless cannot feed
upon that precious Body: whereas the faithful have their life, their abiding in
him; their union, and as it were their incorporation with him. Wherefore let us
prove and try our selves unfeigned, without flattering our selves, whether we
be Plants of the fruitful Olive, living branches of the true Vine, Members
indeed of Christ's Mystical Body, whether God has purified our hearts by Faith,
to the sincere acknowledging of his Gospel, and embracing of his mercies in
Christ Jesus, so that at this his Table we receive not only the outward
Sacrament, but the spiritual thing also: not the Figure, but the Truth: not the
shadow only, but the body: not to death, but to life: not to destruction, but
to salvation: which God grant us to do through the merits of our Lord and
Savior: To whom be all Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

The Second Part of the Homily of the Worthy Receiving and Reverent Esteeming
of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.
IN the Homily of late rehearsed unto you, ye have heard (good People) why it
pleased our Savior our Christ to institute that heavenly memory of his Death
and Passion, and that every one of us ought to celebrate the same at his Table,
in our own Persons, and not by other. You have heard also with what estimation
and knowledge of so high Mysteries, we ought to resort thither. You have heard
with what constant Faith we should clothe and deck our selves, that we might be
fit and decent partakers of that Celestial Food.

Now follows the third thing necessary in him that would not eat of this
Bread, nor drink of this Cup unworthily, which is, newness of life, and
godliness of conversation. For newness of life, as fruits of Faith are required
in the partakers of this Table. We may learn by eating of the Typical Lamb,
whereunto no man was admitted, but he that was a Jew, that was circumcised,
that was before sanctified. Yea, St. Paul testifies, 1 Cor. 10.
that although the People were partakers of the Sacraments under Moses, yet for
that some of them were still Worshippers of Images, Whoremongers, Tempters of
Christ, Murmurers, and coveting after evil things: God overthrew those in the
Wilderness, and that for our example; that is, that we Christians should take
heed we resort unto our Sacraments with holiness of life, not trusting in the
outward receiving of them, and infected with corrupt and uncharitable manners.
For this sentence of God must always be justified: I will have mercy and not
sacrifice. De Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Wherefore (says Basil) it behooves him that comes to the Body and Blood of
Christ, in commemoration of him that died and rose again; not only to be pure
from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, lest he eat and drink his own
condemnation: but also to show out evidently, a memory of him that died and
rose again for us, in this point, that ye be mortified to Sin and the World to
live now to God in Christ Jesu our Lord. So then we must show outward
testimony, in following the signification of Christ's death, amongst the which
this is not esteemed least, to render thanks to Almighty God for all his
benefits, briefly comprised in the Death, Passion, and Resurrection of his
dearly beloved Son. The which thing, because we ought chiefly at this Table to
solemnize, the godly Fathers named it Eucharistia, that is, Thanksgiving. As if
they should have said, Now above all other times ye ought to laud and praise
God. Now may you behold the matter, the cause, the beginning, and the end of
all Thanksgiving. Now if you slack, ye show your selves most unthankful, and
that no other benefit can ever stir you to thank God, who so little regard here
so many, so wonderful, and so profitable benefits. Seeing then that the name
and thing it self does monish us of thanks, Heb. 13.
let us (as St. Paul says) offer always to God the host or sacrifice of praise
by Christ; that is, the fruit of the lips which confess his Name. For as David
sings, Psalm. 50.
He that offers to God thanks and praise, honors him. But how few be there
of thankful Persons, in comparison to the unthankful? Luke 17.
Lo ten Lepers in the Gospel were healed, and but one only returned to give
thanks for his Health. Yea, happy it were, if among sorty Communicants we could
see two unfeignedly give thanks. So unkind we be, so oblivious we be, so proud
Beggars we be, that partly we care nor for our own commodity, partly we know
not our Duty to God, and chiefly we will not confess all that we receive. Yea,
and if we be forced by Gods power to do it: yet we handle it so coldly, so
drily, that our lips praise him, but our hearts dispraise him; our tongues
bless him, but our life curses him; our words worship him, but our works
dishonor him. O let us therefore learn to give God here thanks aright, and so
to agnize his exceeding graces poured upon us, that they being shut up in the
Treasure-house of our Heart, may in due time and season in our life and
conversation, appear to the glorifying of his Holy Name.

Furthermore, for newness of Life, it is to be noted that St. Paul writes:
That we being many, are one bread, and one body: For all be partakers of one
bread. Declaring thereby not only our Communion with Christ, but that Unity
also, wherein they that eat at this Table, should be knit together. For by
Dissension, Vain-glony, Ambition, Strife, Envying, Contempt, Hatred, or Malice,
they should not be dissevered: but so joined by the bond of Love, in one
Mystical Body, as the corns of that Bread in one Loaf. In respect of which
strait knot of Charity, the true Christians in the Primitive Church, called
this Supper, Love. As if they should say, none ought to sit down there that
were out of love and charity, who bare grudge and vengeance in his Heart, who
also did not profess hi^ kind affection by some Charitable Relief for some part
of the Congregation. And this was their Practice. O Heavenly Banquet then so
used! O Godly Guests, who so esteemed this Feasts!

But O wretched Creatures that we be at these days, who be without
reconciliation of our Brethren whom we have offended, without satisfying them
whom we have caused to fall, without any kind of thought or compassion toward
them whom we might easily relieve, without any Conscience of Slander, Disdain,
Misreport, Division, Rancor, or inward bitterness. Yea, being accumbred with
the cloaked Hatred of Cain, Genesis 4. Genesis 27. 2 Samuel 3.
with the long colored Malice of Esau, with the dissembled Falsehood of Joab;
dare ye presume to come up to these sacred and fearful Mysteries? O Man,
whither rushest thou unadvisedly? It is a Table of Peace, and thou art ready to
fight. It is a Table of singleness, and thou art imagining mischief. It is a
Table of quietness, and thou art given to debate. It is a Table of pity, and
thou art unmerciful. Do thou neither fear God, the maker of this Feast, nor
reverence his Christ, the refection and meat, nor regardest his Spouse his
well-beloved Guest, nor weighest thine own Conscience, which is sometime thine
inward accuser? Wherefore (O Man) tender thine own Salvation, examine and try
thy good will and love toward the Children of God, the Members of Christ, the
Heirs of the Heavenly Heritage: yea, toward the Image of God, the excellent
Creature thine own Soul. If thou have offended, now be reconciled: If thou have
caused any to stumble in the way of God, now set them up again. If thou have
disquieted thy Brother, now pacify him. If thou have wronged him, now relieve
him. If thou have defrauded him, now restore to him. If thou have nourished
spite, now embrace friendship. If thou have fostered hatred and malice, now
openly show thy love and charity; yea, be pressed and ready to procure thy
Neighbors health of soul, wealth, commodity, and pleasures, as thine own.
Deserve not the heavy and dreadful burden of Gods displeasure for thine evil
will toward thy Neighbor, so unreverently to approach to this Table of the
Lord. Last of all, as there is here the mystery of Peace, and the Sacrament of
Christian Society, Chrysostom. ad popu. Ant. Homil. 6.
whereby we understand what sincere love ought to be betwixt the true
Communicants: So here be the tokens of pureness and innocence of life, whereby
we may perceive that we ought to purge our own Soul from all uncleanness,
iniquity, and wickedness, lest when we receive the Mystical Bread (as Origin
says) we eat it in an unclean place, that is, In Levit. Cap. 23. 1 Cor. 11.
Luke 17. Homil. 14.
in a Soul defiled and polluted with sin. In Moses Law, the man that did eat of
the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, with his uncleanness upon him, should be
destroyed from his People. And shall we think that the wicked and sinful Person
shall be excusable at the Table of the Lord? 1 Cor. 11. Luke 17. Homil. 114
We both read in St. Paul, that the Church of Corinth was scourged of the Lord,
for misusing the Lords Supper; and we may plainly see Christ's Church these many
years miserably vexed and oppressed, for the horrible profanation of the same.
Wherefore let us all universal and singular, behold our own manners and lives,
to amend them. Yea, now at least let us call our selves to an account, that it
may grieve us of our former evil conversation, that we may hate sin, that we
may sorrow and mourn for our offenses, that we may with tears pour them out
before God, that we may with sure trust desire and crave the Salve of his
Mercy, bought and purchased with the Blood of his dearly Beloved Son Jesus
Christ, to heal our deadly Wounds withal. For surely, Chrysostom. ad popul. Ant.
Homil. 6.
if we do not with earnest Repentance cleanse the filthy stomach of our Soul,
it must needs come to pass, that as wholesome meat received into a raw stomach,
corrupts and marreth all, and is the cause of further sickness; so shall we
eat this wholesome Bread, and drink this Cup to our eternal destruction. Thus we
and no other, must thoroughly examine, and not lightly look over our selves, not
other men; our own Conscience, not other men's lives: which we ought to do
uprightly, truly, and with just correction. O (says Chrysostom) let no Judas
resort to this Table, Ad popul. Ant. Hom. 6 Mat. 26.
let no covetous Person approach. If any be a Disciple, let him be present. For
Christ says, With my Disciples I make my Passover. Why cried the Deacon in the
Primitive Church, if any be holy, let him draw near? Why did they celebrate
these Mysteries, the Quire-door being shut? Why were the public Penitents and
Learners in Religion commanded at this time to avoid? Was it not because this
Table received no unholy, unclean, or sinful Guests? Wherefore if Servants dare
not to presume to an earthly Masters Table, whom they have offended, let us
take heed we come not with our sins unexamined into this presence of our Lord
and Judge. If they be worthy blame which kiss the Princes hand with a filthy
and unclean mouth, shall thou be blameless which with a stinking Soul, full of
Covetousness, Fornication, Drunkenness, Pride, full of wretched Cogitations and
Thoughts, do breath out iniquity and uncleanness on the Bread and Cup of the
Lord.

Thus have you heard, Epilog.
how you should come reverently and decently to the Table of the Lord, having
the knowledge out of his Word, of the thing it self, and the fruits thereof,
bringing a true and constant Faith, the Root and Wellspring of all newness of
life, as well in praising God and loving our Neighbor, as purging our own
Conscience from filthiness. So that neither the ignorance of the thing shall
cause us to contemn it, nor unfaithfulness make us void of fruit, nor sin and
iniquity procure us Gods Plagues: but shall by Faith, in knowledge and
amendment of life in Faith be here so united to Christ our Head in his
Mysteries, to our comfort, that after we shall have full fruition of him
indeed, to our everlasting joy and eternal life: To the which He bring us that
died for us, and redeemed us, Jesus Christ the righteous; to whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, one true and eternal God, be all Praise, Honor, and
Dominion, for ever. Amen.

AN HOMILY CONCERNING The Coming down of the HOLY GHOST, and the manifold Gifts
of the same.
For Whitsunday.
BEfore we come to the declaration of the great and manifold gifts of the Holy
Ghost, wherewith the Church of God has been evermore replenished, it shall
first be needful briefly to expound unto you, whereof this Feast of Pentecost
or Whitsuntide had his first beginning. You shall therefore understand, that
the Feast of Pentecost, was always kept the fiftieth day after Easter; a great
and solemn Feast among the Jews, wherein they did celebrate the memorial of
their deliverance out of Egypt, and also the memorial of the publishing of the
Law, which was given unto them in the Mount Sinai upon that day. It was first
ordained and commanded to be kept Holy, not by any mortal man, but by the mouth
of the Lord himself, as we read in Levit. 23. and Deuteronomy. 16. The place appointed
for the observation thereof, was Jerusalem, where was great recourse of People
from all parts of the World; as may well appear in the second Chapter of the
Acts, wherein mention is made of Parthians, Medes, Elamites, Inhabiters of
Mesopotamia, Inhabiters of Jury, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, Pamphilia,
and diverse other such places, whereby we may also partly gather, what great and
Royal Solemnity was commonly used in that Feast. Now as this was given in
commandment to the Jews in the Old Law, so did our Savior Christ, as it were,
confirm the same in the time of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 10.
ordaining (after a sort) a new Pentecost for his Disciples; namely, When he
sent down the Holy Ghost visibly, in form of cloven Tongues like Fire, and gave
them power to speak in such sort that every one might hear them, and also
understand them in his own Language. Which Miracle, that it might be had in
perpetual remembrance, the Church has thought good to solemnize and keep holy
this day, commonly called Whitsunday. And here is to be noted, that as the Law
was given to the Jews in the Mount Sinai, the fiftieth day after Easter, so was
the Preaching of the Gospel, through the mighty power of the Holy Ghost, given
to the Apostles in the Mount Sion the fiftieth day after Easter.

And hereof this Feast has his name, to be called Pentecost, even of the
number of the days. For as (St. Luke writes in the Acts of the Apostles) when
fifty days were come to an end, the Disciples being all together with one
accord in one place, the Holy Ghost came suddenly among them, and sat upon each
of them, like as it had been cloven Tongues of Fire. Which thing was
undoubtedly done, to teach the Apostles and all other Men, that it is he which
gives eloquence and utterance in Preaching the Gospel; that it is he which
opens the mouth to declare the mighty Works of God; that it is he which
engenders a burning zeal toward Gods Word, and gives all Men a Tongue, yea,
a fiery Tongue; so that they may boldly and cheerfully profess the truth in the
Face of the whole World, as Isaiah was endued with this Spirit. Esaias. 50.
The Lord (says Isaiah) give me a learned and a skilful Tongue, so that I
might know to raise up them that are fallen with the Word. The Prophet David
cries to have this gift, Psalm. 50.
saying, Open thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
For our Savior Christ also in the Gospel says to his Disciples, Mat. 10.
It is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which is within you.
All which testimonies of Holy Scripture, do sufficiently declare that the
Mystery in the Tongues betokens the Preaching of the Gospel, and the open
confession of the Christian Faith, in all them that are possessed with the Holy
Ghost. So that if any Man be a dumb Christian, not professing his Faith openly,
but cloaking and coloring himself for fear of danger in time to come, he
gives Men occasion, justly, and with good Conscience, to doubt lest he have
not the Grace of the Holy Ghost within him, because he is Tongue-tied, and does
not speak. Thus then have ye heard the first institution of this Feast of
Pentecost or Whitsuntide, as well in the Old Law among the Jews, as also in the
time of the Gospel among the Christians.

Now let us consider what the Holy Ghost is, and how consequently he works
his miraculous Works toward Mankind. The Holy Ghost is a spiritual and divine
Substance, the third Person in the Deity, distinct from the Father and the Son,
and yet proceeding from them both; which thing to be true, both the Creed of
Athanasius bears witness, and may be also easily proved by most plain
Testimonies of Gods Holy Word. Mat. 3.
When Christ was Baptized of John in the River Jordan, we read that the Holy
Ghost came down in form of a Dove, and that the Father thundered from Heaven,
saying, This is my dear and well beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Where
note three diverse and distinct Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, which all notwithstanding are not three Gods, but one God. Likewise,
when Christ did first institute and ordain the Sacrament of Baptism, he sent
his Disciples into the whole World, willing them to Baptize all Nations, Mat.
28.
In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And in another place,
he says, I will pray unto my Father, and he shall give you another Comforter.
Again, John 4. John 2.
When the Comforter shall come, whom I will send from my Father, etc. These,
and such other places of the New Testament, do so plainly and evidently confirm
the distinction of the Holy Ghost from the other Persons in the Trinity, that
no Man possibly can doubt thereof, unless he will blaspheme the everlasting
truth of Gods Word. As for his proper Nature and Substance, it is altogether
one with God the Father, and God the Son, that is to say, Spiritual, Eternal,
Uncreated, Incomprehensible, Almighty; to be short, he is even God and Lord
everlasting. Therefore he is called the Spirit of the Father; therefore he is
said to proceed from the Father and the Son; and therefore he was equally
joined with them in the Commission that the Apostles had to Baptize all
Nations. But that this may appear more sensibly to the Eyes of all Men, it
shall be requisite to come to the other part, namely to the wonderful and
heavenly Works of the Holy Ghost, which plainly declare unto the World his
mighty and divine Power. First, It is evident that he did wonderfully govern
and direct the Hearts of the Patriarchs and Prophets in old time, illuminating
their Minds with the knowledge of the true Messiah, and giving them utterance
to Prophecy of things that should come to pass long time after. 2 Pet. 1.
For as St. Peter witnesses, the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of
Man, but the holy Men of God spoke as they were moved inwardly by the Holy
Ghost. And of Zachary the high Priest, it is said in the Gospel, Luke 1.
That he being full of the Holy Ghost, Prophesied and praised God. So did also
Simeon, Anna, Mary, and diverse other, to the great wonder and admiration of all
Men. Moreover, was not the Holy Ghost a mighty worker in the Conception and the
Nativity of Christ our Savior? St. Matthew says, Mat. 1.
that the blessed Virgin was found with Child of the Holy Ghost before Joseph
and she came together. And the Angel Gabriel did expressly tell her, Luke 1.
that it should come to pass, saying, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the Power of the most High shall over-shadow thee. A mavelous matter that a
Woman should conceive and bear a Child without the knowledge of Man! But where
the Holy Ghost works, there nothing is impossible, as may further also appear
by the inward Regeneration and Sanctification of Mankind. When Christ said to
Nicodemus, Unless a Man be born anew, of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God; he was greatly amazed in his mind, and began to reason
with Christ, demanding how a Man might be born which was old? John 3.
Can he enter (says he) into his Mothers Womb again, and so be born anew?
Behold a lively pattern of a fleshly and carnal Man! He had little or no
intelligence of the Holy Ghost, and therefore he goes bluntly to work, and
asks how this thing were possible to be true; whereas otherwise if he had
known the great power of the Holy Ghost in this behalf, that it is he which
inwardly works the Regeneration and New Birth of Mankind, he would never have
marvelled at Christ's words, but would rather take occasion thereby to praise
and glorify God. For as there are three several and sundry Persons in the
Deity, so have they three several and sundry Offices proper unto each of them.

The Father to Create, the Son to Redeem, the Holy Ghost to Sanctify and
Regenerate. Whereof the last, the more it is hid from our understanding, the
more it ought to move all Men to wonder at the secret and mighty working of
Gods Holy Spirit which is within us. For it is the Holy Ghost, and no other
thing, that does quicken the Minds of Men, stirring up good and godly Motions
in their Hearts, which are agreeable to the Will and Commandment of God, such
as otherwise of their own crooked and perverse Nature they should never have.
John. 5.
That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. As who should say, Man of his own
Nature is fleshly and carnal, corrupt and naught, sinful and disobedient to
God, without any spark of goodness in him, without any virtuous or godly
Motion, only given to evil Thoughts and wicked Deeds. As for the Works of the
Spirit, the Fruits of Faith, charitable and godly Motions, if he have any at
all in him, they proceed only of the Holy Ghost, who is the only worker of our
Sanctification, and makes us new Men in Christ Jesus. Did not Gods holy Spirit
miraculously work in the Child David, when of a poor Shepherd, he became a
Princely Prophet? 1 Samuel 17. Mat. 9.
Did not Gods Holy Spirit miraculously work in Matthew, sitting at the receipt
of Custom, when of a proud Publican, he became an humble and lowly Evangelist?
And who can choose but marvel to consider, that Peter should become of a simple
Fisher, a chief and mighty Apostle? Paul of a cruel and bloody Persecutor, a
faithful Disciple of Christ, to teach the Gentiles? Such is the power of the
Holy Ghost to Regenerate Men, and as it were to bring them forth anew, so that
they shall be nothing like the Men that they were before. Neither does he think
it sufficient inwardly to work the Spiritual and New Birth of Man, unless he do
also dwell and abide in him. 1 Cor. 3.
Know ye not (says St. Paul,) that ye are the Temple of God, and that his
Spirit dwells in you? Know ye not that your Bodies are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, which is within you? Again he says, You are not in the Flesh, but
in the Spirit. For why? Romans 8. 1 John. 2*
the Spirit of God dwells in you. To this agrees the Doctrine of St. John,
writing on this wise, The Anointing which ye have received (he means the Holy
Ghost) dwells in you. And the Doctrine of Peter says the same, 1 Pet. 4.
who has these words, The Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you. O what
comfort is this to the heart of a true Christian, to think that the Holy Ghost
dwells within him? Romans 5.
If God be with us (as the Apostle says) who can be against us? O but how
shall I know that the Holy Ghost is within me? Some Man perchance will say,
forsooth, As the Tree is known by his Fruit, so is also the Holy Ghost. The
Fruits of the Holy Ghost (according to the mind of St. Paul,) are these, Love,
Joy Peace, long Suffering, Gentleness Goodness, Gal. 5.
Faithfulness, Meekness, Temperance, etc. Contrariwise the Deeds of the Flesh
are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Wantonness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Debate, Emulation, Wrath Contention, Sedition, Heresy,
Envy, Murder, Drunkenness, Gluttony, and such like.

Here is now that Glass wherein thou must behold thy self, and discern whether
thou have the Holy Ghost within thee or the Spirit of the Flesh. If thou see
that thy Works be virtuous and good, consonant to the prescript Rule of Gods
Word, favoring and tasting not of the Flesh but of the Spirit, then assure thy
self that thou art endued with the Holy Ghost; otherwise, in thinking well of
thy self, thou do nothing else but deceive thy self. The Holy Ghost does
always declare himself by his fruitful and gracious gifts, namely, by the word
of Wisdom, by the word of Knowledge, which is the understanding of the
Scriptures by Faith, 1 Cor. 12.
in doing of Miracles, by healing them that are Diseased, by Prophecy, which
is the Declaration of Gods Mysteries, by discerning of Spirits, diversities of
Tongues, interpretation of Tongues, and so forth. All which gifts as they
proceed from one Spirit, and are severally given to Man according to the
measurable distribution of the Holy Ghost; even so do they bring Men, and not
without good cause, into a wonderful admiration of Gods divine Power. Who will
not marvel at that which is written in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 5.
to hear their bold confession before the Council at Jerusalem? And to consider
that they went away with joy and gladness, rejoicing that they were worthy to
suffer Rebukes and Checks for the Name and Faith of Christ Jesus. This was the
mighty work of the Holy Ghost, who because he gives patience and joyfulness of
heart in Temptation and Affliction, has therefore worthily obtained this name
in Holy Scripture, to be called a Comforter. Who will not also marvel to read
the learned and heavenly Sermons of Peter and the Disciples, considering that
they were never brought up in School of Learning, but called even from their
Nets to supply the Rooms of Apostles? This was likewise the mighty work of the
Holy Ghost, John. 14.
who because he does instruct the hearts of the simple in the true knowledge of
God and his Word, is most justly termed by this name and title to be the Spirit
of Truth. Lib. 11. cap. 3.
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, cap. 3.
tells a strange Story of a certain learned and subtle Philosopher, who being
an extreme adversary to Christ and his Doctrine, could by no kind of Learning be
converted to the Faith, but was able to withstand all the Arguments that could
be brought against him with little or no labor. At length there started up a
poor simple Man of small wit and less knowledge, one that was reputed among the
Learned as an Idiot; and he on Gods name would needs take in hand to dispute
with this proud Philosopher The Bishops and other learned Men standing by, were
marvellously abashed at the matter, thinking that by his doings they should be
all confounded and put to open shame. He notwithstanding goes on, and
beginning in the Name of the Lord Jesus, brought the Philosopher to such Point
in the end, contrary to all Men's expectation, that he could not choose but
acknowledge the power of God in his Words, and to give place to the Truth. Was
not this a miraculous Work, that one silly Soul of no Learning, should do that
which many Bishops of great knowledge and understanding were never able to
bring to pass? So true is the saying of Bid, Where the Holy Ghost does
instruct and teach, there is no delay at all in learning. Much more might here
be spoken of the manifold gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, most excellent
and wonderful in our eyes; but to make a long Discourse through all, the
shortness of time will not serve. And seeing ye have heard the chiefest, ye may
easily conceive and judge of the rest. Now were it expedient to discuss this
Question, Whether all they which boast and brag that they have the Holy Ghost,
do truly challenge this unto themselves, or no? Which doubt, because it is
necessary and profitable, shall (God willing) be dissolved in the next Part of
this Homily. In the mean season, let us (as we are most bound) give hearty
thanks to God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, for sending down his
Comforter into the World, humbly beseeching him so to work in our Hearts by the
power of this Holy Spirit, that we being Regenerate and newly Born again in all
Goodness, Righteousness, Sobriety and Truth, may in the end be made partakers
of everlasting Life in his Heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior. Amen.

The Second Part of the Homily concerning the HOLY GHOST; disso^^^^^ (...)
doubt, Whether all Men ri^htly (...) themselves the HOLY GHOST, or no?
^ohn 14.^5.
OUr Savior Christ departing out of the World unto his Father, promised his
Disciples to send down another Comforter that should continue with them for
ever, and direct them into all truth. Which thing to be faithfully and truly
performed, the Scriptures do sufficiently bear witness. Neither must we think
that this Comforter was either promised, or else given only to the Apostles,
but also to the Universal Church of Christ, dispersed through the whole World.
For unless the Holy Ghost had been always present, governing and preserving the
Church from the beginning, it could never have sustained so many and great
brunts of Affliction and Persecution, with so little damage and harm as it
has. And the words of Christ are most plain in this behalf, saying, John 24.
Mat. 21.
That the Spirit of truth should abide with them for ever, that he would be
with them always (he means by Grace, Virtue and Power,) even to the Worlds
end.

Also in the Prayer that he made to his Father a little before his death, he
makes intercession, not only for himself and his Apostles, but indifferently
for all them that should believe in him through their words, John 17. Romans 8
that is, to wit, for his whole Church. Again, St. Paul says, If any Man have
not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his. Also in the words following,
Ibidem.
We have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. Hereby
then it is evident and plain to all Men, that the Holy Ghost was given, not
only to the Apostles, but also to the whole Body of Christ's Congregation,
although not in like form and majesty as he came down at the Feast of
Pentecost. But now herein stands the Controversy, Whether all Men do justly
arrogate to themselves the Holy Ghost or no? The Bishops of Rome have for along
time made a sore Challenge thereunto, reasoning with themselves after this
sort, The Holy Ghost (say they) was promised to the Church, and never forsakes
the Church. But we are the chief Heads and the principal part of the Church,
therefore we have the Holy Ghost for ever, and whatsoever things we decree are
undoubted Verities, and Oracles of the Holy Ghost. That ye may perceive the
weakness of this Argument, it is needful to teach you. First, What the true
Church of Christ is, and then to confer the Church of Rome therewith, to
discern how well they agree together. The true Church is an Universal
Congregation or Fellowship of Gods faithful and elect People, built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.
Jesus Christ himself being the head Cornerstone. And it has always three
Notes or Marks whereby it is known. Pure and Sound Doctrine, the Sacraments
Ministered according to Christ's holy Institution, and the right use of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. This description of the Church is agreeable both to
the Scriptures of God, and also to the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, so that
none may Justly find fault therewith. Now if you will compare this with the
Church of Rome, not as it was in the beginning, but as it is at present, and
has been for the space of Nine hundred Years and odd; you shall well perceive
the state thereof to be so far wide from the nature of the true Church, that
nothing can be more. For neither are they built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, retaining the sound and pure Doctrine of Christ Jesu;
neither yet do they order the Sacraments, or else the Ecclesiastical Keys, in
such sort as he did first Institute and Ordain them: But have so intermingled
their own Traditions and Inventions, by chopping and changing, by adding and
plucking away, that now they may seem to be converted into a new Guise. Christ
commended to his Church a Sacrament of his Body and Blood; they have changed it
into a Sacrifice for the Quick and the Dead. Christ did Minister to his
Apostles, and the Apostles to other Men, indifferently under both kinds: They
have robbed the Lay people of the Cup, saying, that for them one kind is
sufficient. Christ Ordained no other Element to be used in Baptism, but only
Water, whereunto when the Word is joined, it is made (as St. Augustine says) a
full and perfect Sacrament. Augustine.
They being wiser in their own conceit, than Christ, think it is not well nor
orderly done, unless they use Conjuration, unless they Hallow the Water, unless
there be Oil, Salt, Spittle, Tapers, and such other dumb Ceremonies, serving to
no use, contrary to the plain Rule of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.
who wills all things to be done in the Church to Edification. Christ
Ordained the Authority of the Keys to Excommunicate notorious sinners, and to
Absolve them which are truly Penitent: They abuse this Power at their own
pleasure, as well in Cursing the Godly with Bell, Book, and Candle, as also in
Absolving the Reprobate, which are known to be unworthy of any Christian
Society: Whereof they that Lust to see Examples, let them search their Lives.
To be short, look what our Savior Christ pronounced of the Scribes and
Pharisees in the Gospel, the same may be boldly and with safe Conscience
pronounced of the Bishops of Rome; namely, that they have forsaken, and daily
do forsake the Commandments of God, to erect and set up their own
Constitutions. Which thing being true, as all they which have any light of Gods
Word must needs confess, we may well conclude according to the Rule of
Augustine, That the Bishops of Rome and their adherents, are not the true Church
of Christ, much less then to be taken as chief Heads and Rulers of the same.
Whosoever (says he) do dissent from the Scriptures concerning the Head,
August. contra Petilian. Donatist. Ep. cap. 4.
although they be found in all places where the Church is appointed, yet are
they not in the Church; a plain place, concluding directly against the Church
of Rome. Where is now the Holy Ghost which they so stoutly claim to themselves?
Where is now the Spirit of Truth, that will not suffer them in any wise to err?
If it be possible to be there, where the true Church is not, then is it at
Rome; otherwise it is but a vain brag, and nothing else. St. Paul (as you have
heard before) says, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not
his. And by turning the words, it may be truly said, If any man be not of
Christ, the same has not the Spirit. Now to discern who are truly his, and who
not, we have this Rule given us, that his Sheep do always hear his Voice. And
St. John says, John 10. John 8.
He that is of God, hears Gods Word. Whereof it follows, that the Popes in
not hearing Christ's voice, as they ought to do, but preferring their own
decrees before the express Word of God, do plainly argue to the World, that
they are not of Christ, nor yet possessed with his Spirit. But here they all
allege for themselves, that there are diverse necessary Points not expressed in
holy Scripture, John 16.
which were left to the Revelation of the Holy Ghost. Who being given to the
Church, according to Christ's promise, has taught many things from time to
time, which the Apostles could not then bear. To this we may easily Answer by
the plain words of Christ, teaching us that the proper Office of the Holy Ghost
is, not to institute and bring in new Ordinances, contrary to his Doctrine
before taught; but shall come and declare those things which he had before
taught, John 16.
so that it might be well and truly understood. When the Holy Ghost (says he)
shall come, he shall lead you into all truth. What truth does he mean? Any
other than he himself had before expressed in his Word? John 16.
No. For he says, He shall take of mine, and show unto you. Again, he shall
bring you in remembrance of all things that I have told you. It is not then the
Duty and part of any Christian, under pretense of the Holy Ghost, to bring in
his own Dreams and Fantasies into the Church; but he must diligently provide
that his Doctrine and Decrees be agreeable to Christ's holy Testament; otherwise
in making the Holy Ghost the Author thereof, he does Blaspheme and Belie the
Holy Ghost, to his own Condemnation.

Now to leave their Doctrine, and to come to other Points. What shall we think
or judge of the Popes intolerable Pride? The Scripture says, that God
resists the Proud, and shows grace to the Humble. Also it pronouceth them
blessed which are Poor in Spirit, Matt. 5. Matt. 14.
promising that they which humble themselves, shall be exalted. And Christ our
Savior wills all his to learn of him, because he is humble and meek. As for
Pride, St. Gregory says, it is the Root of all Mischief. And St. Augustin's
judgment is this, that it makes Men Devils. Can any Man then, which either
has or shall read the Popes Lives, justly say that they had the Holy Ghost
within them? First, as touching that they will be termed Universal Bishops and
Heads of all Christian Churches through the World; we have the judgment of
Gregory expressly against them, Lib. 3. Epist. 76.78.
who writing to Mauritius the Emperor, condemns John, Bishop of
Constantinople, in that behalf, calling him the Prince of Pride, Lucifers
Successor, and the fore runner of Antichrist. Sermon. 3. de resur. Dom.
St. Bernard also agreeing thereunto, says, What greater Pride can there be,
than that one Man should prefer his own judgment before the whole Congregation,
as though he only had the Spirit of God? Dialogorum lib. 3.
And Chrysostom pronounces a terrible sentence against them, affirming
plainly, that whosoever seeks to be chief in Earth, shall find confusion in
Heaven; and that he which striveth for the Supremacy, shall not be reputed
among the Servants of Christ. Again he says, To desire a good work, it is
good; Chrysostom. sup. Mat.
but to covet the chief degree of Honor, it is mere Vanity. Do not these places
sufficiently convince their outrageous Pride, in Usurping to themselves a
Superiority above all other, as well Ministers and Bishops, as Kings also and
Emperors? But as the Lion is known by his Claws, so let us learn to know these
Men by their Deeds. What shall we say of him that made the Noble King Dandalus
to be tied by the Neck with a Chain, Sabell. Ennead. 9. lib. 7.
and to lie flat down before his Table, there to gnaw Bones like a Dog? Shall
we think that he has Gods holy Spirit within him, and not rather the Spirit of
the Devil? Such a Tyrant was Pope Clement the VI. What shall we say of him that
proudly and contemptuously trod Frederick the Emperor under his Feet, applying
the verse of the Psalm unto himself, Thou shall go upon the Lion and the Adder,
Psalm. 60.
the young Lion and the Dragon thou shall tread under thy foot? Shall we say
that he has Gods holy Spirit within him, and not rather the Spirit of the
Devil? Such a Tyrant was Pope Alexander the III. What shall we say of him that
Armed and animated the Sun against the Father, causing him to be taken, and to
be cruelly famished to death, contrary to the Law both of God, and also of
Nature? Shall we say that he had Gods holy Spirit within him, and not rather
the Spirit of the Devil? Such a Tyrant was Pope Pascal the II. What shall we
say of him that came into his Popedom like a Fox, that reigned like a Lion, and
died like a Dog? Shall we say that he had Gods holy Spirit within him, and not
rather the Spirit of the Devil? Such a Tyrant was Pope Boniface the VIII. What
shall we say of him that made Henry the Emperor, with his Wife and young Child,
to stand at the Gates of the City in the rough Winter, bare Footed and bare
legged, only clothed in Linsey Wolsey, eating nothing from Morning to Night,
and that for the space of three days? Shall we say that he had Gods holy Spirit
within him, and not rather the Spirit of the Devil? Such a Tyrant was Pope
Hildebrand, most worthy to be called a Firebrand, if we shall term him as he
has best deserved. Many other examples might here be alleged. As of Pope Joan
the Harlot, that was delivered of a Child in the High Street, going solemnly in
Procession. Of Pope Julius the II. that wilfully cast St. Peter's Keys into the
River Tiberis. Of Pope Urban the VI. that caused five Cardinals to be put in
Sacks, and cruely drowned. Of Pope Sergius the III. that persecuted the dead
Body of Formosus his Predecessor, when it had been buried eight years. Of Pope
John the XIV. of that name, who having his Enemy delivered into his hands,
caused him first to be stripped stark naked, his Beard to be shaven, and to be
hanged up a whole day by the Hair, then to be set upon an Ass with his face
backward toward the Tail, to be carried round about the City in despite, to be
miserably beaten with Rods, last of all, to be thrust out of his Country, and
to be banished for ever. But to conclude and make an end, ye shall briefly take
this short Lesson, wheresoever ye find the Spirit of Arrogance and Pride, the
Spirit of Envy, Hatred, Contention, Cruelty, Murder, Extortion, Witchcraft,
Necromancy, etc. Assure your selves that there is the Spirit of the Devil and
not of God, albeit, they pretend outwardly to the World never so much Holiness.
For as the Gospel teaches us, The Spirit of Jesus is a good Spirit, an holy
Spirit, a sweet Spirit, a lowly Spirit, a merciful Spirit, full of Charity and
Love, full of Forgiveness and Pity, not rendering evil for evil, extremity for
extremity, but overcoming evil with good, and remitting all offense oven from
the heart. According to which Rule, if any Man live uprightly, of him it may be
safely pronounced, that he has the Holy Ghost within him: If not, then it is a
plain token that he does usurp the the name of the Holy Ghost in vain.
Therefore (dearly beloved) according to the good Counsel of St. John Believe
not every Spirit, 1 John 4.
but first try them whether they be of God or no. Many shall come in my nam^
(says Christ, Mat. 24.
) and shall transform themselves into Angels of Light, deceiving (if it be
possible) the very Elect. They shall come unto you in Sheeps Clothing, being
inwardly cruel and ravening Wolves; they shall have an outward show of great
Holiness and innocence of Life, so that ye shall hardly or not at all discern
them. But the Rule that ye must follow is this, To judge them by their Fruits;
Mat. 7.
which if they be wicked and naught, then it is unpossible that the Tree of
whom they proceed should be good. Such were all the Popes and Prelates of Rome
for the most part, as does well appear in the Story of their Lives, and
therefore they are worthily accounted among the number of false Prophets and
false Christ's, Luke 6.
which deceived the World a long while. The Lord of Heaven and Earth defend us
from their Tyranny and Pride, that they never enter into his Vineyard again, to
the disturbance of his silly poor Flock, but that they may be utterly
confounded, and put to flight in all parts of the World; and he of his great
mercy so work in all Men's hearts, by the mighty power of the Holy Ghost, that
the comfortable Gospel of his Son Christ may be truly preached, truly received,
and truly followed in all places, to the beating down of Sin, Death, the Pope,
the Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist, that like scattered and dispersed
Sheep, being (at length) gathered into one fold, we may in the end rest all
together in the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, there to be partakers of
Eternal and Everlasting Life, through the merits and death of Jesus Christ our
Savior. Amen.

AN HOMILY FOR THE Days of Rogation-Week.
That all good things come from God.
I Am purposed this day (good devout Christian People) to declare unto you the
most deserved praise and commendation of Almighty God, not only in the
consideration of the mavelous Creation of this World, or for conservation and
governance thereof, wherein his great Power and Wisdom might excellently appear
to move us to honor and dread him; but most especially in consideration of his
liberal and large goodness, which he daily bestows on us his reasonable
Creatures, for whose sake he made the whole Universal World, with all the
Commodities and Goods therein, which his singular goodness well and diligently
remembered on our part, should move us (as Duty is) again with hearty affection
to love him, and with word and deed to praise him and serve him all the days of
our Life. And to this matter, being so worthy to entreat of, and so profitable
for you to hear, I trust I shall not need with much circumstance of Words, to
stir you to give your Attendance to hear what shall be said. Only I would wish
your affection inflamed in secret wise within your self, to raise up some
motion of Thanksgiving to the goodness of Almighty God, in every such Point as
shall be opened by my Declaration particularly unto you. For else, what shall
it avail us to hear and know the great goodness of God toward us, to know that
whatsoever is good, proceeds from him as from the principal Fountain and the
only Author, or to know that whatsoever is sent from him must needs be good and
wholesome? If the hearing of such matter moves us no further but to know it
only, what avails it the wise Men of the World t^ have knowledge of the Power
and Divinity of God, by the secret inspiration of him, where they did not honor
and glorify him in their knowledge as God? What praise was it to them by the
consideration of the Creation of the World, to behold his goodness, and not to
be thankful to him again for his Creatures? What other thing deserved this
blindness and forgetfulness of them at Gods hands, but utter forsaking of him;
and so forsaking of God, they could not but fall into extreme Ignorance and
Error? And although they much esteemed themselves in their Wits and Knowledge,
and gloried in their Wisdom, yet vanished they away blindly, in their thoughts
became Fools, and perished in their folly. There can be none other end of such
as draw nigh to God by knowledge, and yet depart from him in unthankfulness,
but utter destruction. This Experience saw David in his Days; for in his Psalm
he says, Behold, they which withdraw themselves from thee shall perish, Psalm.
73.
for thou have destroyed them all that are strayed from thee.

This Experience was perceived to be true of that holy Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 15.
O Lord, (says he,) whatsoever they be that forsake thee, shall be confounded;
they that depart from thee, shall be written in the Earth, and soon forgotten.
It profits not (good People) to hear the goodness of God declared unto us, if
our hearts be not enflamed thereby to honor and thank him. It profited not the
Jews, which were Gods elect People, to hear much of God, seeing that he was not
received in their hearts by Faith, nor thanked for his benefits bestowed upon
them; their unthankfulness was the cause of their destruction. Let us eschew
the manner of these before rehearsed, and follow rather the Example of that
holy Apostle St. Paul, who when in a deep Meditation he did behold the
mavelous Proceedings of Almighty God, and considered his infinite goodness in
the ordering of his Creatures, he burst out into this conclusion, Surely (says
he) of him, Romans 11.
by him, and in him, be all things. And this once pronounced, he stuck not
still at this Point, but forthwith thereupon joined to these words, To him be
glory and praise for ever. Amen.

Upon the ground of which words of St. Paul, (good Audience,) I purpose to
build my Exhortation of this day unto you. Wherein I shall do my endeavor,
First, To prove unto you that all good things come down unto us from above,
from the Father of Light. Secondly, That Jesus Christ his Son and our Savior
is the mean, by whom we receive his liberal goodness. Thirdly, That in the
power and virtue of the Holy Ghost, we be made meet and able to receive his
gifts and graces. Which things distinctly and advisedly considered in our
minds, must needs compel us in most low reverence, after our bounden Duty
always to render him thanks again, in some testification of our good hearts for
his deserts unto us. And that the entreating of this matter in hand may be to
the glory of Almighty God, Let us in one Faith and Charity call upon the Father
of Mercy, from whom comes every good gift, and every perfect gift, by the
mediation of his well-beloved Son our Savior, that we may be assisted with the
presence of his Holy Spirit, and profitably on both parts, to demean our selves
in speaking and harkening to the Salvation of our Souls.

In the beginning of my speaking unto you (good Christian People) suppose not
that I do take upon me to declare unto you the excellent Power, or the
incomparable Wisdom of Almighty God, as though I would have you believe that it
might be expressed unto you by words; Nay, it may not be thought that that
thing may be comprehended by Man's words, that is incomprehensible. And too much
arrogance it were for Dust and Ashes to think that he can worthily dec^are his
Maker. It passes far the dark understanding and wisdom of a Mortal Man, to
speak sufficiently of that divine Majesty, which the Angels cannot understand.
We shall therefore lay apart to speak of the profound and unsearchable Nature
of Almighty God, rather acknowledging our weakness, than rashly to attempt what
is above all Man's capacity to compass. It shall better suffice us in low
Humility to reverence and dread his Majesty, which we cannot comprize, than by
overmuch curious searching to be overcharged with the Glory. We shall rather
turn our whole Contemplation to answer a while his goodness toward us, wherein
we shall be much more profitably occupied, and more may we be bold to search.
To consider the great Power he is of, can but make us dread and fear. To
consider his high Wisdom, might utterly discomfort our Frailty to have any
thing to do with him; but in consideration of his inestimable goodness, we take
good heart again to trust well unto him. By his goodness we be assured to take
him for our refuge, our hope and comfort, our merciful Father, in all the
course of our Lives. His Power and Wisdom compels us to take him for God,
Omnipotent, Invisible, having Rule in Heaven and Earth, having all things in
his subjection, and will have none in Council with him, nor any to ask the
reason of his doing; Dan. 11.
For he may do what likes him, and none can resist him. For he works all
things in his secret Judgment to his own pleasure, Prove. 16.
yea, even the wicked to damnation, says Solomon. By the reason of his Nature,
he is called in Scripture consuming Fire, he is called a terrible and fearful
God; Heb. 11.
of this behalf therefore, we have no familiarity, no access unto him, but his
goodness again tempereth the rigor of his High Power, and makes us bold, and
puts us in hope that he will be conversant with us, and easy unto us.

It is his goodness that moves him to say in Scripture, It is my delight to be
with the Children of Men. It is his goodness that moves him to call us unto
him, to offer us his Friendship and Presence. It is his goodness that patiently
suffers our straying from him, and suffers us long, to win us to
Repentance. It is of his goodness that we be created reasonable Creatures,
where else he might have made us brute Beasts. Prove. 8.
It was his Mercy to have us born among the number of Christian People, and
thereby in a much more nighness to Salvation, where we might have been born (if
his goodness had not been) among the Paynims, clean void from God and the hope
of Everlasting Life. And what other thing does his loving and gentle Voice,
spoken in his word where he calls us to his Presence and Friendship, but
declare his goodness only without regard of our worthiness? And what other
thing does stir him to call us to him when we be strayed from him, to suffer us
patiently to win us to Repentance, but only his singular goodness, no whit of
our deserving? Let them all come together that be now glorified in Heaven, and
let us hear what answer they will make in these Points before rehearsed,
whether their first Creation was in Gods goodness or of themselves? Forsooth,
David would make answer for them all, and say, Know ye for surety, even the
Lord is God, he has made us, and not we our selves. If they were asked again,
who should be thanked for their Regeneration, for their Justification, and for
their Salvation, Whether their deserts or Gods goodness only? Although in this
Point every one confess sufficiently the truth of this matter in his own
Person; yet let David answer by the mouth of them all at this time, who cannot
choose but say, Not to us, O Lord, not to us but to thy Name give all the thanks
for thy loving mercy, and for thy truths sake. If we should ask again, from
whence came their glorious Works and Deeds, which they wrought in their lives,
wherewith God was so highly pleased and worshipped by them? Let some other
witness be brought in to testify this matter, that in the mouth of two or
three may the truth be known.

Verily, that holy Prophet Esaias bears record, and says, Esaias 26.
O Lord, it is thou of thy goodness that have wrought all our works in us, not
we our selves. And to uphold the truth of this matter, against all Justiciaries
and Hypocrites, which rob Almighty God of his Honor, and ascribe it to
themselves. St. Paul brings in his Belief, 1 Cor. 3. Acts 17.
We be not (says he) sufficient of our selves, as of our selves once to think
any thing, but all our ableness is of Gods goodness: For he it is in whom we
have all our Being, our Living and Moving. If ye will know furthermore where
they had their Gifts and Sacrifices, which they offered continually in their
Lives to Almighty God, they cannot but agree with David, where he says, Of thy
liberal hand, O Lord, we have received that we gave unto thee. If this holy
Company therefore confess so constantly, that all the Goods and Graces
wherewith they were endued in Soul, came of the goodness of God only. What more
can be said to prove that all that is good comes from Almighty God? Is it meet
to think that all spiritual goodness comes from God above only; and that other
good things, either of Nature or of Fortune (as we call them) comes of any
other cause? Does God of his goodness adorn the Soul with all the Powers
thereof as it is; and come the gifts of the Body (wherewith it is endued) from
any other? If he does the more, cannot he do the less? To justify a sinner, to
new create him from a wicked Person to a righteous Man, is a greater Act (says
St. Augustine,) than to make such a new Heaven and Earth as is already made. We
must needs agree that whatsoever good thing is in us, of Grace, of Nature, or
of Fortune, is of God only, as the only Author and Worker.

And yet it is not to be thought that God has created all this whole Universal
World as it is, and thus once made, has given it up to be ruled and used after
our own wits and device, and so takes no more charge thereof. As we see the
Shipwright, after he has brought his Ship to a perfect end, then delivers it
to the Mariners, and takes no more care thereof; nay, (God has not so created
the World that he is careless of it; but he still preserves it by his
goodness, he still stays it in his Creation; for else without his special
goodness it could not stand long in this condition. And therefore St. Paul
says, That he preserves all things, Heb. 2. Heb. 3.
and bears them up still in his Word, lest they should fall without him to
their nothing again, whereof they were made. If his especial goodness were not
every where present, every Creature should be out of order, and no Creature
should have his property wherein he was first created. He is therefore
invisible every where, and in every Creature, and fills both Heaven and Earth
with his Presence. In the Fire to give Heat, in the Water to give Moisture, in
the Earth to give Fruit, in the Heart to give his Strength, yea, in our Bread
and Drink is he to give us nourishment, where without him the Bread and Drink
cannot give sustenance, nor the Herb health, as the Wise Man plainly confesses
it, saying, Wisd. 16.
It is not the increase of Fruits that feeds Men, but it is thy word, O Lord,
which preserves them that trust in thee. And Moses agrees to the same, when
he says, Deuteronomy. 8.
Man's life rests not in Bread only, but in every Word which proceeds out of
Gods mouth. Wisd. 17.
It is neither the Herb nor the Plaster that gives Health of themselves, but
thy Word, O Lord, (says the Wise Man) which heals all things. It is not
therefore the power of the Croatures which works their effects, but the
goodness of God which works in them. In his Word truly do all things consist.
By that same Word that Heaven and Earth were made, by the same are they
upholden, maintained, 2 Pet. 3.
and kept in order (says St. Peter,) and shall be till Almighty God shall
withdraw his Power from them, and speak their dissolution. If it were not thus,
that the goodness of God were effectually in his Creatures to rule them, how
could it be that the Main Sea, so raging and laboring to overflow the Earth,
could be kept within its bounds and banks as it is? That Holy Man Job evidently
spied the goodness of God in this Point, and confessed that if he had not a
special goodness to the preservation of the Earth, it could not but shortly be
over-flowed of the Sea: How could it be that the Elements, so diverse and
contrary as they be among themselves, should yet agree and abide together in a
concord, without destruction one of another to serve our use, if it came not
only of Gods goodness so to temper them? How could the Fire not burn and
consume all things, if it were let loose to go whither it would, and not staid
in its sphere by the goodness of God, measurably to heat these inferior
Creaturs to their riping? Consider the huge Substance of the Earth, so heavy
and great as it is: How could it so stand stably in the space as it does, if
Gods goodness reserved it not so for us to travel on? It is thou, Psalm. 10.3.
O Lord, (says David,) which have founded the Earth in its stability, and
during thy Word it shall never reel or fall down. Consider the great strong
Beasts and Fishes, far passing the strength of Man, how fierce soever they be
and strong, yet by the goodness of God they prevail not against us, but are
under our subjection, and serve our use. Of whom came the invention thus to
subdue them, and make them fit for our Commodities? Was it by Man's Brain? nay,
rather this invention came by the goodness of God, which inspired Man's
understanding to have his purpose of every Creature. Job 38.
Who was it (says Job,) that put Will and Wisdom in Man's head, but God only,
his goodness? And as the same says again, I perceive that every Man has a
mind, but it is the inspiration of the Almighty that gives understanding. It
could not be verily (good Christian People) that Man of his own wit upholden,
should invent so many and diverse devices in all Crafts and Sciences, except the
goodness of Almighty God had been present with Men, and had stirred their wits
and studies of purpose to know the natures and dispositions of all his
Creatures, to serve us sufficiently in our needs and necessities. Yea, not only
to serve our necessities, but to serve our pleasures and delight more than
necessity requires. So liberal is Gods goodness to us, to provoke us to thank
him, if any hearts we have. The Wise Man in his Contemplation by himself, could
not but grant this thing to be true which I reason unto you, In his hands
(says he) be we, and our Words, Wisd. ^^
and all our Wisdom, and all our Sciences and Works of Knowledge; For it is he
that gave me the true instruction of his Creatures, both to know the
disposition of the World, and the virtues of the Elements, the beginning and
end of Times, the change and diversities of them, the course of the Year, the
order of the Stars, the natures of Beasts, and the powers of them, the powers
of the Wind, and the thoughts of Men, the differences of Planets, the virtue of
Roots, and what soever is hid and secret in Nature I learnt it. The Artificer
of all these taught me this wisdom; and further he says, Wisd. 9.
Who can search out the things that be in Heaven? For it is hard for us to
search such things as be on Earth, and in daily sight before us. For our Wits
and Thoughts (says he) be imperfect, and our Policies uncertain. No Man can
therefore search out the meaning in these things, except thou give Wisdom,
and sendest thy Spirit from above. If the Wise Man thus confesses all things
to be of God, why should not we acknowledge it? and by the knowledge of it,
consider our Duty to Godward, and give him thanks for his goodness? I perceive
that I am far here overcharged with the Plenty and Copy of Matter that might be
brought in for the proof of this cause. If I should enter to show how the
goodness of Almighty God appeared every where in the Creatures of the World,
how mavelous they be in their Creation, how beautiful in their Order, how
necessary they be to our use; all with one Voice must needs grant their Author
to be none other but Almighty God, his goodness must they needs extol and
magnify every where: To whom be all honor and glory for evermore.

The Second Part of the Homily for Rogation Week.
IN the former Part of this Homily (good Christian People) I have declared to
your Contemplation, the great goodness of Almighty God in the Creation of this
World, with all the Furniture thereof, for the use and comfort of Man, whereby
we might rather be moved to acknowledge our Duty again to his Majesty; and I
trust it has wrought not only belief in you, but also it has moved you to
render your thanks secretly in your hearts to Almighty God for his loving
kindness. But yet peradventure some will say that they can agree to this, That
all that is good pertaining to the Soul, or whatsoever is created with us in
Body should come from God, as from the Author of all goodness, and from none
other. But of such things as be without them both, I mean such good things
which we call Goods of Fortune, as Riches, Authority, Promotion and Honor; some
Men may think that they should come of our industry and diligence, of our labor
and travel, rather than supernaturally. Now then consider, good People, if any
Author there be of such things concurrent of Man's labor and endeavor, were it
meet to ascribe them to any other than to God? As the Paynims, Philosophers,
and Poets did Err, which took Fortune, and made her a Goddess to be honored for
such things? God forbid (good Christian People,) that this Imagination should
earnestly be received of us that be Worshippers of the true God, whose Works
and Proceedings be expressed manifestly in his Word. (These be the opinions and
sayings of Infidels, not of true Christians; Job 22.
for they indeed (as Job makes mention) believe and say, That God has his
residence and resting place in the Clouds, and considers nothing of our
matters. Epicures they be that imagine that he walks about the Coasts of the
Heavens, and has no respect of these inferior things, but that all these
things should proceed either by chance or at adventure, or else by disposition
of Fortune, and God to have no stroke in them. What other thing is this to say,
than as the Fool supposes in his heart, there is no God? whom we shall none
otherwise reprove, than with Gods own Words by the mouth of David, Hear my
People (says he) for I am thy God, Psalm. 14.
thy very God. All the Beasts of the Wood are mine; Sheep and Oxen that wander
in the Mountains; Psalm. 50.
I have the knowledge of all the Fowls of the Air; the beauty of the Field is
my handy work; mine is the whole circuit of the World; and all the plenty that
is in it. And again the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 23.
Think thou that I am a God of the place nigh me, (says the Lord,) and not
a God far off? Can a Man hide himself in so secret a corner, that I shall not
see him? Do not I fulfill and replenish both Heaven and Earth, says the Lord?
Which of these two should be most believed? Fortune whom they paint to be blind
of both eyes, ever unstable and unconstant in her Wheel, in whose hands they
say these things be? Or God, in whose hand and power these things be indeed,
who for his truth and constancy was yet never reproved; for his sight looks
through Heaven and Earth, and sees all things pr^sently with his eyes. Nothing
is too dark or hidden from his knowledge, not the privy thoughts of Men's minds.
Truth it is, that God is all Riches, all Power, all Authority, all Health,
Wealth and Prosperity, of the which we should have no part without his liberal
distribution, and except it came from him above. David first testifies of
Riches and Possessions, Psalm. 104.
If thou give good luck they shall gather, and if thou openest thy hand they
shall be full of goodness, but if thou turnest thy face they shall be troubled.
Prove. 10. 1 King 2.
And Solomon says, It is the blessing of the Lord that makes rich Men. To
this agrees the Holy Woman Ann, where she says in her Song, It is the Lord
that makes the poor, and makes the rich, it is he that promoteth and pulls
down, he can raise a needy Man from his Misery and from the Dunghill, he can
lift up a poor Personage to sit with Princes and have the seat of Glory, for
all the Coasts of the Earth be his. Now if any Man will ask, What shall it
avail us to know that every good gift, as of Nature and Fortune (so called) and
every perfect Gift, as of Grace, concerning the Soul, to be of God, and that it
is his gift only? Forsooth, for many causes it is convenient for us to know it;
for so shall we know (if we confess the truth,) who ought justly to be thanked
for them. Our Pride shall be thereby abated, perceiving naught to come of our
selves but Sin and Vice; if any goodness be in us, to refer all laud and praise
for the same to Almighty God. It shall make us not advance our selves before
our Neighbor, not despise him for that he has fewer gifts, seeing God gives
his gifts where he will. It shall make us by the consideration of our gifts,
not to extol our selves before our Neighbors. It shall make the Wise Man not to
glory of his Wisdom, nor the Strong Man in his Strength, Jer. 9.
nor the Rich to glory in his Riches, but in the Living God, which is the
Author of all these; Lest if we should do so, we might be rebuked with the
words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4.
What have thou that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why
gloriest thou in thy self, as though thou had not received it? To confess
that all good things come from Almighty God, is a great Point of Wisdom my
Friends: For so confessing, we know whither to resort for to have them, if we
want, as St. James bids us, saying, If any Man wants the gift of Wisdom,
James 1.
let him ask it of God that gives it, and it shall be given him. As the Wise
Man in the want of such a like gift, made his recourse to God for it, as he
testifies in his Book: Sap. 10.
After I knew (says he) that otherwise I could not be chaste, except God
granted it, (and this was as he there writes, high wisdom to know whose gift
it was,) I made have to the Lord, and earnestly besought him, even from the
Roots of my Heart to have it. I would to God (my Friends) that in our wants and
necessities we would go to God, as St. James bids, and as the Wise Man
teaches us that he did. I would we believed steadfastly that God only gives
them; if we did, we should not seek our want and necessity of the Devil and his
Ministers so often as we do, as daily experience declares it. For if we stand in
necessity of Corporal Health, whither go the common People but to Charms,
Witchcrafts, and other delusions of the Devil? If we knew that God were the
Author of this gift, we would only use his means appointed, and bide his
leisure till he thought it good for us to have it given: If the Merchant and
Worldly Occupier knew that God is the giver of Riches, he would content himself
with so much as by just means approved of God, he could get to his Living, and
would be no richer than truth would suffer him, he would never procure his
gain, and ask his Goods at the Devils hand. Godforbid ye will say, that any Man
should take his Riches of the Devil. Verily, so many as increase themselves by
Usury, by Extortion, by Perjury, by Stealth, by Deceits and Craft, they have
their Goods of the Devils gift. And all they that give themselves to such
means, and have renounced the true means that God has appointed, have forsaken
him, and are become Worshippers of the Devil, to have their lucres and
advantages. They be such as kneel down to the Devil at his bidding, and worship
him; for he promises them for so doing, that he will give them the World and
the Goods therein. They cannot otherwise better serve the Devil than to do his
Pleasure and Commandment; and his Motion and Will it is to have us forsake the
Truth, and betake us to Falsehood, to Lies and Perjuries. They therefore which
believe perfectly in their heart that God is to be honored and requested for
the gift of all things necessary, would use none other means to relieve their
necessities but Truth and Verity, and would serve God to have competency of all
things necessary. The Man in his need would not relieve his want by Stealth*
The Woman would not relieve her necessity and poverty by giving her Body to
other in Adultery for gain. If God be the Author indeed of Life, Health, Riches
and VVelfare, let us make our recourse to him as the Author, and we shall have
it, says St. James. Yea, it is high wisdom (by the Wise Man) therefore to know
whose gift it is, for many other skills, it is wsdom to know and believe that
all goodness and graces be of God, as the Author. Which thing well considered,
must needs make us think that we shall make account for that which God gives
us to possess, and therefore shall make us to be more diligent well to spend
them to Gods glory, and to the profit of our Neighbor, that we may make a good
account at the last, and be praised for good Stewards, that we may hear these
words of our Judge, Mat. 24.
Well done good servant and faithful, thou have been faithful in little, I will
make thee Ruler over much, go into thy Masters joy. Besides, to believe
certainly God to be the Author of all gifts that we have, shall make us to be
in silence and patience when they be taken again from us. For as God of his
mercy does grant us them to use, so otherwhiles he does justly take them again
from us, to prove our Patience, to exercise our Faith, and by the means of the
taking away of a few, to bestow the more warily those that remain, to teach us
to use them the more to his Glory, after he gives them to us again. Many there
be, that with Mouth can say, that they believe that God is the Author of every
good Gift that they have; but in the time of Temptation they go back from this
Belief. They say it in word, but deny it in deed. Consider the custom of the
World, and see whether it be not true. Behold the rich Man that is endued with
Substance, if by any Adversity his Goods be taken from him, how fumeth and
fretteth he? How murmureth he and despaireth? He that has the gift of good
Reputation, if his Name be any thing touched by the Detractor, how unquiet is
he? How busy to revenge his despite? If a Man has a gift of Wisdom, and
fortune to be taken of some evil Willer for a Fool, and is so reported? How
much does it grieve him to be so esteemed? Think ye that these believe
constantly that God is the Author of these gifts? If they believe it verily,
why should they not patiently suffer God to take away his gifts again, which he
gave them freely, and lent for a time? But ye will say, I could be content to
resign to God such Gifts, if he took them again from me: But now are they taken
from me by evil chances and false shrews, by naughty wretches, how should I
take this thing patiently? To this may be answered, that Almighty God is of his
nature invisible, and comes to no Man visible after the manner of Man, to take
away his Gifts that he lent. But in this point whatsoever God does, he brings
it about by his instruments ordained thereto. He has good Angels, he has evil
Angels, he has good Men, and he has evil Men, he has Hail and Rain, he has
Wind and Thunder, he has Heat and Cold. Innumerable instruments has he, and
messengers, by whom again he asks such Gifts as he commits to our trust,
as the Wife man confesses, Sap. 1^.
The Creature must needs wait to serve his Maker, to be fierce against unjust
Men to their Punishment. For as the same Author says, He Armeth the Creatrue,
to revenge his Enemies, and otherwhiles to the probation of our Faith, stirs
he up such storms. And therefore by what mean and instrument soever God takes
from us his Gifts, we must patiently take Gods Judgment in worth, and
acknowledge him to be the Taker and Giver, Job 1.
as Job says, The Lord gave, and the Lord took, when yet his Enemies drove his
Cattle away, and when the Devil slew his Children, and afflicted his Body with
grievous Sickness. Such meekness was in that holy King and Prophet David, when
he was reviled of Shimei in the presence of all his Host, he took it patiently,
and reviled not again, but as confessing God to be the Author of his Innocence
and good Name, and offering it to be at his pleasure: Let him alone (says he
to one of his Servants that would have revenged such despite) for God has
commanded him to curse David, 2 Samuel 16.
and peradventure God intends thereby to render me some good turn for this
curse of him to day. And though the Minister other whiles does evil in his Act,
proceeding of Malice, yet forasmuch as God turns his evil act to a proof of
our Patience, we should rather submit our selves in Patience, than to have
indignation at Gods Rod, which peradventure when he has corrected us to our
nurture, he will cast it into the fire, as it deserves. Let us in like manner
truly acknowledge all our Gifts and Prerogatives, to be so Gods Gifts, that we
shall be ready to resign them up at his Will and Pleasure again. Let us
throughout our whole Lives confess all good things to come from God, of what
Name or Nature soever they be, not of these corruptible things only, whereof I
have now last spoken, but much more of all Spiritual Graces behoveable for our
Soul, without whose Goodness no Man is called to Faith or staid therein, as I
shall hereafter in the next part of this Homily declare to you. In the mean
season forget not what has already been spoken to you, forget not to be
conformable in your judgments to the truth of his Doctrine, and forget not to
practice the same in the whole state of your Life, whereby ye shall obtain the
blessing promised by our Savior Christ: Blessed are they which hear the Word
of God, and fulfill it in Life. Which blessing he grant to us all, who reigns
over all, one God in Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; To whom
be all Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

The Third Part of the Homily for Rogation-Week.
I Promised to you to declare, that all Spiritual Gifts and Graces come
specially from God. Let us consider the truth of this matter, and hear what is
testified first of the gift of Faith, the first entry into a Christian Life,
without which no Man can please God. For St. Paul confesses it plainly to be
Gods gift, Ephesians. 2. 1 Pet. 1.
saying, Faith is the gift of God. And again, St. Peter says, It is of Gods
power that ye be kept through Faith to Salvation. It is of the goodness of God
that we falter not in our hope unto him. It is verily Gods work in us, the
Charity wherewith we love our Brethren. If after our fall we Repent, it is by
him that we Repent, which reaches forth his Merciful Hand to raise us up. If
we have any Will to rise, it is he that preventeth our Will, and disposes us
thereto. If after Contrition we feel our Consciences at peace with God through
remission of our sin, and so be reconciled again to his favor, and hope to be
his Children, and Inheritors of Everlasting Life: Who works these great
Miracles in us? Our Worthiness, our Deservings and Endeavors, our Wits and
Virtue? Nay verily, St. Paul will not suffer Flesh and Clay to presume to such
Arrogance, and therefore says, All is of God which has reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ. For God was in Christ when he reconciled the World
unto himself. God the Father of all Mercy, wrought this high benefit unto us,
not by his own Person, but by a mean, by no less a mean than his only beloved
Son, whom he spared not from any pain and travail that might do us good. For
upon him he put our Sins, and upon him he made our Ransom, him he made the mean
betwixt us and himself, whose mediation was so acceptable to God the Father,
through his absolute and perfect Obedience, that he took his Act for a full
satisfaction of all our Disobedience and Rebellion, whose Righteousness he took
to weigh against our Sins, whose Redemption he would have stand against our
Damnation. In this Point, what have we to muse within our selves, good Friends?
I think no less that that which St. Paul said in remembrance of this wonderful
goodness of God, Thanks be to Almighty God, Romans 7. Ephesians. 1.
through Jesus Christ our Lord: for it is he, for whose sake we received this
high gift of Grace. For as by him (being the Everlasting Wisdom) he wrought all
the World, and that is contained therein. So by him only and wholly, would he
have all things restored again in Heaven and Earth. By this our Heavenly
Mediator, therefore do we know the Favor and Mercy of God the Father; by him
know we his Will and Pleasure toward us, Matt. 3.
For he is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and a very clear Image and
Pattern of his Substance. It is he whom the Father in Heaven delights to have
for his well beloved Son, whom he Authorized to be our Teacher, whom he charged
us to hear, Ephesians. 1.
saying, Hear him. It is he by whom the Father of Heaven does bless us with all
Spiritual and Heavenly gifts, for whose sake and favor (writes St. John) we
have received Grace and Favor. John 1.
To this our Savior and Mediator, has God the Father given the Power of
Heaven and Earth, and the whole Jurisdiction and Authority, to destribute his
Goods and Gifts committed to him; for so writes the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.7.
To every one of us is Grace given, according to the measure of Christ's giving.
And thereupon to execute his Authority committed, after that he had brought Sin
and the Devil to Captivity, to be no more hurtful to his Members, he ascended
up to his Father again, and from thence sent liberal Gifts to his welbeloved
Servants, and has still the power to the Worlds end, to distribute his Fathers
Gifts continually in his Church, to the establishment and comfort thereof. And
by him has Almighty God decreed to dissolve the World, to call all before him,
to judge both the Quick and the Dead, and finally by him shall he Condemn the
Wicked to Eternal Fire in Hell, and give the Good Eternal Life, and set them
assuredly in presence with him in Heaven for evermore. Thus ye see how all is
of God, by his Son Christ our Lord and Savior. Remember I say once again your
Duty of Thanks, let them be never to want, still enjoin your self to continue
in Thanksgiving, ye can offer to God no better Sacrifice: For he says himself,
Psalm. 50.
It is the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanks that shall honor me, Which thing was
well perceived of that holy Prophet David, when he so earnestly spoke to
himself thus, Psalm. 103.
O my Soul bless thou the Lord, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name.
I say once again, O my Soul bless thou the Lord, and never forget his manifold
rewards. God give us Grace (good People) to know these things, and to feel them
in our Hearts. This knowledge and feeling is not in our selves, by our selves
it is not possible to come by it, a great pity it were that we should lose so
profitable knowledge. Let us therefore meekly call upon that bountiful Spirit,
the Holy Ghost, which proceeds from our Father of Mercy, and from our
Mediator Christ, that he would assist us, and inspire us with his presence,
that in him we may be able to hear the goodness of God declared unto us, to our
Salvation. For without his lively and secret inspiration, can we not once so
much as speak the Name of our Mediator, as St. Paul plainly testifies; 1 Cor.
12
No Man can once Name our Lord Jesus Christ, but in the Holy Ghost. Much less
should we be able to believe and know these great Mysteries that be opened to
us by Christ. St. Paul says, That no Man can know what is of God, 1 Cor. 2.
but the Spirit of God. As for us (says he) we have received not the Spirit of
the World, but the Spirit which is of God; for this purpose, That in that holy
Spirit, we might know the things that be given us by Christ. The Wise man
says, that in the Power and Virtue of the Holy Ghost, rests all Wisdom and
all Ability to know God, and to please him. For he waits thus: We know that
it is not in Man's power to guide his goings. Wisd. 9.
No Man can know thy Pleasure, except thou give Wisdom, and sendest thy holy
Spirit from above. Send him down therefore (prays he to God) from the holy
Heavens, and from the Throne of thy Majesty, that he may be with me, and labor
with me, that so I may know what is acceptable before thee. Let us with so good
Heart Pray, as he did, and we shall not fail but to have his assistance. For he
is soon seen of them that love him, he will be found of them that seek him; for
very liberal and gentle is the Spirit of Wisdom. In his power shall we have
sufficient Abilty to know our Duty to God, in him shall we be comforted and
encouraged to walk in our Duty; in him shall we be meet vessels to receive the
Grace of Almighty God; for it is he that purges and purifieth the mind by his
secret working. And he only is present every where by his invisible Power, and
contains all things in his Dominion. He lightneth the Heart to conceive
worthy thoughts to Almighty God; he sits in the Tongue of Man to stir him to
speak his Honor; no Language is hid from him, for he has the knowledge of all
Speech, he only Ministers Spiritual strength to the powers of our Soul and
Body. To hold the way which God had prepared for us to walk rightly in our
Journey, we must acknowledge that it is in the power of his Spirit which
helps our infirmity. That we may boldly come in Prayer, and call upon
Almighty God as our Father, it is by this holy Spirit, which makes
intercession for us with continual Sighs. Galat. 4. Romans 8.
If any Gift we have wherewith we may work to the Glory of God, and profit of
our Neighbor, all is wrought by this own and self same Spirit, which makes his
distributions peculiarly to every Man as he will. 1 Cor. 12.
If any Wisdom we have, it is not of our selves, we cannot glory therein, as
begun of our selves, but we ought to glory in God, from whom it came to us, as
the Prophet Jeremy writes, Jerem. 9.
Let him that rejoices, rejoice in this, that he understands and knows me,
for I am the Lord which shows Mercy, Judgment, and Righteousness in the
Earth, for in these things I delight, says the Lord. This Wisdom cannot be
attained, but by the direction of the Spirit of God, and therefore it is called
Spiritual Wisdom. And no where can we more certainly search for the knowledge
of this Will of God (by the which we must direct all our Works and Deeds) but
in the holy Scriptures, for they be they that testify of him, John 5.
says our Savior Christ. It may be called Knowledge and Learning, that is
other where gotten without the Word; but the Wise Man plainly testifies, Wisd.
13.
that they all be but Vain, which have not in them the Wisdom of God. We see to
what Vanity the Old Philosophers came, who were destitute of this Science,
gotten and searched for in his Word. We see what Vanity the School Doctrine is
mixed with, for that in this Word they sought not the Will of God, but rather
the Will of Reason, the Trade of Custom, the Path of the Fathers, the Practice
of the Church; Let us therefore Read and Revolve the holy Scripture both Day
and Night, Psalm. 1. Psalm. 119.
For blessed is he that has his whole meditation therein. It is that which
gives light to our Feet to walk by. It is that which gives Wisdom to the
simple and ignorant. In it may we find Eternal Life.

In the holy Scriptures find we Christ, in Christ find we God; for he it is
that is the express Image of the Father. He that sees Christ, sees the
Father. And contrariwise, as St. Jerome says, the ignorance of the Scripture,
is the ignorance of Christ. Not to know Christ, Psalm. 19. Heb. 1. John 14.
is to be in darkness, in the midst of our Worldly and Carnal light of Reason
and Philosophy. To be without Christ, is to be in foolishness: For he is the
only Wisdom of the Father, in whom it pleased him, that all fullness and
perfection should dwell. Coloss. 2.
With whom whosoever is endued in Heart by Faith, and rooted fast in Charity,
has laid a sure Foundation to build on, whereby he may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the breadth, length, and depth, and to know the love
of Christ. This universal and absolute knowledge, is that Wisdom which St. Paul
wishes these Ephesians to have, as under Heaven the greatest treasure that can
be obtained. Ephesians. 3.
For of this Wisdom the Wise Man writes thus of his experience; All good
things came to me together with her, and innumerable Riches through her hands.
And adds more in that same place, Sap. 7.
She is the Mother of all these things; for she is an infinite treasure unto
Men, which whosoever use, become partakers of the love of God. I might with many
words move some of this audience to search for this Wisdom, to sequester their
Reason, to follow Gods Commandment, to cast from them the Wits of their Brains,
to favor this Wisdom, to renounce the Wisdom and Policy of this fond World, to
taste and Savor of that whereunto the Favor and Will of God has called them,
and wills us finally to enjoy by his Favor, if we would give ear. But I will
haste to the Third Part of my Text, wherein is expressed further in Sapience,
how God gives his Elect understanding of the motions of the Heavens, of the
alteration and circumstances of Time. Which as it follows in words more
plentiful in the Text which I have last cited unto you, so it must needs follow
in them that be endued with this Spiritual Wisdom. For as they can search where
to find this Wisdom, and know of whom to ask it: So know they again that in
time it is found, and can therefore temper themselves to the occasion of the
time, to suffer no time to pass away, wherein they may labor for this Wisdom.
And to increase therein, they know how God of his infinite Mercy and lenity
gives all Men here time and place of Repentance. And they see how the Wicked
(as Job writes) abuse the same to their Pride, Job. 14.
and therefore do the Godly take the better hold of the time, to redeem it out
of such use as it is spoiled in by the Wicked. They which have this Wisdom of
God, can gather by the diligent and earnest study of the Worldlings of this
present life, how they wait their times, and apply themselves, to every
occasion of time, and to get Riches, to increase their Lands and Patrimony.
They see the time pass away, and therefore take hold on it, in such wise, that
otherwhiles they will with loss of their sleep and ease, with suffering many
pains, catch the offer of their time, knowing that that which is past cannot be
returned again; Repentance may follow, but remedy is none. Why should not they
then that be Spiritually Wise in their Generation, wait their time, to increase
as fast in their state, to win and gain Everlastingly? They reason what a brute
forgetfulness it were in Man endued with Reason, to be ignorant of their Times
and Tides, when they see the Turtle Dove, the Stork, and the Swallow to wait
their times, Jer. 8.
as Jeremy says, The Stork in the Air knows her appointed times, the Turtle,
the Grane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming: but my People
knows not the judgment of the Lord. Ephesians. 2.
St. Paul wills us to redeem the time, because the days are evil. It is not
the Counsel of St. Paul only, but of all other that ever gave precepts of
Wisdom.

There is no Precept more seriously given and commanded, than to know the time.
Yea, Christian Men for that they hear how grievously God complains, and
threatens in the Scriptures them which will not know the time of his
Visitations, are learned thereby, the rather earnestly to apply themselves
thereunto. After our Savior Christ had Prophesied with weeping Tears of the
destruction of Jerusalem, at the last he puts the cause: Luke 19.
For that thou have not known the time of thy Visitation. O England, ponder the
time of Gods merciful Visitation, which is showed thee from day to day, and yet
will not regard it, neither will thou with his Punishment be driven to thy
Duty, nor with his benefits be provoked to Thanks! If thou knew what may
fall upon thee for thy unthankfulness, thou would provide for thy Peace.
Brethren, howsoever the World, in generality is forgetful of God, let us
Particularly attend to our time, and win the time with diligence, and apply our
selves to the Light and Grace that is afforded us; let us, if Gods Favor and
Judgments which he works in our time, cannot stir us to call home to our
selves to do that belonging to our Salvation, at the least way, let the malice
of the Devil, the naughtiness of the World, which we see exercised in these
perilous and last times, wherein we see our days so dangerously set, provoke us
to watch diligently to our vocation, to walk and go forward therein.

Let the misery and short transitory joys spied in the casualty of our days,
move us while we have them in our hands, and seriously stir us to be wise, and
to expend the gracious good Will of God to us ward, which all the day long
stretched out his Hands (as the Prophet says) unto us, Isaiah 65.
for the most part his merciful Hands, sometime his heavy Hands, that we being
learned thereby, may escape the danger that must needs fall on the unjust, who
lead their days in felicity and pleasure, without the knowing of Gods Will
toward them, but suddenly they go down into Hell. Let us be found Watchers,
found in the Peace of the Lord, that at the last Day we may be found without
spot, and blameless; yea, let us endeavor our selves (good Christian People)
diligently to keep the presence of his holy Spirit. Job 2.
Let us renounce all uncleanness, for he is the Spirit of Purity. Sap. 1.
Let us avoid all hypocrisy, for this holy Spirit will flee from that which is
feigned. Heb. 11.
Cast we off all malice and all evil will, for this Spirit will never enter
into an evil willing Soul. Let us cast away all the whole lump of sin that
stands about us, for he will never dwell in that Body that is subdued to sin.
We cannot be seen Thankful to Almighty God, and work such despite to the
Spirit of Grace, by whom we be Sanctified. Heb. 10.
If we do our endeavor, we shall not need to fear. We shall be able to overcome
all our Enemies that fight against us. Only let us apply our selves to accept
the Grace that is offered us. Of Almighty God we have comfort by his Goodness,
of our Savior Christ's Mediation we may be sure. And this holy Spirit will
suggest unto us that shall be wholesome, and comfort us in all things. Therefore
it cannot be but true that St. Paul affirms; Of him, by him, and in him be
all things, and in him (after this transitory life well passed) shall we have
all things. For St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.
When the Son of God shall subdue all things unto him, then shall God be all in
all. If ye will know how God shall be all in all, verily after this sense may
we understand it: In this World ye see that we be fain to borrow many things to
our necessity, of many Creatures; there is no one thing that suffices all our
necessities. If we be an Hungered, we lust for Bread. If we be Athirst, we seek
to be refreshed with Ale or Wine. If we be Cold, we seek for Cloth. If we be
Sick, we seek to the Physician. If we be in Heaviness, we seek for Comfort of
our Friends, or of Company; so that there is no one Creature by it self that
can content all our wants and desires. But in the World to come, in that
Everlasting Felicity, we shall no more beg and seek our particular Comforts and
Commodities of diverse Creatures; but we shall possess all that we can ask and
desire, in God, and God shall be to us all things. He shall be to us both
Father and Mother, he shall be Bread and Drink, Cloth, Physician, Comfort; he
shall be all things to us, and that of much more blessed fashion, and more
sufficient contentation, than ever these Creatures were unto us, with much more
declaration than ever Man's declaration, than ever Man's reason is able to
conceive. The Eye of Man is not able to behold, 1 Cor. 2.
nor his Ear can hear, nor it can be compassed in the Heart of Man, what joy it
is that God has prepared for them that love him.

Let us all conclude then with one voice with the words of St. Paul, Ephesians. 3.
To him which is able to do abundantly beyond our desires and thoughts,
according to the power working in us, be Glory and Praise in his Church by
Christ Jesus for ever, World without end. Amen.

AN EXHORTATION TO Be spoken to such Parishes where they use their
Perambulation in Rogation Week, for the oversight of the Bounds and Limits of
their Town.
ALthough we be now Assembled together (good Christian People) most principally
to laud and thank Almighty God for his great Benefits, by beholding the Fields
replenished with all manner of Fruit, to the maintenance of our Corporal
Necessities, for our Food and Sustenance; and partly also to make our humble
suits in Prayers to his Fatherly Providence, to conserve the same Fruits in
sending us seasonable Weather, whereby we may gather in the said Fruits to that
end, for which his Fatherly goodness has provided them; yet have we occasion
secondarily given us in our walks on those days, to consider the old Ancient
Bounds and Limits belonging to our own Township, and to other our Neigbors
bordering about us, to the intent that we should be content with our own, and
not contentiously strive for others, to the breach of Charity, by any
incroaching one upon another, for claiming one of the other further than that
in ancient right and custom, our Forefathers have peaceably laid out unto us
for our commodity and comfort. Surely a great oversight it were in us, which be
Christian Men in one profession of Faith, daily looking for that Heavenly
Inheritance which is bought for every one of us by the Bloodshedding of our
Savior Jesus Christ, to strive and fall to variance for the Earthly Bounds of
our Towns, to the disquiet of our Life betwixt our selves, to the wasting of
our Goods by vain Expenses and Costs in the Law. We ought to remember that our
Habitation is but transitory and short in this mortal Life. The more shame it
were to fall out into immortal hatred among our selves, for so brittle
Possessions, and so to lose our eternal Inheritance in Heaven. It may stand
well with Charity for a Christian Man quietly to maintain his right and just
Title; and it is the part of every good Townsman to preserve as much as lies
in him, the Liberties, Franchises, Bounds and Limits of his Town and Country:
But yet to strive for our very Rights and Duties, with the breach of Love and
Charity, which is the only Livery of a Christian Man, or with the hurt of godly
peace and quiet, by the which we be knit together in one general fellowship of
Christ's Family, in one common Household of God, that is utterly forbidden. That
does God abhor and detest, which provokes Almighty Gods wrath otherwhile to
deprive us quite of our Commodities and Liberties, because we do so abuse them
for matters of Strife, Discord and Dissension. St. Paul blamed the Corinthians
for such contentious suing among themselves, to the slander of their Profession
before the Enemies of Christ's Religion, saying thus unto them, 1 Cor. 9.
Now there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to Law one with another;
why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather suffer ye not harm? If St. Paul
blames the Christian Men, whereof some of them for their own right went
contentiously so to Law, commending thereby the profession of Patience in a
Christian Man: Mat. 5.
If Christ our Savior would have us rather to suffer wrong, and to turn our
left Cheek to him which has smitten the right, to suffer one wrong after
another, rather than by breach of Charity to defend our own; in what State be
they before God who do the wrong? what curses do they fall into who by false
witness defraud either their Neighbor or Township of his due right and just
possession, which will not let to take an Oath by the holy Name of God, the
Author of all Truth, to set out Falsehood and a Wrong? Know ye not (says St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 6.
) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? What shall we then
win to increase a little the Bounds and Possessions of the Earth, and lose the
Possessions of the Inheritance everlasting? Let us therefore take such heed in
maintaining of our Bounds and Possessions, that we commit not wrong by
encroaching upon other; let us beware of sudden Verdict in things of doubt; let
us well advise our selves to avouch that certainly, whereof either we have no
good knowledge or remembrance, or to claim that we have no just Title to. Thou
shall not (commands Almighty God in his Law) remove thy Neighbors Mark, Deuteronomy.
19.
which they of old time have set in their Inheritance. Prove. 22.
Thou shall not (says Solomon,) remove the ancient Bounds which thy Fathers
have laid; and lest we should esteem it to be but a light offense so to do, we
shall understand that it is reckoned among the curses of God, pronounced upon
sinners: Deuteronomy. 27.
Accursed be he (says Almighty God by Moses,) who removes his Neighbors Doles
and Marks, and all the People shall say, answering Amen thereto, as ratifying
that curse upon whom it does light; they do much provoke the wrath of God upon
themselves, which use to grind up the Doles and Marks, which of ancient times
were laid for the division of Meers and Balks in the Fields, to bring the
Owners to their right. They do wickedly which do turn up the ancient Terries of
the Fields, that old Men before-time with great pains did tread out, whereby
the Lords Records (which be the Tenants Evidences) be perverted and translated
sometimes to the disheriting of the right owner, to the oppression of the poor
Fatherless or the poor Widow. These covetous Men know not what inconveniences
they be the Authors of; sometime by such craft and deceit be committed great
Disorders and Riots in the challenge of their Lands, yea, sometimes Murders and
Bloodshed, whereof thou art guilty whosoever thou be that give the occasion
thereof. This covetous practicing therefore with thy Neighbors Lands and Goods
is hateful to Almighty God: Let no Man subtly compass or defraud his Neighbor
(bids St. Paul) in any manner of cause. 1 These. 4.
For God (says he,) is a revenger of all such. God is the God of all equity
and righteousness, and therefore forbids all such deceit and subtilty in his
Law, Deuteronomy. 9.
by these words, Ye shall not deal unjustly in Judgment, in Line, in Weight or
Measure. Prove. 20.
Ye shall have just Balances, true Weights and true Measures. False Balances
(says Solomon,) are an abomination unto the Lord. Remember what St. Paul
says, God is the revenger of all Wrong and Injustice, as we see by daily
experience, however it thriveth ungraciously which is begotten by falsehood and
craft. We be taught by experience, how Almighty God never suffers the third
Heir to enjoy his Fathers wrong Possessions; yea, many a time they are taken
from himself in his own life time. God is not bound to defend such Possessions
as are gotten by the Devil and his Counsel. God will defend all such Men's Goods
and Possessions which by him are obtained and possessed, and will defend them
against the violent Oppressor. Prove. 25.
So witnesses Solomon, The Lord will destroy the House of the proud Man; but
he will establish the borders of the Widow: Psalm. 36.
No doubt of it, says David, better is a little truly gotten to the righteous
Man, than the innumerable Riches of the wrongful Man. Let us flee therefore
(good People) all wrong Practices in getting, maintaining and defending our
Possessions, Lands and Livelihoods, our Bounds and Liberties, remembering that
such Possessions be all under Gods revengeance. But what do we speak of House
and Land? Nay, it is said in the Scripture that God in his ire does root up
whole Kingdoms for wrongs and oppressions, and does translate Kingdoms from one
Nation to another, for unrighteous dealing, for Wrongs and Riches gotten by
deceit. This is the practice of of the Holy One, says Daniel, Dan. 4.
to the intent that living Men may know that the most High has power over the
Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. Furthermore, What is
the cause of Penury and Scarceness, of Dearth and Famine? Is it any other thing
but a token of Gods ire, revenging our Wrongs and Injuries done one to another?
Ye have sown much, (upbraideth God by his Prophet Haggai,) and yet bring in
little; ye eat, Hagg. 1.
but ye be not satisfied; ye drink, but ye be not filled; ye cloth your
selves, but ye be not warm; and he that earneth his Wages, puts it into a
bottomless Purse: Ye looked for much increase, but lo, it came to little, and
when ye brought it home (into your Barns) I did blow it away, says the Lord. O
consider therefore the Ire of God against Gleaners, Gatherers and Incroachers
upon other Men's Lands and Possessions: It is lamentable to see in some places
how greedy Men use to Plough and grate upon their Neighbors Land that lies
next them; how covetous Men now a days Plough up so nigh the common Balks and
Walks, which good Men before time made the greater and broader, partly for the
commodious Walk of his Neighbor, partly for the better shack in Harvest time,
to the more comfort of his poor Neighbors Cattle. It is a shame to behold the
insatiableness of some covetous Persons in their doings, that where their
Ancestors left of their Land a broad and sufficient Bier-balk, to carry the
Corpse to the Christian Sepulture, how Men pinch at such Bier-balks, which by
long use and custom ought to be inviolably kept for that purpose; and now they
either quite ear them up, and turn the dead Body to be born farther about in
the High Streets, or else if they leave any such Mere, it is too straight for
two to walk on.

These strange encroachments (good Neighbors) should be looked upon; these
should be considered in these days of our Perambulations. And afterward the
Parties admonished and charitably reformed, who be the doers of such private
gaining, to the slander of the Township and the hindrance of the Poor. Your
Highways should be considered in your Walks, to understand where to bestow your
days works according to the good Statutes provided for the same. It is a good
deed of Mercy to amend the dangerous and noisome Ways, whereby thy poor Neighbor
sitting on his silly weak Beast, founder not in the deep thereof, and so the
Market the worse served for discouraging of the poor Victuallers, to resort
thither for the same cause. If now therefore ye will have your Prayers heard
before Almighty God for the increase of your Corn and Cattle, and for the
defense thereof from unseasonable Mists and Blasts, from Hail and other such
Tempests, love Equity and Righteousness, ensue Mercy and Charity, which God
most requires at our hands. Which Almighty God respects chiefly in making
his Civil Laws for his People the Israelites, Levit. 24. Deuteronomy. 29.
in charging the owners not to gather up their Corn too nigh at Harvest Season,
nor the Grapes and Olives in gathering time, but to leave behind some Ears of
Corn for the poor Gleaners. By this he meant to induce them to pity the Poor,
to relieve the Needy, to show mercy and kindness. 1 Cor. 9.10.
It cannot be lost which for his sake is distributed to the Poor; for he which
ministers Seed to the Sower and Bread to the Hungry, Joel. 8.
which sends down the early and the latter Rain upon your Fields, so to fill
up the Barns with Corn, and the Winepresses with Wine and Oil; He (I say,) who
recompenseth all kind of Benefits in the Resurrection of the Just, he will
assuredly recompense all merciful deeds showed to the Needy, howsoever unable
the Poor is upon whom it is bestowed. O (says Solomon) let not mercy and truth
forsake thee. Bind them about thy neck (says he) and write them on the Table
of thy Heart, so shall thou find favor at Gods hand.

Thus honor thou the Lord with thy Riches, and with the first Fruits of thine
increase; so shall thy Barns be filled with abundance, and thy Presses shall
burst with new Wine; nay, God has promised to open the Windows of Heaven upon
the liberal righteous Man, that he shall want nothing. He will repress the
devouring Caterpiller which would devour your Fruits. He will give you peace
and quiet to gather in your Provision, that ye may sit every Man under his own
Vine quietly, without fear of the Foreign Enemy to invade you. He will give you
not only Food to feed on, but Stomachs and good Appetites to take comfort of
your Fruits, whereby in all things ye may have sufficiency. Finally, he will
bless you with all manner of Abundance in this transitory Life, and endue you
with all manner of Benediction in the next World in the Kingdom of Heaven,
through the merits of our Lord and Savior; To whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost be all Honor everlasting. Amen.

AN HOMILY OF The State of Matrimony.
THe Word of Almighty God does testify and declare whence the Original
Beginning of Matrimony comes, and why it is ordained. It is instituted of God,
to the intent that Man and Woman should live lawfully in a perpetual
Friendship, to bring forth Fruit, and to avoid Fornication; by which Mean a
good Conscience might be preserved on both Parties, in bridling the corrupt
inclinations of the Flesh within the limits of Honesty; for God has straightly
forbidden all Whoredom and Uncleanness, and has from time to time taken
grievous punishment of this inordinate Lust, as all Stories and Ages have
declared. Furthermore, It is also ordained that the Church of God and his
Kingdom might by this kind of life be conserved and enlarged, not only in that
God gives Children by his Blessing, but also in that they be brought up by the
Parents godly, in the knowledge of Gods Word; that thus the knowledge of God
and true Religion might be delivered by Succession from one to another, that
finally many might enjoy that ev^rlasting Immortality. Wherefore, for as much
as Matrimony serves us as well to avoid sin and offense, as to increase the
Kingdom of God; you, as all other which enter the State, must acknowledge this
benefit of God with pure and thankful minds, for that he has so ruled your
hearts that ye follow not the example of the wicked World, who set their
delight in filthiness of sin, but both of you stand in the fear of God and
abhor all filthiness; for that is surely the singular gift of God where the
common example of the World declares how the Devil has their hearts bound and
entangled in diverse snares, so that they in their Wifeless State run into open
abominations without any grudge of their Conscience. Which sort of Men that
live so desperately and filthy, what damnation tarrieth for them? St. Paul
describes it to them, saying, Neither Whoremongers, 1 Cor. 6.
neither Adulterers shall inherit the Kingdom of God. This horrible Judgment of
God ye be escaped through his mercy, if so be that ye live inseparatly,
according to Gods Ordinance. But yet I would not have you careless without
watching; for the Devil will assay to attempt all things to interrupt and
hinder your Hearts and godly Purpose, if ye will give him any entry. For he
will either labor to break this godly knot once begun betwixt you, or else at
the least he will labor to incumber it with diverse griefs and displeasures.

And this is the principal craft to work dissension of Hearts of the one from
the other; that whereas now there is pleasant and sweet Love betwixt you, he
will in the stead thereof bring in most bittet and unpleasant discord; and
surely, that same Adversary of ours does, as it were from above, assault Man's
nature and condition. For this folly is ever from our tender Age grown up with
us, to have a desire to rule, to think highly of our selves, so that none
thinks it meet to give place to another. That wicked Voice of stubborn Will
and Self-love, is more meet to break and to dissever the love of Heart than to
preserve Concord. Wherefore married Persons must apply their minds in most
earnest wise to Concord, and must crave continually of God the help of his Holy
Spirit, so to rule their Hearts and to knit their Minds together, that they be
not dissevered by any Division or Discord. This necessity of Prayer must be often
in practice and using of married Persons, that often times the one should pray
for the other, lest hate and debate do arise betwixt them. And because few do
consider this thing, but more few do perform it, (I say, to pray diligently) we
see how wonderfully the Devil deludeth and scorneth this State; how few
Matrimonies there be without Chidings, Brawlings, Tauntings, Repentings, bitter
Cursings and Fightings; which things whosoever does commit, they do not
consider, that it is the instigation of the Ghostly Enemy, who takes great
delight therein; for else they would with all earnest endeavor strive against
these mischiefs, not only with Prayer but also with all possible diligence;
yea, they would not give place to the provocation of Wrath, which stirs them
either to such rough and sharp Words or Stripes, which is surely compassed by
the Devil, whose temptation if it be followed, must needs begin and weave the
Web of all Miseries and Sorrows. For this is most certainly true, that of such
beginnings must needs ensue the breach of true Concord in Heart, whereby all
Love must needs shortly be banished. Then can it not be but a miserable thing
to behold, that yet they are of necessity compelled to live together, which yet
cannot be in quiet together. And this is most customably every where to be
seen: But what is the cause thereof? Forsooth, because they will not consider
the crafty Trains of the Devil, and therefore give not themselves to pray to
God that he would vouchsafe to repress his Power. Moreover, they do not
consider how they promote the purpose of the Devil, in that they follow the
wrath of their hearts while they threat one another, while they in their folly
turn all upside down, while they will never give over their right, as they
esteem it; yea, while many times they will not give over the wrong part indeed.
Learn thou therefore if thou desire to be void of all these miseries, if thou
desire to live peaceably and comfortably in Wedlock, how to make thy earnest
Prayer to God, that he would govern both your Hearts by the Holy Spirit, to
restrain the Devils power, whereby your Concord may remain perpetually. But to
this Prayer must be joined a singular diligence, whereof St. Peter gives this
precept, saying, You Husbands, deal with your Wives according to knowledge,
giving honor to the Wife as unto the weaker Vessel, and as unto them that are
Heirs also of the grace of Life, that your Prayers be not hindered. This precept
does particularly pertain to the Husband, for he ought to be the Leader and
Author of Love, in cherishing and increa ing Concord, which then shall take
place if he will use Moderation and not Tyranny, and if he yield something to
the Woman: For the Woman is a weak Creature, not endued with like strength and
constancy of Mind, therefore they be the sooner disquieted; and they be the
more prone to all weak affections and dispositions of Mind more than Men be,
and lighter they be, and more vain in their Fantasies and Opinions. These
things must be considered of the Man, that he be not too stiff, so that he
ought to wink at some things, and must gently expound all things, and to
forbear. Howbeit, The common sort of Men do judge that such moderation should
not become a Man; for they say that it is a token of Womanish cowardness, and
therefore they think that it is a Man's part to fume in anger, to fight with
Fist and Staff. Howbeit, Howsoever they imagine, undoubtedly St. Peter does
better judge what should be seeming to a Man, and what he should most
reasonably perform; for he says, Reasoning should be used and not Fighting.
Yea, he says more, That the Woman ought to have a certain honor attributed to
her, that is to say, she must be spared and born with the rather, for that she
is the weaker Vessel, of a frail heart, inconstant, and with a word soon
stirred to wrath. And therefore considering these her Frailties, she is to be
the rather spared: By this means thou shall not only nourish Concord, but shall
have her Heart in thy power and will; for honest Natures will sooner be
retained to do their Duties, rather by gentle Words than by Stripes. But he
which will do all things with extremity and severity, and does use always rigor
in Words and Stripes, what will that avail in the conclusion? Verily nothing,
but that he thereby sets forward the Devils work; he banisheth away Concord,
Charity and sweet Amity, and brings in Dissension, Hatred and Irksomness, the
greatest griefs that can be in the mutual love and fellowship of Man's Life.
Beyond all this, it brings another evil therewith, for it is the destruction
and interruption of Prayer; for in the time that the Mind is occupied with
Dissension and Discord, there can be no true Prayer used. For the Lords Prayer
has not only a respect to particular Persons, but to the whole Universal, in
the which we openly pronounce that we will forgive them which have offended
against us, even as we ask forgiveness of our sins of God; which thing, how can
it be done rightly when their hearts be at dissension? how can they pray each
for other when they be at hate betwixt themselves? Now, if the aid of Prayer be
taken away, by what means can they sustain themselves in any comfort? For they
cannot otherwise either resist the Devil, or yet have their hearts staid in
stable comfort in all perils and necessities but by Prayer. Thus all
discommodities, as well Worldly as Ghostly, follow this froward testiness and
cumbrous fierceness, in manners which be more meet for brute Beasts, than for
reasonable Creatures. St. Peter does not allow these things, but the Devil
desires them gladly; wherefore take the more heed. And yet a Man may be a Man
although he does not use such extremity, yea, although he should dissemble some
things in his Wives manners. And this is the part of a Christian Man, which
both pleases God, and serves also in good use, to the comfort of their
Marriage State. Now as concerning the Wives Duty, What shall become her? Shall
she abuse the gentleness and humanity of her Husband, and at her pleasure turn
all things upside down? No surely, for that is far repugnant against Gods
Commandment; For thus does St. Peter preach to them, Ye Wives, 1 Pet. 2^
be ye in subjection to obey your own Husbands. To obey is another thing than
to control or command, which yet they may do to their Children and to their
Family. But as for their Husbands, them must they obey, and cease from
commanding, and perform subjection. For this surely does nourish Concord very
much, when the Wife is ready at hand at her Husbands commandment, when she will
apply her self to his Will, when she endeavoreth her self to seek his
contentation, and to do him pleasure, when she will eschew all things that
might offend him: For thus will most truly be verified the saying of the Poet,
A good Wife by obeying her Husband shall bear the Rule^, so that he shall have
a delight and a gladness the sooner at all times to return home to her; but on
the contrary part, When the Wives be stubborn, froward and malepart, their
Husbands are compelled thereby to abhor and flee from their own Houses, even as
they should have Battle with their Enemies. Howbeit, It can scantly be but that
some offenses shall sometime chance betwixt them; for no Man does live without
fault, specially, for that the Woman is the more frail Party. Therefore let
them beware that they stand not in their faults and wilfulness; but rather let
them acknowledge their Follies, and say, My Husband, so it is, that by my anger
I was compelled to do this or that, forgive it me, and hereafter I will take
better heed. Thus ought the Woman more readily to do, the more they be ready to
offend. And they shall not do this only to avoid Strife and debate, but rather
in the respect of the Commandment of God, as St. Paul expresses it in this
form of words, Let Women be subject to their Husbands, as to the Lord; Ephesians. 5.
For the Husband is the Head of the Woman as Christ is the Head of the Church.
Here you understand that God has commanded that ye should acknowledge the
Authority of the Husband, and refer to him the honor of Obedience. And St.
Peter says in that place before rehearsed, that holy Matrons did in former
time deck themselves, not with Gold and Silver, but in putting their whole hope
in God, and in obeying their Husbands, as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him
Lord, Whose Daughters ye be (says he) if ye follow her Example. This Sentence
is very meet for Women to print in their remembrance. Truth it is, that they
must specially feel the grief and pains of their Matrimony, in that they
relinquish the Liberty of their own Rule, in the pain of their Traveling, in
the bringing up of their Children. In which Offices they be in great Perils,
and be grieved with great Afflictions, which they might be without if they
lived out of Matrimony. But St. Peter says, That this is the chief Ornament of
holy Matrons, in that they set their hope and trust in God; that is to say, in
that they refused not from Marriage for the business thereof, for the gifts and
perils thereof; but committed all such Adventures to God, in most sure trust of
help, after that they have called upon his aid. O Woman! do thou the like, and
so shall thou be most excellently beautified before God and all his Angels and
Saints, and thou need not to seek further for doing any better works; for,
obey thy Husband, take regard of his Requests, and give heed unto him to
perceive what he requires of thee, and so shall thou honor God, and live
peaceably in thy House. And beyond all this, God shall follow thee with his
Benediction, that all things shall well prosper both to thee and to thy
Husband, as the Psalm says, Blessed is the Man which fears God, and walks
in his ways, thou shall have the Fruit of thine own hands, happy shall thou be,
and well it shall go with thee. Thy Wife shall be as a Vine, plentifully
spreading about thy House. Thy Children shall be as the young Springs of the
Olives about thy Table. Lo, thus shall that Man be blessed (says David) that
fears the Lord. This let the Wife have ever in mind, the rather admonished
thereto by the Apparel of her Head, whereby is signified that she is under
covert or obedience of her Husband. And as that Apparel is of Nature so
appointed, to declare her subjection; so bids St. Paul, that all other of
her Raiment should express both Shamefacedness and Sobriety. For if it be not
lawful for the Woman to have her Head bare, but to bear thereon the Sign of her
Power wheresoever she goes; more is it required that she declare the thing
that is meant thereby. And therefore those Ancient Women of the old World
called their Husbands Lords, and showed them reverence in obeying them. But
peradventure she will say, That those Men loved their Wives indeed. I know that
well enough, and bear it well in mind; but when I do admonish you of your
Duties, then call not to consideration what their Duties be. For when we our
selves do teach our Children to obey us as their Parents; or when we reform our
Servants, and tell them that they should obey their Masters, not only at the
Eye, but as the Lord; if they should tell us again our Duties, we should not
think it well done; for when we be admonished of our Duties and Faults, we
ought not then to seek what other Men's Duties be. For though a Man had a
Companion in his fault, yet should he not thereby be without his fault. But
this must be only looked on, by what means thou may make thy self without
blame; for Adam did lay the blame upon the Woman, and she turned it unto the
Serpent; but yet neither of them was thus excused; and therefore bring not such
excuses to me at this time, but apply all thy diligence to hear thine obedience
to thine Husband. For when I take in hand to admonish thy Husband to love thee,
and to cherish thee, yet will I not cease to set out the Law that is appointed
for the Woman, as well as I would require of the Man what is written for his
Law. Go thou therefore about such things as becomes thee only, and show thy
self tractable to thy Husband; or rather if thou will obey thy Husband for Gods
precept, then allege such things as be in his duty to do, but perform thou
diligently those things which the Lawmakers has charged thee to do; for thus
is it most reasonable to obey God, if thou will not suffer thy self to
transgress his Law. He that loves his Friend seems to do no great thing, but
he that honoreth that is hurtful and hateful to him, this Man is worthy most
commendation; even so think you, if thou can suffer an extreme Husband, thou
shall have a great reward therefore; but if thou love him only because he is
courteous, what reward will God give thee therefore? Yet I speak not these
things that I would wish the Husbands to be sharp toward their Wives; but I
exhort the Women that they would patiently bear the sharpness of their
Husbands. For when either Parties do their best to perform their Duties the one
to the other, then follows thereon great profit to their Neighbors for their
Examples sake. For when the Woman is ready to suffer a sharp Husband, and the
Man will not extremely entreat his stubborn and troublesome Wife, then be all
things in quiet, as in a most sure Haven. Even thus was it done in old time,
that every one did their own Duty and Office, and was not busy to require the
Duty of their Neighbors. Consider, I pray thee, that Abraham took to him his
Brothers Son, his Wife did not blame him therefore. He commanded him to go with
him a long Journey, she did not gainsay it, but obeyed his precept.

Again, after all those great miseries, labors and pains of that Journey, when
Abraham was made as Lord over all, yet did he give place to Lot of his
Superiority; which matter Sarah took so little to grief, that she never once
suffered her Tongue to speak such words, as the common manner of Women is wont
to do in these days, when they see their Husbands in such Rooms, to be made
Underlings, and to be put under their Youngers; then they upbraid them with
cumbrous Talk, and call them Fools, Dastards and Cowards for so doing. But
Sarah was so far from speaking any such thing, that it came never into her mind
and thought so to say, but allowed the Wisdom and Will of her Husband. Yea,
besides all this, after the said Lot had thus his Will, and left to his Uncle
the less portion of Land, he chanced to fall into extreme Peril; which chance
when it came to the knowledge of this said Patriarch, he incontinently put all
his Men in harness, and prepared himself with all his Family and Friends,
against the Host of the Persians. In which case, Sarah did not counsel him to
the contrary, nor did say, as then might have been said, My Husband, whither
go thou so unadvisedly? Why runnest thou thus on head? Why do thou offer
thy self to so great Perils, and art thus ready to jeopard thine own Life, and
to peril the Lives of all thine for such a Man as has done thee such wrong? At
the least way, if thou regardest not thy self, yet have compassion on me, which
for thy love have forsaken my Kindred and my Country, and have the want both
of my Friends and Kinsfolk, and am thus come into so far Countries with thee;
have pity on me, and make me not here a Widow, to cast me into such cares and
troubles. Thus might she have said; but Sarah neither said nor thought such
words, but she kept her self in silence in a^l things. Furthermore, all that
time when she was Barren, and took no Pains as other Women did, by bringing
forth Fruit in his House; What did he? he complained not to his Wife, but to
Almighty God. And consider how either of them did their Duties as became them;
for neither did he despise Sarah because she was Barren, nor never did cast it
in her teeth. Consider again how Abraham expelled the Handmaid out of the House
when she required it; so that by this I may truly prove, that the one was
pleased and contented with the other in all things; but yet set not your eyes
only on this matter, but look further what was done before this, that Hagar
used her Mistress despitefully, and that Abraham himself was somewhat provoked
against her, which must needs be an intolerable matter and a painful, to a
free-hearted Woman and a chaste. Let not therefore the Woman be too busy to
call for the Duty of her Husband, where she should be ready to perform her own,
for that is not worthy any great commendations. And even so again, let not the
Man only consider what belongs to the Woman, and to stand too earnestly
gazing thereon, for that is not his part or duty. But as I have said, let
either Party be ready and willing to perform that which belongs especially to
themselves. For if we be bound to hold out our left cheek to strangers which
will smite us on the right cheek, how much more ought we to suffer an extreme
and unkind Husband? but yet I mean not that a Man should beat his Wife, God
forbid that, for that is the greatest shame that can be, not so much to her
that is beaten as to him that does the deed. But if by such Fortune thou
chancest upon such an Husband, take it not too heavily, but suppose thou that
thereby is laid up no small Reward hereafter, and in this life time no small
Commendation to thee, if thou can be quiet. But yet to you that be Men, thus
I speak, Let there be none so grievous Fault to compel you to beat your Wives.
But what say I, your Wives? No, it is not to be born with that an honest Man
should lay hands on his Maidservant to beat her. Wherefore, if it be a great
shame for a Man to beat his Bond-Servant, much more rebuke, it is to lay
violent hands upon his Freewoman. And this thing may be well understood by the
Laws which the Paynims have made, which do discharge her any longer to dwell
with such an Husband, as unworthy to have any further company with her that
does smite her. For it is an extreme Point, thus so vilely to entreat her like
a Slave, that is fellow to thee of thy Life, and so joined unto thee beforetime
in the necessary matters of thy living. And therefore a Man may well liken such
a Man (if he may be called a Man, rather than a wild Beast) to a killer of his
Father or Mother. And whereas we be commanded to forsake our Father and Mother,
for our Wives sake, and yet thereby do work them none injury, but do fulfill the
Law of God; how can it not appear then to be a Point of extreme madness, to
entreat her despitefully, for whose sake God has commanded thee to leave
Parents? Yea, who can suffer such despite? Who can worthily express the
inconveniency, that is, to see what weepings and wailings be made in the open
Streets, when Neighbors run together to the House of so unruly an Husband, as
to a Bedlam-man, who goes about to overturn all that he has at home? Who
would not think that it were better for such a Man to wish the Ground to open,
and swallow him in, than once ever after to be seen in the Market? But
peradventure thou will Object, that the Woman provokes thee to this Point. But
consider thou again, that the Woman is a frail Vessel, and thou art therefore
made the Ruler and Head over her, to bear the weakness of her in this her
subjection. And therefore study thou to declare the honest commendation of thy
Authority, which thou can no way better do, than to forbear to urge her in
her weakness and subjection. For even as the King appears so much the more
Noble, the more Excellent and Noble he makes his Officers and Lieutenants,
whom if he should dishonor, and despise the Authority of their Dignity, he
should deprive himself of a great part of his own Honor: Even so, if thou do
despise her that is set in the next room beside thee, thou do much derogate
and decay the Excellency and Virtue of thine own Authority. Recount all these
things in thy mind, and be gentle and quiet. Understand that God has given
thee Children with her, and art made a Father, and by such reason appease thy
self. Do thou not see the Husbandmen, what diligence they use to Till that
Ground which once they have taken to Farm, though it be never so full of
faults? As for an Example, though it be Dry, though it brings forth Weeds,
though the Soil cannot bear too much Wet; yet he Tilleth it, and so wins
Fruit thereof: Even in like manner, if thou would use like diligence to
instruct and order the mind of thy Spouse, if thou would diligently apply thy
self to weed out by little and little the noysom Weeds of uncomely Manners out
of her mind, with wholesome precepts, it could not be, but in time thou should
feel the pleasant Fruit thereof to both your comforts. Therefore that this
thing chance not so, perform this thing that I do here Counsel thee: Whenever
any displeasant matter rises at home, if thy Wife has done ought amiss,
comfort her, and increase not the Heaviness. For though thou should be
grieved with never so many things, yet shall thou find nothing more grievous
than to want the benevolence of thy Wife at home. What offense soever thou
can name, yet shall thou find none more intolerable, than to be at debate
with thy Wife. And for this cause, most of all ought thou to have this love
in Reverence. And if reason moves thee to bear any burden at any other Man's
hands, much more at thy Wives. For if she be poor, upbraid her not; if she be
simple, taunt her not, but be the more courteous; for she is thy Body, and made
one Flesh with thee. But thou peradventure wilt say, that she is a wrathful
Woman, a Drunkard, and Beastly, without Wit or Reason. For this cause bewail
her the more. Chafe not in Anger, but Pray unto Almighty God. Let her be
admonished and helped with good Counsel, and do thou thy best endeavor, that
she may be delivered of all these affections. But if thou should beat her,
thou shall increase her evil affections, for frowardness and sharpness is not
amended with frowardness, but with softness and gentleness. Furthermore,
consider what reward thou shall have at Gods hand; for where thou might beat
her, and yet, for the respect of the fear of God, thou will abstain and bear
patiently her great offenses, the rather in respect of that Law which
forbids that a Man should cast out his Wife, what fault soever she be
cumbred with, thou shall have a very great reward; and before the receipt of
that reward, thou shall feel many commodities. For by this means she shall be
made the more Obedient, and thou for her sake shall be made the more meek. It
is written in a Story of a certain strange Philosopher, which had a cursed
Wife, a froward, and a Drunkard: When he was asked for what consideration he
did so bear her evil manners? He made Answer, By this means (said he) I have at
home a Schoolmaster, and an Example how I should behave my self abroad; For I
shall (says he) be the more quiet with others, being thus daily exercised and
taught in the forbearing her. Surely it is a shame that Paynims should be wiser
than we; we, I say, that be commanded to resemble Angels, or rather God himself
through meekness. And for the love of Virtue, this said Philosopher Socrates
would not expel his Wife out of his House. Yea some say that he did therefore
marry his Wife, to learn this Virtue by that occasion. Wherefore, seeing many
Men be far be hind the wisdom of this Man, my Counsel is, that first and before
all things, a Man do his best endeavor to get him a good Wife, endued with all
Honesty and Virtue: But if it so chance that he is deceived, that he has
chosen such a Wife as is neither good nor tolerable, then let the Husband
follow this Philosopher, and let him instruct his Wife in every condition, and
never lay these matters to sight. For the Merchantman, except he be first at
composition with his Factor to use his interfairs quietly, he will neither stir
his Ship to sail, nor yet will lay hands upon his Merchandise: Even so, let us
do all things, that we may have the fellowship of our Wives, which is the
Factor of all our doings at home, in great quiet and rest. And by these means
all things shall prosper quietly, and so shall we pass through the dangers of
the troublous Sea of this World. For this state of life will be more Honorable
and Comfortable than our Houses, than Servants, than Money, than Lands and
Possessions, than all things that can be told. As all these with Sedition and
Discord, can never work us any comfort: So shall all things turn to our
Commodity and Pleasure, if we draw this Yoke in one concord of Heart and Mind.
Whereupon do your best endeavor, that after this sort ye use your Matrimony,
and so shall ye be armed on every side. Ye have escaped the snares of the
Devil, and the unlawful lusts of the Flesh, ye have the quietness of Conscience
by this instruction of Matrimony ordained by God; therefore use often Prayer to
him, that he would be present by you, that he would continue Concord and
Charity betwixt you. Do the best you can of your parts, to Custom your selves
to softness and meekness, and bear well in worth such oversights as chance; and
thus shall your Conversation be most pleasant and comfortable. And although
(which can no otherwise be) some Adversities shall follow, and otherwhiles now
one discommodity, now another shall appear; yet in this common Trouble and
Adversity, lift up both your Hands unto Heaven, call upon the help and
assistance of God, the Author of your Marriage, and surely the promise of
relief is at hand. For Christ affirms in his Gospel, Where two or three be
gathered together in my Name, and be agreed, what matter soever they Pray for,
it shall be granted them of my Heavenly Father. Why therefore should thou be
afraid of the danger, where thou have so ready a Promise, and so nigh an Help?
Furthermore, you must understand how necessary it is for Christian Folk to bear
Christ's Cross; for else we shall never feel how comfortable Gods help is unto
us. Therefore give thanks to God for his great benefit, in that ye have taken
upon you this state of Wedlock, and Pray ye instantly, that Almighty God may
luckily defend and maintain ye therein, that neither ye be overcome with any
Temptations, nor with any Adversity. But before all things, take good heed that
ye give no occasion to the Devil to let and hinder your Prayers by Discord and
Dissension; for there is no stronger defense and stay in all our life, than is
Prayer, in the which we may call for the help of God and obtain it, whereby we
may win his Blessing, his Grace, his Defense and Protection, so to continue
therein, to a better life to come: Which grant us, he that died for us all, to
whom be all Honor and Praise, for ever and ever. Amen.

AN HOMILY AGAINST IDLENESS.
FOrasmuch as Man, being not born to Ease and Rest, but to Labor and Travel, is
by corruption of Nature through sin, so far degenerated and grown out of kind,
that he takes Idleness to be no evil at all, but rather a commendable thing,
seemly for those that be Wealthy; and therefore is greedily embraced of most
part of Men, as agreeable to their sensual affection, and all Labor and Travel
is diligently avoided, as a thing Painful and Repugnant to the pleasure of the
Flesh: It is necessary to be declared unto you, that by the Ordinance of God,
which he has set in the Nature of Man, every one ought, in his Lawful Vocation
and Calling, to give himself to Labor; and that Idleness, being Repugnant to
the same Ordinance, is a grievous sin, and also, for the great inconveniences
and mischiefs which spring thereof, an intolerable Evil: To the intent that
when ye understand the same, ye may diligently flee from it, and on the other
part earnestly apply your selves, every Man in his Vocation, to honest Labor
and Business, which as it is enjoined unto Man by Gods appointment; so it
wants not his manifold Blessings and sundry Benefits.

Almighty God, after that he had Created Man, put him into Paradise, that he
might dress and keep it; but when he had transgressed Gods Commandment, Eating
the Fruit of the Tree which was forbidden him, Almighty God fort with did cast
him out of Paradise into this woeful Vail of Misery, Genesis 3.
enjoining him to Labor the Ground that he was taken out of, and to eat his
Bread in the sweat of his Face all the days of his Life. It is the appoinment
and will of God, that every Man, during the time of this Mortal and Transitory
life, should give himself to such Honest and Godly Exercise and Labor, and
every one follow his own business, and to walk uprightly in his own Calling.
Man (says Job) is born to Labor. Job 5. Eccles. 7.
And we are commanded by Jesus Sirach, not to hate painful works, neither
Husbandry, or other such Mysteries of Travel, which the highest has Created.
The Wise Man also exhorts us, Prove. 5.
to drink the Waters of our own Cistern, and of the Rivers that run out of the
midst of our own Well; meaning thereby, that we should live of our own Labors,
and not devour the Labors of others. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
St. Paul hearing that among the Thessalonians there were certain that lived
dissolutely and out of order, that is to say, which did not work, but were
busybodies; not getting their own living with their own Travel, but eating
other Men's Bread of free-cost, did command the said Thessalonians, not only to
withdraw themselves, and abstain from the familiar company of such inordinate
persons, but also that if there were any such among them that would not Labor,
the same should not Eat, nor have any Living at other Men's hands. Which Doctrine
of St. Paul (no doubt) is grounded upon the general Ordinance of God, which is,
that every Man should Labor: And therefore it is to be obeyed of all Men, and
no Man can justly exempt himself from the same. But when it is said, all Men
should Labor, it is not so straightly meant, that all Men should use handy
Labor. But as there be diverse sorts of Labors, some of the Mind, and some of
the Body, and some of both: So every one (except by reason of Age, debility of
Body, or want of Health, he be unapt to Labor at all) ought both for the
getting of his own living honestly, and for to profit others, in some kind of
Labor to exercise himself, according as the Vocation whereunto God has called
him shall require. So that whosoever does good to the Common Weal and Society
of Men with his Industry and Labor, whether it be by Governing the Common Weal
publicly, or by bearing public Office or Ministry, or by doing any common
necessary affairs of his Country, or by giving Counsel, or by teaching and
instructing others, or by what other means soever he be occupied, so that a
profit and benefit redound thereof unto others, the same person is not to be
accounted Idle, though he work no Bodily Labor, nor is to be denied his living
(if he attended his Vocation) though he work not with his hands.

Bodily Labor is not required of them which by reason of their Vocation and
Office are Occupied in the Labor of the Mind, to the succor and help of
others. St. Paul exhorts Timothy to eschew and refuse Idle Widows, 1 Timothy 5.
which go about from House to House, because they are not only Idle, but
Pratlers also, and Busybodies, speaking things which are not comely. The
Prophet Ezekiel, declaring what the Sins of the City of Sodom were, reckons
Idleness to be one of the principle. Ezekiel. 16.
The Sins (says he) of Sodom were these, Pride, fullness of Meat, Abundance,
and Idleness. These things had Sodom and her Daughters, meaning the Cities
subject to her. The horrible and strange kind of Destruction of that City, and
all the Country about the same, (which was Fire and Brimstone raining from
Heaven) most manifestly declares, what a grievous Sin Idleness is, and ought
to admonish us to flee from the same, and embrace Honest and Godly Labor. But
if we give our selves to Idleness and Sloth, to Lurking and Loitering, to
wilful Wandering, and wastful Spending, never settling our selves to Honest
Labor, but living like drone Bees by the Labors of other Men, then do we break
the Lords Commandment, we go astray from our Vocation, and incur the danger of
Gods wrath and heavy displeasure, to our endless destruction, except by
Repentance we turn again unfeignedly unto God. The inconveniences and
mischiefs that come of Idleness, as well to Man's Body as to his Soul, are more
than can in short time be well rehearsed. Some we shall declare and open unto
you, that by considering them, ye may the better with your selves gather the
rest. An Idle Hand (says Soloman) makes Poor, Prove. 10. Prove. 11.28. Prove. 10.
but a quick Laboring Hand makes Rich. Again, He that Tilleth his Land, shall
have plenteousness of Bread, but he that flows in Idleness is a very Fool,
and shall have Poverty enough. Again, A Sloathful Body will not go to Plough
for cold of Winter, therefore shall he go a begging in the Summer, and have
nothing.

But what shall we need to stand much about the proving this, that Poverty
follows Idleness: We have too much experience thereof (the thing is the more
to be lamented) in this Realm. For a great part of the beggary that is among
the Poor, can be imputed to nothing so much as to Idleness, and to the
negligence of Parents, which do not bring up their Children either in good
Learning, Honest Labor, or some commendable Occupation or Trade, whereby when
they come to Age, they might get their living. Daily Experience also teaches,
that nothing is more an enemy or pernicious to the health of Man's Body, than is
Idleness, too much Ease and Sleep, and want of Exercise. But these and such
like incommodities, albeit they be great and noisome, yet because they concern
chiefly the Body and external Good, they are not to be compared with the
mischiefs and inconveniences, which through Idleness happen to the Soul,
whereof we will recite some. Idleness is never alone, but has always a long
Tail of other Vices hanging on, which corrupt and infect the whole Man after
such a sort, that he is made at length, nothing else but a lump of Sin.
Idleness (says Jesus Sirach) brings much Evil and Mischief. Ecclus 33.
St. Bernard calls it the Mother of all Evils, and step-dame of all Virtues,
adding moreover, that it does prepare, and (as it were) tread the way to Hell
Fire. Where Idleness is once received, there the Devil is ready to set in his
Foot, and to plant all kind of Wickedness and Sin, to the everlasting
Destruction of Man's Soul. Which thing to be most true, we are taught plainly in
the 13. Matt. 13.
of Matthew, where it is said, that the Enemy came while Men were asleep, and
Sowed naughty Tares among the good Wheat. In very deed, the best time that the
Devil can have to work his feat, is when Men be asleep, that is to say, Idle:
Then is he most busy in his work, then does he soonest catch Men in the snare
of Perdition, then does he fill them with all iniquity, to bring them (without
Gods special favor) unto utter Destruction. Hereof we have two notable
Examples, most lively set before our Eyes. The one in King David, 1 Kings 11.
who tarrying at home Idly (as the Scripture says) at such times as other
Kings go forth to Battle, was quickly seduced of Satan to forsake the Lord his
God, 2 Kings 12.
and to commit two grievous and abominable sins in his sight, Adultery and
Murder.

The Plagues that ensued these Offenses were horrible and grievous, as it may
easily appear to them that will read the Story. Judge. 16.
Another example of Samson, who so long as he Warred with the Philistines,
Enemies to the People of God, could never be taken or overcome: But after that
he gave himself to Ease and Idleness, he not only committed Fornication with
the Strumpet Dalila, but also was taken of his Enemies, and had his Eyes
miserably put out, was put in Prison, and compelled to grind in a Mill, and at
length was made the laughing strock of his Enemies. If these two, who were so
excellent Men, so wellbeloved of God, so endued with singular and Divine Gifts,
the one namely of Prophecy, and the other of Strength, and such Men as never
could by Vexation, Labor, or Trouble, be overcome, were overthrown and fell
into grievous Sins by giving themselves for a short time to Ease and Idleness,
and so consequently incurred miserable Plagues at the hands of God: What Sin?
What Mischief? What Inconvenience and Plagues is not to be feared of them,
which all their life long give themselves wholly to Idleness and Ease? Let us
not deceive our selves, thinking little hurt to come of doing nothing; for it
is a true saying, When one does nothing, he learneth to do Evil. Let us
therefore always be doing of some honest Work, that the Devil may find us
Occupied. He himself is ever Occupied, never Idle, but walks continually
seeking to devour us. Let us resist him with our diligent Watching, in Labor,
and in Well-doing. For he that diligently exercises himself in honest
Business, is not easily catched in the Devils snare. When Man through Idleness,
or for defalt of some honest Occupation or Trade to live upon, is brought to
Poverty, and want of things necessary, we see how easily such a Man is induced
for his gain, to Lie, to Practice how he may deceive his Neighbor, to forswear
himself, to bear false Witness, and oftentimes to Steal and Murder, or to use
some other ungodly mean to live withal; whereby not only his good Name, honest
Reputation, and a good Conscience, yea, his Lise is utterly lost, but also the
great displeasure and wrath of God, with diverse and sundry grievous Plagues are
procured. Lo here the end of the Idle and Sluggish Bodies, whose hands cannot
away with honest Labor; loss of Name, Fame, Reputation, and Life, here in this
World, and without the great Mercy of God, the purchasing of Everlasting
Destruction in the World to come. Have not all Men then good cause to beware
and take heed of Idleness, seeing they that embrace and follow it, have
commonly of their pleasant Idleness, sharp and sour displeasures? Doubtless
good and godly Men, weighing the great and manifold harms that come by Idleness
to a Commonweal, have from time to time provided with all deligence, that
sharp and severe Laws might be made for the Correction and Amendment of this
Evil. The Egyptians had a Law, Herodotus.
that every Man should Weekly bring his Name to the chief Rulers of the
Province, and therewithal declare what trade of Life he used, to the intent
that Idleness might be worthily punished, and diligent Labor duly rewarded. The
Athenians did chastise Sluggish and Sloathful People, no less than they did
Heinous and Grievous Offenders, considering (as the truth is) that Idleness
causes much mischief. The Areopagites called every Man to a strait account how
he lived; and if they found any Loyterers that did not profit the Commonweal
by one means or other, they were driven out, and banished, as unprofitable
Members, that did only hurt and corrupt the Body. And in this Realm of England,
good and godly Laws have been diverse times made, that no Idle Vagabonds and
Loytering Runnagates, should be suffered to go from Town to Town, from Place to
Place, without Punishment, which neither serve God nor their Prince, but devour
the sweet Fruits of other Men's Labor, being common Liars, Drunkards, Swearers,
Thieves, Whoremasters, and Murderers, refusing all honest Labor, and give
themselves to nothing else but to invent and do mischief, whereof they are more
desirous and greedy than is any Lion of his prey. To remember this
inconvenience, let all Parents and others which have the care and governance of
Youth, so bring them up either in good Learning, Labor, or some honest
Occupation or Trade, whereby they may be able in time to come, not only to
sustain themselves competently, but also to rel^eve and supply the necessity
and want of others. And St. Paul says, Let him that has stolen, Ephesians. 4.
steal no more; and he that has deceived others, or used unlawful ways to get
his living, leave off the same, and Labor rather, working with his Hands that
thing which is good, that he may have that which is necessary for himself, and
also be able to give unto others that stand in need of his help. The Prophet
David thinks him happy that lives upon his Labor, saying, Psalm. 128.
When thou eatest the Labors of thine Hands, hapyy art thou, and well is thee.
This happyness or blessing consists in these and such like Points.

First, Eccles. 3.
It is the gift of God (as Solomon says) when one eats and drinks, and
receives good of his Labor. Secondly, When one lives of his own Labor (so it
be honest and good) he lives of it with a good Conscience, and an upright
Conscience is a treasure inestimable. Thirdly he Eats his Bread not with
brawling and chiding, but with peace and quietness, when he quietly Laboreth
for the same, according to St. Paul's admonition. Fourthly, He is no Man's
Bondsman for his meat sake, nor needs not for that, to hang upon the good Will
of other Men; but so lives of his own, that he is able to give part to others.
And to conclude, the Laboring Man and his Family, whiles they are busily
Occupied in their Labor, be free from many Temptations and occasions of Sin,
which they that live in Idleness are subject unto. And here ought Artificers
and Laboring Men, who be at Wages for their Work and Labor, to consider their
Conscience to God, and their Duty to their Neighbor, lest they abuse their time
in Idleness, so defrauding them which be at Charge both with great Wages, and
dear Commons. They be worse than Idle Men indeed, for that they seek to have
Wages for their Loytering. It is less danger to God to be Idle for no gain,
than by Idleness to win out of their Neighbors Purse, Wages for that which is
not deserved. It is true, that Almighty God is angry with such as do defraud
the Hired Man of his Wages; the cry of that injury ascends up to Gods ear for
vengeance. And as true it is, that the hired Man, who uses deceit in his
Labor, is a thief before God. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Let no Man (says St. Paul to the Thessalonians) subtly beguile his Brother,
let him not defraud him of his business: For the Lord is the revenger of such
deceits. Whereupon he that will have a good Conscience to God, that Laboring
Man, I say, which depends wholly upon Gods benediction, ministering all things
sufficient for his living, let him use his time in a faithful Labor, and when
his Labor by Sickness or other misfortune does cease, yet let him think for
that in his health he served God and his Neighbor truly, he shall not want in
time of necessity. God upon respect of his fidelity in health, will recompense
his indigence, to move the Hearts of good Men to relieve such decayed Men in
Sickness. Where otherwise, whatsoever is gotten by idleness shall have no means
to help in time of need.

Let the Laboring Man therefore eschew for his part this vice of Idleness and
Deceit, Ephesians. 4.
remembering that St Paul exhorts every Man to lay away all Deceit,
Dissimulation, and Lying, and to use truth and plainness to his Neighbor,
because (says he) we be Members together in one Body, under one head Christ
our Savior. And here might be charged the Servingmen of this Realm, who spend
their time in much Idleness of life, nothing regarding the opportunity of their
time, forgetting how Service is no Heritage, how Age will creep upon them;
where Wisdom were, they should expend their Idle time in some good Business,
whereby they might increase in knowledge, and so the more worthy to be ready
for every Man's service: It is a great rebuke to them, that they study not
either to Write fair, to keep a Book of Account, to study the Tongues, and so
to get wisdom and knowledge in such Books and Works, as be now plentifully set
out in Print of all manner of Languages. Let young Men consider the precious
value of their time, and waste it not in Idleness, in Jollity, in Gaming, in
Bant queting, in Ruffians company. Youth is but Vanity, and must be accounted
for before God. How merry and glad soever thou be in thy Youth, O young Man
(says the Preacher) how glad soever thy Heart be in thy young days, Eccles. 11.
how fast and freely soever thou follow the ways of thine own Heart, and the
lust of thine own Eye, yet be thou sure that God shall bring thee into Judgment
for all these things. God of his mercy put it into the Hearts and Minds of all
them that have the Sword of Punishment in their Hands, or have Families under
their Governance, to Labor to redress this great enormity, of all such as live
Idly and unprofitably in the Commonweal, to the great dishonor of God, and the
grievous Plague of his silly People. To leave sin unpunished, and to neglect
the good bringing up of Youth, is nothing else but to kindle the Lords wrath
against us, and to heap Plagues upon our own Heads. As long as the Adulterous
people were suffered to live Licentiously without Reformation; so long did the
Plague continue and increase in Israel, Numb. 25.
as you may see in the Book of Numbers.

But when due correction was done upon them, the Lords anger was strait way
pacified, and the Plauge ceased. Let all Officers therefore look straightly to
their charge. Let all Masters of Households reform this abuse in their Families;
let them use the Authority that God has given them; let them not maintain
Vagabonds and Idle persons, but deliver the Realm and their Households from such
noysom Loyterers, that Idleness the Mother of all Mischief, being clean taken
away, Almighty God may turn his dreaful Anger away from us, and confirm the
Covenant of Peace upon us for ever, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our only
Lord and Savior; to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, World without end. Amen.

AN HOMILY OF Repentance, and of true Reconciliation unto God.
THere is noting that the Holy Ghost does so much Labor in all the Scriptures
to beat into Men's Heads, as Repentance, amendment of Life, and speedy returning
unto the Lord God of Hosts. And no marvel why; for we do Daily and Hourly by
our wickedness and stubborn Disobedience, horribly fall away from God, thereby
purchasing unto our selves (if he should deal with us according to his Justice)
Eternal Damnation. The Doctrine of Repentance is most necessary.
So that no Doctrine is so necessary in the Church of God, as is the Doctrine of
Repentance and amendment of Life. And verily the true Preachers of the Gospel
of the Kingdom of Heaven, and of the glad and joyful tidings of Salvation, have
always in their Godly Sermons and Preachings unto the People, joined these two
together, I mean Repentance and Forgiveness of Sins, even as our Savior Jesus
Christ did appoint himself, saying, So it behoved Christ to Suffer, and to Rise
again the Third Day, and that Repentance and Forgiveness of sins should be
preached in his Name among all Nations. And therefore the holy Apostle does in
the Acts speak after this manner, I have witnessed both to the Jews and to the
Gentiles, the Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
Did not John Baptist, Zacharias Son, begin his Ministry with the Doctrine of
Repentance, saying, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand? The like Doctrine
did our Savior Jesus Christ preach himself, and commanded his Apostles to
preach the same.

I might here allege very many places out of the Prophets, in the which this
most wholesome Doctrine of Repentance is very earnestly urged, as most needful for
all degrees and orders of Men, but one shall be sufficient at this present time.

These are the words of Joel the Prophet; therefore also now the Lord says,
Joel 2.
Return unto me with all your heart, with Fasting, Weeping and Mourning; rent
your hearts and not your clothes, and return unto the Lord your God, for he is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great compassion, and ready to
pardon wickedness. Whereby it is given us to understand, A perpetual Rule which
all must follow.
that we have here a perpetual Rule appointed unto us, which ought to be
observed and kept at all times; and that there is none other way whereby the
wrath of God may be pacified, and his anger assuaged, that the fierceness of
his fury and the plagues of destruction, which by his righteous Judgment he had
determined to bring upon us, may depart, be removed and taken away. Where he
says, But now therefore (says the Lord,) return unto me. It is not without
great importance that the Prophet speaks so; for he had before set forth at
large unto them the horrible Vengeance of God, which no Man was able to abide,
and therefore he does move them to Repentance, to obtain Mercy, as if he should
say, I will not have these things to be so taken, as though there were no hope
of grace left. For although ye do by your sins deserve to be utterly destroyed,
and God by his righteous Judgments has determined to bring no small
destruction upon you; yet know that ye are in a manner on the very edge of the
Sword; if ye will speedily return unto him, he will most gently and most
mercifully receive you into favor again. Whereby we are admonished that
Repentance is never too late, so that it be true and earnest. For since that God
in the Scriptures will be called our Father, doubtless he does follow the
nature and property of gentle and merciful Fathers, which seek nothing so much
as the returning again, and amendment of their Children, as Christ does
abundantly teach in the Parable of the Prodigal Son. Luke 15. Ezekiel. 18. Esaias 1.
1 John 2.
Does not the Lord himself say by the Prophet, I will not the death of the
wicked, but that he turn from his wicked ways and live? And in another place,
If we confess our sins, God is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins,
and to make us clean from all wickedness. Which most comfortable Promises are
confirmed by many Examples of the Scriptures; when the Jews did willingly
receive and embrace the wholesome counsel of the Prophet Esaias; Esaias 33.
God by and by did reach his helping hand unto them, and by his Angel did in
one night slay the most worthy and valiant Soldiers of Sennacheribs Camp. 2
Par. 53.
Whereunto may King Manasses be added, who after all manner of damnable
wickedness returned unto the Lord, and therefore was heard of him, and restored
again into his Kingdom. Luke 7.16.
The same grace and favor did the sinful Woman Magdalen; Zacheus, the poor
Thief, and many others feel. All which things ought to serve for our comfort
against the temptations of our Consciences, whereby the Devil goes about to
shake, or rather to overthrow our Faith. For every one of us ought to apply the
same unto himself, and say, Yet now return unto the Lord; neither let the
remembrance of thy former life discourage thee, yea, the more wicked that it
has been, the more fervent and earnest let thy Repentance or returning be, and
forthwith thou shall feel the ears of the Lord wide open unto thy Prayers: But
let us more narrowly look upon the Commandment of the Lord touching this
matter. Turn unto me (says he by the holy Prophet Joel,) with all your hearts,
with Fasting, Weeping and Mourning. Rent your Hearts and not your Garments,
etc. In which words, he comprehends all manner of things that can be spoken
of Repentance, which is a returning again of the whole Man unto God, from whom
we be fallen away by sin. But that the whole Discourse thereof may the better
be born away; we shall first consider in order four principal Points, that is,
from what we must return, to whom we must return, by whom we may be able to
convert, and the manner how to turn to God.

First, From whence we must turn.
From whence or from what things we must return? Truly we must return from
those things whereby we have been withdrawn, plucked, and led away from God. And
these generally are our sins, which, as the holy Prophet Esaias does testify, do
separate God and us, and hide his Face, that he will not hear us. But under the
name of sin, not only those gross words and deeds, which by the common judgment
of Men are counted to be filthy and unlawful, and so consequently abominable
sins; but also the filthy Lusts and inward Concupiscences of the Flesh, which
(as St. Paul testifies) do resist the Will and Spirit of God, Gal. 5.
and therefore ought earnestly to be bridled and kept under. We must repent of
the false and erroneous Opinions that we have had of God, and the wicked
Superstition that does breed of the same, the unlawful worshipping and service
of God, and other like. Ephesians. 5.
All these things must they forsake that will truly turn unto the Lord and
repent aright. For since that, for such things the wrath of God comes upon the
Children of disobedience, no end of punishment ought to be looked for, as long
as we continue in such things. Therefore they be here condemned which will seem
to be repentant Sinners, and yet will not forsake their Idolatry and
Superstition. Secondly, We must see unto whom we ought to return; Unto whom we
ought to return.
Revertimini usque ad me, says the Lord; that is, return as far as unto me. We
must then return unto the Lord, yea, we must return unto him alone: For he
alone is the Truth, and the Fountain of all goodness; but we must labor that we
do return as far as unto him, and that we do never cease nor rest till we have
apprehended and taken hold upon him.

But this must be done by Faith; for since that God is a Spirit, he can by no
other means be apprehended and taken hold upon. Wherefore, first, they do
greatly err, which do not turn unto God, but unto the Creatures, or unto the
inventions of Men, or unto their own Merits. Secondly, They that do begin to
return unto the Lord, By whom we must return unto God.
and do saint in the Midway, before they come to the mark that is appointed
unto them. Thirdly, Because we have of our own selves nothing to present us to
God, and do no less flee from him after our Fall, than our first Parent Adam
did, who when he had sinned did seek to hide himself from the sight of God; we
have need of a Mediator for to bring and reconcile us unto him, who for our
sins is angry with us. The same is Jesus Christ, who being true and natural
God, equal, and of one substance with the Father, did at the time appointed
take upon him our frail Nature in the blessed Virgins Womb, and that of her
undefiled Substance, that so he might be a Mediator between God and us, and
pacify his wrath. Of him does the Father himself speak from Heaven, saying,
Mat. 3.
This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. And he himself in his
Gospel does cry out and say, John 14.
I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, no Man comes unto the Father but by me.
For he alone did with the Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, John 1. 1 Pet. 1.
Acts 5.
make satisfaction unto the Justice of God for our sins. The Apostles do
testify that he was exalted for to give repentance and remission of sins unto
Israel; both which things he himself did command to be preached in his name.
Luke 24.
Therefore they are greatly deceived that preach Repentance without Christ,
John 15.
and teach the simple and ignorant that it consists only in the Works of Men.
They may indeed speak many things of good Works, and of amendment of Life and
Manners; but without Christ they be all vain and unprofitable. They that think
that they have done much of themselves toward Repentance, are so much more the
farther from God, because they do seek those things in their own Works and
Merits, which ought only to be sought in our Savior Jesus Christ, and in the
merits of his Death and Passion, and Bloodshedding. Fourthly, This holy
Prophet Joel does lively express the manner of this our Returning or
Repentance, comprehending all the inward and outward things that may be here
observed. First, He will havs us to return unto God with our whole heart, The
manner of our turning. Esaias 29. Mat. 15.
whereby he does remove and put away all Hypocrisy, lest the same might justly
be said unto us, This People draws near with their mouth, and worship me with
their lips, but their heart is far off from me.

Secondly, He requires a sincere and pure love of godliness, and of the true
worshipping and service of God, that is to say, that forsaking all manner of
things that are repugnant and contrary unto Gods Will; we do give our hearts
unto him, and the whole strength of our Bodies and Souls, according to that
which is written in the Law, Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, and
with all thy Strength. Here therefore nothing is lest unto us that we may give
unto the World, and unto the Lusts of the Flesh. For since that the heart is the
Fountain of all our Works, as many as do with their whole heart turn unto the
Lord, do live unto him only. Halting on both sides.
Neither do they yet repent truly, that halting on both sides, do otherwhiles
obey God, but by and by do think that laying him aside, it is lawful for them
to serve the World and the Flesh. And because that we are let by the natural
corruption of our own Flesh, and the wicked affections of the same, he does bid
us also to return with Fasting; not thereby understanding a superstitious
Abstinence and choosing of Meats, but a true Discipline or taming of the Flesh,
whereby the nourishments of filthy Lusts, and of stubborn Contumacy and Pride,
may be withdrawn and plucked away from it. Whereunto he does add weeping and
mourning, which do contain an outward profession of Repentance, which is very
needful and necessary, that so we may partly set forth the righteousness of
God, when by such means we do testify that we deserved punishments at his
hands, and partly stop the offense that was openly given unto the weak.

Psalm. 25.
Thus did David see, who being not content to have bewept and bewailed his sins
privately, would publicly in his Psalms declare and set forth the rigteousness
of God in punishing sin, and also stay them that might have abused his Example
to sin the more boldly. Therefore they are farthest from true Repentance, that
will not confess and acknowledge their sins, nor yet bewail them, but rather do
most ungodlily glory and rejoice in them. Now lest any Man should think that
Repentance does consist in outward weeping and mourning only, he does rehearse
that wherein the chief of the whole matter does lie, when he says, Rent your
Hearts and not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord your God. For the People
of the East part of the World were wont to rent their Garments, Psalm. 52.
if any thing happened unto them that seemed intolerable. Hypocrites do
counterfeit all manner of things.
This thing did Hypocrites sometimes counterfeit and follow, as though the
whole Repentance did stand in such outward gesture. He teaches then, that
another manner of thing is required, that is, That they must be contrite in
their Hearts, that they must utterly detest and abhor Sins; and being at
defiance with them, return unto the Lord their God, from whom they went away
before. For God has no pleasure in the outward Ceremony, but requires a
contrite and humble Heart, Psalm. 52.
which he will never despise, as David does testify. There is therefore none
other use of these outward Ceremonies, but as far forth as we are stirred up by
them, and do serve to the glory of God, and to the edifying of others.

Now does he add unto this Doctrine or Exhortation, How Repentance is not
unprofitable.
certain godly Reasons, which he does ground upon the nature and property of
God, and whereby he does teach, that true Repentance can never be unprofitable
or unfruitful. For as in all other things Men's hearts do quail and faint, if
they once perceive that they travel in vain: Even so most especially in this
matter, must we take heed and beware that we suffer not our selves to be
persuaded, that all that we do is but labor lost; for thereof either sudden
desperation does arise, or a licentious boldness to sin, which at length
brings unto desperation. Lest any such thing then should happen unto them, he
does certify them of the grace and goodness of God, who is always most ready
to receive them into favor again that turn speedily unto him. Which thing he
does prove with the same Titles, wherewith God does describe and set forth
himself unto Moses, speaking on this manner, Exodus 34.
For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil; that is, such a one as is sorry for your
Afflictions. First, He calls him gentle and gracious, as he who of his own
nature is more prompt and ready to do good than to punish. Whereunto this
saying of Esaias the Prophet seems to pertain, where he says, Esaias. 55.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and
return unto the Lord, and he will have pity on him, and to our God, for he is
very ready to forgive. Secondly, Does attribute unto him mercy, or rather
(according to the Hebrew word) the Bowels of mercies; whereby he signified the
natural affections of Parents toward their Children. Which thing David does
set forth goodly, Psalm. 103.
saying, As a Father has compassion on his Children, so has the Lord
compassion on them that fear him, for he knows whereof we be made, he
remembers that we are but dust. Thirdly, He says, that he is slow to anger,
that is to say, long-suffering, and which is not lightly provoked to wrath.
Fourthly, That he is of much kindness, for he is that bottomless Well of all
goodness, who rejoices to do good unto us; therefore did he create and make
Men, that he might have whom he should do good unto, and make partakers of his
Heavenly Riches. Fifthly, He repents of the evil, that is to say, he does
call back again, and revoke the punishment which he had threatened, when he
sees Men repent, turn and amend. Against the Novatians.
Whereupon we do not without a just cause detest and abhor the damnable Opinion
of them which do most wickedly go about to persuade the simple and ignorant
People, That if we chance after we be once come to God, and grafted in his Son
Jesus Christ, to fall into some horrible sin, shall be unprofitable unto us,
there is no more hope of reconciliation, or to be received again into the favor
and mercy of God. And that they may give the better color unto their pestilent
and pernicious Error, they do commonly bring in the sixth and tenth Chapters of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the second Chapter of the second Epistle of
Peter, not considering that in those places the holy Apostles do not speak of
the daily falls that we (as long as we carry about this body of sin) are
subject unto; Mat. 12. Mark. 3.
but of the final falling away from Christ and his Gospel, The sin against the
Holy Ghost.
which is a sin against the Holy Ghost that shall never be forgiven, because
that they do utterly forsake the known Truth, do hate Christ and his Word, they
do crucify and mock him, (but to their utter destruction,) and therefore fall
into desparation, and cannot repent. And that this is the true meaning of the
holy Spirit of God, it appears by many other places of the Scriptures, which
promise unto all true repentant sinners, and to them that with their whole
heart do turn unto the Lord their God; free pardon and remission of their sins.
For the probation hereof, we read this, O Israel (says the holy Prophet
Jeremy,) if thou return, Jer. 4.
return unto me, says the Lord, and if thou put away thine abominations out of
my sight, then shall thou not be removed. Again, these are Esaias words, Esaias.
55.
Let the wicked forsake his own ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and turn again unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God
for he is ready to forgive. And in the Prophet Hosea, the godly exhort one
another after this manner, Come and let us turn again unto the Lord, Hos. 6.
for he has smitten us, and he will heal us, he has wounded us, and he will
bind us up again. Note.
It is most evident and plain that these things ought to be understood of them
that were with the Lord before, and by their sins and wickednesses were gone
away from him.

For we do not turn again unto him with whom we were never before, but we come
unto him. Now, unto all them that will return unfeignedly unto the Lord their
God, Eccles. 7. 1 John 1.
the favor and mercy of God unto forgiveness of sins is liberally offered;
whereby it follows necessarily, that although we do, after we be once come to
God, and grafted in his Son Jesus Christ, fall into great sins, (for there is
no righteous Man upon the Earth that sins not; and if we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us,) yet if we rise again by
Repentance, and with a full purpose of amendment of Life, do flee unto the
mercy of God, taking sure hold thereupon, through Faith in his Son Jesu Christ;
there is an assured and infallible hope of pardon and remission of the same,
and that we shall be received again into the favor of our Heavenly Father. It
is written of David, Acts 13. 2 Samuel 7.
I have found a Man according to mine own heart; or, I have found David the Son
of Jesse, a Man according to mine own heart, who will do all things that I
will. This is a great commendation of David. It is also most certain, that he
did steadfastly believe the promise that was made him touching the Messiah, who
should come of him touching the Flesh, and that by the same Faith he was
justified, and grafted in our Savior Jesu Christ to come, and yet afterward
he fell horribly, committing most detestable Adultery and damnable Murder, and
yet as soon as he cried Peccavi, 2 Samuel 2. 2 Samuel 22.
I have sinned unto the Lord, his sin being forgiven, he was received into
favor again. Now will we come unto Peter, of whom no Man can doubt but that he
was grafted in our Savior Jesus Christ, long before his denial. Which thing
may easily be proved by the answer which he did in his Name, and in the Name of
his Fellow Apostles make unto our Savior Jesus Christ, when he said unto them,
Will ye also go away? John 6.
Master (says he,) to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life,
and we believe and know that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God.
Whereunto may be added the like Confession of Peter, where Christ does give us
most infallible testimony, Thou art blessed Simon the Son of Jonas, for neither
Flesh nor Blood has revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven.
These words are sufficient to prove that Peter was already justified, through
this lively Faith in the only begotten Son of God, whereof he made so notable
and so solemn a confession. But did not he afterward most cowardly deny his
Master, although he had heard of him; Mat. 26. Mat. 10.
Whosoever denies me before Men, I will deny him before my Father?
Nevertheless, as soon as with weeping eyes, and with a sobing heart he did
acknowledge his offense, and with an earnest repentance did flee unto the mercy
of God, taking sure hold thereupon through Faith in him, whom he had so
shamefully denied, his sin was forgiven him; and for a Certificate and
Assurance thereof, the Room of his Apostleship was not denied unto him. But now
mark what does follow: After the same Holy Apostle had on Whitsunday, Acts 2.
with the rest of the Disciples, received the gift of the Holy Ghost most
abundantly, he committed no small offense in Antiochia, by bringing the
Consciences of the Faithful into doubt by his Example, Gal. 2.
so that Paul was fain to rebuke him to his Face, because that he walked not
uprightly, or went not the right way in the Gospel. Shall we now say, that
after this grievous offense, he was utterly excluded and shut out from the
grace and mercy of God; and that this his trespass, whereby he was a stumbling
Block unto many, was unpardonable? God defend we should say so. But as these
Examples are not brought in, to the end that we should thereby take a boldness
to sin, presuming on the mercy and goodness of God, but to the end that if
through the frailness of our own Flesh and the temptation of the Devil, we fall
into like sins, we should in no wise despair of the mercy and goodness of God:
What we must beware of.
Even so must we beware and take heed that we do in no wise think in our
hearts, imagine, or believe that we are able to repent aright, or to turn
effectually unto the Lord by our own might and strength. For this must be
verified in all Men, John 15. 2 Cor. 3. Phil. 2.
Without me ye can do nothing. Again, Of our selves we are not able as much as
to think a good thought. And in another place, It is God that works in us
both the Will and the Deed. For this cause, although Jeremy had said before,
Jer. 6.
If thou return, O Israel, return unto me, says the Lord; yet afterward he
says, Turn thou me, O Lord, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my
God. And therefore that holy Writer and ancient Father Ambrose does plainly
affirm, That the turning of the heart unto God, Ambros. de Vocat. Gent. lib. 8
cap. 9.
is of God, as the Lord himself does testify by his Prophet, saying, And I
will give thee an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my
People, and I will be their God, for they shall return unto me with their whole
heart. These things being considered, let us earnestly pray unto the living God
our Heavenly Father, that he will vouchsafe by his holy Spirit to work a true
and unfeigned Repentance in us, that after the painful labors and travels of
this Life, we may live eternally with his Son Jesus Christ; to whom be all
praise and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

The Second Part of the Homily of Repentance.
HItherto have ye heard (Well-beloved,) how needful and necessary the Doctrine
of Repentance is, and how earnestly it is throughout all the Scriptures of God,
urged and set forth, both by the ancient Prophets, by our Savior Jesus Christ
and his Apostles: And that for as much as it is the conversion or turning again
of the whole Man unto God, from whom we go away by sin; these four Points ought
to be observed, that is, From whence, or from what things we must return? Unto
whom this our returning must be made? By whose means it ought to be done that
it may be effectual? And last of all, after what sort we ought to behave our
selves in the same, that it may be profitable unto us, and attain unto the
thing that we do seek by it? Ye have also learned that as the Opinion of them
that deny the benefit of Repentance unto those, that after they be come to God
and grafted in our Savior Jesus Christ, do through the frailness of their
Flesh, and the temptation of the Devil, fall into some grievous and detestable
sin, is most pestilent and pernicious; so we must beware that we do in no wise
think that we are able of our own selves, and of our own strength, to return
unto the Lord our God, from whom we are gone away by our wickedness and sin.
Now it shall be declared unto you, what be the true parts of Repentance, and
what things ought to move us to repent, and to return unto the Lord our God
with all speed. Repentance (as it is said before,) is a true rtturning unto
God, whereby Men forsaking utterly their Idolatry and wickedness, do with a
lively Faith embrace, love, and worship the true living God only, and give
themselves to all manner of good Works, which by Gods Word they know to be
acceptable unto him. There be four parts of Repentance.
Now there be four parts of Repentance, which being set together, may be
likened to an easy and short Ladder, whereby we may climb from the bottomless
Pit of perdition, that we cast our selves into by our daily offenses and
grievous sins, up into the Castle or Tower of eternal and endless Salvation.

The first is the Contrition of the Heart; for we must be earnestly sorry for
our sins, and unfeignedly lament and bewail that we have by them so grievously
offended our most bounteous and merciful God, who so tenderly loved us, that he
gave his only begotten Son to die a most bitter death, and to shed his dear
Heart Blood for our Redemption and Deliverance. And verily this inward sorrow
and grief being conceived in the heart for the heinousness of sin, if it be
earnest and unfeigned, is a Sacrifice to God, as the holy Prophet David does
testify, saying, Psalm 5.
A Sacrifice to God is a troubled Spirit, a contrite and broken Heart, O Lord,
thou will not despise.

But that this may take place in us, we must be diligent to read and hear the
Scriptures and the Word of God, which most lively do paint out before our eyes
our natural uncleanness, and the enormity of our sinful life. 2 Samuel 12
For unless we have a through feeling of our sins, how can it be that we should
earnestly be sorry for them? Before David did hear the Word of the Lord by the
mouth of the Prophet Nathan, what heaviness I pray you was in him for the
Adultery and the Murder that he had committed? So that it might be said right
well, that he slept in his own sin. We read in the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 4.
that when the People had heard the Sermon of Peter, they were compunct and
pricked in their hearts. Which thing would never have been, if they had not
heard that wholesome Sermon of Peter: They therefore that have no mind at all
neither to read, nor yet to hear Gods Word, there is but small hope of them,
that they will as much as once set their Feet, or take hold upon the first
Staff or Step of this Ladder, but rather will sink deeper and deeper into the
bottomless Pit of perdition. For if at any time through the remorse of their
Conscience which accuses them, they feel any inward grief, sorrow, or
heaviness for their sins; for as much as they want the salve and comfort of
Gods Word, which they do despise, it will be unto them rather a Mean to bring
them to utter desperation than otherwise. The second is an unfeigned Confession
and acknowledging of our sins unto God, whom by them we have so grievously
offended, that if he should deal with us according to his justice, we do
deserve a thousand Hells, if there could be so many. Yet if we will with a
sorrowful and contrite Heart, Ezekiel. 18.
make an unfeigned Confession of them unto God, he will freely and frankly
forgive them, and so put all our wickedness out of remembrance before the sight
of his Majesty, that they shall no more be thought upon. Hereunto does pertain
the golden saying of the holy Prophet David, where he says on this manner,
Then I acknowledge my sin unto thee, Psalm 51.
neither did I hide mine iniquity: I said, I will confess against my self my
wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the ungodliness of my sin. These
are also the words of John the Evangelist, 1 John 1.
If we confess our sins, God is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins,
and to make us clean from all our wickedness; which ought to be understood of
the Confession which is made unto God. For these are St. Augustins words, In
Epist. ad Julian comitem 30.
That Confession which is made unto God is required by Gods Law; whereof John
the Apostle speaks, saying, If we confess our sins, God is faithful and
righteous to forgive us our sins, and to make us clean from all our wickedness.
For without this Confession, sin is not forgiven. This is then the chiefest and
most principal Confession, that in the Scriptures and Word of God we are bidden
to make, and without the which we shall never obtain pardon and forgiveness of
our sins. Indeed, besides this, there is another kind of Confession which is
needful and necessary.

And of the same does St. James speak after this manner, saying, Acknowledge
your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be saved; As
if he should say, Open that which grieveth you, that a Remedy may be found. And
this is commanded both for him that complains and for him that hears, that
the one should show his Grief to the other. The true meaning of it is, that the
Faithful ought to acknowledge their offenses, whereby some hatred, rancour,
ground or malice, having risen or grown among them one to another, that a
Brotherly reconciliation may be had, without the which nothing that we do can
be acceptable unto God, Mat. 5.
as our Savior Jesus Christ does witness himself, saying, When thou offerest
thine Offering at the Altar, if thou remembrest that thy Brother has ought
against thee, leave there thine Offering, and go and be reconciled, and when
thou art reconciled, come and offer thine Offering. It may also be thus taken,
that we ought to confess our weakness and infirmities one to another, to the
end that knowing each others frailness, we may the more earnestly pray together
unto Almighty God our Heavenly Father, that he will vouchsafe to pardon us our
infirmities, for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, and not to impute them unto us,
when he shall render to every Man according to his Works. Answer to the
Adversaries which maintain Auricular Confession.
And whereas the Adversaries go about to wrest this place, for to maintain
their Auricular Confession withal, they are greatly deceived themselves, and do
shamefully deceive others; for if this Text ought to be understood of Auricular
Confession, then the Priests are as much bound to confess themselves unto the
Lay People, as the Lay People are bound to confess themselves to them. And if
to Pray, is to Absolve, then the Laity by this place has as great Authority to
Absolve the Priests, as the Priests have to Absolve the Laity. This did
Johannes Scotus, otherwise called Duns, well perceive, who upon this place
writes on this manner, Johannes Scotus lib. 4. sen. distinct. 17 quaest. 1.
Neither does it seem unto me that James did give this commandment, or that he
did set it forth as being received of Christ. For first and foremost, whence
had he Authority to bind the whole Church, since that he was only Bishop of the
Church of Jerusalem? except thou will say, that the same Church was at the
beginning the Head Church, and consequently that he was the Head Bishop, which
thing the Sea of Rome will never grant. The understanding of it then, is as in
these words, Confess your sins one to another. A persuasion to Hum lity,
whereby he wills us to confess our selves generally unto our Neighbors, that
we are sinners, according to this saying, If we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us. And where that they do allege this
saying of our Savior Jesus Christ unto the Leper, to prove Auricular
Confession to stand on Gods Word, Go thy way, Mat. 8.
and show thy self unto the Priest. Do they not see that the Leper was cleansed
from his Leprosy, before he was by Christ sent unto the Priest for to show
himself unto him? By the same reason we must be cleansed from our Spiritual
Leprosy, I mean, our sins must be forgiven us before that we come to
Confession. What need we then to tell forth our sins into the ear of the
Priest, since that they be already taken away? Therefore holy Ambrose in his
second Sermon upon the hundred and nineteenth Psalm, does say full well, Go
show thy self unto the Priest. Who is the true Priest, but he which is the
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech? whoreby this holy Father does
understand, that both the Priesthood and the Law being changed, we ought to
acknowledge none other Priest for deliverance from our sins; but our Savior
Jesus Christ, who being Sovereign Bishop, does with the Sacrifice of his Body
and Blood, offered once for ever upon the Altar of the Cross, most effectually
cleanse the Spiritual Leprosy, and wash away the Sins of those that with true
confession of the same do flee unto him. It is most evident and plain, that
this Auricular Confession, has not his warrant of Gods Word, Nectarius.
Sozomen. Eccles. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 16. lib. 10. confessionum. cap. 3.
else it had not been lawful for Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, upon a
just occasion to have put it down. For then any thing ordained of God, is by
the lewdness of Men abused, the abuse ought to be taken away, and the thing it
self suffered to remain. Moreover, these are St. Augustins words, What have I
to do with Men, that they should hear my Confession, as though they were able
to heal my Diseases? A curious sor^ of Men to know another Man's life, and
slothfully to correct and amend their own. Why do they seek to hear of me what
I am, which will not hear of thee what they are? And how can they tell when
they hear by me of my self, whether I tell the truth or not, ^^th no mortal Man
knows what is in Man, but the Spirit of Man which is in him? Augustine would
not have written thus, if Auricular Confession had been used in his time. Being
therefore not led with the Conscience thereof, let us with fear and trembling,
and with a true contrite Heart, use that kind of Confession, that God does
command in his Word, and then doubtless, as he is Faithful and Righteous, he
will forgive us our Sins, and make us clean from all wickedness. I do not say,
but that if any do find themselves troubled in Conscience, they may repair to
their Learned Curate or Pastor, or to some other Godly Learned Man, and show
the trouble and doubt of their Conscience to them, that they may receive at
their hand the comfortable Salve of Gods Word: but it is against the true
Christian liberty, that any Man should be bound to the numbering of his Sins, as
it has been used heretofore in the time of blindness and ignorance.

The Third prrt of Repentance, is Faith, whereby we do apprehend and take hold
upon the promises of God, touching the free Pardon and Forgiveness of our sins.
Which promises are Sealed up unto us, with the Death and Bloodshedding of his
Son Jesus Christ. For what should avail and profit us to be sorry for our Sins,
to lament and bewail that we have offended our most Bounteous and Merciful
Father, or to confess and acknowledge our Offenses and Trespasses, though it be
done never so earnestly, unless we do steadfastly believe, and be fully
persuaded, that God for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, will Forgive us all our
Sins, and put them out of Remembrance, and from his sight? Therefore they that
teach Repentance without a lively Faith in our Savior Jesus Christ, do teach
none other but Judas Repentance, as all the Schoolmen do, The Repentance of
the Schoolmen. Judas and his Repentance. Matt. 27.
which do only allow these Three Parts of Repentance, the Contrition of the
Heart, the Confession of the Mouth, and the Satisfaction of the Work. But all
these things we find in Judas Repentance, which in outward appearance did far
exceed and pass the Repentance of Peter. For first and foremost we read in the
Gospel, that Judas was so sorrowful and heavy, yea that he was fillled with
such anguish and vexation of mind, for that which he had done, that he could
not abide to live any longer. Did not he also before he Hanged himself, make an
open Confession of his fault, when he said, I have sinned, betraying the
Innocent Blood? and verily this was a very bold Confession, which might have
brought him to great trouble. For by it he did lay to the High Priest and
Elders charge, the shedding of Innocent Blood, and that they were most
Abominable Murderers. He did also make a certain kind of satisfaction, when he
did cast their Money unto them again. No such things do we read of Peter,
although he had committed a very heinous sin, and most grievous offense, Peter
and his Repentance.
in denying his of Master. We find that he went out and wept bitterly, whereof
Ambrose speaks on this manner; Peter was sorry and wept, De poenitentia
distin. I. cap. Petrus.
because he erred as a Man. I do not find what he said, I know that he wept: I
read of his Tears, but not of his satisfaction. But how chance that the one was
received into favor again with God, and the other cast away, but because that
the one did, by a lively Faith in him whom he had denied, take hold upon the
mercy of God, and the other wanted Faith, whereby he did despair of the
Goodness and Mercy of God? It is evident and plain then, that although we be
never so earnestly sorry for our sins, acknowledge and confess them; yet all
these things shall be but means to bring us to utter desparation, except we do
steadfastly believe, that God our Heavenly Father will for his Son Jesus Christ's
sake, Pardon and Forgive us our Offenses and Trespasses, and utterly put them
out of remembrance in his sight. Therefore as we said before, they that teach
Repentance without Christ, and a lively Faith in the Mercy of God, do only
teach Cains or Judas Repentance. The Fourth is, an Amendment of Life, or a new
Life, in bringing forth Fruits worthy of Repentance. For they that do truly
Repent, must be clean altered and changed, they must become new Creatures, they
must be no more the same that that they were before. And therefore thus said
John Baptist unto the Pharisees and Sadducees that came unto his Baptism: O
generation of Vipers, Matt. 3.
who has forewarned you to flee from the anger to come? bring forth therefore
Fruits worthy of Repentance. Whereby we do learn, that if we will have the
wrath of God to be pacified, we must in no wise dissemble, but turn unto him
again with a true and found Repentance, which may be known and declared by good
Fruits, as by most sure and infallible signs thereof.

They that do from the bottom of their Hearts acknowledge their Sins, and are
unfeignedly sorry for their Offenses, will cast off all Hypocrisy, and put on
true Humility, and lowliness of Heart. They will not only receive the Physician
of the Soul, but also with a most fervent desire long for him. They will not
only abstain from the Sins of their former Life, and from all other filthy
Vices, but also flee, eschew, and abhor all the occasions of them. And as they
did before give themselves to uncleanness of Life, so will they from
henceforwards with all diligence give themselves to Innocence, pureness of
Life, and true Godliness. Jonas 3.
We have the Ninevites for an example, which at the Preaching of Jonas did not
only proclaim a general Fast, and that they should every one put on Sackcloth;
but they all did turn from their Evil Ways, and from the Wickedness that was in
their Hands. But above all other, the History of Zaccheus is most notable; For
being come unto our Savior Jesus Christ, Luke 19.
he did say, Behold Lord, the half of my Goods I give to the Poor; and if I
have defrauded any Man, or taken ought away by Extortion or Fraud, I do restore
him fourfold.

Here we see that after his Repentance, he was no more the Man that he was
before, but was clean changed and altered. It was so far off, that he would
continue and abide still in his unsatiable covetousness, or take ought away
fraudulently from any Man, that rather he was most willing and ready to give
away his own, and to make satisfaction unto all them that he had done injury
and wrong unto. Here may we right well add the sinful Woman, which when she
came to our Savior Jesus Christ, Luke 7.
did pour down such abundance of Tears out of those wanton Eyes of hers,
wherewith she had allured many unto folly, that she did with them wash his
Feet, wiping them with the Hairs of her Head, which she was wont most
gloriously to set out, making of them a Net for the Devil. Hereby we do learn,
what is the satisfaction that God does require of us, which is, that we cease
from Evil, John 5.
and do Good; and if we have done any Man wrong, to endeavor our selves to make
him true amends to the utmost of our power, following in this the example of
Zaccheus, and of this sinful Woman, and also that goodly Lesson that John
Baptist, Zacharias Son, bid give unto them that came to ask Counsel of him.
This was commonly the Penance that Christ enjoined sinners, Go thy way and sin
no more. John 15.
Which Penance we shall never be able to fulfill without the special grace of
him that does say, Without me ye can do nothing. It is therefore our parts, if
at least we be desirous of the health and salvation of our own selves, most
earnestly to pray unto our heavenly Father, to assist us with his holy Spirit,
that we may be able to hearken unto the Voice of the true Shepherd, and with
due obedience to follow the same.

Let us hearken to the Voice of Almighty God, when he calls us to Repentance,
let us not harden our hearts as such Infidels do, who abuse the time given them
of God to repent, and turn it to continue their pride and contempt against God
and Man, which know not how much they heap Gods wrath upon themselves, for the
hardness of their hearts, which cannot repent at the day of Vengeance. Where we
have offended the Law of God, let us repent us of our straying from so good a
Lord. Let us confess our unworthiness before him, but yet let us trust in Gods
free mercy, for Christ's sake, for the pardon of the same. And from henceforth
let us endeavor our selves to walk in a new Life as new born Babes, whereby we
may glorify our Father which is in Heaven, and thereby to bear in our
Consciences a good testimony of our Faith; so that at the last to obtain the
fruition of everlasting life, through the merits of our Savior; To whom be all
praise and honor for ever. Amen.

The Third Part of the Homily of Repentance.
IN the Homily last spoken unto you (right well-beloved People, in our Savior
Christ) ye heard of the true parts and tokens of Repentance; that is, hearty
contrition and sorrowfulness of our Hearts, unfeigned confession in word of
mouth for our unworthy living before God, a steadfast Faith to the merits of our
Savior Christ for pardon, and a purpose of our selves by Gods grace to
renounce our former wicked life, and a full Conversion to God in a new life, to
glorify his Name, and to live orderly and charitably, to the comfort of our
Neighbor, in all righteousness, and to live soberly and modestly to our selves,
by using abstinence and temperance in word and in deed, in mortifying our
earthly Members here upon Earth. Now for a further persuasion to move you to
those parts of Repentance, I will declare unto you some causes, which should
the rather move you to Repentance.

The causes that should move us to Repent. Esaias 31. Ezekiel. 33. Hos. 14.
First, The Commandment of God (who in so many places of the holy and sacred
Scriptures) does bid us return unto him. O ye Children of Israel (says he)
turn again from your infidelity, wherein ye drowned your selves. Again, Turn
you, turn you from your evil ways; For why will ye die, O ye House of Israel?
And in another place, thus does he speak by his Prophet Hosea, O Israel, return
unto the Lord thy God; For thou have taken a great fall by thine iniquity. Take
unto you these words with you, when you turn unto the Lord and say unto him,
Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we offer the Calves
of our Lips unto thee. In all these places we have an express commandment given
unto us of God, for to return unto him. Therefore we must take good heed unto
our selves, lest whereas we have already by our manifold sins and
transgressions provoked and kindled the wrath of God against us; we do by
breaking this his Commandment, double our offenses, and so heap still damnation
upon our own heads by our daily offenses and trespasses, whereby we provoke the
eyes of his Majesty, we do well deserve (if he should deal with us according to
his justice,) to be put away for ever from the fruition of his Glory. How much
more then are we worthy of the endless torments of Hell, if when we be so
gently called again after our Rebellion, and commanded to return, we will in no
wise hearken unto the voice of our heavenly Father, but walk still after the
stubbornness of our own hearts?

Secondly, The most comfortable and sweet promise that the Lord our God did of
his mere mercy and goodness join unto his Commandment; for he does not only
say, Return unto me, O Israel; Jer. 4.
but also, if thou will return, and put away all thine abominations out of my
sight, thou shall never be moved. These words also have we in the Prophet
Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 18.
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, from the bottom of
his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, (says the
Lord,) so that they shall be no more thought upon. Thus are we sufficiently
instructed, that God will according to his promise, freely pardon, forgive, and
forget all our sins, so that we shall never be cast in the teeth with them; if
obeying his Commadment, and allured by his sweet Promises, we will unfeignedly
return unto him.

Thirdly, The filthiness of sin, which is such, that as long as we do abide in
it, God cannot but detest and abhor us, neither can there be any hope that we
shall enter into the Heavenly Jerusalem, except we be first made clean and
purged from it. But this will never be, unless forsaking our former life, we do
with our whole heart return unto the Lord our God, and with a full purpose of
amendment of life, flee unto his mercy, taking sure hold thereupon through
Faith in the Blood of his Son Jesus Christ. If we should suspect any
uncleanness to be in us, Similitude
wherefore the earthly Prince should loath and abhor the sight of us, what
pains would we take to remove and put it away? How much more ought we with all
diligence and speed that may be, to put away that unclean filthiness that does
separate and make a division betwixt us and our God, Esaias 59.
and that hides his Face from us, that he will not hear us? And verily herein
does appear how filthy a thing sin is, since than it can by no other means be
washed away, but by the Blood of the only begotten Son of God. And shall we not
from the bottom of our hearts detest and abhor, and with all earnestness flee
from it, since that it did cost the dear Heart-Blood of the only begotten Son of
God our Savior and Redeemer, to purge us from it? Plato does in a certain
place write, that if Virtue could be seen with bodily Eyes, all Men would
wonderfully be inflamed and kindled with the love of it; even so on the
contrary, if we might with our bodily Eyes behold the filthiness of sin, and
the uncleanness thereof, we could in no wise abide it, but as most present and
deadly Poison hate and eschew it. We have a common Experience of the same in
them, which when they have committed any heinous offense, or some filthy and
abominable sin, if it once come to light, or if they chance to have a through
feeling of it, they be so ashamed (their own Conscience putting before their
Eyes the filthiness of their Act,) that they dare look no Man in the Face, much
less that they should be able to stand in the sight of God.

Fourthly, The uncertainty and brittleness of our own lives, which is such,
that we cannot assure our selves that we shall live one hour, or one half
quarter of it. Which by experience we do find daily to be true, in them that
being now merry and lusty, and sometimes Feasting and Banqueting with their
Friends, do fall suddenly dead in the Streets, and otherwhiles under the Board
when they are at meat. These daily Examples, as they are most terrible and
dreadful, so ought they to move us to seek for to be at one with our heavenly
Judge, that we may with a good Conscience appear before him, whenever it
shall please him for to call us, whether it be suddenly or otherwise; for we
have no more Charter of our life than they have. But as we are most certain
that we shall die, so are we most uncertain when we shall die. For our life
does lie in the hand of God, who will take it away when it pleases him. And
verily when the highest Summer of all, Death, the Lords Sumner. Eccles. 11.
Contra Demetrianum. Eccles. 5.
which is death, shall come, he will not be said nay; but we must be forthwith
be packing, to be present before the Judgment seat of God, as he does find us,
according as it is written, Whereas the Tree falls, whether it be toward the
South or toward the North, there it shall lie. Whereunto agrees the saying of
the holy Martyr of God St. Cyprian, saying, As God does find thee when he does
call, so does he judge thee. Let us therefore follow the Counsel of the Wise
Man, where he says, Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off
from day to day. For suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in
thy security shall thou be destroyed, and shall perish in the time of
Vengeance. Which words I desire you to mark diligently, because they do most
lively put before our Eyes the fondness of many Men, who abusing the
long-suffering and goodness of God, do never think on Repentance or amendment
of Life. Follow not (says he) thine own mind, and thy strength, to walk in the
ways of thy heart; neither say thou, Who will bring me under for my works? For
God the Revenger, will revenge the wrong done by thee. And say not, I have
sinned, and what evil has come unto me? For the Almighty is a patient
Rewarder, but he will not leave thee unpunished. Because thy sins are forgiven
thee, be not without fear to heap sin upon sin. Say not neither, The mercy of
God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins. For mercy and wrath come from
him, and his indignation comes upon unrepentant sinners. As if ye should say,
Art thou strong and mighty? Art thou lusty and young? Have thou the Wealth and
Riches of the World? Or when thou have sinned, have thou received no punishment
for it? Let none of all these things make thee to be the slower to repent, and
to return with speed unto the Lord. For in the day of punishment and of his
sudden vengeance, they shall not be able to help thee. And specially, when thou
art either by the Preaching of Gods Word, or by some inward motion of his holy
Spirit, or else by some other means called unto Repentance, neglect not the
good occasion that is ministered unto thee, lest when thou would repent, thou
have not the grace for to do it. For to repent is a good gift of God, which he
will never grant unto them, who living in carnal security, do make a mock of
his Threatenings, or seek to rule his Spirit as they list, as though his working
and gifts were tied unto their will.

Fifthly, The avoiding of the plagues of God, and the utter destruction that by
his righteous Judgment does hang over the heads of them all that will in no
wise return unto the Lord: Jer. 24.
I will (says the Lord) give them for a terrible plague to all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, and for a Reproach, and for a Proverb, and for a Curse in all places
where I shall cast them, and will send the Sword of Famine and the Pestilence
among them, till they be consumed out of the Land. And wherefore is this?
Because they hardened their hearts, and would in no wise return from their evil
ways, nor yet forsake the wickedness that was in their own hands, that the
fierceness of the Lords fury might depart from them. Romans 8.
But yet this is nothing in comparison of the intolerable and endless torments
of Hell fire, which they shall be fain to suffer, who after their hardness of
heart that cannot repent, do heap unto themselves Wrath against the day of
anger, and of the declaration of the just Judgment of God: Whereas, if we will
repent, and be earnestly sorry for our sin, and with a full purpose and
amendment of Life, flee unto the mercy of our God, and taking sure hold
thereupon through Faith in our Savior Jesus Christ, do bring forth Fruits
worthy of Repentance; he will not only pour his manifold Blessings upon us here
in this World, but also at the last, after the painful Travels of this Life,
reward us with the inheritance of his Children, which is the Kingdom of Heaven,
purchased unto us with the death of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all praise, glory and honor, World without
end. Amen.

AN HOMILY AGAINST Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion.
The First Part.
AS God the Creator and Lord of all things, appointed his Angels and heavenly
Creatures in all obedience to serve and to honor his Majesty; so was it his
will that Man, his chief Creature upon the Earth, should live under the
obedience of his Creator and Lord; and for that cause, God, as soon as he had
created Man, gave unto him a certain Precept and Law, which he (being yet in
the State of innocence, and remaining in Paradise,) should observe as a pledge
and token of his due and bounden Obedience, with denunciation of Death if he
did transgress and break the said Law and Commandment. And as God would have
Man to be his obedient Subject, so did he make all earthly Creatures subject
unto Man, who kept their due obedience unto Man, so long as Man remained in his
obedience unto God: In the which obedience, if Man had continued still, there
had been no Poverty, no Diseases, no Sickness, no Death, nor other miseries
wherewith Mankind is now infinitely and most miserably afflicted and oppressed.
So here appears the Original Kingdom of God over Angels and Man, and
universally over all things, and of Man over earthly Creatures which God has
made subject unto him, and withal, the felicity and blessed State, which
Angels, Man, and all Creatures had remained in, had they continued in due
obedience unto God their King. For as long as in this first Kingdom, the
Subjects continued in due obedience to God their King, so long did God embrace
all his Subjects with his love, favor and grace, which to enjoy, is perfectly
Felicity; whereby it is evident, that Obedience is the principal Virtue of all
Virtues, and indeed the very root of all Virtues, Mat. 4. b. 9. Mat. 25. d. 41.
John 8. f. 44. 2 Pet. 2. a 4. Epist. Jude a. 6. Apoc. 12. b. 7. Genesis 3. a. 1,
and. Wisd. 2. d. 24. Genesis 3. b. 8.9, etc. c. 17. and d. 23.24.
and the cause of all Felicity. But as all Felicity and Blessedness should have
continued with the continuance of Obedience, so with the breach of Obedience,
and breaking in of Rebellion, all Vices and Miseries did withal break in, and
overwhelm the World. The first Author of which Rebellion, the Root of all
Vices, and Mother of all Mischiefs, was Lucifer, first Gods most excellent
Creature and most bounden Subject, who by Rebelling against the Majesty of God,
of the brightest and most glorious Angel, is become the blackest and most foul
Fiend and Devil; and from the height of Heaven, is fallen into the Pit and
bottom of Hell.

Here you may see the first Author and Founder of Rebellion, and the reward
thereof; here you may see the grand Captain and Father of Rebels, who
persuading the following of his Rebellion against God their Creator and Lord,
unto our first Parents Adam and Eve, brought them in high displeasure with God,
wrought their exile and banishment out of Paradise, a place of pleasure and
goodness, into this wretched earth and vale of misery; procured unto them
sorrows of their Minds, Mischiefs, Sickness, Diseases, death of their Bodies;
and which is far more horrible than all worldly and bodily Mischiefs, Romans 5.
c. 12. etc. and d. 19. etc.
he had wrought thereby their eternal and everlasting death and damnation, had
not God by the obedience of his Son Jesus Christ, repaired that which Man by
Disobedience and Rebellion had destroyed, and so of his mercy had pardoned and
forgiven him; of which all and singular the Premises, the holy Scriptures do
bear record in sundry places.

Thus do you s^e that neither Heaven nor Paradise could suffer any Rebellion in
them, neither be places for any Rebels to remain in. Thus became Rebellion, as
you see both the first and the greatest, and the very root of all other sins,
and the first and principal cause both of all worldly and bodily Miseries,
Sorrows, Diseases, Sicknesses and Deaths; and which is infinitely worse than
all these, as is said, the very cause of death and damnation eternal also.
After this breach of Obedience to God and Rebellion against His Majesty, all
mischiefs and miseries breaking in therewith, and overflowing the World, lest
all things should come unto confusion and utter ruin, God forthwith by Laws
given unto Mankind, Genesis 3. d. 17. Gen 3. c. 16. Job 34. d. 30. and 36. a. 7.
repaired again the rule and order of Obedience, thus by Rebellion overthrown;
and besides the Obedience due unto his Majesty, he not only ordained that in
Families and Households, The Wife should be obedient unto her Husband, the
Children unto their Parents, the Servants unto their Masters; but also, when
Mankind increased, and spread it self more largely over the World, he by his
holy Word did constitute and ordain in Cities and Countries, several and
special Governors and Rulers, unto whom the residue of his People should be
obedient.

Eccl. 8. a 2. and 10. c. 16.17. and d. 20. Psalm. 18. g. 50. and 20. b. 6. and
21. a. 1. Prove. 8.115.
As in reading of the Holy Scriptures, we shall find in very many and almost
infinite places, as well of the Old Testament as of the New, that Kings and
Princes, as well the evil as the good, do Reign by Gods Ordinance, and that
Subjects are bounden to obey them; that God does give Princes Wisdom, great
Power and Authority; that God defends them against their Enemies, and
destroys their Enemies horribly; that the anger and displeasure of the Prince
is as the roaring of a Lion, and the very messenger of death; and the Subject
that provokes him to displeasure, sins against his own Soul; with many
other things concerning both the Authority of Princes and the Duty of Subjects.
But here let us rehearse two special places out of the New Testament, which may
stand instead of all other. Romans 13.
The first out of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans and the thirteenth Chapter,
where he writes thus unto all Subjects, Let every Soul be subject unto the
higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God, and the Powers that be, are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.
For Princes are not to be feared for good Works, but for evil. Will thou then
be without fear of the Power? Do well, so shall thou have praise of the same;
for he is the Minister of God for thy Wealth: But if thou do evil, fear; for he
bears not the Sword for naught, for he is the Minister of God, to take
vengeance upon him that does evil. Wherefore ye must be subject, not because of
Wrath only, but also for Conscience sake; for, for this cause ye pay also
tribute; for they are Gods Ministers, serving for the same purpose. Give to
every Man therefore his due; tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to whom
custom is due, fear to whom fear belongs, honor to whom ye owe honor. Thus
far are S. Paul's words. The second place is in St. Peter's Epistle, and the
second Chapter, 1 Pet. 2.
whose words are these, Submit your selves unto all manner of Ordinances of Man
for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto the chief Head; either
unto Rulers, as unto them that are sent of him for the punishment of evil
doers, but for the cherishing of them that do well. For so is the Will of God,
that with well doing ye may stop the mouths of ignorant and foolish Men, as
free, and not as having the liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but even as
the Servants of God. Honor all Men, love Brotherly Fellowship, fear God, honor
the King. Servants, obey your Masters with fear, not only if they be good and
courteous, but also though they be froward. Thus far out of St. Peter.

By these two places of the Holy Scriptures, it is most evident that Kings,
Queens, and other Princes, (for he speaks of Authority and Power, be it in
Men or Women,) are ordained of God, are to be obeyed and honored of their
Subjects; that such Subjects as are disobedient or rebellious against their
Princes, disobey God, and procure their own damnation; that the government of
Princes is a great blessing of God, given for the Commonwealth, specially of
the good and godly: For the comfort and cherishing of whom, God gives and
sets up Princes; and on the contrary part, to the fear, and for the
punishment of the evil and wicked. Finally, That if Servants ought to obey
their Masters, not only being gentle, but such as be froward; as well and much
more ought ^ubjects to be obedient, not only to their good and courteous, but
also to their sharp and rigorous Princes. It comes therefore neither of chance
and fortune, (as they term it,) nor of the ambition of mortal Men and Women,
climbing up of their own accord to dominion, that there be Kings, Queens,
Princes, and other Governors ov^r Men being their Subjects; but all Kings,
Queens, and other Governors are specially appointed by the ordinance of God.
And as God himself being of an infinite Majesty, Power and Wisdom, rules and
governs all things in He^ven and Earth, Psalm. 80. b. 16 and 45. a. 6. etc.
and 47. a. 2. Eccl. 17. c.
as the Universal Monarch, and only King and Emperor over all, as being only
able to take and bear the charge of all; so has he constituted, ordained, and
set earthly Princes over particular Kingdoms and Dominions in Earth, both for
the avoiding of all confusion, which else would be in the World, if it should
be without Governors, and for the great quiet and benefit of earthly Men their
Subjects; and also that the Princes themselves in Authority, Power, Wisdom,
Providence, and righteousness in government of People and Countries committed
to their charge, should resemble his heavenly Governance, as the Majesty of
heavenly things, may by the baseness of earthly things be shadowed and
resembled. Mat. 18. c. 23. and 22.12. Ps. 10. b. 16 and 45. a. b. and 47. a. 2.
etc. Mat. 22. b. 13. and 25. c. 34. Psalm. 82. b. 6.
And for that similitude that is between the heavenly Monarchy and earthly
Kingdoms well governed, our Savior Christ in sundry Parables says, That the
Kingdom of Heaven is resembled unto a Man, a King; and as the name of the King
is very often attributed and given unto God in Holy Scriptures, so does God
himself in the same Scriptures, sometimes vouchsafe to communicate his Name
with earthly Princes, terming them Gods; doubtless for that similitude of
Government, which they have or should have, not unlike unto God their King,
unto the which similitude of heavenly Government, the nearer and nearer that an
earthly Prince does come in his Regiment, the greater Blessing of Gods mercy is
he unto that Country and People over whom he Reigns; and the further and
further that an earthly Prince does swerve from the example of the heavenly
Government, the greater plague is he of Gods wrath, and punishment by Gods
justice, unto that Country and People, over whom God for their sins has placed
such a Prince and Governor. For it is indeed evident, both by the Scriptures,
and daily by experience, that the maintenance of all Virtue and Godliness, and
consequently of the Wealth and Prosperity of a Kingdom and People, does stand
and rest more in a wise and good Prince on the one part, than in great
multitudes of other Men being Subjects; and on the contrary part, the overthrow
of all Virtue and Godliness, and consequently the decay and utter ruin of a
Realm and People, does grow and come more by an undiscreet and evil Governor,
than by many thousands of other Men being Subjects. Eccles. 10. d. 16. Prove.
16. and 29. Eccles. 10. Esa. 32. a.
Thus say the Scriptures, Well is thee, O thou Land (says the Preacher) whose
King is come of Nobles, and whose Princes eat in due season, for necessity, and
not for lust. Again, A Wise and Righteous King makes his Realm and People
wealthy: And a Good, Merciful, and Gracious Prince, is a shadow in Heat, as a
defense in Storms, as Dew, as sweet showers, as fresh Water-springs in great
droughts.

Again, the Scriptures, of undiscreet and evil Princes, speak thus, Eccles.
10.16. Pro. 28. and 29.
Woe be to thee (O thou band) whose King is but a Child, and whose Princes are
early at their Banquets. Again, When the wicked do Reign, then Men go to Ruin.
And again, A foolish Prince destroys the People, and a covetous King undoeth
his Subjects. Thus speak the Scriptures, thus experince testifies of good and
evil Princes.

What shall Subjects do then? shall they obey Valiant, Stout, Wise, and Good
Princes, and Contemn, Disobey, and Rebel against Children being their Princes,
or against undiscreet and evil Governors? God forbid: For First, What a
perilous thing were it to commit unto the Subjects the Judgment, which Prince
is Wise and Godly, and his Government good, and which is otherwise; as though
the Foot must judge of the Head; an enterprise very heinous, and must needs
breed Rebellion. For who else be they that are most inclined to Rebellion, but
such haughty Spirits? From whom springs such foul ruin of Realms? Is not
Rebellion the greatest of all Mischiefs? And who are most ready to the greatest
of Mischiefs, but the worst Men? Rebels therefore the worst of all Subjects are
most ready to Rebellion, as being the worst of all Vices, and farthest from the
duty of a good Subject, as on the contrary part, the best Subjects are most
firm and constant in obedience, as in the special and peculiar virtue of good
Subjects. What an unworthy matter were it then, to make the naughtiest Subjects
(and most inclined to Rebellion and all evil,) Judges over their Princes, over
their Government, and over their Counselors, to determine which of them be good
or tolerable, and which be evil and so intolerable, that they must needs be
removed by Rebels, being ever ready as the naughtiest Subjects, soonest to
Rebel against the best Princes, specially if they be young in Age, Women in
Sex, or gentle and courteous in Government; as trusting by their wicked
boldness, easily to overthrow their weakness and gentleness, or at the least so
to fear the minds of such Princes, that they may have impunity of their
mischievous doings.

But whereas, indeed a Rebel is worse than the worst Prince, and Rebellion
worse than the worst Government of the worst Prince that hitherto has been;
both Rebels are unmeet Ministers, and Rebellion an unfit and unwholsom Medicine
to reform any small lacks in a Prince, or to cure any little griefs in
Government; such lewd Remedies being far worse than any other maladies and
disorders that can be in the Body of a Commonwealth. But whatsoever the Prince
be or his Government, it is evident, that for the most part those Princes whom
some Subjects do think to be very godly, and under whose Government they
rejoice to live; some other Subjects do take the same to be evil and ungodly,
and do wish for a change. If therefore all Subjects that mislike of their
Prince should Rebel, no Realm should ever be without Rebellion. It were more
meet that Rebels should hear the advice of wise Men, and give place unto their
Judgment, and follow the example of obedient Subjects; as reason is, that they
whose understanding is blinded with so evil an affection, should give place to
them that be of sound judgment, and that the worst should give place to the
better; and so might Realms continue in long Obedience, Peace and Quietness.
But what if the Prince be undiscreet, and evil indeed, and is also evident to
all Men's eyes, that he so is? I ask again, What if it be long of the wickedness
of the Subjects, that the Prince is undiscreet and evil; Shall the Subjects
both by their wickedness provoke God for their deserved punishment, to give
them an undiscreet or evil Prince, and also rebel against him, and withal
against God, who for the punishment of their sins did give them such a Prince?
Will you hear the Scriptures concerning this Point? Job 34.10. Hos. 13.6.
God (say the Holy Scriptures,) makes a wicked Man to Reign for the sins of
the People. Again, God gives a Prince in his anger, (meaning an evil one,) and
takes away a Prince in his displeasure; meaning especially, when he takes
away a good Prince for the sins of the People; as in our Memory he took away
our good Josias, King Edward, in his young and good years for our wickedness.
And contrarily the Scriptures do teach, 2 Par. 2.9. Prove. 16.
That God gives wisdom unto Princes, and makes a wise and good King to Reign
over that People whom he loves, and who loves him. Again, If the People obey
God, 1 Reg. 12.
both they and their King shall prosper and be safe, else both shall perish,
says God by the mouth of Samuel.

Here you see that God places as well evil Princes as good, and for what cause
he does both. If we therefore will have a good Prince, either to be given us,
or to continue; now we have such a one, let us by our obedience to God and to
our Prince, move God thereunto. If we will have an evil Prince (when God shall
send such a one,) taken away, and a good in his place, let us take away our
wickedness which provokes God to place such a one over us; and God will either
displace him, or of an evil Prince make him a good Prince, so that we first
will change our evil into good. For will you hear the Scriptures? Prove. 21.
The heart of the Prince is in Gods hand, which way soever it shall please him,
he turns it. Thus say the Scriptures, Wherefore let us turn from our sins
unto the Lord with all our Hearts, and he will turn the Heart of the Prince
unto our quiet and wealth: Else for Subjects to deserve through their sins to
have an evil Prince, and then to Rebel against him, were double and treble
evil, by provoking God more to plague them. Nay, let us either deserve to have
a good Prince, or let us patiently suffer and obey such as we deserve. And
whether the Prince be good or evil, let us according to the Counsel of the holy
Scriptures, Pray for the Prince, for his continuance and increase in goodness,
if he be good, and for his amendment, if he be evil.

Will you hear the Scriptures concerning this most necessary Point? 1 Timothy 2.
I exhort therefore (says St. Paul) that above all things, Prayers,
Supplications, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be had for all Men, for
Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may live a quiet and peaceable
life with all godliness; for that is good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Savior, etc. This is St. Paul's Counsel, and who I pray you, was Prince
over the most part of the Christians, when Gods holy Spirit by St. Paul's Pen
gave them this Lesson? Forsooth, Caligula, Claudius, or Nero; who were not only
no Christians but Pagans, and also either foolish Rulers, or most cruel
Tyrants. Will you yet hear the Word of God to the Jews, when they were
Prisoners under Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon, after he had slain their Kings,
Nobles, Parents, Children, and Kinsfolks, burned their Country, Cities, yea
Jerusalem it self, and the holy Temple, and had carried the residue remaining a
live, Captives with him into Babylon? Will you hear yet what the Prophet Baruch
says unto Gods People being in this Captivity: Baruc. 1.11.
Pray you, says the Prophet, for the life of Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon,
and for the life of Balthazar his Son, that their days may be as the days of
Heaven upon the Earth, that God also may give us strength and lighten our Eyes,
that we may live under the defense of Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon, and under
the Protection of Balthazar his Son, that we may long do them service, and find
favor in their sight. Pray for us also unto the Lord our God, for we have
sinned against the Lord our God.

Thus far the Prophet Baruch his words, which are spoken by him unto the People
of God, of that King who was an Heathen, a Tyrant, and cruel Oppressor of them,
and had been a Murderer of many Thousands of their Nations, and a Destroyer of
their Country, with a Confession that their sins had deserved such a Prince to
Reign over them. And shall the old Christians, by St. Paul's exhortation, Pray
for Caligula, Claudius, or Nero? Shall the Jews Pray for Nabuchodonosor? These
Emperors and Kings being strangers unto them, being Pagans and Infidels, being
Murderers, Tyrants, and cruel Oppressors of them, and Destroyers of their
Country, Countrymen, and Kinsmen, the Burners of their Villages, Towns, Cities,
and Temples? And shall not we Pray for the long, prosperous, and godly Reign of
our natural Prince? No stranger (which is observed as a great blessing in the
Scriptures) of our Christian, our most gracious Sovereign, no Heathen, nor
Pagan Prince? Shall we not Pray for the health of our most merciful, most
loving Sovereign, the Preserver of us and our Country in so long peace,
quietness, and security, no cruel Person, no Tyrant, no Spoyler of our Goods,
no Shedder of Blood, no Burner and Destroyer of our Towns, Cities, and
Countries, as were those for whom yet as ye have heard, Christians being their
Subjects ought to Pray? Let us not commit so great Ingratitude against God and
our Sovereign, as not continually to thank God for his Government, and for his
great and continual benefits and blessings poured upon us by such Government.
Let us not commit so great a sin aginst God, against our selves, and our
Country, as not to pray continually unto God for the long continuance of so
gracious a Ruler unto us and our Country. Else shall we be unworthy any longer
to enjoy those benefits and blessings of God, which hitherto we have had by
her, shall be most worthy to fall into all those mischiefs and miseries, which
we and our Country have by Gods grace through her Government, hitherto escaped.

What shall we say of those Subjects? May we call them by the name of Subjects?
Who neither be thankful, nor make any Prayer to God for so gracious a
Sovereign; but also themselves take Armor wickedly, assemble Companies and
Bands of Rebels, to break the public Peace so long continued; and to make, not
War, but Rebellion, to endanger the Person of such a gracious Sovereign, to
hazard the Estate of their Country, (for whose defense they should be ready to
spend their Lives,) and being English Men, to rob, spoil, destroy, and burn in
England English Men, to kill and murder their own Neighbors and Kinsfolk, their
own Contrymen, to do all evil and mischief; yea, and more too than Foreign
Enemies would or could do? What shall we say of these Men, who use themselves
thus rebelliously against their gracious Sovereign? Who, if God for their
wickedness had given them an Heathen Tyrant to Reign over them, were by Gods
Word bound to obey him, and to pray for him? What may be spoken of them? So far
does their unkindness, unnaturalness, wickedness, mischievousness in their
doings, pass and excel any thing, and all things that can be expressed and
uttered by words. Only let us wish unto all such most speedy Repentance, and
with so grievous sorrow of heart, as such so horrible sins against the Majesty
of God do require; who in most extreme unthankfulness do rise, not only against
their gracious Prince, against their natural Country, but against all their
Contrymen, Women and Children, against themselves, their Wives, Children and
Kinsfolks, and by so wicked an example, against all Christendom, and against
whole Mankind of all manner of People throughout the wide World, such
Repentance, I say, such sorrow of Heart God grant unto all such, whosoever rise
of private and malicious purpose, as is meet for such mischiefs attempted, and
wrought by them. And unto us and all other Subjects, God of his mercy grant,
that we may be most unlike to all such, and most like to good, natural, loving,
and obedient Subjects: Nay, that we may be such indeed, not only showing all
obedience our selves, but as many of us as be able to the uttermost of our
power, ability, and understanding, to stay and repress all Rebels, and
Rebellions against God, our gracious Prince, and natural Country, at every
occasion that is offered unto us. And that which we are all able to do, unless
we do it, we shall be most wicked, and most worthy to feel in the end such
extreme Plagues, as God has ever poured upon Rebels.

Let us make continual Prayers unto Almighty God, even from the bottom of our
hearts, that he will give his grace, power and strength unto our gracious King,
to vanquish and subdue all, as well Rebels at home as Foreign Enemies, that all
Domestical Rebellions being suppressed and pacified, and all outward Invasions
repulsed and abandoned, we may not only be sure, and long continue in all
obedience un o our gracious Sovereign, and in that peaceable and quiet life
which hitherto we have led under his Majesty, with all security; but also that
both our gracious King, and we his Subjects, may all together in all obedience
unto God the King of Kings, and unto his holy Laws, lead our lives so in this
World, in all Virtue and Godliness, that in the World to come, we may enjoy his
everlasting Kingdom; which I beseech God to grant, as well to our gracious
Sovereign, as unto us all, for his Son our Savior Jesus Christ's sake; To whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one God and King immortal, be all glory,
praise and thanksgiving, World without end. Amen.

Thus have you heard the First Part of this Homily. Now, good People, Let us
pray.

The PRAYER as in that time it was Published.
O Most mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, the Governor of all Creatures, the only
giver of all Victories, who alone art able to strengthen the Weak against the
Mighty, and to vanquish infinite multitudes of thine Enemies, with the
Countenance of a few of thy Servants calling upon thy Name, and trusting in
thee: Defend, O Lord, thy Servant and our Governor under thee, our Sovereign
Lord the KING, and all thy People committed to his charge. O Lord, withstand
the cruelty of all those which be Common Enemies, as well to the Truth of thy
Eternal Word, as to their own natural Prince and Country, and manifestly to
this Crown and Realm of England, which thou have of thy Divine Providence
assigned in these our days to the Government of thy Servant, our Sovereign and
gracious KING. O most merciful Father, (if it be thy holy Will,) make soft and
tender the stony Hearts of all those that exalt themselves against thy Truth,
and seek either to trouble the quiet of this Realm of England, or to oppress
the Crown of the same; and convert them to the knowledge of thy Son, the only
Savior of the World, Jesus Christ, that we and they may jointly glorify thy
Mercies. Lighten (we beseech the) their ignorant Hearts to embrace the Truth of
thy Word, or else so abate their cruelty (O most mighty Lord) that this our
Christian Realm, with others that confess thy holy GOSPEL, may obtain by thy
aid and strength, surety from all Enemies, without shedding of Christian Blood,
whereby all they which be oppressed with their Tyranny, may by relieved, and
they which be in fear of their cruelty, may be comforted; and finally that all
Christian Realms, and especially this Realm of England, may by thy Defense and
Protection continue in the Truth of the Gospel, and enjoy perfect Peace,
Quietness and Security: And that we for these thy Mercies, jointly all together
with one consonant Heart and Voice, may thankfully render to thee all Laud and
Praise, that we, knit in one Godly concord and unity amongst our selves, may
continually magnify thy glorious Name, who with thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, and the holy Ghost, art one Eternal, Almighty, and most merciful God:
To whom be all Laud and Praise, World without end. Amen.

The Second Part of the Homily against Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion.
AS in the First Part of this Treaty of Obedience of Subjects to their Princes,
and against Disobedience and Rebellion, I have alleged diverse sentences out of
the holy Scriptures for proof; so shall it be good for the better declaration
and confirmation of the said wholesome Doctrine, to allege one example or two out
of the holy Scriptures of the Obedience of Subjects, not only unto their good
and gracious Governors, but also unto their evil and unkind Princes. As King
Saul was not of the best, but rather of the worst sort of Princes, as being out
of Gods favor for his disobedience against God in sparing (in a wrong pity) the
King Agag, whom Almighty God commanded to be slain, according to the Justice of
God against his sworn Enemy; and although Saul of a Devotion meant to Sacrifice
such things as he spared of the Amalechites to the Honor and Service of God;
yet Saul was reproved for his wrong Mercy and Devotion, and was told, that
Obedience would have more pleased him than such lenity, which sinful humanity
(says holy Chrysostom) is more cruel before God, than any Murder or shedding
of Blood when it is commanded of God. But yet how evil soever Saul the King
was, and out of Gods favor, yet was he obeyed of his Subject David, the very
best of all Subjects, and most valiant in the service of his Prince and Country
in the Wars, the most obedient and loving in Peace, and always most true and
faithful to his Sovereign and Lord, and farthest off from all manner of
Rebellion. For the which his most painful, true and faithful Service, King Saul
yet rewarded him not only with great unkindness, but also sought his
destruction and death by all means possible; so that David was fain to save his
life, not by Rebellion or any Resistance, but by flight, and hiding himself
from the Kings sight. Which notwithstanding, when King Saul upon a time came
alone into the Cave where David was, so that David might easily have slain him,
yet would he neither hurt him himself, neither suffer any of his Men to lay
hands upon him. Another time also David entering by night with one Abisai, a
valiant and fierce Man, into the Tent where King Saul did lie asleep, where
also he might yet more easily have slain him, yet would he neither hurt him
himself nor suffer Abisai (who was willing and ready to slay King Saul,) once
to touch him. Thus did David deal with Saul his Prince, notwithstanding that
King Saul continually saught his death and destruction. It shall not be amiss
unto these Deeds of David, to add his words, and to show you what he spoke unto
such as encouraged him to take his opportunity and advantage to slay King Saul
as his mortal Enemy, when he might. 1 Reg. 24. b. 7, etc. 1 Reg. 26. b. 9. and
b. 10, etc.
The Lord keep me (says David,) from doing that thing, and from laying hands
upon my Lord, Gods Anointed. For who can lay his hand upon the Lords Anointed
and be guiltless? As truly as the Lord lives, except that the Lord do smite
him, or his days shall come to die, or that he go down to War, and be slain in
Battle; the Lord be merciful unto me, that I lay not my hand upon the Lords
Anointed.

These be David's words, 1 Reg. 24. a. 1 Reg. 1, b. 7. and b. 9. 2 Reg. 1. b.
spoken at sundry times to diverse his Servants, provoking him to slay King Saul
when opportunity served him thereunto. Neither is it to be omitted and left
out, how, when an Amalechite had slain King Saul, even at Saul's own bidding and
commandment; (for he would live no longer now, for that he had lost the Field
against his Enemies the Philistines,) the said Amalechite making great have to
bring first word and news thereof unto David, as joyous unto him for the death
of his mortal Enemy, bringing withal the Crown that was upon King Saul's head,
and the Bracelet that was about his arm, both as a proof of the truth of his
news, and also as fit and pleasant Presents unto David, being by God appointed
to be King Saul his Successor in the Kingdom; 2 Reg. 1. c. 12.
yet was that faithful and godly David so far from rejoicing at these news,
that he rent his Clothes, Wept and Mourned, and Fasted; and so far off from
thanksgiving to the Messenger, either for his deed in killing the King, though
his deadly Enemy, or for his Message and News, or for his Presents that he
brought, that he said unto him, How happened it that thou wast not afraid to lay
thy hands upon the Lords Anointed, to slay him? Whereupon, 2 Reg. 1. c. 4. c.
15.
immediately he commanded one of his Servants to kill the Messenger, and said,
Thy Blood be upon thine own head, for thine own mouth has witnessed against
thy self in confessing that thou have slain the Lords Anointed.

This Example, dearly beloved, is notable, and the Circumstances thereof are
well to be considered, for the better instruction of all Subjects in their
bounden Duty of Obedience, and perpetual fearing of them from attempting of any
Rebellion or hurt against their Prince. On the one part, David was not only a
good and true Subject, but also such a Subject as both in Peace and War had
served and saved his Princes honor and life, and delivered his Country and
Contrymen from great danger of Infidels, Foreign and most cruel Enemies,
horribly invading the King and his Country; 1 Reg. 8. d. 18. and g. 30.
for which David was in a singular favor with all the People, so that he might
have had great numbers of them at his Command, if he would have attempted any
thing. 1 Reg. 16. c 12. c. etc. 1 Reg. 18. c. 11. 2 Reg. 15. c. 11. 1 Reg. 18.
10. 12.
Besides this, David was no common nor absolute Subject, but Heir apparent to
the Crown and Kingdom, by God appointed to Reign after Saul; which as it
increased the favor of the People that knew it, toward David, so did it make
David's cause and case much differing from the case of common and absolute
Subjects. And which is most of all, David was highly and singularly in the
favor of God: On the contrary part King Saul was out of Gods favor (for that
cause which is before rehearsed) and he as it were Gods Enemy, and therefore
like in War and Peace to be hurtful and pernicious unto the Commonwealth, and
that was known to many of his Subjects, for that he was openly rebuked of
Samuel for his disobedience unto God, which might make the People the less to
esteem him. 1 Reg. 15. and 22. and 26.
King Saul was also unto David a mortal and deadly Enemy, though without David's
deserving, who by his faithful, painful, profitable, yea, most necessary
Service, had well deserved, as of his Country, so of his Prince; but King Saul
far otherwise; the more was his unkindness, hatred, and cruelty toward such a
good Subject, both odious and detestable. Yet would David neither himself slay
nor hurt such an Enemy, for that he was his Prince and Lord, nor would suffer
any other to kill, hurt, or lay hand upon him, when he might have been slain
without any stir, tumult, or danger of any Man's life: Now let David answer to
such demands, as Men desirous of Rebellion, do use to make. Shall not we,
specially being so good Men as we are, The Demand.
Rise and Rebel against a Prince, hated of God, and Gods Enemy; and therefore
likely not to prosper either in War or Peace, but to be hurtful and pernicious
to the Commonwealth? The Answer.
No, says good and godly David, Gods and such a Kings faithful Subject; and so
Convicting such Subjects as attempt any Rebellion against such a King, to be
neither good Subjects nor good Men. But say they, The Demand.
shall we not rise and rebel against so unkind a Prince, nothing considering or
regarding our true, faithful, and painful Service, or the safeguard of our
Posterity? No, (says good David, The Answer. The Demand. The Answer.
) whom no such unkindness could cause to forsake his due obedience to his
Sovereign. Shall we not (say they,) rise and rebel against our known, mortal,
and deadly Enemy, that seeks our lives? No, (says godly David,) who had
learned the Lesson that our Savior afterward plainly taught, that we should do
no hurt to our Fellow Subjects, though they hate us and be our Enemies; much
less unto our Prince, though he were our Enemy. Shall we not Assemble an Army
of such good Fellows as we are, and by hazarding of our lives, The Demand.
and the lives of such as shall withstand us; and withal hazarding the whole
Estate of our Country, remove so naughty a Prince? No, (says godly David,) for
I, The Answer.
when I might without Assembling force or number of Men, without tumult or
hazard of any Man's life, or shedding of any drop of Blood, The Demand.
have delivered my self and my Country of an evil Prince; yet would I not do
it. Are not they (say some,) lusty and courageous Captains, valiant Men of
stomach, and good Men's Bodies, that do venture by force to kill and depose
their King, The Answer.
being a naughty Prince, and their mortal Enemy? They may be as lusty and
courageous as they list; yet says godly David, They can be no good nor godly
Men that so do; for I not only have rebuked, but also commanded him to be slain
as a wicked Man, which slew King Saul mine enemy; though he being weary of his
life for the loss of the Victory against his Enemies, desired that Man to slay
him. The Demand. The Answer.
What shall we then do to an evil, to an unkind Prince, an Enemy to us, hated
of God, hurtful to the Commonwealth, etc? Lay no violent hand upon him, (says
David,) but let him live until God appoint and work his end, either by natural
Death, or in War by lawful Enemies, not by traitorous Subjects.

Thus would godly David make answer; and St. Paul, as ye heard before, wills
us also to pray for such a Prince. If King David would make these Answers, as
by his deeds and words recorded in the Holy Scriptures, indeed he does make
unto all such Demands concerning rebelling against evil Princes, unkind
Princes, cruel Princes, Princes that be to their good Subjects mortal Enemies,
Princes that are out of Gods favor, and so hurtful or like to be hurtful to the
Commonwealth: What Answer think you would he make to those that demand, An
unnatural and wicked Question.
whether they (being naughty and unkind Subjects,) may not, to the great hazard
of the life of many thousands, and the utter danger of the State of the
Commonwealth, and the whole Realm assemble a sort of Rebels, either to depose,
to put in fear, or to destroy their natural and loving Princes, enemy to none,
good to all, even to them, the worst of all other, the maintainer of perpetual
Peace, Quietness and Security, most beneficial to the Commonwealth, most
necessary for the safeguard of the whole Realm? What answer would David make to
their Demand, whether they may not attempt cruelly and unnaturally to destroy
so peaceable and merciful a Prince? What (I say,) would David, so reverently
speaking of Saul, and so patiently suffering so evil a King, what would he
answer and say to such Demands? What would he say? nay, what would he do to
such high Attempters, who so said and did as you before have heard, unto him
that slew the King his Master, though a most wicked Prince? If he punished with
death as a wicked doer such a Man, with what reproaches of words would he
revile such, yea, with what torments of most shameful deaths would he destroy
such Hell Hounds rather than evil Men, such Rebels, I mean, as I last spoke of?
For if they who do disobey an evil and unkind Prince, be most unlike unto
David, that good Subject: What be they who do rebel against a most natural and
loving Prince? And if David being so good a Subject that he obeyed so evil a
King, was worthy of a Subject to be made a King himself: What be they which are
so evil Subjects, that they will rebel against their gracious Prince, worthy
of? Surely, no mortal Man can express with words, nor conceive in mind the
horrible and most dreadful damnation that such be worthy of, who disdaining to
be the quiet and happy Subjects of their good Prince, are most worthy to be the
miserable Captives, and vile Slaves of that infernal Tyrant Satan, and with him
to suffer eternal slavery and torments. This one Example of the good Subject
David, out of the Old Testament, may suffice, and for the notableness of it,
serve for all. Luke 2. a. 1
In the New Testament, the excellent Example of the blessed Virgin Mary, the
Mother of our Savior Christ, does at the first offer it self. When
Proclamation or Commandment was sent into Jury from Augustus the Emperor of
Rome, that the People there should repair unto their own Cities and Dwelling
places, there to be taxed; neither did the blessed Virgin, though both highly
in Gods favor, and also being of the Royal Blood of the ancient natural Kings
of Jury, disdain to obey the Commandment of an Heathen and Foreign Prince, when
God had placed such an one over them: Neither did she allege for any excuse,
that she was great with Child, and most near her time of Deliverance; neither
grudged she at the length and tedious Journey from Nazareth to Bethlehem, from
whence and whither she must go to be taxed; neither repined she at the
sharpness of the dead time of Winter, being the latter end of December, an
unfit time to travel in, specially a long Journey for a Woman being in her
case; but all excuses set apart she obeyed, Luke 2. a. 7.
and came to the appointed place; where at her coming she found such great
resort and throng of People, that finding no place in any Inn, she was fain,
after her long, painful, and tedious Journey, to take up her Lodging in a
Stable, where also she was delivered of her blessed Child; and this also
declares how near her time she took that Journey. This Obedience of this most
noble and most virtuous Lady, to a Foreign and Pagan Prince, does well teach us
(who in comparison of her, are most base and vile,) what ready obedience we do
owe to our natural and gracious Sovereign. Howbeit, in this case the obedience
of the whole Jewish Nation (being otherwise a stubborn People, Luke a. 2.3.
^at. 17. d. 25, etc. Mark 12. b. 17. Luke 20. d. 15. Mat. 27. a. Luke 23.1.
John 19.20 Mat. 17. c. 26. Luke 23. d. 24.
) unto the commandment of the same Foreign Heathen Prince, does prove, that
such Christians as do not most readily obey their natural and gracious
Sovereign, are far worse than the stubborn Jews, whom we yet account as the
worst of all People. But no Example ought to be of more force with us
Christians, than the example of Christ our Master and Savior, who though he
were the Son of God, yet did always behave himself most reverently to such Men
as were in Authority in the World in his time; and he not rebelliously behaved
himself, but openly did teach the Jews to pay tribute unto the Roman Emperor,
though a Foreign and a Pagan Prince, yea, himself with his Apostles paid
tribute unto him: And finally, being brought before Pontius Pilate, a stranger
born, and an Heathen Man, being Lord President of Jury, he acknowledged his
Authority and Power to be given him from God, and obeyed patiently the sentence
of most painful and shameful Death, which the said Judge pronounced and gave
most unjustly against him, without any grudge, murmuring, or evil word once
giving.

There be many and diverse other examples of the obedience to Princes, even such
as be evil, in the New Testament, to the utter confusion of disobedient and
rebellious People; but this one may be an eternal Example, which the Son of
God, and so the Lord of all, Jesus Christ has given to us his Christians and
Servants, and such as may serve for all, to teach us to obey Princes, though
strangers, wicked and wrongful, when God for our sins shall place such over us.
Whereby it follows unavoidably, that such as do disobey or rebel against
their own natural gracious Sovereigns, howsoever they call themselves or be
named of others, yet are they indeed no true Christians, but worse than Jews,
worse than Heathens, and such as shall never enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven, which
Christ by his obedience purchased for true Christians, being obedient to him
the King of all Kings, and to their Prince whom he has placed over them; The
which Kingdom the peculiar place of all such obedient Subjects, I beseech God
our heavenly Father, for the same our Savior Jesus Christ's sake to grant unto
us; To whom with the Holy Ghost, be all laud, honor and glory, now and for
ever. Amen.

Thus have you heard the Second Part of this Homily. Now, good People, Let us
pray.

The PRAYER as in that time it was Published.
O Most mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, the Governor of all Creatures, the only
giver of all Victories, who alone art able to strengthen the Weak against the
Mighty, and to vanquish infinite multitudes of thine Enemies, with the
Countenance of a few of thy Servants calling upon thy Name, and trusting in
thee: Defend, O Lord, thy Servant and our Governor under thee, our Sovereign
Lord the KING, and all thy People committed to his charge. O Lord, withstand
the cruelty of all those which be Common Enemies, as well to the Truth of thy
Eternal Word, as to their own natural Prince and Country, and manifestly to
this Crown and Realm of England, which thou have of thy Divine Providence
assigned in these our days to the Government of thy Servant, our Sovereign and
gracious KING. O most merciful Father, (if it be thy holy Will,) make soft and
tender the stony Hearts of all those that exalt themselves against thy Truth,
and seek either to trouble the quiet of this Realm of England, or to oppress
the Crown of the same; and convert them to the knowledge of thy Son, the only
Savior of the World, Jesus Christ, that we and they may jointly glorify thy
Mercies. Lighten (we beseech the) their ignorant Hearts to embrace the Truth of
thy Word, or else so abate their cruelty (O most mighty Lord) that this our
Christian Realm, with others that confess thy holy GOSPEL, may obtain by thy
aid and strength, surety from all Enemies, without shedding of Christian Blood,
whereby all they which be oppressed with their Tyranny, may be relieved, and
they which be in fear of their cruelty, may be comforted; and finally that all
Christian Realms, and especially this Realm of England, may by thy Defense and
Protection continue in the Truth of the Gospel, and enjoy perfect Peace,
Quietness and Security: And that we for these thy Mercies, jointly all together
with one consonant Heart and Voice, may thankfully render to thee all Laud and
Praise, that we, knit in one Godly concord and unity amongst our selves, may
continually magnify thy glorious Name, who with thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, and the (...) Ghost, art one Eternal, Almighty, and most merc^^^^ God:
To whom be all Laud and Praise, World without end. Amen.

The Third Part of the Homily against Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion.
AS I have in the First Part of this Treatise showed unto you the Doctrine of
the Holy Scriptures, as concerning the Obedience of true Subjects to their
Princes, even as well to such as be evil, as unto the good; and in the Second
Part of the same Treaty, confirmed the same Doctrine by notable examples,
likewise taken out of the Holy Scriptures; so remains it now, that I partly
do declare unto you in this Third Part, what an abominable sin against God and
Man Rebellion is, and how dreadfully the wrath of God is kindled and inflamed
against all Rebels, and what horrible plagues, punishments and deaths, and
finally, eternal damnation does hang over their heads; as how on the contrary
part, good and obedient Subjects are in Gods favor, and be partakers of Peace,
Quietness and Security, with other Gods manifold blessings in this World, and
by his mercies through our Savior Christ, of life everlasting also in the
World to come. How horrible a sin against God and Man Rebellion is, cannot
possibly be expressed according unto the greatness thereof. For he that names
Rebellion, names not a singular or one only sin, as is Theft, Robbery, Murder,
and such like; but he names the whole puddle and sink of all sins against God
and Man, against his Prince, his Country, his Countrymen, his Parents, his
Children, his Kinsfolks, his Friends, and against all Men universally; all
sins, I say, against God and all Men heaped together, names he, that names
Rebellion. For concerning the offense of Gods Majesty, who sees not that
Rebellion rises first by contempt of God and of his holy Ordinances and Laws,
wherein he so straightly commands Obedience, forbids. Disobedience and
Rebellion? And besides, the dishonor done by Rebels unto Gods holy name, by
their breaking of their Oath made to their Prince, with the attestation of Gods
Name, and calling of his Majesty to witness: Who hears not the horrible Oaths
and Blasphemies of Gods holy Name, that are used daily amongst Rebels, that is,
either amongst them, or hears the truth of their Behavior? Who knows not
that Rebels do not only themselves leave all Works necessary to be done upon
Work-days, undone, whiles they accomplish their abominable work of Rebellion,
and to compel others that would gladly be well occupied to do the same; but
also how Rebels do not only leave the Sabbath Day of the Lord unsanctified, the
Temple and Church of the Lord unresorted unto, but also do by their Works of
wickedness, most horribly profane and pollute the Sabbath Day, serving Satan,
and by doing of his work, making it the Devils day instead of the Lords day?
Besides that, they compel good Men that would gladly serve the Lord, assembling
in his Temple and Church upon his day, as becomes the Lords Servants, to
Assemble and meet Armed in the Field, to resist the fury of such Rebels. Yea,
and many Rebels, lest they should leave any part of Gods Commandments in the
first Table of his Law unbroken, or any sin against God undone, do make
Rebellion for the maintenance of their Images and Idols, and of their Idolatry
committed, or to be committed by them; and in despite of God, cut and tear in
sunder his holy Word, and tread it under their Feet, as of late ye know was
done.

The fifth Commandment.
As concerning the second Table of Gods Law, and all sins that may be committed
against Man, who sees not that they be contained in Rebellion? For first, the
Rebels do not only dishonor their Prince, the Parent of their Country, but also
do dishonor and shame their natural Parents, if they have any, do shame their
Kindred and Friends, do disinherit and undo for ever their Children and Heirs.
The sixth and eighth Commandment.
Thefts, Robberies and Murders, which of all sins are most loathed of most Men,
are in no Men so much, nor so perniciously and mischievously as in Rebels. For
the most arrant Thieves, cruellest Murderers that ever were, so long as they
refrain from Rebellion, as they are not many in number, so spreads their
wickedness and damnation unto a few; they spoil but a few, they shed the Blood
but of a few in comparison. But Rebels are the cause of infinite Robberies, and
murderers of great Multitudes, and of those also whom they should defend from
the spoil and violence of other; and as Rebels are many in number, so does
their wickedness and damnation spread it self unto many. And if Whoredom and
Adultery amongst such Persons as are agreeable to such wickedness, are (as they
indeed be) most damnable: The Seventh Commandment
What are the forcible oppressions of Matrons and Men's Wives, and the violating
and deflouring of Virgins and Maids, which are most rife with Rebels? How
horrible and damnable think you are they? Now besides that, The Nninth
Commandment.
Rebels by breach of their Faith given, and the Oath made to their Prince, be
guilty of most damnable Perjury: It is wondrous to see what false colors and
feigned causes, by slanderous lies made upon their Prince and the Counselors,
Rebels will devise to cloak their Rebellion withal, which is the worst and most
damnable of all false witness-bearing that may be possible: For what should I
speak of coveting or desiring of other Men's Wives, Houses, Lands, Goods and
Servants, The Tenth Commandment.
in Rebels, who by their wills would leave unto no Man any thing of his own.

Thus you see that all good Laws are by Rebels violated and broken, and that
all sins possible to be committed against God or Man, be contained in
Rebellion; which sins if a Man list to name by the accustomed names of the
seven capital or deadly sins, as Pride, Envy, Wrath, Covetousness, Sloth,
Gluttony and Lechery; he shall find them all in Rebellion, and amongst Rebels.
For first, As Ambition and Desire to be aloft, which is the property of Pride,
stirs up many Men's minds to Rebellion; so comes it of a Luciferian pride
and presumption, that a few rebellious Subjects should set themselves up
against the Majesty of their Prince, against the Wisdom of the Counselors,
against the power and force of all Nobility, and the faithful Subjects and
People of the whole Realm. As for Envy, Wrath, Murder, and desire of Blood, and
covetousness of other Men's Goods, Lands and Livings, they are the inseparable
accidents of all Rebels, and peculiar Properties that do usually stir up wicked
Men unto Rebellion.

Now such as by Riotousness, Gluttony, Drunkenness, excess of Apparel, and
unthrifty Games, have wasted their own Goods unthriftily; the same are most apt
unto and most desirous of Rebellion, whereby they trust to come by other Men's
Goods unlawfully and violently. And where other Gluttons and Drunkards take too
much of such Meats* and Drinks as are served to Tables, Rebels waste and
consume in short space, all Corn in Barns, Fields, or elsewhere, whole Garners,
whole Storehouses, whole Sellers, devour whole Flocks of Sheep, whole Droves
of Oxen and Kine. And as Rebels that are married, leaving their own Wives at
home, do most ungraciously; so much more do unmarried Men, worse than any
Stallions or Horses, (being now by Rebellion set at liberty from Correction of
Laws, which bridled them before,) abuse by force, other Men's Wives and
Daughters, and ravish Virgins and Maids most shamefully, abominably, and
damnably.

Thus all sins, by all names that sins may be named, and by all means that sins
may be committed and wrought, do all wholly upon heaps follow Rebellion, and
are to be found altogether amongst Rebels. Now whereas Pestilence, 2 Reg. 24.
cap. 14.
Famine and War, are by the Holy Scriptures declared to be the greatest Worldly
Plagues and Miseries that likely can be; it is evident, that all the Miseries
that all these Plagues have in them, do wholly altogether follow Rebellion;
wherein, as all their Miseries be, so is there much more mischief than in them
all.

For it is known, that in the resorting of great Companies of Men together,
which in Rebellion happens both upon the part of true Subjects and of the
Rebels, by their close lying together, and corruption of the Air and place
where they do lie, with Ordure and much filth in the hot weather, and by
unwholsom Lodging, and lying often upon the ground, specially in cold and wet
weather in Winter, by their unwholsom Diet, and feeding at all times, and often
by Famine, and lack of Meat and Drink in due time; and again, by taking too much
at other times: It is well known, I say, that as well Plagues and Pestilences,
as all other kinds of Sicknesses and Maladies, by these means grow up and
spring amongst Men, whereby more Men are consumed at the length, than are by
dint of Sword suddenly slain in the Field. So that not only Pestilences, but
also all other Sicknesses, Diseases and Maladies, do follow Rebellion, which
are much more horrible than Plagues, Pestilences and Diseases, sent directly
from God, as hereafter shall appear more plainly.

And as for Hunger and Famine, they are the peculiar companions of Rebellion;
for while Rebels do in short time spoil and consume all Corn and necessary
Provision, which Men with their labors had gotten and appointed upon, for their
finding the whole Year after; and also do let all other Men, Husbandmen, and
others, from their Husbandry, and other necessary works, whereby Provision
should be made for times to come; who sees not that extreme Famine and Hunger
must needs shortly ensue and follow Rebellion? 2 Reg. 24. cap. 24.
Now whereas the wise King and godly Prophet David judged War to be worse than
either Famine or Pestilence, for that these two are often suffered by God for
Man's amendment, and be not sins of themselves; but Wars have always the sins
and mischiefs of Men, upon the one side or other joined with them, and
therefore is War the greatest of these worldly mischiefs; but of all Wars,
Civil War is the worst, and far more abominable yet is Rebellion than any Civil
War, being unworthy the name of any War; so far it exceeds all Wars in all
naughtiness, in all mischief, and in all abomination. And therefore our Savior
Christ denounces desolation and destruction to that Realm, Mat. 12.
that by Sedition and Rebellion is divided in it self.

Now as I have showed before, that Pestilence and Famine, so is it yet more
evident, that all the calamities, miseries, and mischiefs of War, be more
grievous, and do more follow Rebellion than any other War, as being far worse
than all other Wars. For not only those ordinary and usual mischiefs and
miseries of other Wars do follow Rebellion, as Corn, and other things necessary
to Man's use, to be spoiled, Houses, Villages, Towns, Cities to be taken,
sacked, burned and destroyed, not only many very wealthy Men, but whole
Countries to be impoverished and utterly beggered, many thousands of Men to be
slain and murdered, Women and Maids to be violated and deflowred; which things
when they are done by Foreign Enemies, we do much mourn, as we have great
causes; yet are all these miseries without any wickedness wrought by any of our
own Countrymen. But when these mischiefs are wrought in Rebellion by them that
should be Friends, by Countrymen, by Kinsmen, by those that should defend their
Country and Countrymen from such miseries; the misery is nothing so great as
is the mischief and wickedness, when the Subjects unnaturally do Rebel against
their Prince, whose honor and life they should defend, though it were with the
loss of their own lives. Countrymen disturb the public Peace and Quietness of
their Country, for defense of whose Quietness they should spend their lives;
the Brother to seek, and often to work the death of his Brother, the Son of the
Father, the Father to seek or procure the death of his Sons, being at Man's Age,
and by their faults to disinherit their innocent Children and Kinsmen their
Heirs for ever, for whom they might purchase Livings and Lands, as natural
Parents do take care and pains, and to be at great costs and charges; and
universally instead of all Quietness, Joy and Felicity, which do follow blessed
Peace and due Obedience, to bring in all troubles, sorrow, disquietness of
Minds and Bodies, and all Mischief and Calamity, to turn all good Order upside
down, to bring all good Laws in contempt, and to tread them under feet, to
oppress all Virtue and Honesty, and all virtuous and honest Persons, and to set
all Vice and Wickedness, and all vicious and wicked Men at liberty; to work
their wicked Wills, which were before bridled by wholesome Laws, to weaken, to
overthrow, and to consume the strength of the Realm, their natural Country, as
well by the spending and wasting of the Money and Treasure of the Prince and
Realm, as by murdering the People of the same, Prove. 14.
their own Countrymen, who should defend the honor of their Prince and liberty
of their Country, against the Invasion of Foreign Enemies: And so finally, To
make their Country thus by their mischief weakened, ready to be a prey and spoil
to all outward Enemies that will invade it, to the utter and perpetual
captivity, slavery, and destruction of all their Countrymen, their Children,
their Friends, their Kinsfolk left alive, whom by their wicked Rebellion, they
procure to be delivered into the hands of the Foreign Enemies, as much as in
them does lie.

In Foreign Wars our Countrymen in obtaining the Victory win the praise of
valiantness; yea, and though they were overcome and slain, yet win they an
honest commendation in this World, and die in a good Conscience for serving
God, their Prince, and their Country, and be Children of eternal Salvation: But
the Rebels, how desperate and strong soever they be, yet win they shame here in
fighting against God, their Prince and Country, and therefore justly do fall
headlong into Hell if they die, and live in shame and fearful Conscience though
they escape.

But commonly they be rewarded with shameful Deaths, their Hands and Carcasses
set upon Poles, and hanged in Chains, eaten with Kites and Crows, judged
unworthy the honor of Burial; and so their Souls, if they repent not, (as
commonly they do not,) the Devil hurrieth them into Hell in the midst of their
mischief. For which dreadful execution, St. Paul shows the cause of
Obedience, Romans 13.
not only for fear of Death, but also in Conscience to Godward, for fear of
eternal damnation in the World to come.

Wherefore good People, let us, as the Children of Obedience, fear the dreadful
Execution of God, and live in quiet Obedience, to be the Children of
everlasting Salvation. For as Heaven is the place of good obedient Subjects,
and Hell the Prison and Dungeon of Rebels against God and their Prince; so is
that Realm happy where most obedience of Subjects does appear, being the very
Figure of Heaven; and contrariwise where most Rebellions and Rebels be, there
is the express similitude of Hell; and the Rebels themselves are the very
Figures of Fiends and Devils, and their Captain the ungracious pattern of
Lucifer and Satan, the Prince of darkness; of whose Rebellion as they be
Followers, so shall they of his damnation in Hell undoubtedly be partakers; and
as undoubtedly Children of Peace, the inheriters of Heaven with God the Father,
God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. To whom be all Honor and Glory, for ever
and ever. Amen.

Thus have you heard the First Part of this Homily. Now, good People, Let us
pray.

The PRAYER as in that time it was Published.
O Most mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, the Governor of all Creatures, the only
giver of all Victories, who alone art able to strengthen the Weak against the
Mighty, and to vanquish infinite multitudes of thine Enemies, with the
Countenance of a few of thy Servants calling upon thy Name, and trusting in
thee: Defend, O Lord, thy Servant and our Governor under thee, our Sovereign
Lord the KING, and all thy People committed to his charge. O Lord, withstand
the cruelty of all those which be Common Enemies, as well to the truth of thy
Eternal Word, as to their own natural Prince and Country, and manifestly to
this Crown and Realm of England, which thou have of thy Divine Providence
assigned in these our days, to the government of thy Servant, our Sovereign and
gracious KING. O most merciful Father, (if it be thy holy Will,) make soft and
tender the stony Hearts of all those that exalt themselves against thy Truth,
and seek either to trouble the quiet of this Realm of England, or to oppress
the Crown of the same; and convert them to the knowledge of thy Son, the only
Savior of the World, Jesus Christ, that we and they may jointly glorify thy
mercies. Lighten (we beseech thee,) their ignorant Hearts to embrace the Truth
of thy Word, or else so abate their cruelty (O most mighty Lord,) that this our
Christian Realm, with others that confess thy holy GOSPEL, may obtain by thy
aid and strength, surety from all Enemies, without shedding of Christian Blood,
whereby all they which be oppressed with their Tyranny, may be relieved, and
they which be in fear of their cruelty may be comforted; and finally that all
Christian Realms, and especially this Realm of England, may by thy Defense and
Protection continue in the Truth of the Gospel, and enjoy perfect Peace,
Quietness and Security: And that we for these thy Mercies, jointly all together
with one consonant Heart and Voice, may thankfully render to thee all Laud and
Praise, that we knit in one godly Concord and Unity amongst our selves, may
continually magnify thy glorious Name, who with thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Ghost, art one Eternal, Almighty, and most merciful God.
To whom be all Laud and Praise, World without end. Amen.

The Fourth Part of the Homily against Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion.
FOr your further instruction, (good People,) to show unto you how much
Almighty God does abhor Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion, specially when
Rebels advance themselves so high, that they arm themselves with Weapon, and
stand in the Field to sight against God, their Prince, and their Country: It
shall not be out of the way to show some Examples set out in Scriptures,
written for our eternal Erudition. We may soon know (good People,) how heinous
an offense the treachery of Rebellion is, if we call to remembrance the heavy
wrath and dreadful indignation of Almighty God against Subjects, as do only but
inwardly grudge, mutter, and murmur against their Governors, though their
inward Treason so privily hatched in their Breasts, come not to open
Declaration of their doings, as hard it is, whom the Devil has so far enticed
against Gods Word to keep themselves there; no, he means still to blow the
Coal, to kindle their Rebellious Hearts to flame into open Deeds, if he be not
with Grace speedily withstood.

Number. 11. a Number. 12. c. 10. Number. 16. Ps. 77.
Some of the Children of Israel being Murmurers against their Magistrates,
appointed over them by God, were stricken with foul Leprosy; many were burnt
up with Fire, suddenly sent from the Lord; sometime a great sort of thousands
were consumed with the Pestilence; sometime they were stinged to death with a
strange kind of fiery Serpents; and (which is most horrible,) some of the
Captains with their Band of Murmurers, not dying by any usual or natural death
of Men, but the Earth opening, they, with their Wives, Children and Families,
were swallowed quick down into Hell. Number. 16.
Which horrible destructions of such Israelites as were Murmurers against
Moses, appointed by God to be their Head and chief Magistrate, Number. 16.
are recorded in the Book of Numbers, and other places of the Scriptures; for
perpetual memory and warning to all subjects, how highly God is displeased with
the murmuring and evil speaking of Subjects against their Princes; so that as
the Scripture records, Exodus 16. b. 7, etc.
Their murmur was not against their Prince only, being a mortal Creature, but
against God himself also. Now if such strange and horrible Plagues did fall
upon such Subjects as did only murmur and speak evil against their Heads, what
shall become of those most wicked imps of the Devil that do conspire, arm
themselves, assemble great numbers of Armed Rebels, and lead them with them
against their Prince and Country, spoiling and robbing, killing and murdering
all good Subjects that do withstand them, as many as they may prevail against?
But those Examples are written to stay us, not only from such mischiefs, but
also from murmuring, and speaking once an evil word against our Prince, which
though any should do never so secretly, yet do the Holy Scriptures show, that
the very Birds of the Air will bewray them; and these so many Examples before
noted out of the Holy Scriptures, do declare, That they shall not escape
horrible punishment therefore. Now concerning Actual Rebellion; Eccl. 10. d. 2
King. 15. c. 12. and 17. a. 1, etc. 11. and 18. b. 7.18.
Amongst many Examples thereof set forth in the Holy Scriptures, the Example of
Absalom is notable; who entering into Conspiracy against King David his Father,
both used the advice of very witty Men, and assembled a very great and huge
company of Rebels; the which Absalom, though he were most goodly of Person, of
great Nobility, being the Kings Son, in great favor of the People, and so
dearly beloved of the King himself, so much, that he gave commandment that
(notwithstanding his Rebellion,) his life should be saved; when for these
considerations, most Men were afraid to lay hands upon him, 2 King. 18. a. 5.
a great Tree stretched out his Arm, as it were for that purpose, caught him by
the great and long Bush of his goodly Hair, lapping about it as he fled hastily
bare-headed under the said Tree, and so hanged him up by the Hair of his Head
in the Air, to give an eternal document, that neither comeliness of Personage, 2
King. 18. b. 9.
neither Nobility, nor favor of the People, no, nor the favor of the King
himself can save a Rebel from due punishment: God the King of all Kings being
so offended with him, that rather than he should lack due Execution for his
Treason, every Tree by the Way will be a Gallows or Gibbet unto him, and the
Hair of his own Head will be unto him instead of a Halter to hang him up with,
rather than he should lack one. A fearful example of Gods punishment (good
People,) to consider. Now Achitophel, Achitophel
though otherwise an exceeding wise Man, yet the mischievous Counselor of
Absalom in this wicked Rebellion, for lack of an Hangman, a convenient Servitor
for such a Traitor, went and hanged up himself. 2 King. 15. c. 12. and 16. d.
2. 23. and 17. f. 23. 2 King. 18. c. 7. 8, 9.
A worthy end of all false Rebels, who rather than they should lack due
execution, will by Gods just Judgment become Hangmen unto themselves. Thus
happened it to the Captains of that Rebellion; beside forty thousand of rascal
Rebels slain in the Field, and in the Chase.

Likewise, is it to be seen in the Holy Scriptures, how that great Rebellion,
which the Traitor Seba moved in Israel, 2 King. 20.
was suddenly appeased, the head of the Captain Traitor (by the means of a
silly Woman,) being cut off. And as the Holy Scripture does show, so does daily
experience prove, that the Counsels, Conspiracies, and attempts of Rebels,
never took effect, neither came to good, but to most horrible end. For though
God does oftentimes prosper just and lawful Enemies, Ps. 20.12.
which be no Subjects, against their Foreign Enemies; yet did he never long
prosper Rebellious Subjects against their Prince, were they never so great in
Authority, Genesis 14.
or so many in number. Five Princes or Kings (for so the Scripture terms
them,) with all their multitudes, could not prevail against Chedorlaomer, unto
whom they had promised Loyalty and Obedience, and had continued in the same
certain years, but they were all overthrown and taken Prisoners by him; but
Abraham with his Family and Kinsfolks, an handful of Men in respect, owing no
subjection unto Chedorlaomer, overthrew him and all his Host in Battle, and
recovered the Prisoners, and delivered them. So that though War be so dreadful
and cruel a thing, as it is, yet does God often prosper a few in lawful Wars
with Foreign Enemies, against many thousands; but never yet prospered he
Subjects being Rebels against their natural Sovereign, were they never so great
or noble, so many, so stout, so witty and politic, but always they came by the
overthrow, and to a shameful end; so much does God abhor Rebellion more than
other Wars, though otherwise being so dreadful, and so great a destruction to
Mankind. Though not only great multitudes of the rude and rascal Commons, but
sometime also Men of great Wit, Nobility and Authority, have moved Rebellions
against their lawful Princes, (whereas true Nobility should most abhor such
Villainous, and true wisdom should most detest such frantic Rebellion,) though
they should pretend sundry causes, as the Redress of the Commonwealth (which
Rebellion of all other mischiefs does most destroy,) or Reformation of
Religion, (whereas Rebellion is most against all true Religion,) though they
have made a great show of holy meaning by beginning their Rebellions with a
counterfeit Service of God, 2 Reg. 15. c. 12.
(as did wicked Absalom begin his Rebellion with Sacrificing unto God,) though
they display and bear about Ensigns and Banners, which are acceptable unto the
rude ignorant common people; great multitudes of whom by such false pretenses
and shows, they do deceive and draw unto them; yet were the multitudes of the
Rebels never so huge and great, the Captains never so noble, politic and witty,
the Pretenses feigned to be never so good and holy, yet the speedy overthrow of
all Rebels, of what number, State or Condition soever they were, or what color
or cause soever they pretended, is and ever has been such, that God thereby
does show, that he allows neither the dignity of any Person, nor the
multitude of any People, nor the weight of any Cause, as sufficient, for the
which the Subjects may move Rebellion against their Princes.

Turn over and read the Histories of all Nations, look over the Chronicles of
our own Country, call to mind so many Rebellions of old time, and some yet
fresh in memory, ye shall not find that God ever prospered any Rebellion
against their natural and lawful Prince; but contrariwise, that the Rebels were
overthrown and slain, and such as were taken Prisoners dreadfully executed.
Consider the great and noble Families of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and other
Lords, whose Names ye shall read in our Chronicles, now clean extinguished and
gone, and seek out the causes of the decay; you shall find, that not lack of
Issue and Heirs Male has so much wrought that decay, and wast of Noble Bloods
and Houses, as has Rebellion.

And for so much as the Redress of the Commonwealth has of old been the usual
feined pretense of Rebels, and Religion now of late begins to be a color of
Rebellion; let all godly and discreet Subjects consider well of both, and first
concerning Religion. If peaceable King Solomon was judged of God to be more
meet to build his Temple, (whereby the ordering of Religion is meant,) than his
Father King David, though otherwise a most godly King; for that David was a
great Warrior, and had shed much Blood, though it were in his Wars against the
Enemies of God: Of this may all godly and reasonable Subjects consider, that a
peaceable Prince, specially our most peaceable and merciful King, who has
hitherto shed no Blood at all, no, not of his most deadly Enemies, is more like
and far meeter, either to set up or to maintain true Religion, than are bloody
Rebels, who have not shed the Blood of Gods Enemies, as King David had done,
but do seek to shed the Blood of Gods Friends, of their own Countrymen, and of
their own most dear Friends and Kinsfolk, yea, the destruction of their most
gracious Prince and natural Country, for defense of whom they ought to be ready
to shed their Blood if need should so require. What a Religion it is, that such
Men by such means would restore, may easily be judged; even as good a Religion
surely, as Rebels be good Men and obedient Subjects, and as Rebellion is a good
Mean of Redress and Reformation, being it self the greatest deformation of all
that may possibly be. But as the truth of the Gospel of our Savior Christ,
being quietly and soberly taught, though it do cost them their lives that do
teach it, is able to maintain the true Religion; so has a frantic Religion
need of such furious maintainances as is Rebellion, and of such Patrons as are
Rebels, being ready not to die for the true Religion, but to kill all that
shall or dare speak against their false Superstition and wicked Idolatry. Now
concerning pretenses of any Redress of the Commonwealth made by Rebels, every
Man that has but half an Eye may see how vain they be; Rebellion being, as I
have before declared, the greatest ruin and destruction of all Commonwealths
that may be possible. And who so looks on the one part upon the Persons and
Government of the Kings most Honorable Counselors, by the experiment of so
many years proved honorable to his Majesty, and most profitable and beneficial
unto our Country and Countrymen; and on the other part, considers the
Persons, State and Conditions of the Rebels themselves, the Reformers, as they
take upon them, of the present Government, he shall find that the most rash and
hair-brained Men, the greatest unthrifts that have most lewdly wasted their own
Goods and Lands, those that are over the ears in debt, and such as for their
Thefts, Robberies and Murders, dare not in any well governed Commonwealth,
where good Laws are in force, show their Faces, such as are of most lewd and
wicked Behavior and Life, and all such as will not or cannot live in peace, are
always most ready to move Rebellion, or take part with Rebels. And are not
these meet Men, trow you, to restore the Commonwealth decayed, who have so
spoiled and consumed all their own Wealth and Thrift? and very like to amend
other Men's manners, who have so vile Vices and abominable; Conditions
themselves? Surely, that which they falsely call Reformation, is indeed not
only a defacing or deformation, but also an utter destruction of all
Commonwealth, as would well appear, might the Rebels have their wills? and
does right well, and too well appear by their doing in such places of the
Country where Rebels do rout, where though they tarry but a very little while,
they make such Reformation that they destroy all places, and undo all Men where
they come, that the Child yet unborn may rue it, and shall many Years hereafter
curse them.

Let no good and discreet Subjects therefore follow the Flag or Banner
displayed to Rebellion, and born by Rebels, though it have the image of the
Plough painted therein, with God speed the Plough, written under in great
Letters, knowing that none hinder the Plough more than Rebels, who will neither
go to the Plough themselves, nor suffer other that would go unto it. And though
some Rebels bear the Picture of the five wounds painted, against those who put
their only hope of Salvation in the wounds of Christ; not those wounds which
are painted in a Clout by some lewd Painter, but in those wounds which Christ
himself bare in his precious Body; though they little knowing what the Cross of
Christ means, which neither Carver nor Painter can make, do bear the Image of
the Cross painted in a Rag, against those that have the Cross of Christ painted
in their Hearts, yea, though they paint withal in their Flags, Hoc signo
vinces. By this Sign thou shall get the Victory, by a most fond imitation of
the Posie of Constantinus Magnus, that noble Christian Emperor, and great
Conqueror of Gods Enemies, (a most unmeet Ensign for Rebels,) the Enemies of
God, their Prince and Country, or what other Banner soever they shall bear; yet
let no good and godly Subject, upon any hope of Victory or good Success, follow
such Standard-bearers of Rebellion.

For as examples of such Practices are to be found as well in the Histories of
old, as also of latter Rebellions, in our Fathers and our fresh Memory; so
notwithstanding these Pretenses made and Banners born, are recorded withal to
perpetual Memory, the great and horrible murders of infinite multitudes and
thousands of the Common People slain in Rebellion, dreadful executions of the
Authors and Captains, the pitiful undoing of their Wives and Children, and
disinheriting of the Heirs of the Rebels for ever, the spoiling, wasting, and
destruction of the People and Country where Rebellion was first begun, that the
Child then, and yet unborn might rue and lament it, with the final overthrow
and shameful deaths of all Rebels, set forth as well in the Histories of
Foreign Nations, as in the Chronicles of our own Country, some thereof being
yet in fresh Memory, which if they were collected together, would make many
Volums and Books: But on the contrary part, all good luck, success and
prosperity that ever happened unto any Rebels of any Age, Time or Country, may be
contained in a very few lines or words.

Wherefore, to conclude, let all good Subjects, considering how horrible a sin
against God, their Prince, their Country and Countrymen, against all Gods and
Man's Laws Rebellion is, being indeed not one several sin, but all sins against
God and Man heaped together, considering the mischievous life and deeds, and
the shameful ends and deaths of all Rebels hitherto; and the pitiful undoing of
their Wives, Children and Families, and disinheriting of their Heirs for ever;
and above all things considering the eternal damnation that is prepared for all
impenitent Rebels in Hell, with Satan the first Founder of Rebellion, and Grand
Captain of all Rebels; let all good Subjects (I say,) considering these things,
avoid and flee all Rebellion as the greatest of all mischiefs, and embrace due
obedience to God and our Prince, as the greatest of all Virtues, that we may
both escape all Evils and Miseries that do follow Rebellion in this World, and
eternal damnation in the World to come, and enjoy Peace, Quietness and
Security, with all other Gods benefits and blessings which follow Obedience in
this life, and finally may enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven, the peculiar place of
all obedient Subjects to God and their Prince in the World to come; which I
beseech God, the King of all Kings, grant unto us for the obedience of his Son
our Savior Jesus Christ; unto whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one God
and King immortal, all honor, service and obedience of all his Creatures is due
for ever. Amen.

Thus have you heard the Fourth Part of this Homily. Now, good People, Let us
pray.

The PRAYER as in that time it was Published.
O Most mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, the Governor of all Creatures, the only
giver of all Victories, who alone art able to strengthen the Weak against the
Mighty, and to vanquish infinite multitudes of thine Enemies, with the
Countenance of a few of thy Servants calling upon thy Name, and trusting in
thee: Defend, O Lord, thy Servant and our Governor under thee, our Sovereign
Lord the KING, and all thy People committed to his charge. O Lord, withstand
the cruelty of all those which be common Enemies, as well to the truth of thy
eternal Word, as to their own natural Prince and Country, and manifestly to
this Crown and Realm of England, which thou have of thy Divine Providence
assigned in these our days, to the government of thy Servant, our Sovereign and
gracious KING. O most merciful Father, (if it be thy holy Will,) make soft and
tender the stony Hearts of all those that exalt themselves against thy Truth,
and seek either to trouble the quiet of this Realm of England, or to oppress
the Crown of the same; and convert them to the knowledge of thy Son, the only
Savior of the World, Jesus Christ, that we and they may jointly glorify thy
mercies. Lighten (we beseech thee,) their ignorant Hearts to embrace the Truth
of thy Word, or else so abate their cruelty (O most mighty Lord,) that this our
Christian Realm, with others that confess thy holy GOSPEL, may obtain by thy
aid and strength, surety from all Enemies, without shedding of Christian Blood,
whereby all they which be oppressed with their Tyranny, may be relieved, and
they which be in fear of their cruelty may be comforted; and finally that all
Christian Realms, and especially this Realm of England, may by thy Defense and
Protection continue in the Truth of the Gospel, and enjoy perfect Peace,
Quietness and Security: And that we for these thy Mercies, jointly all together
with one consonant Heart and Voice, may thankfully render to thee all Laud and
Praise, that we knit in one godly Concord and Unity amongst our selves, may
continually magnify thy glorious Name, who with thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Ghost, art one Eternal, Almighty, and most merciful God.
To whom be all Laud and Praise, World without end. Amen.

The Fifth Part of the Homily against Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion.
WHereas, after both Doctrine and examples of due Obedience of Subjects to their
Princes, I declared lastly unto you, what an abominable sin against God and Man
Rebellion is, and what horrible Plagues, Punishments and Deaths, with Death
everlasting, finally does hang over the heads of all Rebels; it shall not be
either impertinent or unprofitable now to declare who they be, whom the Devil,
the first Author and Founder of Rebellion, does chiefly use, to the stirring up
of Subjects to Rebel against their lawful Princes; that knowing them, ye may
flee them and their damnable suggestions, avoid all Rebellion, and escape the
horrible plagues, and dreadful death and damnation eternal, finally due to all
Rebels.

Though many causes of Rebellion may be reckoned, and almost as many as there
be Vices in Men and Women, as has been before noted; yet in this place I will
only touch the principal and most usual causes, as specially Ambition and
Ignorance. By Ambition, I mean, the unlawful and restless desire in Men, to be
of higher estate than God has given or appointed unto them. By Ignorance, I
mean no unskilfulness in Arts and Sciences, but the lack of knowledge of Gods
blessed Will declared in his holy Word, which teaches both extremely to abhor
all Rebellion, as being the root of all mischief, and specially to delight in
obedience, as the beginning and Foundation of all goodness, as has been also
before specified. And as these are the two chief causes of Rebellion, so are
there specially two sorts of Men in whom these Vices do Reign, by whom the
Devil, the Author of all evil, does chiefly stir up all Disobedience and
Rebellion.

The restless Ambitious having once determined by one means or other to
atchieve to their intended purpose, when they cannot by lawful and peaceable
means climb so high as they do desire, they attempt the same by force and
violence; wherein, when they cannot prevail against the ordinary Authority and
Power of lawful Princes and Governors themselves alone, they do seek the aid
and help of the ignorant multitude, abusing them to their wicked purpose.
Wherefore, seeing a few ambitious and malicious are the Authors and Heads, and
multitudes of ignorant Men are the Ministers and furtherers of Rebellion; the
chief Point of this part shall be as well to notify to the simple and ignorant
Men, who they be that have been and be usual Authors of Rebellion, that they
may know them; and also to admonish them to beware of the subtle suggestions of
such restless ambitious Persons, and so to flee them; that Rebellions, (though
attempted by a few Ambitious,) through the lack of maintenance by any
multitudes, may speedily and easily, without any great labor, danger or damage,
be re-ressed and clearly extinguished.

It is well known, as well by all Histories as by daily Experience, that none
have either more ambitiously aspired above Emperors, Kings and Princes; nor
have more perniciously moved the ignorant People to Rebellion against their
Princes, than certain Persons which falsely challenge to themselves to be only
counted and called Spiritual. I must therefore here yet once again briefly put
you (good People,) in remembrance out of Gods holy Word, how our Savior Jesus
Christ and his holy Apostles, the Heads and chief of all true Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Men, behaved themselves toward the Princes and Rulers of their
time, though not the best Governors that ever were, that you be not ignorant
whether they be the true Disciples and followers of Christ and his Apostles,
and so true spiritual Men, that either by Ambition do so highly aspire, or do
most maliciously teach, or most perniciously do execute Rebellion against their
lawful Princes, being the worst of all carnal Works and mischievous Deeds.

Mat. 17. d. 25. Mark. 12. b. 14. Luke 20. d. 25. Mat. 27. Luke 23. Romans 13. a.
1, etc. 1 Timothy 2. a. 1. 1 Pet. 2. c. 13. John 6. b. 15. and 18. f. 36. Mat. 20.
d. 25. Mark 10. f. 42. Luke 22. c. 25. Mat. 23. a. 8. Luke 9. f. 46. 2 Cor. 1.
d. 24. 1 Pet. 5. a 3. Mat. 18. a. 4. and 20. d. 28. Luke 9. f. 48. and 22. c.
27. Sex decre. lib. 3. tit. 16. cap. unic. and lib. 5. tit. 9. cap. 5. i^
glossa.
The holy Scriptures do teach most expressly, that our Savior Christ himself,
and his Apostles, St. Paul, St. Peter, with others, were unto the Magistrates
and higher Powers, which ruled at their being upon the Earth, both obedient
themselves, and did also diligently and earnestly exhort all other Christians
to the like obedience unto their Princes and Governors; whereby it is evident,
that Men of the Clergy and Ecclesiastical Ministers, as their Successors ought
both themselves specially, and before other, to be obedient unto their Princes,
and also to exhort all others unto the same. Our Savior Christ likewise
teaching by his Doctrine that his Kingdom was not of this World, did by his
Example in fleeing from those that would have made him King, confirm the same;
expressly also forbidding his Apostles, and by them the whole Clergy, all
Princely Dominion over People and Nations; and he, and his holy Apostles
likewise, namely Peter and Paul, did forbid unto all Ecclesiastical Ministers,
dominion over the Church of Christ. And indeed, whiles the Ecclesiastical
Ministers continued in Christ's Church, in that order that is in Christ's Word
prescribed unto them, and in Christian Kingdoms kept themselves obedient to
their own Princes, as the Holy Scripture does teach them; both was Christ's
Church more clear from ambitious Emulations and Contentions, and the State of
Christian Kingdoms less subject unto Tumults and Rebellions. But after that
Ambition and desire of Dominion entered once into Ecclesiastical Ministers,
whose greatness, after the Doctrine and Example of our Savior, should chiefly
stand in humbling themselves; and that the Bishop of Rome being by the order of
Gods Word, none other than the Bishop of that one See and Diocese, and never
yet well able to govern the same, did by intolerable Ambition, challenge not
only to he the Head of all the Church dispersed throughout the World, but also
to be Lord of all Kingdoms of the World, as is expressly set forth in the Book
of his own Canon Laws, most contrary to the Doctrine and Example of our Savior
Christ, whose Vicar, and of his Apostles, namely Peter, whose Successor he
pretends to be: After this Ambition entered, and his Challenge once made by
the Bishop of Rome, he became at once the spoiler and destroyer both of the
Church, which is the Kingdom of our Savior Christ, and of the Christian
Empire, and all Christian Kingdoms, as an Universal Tyrant over all.

And whereas, before that Challenge made, there was great amity and love
amongst the Christians of all Countries; hereupon began Emulation and much
Hatred between the Bishop of Rome and his Clergy and Friends on the one part,
and the Grecian Clergy and Christians of the East on the other part, for that
they refused to acknowledge any such Supreme Authority of the Bishop of Rome
over them: The Bishop of Rome for this cause amongst other, not only naming
them, and taking them for Schismatics, but also never ceasing to persecute
them; and the Emperors who had their See and continuance in Greece, by stirring
of the Subjects to Rebellion against their Sovereign Lords, and by raising
deadly hatred and most cruel Wars between them and other Christian Princes. And
when the Bishops of Rome had translated the Title of the Emperor, and as much
as in them did lie, the Empire it self, from their Lord the Emperor of of
Greece, and of Rome also by right unto the Christian Princes of the West, they
became in short space no better unto the West Emperors, than they were before
unto the Emperors of Greece; for the usual discharging of Subjects from their
Oath of Fidelity, made unto the Emperors of the West their Sovereign Lords, by
the Bishops of Rome; the unnatural stirring up of the Subjects unto Rebellion
against their Princes, yea, of the Son against the Father, by the Bishop of
Rome; the most cruel and bloody Wars raised amongst Christian Princes of all
Kingdoms, the horrible murder of infinite thousands of Christian Men, being
slain by Christians; and which ensued thereupon, the pitiful losses of so many
goodly Cities, Countries, Dominions and Kingdoms, sometime possessed by
Christians in Asia, Africa, Europe; the miserable fall of the Empire and Church
of Greece, sometime the most flourishing part of Christendom, into the hands of
the Turks; the lamentable diminishing, decay, and ruin of Christian Religion;
the dreadful increase of Paganism, and Power of the Infidels and Miscreants,
and all by the practice and procurement of the Bishop of Rome chiefly, is in
the Histories and Chronicles written by the Bishop of Romes own Favorers and
Friends to be seen, and as well known unto all such as are acquainted with the
said Histories. The ambitious intents and most subtle drifts of the Bishops of
Rome in these their Practices, appeared evidently by their bold attempt in
spoiling and robbing the Emperors of their Towns, Cities, Dominions and
Kingdoms, in Italy, Lombardy and Sicily, of ancient right belonging to the
Empire; and by joining of them unto their Bishopric of Rome, or else giving
them unto strangers, to hold them of the Church and Bishop of Rome as in
capite, and as of the chief Lords thereof, in which tenure they hold the most
part thereof even at this day. But these ambitious, and indeed traitorous means
and spoiling of their Sovereign Lords; the Bishops of Rome, of Priests, and
none other by right than the Bishops of one City and Diocese, are by false
usurpation become great Lords of many Dominions, mighty Princes, yea, or
Emperors rather, as claiming to have diverse Princes and Kings to their Vassals,
Liegemen and Subjects; as in the same Histories written by their own Familiars
and Courtiers, is to be seen. And indeed, since the time that the Bishops of
Rome by Ambition, Treason and Usurpation, achieved and attained to this height
and greatness, they behaved themselves more like Princes, Kings and Emperors in
all things, than remained like Priests, Bishops, and Ecclesiastical or (as they
would be called) Spiritual persons, in any one thing at all. For after this
rate they have handled other Kings and Princes of other Realms throughout
Christendom, as well as their Sovereign Lords the Emperors, usually discharging
their Subjects of their Oath of Fidelity, and so stirring them up to Rebellion
against their natural Princes, whereof some examples shall in the last part
hereof be notified unto you.

Wherefore let all good Subjects knowing these, the special Instruments and
Ministers of the Devil, to the stirring up of all Rebellions, avoid and flee
them and the pestilent suggestions of such Foreign Usurpers and their
Adherents, and embrace all obedience to God, and their natural Princes and
Sovereigns, that they may enjoy Gods blessings and their Princes favor, all
Peace, Quietness, Security in this World, and finally attain through Christ our
Savior, life everlasting in the World to come; which God the Father for the
same our Savior Jesus Christ his sake grant unto us all. To whom with the Holy
Ghost, be all honor and glory, World without end. Amen.

Thus have you heard the Fifth Part of this Homily. Now, good People, Let us
Pray.

The PRAYER as in that time it was Published.
O Most mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, the Governor of all Creatures, the only
giver of all Victories, who alone art able to strengthen the Weak against the
Mighty, and to vanquish infinite multitudes of thine Enemies, with the
Countenance of a few of thy Servants calling upon thy Name, and trusting in
thee: Defend, O Lord, thy Servant and our Governor under thee, our Sovereign
Lord the KING, and all thy People committed to his charge. O Lord, withstand
the cruelty of all those which he Common Enemies, as well to the Truth of thy
Eternal Word, as to their own natural Prince and Country, and manifestly to
this Crown and Realm of England, which thou have of thy Divine Providence
assigned in these our days to the Government of thy Servant, our Sovereign and
gracious KING. O most merciful Father, (if it be thy holy Will,) make soft and
tender the stony Hearts of all those that exalt themselves against thy Truth,
and seek either to trouble the quiet of this Realm of England, or to oppress
the Crown of the same; and convert them to the knowledge of thy Son, the only
Savior of the World, Jesus Christ, that we and they may jointly glorify thy
Mercies. Lighten we beseech thee) their ignorant hearts to embrace the Truth of
thy Word, or else so abate their cruelty (O most mighty Lord) that this our
Christian Realm, with others that confess thy holy GOSPEL, may obtain by thy
aid and strength, surety from all Enemies, without shedding of Christian Blood,
whereby all they which be oppressed with their Tyranny, may be relieved, and
they which be in fear of their cruelty, may be comforted; and finally that all
Christian Realms, and especially this Realm of England, may by thy Defense and
Protection continue in the Truth of the Gospel, and enjoy perfect Peace,
Quietness and Security: And that we for these thy Mercies, jointly all together
with one consonant Heart and Voice, may thankfully render to thee all Laud and
Praise, that we, knit in one Godly concord and unity amongst our selves, may
continually magnify thy glorious Name, who with thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, and the holy Ghost, art one Eternal, Almighty, and most merciful God:
To whom be all Laud and Praise, World without end. Amen.

The Sixth and last Part of the Homily against Disobedience and Wilful
Rebellion.
NOw whereas the Injuries, Oppressions, Raveny, and Tyranny of the Bishops of
Rome, Usurping as well against their natural Lords the Emperors, as against all
other Christian Kings and Kingdoms, and their continual stirring of Subjects
unto Rebellions against their Sovereign Lords, whereof I have partly admonished
you before, were intolerable; and it may seem more than marvel, that any
Subjects would after such sort hold with unnatural Foreign Usurpers against
their own Sovereign Lords and natural Country: It remains, that I do declare
the Mean whereby they compassed these matters, and so to conclude this whole
^reaty of due Obedience, and against Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion. You
shall understand, Of the ignorance of simple people, the later Part:
that by ignorance of Gods Word, wherein they kept all Men, specially the
Common People, they wrought and brought to pass all these things, making them
believe that all that they said was true, all that they did was good and godly;
and that to hold with them in all things, against Father, Mother, Prince,
Country, and all Men, was most meritorious. And indeed what mischief will not
blind ignorance, lead simple Men unto?

By ignorance the Jewish Clergy induced the common People to ask the delivery
of Barabbas the seditious murderer, and to sue for the cruel Crucifying of our
Savior Christ, for that he rebuked the Ambition, Superstition, and other Vices
of the High Priests and Clergy. For as our Savior Christ testifies, that
those who Crucified him wist not what they did; so does the Holy Apostle St.
Paul say, If they had known, if they had not been ignorant, they would never
have Crucified the Lord of Glory; but they knew not what they did. Our Savior
Christ himself also foreshew that it should come to pass by ignorance, that
those who should persecute and murder his true Apostles and Disciples, should
think they did God acceptable Sacrifice and good Service; as it is also
verified even at this day.

And in this ignorance have the Bishops of Rome kept the People of God,
specially the common sort, by no means so much as by withdrawing the Word of
God from them, and by keeping it under the vail of an unknown strange tongue.
For as it served the ambitious humor of the Bishops of Rome, to compel all
Nations to use the natural Language of the City of Rome, where they were
Bishops, which showed a certain acknowledging of subjection unto them; so yet
served it much more their crafty purpose, thereby to keep all People so blind,
Si cognovissent. Gregorius 2, and 3. Anno Dom. 726. etc. In the second
Commandment.
that they not knowing what they prayed, what they believed, what they were
commanded by God, might take all their Commandments for Gods. For as they would
not suffer the Holy Scriptures or Church Service to be used or had in any other
Language than the Latin, so were very few, even of the most simple People
taught the Lords Prayer, the Articles of the Faith, and the Ten Commandments,
otherwise than in Latin, which they understood not; by which universal
ignorance, all Men were ready to believe whatsoever they said, and to do
whatsoever they commanded.

For to imitate the Apostles phrase; if the Emperors Subjects had known out of
Gods word their Duty to their Prince, they would not have suffered the Bishop
of Rome to persuade them to forsake their Sovereign Lord the Emperor against
their Oath and Fidelity, and to Rebel against him, only for that he cast Images
(unto the which Idolatry was committed,) out of the Churches, which the Bishop
of Rome bare them in hand to be Heresy. If they had known of Gods Word but as
much as the Ten Commandments, they should have found that the Bishop, of Rome
was not only a Traitor to the Emperor his Liege Lord, but to God also, and an
horrible Blasphemer of his Majesty, in calling his holy Word and Commandment
Heresy; and that which the Bishop of Rome took for a just cause to rebel
against his lawful Prince, they might have known to be a doubling and trebling
of his most heinous wickedness, heaped with horrible Impiety and Blasphemy.

But lest the poor People should know too much, he would not let them have as
much of Gods Word as the Ten Commandments wholly and perfectly, Henry 4.
Gregor. 7. Anno Dom 167. Paschal. 2. Anno 19^
withdrawing from them the second Commandment that bewrays his Impiety, by a
subtle Sacrilege. Had the Emperors Subjects likewise known, and been of any
understanding in Gods Word, would they at other times have rebelled against
their. Sovereign Lord, and by their Rebellion have helped to depose him; only
for that the Bishop of Rome did bear them in hand, that it was Symony and
Heresy too for the Emperor to give any Ecclesiastical Dignities or promotion
to his learned Chaplains, or other of his learned Clergy, which all Christian
Emperors before him had done without controlement? would they, I say, for that
the Bishop of Rome bare them so in hand, have rebelled by the space of more
than forty Years together against him, with so much shedding of Christian
Blood, and murder of so many thousands of Christians, and finally have deposed
their Sovereign Lord, had they known and had in Gods Word any understanding at
all? specially had they known that they did all this to pluck from their
Sovereign Lord and his Successors for ever, that ancient Right of the Empire,
to give it unto the Romish Clergy, and to the Bishop of Rome, that he might for
the Confirmation of one Archbishop, and for the Romish Rag, which he calls a
Pall, scarce worth Twelve pence, receive many thousand Crowns of Gold, and of
other Bishops, likewise great Sums of Money for their Bulls, which is Symony
indeed: Would, I say, Christian Men and Subjects, by Rebellion have spent so
much Christian Blood, and have deposed their natural, most noble, and most
valiant Prince, to bring the matter finally to this pass, had they known what
they did, or had any understanding in Gods Word at all? And as these ambitious
Usurpers the Bishops of Rome have over-flowed all Italy and Germany with
streams of Christian Blood, shed by the Rebellions of ignorant Subjects against
their natural Lords and Emperors, whom they have stirred thereunto by such
false pretenses; so is there no Country in Christendom, which by their like
means and false pretenses has not been over-sprinkled with the Blood of
Subjects, by Rebellion against their natural Sovereigns, stirred up by the same
Bishops of Rome.

And to use one Example of our own Country; the Bishop of Rome did pick a
Quarrel to King John of England, ^ing John.
about the Election of Stephen Langton to the Bishopric of Canterbury, wherein
the King had ancient Right, being used by his Progenitors, all Christian Kings
of England, before him the Bishops of Rome having no Right, but had begun then
to usurp upon the Kings of England, and all other Christian Kings, as they had
before done against their Sovereign Lords the Emperors; proceeding even by the
same ways and means, and likewise cursing King John, and discharging his
Subjects of their Oath of Fidelity unto their Sovereign Lord. Now had
Englishmen at that time known their Duty to their Prince, set forth in Gods
Word, would a great many of Nobles, and other Englishmen natural Subjects, for
this Foreign and unnatural Usurper, Innocent. III.
his vain curse of the King, and for his feigned discharging of them of their
Oath and Fidelity to their natural Lord, upon so slender or no ground at all,
have rebelled against their Sovereign Lord the King? Would English Subjects
have taken part against the King of England, and against Englishmen, Philip
French King.
with the French King and Frenchmen, being incensed against this Realm by the
Bishop of Rome? Would they have sent for, and received the Dolphin of France
with a great Army of Frenchmen into the Realm of England? Lewis Dolphin of
France.
Would they have sworn Fidelity to the Dolphin of France, breaking their Oath
of Fidelity to their natural Lord the King of England, and have stood under the
Dolphins Banner displayed against the King of England? Would they have expelled
their Sovereign Lord the King of England out of London, the chief City of
England, and out of the greatest part of England, upon the South Side of the
Trent, even unto Lincoln, and out of Lincoln it self also, and have delivered
the possession thereof unto the Dolphin of France, whereof he kept the
possession a great while? Would they being English men, have procured so great
shedding of English-blood, and other infinite mischiefs and miseries unto
England, their natural Country, as did follow those cruel Wars and traitorous
Rebellion, the fruits of the Bishop of Romes blessings? Would they have driven
their natural Sovereign Lord the King of England to such extremity, that he was
enforced to submit himself unto that Foreign false Usurper the Bishop of Rome,
who compelled him to surrender up the Crown of England into the hands of his
Legate, who in token of possession kept it in his hands diverse days, and then
delivered it again to King John, upon that condition that the King and his
Successors, Kings of England, should hold the Crown and Kingdom of England of
the Bishop of Rome and his Successors, as the Vassals of the said Bishop of
Rome for ever; in token whereof, the Kings of England should also pay a yearly
Tribute to the said Bishop of Rome as his Vassals and Liege-men. Would
Englishmen have brought their Sovereign Lord and Natural Country into this
thraldom and subjection to a false Foreign Usurper, had they known and had any
understanding in Gods Word at all? Out of the which most lamentable case and
miserable tyranny, raveny, and spoil of the most greedy Romish Wolves ensuing
hereupon, the Kings and Realm of England could not rid themselves by the space
of many years after; the Bishop of Rome by his Ministers continually not only
spoiling the Realm and Kings of England of infinite treasure, See the Acts of
Parliament in King Edward the Third his days.
but also with the same Money hiring and maintaining Foreign Enemies against the
Realm and Kings of England; to keep them in such his subjection, that they
should not refuse to pay whatsoever those unsatiable Wolves did greedily gape
for, and suffer whatsoever those most cruel Tyrants would lay upon them. Would
Englishmen have suffered this? Would they by Rebellion have caused this trow
you, and all for the Bishop of Romes causless curse, had they in those days
known and understood, that God does curse the Blessings and bless the Cursings
of such wicked usurping Bishops and Tyrants? As it appeared afterward in King
Henry the Eighth his days, and King Edward the Sixth, and in our gracious
Sovereigns days that now is, where neither the Popes curses, Malac. 2.
nor Gods manifold blessings are wanting. But in King John's time, the Bishop of
Rome understanding the brute blindness, ignorance of Gods Word, and
superstition of Englishmen, and how much they were inclined to worship the
Babylonical Beast of Rome, and to fear all his threatenings and causless curses,
he abused them thus; and by their Rebellion brought this noble Realm and Kings
of England under his most cruel Tyranny, and to be a spoil of his most vile and
unsatiable covetousness and raveny, for a long and a great deal too long a
time. And to join unto the reports of Histories, matters of later Memory, could
the Bishop of Rome have raised the Rebellions in the North and West-Countries
in the times of King Henry and King Edward, but by abusing of the ignorant
People? Or, is it not most evident, that the Bishop of Rome has of late
attempted by his Irish Patriarchs and Bishops, sent from Rome with his Bulls,
(whereof some were apprehended) to break down the Bars and Hedges of the public
Peace in Ireland, only upon confidence easily to abuse the ignorance of the
wild Irish-men? Or who sees not that upon like confidence, yet more lately he
has likewise procured the breach of the public Peace in England, (with the
long and blessed continuance whereof he is sore grieved,) by the Ministry of
his disguised Chaplains, creeping in Laymens Apparel into the Houses, and
whispering in the ears of certain Northern borderers, being then most ignorant
of their duty to God and to their Prince of all People of the Realm, whom
therefore as most meet and ready to execute his intended purpose, he has by
the said ignorant Mass Priests, as blind guides, leading the blind, brought
those silly blind Subjects into the deep ditch of Horror and Rebellion,
damnable to themselves, and very dangerous to the State of the Realm, had not
God of his mercy miraculously calmed that raging Tempest, not only without any
Shipwreck of the Commonwealth, but almost without any shedding of Christian
and English Blood at all.

And it is yet much more to be lamented, that not only common People, but some
other youthful or unskilful Princes also, suffer themselves to be abused by the
Bishop of Rome, his Cardinals and Bishops, to oppressing of Christian Men their
faithful Subjects, either themselves, or else by procuring the force and
strength of Christian Men, to be conveyed out of one Country, to oppress true
Christians in another Country, and by these means open an entry unto Moors and
Infidels, into the possession of Christian Realms, Countries; other Christian
Princes in the mean time, by the Bishop of Romes procuring also, being so
occupied in Civil Wars, or troubled with Rebellions, that they have neither
leisure nor ability to confer their common Forces to the defense of their
Fellow Christians, against such invasions of the common Enemies of Christendom,
the Infidels and Miscreants. Would to God we might only read and hear out of
the Histories of old, and not also see and feel these new and present
oppressions of Christians, rebellions of Subjects, effusion of Christian Blood,
destruction of Christian Men, decay and ruin of Christendom, increase of
Paganism, most lamentable and pitiful to behold, being procured in these our
days, as well as in times past, by the Bishop of Rome and his Ministers,
abusing the ignorance of Gods Word, yet remaining in some Christian Princes and
People. Jer. 18. c. 18.
By which sorrow and bitter fruits of ignorance, all Men ought to be moved to
give ear and credit to Gods Word, showing as most truly, so most plainly how
great a mischief ignorance is; and again, how great and how good a gift in
knowledge Gods Word is. And to begin with the Romish Clergy, who though they do
brag now, as did sometime the Jewish Clergy, that they cannot lack knowledge;
yet does God by his holy Prophets both charge them with ignorance, Ezekiel. 7. g.
26. Hos. 4. b. 6. Ps. 2.
and threaten them also, for that they have repelled the knowledge of Gods Word
and Law, from themselves, and from his people, that he will repel them, that
they shall be no more his Priests. God likewise charge Princes as well as
Priests. that they should endeavor themselves to get understanding and
knowledge in his Word, threatening his heavy wrath and destruction unto them, if
they sail thereof. Prove. 19. Wisd. 13. Prove. 17. Ephesians. 4. John 12. Esaias 5.13.
Luke 19. g. 44 and 23. c. 34. Acts multis locis. John 16. a. 2. Esaias 27. Hos.
4. Baruc. 3. Esaias 6. c. 9. Mat. 13. b. 14.15. John 12.40. Wisd. 5. Mat. 13.19 2
Cor. 4. a.
And the wise Man says to all Men universally, Princes, Priests and People,
Where is no knowledge, there is no good nor health to the Soul, and that all
Men be vain in whom is not the knowledge of God and his holy Word, that they
who walk in darkness wot not whither they go; and that the People that will not
learn shall fall into great mischiefs, as did the People of Israel, who for
their ignorance in Gods Word were first led into captivity, and when by
ignorance afterward they would not know the time of their Visitation, but
crucified Christ our Savior, persecuted his holy Apostles, and were so
ignorant and blind, that when they did most wickedly and cruelly, they thought
they did God good and acceptable Service, (as do many by ignorance think even
at this day:) Finally, through their ignorance and blindness, their Countries,
Towns, Cities, Jerusalem it self, and the Temple of God, were almost horribly
destroyed, the chiefest part of their People slain, and the rest led into most
miserable captivity. For he that made them had no pity upon them, neither would
spare them, and all for their ignorance.

And the Holy Scriptures do teach, that the People that will not see with their
Eyes nor hear with their Ears, to learn, and to understand with their Hearts,
cannot be converted and saved. And the wicked themselves being damned in Hell,
shall confess ignorance in Gods Word to have brought them thereunto; saying, We
have erred from the way of the truth, and the light of Righteousness has not
shined unto us, and the Sun of understanding has not risen unto us; Mat. 7.
John 3.
we have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and perdition, and have
walked cumberous and crooked ways; but the way of the Lord have we not known.

Mat. 11. b. 15. and 13. a. 9. f. 3. Luke 8. a. 8. Joh. 5. f. 39. Ps. 1. Mat.
7. b. 7. Luke 11.9. Luke 16. g. 30.31. Gal. 1. b. 8. Deuteronomy. 5.32. Deuteronomy. 17. c.
14.15. etc. Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. Psalm. 118. Psalm. 18. and 118. Ephesians. 5.14. 1 These.
5. a. 4.5. John 12.35.36. Jam 1. c. 17. 1 Timothy 6. d. 16. John. 3.
And as well our Savior himself, as his Apostle St. Paul does teach, that the
ignorance of Gods Word comes of the Devil, is the cause of all error and
misjudging, (as falls out with ignorant Subjects, who can rather espy a
little mote in the eye of the Prince or a Counselor, than a great Beam in
their own;) and universally it is the cause of all evil, and finally of eternal
damnation: Gods Judgment being severe toward those, who when the light of
Christ's Gospel is come into the World, do delight more in darkness of ignorance
than in the light of knowledge in Gods Word. For all are commanded to read or
hear, to search and study the holy Scriptures, and are promised understanding
to be given them from God, if they so do; all are charged not to believe either
any dead Man, nor if an Angel should speak from Heaven, much less if the Pope
do speak from Rome against or contrary to the Word of God, from the which we
may not decline, neither to the right hand nor to the left.

In Gods Word Princes must learn how to obey God and to govern Men; in Gods
Word Subjects must learn Obedience both to God and their Princes. Old Men and
young, rich and poor, all Men and Women, all Estates, Sexes and Ages, are
taught their several Duties in the Word of God. For the Word of God is bright,
giving light unto all Men's Eyes, the shining Lamp directing all Men's Paths and
Steps. Let us therefore awake from the sleep and darkness of Ignorance, and
open our Eyes that we may see the light; let us rise from the works of
darkness, that we may escape eternal darkness, the due reward thereof, and let
us walk in the light of Gods Word, whiles we have light, as becomes the
Children of light so directing the steps of our Lives in that way which leads
to light and life everlasting, that we may finally obtain and enjoy the same;
which God the Father of Lights, who dwells in light incomprehensible, and
inaccessible grant unto us, through the light of the World our Savior Jesus
Christ. Unto whom with the Holy Ghost, one most glorious God, be all Honor,
Praise and Thanksgiving, for ever and ever. Amen.

Thus have you heard the Sixth Part of this Homily. Now, good People, Let us
pray.

The PRAYER as in that time it was Published.
O Most mighty God, the Lord of Hosts, the Governor of all Creatures, the only
giver of all Victories, who alone art able to strengthen the Weak against the
Mighty, and to vanquish infinite multitudes of thine Enemies, with the
Countenance of a few of thy Servants calling upon thy Name, and trusting in
thee: Defend, O Lord, thy Servant and our Governor under thee, our Sovereign
Lord the KING, and all thy People committed to his charge. O Lord, withstand
the cruelty of all those which be common Enemies, as well to the truth of thy
eternal Word, as to their own natural Prince and Country, and manifestly to
this Crown and Realm of ENGLAND, which thou have of thy Divine Providence
assigned in these our days to the Government of thy Servant, our Sovereign and
gracious KING. O most merciful Father, (if it be thy holy Will,) make soft and
tender the stony hearts of all those that exalt themselves against thy Truth,
and seek either to trouble the quiet of this Realm of ENGLAND, or to oppress
the Crown of the same; and convert them to the knowledge of thy Son the only
Savior of the World, Jesus Christ, that we and they may jointly glorify thy
Mercies. Lighten (we beseech thee) their ignorant hearts to embrace the truth
of thy Word, or else so abate their cruelty (O most mighty Lord,) that this our
Christian Realm, with others that confess thy holy GOSPEL, may obtain by thine
aid and strength, surety from all Enemies, without shedding of Christian Blood,
whereby all they which be oppressed with their Tyranny, may be relieved, and
they which be in fear of their cruelty, may be comforted: And finally, that all
Christian Realms, and especially this Realm of ENGLAND, may by thy Defense and
Protection continue in the truth of the Gospel, and enjoy perfect Peace,
Quietness and Security; and that we for these thy Mercies, jointly all together
with one consonant heart and voice, may thankfully render to thee all laud and
praise, that we knit in one godly concord and unity amongst our selves; may
continually magnify thy glorious Name, who with thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Ghost, art one Eternal, Almighty, and most merciful GOD.
To whom be all laud and praise, World without end, Amen.

A THANKSGIVING for the Suppression of the last Rebellion.
O Heavenly and most merciful Father, the defender of those that put their
trust in thee, the sure fortress of all them that flee to thee for succor; who
of thy most just Judgments for our Disobedience and Rebellion against thy holy
Word, and for our sinful and wicked living, nothing answering to our holy
profession, whereby we have given an occasion that thy holy Name has been
blasphemed amongst the ignorant, have of late both sore abashed the whole Realm
and People of England, with the terror and danger of Rebellion, thereby to
awake us out of our dead sleep of careless security; and have yet by the
miseries following the same Rebellion, more sharply punished part of our
Countrymen and Christian-brethren, who have more nearly felt the same; and
most dreadfully have scourged some of the seditious Persons with terrible
Executions, justly inflicted for their disobedience unto thee, and to thy
Servant their Sovereign, to the example of us all, and to the warning,
correction, and amendment of thy Servants, of thine accustomed goodness,
turning always the wickedness of evil Men to the proof of them that fear thee;
who in thy Judgments remembering thy Mercy, have by thy assistance given the
Victory to thy Servant our Queen, her true Nobility and faithful Subjects, with
so little, or rather no effusion of Christian Blood, as also might have justly
ensued, to the exceeding comfort of all sorrowful Christian hearts, and that of
thy fatherly pity, and merciful goodness only, and even for thine own names
sake, without any our desert at all. Wherefore we render unto thee most humble
and hearty thanks for these thy great mercies showed unto us, who had deserved
sharper punishment, most humbly beseeching thee to grant unto all us that
confess thy holy Name, and profess the true and perfect Religion of thy holy
Gospel, thy heavenly Grace, to show our selves in our living according to our
profession; that we truly knowing thee in thy blessed Word, may obediently walk
in thy holy Commadments, and that we being warned by this thy Fatherly
correction, do provoke thy just wrath against us no more; but may enjoy the
continuance of thy great mercies toward us, thy right hand, as in this, so in
all other Invasions, Rebellions and dangers, continually saving and defending
our Church, our Realm, our Queen, and People of England, that all our
Posterities ensuing, confessing thy holy Name, professing thy holy Gospel, and
leading an holy Life, may perpetually praise and magnify thee, with thy only
Son Jesus Christ our Savior, and the Holy Ghost. To whom be all laud, praise,
glory, and Empire, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

