A LETTER FROM EXCETER, SENT To the Deputy-Lievtenants of Sommersetshire,
Subscribed George Chudley, and Nich. Martin.

Showing how Colonel Ruthen sallyed out of Plymouth, and has taken Sir Edward
Fortescue, Sir Edward Seymore, and diverse other Gentlemen of note prisoners.

With the Covenant entered into by the Mayor, Deputy-Lievtenants, and
Common Council of the City and County of Exceter.

Also the true Copy of a Letter sent from Bristoll, declaring the manner and
means how that City was secured from the Cavaliers.

London, Printed for C. M. 1642.

A Letter sent from Exceter to the Deputy Lievtenants of Sommerset.
Noble Gentlemen,
YOur fears have been so often grated with the Relations of our miseries, ready
to overwhelm us, as we now think it a neighbourly office, and suting our
association to acquaint you with a blessing that God has sent us yesterday,
being the seventh of this instant. Colonel Ruthen sallyed out of Plymouth in
the night, with five hundred Horse and Dragooners, and ferching a compass
about Plympton Northward, fell upon Modbury. where the Sheriff Sir Edward
Fortescue, and Sir Edward Seymore, and others, whose names are underwritten,
were mustering the forces of the County, by virtue of the Posse Comitatis. At
the sod(...) coming of our Troops, the Soldiers fl^d, and (...) their
Commanders in Master Champer^^^^ H(...) where they a while stood upon their
defense, (...) upon the firing of an out-house, and the rest (...)roned, they
at length yielded, and are (...) Dartmouth, That you may be partakers of this
encouragements sent us from God, is the end of these hasty lines; From your
most assured friends,

George Chudley, Nich. Martin.
Exon the 7 December. 1642.

The Names of the prisoners taken.
Sir Edward Fortescue. Sir Edward Seymore. Master Seymore Knight of the Shire.
Master Arthur Basset. Master Shapcot. Master Row, and two or three more taken
prisoners. Captain Peter Fortescue. Captain Bidlack. Captain Champernoon.
Lieutenant Holigrove. Captain Pomroy. Captain Wood. Master Bailey of Barstable a
Papist.
The Covenant entered into by the Mayor of Exceter, Deputy-Lievtenants of that
County, and Common Council of the City.
IN regard of the extraordinary danger the City and County of Exceter now
stands in, by reason of the near approach of the enemy whom we understand to be
on his March hitherward, and may within a few days be before our Gates; We the
Mayor, Deputy-Lievtenants, and Common-Counsell of the said City and County, Do
solemnly promise and vow according to our late general Protestation, to defend
His Majesty's honor, and Person, the privileges of Parliament, the Laws of
the Land, the Liberty and propriety of the Subject, all which, are declared by
the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, to be actually invaded by Sir
Ralph Hopton, Sir John Bartly, Sir William Ashburnam their accomplices and
adherents, who have gathered together great Forces, for the accomplishment of
their wicked Designs to the ruin of this present happy

Parliament, and in it to lay the Foundation of Tyrany and Popery; We therefore
do firmly and constantly resolve by the blessing and assistance of Almighty
God, as we shall one day answer the contrary before him at his great Tribunal,
to discharge our duties and consciences in the exact performance of the said
Vow and Protestation by our unwearied labors and endeavors, though with the
expense of our Lives and Estates, to defend, preserve, and protect this City
and County, against the said Sir Ralph Hopton, and his adherents in this their
Rebellious Insurrections; And we do further promise, Vow, and Protest,
according to the true intent* and meaning hereof* without any equivocation or
mental reservation* never to desert this cause, but mutually to join with and
support each other in the maintenance of it; in testimony thereof, we have
subscribed this Protestation.

THe Exceter Covenant taken by the Mayor, and the well affected there; and I
here those that refuse to take this, shall be cast out; they have raised 3000
Vo^ in Exon to withstand the Caveliers of Cornwall.

A Letter from Bristoll the tenth of December. 1642.
IT is this day Written from Bristoll, that whereas His Majesty had sent to
that City acknowledging their affections to His service, and out of a sense of
the present distractions of the Kingdom, to give them order not to receive any
forces whatsoever, which might come in to disturb their Peace; whereupon they
understanding, that Colonel Essex from Gloucester was ready to march to
Bristoll, they sent 3 of their Aldermen to him, to desire him not to advance;
who upon treaty with them, finding the malignity of their Message, detained
their persons, and set forward his march thither, where he found strong
resistance; but setting these Aldermen in the Front of the battle, by that
means abated their rage, and with the assistance of the good party in the City,
they got entrance, which City and Castle they have now secured for the King
King and Parliament, and placing there a sufficient Garrison, are gone into
Sommersetshire to join (...) the Volunteers there to resist Sir Ralph Hopton in
his march. The Marquess of Hartford was at Monmouth on his way to Bristoll,
expecting admittance thither; but understanding that Colonel Essex was got in,
he is again retreated into Wales.


FINIS.

