CHRIST'S Personal Reign On Earth, One Thousand Years with his SAINTS.

The Manner, Beginning, and Continuation of his Reign clearlie proved, by many
plain Texts of Scripture, and the chief Objections against it fully answered.

Explaining the 20. of the Revelations, and all other Scripture-Prophesies that
treat of it, and of Satan being shut up for One Thousand Years, that he shall
not have power to deceive the Nations during that Thousand Years.

ISAIAH 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

LONDON, Printed by T. Lock, for Will. Burden, and are to be sold at his shop
in Cannons-Street near Londonstone. 1654.

To all the sincere-hearted Christians, who are members of the Church of Jesus
Christ, and in visible communion with his Saints by Baptism, and which have a
desire to be informed in that glorious truth of Christ's visible reign on earth
with his Saints a thousand years. Greeting,
DEarly beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ, and right precious Christian friends,
to that end I may be instrumental to vindicate the truth of Jesus, as also to
build up the Saints in their most holy faith; and considering with my self that
the publishing of that precious truth, viz. The visible Reign of Christ on
earth with his Saints, might be one means by which I might be instrumental in
so good a work; I was therefore so much the bolder for to present this ensuing
discourse unto your most serious considerations, I being assured that through
Gods blessing, it will be profitable unto you, when well considered by you. Truly
my friends, was it not so that I was fully persuaded that this is a truth which
I here maintain, I should not be so bold as to give it forth unto public view,
and should hardly now have published this Treatise, but that I find such
little entertainment of this truth among the sons of men; and therefore the
rather it is exposed unto opposition; but I question not but that it will ere
long appear to be a truth of such great Antiquity as from the Apostolical
times, and how that it is an unrepealed truth which has been obscure these
many years, yet its now coming forth so gloriously, like the Sun at noon day,
so as that it will be individual. Brethren, I know not how you will resent that
which I have wrote; I hope you will not have any occasion to take it ill of me,
for as much as I desire nothing more, than the promoting of the truth in this
ensuing Discourse. I desire that this my writing may no further find
acceptance by you, than you find it managed according unto Scripture-record,
for be you assured, that whosoever speaks not according unto that truth, it is
because they have no light in them, Esai. 8.20. for you are to search the
Scriptures, for they testify of Jesus Christ; As also of his truth, Ioh. 5.39.
for my part, I should be loath that any of you should have any cause to say of
me, that I should misguide you, I had rather shut my self up in silence, than
that I should be found by you such an evil instrument, but I hope you are
persuaded better things of me than so, for this I can assure you, I have a
clear conscience both toward God and Men, wishing and earnestly longing to see
your further growth in Christianity, and your perfection in the Doctrine of
Jesus, that so you may be complete in all the will of God, then shall you shine
gloriously, and appear beautiful in the eyes of our heavenly father, even then
when you are completely built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and
Prophets. Jesus Christ being the chief Cornerstone of that Building, as is
apparent, Ephesians. 2.20 21. then you will grow to a holy temple in the Lord, and to
a complete City, and then when Zion is built up, the Lord will appear in glory,
Psalm. 102.16. which Scripture I desire to leave upon your spirits; desiring the
Lord Jesus to apply it home to you by his Spirit. I shall now commit this
ensuing Discourse unto you, desiring that the Spirit of Moderation and of
Christ may guide you, as in Phi. 4.5. Because the Lord is at hand, wishing you
to try al things, and to try this thing and to hold fast that which is good;
and if you recive any benefit by what is here declared, give God the glory of
it. And so I commit you to God, and to the word of his grace, which can perfect
you in every good word and work, which shall be the continual prayer and
earnest endeavor of me,

Your dearly Beloved Brother in Christ Jesus, William Burden.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THou have here a small piece presented unto thy view; and if the Lord is
pleased to bring it home to thy spirit, I hope it may be profitable unto thee,
to that end my desire is that the Reader would seriously employ his thoughts to
consider well of the subject matter contained in this little Book; desiring him
rather to affect soundness of matter than curiosity of speech, and let not any
prejudice which thou have against the person of the Author, prevent thee of
receiving the truth, for god many times makes forth truth by such instruments
which are weak ones in the worlds eyes, for to manifest his own power, and to
stop the fury of the enemies of his people, and to confound their wisdom, 1
Cor. 2.4.5. Psa. 8.2, 3. Having thus far proceeded, I shall not willingly
trespass upon thy patience any further, only desire that thou would deal with
the Author according unto the Law of equity, even as thou would be dealt by
thy self, hoping thou will not misconsture any of my words, but that thou will
deal fairly and ingenuously with me; which that thou may the better do, I
shall commit thee unto the guidance of that good god, and unto the teaching of
that sweet Spirit in the Scriptures of truth, 2 Timothy 3.16.17. 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
which is able to make thee wise unto salvation in case thou obey it, and to
give thee an inheritance with the Saints in light, which shall be the humble
prayer and earnest endeavor of me, at all times, who am thy Servant in and for
the truth.

W. B.

Acts 1.11. Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same
Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner, as
ye have seen him go into heaven.
CHrist is coming down from heaven, and to dwell with men upon earth for a
thousand years to deliver the whole mortal works and creatures of God on earth
under heaven from the whole Principalities and powers of the Devil, for, and
during that thousand years, according to promise, ^: Peter 3.3.4.
does Peter say to these unbelieving scoffers: But Beloved, be not ignorant of
this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years. Therefore as
the Lord was six days making the whole mortality very good, and man by his sin
did provoke God to curse the same, with giving the Devil power over the
whole-Man, so that man must also labor under the power of the Devil with the
whole mortality for 6000. years. Therefore does Peter say, that in the latter
days, or toward the end of the 6000. years. Near to that coming of Christ
there shall be impatient unbelieving scoffers, that shall say, where is the
promise or the fulfilling of the promise of his coming; unto whom Peter says,
Be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand
years with man, or man cannot accomplish that under six thousand years, that
God did in six days, even his working will. And as God did add a seventh day
of holy rest unto his six days of labor: So man was from the beginning to
celebrate every seventh day a holy day of rest from labor, in remembrance of
the sure promise of Christ his coming to deliver man and the whole mortality,
as Paul says, Romans 8.21.22.23. Rev. 21.1.2.3.
the creature shall be delivered from the tyrannical power of the Devil for a
thousand years, into the glorious liberty of the Sonns of God, even for that
thousand years in which John saw a new heaven and a new earth, and the holy
City new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, with a great voice out
of heaven, saying, Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them; Rev: 20.6.
and they shell be his people (because the Devil in, or during that time, shall
have nothing to do with them) and God himself shall be with them, and be their
God. Therefore says John, Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection: because on such the second death has no power. But they shall be
Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years;
according to the promise of God to Jesus Christ: Sit thou at my right hand,
until I make thine enemies thy foote-stoole. Even the Devil and all his power
and wicked instruments, who are the enemies of Jesus Christ and his members,
and so taking the six days of Gods account, inwhich he made the whole
mortality: and according to Peter's account, six thousand years of Man's misery
under the power of the Devil, by reason of sin: and taking the seventh day of
Gods account, in which he, with all the works of his hands, rested and kept a
holy day unto himself, and account a thousand years deliverance from the power
of the devil, sin, and death, in which God again will with man keep on earth a
holy Sabbath or rest, then and thereby are the promises of Christ his coming by
Peter, confirmed by the works of God, under Gods account, of seven days in the
beginning: but Peter for more certainty of this truth, notwithstanding those
impatient unbelieving scoffers, questioning the same in the behalf of himself,
2 Pet. 3.13
and all the believing members of Jesus Christ of the promises of God in
Christ, 2 Pet. 3.14
says, Nevertheless we according to his (that is Gods) promise, look for a new
heaven and a new earth, wherein awelleth righteousness Unto such says Peter,
Beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be
found in peace, without spot, and blameless; because they that shall enjoy such
things says Peter, 1 Pet. 2 9.
Are a chosen genertion, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people.
Being made so by the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, the coming of Christ is manifested by the glory of God, as the Text
says, If Christ had not risen from the dead, then had Christ dyed in vain: So
likewise may it be said, if Christ be perfect God, as well as perfect man, (who
for man took upon him the nature of man: by which on earth he was by his
perfect obedience to redeem man from that Power of the Devil, which the Devil
gained over man by man's disobedience) it stands with the glory of God, for
Christ, God on earth, to triumph over the Devil and all his power on earth, as
well as to suffer under the devil and all his power on earth. Jesus Christ as
he was a mortal man, it was a glory to him to suffer for sinners, who himself
sinned not, as the Text says, The just suffers for the unjust. But if Jesus
Christ as he is God should not triumph over his enemies as a Conqueror, his
sufferings would be counted in vain on earth, therefore Jesus Christ as he is
God, for the glory of his Godhead, by his servant John reveals to His, who
shall partake of that glory that shall be on earth, when the power of the Devil
shall be done away. And when new beavens and a new earth, and the holy City new
Jerusalem from heaven shall appear, then shall Jesus Christ glorify himself as
God. over the Devil and all his works and powers, as that God by whom all
things were created both in heaven and earth. And thus is Christ coming to
reign on the earth proved by the promises of God, the works of God, and the
glory of God.

Quest. What manner of glory will that be that Christ will have on earth
amongst his Saints, and what habitation will he reside in?

Answ. It will be a heavenly glory, according to that which Christ desired as a
son from god, as a father, saying, Father glorify thy Son with that glory,
which he had with thee. Jesus Christ amongst men on earth prayed to be
glorified amongst men on earth, with a heavenly glory, that man on earth may
see him a glorified god, and a conqueror of his enemies, as well as they did
see him a despised and a suffering man under his enemies: Therefore and
according to this does John after the prophecy of Esaias say, I saw a new heaven
and a new earth, and the holy City new Jerusalem coming down from god out of
heaven, with a loud voice, saying, behold the Tabernacle of god is with men,
and he will dwell with them. This glory for the fullness of it is not revealed,
nor shall it be manifested unto men, until men's corruptions shall be done away,
and that shall not be until the power of the Devil by the power of Christ shall
be taken off of mortality, according to that of John; I saw an Angel come down
from heaven, and he laid hold on the Devil, and bound him a thousand years that
he should deceive the Nations or corrupt mortality no more, until those
thousand year should be fulfilled, or accomplished.

The heavenly glory is within the apprehension of no corrupted flesh, further
then the things of the flesh does behold: And the brightest glory of mortality
is the Sun: And John says, that that glory shall pass the glory of the Sun;
insomuch that that holy City new Jerusalem, shall not need the light of the
Sun: neither shall there be any night in it: But as in the Land of Egypt there
was an exceeding darkness at noonday. But in the land of Goshen no darkness. So
likewise during those 1000. years in all the world there shall be night as well
as day: But in the new and heavenly Jerusalem there shall be no night at all.
And this is all that god has revealed concerning the fullness of that havenly
glory, because corrupted mortality can apprehend no more: as Paul says, If our
hope were only in this mortal life, then we were of all men most miserable to
suffer affliction for hope of a better life. If we should miss of it. But says
he, Yet it does not, or here it does not appear what we shall be. But when
mortality shall put on immortality, and corruption shall be changed into
interruption, then it will appear; for here we know but in part: But then shall
we know as we are known. That is, we who know Jesus Christ as a sufferer, and
rest upon the promises of God by faith in Jesus Christ for a rewarder: Though
now we here with Christ suffer for the same, shall then know God and Jesus
Christ in a heavenly glory, conqueringly, as they knew us here sufferingly.

Secondly, besides this heavenly glory which will in brightness pass the glory
of the Sun, Christ will be glorified by new ereated heavens and earth, as Peter
says, That is, by restoring of the firmamental heavens, whereof now the Devil
is prince, into that same condition they were by God created in, when God saw
them to be very good, before man had sinned, and they therefore corrupted by
those evil Inhabitants, the Devil and his Angels: And by restoring of the earth
with all the creatures created of it by God in the beginning within the six
first days: And that God when he had looked, saw them to be very good, to that
same condition they were by god created in, before man had sinned. And they
therefore and thereby were by the power of the Devil corrupted: This
restoration after so long a continuance as almost six thousand years, shall by
men be such a strange alteration, as though it were rather a creation then an
alteration: And they who never did see no other but the corrupted heavens, and
earth, to see an uncorrupted heaven and earth, will be to them as a new created
heaven and earth. And none male, nor female, from Adam and Eve, ever saw any
but a corrupted heaven and earth: because the heavens and the eath were
corrupted before they had any ^ssa^; therefore does the Text say, that God will
create new heavens and new earth, because the sons of Adam never saw that very
good condition the heavens and the earth were at the first created in, and into
which they shall be again restored.

Thirdly God, Christ on earth, will be gloryfied by a a holy City, a new
Jerusalem from God out of heaven; which shall in largness far pass that old
Jerusalem builded by the Jews, though it was in Solomon's time, the greatest
City in the whole world, as a City of twelve thousand furlongs square; which is
by eight furlongs to a mile, fifteen hundred miles square, can pass the
largness of that old Jerusalem; And this City shall so far pass the old
Jerusalem in glory, as precious stones can surpass in glory ordinary stones,
wood, buck, mortar, iron, Steel, and brass, in the foundations, walls and gates
thereof. And the pavements of this City shall so far surpass in glory the
pavements of the old Jerusalem, as polished gold like transparent glass does
surpass pibble stones; Rev. 21 and 22.
as John at large expresses the same: And the Temple in the City shall so far
surpass in glory Solomon's Temple, that was the glory of the old Jerusalem, as
the glory of God and Jesus Christ does surpass the glory of fine gold, which
was the glory of that Temple, as the Text says, The gold beautified the
Temple. And this holy and great City shall be the residing place of GOD and
Jesus Christ on earth with all the faithful members of Jesus Christ from Abel
to that day.

Object. This relation of John is to signify and figure out Gods glorious
Kingdom to eternity; and not that there shall ever be here on earth any such
glorious place or being.

Answ. That which is imposfible with man, is possible with god, who is able to
do all things. And has any man found God a liar at any time, who is faithful
in all his promises, 2 Pet. 3.4.
and just in all his ways? But Peter says, That in the latter days there shall
be scoffers, who shall say, where is the promise of his coming? for all things
continue as they were from the beginning; and so deny the word of truth. But
says Peter, We who are written in the Book of life. Neverwee according to his
promise look for new heavens and a new earth wherein dwells righteousness, 2
Pet. 3:13.
which is Jesus Christ, as John says, J heard a great voice out of heaven,
saying Behold the Tabernacle of god is with men, Rev. 21, 3.
and he will dwell, with them, and they shall be his people, and god himself
shall be with them, and be their god: as Solomon says, it is true indeed, 1
King. 8 27. Rev. 22, 16.
that god will dwell on the earth, and for a sure evidence of the same says
the Text, J Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the
Churches: which things Peter questioned not, but to his Church said, Beloved
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found in
peace, without spot and blameless. And to any Church that shall question these
things, 2 Pet. 3.14.
says John. These sayings are faithful and true; for I John saw and heard
these things; Rev. 22.6, 16, 18
and J testify unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of this
book, (wheresoever it is published) that if any man shall add too, or take away
from the words of the Prophecy of this book, God shall take away his part out
of the book of life; and also take away his Part out of the holy City; which
City says the Text lies apiece, the length is as the breadth, Rev. 21.16,
twelve thousand furlongs; the squares lie East, West, North, and South. The
East and West are derived from the antipodes of the rising and setting of the
Sun in the firmamental heavens, created on the fourth day. The North and the
South are derived from the antipodes of the two ends of the worlds Axletree,
called the North and south pole, or the two frozen Zones of the earth by reason
of the suns obscurity and distance. This City is to be on earth, because it
lies apiece, East, West, North and south; It is walled about, and so
bounded. The length is as the breadth, twelve thousand furlongs, which is
fifteen hundred miles. The Text says, in it there shall be no need of the sun.
But the Text does not say that it is not within the compass of the sun,
therefore on earth; for in heaven gods glorious Kingdom, habitation and
dwelling place is no sun, and where there is no sun, there can be no East,
West, North nor South; therefore this city cannot be meant nor understood to be
heaven, but is meant and to be understood that such a city shall be on earth.

Now the reason why these things of the Devils confinement or imprisonment for
a thousand years, and the glorious new Jerusalem with all its glorious
accommodations promised, are not believed by us Gentiles, is this, As the Devil
by his power in mortality deceived the Jews of the suffering coming of Jesus
Christ for man's redemption, though promised and prophesied of by the only
looking for Jesus Christ a conqueror, and King of Kings, according to the
promises of a conquering Savior by the Devils deceit, esteeming his suffering
Redeemers condition to be too mean a condition for the Son of god, and so
therefore did not believe him to be the son of God: but upon the Cross said
unto him, If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross, and then we will
believe thee. And so the Devil Deceived the Jews, from their benefit of Jesus
Christ, his redeeming condition. And so also the Devil by his power in
mortality goes about to deceive us Gentiles of Jesus Christ his glorious
conquering, Princely condition, by putting on this mask of infidelity upon us
gentiles, notwithstanding all the sure promises of God, that for Christ to come
down out of heaven, and on earth to dwell in a walled City that is bounded, is
too glorious a condition for man to behold, and for the earth to bare; and
therefore through unbelief and the Devils deceit do scoffingly say, where is
the promise of his coming? Expecting no other coming, but his coming to
Judgment: and so does the Devil go about to deceive us gentiles of our benefit
of Christ his glorious conquering reign and condition here on earth in that
great holy City new Jerusalem. Noah had three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japhat. Noah
was drunk, Ham jeers at his Fathers nakedness, and therefore is cursed and
deprived of all the precious promises made to Noah and his seed. Shem and
Japhat were sorry and ashamed to see their Fathers nakedness; and therefore
going backward covered their Fathers nakedness, upon whom the promises of God
to Noah were confirmed; notwithstanding the said confirmation of promises,
inasmuch as the Devils original power in, and over mortality by Adam is not
taken away, his deceit cease not; for as he did deceive the Jews of Christ's
suffering coming, so he labors to deceive us gentles of Christ his
conquoring coming, as he does deceive the Heathen of both, who never have had
in the one, nor shall have in the other any more benefit then the bruit beasts;
therefore says John without this C^ty shall be dogs, murderers, whoremangers,
adulterers and liars, into whom the Devil when he shall be let loose for a
little season, shall again enter into under the name of Gog and Magog, to make
them more wicked then ever they were before, according to that Text, Out of
whom the Devil is cast, and returns again, he carries with him seven worse
spirits then the former, and so the latter end of that man is worse then the
beginning, because they have no share or part in the book of life, nor in this
holy City.

Quest. When will the time of the coming of Christ be to reign on earth for
1000, years?

Ans. That man that will declare more then God has revealed, must be wiser then
God made him; for says the Text, If an Angel from heaven teach any other
doctrine then what is delivered, believe him not. And as is also said, if they
will not believe the Law and the Prophets, neither will they believe if one
should rise from the dead. The precise time God has concealed, therefore no
man can declare it. But so far as God has revealed, and presidents of
Scripture do make out, Genesis 3.
so far may a man suppose thus. Man was tempted by the devil to disobey God,
Genesis 5.3.28. Genesis 7.6.
whose disobedience God suffered from the creation of Adam to Noah's flood,
which was 1656. years.

And as God waited with patience on Satan's deceived ones, 1656 years. In
relation by comparison to that may be supposed that John does declare the time
of Christ his patience, and waiting on Satan the deceiver; for as God in
vengeance did not destroy the old world, until he with patience had suffered
their evil mannners 1656, years. So may it be supposed that Christ will not
destroy the power of Satan the deceiver, until with patience he has waited,
and born and suffered in himself and members, Satan's evils. 1666. years from
his own birth; for John says, Here is wisdom; Rev. 13.18.
let him that has understanding count the number of the beast; for it is the
number of a man, and his number is 666. David in his days did number the days
of a man to be 70. years, and John here to 66. years, because of the decay of
nature; for it cannot be thought that man's life toward the end of the world, of
which John treats, should be 666. but 66. may be, and also is commonly seen; by
which supposition it may be gathered, that Christ with patience will wait and
forbear Satan's evils ten years longer then God did bare with the old world.
The one was 1656. years; and the other will be 1666. years, according to this
collection. Christ will bare and suffer the evils of Satan, before he take
vengence on the Devil, to destroy or confine his power, for a thousand years
until 1666. years from the birth of Jesus Christ to deliver the whole mortality
from the power of the Devil, Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
as Paul says, the fervent desire of the creature waits when the Sons of God
shall be revealed; for the creatures earnestly desire the revelation of the
time that the Sons of God shall be delivered, because the creature is subject
to vanity, not of its own will, but by reason of him which has subdued it
under hope. The creature did not offend, it was the man, male, and semale, Adam
that did offend: but the creature because it was created for man, must abide
the curse with man; therefore the creatures also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; for we
know that every creature groaneth with us also, and travelleth in pain together
unto this present. And not only the creature, but we also which are the first
fruits of the Spirit, even we do sigh in our selves, and wait for the adoption,
even for the redemption of our bodies, or an assurance of our parts in the
blessed first resurrection, which shall bring us the redemption of our bodies,
who are the adopted Sons of Jesus Christ, by which blessed first resurrection
shall our bodies be delivered out of the Devils prison, the grave, and the
bodies hell, to Gods Saints: against whom the Devil had no further power, but
to kill our bodies, and to imprison them in the mortal hell, the grave of
earth, from whence our bodies came, and unto which we did expect they should
return again for a time and as the corn there lies in the earth, waiting with
the Husbandman; for the first fruits of the spirit, which is that blessed
first resurrection of all that are dead in Christ, from Abel the first that
dyed, and all others dead before, and the living then in the year of Christ,
from the birth of Christ. 1666. shall be partakers of Jesus Christ his glorious
reign for that 1000 years of the Devils confinement or imprisonment.

FINIS.

