REASONS OF A CHALLENGE SENT TO THE Universities of ENGLAND, IN Matters of
Religion.

By Edmund Campion, Priest of the Society of Jesus.

Faithfully Translated into English.

Permissu Superiorum.

LONDON, Printed for Mat. Turner, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb in
High-Holbourn. MDCLXXXVII.

To the most Pregnant Wits of the two Famous Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge.
LAst year being come in a Mission to this Isle, Campions Epistle Dedicatory.
1581.
according to my employment (Renowned Champions) I found waves more Tempestuous
a great deal on the English Shore than I left in the Britannick Ocean. By and
by, when I had pressed farther into England, I saw nothing more common than
unaccustomed Tortures, nothing more certain than unexpected Dangers: I
recollected my self as well as I could, mindful of the Justice of my cause, and
not forgetful of the times; and lest I should by chance be taken up before I
was heard, I reduced the intentions of my mind into writing; I thought fit to
declare to the World what I came for, what I zealously endeavored for, what
kind of War I waged, and against whom I Proclaimed it; I had the Original Copy
with me, which I was resolved should be taken with me if I was taken: I
entrusted a friend with a Copy of it, who, contrary to my knowledge,
communicated it to a great many more; my Adversaries Rudely seized the Book as
soon as it was Published, passing their most malicious Censures upon it: That
one man should Challenge them all in matters of Religion, although I should not
stand alone in the Field in case I was engaged for the Public Faith. Hanmer
and Charke answered my Challenges, and what then? disingenously all; for they
made no material answer, but one which will never be approved of: We embrace
your Proposals, the Queen Espouses them, make your application to her. In the
interim they cry our your Society, your Seditions, your Arrogance, a Traitor,
without doubt a Traitor. O Ridiculous! Why do Wise Men thus lose their labor
and credit? But of these two, one for his fancies sake made Incursions into my
Book, the last did more maliciously weigh the whole cause: The Book was
published lately, being very plain, treating of our Society, of the injuries we
sustained, and of the Province we now undertake; what remains therefore (since
our Adversaries prepare Torments for me and not the Schools) but to prove the
matter of Fact to you which Created so much Confidence in me, as to
demonstratively show the sources of things. I would also exhort you, whom it
concerns above all men, to take that care which Christ, the Church, your
Country and Salvation requires of you; had I trusted in my Parts, Learning,
Subtilty, Reading, Memory, and Challenged such a crowd of Adversaries, I had
been Vain and Arrogant, but I never regarded my self nor them, but considering
the cause, I deemed my self sufficient to uncloud the Sun at Noon Day;
therefore pardon those heats of Zeal, which the honor of Christ, my King, and
the invincible Truth have occasioned. Ye know M. Tullius, when Roscius did
promise him a Victory, in case he would defend by dint of Argument, that Seven
Hundred Miles could not be run in two days, did not only not fear the force and
efficacy of Hortensius his Arguments, but even of those that were his betters,
the Philippi, the Cottae, Antonii, and Crassi, who gained to themselves great
honor in Rhetoric. Indeed there is some Truth so Transparent, that no
Sophistry in words, nor Juggling in things can Eclipse: Moreover, that is more
manifest which we undertake, than that supposition of Roscius, for if I can
prove that there is a Heaven, that there are Saints, that there is one true
Faith, that there is a Christ, the Victory is mine. May I not be then
Courageous here? They may Martyr me, but they can never Baffle me, for I insist
on those Doctrines which the Spirit has Taught, which is never deceived nor
overthrown. I beseech you that you would use the means whereby you might obtain
Salvation, as for the rest I am not at all in suspense, but that I shall
receive from those I Petition it of; if they will apply themselves to study,
call upon Christ and be diligent, they will certainly find out the Truth, to
the Confusion of its Adversaries: in the mean while it behooves us, who are so
firmly grounded, to take the Field with a magnanimous Courage. I draw the
Curtain here, because the rest which I have to say is Dedicated to you.

Farewell.
The Heads of the Reasons.
1. HOly Scripture. 2. The Sense of Holy Scripture. 3. The Nature of the
Church. 4. Councils. 5. Fathers. 6. Decrees of the Fathers. 7. History. 8.
Paradoxes. 9. Sophisms. 10. All sorts of Witnesses.
The Reasons of the Challenge sent to the Universities of England, by Edmund
Campion.
ALthough there are Innumerable Arguments, First Reason, Holy Scripture.
to Demonstrate our Adversaries Diffidence in their Cause, yet not any one so
Material as their Violation of the Divine Majesty of the Holy Bible, which is
the Authority I draw my Sword for, against Those, who after they have contemned
the Votes and Suffrages of all other Witnesses, yet are reduced to that
Nonplus, that they cannot subsist, unless they seize on SCRIPTURE, and deprive
Her of her Stings. Indeed they do by their Actions insinuate unto the World, as
though they were driven into very dangerous Streights, and were resolved in
this so imminent danger of Shipwreck, Aug. b. 28. against Faust. and de c. 2.
uti. cre. cap. 3. Mat. 1. Act. 1.
to make their most Audacious Efforts for their Religions and their last. What
induced the Manichees to reject the Gospel of St. Matthew, and the Acts of the
Apostles? Distrust in their Cause. For at these Volumes they were
Thunderstruck, who denied Christ Born of the Virgin Mary, and who feigned that
the Spirit descended from Heaven upon Christians; when their Paracletus, a
Diabolical Persian, started up. Why did the Ebionites divorce the Epistles of
St. Paul? Iren. l. c. 26. Pres. on the Ep. of Jam. v. the book de cap. Bab. and
Cent. 2. magd p. 5, 8 Jam. Geneva Bible. Tob. 12. Eccl. 15. 1 Matthew. 12, 15.
Distrust in their Cause: for these retaining their pristin Grandeur, their
Ancient, though Polite Imbellishments were antiquated; which they, forsooth,
had newly reformed. What Instigated Luther, that cursed Apostate, to Censure
the Epistle of St. James as Contentious, bigg with Pride and Arrogance insipid,
empty, and unworthy of an Apostolical Spirit Distrust in his Cause: For with
this Particle of Scripture the Fiend was Wounded and Stabbed to the Heart, when
he took up the Gauntlet for Justification by Faith only. What made Luther's
Hell Hounds strike out of the Authentic Canon Tobias, Ecclesiasticus,
Maccabees, and many others, with the same disgust? Distrust in their Cause. For
with these Oracles they were most Eloquently reprimanded as often as they
disputed of Guardian Angels, of the Liberty of free will, of the Faithful
departed this Life, and the Intercession of the Saints. But is it so? Is there
so great Infidelity, so great Confidence? when the Footsteps of Antiquity and
Authority are imprinted in the Church, Councils, Popes, Fathers, Martyrs,
Empires, Peoples, Laws. Universities, Histories; by Scripture, they are
resolved to put an end to Controversies, and lmbowel its very Body their only
Buoy to Posterity, exenterating its most goodly and specious parts. For the
seven Books of the Old Testament (to connive at small things) were spewed out
by the Calvinists, and the Epistle of St. James, and five others by the
Lutherans, with the like Hickups of indigestion; viz. Baruch, Tobias, Judith,
Wisdom, Eccl. 2. Match. New Test. Ep. Jam. Ep. to Heb. Ep. of Jude. Ep. 2 of
Pet. Ep. 2. and 3. of Joh. Lutherans in Pref. Magd. St. Aug. c. 2. c. 4. Kem.
in exam. of the Council of Trent, ser 4. Chr. gift* B. 2. c. 8. Ser. 4. v.
Melch. Can. B. 2. de Lo. Th. c. 9. 10. 11. de pred. Sanct.
about which there was one while a Controversy. To these our Modern
Presbyterians add the Book of Hester, and in a manner, the Three Chapters of
Daniel, which the Anabaptists, their contemporaries, long since Hissed out and
derided. How modestly did St. Augustine, who concluding his Holy Catalogue, did
not lay down the Hebrew Alphabet for a Rule as the Jews did, nor a private
Spirit, as the Sectaries did, but, that Spirit which Christ infused into his
Church, which Church indeed is the Trustee of this Legacy; not the Testatrix as
some Heretics do object: This Trust the Council of Trent embraced, and was
challenged by more Ancient Councils. The same St. Augustine could not draw into
the Scheme of his knowledge why the Book of Wisdom, which is now, and was then
in force as Authentic and Canonical, both by the Suffrages of the Church,
Succession of Ages, by the Testimony of the Ancients, and Inspirations of the
Faithful, should be struck out of the Canon with a Rash and Unadvised Censure.
What would he say now, if he should have survived so many Lutheran and
Calvinistical Artificers of the Bible, who with their Polite and Elegant File
have extenuated the Old and New Testament; neither have they excluded the Book
of Wisdom only, but many others out of the Canonical Predicament. That
whatsoever came not from their Anvil, that by a Phrensical Decree was spewed
out as Monstrous and Abortive. To this so Dire and Unconsecrated a Sanctuary,
who have recourse to, they indeed, although they are extolled in the mouths of
their Scullions, do make Sale of their Benefices, Declaim against Catholics in
their Sermons, prepare Axes, Racks, Tormentilio's, and Crosses, yet they have
been overcome, abject, disgraced, vanquished, and defeated; forasmuch as having
passed their Sentences as Authorized Judges, they obliterate Scripture it self,
if any part agrees not with their Stomach; who is there even ordinarily Learned
would fear such Rabbet-like Enemies? Which Enemies, when they are besieged by a
Ring of such Learned men as we are, will run to their old wiles, as it were to
Familiar Devils, and should not be Entertained with Victorious Hummings, but
Disgraceful Hissings. I ask of them, for instance, By what Right they Maim and
Rend the Body of the Bible? They answer, They do not cut out the true
Scriptures, but cull out the Supposititious. Who is their Judge? The Holy
Spirit. For this answer is prescribed by Calvin, that he might escape the
Sentence of the Church, by which Spirits are tried: Why therefore do you
torment one another, when all glory in the same Spirit? The Spirit of the
Calvinists receive Six Epistles, which do not please the Spirit of the
Lutherans; yet both trusted in the Holy Spirit. The Anabaptists term the
History of Job a Fable, Hist. Sen. l. 7.
interwoven with Comical and Tragical Laws: How do they know? The Spirit
teaches them so. Castalio a Debauched Rascal, Pref. on the Can.
esteemed the Mystical Song of Solomon, which the Catholics admire as the
Paradise of the Soul, as the hidden Manna, as Rich delights in Christ, no more
than a Song on his Mistress, a Love-colloquie, with the Ladies of the Court.
Whence did he draw it? From the Spirit. In the Revelation of St. John, where
every point does express something Magnificent and Lofty, Ep. to Paul Pref. on
the Apo.
as St. Jerome says; yet Luther, Brentius, and Kemnitius, curious Critics,
desire it should be Authorized: Who would they ask? The Spirit. Luther, with a
Preposterous Zeal, places the Four Evangelists by themselves, and preferring
them before the Three Epistles of St. Paul, does moreover Decree that the
Gospel of St. John should be denominated True and Singular; Pref. on the New
Test.
and good Reason for it, because in it he made the Apostles partakers of his
Contentions: who teach'd him so to do? the Spirit. But yet that Friar did not
scruple to touch the Gospel of S. Luke with a petulant style; because the good
Works of Virtue are too often commended in it. Who told him so? The Spirit.
Theodorus Beza dared to Traduce that Mystical Expression out of the Twenty
Second Chapter of St. Luke: This is the Cup, Luke 22. cap.
the New Testament in my Blood, which (Cup) shall be poured out for you, as
Corrupted and Depraved, because these Sentences admit of no other Exposition
than of the Wine of the Cup, being changed into the real Blood of Christ: who
told him so? the Spirit. Lastly, when every one intrusts all things to his
Spirit, they do asperse the Holy Spirit with horrible Blasphemy; whoever does
these things, do not they betray themselves? are they not easily Confuted? are
they not bridled and restrained without difficulty by a Consistory of such
Learned Men as you are, O! ye Academians? May I fear to dispute with those who
have not only with the most Treacherous Infidelity laid hands on Humane
Writings, but Divine? I pass by those things which they have misconstrued,
although I can accuse them of things inexcusable. I submit that to my Friend
Gregory Martin, who is Skilful of Languages, who will perform it more Learnedly
and Accurately than I; and to others (who as I am informed) have it on the
Anvil: I Prosecute Crimes more heinous and of a worse nature: I have found out
Learned Banterers, who with rash Incursions have Invaded Gods Prerogative, and
in many places have inveighed against it as Corrupt, Imperfect, False and
Surreptitious: Some parts they have Corrected, some they have Carped at, and
some they have Rooted out quite: Hence all the Turrets which they were
Fortified with were changed into Lutheran Spirits, as it were into Castles of
Phantasms, that they should not be Gravelled when they should Quote the
Scriptures, infested with their Errors, which indeed they can no more clear
themselves of, than Sup the Sparks, or Eat the Stones.

For this Cause my first Reason was Vehement and Just, that when it had
delineated our Adversaries party, despersed and vanished, it might add Courage
to all Christians who exert their Wits in these Studies, to Fight for a Crown
of Glory against the residue of our overthrown Enemies.

The Second Reason.
ANother thing which has inflamed me to a Combat, The Sense of Holy Scripture.
and to bring such Ammunition, Muskets, and Blunderbusses with me, is our
Adversaries policy (big with Fraud, and barren of Prudence) in explaining the
Scriptures; presently ye will touch at this (ye Philosophers) and therefore I
sought out you for my Auditors. We ask of our Adversaries, for instance, who
they follow? what new Sect they entered into, that they exclude Christ out of
the Mystical Supper? If they Quote the Gospel, we appeal to it; the words with
us are, This is my Body, this is my Blood, which expression seemed so prevalent
with Luther, that he desired to be a Zuinglian, because in that point he could
be prejudicial to the Pope, yet being taken and bound, in the conclusion did
yield, and acknowledged Christ to be really present in the Holy Sacrament, not
less against his will, than the Devils heretofore being overcome with Miracles,
called upon the Name of God. Let it be so, we treated of the Scripture before,
the Controversy now is on the Sense of Scripture; we will search out this from
the following words, My Body which is given for you, my Blood which shall be
shed for you, as yet Calvin's side is the hardest, ours is easy and plain;
what would ye have more? Search the Scriptures; ye say well, the Scriptures
agree; St. Paul is for us: The Words, Clauses and whole Connection do reverently
repeat the Bread and Wine, a singular Miracle, Heavenly Food, Flesh, Body and
Blood. There is nothing enigmatical, nothing overclouded with obscurity of
words, yet our Adversaries persist, neither do they make an end of Bantering;
what do we do? Antiquity may be heard I think, and Antiquity of time may bring
forth that which we cannot see betwixt one another, other, they do not bring
it, they say they are betrayed, they call the Scripture pure, they are averse
to men's Comments on it as treacherous and disingenious; we urge the Word of
God, they obscure it; we call Saints to witness, as Interpreters, they
withstand them; in fine, so they order it, that unless you will side with the
guilty, you must not give your judgment at all; and so they behave themselves
in every Controversy they undertake, of infused Grace, of inherent Justice, of
the visibility of the Church, of necessity of Baptism, of the Sacraments and
Sacrifice of the Mass, of the merits of the Just, of Hope and Fear, of the
disparity of Sins according to their aggravations, of the Authority of Peter,
of the Keys, of Prayers, of Evangelical Mysteries, and so of other things: And
we Catholics have cited a great many weighty Texts of Scripture, and discussed
them in Books, Colloquies, Churches, they have eluded them; we have hinted on
the Commentaries of Greek and Latin Writers, they have winked at them; what
then? Dr. Martin Luther, or certainly Phillippus, or to be sure Zuinglius has
faithfully published it, or without doubt, Calvin or Beza. Can I think any
Bodies Nose so stopped as not to smell out this deceit, wherefore I confess I
ardently desire the University Schools, that openly I may raise those
accomplished Soldiers out of their Ambush, not to charge them in the hundredth
part with my force, for alas! what is mine, but defeat them with the Prevalent
and Invincible Truth.

The Third Reason.
WHen the name of a Church was heard the Enemy grew pale, The nature of the
Church.
yet I have devised something which I would have you consider, that you might
know the ruin and decay of Falsehood; you are sensible that in the Scriptures
both Prophetic and Apostolic, there is an honorable mention made of the
Church, that it is called the Holy City, the Fruitful Vine, the High Mountain,
Apoc. 2. Psalm. 7. Isa. 2. 35. Cant. 6. Mat. 13. Ephesians. 5. 1. Cor. 12: 1. Tim.
3. Jo. 14. Mat. 16. 18 Call. Inst. l. 4. Ca. 1. Number. 2. 3. Apoc. 1. 2, 3. Act.
8. 10. 11. Seq. Luther. Calvin.
the Direct Way, the only Dove, the Kingdom of Heaven, the Spouse and Body of
Christ, the Firmament of Truth, that Assembly in which Christ has infused all
things necessary to Salvation; against which Catholic Church the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail; that which whosoever opposes, although he Preaches Christ
with his mouth, does no more enjoy him than the Publican or Gentile; he dares
not contradict me with his roaring, he would not seem to resist the Church
which the Scripture so often Commemorates, he has craftily retained the name,
he has carried the day by his definition of it, for he has delineated a Church
with these Properties, which may be hidden quite, removed from the senses, and
Phoenix like, may be exposed to view at a certain time to a very small number;
and those supernaturally inspired, they may comprehend her Body, Air-like, in
their understanding, and may discern the Members of her Society, with the
subtle Eye of the Intellect, as they may Cuckows Persecuted and Destroyed by
their Young ones. Where is your Candor? Where is your Sincerity? What
Scriptures, What Interpretations, what Fathers draw out such a Church with
their Pencil? There are Epistles of Christ to the Churches of Asia, of Peter,
of Paul, John, and other Epistles to diverse: There are many Churches in the
Acts of the Apostles begun and propagated, what are these: Are they visible to
God alone and holy men, or to Christians of all sorts, but Necessity has no
Law: For how is it after 15 Ages, they find no Town, Village, or House, has
imbibed their Doctrine, until that Diabolical Monk had Debauched a Devoted Nun
by Incestuous Matrimony, or Zuinglius the Fencer had Plotted against his
Country, and the Stigmatized Vagabond had settled at Geneva; they are compelled
to expose a Church to view in Caves, if they will have one, and Adopt them Sons
which they never knew, nor ever any man saw, unless they trace the Footsteps
of their Ancestors, who are plainly demonstrated to have been Heretics, as
Henry Pantal, in Chro.
as Aerius, Jovenianus, Vigilantius, Helvidius, Iconomachi, Berengarius,
Waldenses, Lolhard, Wickliff, Hass, from which several Poisonous Fragments of
Opinions went a begging; don't you wonder if I did not fear those Meteors,
which if I can but come to the daylight I will easily dispel, for this is our
time for Disputation: Tell me, do you subscribe to the Church which flourished
in Ages before? Yes. Let us then survey Nations, Countries and Times, in our
mind. -- To what? To the Congregation of the Faithful, of whom their Names are
not known, but it is evident there are a great many; how is it evident? by God.
Who promulgated it? We who are divinely inspired: They are Stories; how can I
believe them? If you are fervent in Faith you should know this, so as to live
by it.

When you, my Advocates, behold these wiles,
Can you through modesty refrain from smiles!
That all Christians be enjoined to incorporate themselves into this Church,
and beware lest they be killed with the Sword of the Spirit; to Worship Peace
in the House of God, to trust to this Pillar of Truth, and lay aside all
Controversies about it, and from henceforth to be cast out as Gentiles, so many
men to be bound in Chains wheresoever she is: Who do these belong to? that only
thing is in suspense; where, where is their Church? She is reserved for Saints
only, and those that are Predestined for Salvation; how is it? That if any
one will Lampoon the Government he may be absolved from the offense, so that he
fall into the Presbyterian Persuasion, and Apostatize from the Church. When I
found my Adversaries to insinuate such things, which was a Custom in no Age of
the Church before, I was an Orphan to the thing, yet put in a word for need,
and comforted my self with your Wit and Judgment, and promised my self so to
do, until by their own Concessions you would discern their Stratagems; and then
as Ingenious and Impartial Judges, turn their Snares laid against us upon
themselves.

The Fourth Reason.
A Weighty Query there was in the Infancy of the Church concerning Lawful
Ceremonies, Councils.
which has distracted the minds of a great many, which now by the Congregated
Council of Apostles and Elders is solved; the Sons believed their Fathers, the
Sheep their Pastors, commanding them in these words, Act the 15. Greg. l. 1.
Ep. 25.
It has pleased the Holy Ghost and Us. The Four General Councils which were of
so great Authority, that before a Thousand years a singular Honor was paid to
them as to the Scriptures, were followed for the rooting out of Heresy, which
in diverse places sprung up in those ages. I will not wander any farther, for
even at home, the same Councils have their respect and value in the Parliaments
of this Kingdom; Greg. 1. Ep. 24. An. 1. Eliz.
I will cite these things, and call thee to witness, O my dear Country England,
as thou do reverence those four General Councils, so do thou pay Supremacy to
the Bishop of Rome, Successor of St. Peter. Scan the bloody Sacrifice of the
Body and Blood of Christ on the Altar, Constable. c. 5. Ephesians. Conte in Eptonestorum.
Nu. Can. 14. Chal. Act. 11. Nic. Conce. Apud. Sec. l. 1. c. 8. v. Chalc. Can.
4. 15. and 23.
beseech the blessed Martyrs, and all the Heavenly Saints, that they may pray
to Christ for thee: Restrain the feminine Apostates from Whoring, and public
Incest. Moreover, I do espouse the Councils of other times, and namely that of
Trent, as equally authentic with the Gospels, and when occasion serves, I will
prove it. Being fortified therefore with the strong and exquisite safeguard of
Councils, why should not I enter the Field, when I see where my adversary will
incommode himself? Moreover I will produce most evident demonstrations that
cannot be wrested, and axioms that cannot be denied; perhaps they will endeavor
to prolong the day with a circumlocution of words; but by ingemous men, if I
knew them well, neither Eyes nor Ears would be prepared for them: which if any
one shall be so mad as to oppose himself against the Senators of the whole
World, those great beyond exception, Holy, Learned, and Ancient. I will
willingly behold his Face, who when I shall demonstrate things to you, will
leave the rest to your judgment: In the mean while I Will admonish you: He that
in a full Council rightly and duly Summoned, abrogates any thing of weight or
moment, seems to me to be a man of no Conduct no Wit, and not only unskilful in
Divinity but Policy: If ever the Spirit of God illuminated the Church, that was
the time of sending down the Deity, when the Religion, Maturity, Knowledge,
Wisdom and Dignity, of all the Churches in the World, concentred in that City:
and all means used, both Divine and Humane, to search out the truth, when they
might implore the Spirit to Establish it wholesomely and prudently. But now
there appears some head of an Heretical Faction, he steels his Forehead, bears
the Nose of a Rhinoceros, and scurrilously treats his Judges; what Sports, what
Pranks will he show? Ca^. de B^^l.
up starts Luther, who could say he preferred himself before the Councils? The
Suffrages of two good and Learned men, ( viz. his and Philips) were enough in
case they agreed in the name of Christ; O Circles! Kemnitius is found out, who
examined the Council of Trent according to the approbation of his own giddy
Brain; what did he gain by it? Disgrace; whereas he, unless he had been
cautious, had been Buried with Arrius. The Council of Trent, by how much the
older it grows, so much the more it daily and yearly flourishes. Good God! What
variety of Nations, what choice of Bishops in the whole World? What Splendor
of Kingdoms and Commonwealths? What Marrow of Divines? What Sanctity? What
Tears? What Fastings? What Academical Flowers? What Tongues? How great
Subtilty? How great Labor? What Infinite Reading? What fruitfulness of Virtues
and Riches adorned the Sacred Tabernacles? I heard the High Priests rejoicing,
and amongst them Anthony Archbishop of Prague, by whom I was ordained Priest,
the most Eminent and Prudent men that have been in that School this many years,
so that they could receive no better a kindness of Ferdinand Caesar, to whom
they were much obliged, than that they came Legates out of Pannonia, and
returned with this gratuity, Aluimus vos in Schola optima, being invited hither
for the Public Faith: Why did not our Adversaries come and contradict them,
against which they Croaked like Frogs out of their holes: They say to Huss and
Jerome, that they broke their promise; Who did? The Members of the Council of
Constance; it is false, for they made none, neither had Huss been burned in the
Hand, Joan. Huss.
but that he was a man perfidious and turbulent, recalled from banishment,
which Sigismund the Emperor published an Edict for, when he was condemned to
dye, but the Articles being violated he lost all hopes of his pardon: Headlong
Malice deceived Huss, for being commanded when he had dispersed his Tragedy in
Bohemia to reside at Constance, he despised the Prerogative of the Council, and
demanded security of Caesar. Caesar signed it, the Christian World re-signed
it, which was greater than Caesar. The beginning of Heresy could not taint the
mind, it perished, but Jerome of Prague came privately to Constance, Hieron.
Prag.
protected by no body, appeared before them, submitted, and was received
graciously, he went freely where he would, he was pardoned, he abjured Heresy,
relapsed, and was burned. An. 1518.
Why do they so often agitate one example of six hundred. Let them read well
the Annals. Did not Martin Luther himself, that scandal of God and Man, prefer
Augusta before Cardinal Caietan, and often counterfeit the Letters of
Maximilian. And again in the case of Wormatius, when he had offended Caesar,
and many other Princes of the Empire, An. 1521.
was not he safe by Caesar's word; at last, did not the heads of the Lutherans
and Zuinglians, Charles the Fifth being present, an Enemy to Heretics, Lord
and Conqueror, did not these, a treaty being made, Exhibit their Penitent
Confessions to the Synod, Augustanae Confessio. v. the Council of Trent.
and they went away safe? No other ways had the Trent Summons provided very
ample Proposals to our Adversaries, but they would not make use of them;
notwithstanding, it is boasted of in Corners, that I seemed wise when I could
pronounce 3 Greek words; he leaves the most faithful way of Interpretation who
puts a linguist in the place of a faithful Judge; since they so love the
Salvation of Souls as to grant the like liberty to the Catholics. We do not do
what Huss did, we fly unto Court at the word of a Prince: But where I began
there I Will end, mine are general, first, last, and intermediate Councils, with
these I Will fight; my Adversaries may expect a Dart from my Bow, which they can
never pull out. Let Satan be overthrown, let Christ live.

The Fifth Reason.
AT Antioch, Fathers.
in which the noble Surname of Christian was first assumed, Act. 15. 1. Cor.
12. Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 14. Mat. 13. 23.
did the Doctors, Eminent Divines, Prophets and renowned Preachers flourish: Of
this sort God beheld posterity, the Scribes and Magi, the Learned in the
Kingdom of God, searching out things new and old; prophesying of Christ and
Moses, what a heinous thing it is to hiss at such good men, and maliciously
extol evil? my adversaries hissed, why so? because they have exploded a Learned
Scribe. When I found that true, I desired the Field singly, not that sporting
one, which the Rabble Skirmish on ( viz.) the Street, but a large Campaigne,
Foot to Foot, a Giant with a Dwarf, but if the Fathers should chance to be in
ambush, S. Dion Areo Pa. concerning which v. Adon Treu. in Martyrol. Adon.
Turon. Sing. Suid. Metap Comment. in. 1. 13. 17. Deuteronomy. Item in Cap. Bab.
the Fight is ended: they Fight as much for us as Gregory the 13th, that most
Loving Father of the Sons of the Church: For to connive at many different
Proofs which may be gathered out of the Monuments of Antiquity, they do
Positively and Affirmatively defend the same Faith; they do fully and
distinctly explain those Volumes which we Patronize, and Industriously desend
that Religion we profess. There is a twofold Hierarchy, which teaches us in
what Classis Rites and Ceremonies are: This thing Pricked Luther so much that he
thought of his Works in his Dreams and Visions. Causeus imitating his Father,
Dial. 5 and 11. Genesis 2. ca. 10 Inst. li. 1. ca 13. nu. 29.
a Terrefilius of France, did not blush to call this Dionysius a doting old
Man, although an Apostle of a good Family. Ignatius, was offended at the
Centuriators and at Calvin, in that he esteemed of him as the scum of the
Earth, his Works as disfiguring Moles and mere Songs. Ireneus published
something Phanatical to the World, Genesis 2. cap. Vide cen. 1. li. 2. cap. 10.
and sequi.
in the Judgment of Censors. Clemens the first Inventor of Coverleds, Midwifed
into the World Tares and Dregs. The rest of the Fathers of this age were men of
an Apostolical Spirit, but lest to their posterity Blasphemies. Tertullian they
greedily snap at, what they learn from us, they indigestedly spew up again; but
they should have remembered the Book of Prescriptions, Lib. de proescri. con.
haer.
which touched the Sectaries of our age so much was never called in. Orat. de
cons. secul.
How well did Hippolitas Bishop of Portua, Divine the strength of Antichrist
and Luthers times? Juel. etc.
therefore they term him a young Writer and a Conjurer. The French Critic and
the Magdeburgecy term Cyprian the Glory and Honor of Africa, one stupid and
not Divinely inspired, and a Corrupter of repentance. What did he receive?
Causs. dial. 8. and 11. Cent. 3 cap. 4.
he wrote of Virgins, of Sins, of the unity of the Church, with many other
Tracts of the like nature, and Epistles to Cornelius Romanus the High Priest,
and if Faith be not applied to this Martyr, Peter Martyr, Vermilius and his
Confederates can be accounted no better than Adulterers and Sacrilegious
persons. And not to insist longer on particulars, Cent. 3. ca. 4.
all the Fathers of our Age are condemned, for they are they who would have
corrupted the Doctrine of the Penitent Myrrh Tree; by what means? for the
Austerity of the Canon, which was vigorous at that time, Canones Paenitentiae
veteres.
did in abundant manner displease this plausible Sect, who delighted more in
Couches than in Temples, in tickling their Voluptuous Ears, and in sowing
Pillows to their Elbows. What did the next Age? Ezech. 13. Praef. in cent. 5.
How did they offend? Chrysostom and those Fathers did foully obscure the
Justice of Faith; Nazianzen whom for honors sake the Ancients called a Divine,
Causaus being Judge, Dial. 6. 78.
was a liar, and knew not what he said; Ambrose was bewitched by an Evil
Spirit; Hierome was equally damned with the Devil, injurious to an Apostle,
blasphemous, Beza in Act. Apost. ca. 23. Staacha. li. de. Trin.
wicked, impious. One Calvin with Gregory Massovius, is worth a hundred
Augustines, a hundred; they are few, Luther prefers himself before a Thousand
Augustines, a Thousand Cyprians, a Thousand Churches. I think it needless to
protract the time longer; Lib. contra Henr. 8. Reg. Angl.
but who inveighs against these? who wonders at these, Optatus, Athanasius,
Hillary, Cyril, Epiphanius, Basil, Vincentius, Pulgentius, Leo and Pope
Gregory, as puffed up with Pride? Although we will grant a just defense to
unjust things, yet we have the Fathers ready to stand by us, and lay new Irons
in the fire to suppress them by force, and therefore they are stomach'd; for
they which have refused to fast at set times, how can they follow Basil,
Nazianzen, Leo, Chrysostom, who have published so many Sermons concerning
Lent, appointed Vigils and Feasts as accustomed things; they that have sold
themselves to Gold, Lust, Gluttony, and Ambitious Prospects, to do Wickedly,
cannot be friends to Basil, Chrysostom, Jerome, Augustine, whose excellent
Books of the Discipline of the Monks, of their Rules and Morals, are worn out;
they who have captivated the understandings of men, who have brought
Persecutions on the Christians, Lib. 22. de ci Dei ca. 8. and ser. de diverse.
34. and sequ.
who have burned the Relics of the Saints, are they acceptable to St. Austin,
who in his Three Books of Free Will, of the care for the Dead, of the Miracles
and Monuments due to the Memories of Martyrs, has printed the select heads and
Sermons of his most noble endeavors. They which pretend Faith by their
Fallacies, Con ep. Ma* qu^m vocant funda. ca. 4. Parmen.
are not they angry with Augustine, who wrote an excellent Epistle against a
Manichee, where he acknowledges himself to assent to antiquity. agreement to
the Fathers, Succession of Pastors, and to that perpetual Church which only
owns the name of Catholic Li. 1. cont.
amongst so many Heresies. Optatus Bishop of Millain, Excommunicated the
Donatists out of the Church, Li. 2.
he accuses them of Heresy, by the Decree of Melchiades; he clears the
Priesthood, he proclaims to the world the barbarous indignities and
contaminations Li. 3. Li. 6.
offered to the Eucharist and Chrisme; he is amazed at their Sacrilege and
abused Altars, on which the Members of Christ are born, Ang. li 1. cont. parmen
De unit. cap. 16. de Doct. Christ. cap. 40. Fulgem B. Sec. to Monim. v. Ep.
Synod. Alex, ^^ Feli^
and their polluted Cups which contained the blood of Christ. What do they
think of Optatus, (I desire to know) whom Augustine makes mention of as a
Venerable and Catholic Bishop, Contemporary with Ambrose and Cyprian, whom
Fulgentius denotes as a Holy and Faithful Interpreter of St. Paul, not unlike
to Augustine and Ambrose. They sing the Song of Athanasius in Churches. Is not
he a grave Author who commended Antonium Eremitam the Egyptian Hermit, for his
accurate Book? And by that means he was called to the Synod of Alexandria, by
the Decree of the Apostolical Chair, to wit, St. Peter's. Prudentius in his
Hymns, how often does he sing to those Martyrs whom he praised? will they
approve of this? Jerome writes for the relics of the Saints and their honors
against Vigilantius, Vide ep. D. Am. ad Epis Ita. Item. ad so. li. 10. ep. 85.
Item Item. ser. 91 Au. li. 22 de Ci. Det. ca. 1. Gre. Turo. li. de glor. mar.
cap. 46. Metaphrast. Inst li. 1. cap* 11. nu. 5.
against Jovinianus, for Caelibacy, will they suffer this? Ambrose honored his
Tutors Gervasius and Proteus with an Immortal Fame; to the shame of the
Arrians: so that the Holy Fathers pay an Encomium of praise to him, which deed
God has not Graced with one Miracle, will they therefore wish well to St.
Ambrose for the future? Gregory the Great, our Apostle certainly ours, and by
that Title odious to our adversaries, the Blind Zeal of Calvin denies to have
been brought up in the School of the Holy Ghost, because he termed Images the
Books of the unlearned. My time will fail me if I should number the Epistles,
Sermons, Homilies, Tracts, Controversies of the Fathers, which without delay,
weightily, and politely confirmed our Catholics Opinions; as long as they were
to be bought at the Booksellers, in vain were our Books prohibited in vain were
the Seaports stopped, in vain were our Houses, Boxes, Chests and Trunks
searched; in vain were so many Wars proclaimed at the Gates, for there is no
Sanders, nor Allen, nor Stapleton, nor Bristow, can prosecute these new Dreams
better than these Fathers I have quoted; taking a prospect of these things I
was inflamed, and desired the Field, in which wheresoever our Adversaries turn
themselves, unless they yield the glory to God, they shall be overthrown; they
admit of the Fathers, taken, vanished, nothing. It happened when we were
N^vices John Jewel, Eminent amongst the Calvinists of England, challenged with
Vainglorious Sarcasms the Catholics at St. Paul's, London, crying out, Show me
the Fathers which flourished the first six hundred years. Some worthy Persons
embraced the propositions, who were banished from Lavain, and environed with
d^fficulties, by means of the vitiousness of the Times. I dare to say, he has
done more good to the Catholics by that disingenuity, ignorance, knavery and
impudence which our writers have discovered, than any one in my mind ever did,
who took up the Cudgels for the Church of England: An Edict was always on the
Gates, lest those Books which came out in a hurry could not be had. They which
managed this business were convinced that the Fathers were Catholics, viz.
ours. Lawrence Humphrys, who had received a mortal wound to him and his Party,
notwithstanding he had supported Jewel in other things, now aspersed Jewels
Life.
him with unadvisedness, that he had admitted of the approbation of those
Fathers, whom he had nothing to do with, nor should not have mentioned them
without turning them over. We ask Matthew Tobias, who now domineers in the
Pu^pit, whom we chose out for his good Learning and seeds of Virtue, and well
read in the Fathers, whether they confirmed these things or no; he answered
ingeniously they did not, neither will any say so that read them: This is very
true, for neither he nor Matthew Hutton, although a man of a hundred, is said
to have consulted the Fathers, nor I believe any of our Adversaries who say so.
So far I can go into the Field against those who do as 'twere stop their Ears;
either they will be compelled to bear the Eternal Reproach of their Cause, or
refuse the Fathers, or appeal to them: If one, they fly, if another, they are
gravelled.

The Sixth Reason.
IF they had that Courage or care, Decrees of the Fathers
that chiefly ought to be in them, and searched the Scriptures, the Holy
Fathers, had Caesar like, been Triumphant; by whose labor and cost the Bible
has been Translated into so many Languages, and carried into so many Nations;
in their dangers and torments snatched out of the flames; by their labors and
watchings all things are revealed as clear as the Sun; they have been day and
night intent on the Holy Scriptures, published it with the Opinions of all,
they have wrote large Volumes of Scripture, they hunger'd and thirsted; at
length being expert in Holy writ, they came to a decrepit Old Age: Which if
they frequently argue also from the authority of our Ancestors, Practice of the
Church, Succession of Popes, General Councils, Apostolical Traditions, Blood of
Martyrs; from the Edicts of Kings, from Visions and Miraculous Aspects, yet all
these do contain Testimonies of Holy writ; this they press for, this they
subsist in, this Armor do their Courageous Captains use themselves to, to
defend the City of God against all Assaults. How much more do I admire at my
Adversaries, who object against want of Scripture in full Scripture; so far
they say they adhere to the Fathers, as they agree with the Holy Scripture; do
they speak according to their mind? Then I Will take care they shall go armed
with Christ, the Apostles, Prophets and all Scripture, the most famous Men,
most Holy Fathers, and most Ancient Fathers, viz. Dionysius, Cyprian,
Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Augustine, and
Gregory the Roman. Let that Faith Reign in England which these courteous
Fathers ground on the Scriptures of Scriptures; what they bring we'll bring,
whom they counsel we'll counsel, we'll infer what they infer, content: Say, let
it be so, but you say no, unless they explain it right; what is this right
explanation? According to our pleasure. Are not you ashamed of this Labyrinth?
Therefore my hope is in the flourishing Universities, where I shall be
accompanied with those who will not inspect these Controversies with a gross
judgment, but an accute one, and weighing these trifling answers will gladly
wait this day at Camp, while I show forth the Church against the forces of
unarmed Beggars.

The Seventh Reason.
ANcient History does discover the face of an Ancient History.
Church. This I dare do. Certainly the most Ancient Historians which our
Adversaries insist upon, are in a manner numbered here, Instit. libr. 4. 6. ^p.
2 nu. 3. and in epist. ad Sadol.
Eusebius, Damasus, Hierome, Ruffinus, Orosius, Socrates, Sozomenus, Theodoret,
Cassiodorus, Gregory the Turonian, Vsuardus, Regino, Marianus, Sigebe^t*
Zonaras, Cedrenus, Nicephorus. What do they say? they tell our Progress, our
Praise, our hard Fortune, they speak of our Enemies; yea truly that you may
observe diligently those who separate from ^^ with a mortal hatred, Phillip,
Pantaleon, Func^ias, Mag^^^^gici, who when they applied themselves to write
either the Chronology, or History of the Church, unless they could collect the
actions of us, or our Enemies, let slip five hundred years without one
Argument. With these revolve the peculiar Historians of certain Nations, who
have searched out the actions of all people very nicely and censoriously; these
having got what they aimed at, endeavored by all means to improve it, and who
are not silent truly in their dainties, Coat-sleeves, Dagger-hilts,
Goldenspurs, or such toys, if they are in the fashion; and truly, had any thing
in Religion changed or degenerated from its first Principles there would
certainly some one of them Commemorate it: But no one at all either of a good
or bad genius toward us has discovered the thing, or so much as signified it.
For instance, our Adversaries grant, (neither can they do otherwise) that the
Church of Rome was sometime Holy, Catholic and Apostolic; moreover it
deserved this Encomium from St. Paul, Your Faith is Preached in the whole
World, Romans 1. v. 8. Romans 1. v. 9. To. 15. v. 29 Romans 16. v. 19. Act. 28. 1
Pet. 5. v. 13. Hieron. in ca. scrip. Eccl. and Papias apud Ens. 2. hist. 15.
Phil. 4 v. 3. Ire. lib. 3. ca. 3.
without intermission, I make mention of you, I know because coming to you, I
come to you in the abundance of the blessing of Christ; they salute you all of
the Church of Christ, for your obedience is divulged unto every place; And
'twas then when Paul had the liberty of the Prison and did sow the Gospel, Then
when Peter did govern the Church at Rome, Then when Clemens, very commendable
in the sight of the Apostle, did fill the Chair, Then when the profane Caesar's,
Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Antonine, did torment the Popes of Rome; then also, as
Calvin witnesses, when Damasus, Syricius, Anastasius, Innocentius, did fill
the Apostolic Chair, for in this Age they grant none but Rome has deviated
from the Evangelical Doctrine. When therefore Rome had corrupted its Faith so
earnestly celebrated, when it ceased to be what it was before. At what time,
under what Pope, after what manner, by what force, with what increase did
another Religion invade the City and the World? What Votes, what Ryots, what
Lamentations did it beget? All the rest of the World were asleep while Rome,
Rome, I say, had new Sacraments, a new Sacrifice, and a new Model of Religion
on the Anvil. Is there no Historian either Latin or Greek, far nor near, would
lay this unto his Commentaries? Therefore this certainly is evident; if we do
believe any thing, much History and various, the Messenger of Truth, the life
of memory would fluently speak and repeat it, those things which they do
obtrude, no Modern relation can authorize in the Church: The Historians are for
me, and my Adversaries Incursions very cold, Vide Cocle. in Anno. 1523.
which cannot move any one, unless it is first received; all Christians of all
times fell into gross Treachery and into the Lake of Hell, till Luther Ravished
Bora.

The Eighth Reason.
BUt (most excellent Men) when I consider the monstrous Paradoxes.
opinions of men concerning Heresies, I had some with me which will come in the
way to be Confuted; I may condemn my self of Sloth and Madness, if I should
fear the faculty or force of any one in trying me. Let him be Ingenious,
Eloquent, let him be Active, let him be well Read in Books: he will necessarily
seem dry, when he shall Defend things so impossible, he shall be disputed with,
De Deo. l. Call inst. lib. 1 cap. 18. li. 2. c. 4. li. 3 cap. 23. and 24. Pet.
M^r. 1. Sa 2. Melanthan in. ca. Romans 8. Wit. ^em 1524.
if he refuses these, of God, of Christ, of Man, of Sin, of Justice, of the
Sacraments, of Manners. I will see whether they dare to affirm those things
which they think, and those things which they accounting as necessary do
divulge as the Scripture ( viz.) God is the Author and cause of my Sin,
Willing, Suggesting, Effecting, Commanding, Laboring, and Governing the
Diabolical Counsels of the Wicked: Sic docet Lu. in asser. 36. and in resel
ass. 36. and in li. de ser. arbit. Praefat. in anco Phil in ^pi^^^^ Romans In
Apol. 1. Eccl. Aaglic. Vide enc. pro. ann. 1543. De Christo. Instit. lib. eap.
13. nn. 25. and 24. Beza. in Hes. Beza contra Smidel. li. de unita. hyposta.
duas in Christ. not. Calvin Joan 10. Luth. cont. Latom. Buc. in Lu. 2. Call. i^
haer. aeu. Luc. L^s Item Melan in ^^an. do 1. post Epiph. Marlerat. in Matt.
26. Call. in ar. Evarng. Bren. in Luc. part 2. hom. 65 and in Catecar. 1551. and
in Jo. hon. 54. Call. in har. evang. In eand. sentent. Loss. in Matt. 26.
Schmid. Conci de pass. and caena Dom. Epinus. comm. in Pl. 16. Calvin instit.
l. 2. ca. 16. Brent. in Catecb. 1551. Insti. lib. 2. c. 16. nu. 12. 1. Tim. 2.
Apoc. 2. Bucer in Matt. 26. De homine. Illyr. in var. li. de Ori. pecc. Call.
Insti. lib. 2. ca. 3. Sarcer. de cons. vet. Eccl. Epi. and imb. and pec. Sanct.
Kemp. cont. censu. Call. De peccato Illyr. in var. li. de Orig. pec. Vide
Heshus. in epis. ad Illyr. Call. in An tido. Conc. Trid. idem docuerat Wide.
apud Walden. lib. 2. de Sacra. c. 154.
It was the proper work of God, so was the calling of Paul, the Adultery of
David, and the wickedness of the Traitor Judas. This Monster which sometime
Philip was ashamed of, yet Luther, from whom Philip had it, as an Heavenly
Oracle, extolled it with wonderful praise, and his Scholar, for that he did not
much differ from the Apostle St. Paul. I will ask also of what Spirit Luther
was, whom the English Calvinists term a Man Divinely inspired to enlighten the
World, when he took this from the Litany of the Church, Holy Trinity one God
have mercy one us. By and by I will go to the Person of Christ, I will see what
they would have to themselves there: Christ the Son of God, Son of the God
Calvin. God of himself Beza, he is not begot of the Essence of the Father; also
their are two Hypostatical Unions constituted in Christ, one of the Soul with
the Flesh, another of Divinity with the Humanity. There is a place in St. John,
I and my Father are one, he does not show Christ God of the same Substance with
the Father, but my Soul also, says Luther, hates this word (...): go forward.
Christ from his Infancy was not perfect in Grace but in the Dowries of the mind
as other men, he grew older becoming more wise by use, so that the Youth
Labored with Ignorance which is as much truly as to say he was contaminated
with Original Sin and Vice: but know those things which are more horrid. Christ
when Praying in the Garden sweat Water* and Blood, was amazed with the sense of
Eternal Damnation, he cried out with a loud Voice without Reason, without
Spirit, a sudden Voice with the Impetuosity of Grief, which being not well
Premeditated he severely rebuked. Is there any thing more? Christ when he was
Nailed on the Cross cried out my God, my God, etc. He was Kindled with the
Flames of Hell, he sent out the Voice of despair, no otherwise affected than if
he was in everlasting Death, also they add what they can to these. Christ they
say Descended to Hell, (viz.) being Dead tasted of Hell, no less than the Souls
of the Damned unless that they were restored by him. For even as corporal Death
profits nothing, so the Soul also ought to struggle with everlasting death, and
after this manner weigh our wickedness and punishment, and lest any one should
by chance think that this crept into Calvin through neligence, the same Calvin
calls all them, if any of them revolved that Doctrine of Comfort, damned
Knaves. O the times you have nourished this Monster; that delicate and Royal
Blood which Sprung out of the torn, and cleft Body of the Lamb, every drop of
whose Blood, by means of the Dignity of the Host, could redeem a 1000 Worlds,
profited nothing to manking unless the Mediator of God and Man, Christ Jesus
had made also the second Death, the Death of the Soul, the Death of Grace;
partaker of Sin alone: Execrable Blasphemy. Bucer will seem modest in respect
of this madness, although he is impudent, who accounts, the Grave Hell in a
symbol, by a vain preposterous repetition, and Tautology rather: The English
Calvinists have recourse to Calvin their Idol, part to Bucer their great
master, part also have murmured against this article lest it should cause any
more trouble, since that 'twas exempted from the Symbol without noise, that
also was attempted in a Conventicle at London. I remember Rich. Cheney who was
there, told me so, a very Old Man, who had been injuriously Fined by the
Plunderers abroad, and could not enter into his Fathers House. So far
concerning Christ, what concerning Man? The Image of God was quite razed out in
man, no spark of good was quick in him, his whole nature as to all the parts of
his Soul was so extremely revered, that truly he was not at all Holy, there is
nothing else within him but coruption and contagion: To what purpose are are
these things? That they who got Glory by Faith only, wallowing in the Dunghill
of their filthiness may accuse nature, despair of virtue, and disburthen
Precepts. Hither Illyricus the chief of the Magdeburgenses, added his direful
opinion of Original Sin, which he would have to be the inward substances of the
Soul, for those since Adams Fall the Devil procreates and makes like himself.
This also is trivial, in this case all sins are alike, so (lest the Stoics
should revive) they are weighed by God the Judge, although God that just Judge
should add a heap to our Burden rather than an easement, and should heap up
that which is not in the thing, when he is just: The Cook who killed a Dunghill
Cock when there was no need of him, did no less offend against God, the
righteous Judge, than that Assassinator, who Beza like, being disguised in
Drink, killed the Duke of Guise, a Prince of great worth, with his Hand Gun,
than which Exploit the world never saw any thing in our Age more Dolorous and
Lamentable. But, perhaps they which are in this state of Sin, Degratia. Luth.
in Resp. corta Louan. Bucer. in Joan. 1. Wald. in not. Christi. Brent. ho. 12.
in Joan Cent. li. 1. cap. 4.
being bad, do much Philosophize of Divine Grace, which can heal and succor
this Sin: But Graces do assign those famous parts, which they report neito be
infused in our hearts, nor be of force to resist wickedness, but are placed
without us in the favor of God alone, which favor cannot amend the Wicked,
nor cleanse them, nor illuminate them, nor enrich them, but the old Sink, as
yet remaining and waxing rank, that it should not seem stinking and odious, God
winking at it they conceal. With this their Sophism they are so delighted, that
with them indeed Christ cannot be said to be full of Grace and Truth, than that
God the Father has favored him in a wonderful manner. -- What then therefore
is justice? De justitia Hesh. de inst. in re. s. ad 115. object. Illy. in Apol,
conf. Antwer. ca. 9. de justifi. Calvi. inst. lib. 3. ca 2. nu. 28. and 42.
Matt. 12. Luc. 12. Instit. l. 3. c. 2. nu. 4. Luth. lib. de Capt. Babylon. De
Sacramentis. Calvin. Insti. li, 4. ca. 15. nu. 2. and 10. and 7. Cent. 1. li.
1. c. 10. Luth. lib. de. Cap. Baby.
A relation, for it is not trimmed up out of Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope,
and Charity, which do cloth the mind with its splendor, but only the hiding a
fault, which could he that has Faith alone comprehend, he is sure of
Salvation, and e're long will enjoy the infinite joy of Heaven. -- Let it be
so, let this sleep, but how will it be evident concerning future Perseverance,
which whosoever wants makes an unhappy Exit, although for a time he worships
Justice purely and piously? Yea truly, this is thy Faith, Calvin says so,
unless he firmly foretells thy Perseverance to thee, as thou can not be
deceived, thou would be despised as empty and faint. And again Luther. A
Christian also says he, cannot willingly lose Salvation unless he will not
believe. I hasten to the Sacraments, none, none, not two, not one, O Christ,
have they left, for their Bread is Poison. Baptism, although it be yet true,
yet in their judgment it is nothing, it is not the Water of Health, nor the
Channel of Grace, it does not derive Christ's Merits unto us, but it is only a
signification of Health; therefore they make no more of the Baptism of Christ,
according to the nature of the thing, than the ceremony of John. If you have
it, well, if you want it, no loss; believe thou art saved before thou art
washed: Magd. cent. 2. and 5. cap. 4. Luth. advers. Cochlae. Item episto ad
Melaa. 2. 2. and in ep Wallden. Anabaptista. Apoc. 13. De morihus. Ser. de
Matri. and Lib. de vit. cont. and ass ar. 16. lib. de vo. Euan. Li. de. vo.
Monasticis. Charc. li. in Cens. suum. Luth ser. de Pet. Item in aspert. art.
lib. 32. lib. de ser. arb. and ser. de Moys. Item lib. de capt. Bab. cap. of
the Euch. of holy order. of Baptism.
What then, the Infants, who unless they are saved by their own Faith, to their
own misery obtain nothing. Rather than we should attribute any thing to the
Sacrament of Baptism, say the Magdeburgici, we grant that there is Faith in
Infants by which they may be saved; they understand some hidden impulsions of
Faith; that they live, and do not as yet understand, is hard: If this be so
hard, hearken to the Physic of Luther; It is better to omit it, since that
unless an Infant believes, he cannot be washed. These things, they say; being
doubtful in mind, they affirm any thing categorically: Therefore Baltasar
Pacimentanus the parter of strife, intervenes; who being the Parent of the
Anabaptists, could not feign the motion of Faith in Infants, approved of
Luthers caution, and casting Paedo-baptism out of the Churches; he decreed that
no body should be washed in the Holy Font, unless ripe of age. That which
appertains to the rest of the Sacraments, although the many-headed Beast may
cast out horrid Contumelies, yet because they are daily buzzed in their Ears, I
pass it by here. The most Nocent fragments of the Lives and Manners of
Heriticks, which Luther has spewed out in his writings, that with one impure
Gale of his Breath he would breath the Plague into his Readers; hear patiently
and blush, and pardon me which recites them, if a Wife will not, or cannot let
the Maid come, for to have to do with a Wife, is as necessary as Meat, Drink,
Sleep. Matrimony is much more excellent than Virginity; St. Paul has dissuaded
Christians from it. But these things perhaps are proper only to Luther; They
are not; even now it was defended by Chark, but miserably and fearfully. Will
you have any more? What else? By how much the more Wicked you are, so much the
nearer Grace. All good actions, God being judge, are Mortal Sins; God being
favorable, are light ones; no body thinks evil at his own will. Apol. Eccl.
Angl.
The Decalogue is nothing to Christians, God does not regard our Works: Those
only rightly partake of the Lords Supper, who bring sad, afflicted, troubled,
confused, wandering Consciences. Crimes are to be confessed, but to whom? If any
have absolved thee even in a jest, you are absolved, in case you have believed.
To read hourly Prayers is not the part of Priests, but of the Laity, Christian
Children, are from the Statutes of Men. I have stirred this Sink enough, and
too much, now I will end; neither truly can you think me more unjust, who have
promiscuously reproved the Lutherans and Zuinglians, for they being mindful
from whence they sprung, would be Brethren and Friends amongst themselves, and
interpret it a grievous injury, when they are discriminated in any thing
besides one. Truly I am not of such a value, that I should take a mean place to
my self, amongst the select Divines, who have to day proclaimed War against
Heresies; but this I know, of how great value soever I am, I cannot be in
danger, whilst supported by Christ's Grace: I will, Heaven and Earth helping me,
maintain the War against such Devices, so envious, so dull, and so brutish.

The Ninth Reason.
IT IS well known that among the Blind, Sophisms.
sometimes the Moon-Eye reigns; amongst the Ignorant, oftentimes a Fallacious
Disputation is prevalent which is hissed out in the Schools: Our Adversaries
offend much in this kind, but for the most part it is tacked together with 4
Fallacies, which I had rather unfold in the University than in the Street. The
first Schiamachia, Schiamachy.
which beats the Ears with a great blustering, in this manner: In unmarried men
sworn and vowed unto Chastity, that Marriage is good, but Virginity is better;
Scriptures are brought speaking honorably of Marriage; whom do they fight
against? The desert of a Christian Man, died with Christ's Blood, otherwise
there are no Testimonies drawn, by which we are commanded not to trust to
Nature nor the Law, but the Blood of Christ: Whom do they argue against?
Against those who Worship Saints as the most gracious Servants of Christ; there
are whole Pages cited, which forbid them to Worship many Gods: Where are they?
These Arguments which as I find are infinite among Heretics, cannot be to our
damage, it may be for you an object of Derision. -- Another Vice is Logomachy,
Logomachy.
which deserting the Senses do quarrel with a word: Show me the Mass or
Purgatory in Holy Scriptures: In 1. part. q. 13. art. 2. ad 3.
What then? Trinity, (...) Person, are no where in the Bibles, because they are
not words? a carping at Letters is a kin to this, when custom and mind of
speakers being neglected; that which is the life of the word is contended with
the Elements: For so they say, Presbyter is nothing else in Greek than Seniour,
the Sacrament any Mystery. But D. Thomas says, in words, we must take heed that
all things are not taken so much ex quo as ad quid. -- The third is Homonymia,
Homonymia. Apoc. 5
of long and large extent, as to what purpose is the Order of Priests, when
John called us all Priests? also he subjoined this, We will reign upon the
Earth: To what end therefore are Kings? Also, the Prophet celebrates the
Spiritual Feast, that is, Abstinence from inveterate Crimes. Therefore let
choice of foods, and set days prevail. Is it so, therefore Moses, David, Elias,
Baptistes, Apostles were mad, who determinated the fasting of the Week to 2 or
3 days, which indeed is a perpetual crime: You see now what it is, I make have.
-- The fourth is added to this Circulation, Circulation.
after this manner: Give me, I say, the marks of your Church, the Word of God,
and the most pure Sacraments. What are these with you? who doubts it? But I
deny it. Counsel the word of God; I have Counseled it already, and I less
favor you than I did before; ah! but yet it is plain. Prove it to me, because
indeed we do not depart the breadth of a nail from the Word of God. Where is
your Wit? you will always take for an Argument that which is put in the
Question. How often do I inculcate this! Do not thou watch me? Are not the
Torches to be removed? I say, the Word of God to be a little explained by thee?
I have 15 Ages witnesses, stand to the sense, not mine nor thine, but of these
all. I will stand to the sense of the Word of God: Joan. 3.
Where the Spirit will, it breathes. Behold what circles, what wheels does he
make: This is a Trifler, a Coiner of so many words and sophistries; I know not
to whom he cannot be deceitful, he may be troublesome perhaps. Your Prudence
will raise the trouble, the thing will cast away fear.

The Tenth Reason.
THis will be to you a direct way, All sorts of Witnesses. Esa. 35.
so that Fools cannot err by it: For who is there, although dull in a
Commonwealth, when desirous of Salvation, has considered a little, does not
see and hold the Path of the Church so well plained, detesting both Brambles
and Rocks, and inaccessible places. These things also shall be desired by the
Ignorant, as Isaias foretold. To you also, if you would have it very
desirously, we lay a prospect of the Scene of things before your Eyes: What is
more we Err in, all things to us affords an argument. Let us go into Heaven;
(...) Aug. ser 37 de Sanct. Dam in vit. Pom. Romans Hier. in cat. Sorip.
let us contemplate Roses and Lillies, purpled with Martyrdom, white with
Innocence. Three and Thirty Popes slain together: the Pastors in all Nations,
who pawned their Blood for the Name of Christ, the Flocks of the Faithful who
traced their Pastors steps, all the Heavenly Saints with crowds of men shining
forth with Purity and Holiness; thou may see ours lived here, but ours are
removed from hence; ours was Ignatius, (that I may take a smack of few things)
m^st thirsty of Martyrdom, In Epi. ad Smir. Eu. seb. lib. 3. cap. 30. c. Dam in
vit. Teles. ^^. 1. ^onae. star. d. 5. Lib. 3. c. 3. Eus. 5. hi. 24 Eus. 4. Eus
4. 14. Suidas. Eus. 7. hist. 2. interp. Ruff.
Who in Ecclesiastical affairs equaliz'd none, yea not the King himself, with a
Bishop: Who committed many Apostolical Traditions, of which he himself was
witness, to writing. Our Anchorite Telesphorus, who commanded the Fast of Lent,
being established by the Apostles, to be more severely observed. Our Irenaeus,
who derived the Apostolic Faith from the Succession of the Roman See. Ours was
Pope Victor, who restrained all Asia with his Edict, which did seem so sharp to
some, and also to Irenaeus, a very Holy Man, yet no body envied it as a Foreign
Power. Our Polycarp, who went to Rome upon the Query of the Passover, whose
burnt Relics Smyrna gathered up, reverencing their Bishop on an Anniversary
day, and with particular ceremonies. Our Cornelius and Cyprian, a Golden Pair
of Martyrs, both great Bishops, but greater was he who being a Roman,
suppressed the African Heresy: Who, being renowned for his vigilance,
Prosecuted his own Predecessor. Our Sextus, to whom waiting at the Altar, Seven
Angels appeared. Our Arch Deacon Laurence, whom our Adversaries struck out of
their Calender, although so much extolled by Prudentius, in him, de S. Laur.

Ours those blessed Virgins, Caecilia, Agatha, Anastasia, Barbara, Agnes,
Lucia, Dorothy, Catherine, who established their devoted Chastity, against the
Tyranny both of Men and Devils. Our Hellen, whom the Festival of Inventio
Crucis Celebrates. Our Monica, who dying most religiously, desired to be Prayed
for after her Death. Our Paula, who from a Palace, fled into a Cave of
Bethlehem, although a stranger in so great a Journey, to attend the Person of
Christ. Ours Paul, Hilarion, Antony, who retired into a Wilderness. Our
Satyrus, Brother-in-law to St. Ambrose, who carrying the Consecrated Host about
him, in danger of Shipwreck leaped into the Ocean, Amb. in Orat fu. de Satyro.
and being full of Faith, Swam out again. Our Bishops, Nicolas, and Martin,
exercised in Watches, Fenced in with Turfes, fed with fasting. Our Benedict the
Father of so many Monks. I could not finish those Chiliads in ten years.
Neither do I repeat those which I ranked before amongst the Doctors of the
Church. I am mindful of shortness. Let them inspect those as will, in the
Fertile History of the Ancients, or rather in the most Grave Authors; who
almost each of them, have left each of the Saints to memory. Let any one
declare to me out of those most Ancient and blessed Books what he thinks?
whether they are Catholic Doctrine, or Lutheran. I call the throne of God to
witness, and that Tribunal before which I shall stand, to give the Reason of
these Reasons; Word and Deed, whether there is no Heaven or whether it is ours:
If there is we embrace it, if not, we defy it. Now on the contrary, if you
will, let us look into Hell. They are burnt with everlasting fire; who? the
Jews, what Church were they averse to? Ours. Who? the Gentiles. What Church did
they most cruelly Persecute? Ours. Who? the Turks: Whose Temples did they
demolish? Ours: Who? Heretics; Mat. 16.
of whose Church were they Enemies? Ours: For what Church besides ours has
opposed it self against the Gates of Hell.

When the Jews being banished, Eus. 4. hi. 5.
the Christians settled at Jerusalem: Good God! What concourse of People
resorted to the Holy Tabernacles; what the Festival of the Sepulcher, what of
the Manger, what of the Cross, what of all Saints, with which as it were with
the Ornaments of a Spouse they were delighted? Hence arose the fierce and
implacable hatred of the Jews toward us. Also they say now, our Ancestors were
the cause of their own destruction, but they received no blow from Simon Magus
or the Lutherans.

The Gentiles were very furious, who in a small space of time brought most
miserable Persecutions on the Christians: On whom? The Fathers and Sons of our
Church. Hear ye the voice of the Tyrant who Roasted St. Lawrence on a
Grid-iron; of which See Prudentius in him. de S. Laur.

Against whom does he rage? The Holy things of whose Church, Lamps, Rites and
Ornaments, does he root out? To whom does he envy Golden Dishes and Silver
Chalices, and rich Treasure? To us: Indeed it is Luther like. For what other
Veil did his Nimrods cloud their Robberies with, Genesis 10. Dam. in Syl. Zor^^^^.
C^^r. Eus. lib 2. (...) cont. cap. 7. 8. 9. S^zom. lib. 1. cap. 9.
when they did Rob the Churches, and Dissipate the Patrimony of Christ? And
again, Constantine the Great, that terror of Heretics, what Church did he
quiet? That which Pope Sylvester presided over, when he Christened him with our
Baptism. With what sign was he Victorious? with the sign of the Cross: What
Mother was he Glorious in? Hellen: To what Fathers did he apply himself? To the
Nicene: Of what sort? To Sylvester, to Mark, to Julius, to Athanasius, to
Nicolas: Whose Prayers did he commend himself to? Athan. in vita. S. Anton.
Theodor. lib. ^. hist. cap. 6
Anthonys: What Seat did he desire in the Synod? The lowest: Much more
Prince-like was he in that Seat, than if he had ambitiously desired an honor
not becoming him. To tell of all things would be long, but of these two, the
one being prejudicial to us, the other advantageous; it is not amiss to
conjecture of things by their similitudes; for as theirs was a turbulent
Epitasis, so ours was a Divine Catastrophe.

Let us view the affairs of the Turks: Turks. Zonoras. Vide Velat. Jovium.
Emil. lib 8. Blon. lib. 9. de c.
Mahomet, and Sergius the Apostate Monk, lie howling in Hell, loaded with their
own and their posteritys wickedness. This monstrous and many headed Beast, the
Saracens, Turks; this furious Erinnys, I say, by Luther and Luthers means (to
whom the progress of the Turks seemed grateful, and who was congratulated in
this Emergency) had totally depopulated Europe, unless they had been suppressed
by our Files, by our Princes and People; and with no less diligence had
demolished Altars and Crosses than Calvin himself: Therefore they were our
Enemies, insomuch as by our industry they were repulsed, to the saving of the
Christians Throats.

Let us behold Heretics, Heretics. Clem. lib. 1. recog. Iroen. lib. 1. cap.
2. Cyp. Ep. ad Jubatum and lib. 4. ep. 2. Theodo. de fab. Haeres. Aug. haer.
46. 53. 54. Epiph. haer. 75. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 28. Hier. in Iou. and Vigil.
Aug. haer. 82.
Bellows and Fuel for Hell fire. Up starts Simon Magus: What did he? He took
from Man the liberty of free will; he boasted of Justification by Faith only.
Next Novatianus: What was he? An Adversary to Pope Cornelius, he spoke against
Penance and Extreme Unction. Then Manes the Persian who taught That Baptism
did not avail any thing to Salvation. Next Aerius the Arrian, who condemned
Prayers for the Dead, and placed Priests and Bishops in the same Sphere, was
Surnamed (...), as Lucian was. Vigilantius follows, who would not have the
Saints Prayed to: And Jovinianus, who ranked Virginity and Marriage in the same
Predicament: Then a whole Ring, Macedonius, Pelagius, Nestorius, Eutiches,
Monothelitae Iconomachi, etc. to which Posterity add Luther and Calvin: What
are they? All alike, all revolted from our Church, and by her were Condemned
and Excommunicated.

Let us leave Hell, The Earth. Seeds Apostolica. Epist. 162. Vide Ter. de
praeser. Aug. lib. 2. de Doctr. Christ. c. 8. Disiunctissima terrarum.
and survey the Earth: Wheresoever I turn my self, Patriarchs, Apostles,
Bishops of all Nations, Princes, Kings, Caesar's, Antiquity, Light of Reason;
all Voted for us. Witness the Succession of Popes at Rome, whose Bishops (as
St. Austin says) always flourished as Supreme: Witnesses the other Apostolical
Sees, (where his name has been divulged) built by the Apostles themselves and
their hearers.

Witnesses the Pastors of all Nations, who every where agreed in our Religion:
Hier. in Cat. scrip. Eccles. and alii.
Ignatius and Chrysostom at Antioch; Peter, Alexander, Athanasius, Theophilus
at Alexandria; Macarius and Cyril at Jerusalem; Proclus at Constantinople,
Gregory and Basil in Cappadocia, Thaumaturgus in Pontus, Polycarp at Smyrna,
Justin at Athens, Dionysius at Corinth, Gregory at Nyssa, Methodius at Tire,
Ephreemus in Syria, Cyprian, Optatus, Augustine in Africa; Epiphanius in Cyprus,
Andreas at Crete, Ambrose, Paulinus, Gaudentius, Prosper, Faustus, Vigilius, in
Italy; Ireneus, Martinus, Hillary, Eucherius, Gregory, Salvianus in France;
Vincentius, Orosius, Hildephonse, Leander, Isidore, in Spain; in Britain,
Fugatius, Damian, Justus, Mellitus, Beda. Lastly, lest I should seem ambitious
in Names, whatsoever either works or fragments of theirs remain, who have
Preached the Gospel in the most remote parts of the World, all those do exhibit
to us one Faith, which to day we Catholics do profess. O Christ! What occasion
shall I afford unto thee to disinherit me, if I should prefer so few, and those
obscure, wicked, and unlearned men, before so many lights of the Church.

Witnesses also, Princes.
Princes, Kings, Caesar's, and their noble Subjects, whose Piety has settled
them in this our Catholic Church. Vide 12. Tom. Sur.
The Theodosius's in the East, the Charles's in the West, the Edwards in
England, the Lewes's in France, the Hermingilds in Spain, the Henrys in Saxony,
the Wenceslaus of Bohemia, Leopolds of Austria, the Stephens of Hungary,
Josaphats of India: What Princes and Governors can I mention, who have
propagated our Church by their good Example, by their Arms, by their Laws, by
their Trouble and Cost? For so Isaias foretold, That Kings should be thy
Nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Nursing Mothers. Hear ye Protestant Princes, to
you so great a Prophet sings, he teaches you your Lesson. I tell you, one
Heaven cannot contain Calvin, and the forementioned Princes, therefore join
your selves to them, worthy of your Ancestors, worthy of your Praises, worthy
of your Fortune. This thing only do I endeavor for you, and I will endeavor
it, as far as it is in my power, to whom as an Enemy to your Crowns you have so
often threatened Martyrdom. Welcome good Cross. That day, that day will come,
which will clearly demonstrate to you who are your friends, the Jesuits or the
Lutherans. Further,

Witnesses are all the Coasts and Climates of the world, to whom the
Evangelical Trumpet has Sounded since Christ's Birth. Are these small things to
take away all pretense for Idols, to imply a Kingdom of God on Earth? Luther
Preaches Christ; 1. Cor. 1.
we Catholics Preach Christ. Is Christ divided? No: Either his Christ is false
or ours. What then? I say, he is their Christ who is an Enemy to Baal; ours,
who by his means banishes Jupiter, Mercury, Diana, Phoebus, Erebus, out of the
minds of men. My time fails me, I must presently draw the Curtain, only take a
view of some things near home: viz. Of the Irish from St. Patrick, the Scots
from Pelagius, the English from St. Augustine, Roman Devota's, Roman Missioners,
either they embraced no Religion, or certainly ours, viz. the Catholic. The
thing is plain, I acquiesce.

Witnesses are the Universities, witnesses are the Records, witnesses the
Inauguration of Caesar's, and the Ceremonies and Coronation of Kings: Witnesses
are the Orders of Knighthood and Chivalry: Witnesses the Windows, Moneys and
City Gates: That no Religion but ours was ever established from the beginning.
Which things revolving, and considering I had to do with men in a desperate
and damnable state, I was animated (I do not deny) and inflamed to a Combat, in
which unless the Saints are driven from Heaven, and proud Lucifer recovers his
Empire, I shall never be overthrown. How much better is Chark than I, who has
so bitterly railed at me? If I had rather entrust this sinful Soul to the safe
way, to the sure way, than expose it to the Quicksands and Rocks of Calvin.

The Conclusion.
YE have of me now (most flourishing Academicks) the context of my work,
performed at leisure in my Journey. I had a mind to clear my self of arrogance,
and satisfy you of my confidence, and in the mean while, you being invited
with me unto the Schools, to propose some wholesome things to be chewed upon. If
you do think it just, if safe, if honest, to account of Luther or Calvin, the
Canons of Scripture, a private Spirit as the rule of the Church, instructor of
Councils, and Fathers, there is nothing I can hope for, you being Readers and
Hearers. But if you are those whom I have drawn in the Scheme of my mind,
Philosophers, lovers of Truth, Sincerity, Modesty: Enemies of Rashness,
Sophistry, and Babbling; you will easily see the open day, who now see it
Glimmering. I speak boldy, because my love toward you, your danger, and the
weightiness of the Province requires it. The Devil knows that if you will open
your Eyes, you will behold the light of Truth. For is it not an object of
amazement, that Hanmer and Charke, should be preferred before Christian
Antiquity; but there are some Lutheran Baits, by which he propagates his
Kingdom, and Inveigles many in your Sphere. What are they? Gold, Glory,
Delights, Pleasures: contemn them. For what else are they than the Scum of the
Earth, a Hoarse air, a Feast for the Worms, Specious Dunghils? despise them.
Christ is full, he will feed us: He is King who will honor us: He is Rich, who
will endow us with all Felicity: Recommend your selves to him in the Field,
that with him ye truly Learned, and truly Famous, may return Triumphant.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13. l. 22. for the Doctrine of the Penitent Myrrh Tree, r. the Doctrine
of Repentance: p. 16. l. 10. for ask r. asked, p. 21. l. 17. for attempted r.
held forth, l. 36. insert with them, p. 25. l. 17. for Therefore let choice of
Foods, and set days prevail, r. Farewell choice of Foods, and set days. l. 28.
for nail r. hair.


