THE Campaign OF THE FRENCH KING, In the Year 1677.

In which is described exactly the three Sieges and taking in of Valenciennes
by assault, and of the Town and Citadel of Cambray, and of St. Omers, with an
account of the Battle of Cassel.

Licensed Sept. the 6th, 1678.

Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Dring, at the Harrow at the corner of Chancery Lane
in Fleet Street. 1679.

THE CAMPAIGN OF THE French King In the Year 1677, etc.
NO sooner had those puissant Parties, who were engaged in a war, that had
divided almost all Europe, seen the conclusion of the Campaign 1676 and the
beginning of the Year 1677, but they began with equal heat and diligence to put
their Armies into a condition to enter upon action, and to give Life to those
Negotiations on foot, which might be advantageous to them.

The Estate of the Courts of Europe.
The Imperialists being re-assured by the Peace made with the Rebels of
Hungary, and the Circles of the Empire being full of hopes for the carrying the
War on the other side of the Rhine, every one for their parts formed very
strong Armies. The Spaniards, to show the Vigor of the new Government of Don
John, seemed to cover the Mediterranean with Ships, and all Catalonia with
Soldiers: and making them in the low Countries to expect mighty sums for their
releif. The Hollanders vexed at the evil success of the last Campaign, did not
only undertake to recrute their Troops, but also to increase them by new
Levies. France who alone regarding these preparations of so puissant Enemies,
was not asleep, but put it self into a condition to resist all their
endeavors. The chance of Arms on the other side being against the King of
Denmark, the King of the Sweeds at the head of his victorious Army thought of
nothing else but of reconquering those places which they had taken from him.

In the mean time the Assembly at Nimegen for the general Peace came together
slowly, and though the Ambassadors from all parties had waited on his Majesty
the King of England, who was chosen for a Mediator, it might be easily judged,
that for the most part those Princes who had sent them, had several Interests
in prospect.

The Voyage of Flanders resolved on.
Things being in this condition, after the French King had ordered a
considerable part of his Armies for the Rhine, for Catalonia, and for Sicily,
he formed out of the Troops that were left a flourishing army for Flanders, and
resolved to command it himself in person. He declared at the same time the
general Officers which he had chosen to serve him in the several Provinces. The
names of the Commanders of the French Army.
He gave to Marshal Crequi the command of the Army in Germany. To the Marshal
Duke de Navailes that of the Army of Catalonia. The Marshal Duke de Vivonne was
continued in Sicily. And the Marshal de Humieres, de Schomberg and Luxemburg,
Feuillade and Lorges were nominated to Command in Flanders under the Kings
Orders.

The resolution of the French Kings departure was published on the 25th of
February, The Kings resolution surprises every body.
and equally surprised both the Court, the Officers of his Armies French and
Strangers. The Season so little proper for Military Actions, the Campaign
unfurnished of Forage, the Feasts and divertisements, which the King had made
public, to hide his secret designs, had deceived them all. He had no Equipage
ready and yet he must have it, and would depart within three days.

The Duke de Villa Hermosa Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, Chiefly the
Duke De Villa Hermosa.
seeing so great plenty of Forage and provision which they had made on the
Frontiers, did not amuse himself with the rigours of the Winter, and not at all
doubting but that the French were about to come thundering down upon him all on
a sudden, he aforehand reenforced his Garrisons, and provided what was necessary
in all places which he was able to succor, and which he thought lay most in
danger of Siege. He also employed with great industry and indefatigable care
and pains those Sums of Money which they had remitted him out of Spain to put
his Troops in good condition, and he extremely pressed the Hollanders to join
themselves with him, that they might jointly oppose what ever the French should
go about to enterprise.

The French Kings departure.
The Sunday Morning being 18th of February, the King departs from the Castle of
St. Germains where he left the Queen and Monsieur the Dauphin: The most parts
of the Princes, Dukes and Lords of the Court following him, in the quality of
Volunteers. The same day he arrived in Champaine, the first of March he lay at
Chauny, the second at St. Quintin, the third at Cate-cambresis, Arrives at
Valencienes.
and the fourth he came to the Camp before Valenciennes, before the Equipage
was arrived there: and then it was that he first began to discover a part of
his Intentions.

The French King the last year had laid the foundation of the Enterprises,
which he since so gloriously achieved. Those who did not penetrate into the
business of the Conquest of Conde and Bouchain, and who condemned the
endeavors which had been made on Flanders, because they believed it more
necessary to conserve our Frontiers on the side of the Rhine, now were able to
perceive die weakness of their reasoning. For indeed these two places did
incommode those of Hanault and Cambresis and hindered them from all kind of
communication: the Baron of Quincy with a flying Camp reducing them to
extremity. He being a native of the Country, knew perfectly all the Coast, and
understanding War so well as he did, he not only hindered all commerce between
those places, but so opposed those Spaniards on that side, that they were not
able to make any inroads into Picardy, nor receive those contributions they had
established there; nor subsist in their Garrisons without much trouble. These
courses of the Baron of Quincy, and the Magazins which they had made on the
Frontiers in diverse places showed plain enough the designs that France might
have upon Mons, Valenciennes, St. Guilain, and Cambray; but besides, Ypres and
St. Omer being also menaced by the grand preparations of Arms and Munition
which they made on the side of Artois and of Boulonois, it was difficult to
judge the true intention of the French, and they never imagined that they would
enterprise more than one Siege at one time.

The Marquis de Louvois Secretary of State, The activity of the Marquis de
Louvois.
and chief minister for the carrying on of the War, had so ably managed all
things to forward the designs of the King, and had joined to his Counsels so
much care and pains, made voyages, and given orders so to the purpose, that
as soon as his Majesty arrived in the Camp, all things were in readiness to
begin the Campaign.

The Marshal the Duke of Luxembourg, who was departed from Court with this
Minister some days before the King, had inverted Valenciennes the twenty
eighth of February; and the better to hide the design of the Siege, the Marshal
de Humieres held Mons blocked up at the same time.

The disposition of the Siege.
The King immediately caused the Lines to be drawn himself, visited the Posts,
viewed the Place, and gave all necessary orders for the shutting up the
passages to hinder them from all manner of succor. The Camp increased
immediately by the arrival of several Troops and their Equipages, and by the
provisions which were continually brought thither from the Magazins, where they
had been stored up: So that within the space of eight days there were no less
than 50000 Combatants, which indeed appeared an incredible thing, considering
the rigor of the season, and the ill condition they might expect to find
themselves in, where a Country was desolate by the War. In the mean time
Monsieur Le Mot Marshal de Camp, and Monsieur de Mommont Brigadier of the
Infantry with these Troops which they commanded, did incommodate St. Omer in
Artois and gave a jealousy to Ypres. The Baron de Quincy Marshal de Camp and
Monsieur de Fit Brigadier of the Cavalry were at the Gates of Cambray. The
establishment of the Quarters.
The gross of the Army being come into the Camp, the King distributed their
Quarters. He took his own near to Famars, which was on that side where they
made the Attacques, and he chose the Marshal de Humieres and Feuillade to
command under his orders. The Duke of Luxemburg had his Quarter at Launoy. The
Marshal de Lorges at Mount Azin. These Posts were in so many Villages situate
on thee eminencies the most near to the place.

The situation and strength of the place.
Valenciennes is a place so important, that it may well deserve all these grand
preparations of an Army royal for the taking it. Its situation is very
advantageous, and the Emperor Valentinian found it so well fortified for
defense that he bestowed on it his Name. It Is also considerable for the people
which inhabit it, for its great commerce and for the reputation it has had for
having resisted great Armies. Besides its fortifications it is encompassed
about with two Rivers, the Escaut, and the Ronnel, with an inaccessible marsh,
and Sluices to drown all the country round about it. In fine, it is one of the
most important places not only of Hanault, but of all the low Countries.
Besides, the taking of it secures a part of Picardy and of Champaine and the
Countries of the French Conquest, takes away from Cambray all hopes of
succors, and advances the bounds of France even into the heart of Flanders.
All these thing being well known to the Spaniards as well as to the French,
they forgot nothing which might serve to save Valenciennes. The Duke de Villa
Hermosa endeavors its defense.
The Duke de Villa Hermosa had sent away this Commissary General toward
Dendermond with money to furnish the Magazins for the subsistence of his Army,
and for the furthering the advance of the Hollanders, who assembled together
about Rosendal with a design to march against the French.

The Garrison there.
They had in the place a 1000 Horse, an Italian Regiment of Foot commanded by
Silva. Two Regiments of Walloons, one commanded by the Count de Solres, the
other by Monsieur de Ostils sometimes Governor of Conde. Two Regiments of
Germans of the Marquis of Ledens, and 2000 select Burgeses; to whom they had
given Arms and Officers able to command them. It was abundantly furnished with
Artillery, and with all sorts of munition for War and provision for men: and a
great many both of the Nobility and of the country Paysants had put themselves
within it for its defense. The Count de Solres being it seems abroad when it
was invested, was fain to use his skill to enter again. The Marquis de
Richeboury, Brother to the Prince of Espinoy a man of Experience and Courage
commanded there in quality of Governor. He had inspired both the Soldiers and
the Inhabitants with a strong resolution to defend themselves to the very last
extremity, and had caused Gallouses to be set up in the cross Streets to
terrify the people that they might be no hindrance to their defense, and might
not dare to spread any Intelligence that might cause any mutiny, and in fine,
he had so well disposed the Garrison without and the Militia within, that he
might promise to himself a vigorous defense. All this they came to understand
by an Italian Officer of the Garrison who was taken in the Camp.

The continual Rains had stopped the Canon on the way, and hindered the King
that he could not give order for the opening the Trenches. But on the eighth,
they being come, he deferred it no longer; and gave order to attaque it in the
weakest places, which appeared to be at the Port of Cambray and that of Cardon:
The Attaque resolved.
but the difficulty of bringing thither their Canon made him resolve to command
the attaque to be made on the side of the Port of Azin, although the better
fortified. To this end they must first take a Crown Work, The Horn work
described.
defended by two Demy-Bastions with their Halfmoons advanced and with a strong
Palisado, a large ditch, and a good Counterscarp. But besides all this there
was a well furnished Halfmoon, which had Works on Front and a great ditch
betwixt two others, and a little before it an irregular Fort named the Pie or
the Horshooe, to which one Arm of the Escaut served for a ditch. They must
cross over the Escaut which ran with great rapidness along the ramparts of the
Town, separate by a little Fort. In spite of all these obstacles which appeared
not to be surmounted, they believed if they might be able once to render
themselves masters of this Crown-work, then to prepare their Batteries and
place their Morterpieces to fire the body of the Town, that they would be
obliged to capitulate rather than to see it reduced to ashes without costing
the King any thing but powder. So then his Majesty gave orders for the opening
the Trenches on the ninth or tenth of March, The opening of the Trenches.
and would needs assist in it himself to animate his Soldiers by his presence.

The Marshall Schomberg was the first that mounted the Guard with Count Bardi
Magolotti Lieutenant General, The ground of M. Schomberg.
the Count of St. Geran Marshal de Camp, the Marquis de Angeau Aid de Camp,
three Battalions of the Regiment of Guards of Picardy and Soissons: followed by
Monsier Javil Brigadier of the Cavalry with six Squadrons, two of the Companies
of the Corpse du Guard of Noailles and Duras, one of the Gens de Arms of Scotch
and English: and the others of the Colonel General master de Camp and of the
Kings. This last Body consisted of two thousand Soldiers drawn out of diverse
Regiments, who carried the Trench above six hundred paces toward the
Counterscarp. The besieged failed not to fire stoutly, but with little effect,
for there was but a few Soldiers and two Officers killed. The Marquis of
Livourn had his Horse killed under him by a Canon shot as he went to visit a
certain Post. The Governor is wounded.
The Marquis of Richbourg Governor of the place, being advanced to the out
Works was wounded that night in giving out orders, and his wound putting him in
a condition not to act, Monsieur Despres was put in his place, with full and
absolute power by the consent of all the Officers: this was not then known in
the Camp.

From the tenth to the twelfth at night they put a Blind at the head of the
Trench, The Guard of M. de Feuillade.
and made a place for their Arms. The Marshal de Feuillade was that day with
the Marquis de Renel Lieutenant general, the Marquis de Tilladet Marshal de
Camp, the Prince de Harcourt Aid de Camp at the head of two Battalions of the
Guards of Switzers, two of Navarre, one of Harcourt-Beuvron, and another of
Artois under Monsieur de Aubarede Brigadier of the Infantry sustained by the
Marquis de Revel Brigadier of the Cavalry at the head of the Squadrons of the
Corpse du Guard of Luxembourg and Lorges, of the Gend'armery of the Colonel
Master of the Camp and the Regiment of the King.

The Guard of M. de Luxembourg.
At the beginning of the eleventh night the King went himsels to see the Guard
mounted by the Marshal Luxembourg, the Marquis de Cardonnierre Lieutenant
General, the Chevalier de Sourdis, Marshal de Camp, Monsieur de Bartillade
Brigadier of the Cavalry, Monsieur de Tracy Brigadier of the Infantry, the
Marquis de Chiverny Aid de Camp, with the three last Battalons of the Guards,
and the two of Auvergne commanded by the Marquis de Coeuvres, one Lemayn, and
the Squadrons of the Corpse du Guard of Nailles and Duras, one Gens d' Arms and
the others of the Colonel master de Camp and of the King.

On the morrow being the twelfth, The Battery.
the Artillery began to play. Monsieur de Vauban who had the direction of the
Works made them to continue a Demisap to favor the Canon, whilst the first
shots dismounted many pieces of the besieged. Monsieur St. Cathern Commissary
of the Artillery was killed in the Battery where he commanded The provisions
which they had made on the Frontier, Provisions in the Camp.
for the subsistence of the Army arrived by Bouchain and Conde and made plenty
in the Camp.

Monsieur arrives.
Monsieur the only Brother of the King who had left Paris the seventh, arrived
at the Camp this day and was lodged in the King's Quarter.

M. de Lorgis his Guard.
The Marshal de Lorges mounted the Trenches with Count Plessis Lieutenant
general, Monsier de Albert Marshal de Camp, Marquis de Livourn Brigadier of the
Cavalry, the Marquis of Cavois Aid de Camp, the Marquis of Bourlemount
Brigadier of the Infantry with three Battalions of the Kings Regiment, two of
the Royal and one other of Freezelier assisted by two Squadrons of the Guards
du Corpse of Luxembourg and Lorges, one of the Gend' Arms, and the others of the
Curassiers of Sourdis and Tilladet. They approached near the French on the edge
of the Counterscarp, and the Marquis de Sevigni Ensign of the Dauphins Gend'
Arms was there wounded. They seized on some Spanish Officers in the Camp, who
would have entered the place either to carry them some intelligence or to have
joined themselves to their Companies.

The same night they took one Redout and the Fauxbourg Nostredame without much
resistance on the besiegeds part. They take the Fauxbourg of Nostredame.
As more than thirty pieces of Canon, a great many Morterpieces, and of Bombes
poured down upon the Town, a continual tempest of Fire, Lead and Iron, one
would have thought that the besieged had enough to do within the place and that
they had not time to think of succouring them without. But there was yet a
reason for their small resistance, which was that they hoped to be able to
drown the Besiegers in the same places without, when they should seize them, in
letting go their Sluices, and so revenge by water the ravage they had made by
Fire. They then let them loose in the Fauxbourg, but to little purpose, for
there the fifth part of the Guard did not quit the place but lodged themselves
there, and made many places of shelter because the Defenses and Palisadoes were
overthrown by the Artillery.

M. de Humieres Guard,
It was the Marshal De Humieres who mounted the fifth Guard on the thirteenth
with the Count de Auvergne Lieutenant General, the Chevalier de Tilladet,
Marshal de Camp the Chevalier Nogent Aid de Camp, the Chevalier Grignan
Brigadier of the Cavalry, Monsieur St. George Brigadier of the Infantry, two
Battalions of the Regiment of Lyonnois, two of the Dauphins, one of Harcour
Bauvron, one of Fuziliers, and the Squadrons of one quarter of the Gens d'
Arms, and the light Horse of the Guards, one of the first Companies of the
white Musketeers, one of the Dauphins Gens d' Arms, one of the Cuirassiers,
and the other of Tilladet and Sourdis.

The fourteenth the Guard was relieved by the Marshal de Schomberg, M. de
Scombergs Guard.
the Duke de Villeroy Lieutenant General, the Prince Palatin de Birckenfeild
Marshal de Camp, the Marquis de Montrevel Brigadier of the Cavalry, the Marquis
Pierre Brigadier of the Infantry, and the Marquis de Arcy Aid de Camp with two
Battalions of the Queens Regiment, two of the Fleets, one of Piemont Genoways,
and one also of Saluces of Piemont, and those Troops which the Court of Savoy
sent for France, and seven Squadrons of the second company of black
Musketeers, the Dauphins light Horse, the Gend' Arms of Anjou, and the
Cuirassiers of Sourdis, of Tilladet, and of Bartillat.

M. de Feuillades Guard.
The Guard was mounted the fifteenth by the Duke of Feuillade, the Count
Montbron Lieutenant General, Monsieur Stoup Marshal de Camp, the Prince de
Elbeuf Aid de Camp, the Marquis de Revel Brigadier of of the Cavalry, the
Marquis de Uxelles Brigadier of the Infantry, with six Battalions of the
Regiments of Alsatia, Saluces and Salis, and six Squadrons of Bartillat,
Grignan, Leomare, Konismark, and Gassion. This day the Works were very much
advan- and divided into three branches, being more than two 200 yards in
length, and two in height. They being fortified in very many places, and
encompassing the Angle of the Crown Work which we described before, gave
shelter to most of the Infantry, and favored the approach of the Batteries.

All that we have told you was done by the Kings orders, which he gave forth
himself every day. He was every where he commanded, he animated the Officers
and Soldiers with his presence, and was with them often on the least occasion.

The sixteenth the Marshal de Luxembourg mounted the Trench with the Marquis de
M. de Luxembourgs Guard.
Trousse Lieutenant General, the Count St. Geran Marshal de Camp, the Chevalier
de Vendosme Aid de Camp, and three Battalions of the French Guards conducted by
Monsieur de Rubentel Brigadier of the Infantry and Captain in the Regiment, and
three other Battalions of Picardy and of Soissons under the Marquis of
Boulemont and le Pierre.

All this while the Besiegers lost but very few men, and the besieged did not
show all that vigor that they expected. Whether it were that the Trench was so
good that it rendered unprofitable the shot of the Besieged, or that they were
so exposed to the Batteries that it was impossible to fire stoutly from the
Redouts: or that indeed they did not think that little Fort important enough
for to hazard their Soldiers, which they might be willing to conserve for the
defense of the Town. For at last when they should have lost that Post, the
River which separated it from the Town, gave shelter enough to that side, and
two other places, the marsh and the Water Sluices which they having let loose,
hindered well enough their approaches, so that they did not fear any assault.

The King whom success animated, The King attaques the Crown works.
and who measured his designs by the progress of the Siege, resolved to attaque
the Counterscarp on the morrow being the seventeenth. He visited the Posts that
night, he wrote with his own hand the orders of that attaque, and put them into
the hand of Monsieur Rose Secretaty of the Cabinet to copy them forth, which
were distributed presently to the General Officers whose day it was, and to the
principal offices of the Troops designed for that enterprise. His Majesty
commanded sixty of the Guard of the Body to a light in the Fauxbourg armed with
their Carabines, and to observe all the night the countenance of the Besieged.
He caused to be made ready in the same Fauxbourg Nostredame a Battery of six
pieces of Ordinance, and some Mortars which might annoy the backside of the
Crown Work. The Troops which he had chosen for this enterprise, beside those
which were already on the Guard in the Trenches were the two Companies of white
Musketeers commanded by the Chevalier Fourbin, and the black by Monsieur
Jauvel, Captain Lieutenants, the Company of Granadiers of his House under
Captains Riotot, and twenty four Companies of Granadiers drawn out of all the
Battalions of the Army. All these Troops went into the Trench the sixteenth at
night. The Granadiers of the Kings Regiments lodged amongst the white
Musketeers, and the Guards and the Granadiers of Avergne and Navarre, among
the black Musketeers, and the Battalion of Burlemont, the Marquis de Angeau
the the employment of Aid de Camp. The Chevalier de Vendome would not be
relieved on this important occasion, for Which he prepared himself, and obained
leave to fight, and the Marquis de Angeau carried him orders from the King to
observe exactly all things that should pass in that action, that he might be
able to send the news with speed to his Majesty.

The order of the Attaque.
All things being thus disposed for the Attaque, on the seventeenth in the
morning about nine or ten of the clock there was heard nine shots of Canon,
which was a sign for the Besiegers to come forth of the Trenches to attaque the
Crown Work.

The King being ready on the bank of the River, and the report of his presence
being spread through the commanded Troops, they prepared themselves for the
execution of the enterprise with an incredible order and undauntedness. The
Granadiers of the Kings house backed by the Chevalier Fourbin at the head of
the white Musketeers and by Tournelle and Davejan Captains of the Guards, with
one of their Battalions assaulted the right side of the Work, the Granadiers of
the Regiment of Picardy followed by Jauvelle with the black Musketeers and by
the Marquis of Bourlemont, with a part of the Regiment af Picardy assaulted the
left side, and the Marquis de Trousse Lieutenant General, and the Count St.
Geran Marshal de Camp, with the rest of the Regiment of Picardy, and the
commanded Troops, fell upon the Front.

Despres, The besieged vanquished.
the Count Solres and the other Officers of the place, Who were assembled in
the same Work to consult of the means to defend it, hearing all on a sudden the
shot of the Canon after a great calm and a profound silence on either side for
some time, and perceiving the Troops of the King to advance, they immediately
separated and ran to the places where they were about to make the Attaques and
there to animate their men to do well. But their Soldiers being terrified by
the Artillery, exposed to the shot of the Carabines in the Fauxbourg and to the
continual Tempest of the Bombs, and galled in the flank, their half moons on
the sides not being able to help them, they gave themselves for lost, and that
the assailants, which on every side encompassed them about, would throw down
Heaven upon them. Fear having seized upon them, they abandoned all without,
Counterscarp, Pallissadoes, Ditch, and the Work it self, which they should have
defended, and their Arms also: and in the end their courage wholly forsaking
them, they cast themselves into a crowd and without Order or Rank fled out of
the well furnished half Moon. The Valor of the assailants.
The Musketeers and the Granadiers mingling themselves with those who fled,
stopped them in the passages of their retreat, and killed all those they
encountered on the way. But those of the French party who had pierced even into
the half Moon by a wooden Bridge, which was laid over the Ditch, perceived that
to favor the retreat of the Besieged, they had let down the draw-Bridg which
gave entranee into the Pie: but for that the wicket was barricadoed with dead
bodies, the wounded, and the crowd of those who endeavored to save themselves
not being able to do it all at once, flung themselves into the Arm of the River
which served the ditch of the Pie, others lay down on the ground counterfeiting
themselves dead, to avoid that way the first fury of the Conquerers. This
disorder of the Besieged animated the most hardy of the French, and gave them
no leisure to make any reflections of any Ambuscade which they might have laid
for them, or of the resistance which they might find, they pushed on their
victory to the end, and carried on by a point of honor so delicate among those
Musketeers, of which none would yield to his companion the glory of being the
first in those so dangerous occasions, so that they flung themselves one after
another through the Wicket. It had been no hard matter for a few Officers and
Soldiers which were in the Pie, to repress the ardour of the most furious: But
whether they could no longer distinguish Foes from Friends, or that they were
of the number of those that fled the vigor with which they saw themselves
pursued, had made them utterly lose their judgment and their courage, they
flung down their Arms, and some of them who were afraid of falling by the edge
of the Sword demanded their lives on their knees. The Conquerors advanced
toward the Gate of the Town, but they found the Drawbridge up. They were
aware that on the left side of the entry of the Pie, there was a little ladder
placed in the wall, which served as a crust to the Pie, by which one might
ascend upon the Terrace that covered it, and from thence pass to the rampart of
the Town by the means of certain vaults which reached from the side of a little
Sluce-house, to the place of the Drawbridge.

The Granadiers enforcing then a little Port which shut up that ladder, They
get into the Town.
they mounted upon the Terrace, where they found but two or three Soldiers, and
passing the Terrace upon the vaults which were fastened there, they went on even
to another small Gate, which gave entrance to the Rampart. From thence they
advanced toward the draw-Bridg, and having chased away certain Soldiers who
guarded it, they got down to give a free passage to their companions, and they
advanced all together into the first Street even in sight of the stone Bridge
over the Escaut which crossed the Town in that place.

The Musketeers and the Granadiers who were advanced into the Town under
Vincheguerre, and followed by Moissac, and le Bar chief Officers, and under
Molinneuf Lieutenant of the others, seconded by the Marquis of Beaumont
Volunteer, not being above thirty men in all, when they perceived the people
running to their Arms, and saw a party of the Cavalry who began to rank
themselves upon the stone Bridge, they at first thought good to shelter
themselves under the porches of the houses. But their number presently,
increased by the arrival of some under Maupertuis, yet by reason the little
door of the Pie by which they must pass, was troublesome, there could come but
a few at once, they fortified themselves as well as they could in the same
Street, and there stood firm for some time. Certain Cavaliers and Dragoons of
the Enemy and some Soldiers also advanced still on this side the Bridge to
drive them back, but the most forward of them being killed, their Cavalry left
the Bridge to put themselves in Battle array in the grand place. The Militia,
who had run to their Arms on the report being spread of the entry of the Enemy,
were surprised, yet made a show as if they would dispute the passage of the
Bridge, and to make fast the chains cross the Streets. But the Chevalier
Fourbin, Javelle, Riotot, with the rest of their companies, and all those who
had been willing to follow having wholly defeated or taken prisoners all that
withstood them without, and having disengaged the Bascule or hanging door they
entered the Town like a Torrent.

The Town taken by assault.
The principal Burgers at the first brute of the Entry of the French into the
Town ran to the Alarm bell at the Council house and made their deputies to
come forth to the Troops which were already in Battalia and to tell them that
they would capitulate. But Moissac and the other Officers told them that it was
not time now, and that it was not the Custom that they should capitulate with
their Masters. Then one of the Deputies desired at least that they would let
them go to implore the Clemency of the King, which they permitted them, who
meeting the Duke of Luxemburg at the gate of the Town, accompanied with
Monsieur Dumetz Leiutenant General of the Artillery, Hostages sent to the King.
he put them into the hands of the Marquis de Angeau, for to conduct them to
his Majesty. He then commanded the Musketeers to stand in Battalia in the
grand Place, and their Officers made those of the Garrison whom they found
there, to lay down their Arms and those of the Cavalry to dismount. He ordered
the Granadiers to seize the Market place, where was a small Court of Guard of
the Enemies, and disposed of the rest of the Troops and of the Artillery as he
thought convenient to assure himself of all quarters of the Twon.

The King can hardly believe the Report.
This great Action was performed with so much rapidity and was accompanied with
so much Valor and good Fortune, that the King who had only ordered the taking
of the Counterscarp could very hardly believe the testimony of his own Ears
when he heard the Cry of Vive le Roy, and the noise of their Grenades and
muskets in the middle of the Town. But the Chevalier de Vandome who among the
first had entered this placed posting with all diligence to his Majesty, drew
him out of his incertitude, and he was no sooner assured of the verity but he
went to the place of the Attaque, and met in the way the Baron of Langiamet and
presently after many other persons of quality, who confirmed that they were
masters of the Town. At this certain News the King sent away the Marquis De
Louvis to hinder the pillage of the Town and other Desolations of Conquest made
by Assault, Marquis Louvis sent into the Town.
and to give Orders as he should judge necessary, and according as he should
find the disposition of things. His Majesty was but just past the Bridge which
he had laid over the Escaut for Communication of his Quarters, when he met
with the Marquis de Angeau who conducted the Provost of the County of Hanault
and the chief of the Inhabitants which they had sent for Hostages. They
Implored the Clemen^ of the King, and demanded a Confirmation of their
Privileges. By the right of war the Town ought to be left to be pillaged by
the soldiers, which the King let these hostages know, The Kings Clemency.
yet such was the natural bounty and sweetness of his Majesty, which equalled
his Valor, that he compassionated the misery of the People, and made his
Victory and Force to give way to his Generosity, and would not permit the least
displeasure to be done to the Inhabitants, and made them to hope in his mercy.

The Marquis de Louvis being arrived in the Town bid the Musketeers to mount
on the horses of the Garrison which appertained to them of right, and commanded
the vanquished to withdraw themselves into a Church, till they should receive
new orders. Certain squadrons of the Guards of the Body and certain Batalions
of the French Guards relieved the Musketeers and the Granadiers: And thus
Valenciennes by one only assault as sudden as unheard of submitted it self to
France.

The Town obliged themselves to pay the sum of 400000 Crowns in acknowledgment
of the grace which the King had done them in conserving their goods, The Town
ransomed.
the honor of their wives and their Lives, and for preserving their Town from
fire and pillage. Eight hundred soldiers of the Garrison stayed upon the place,
The Garrison made prisoners of war.
all the rest were made prisoners of war. The principal Officers were the
Marquis of Richboury Governor of the place who was wounded at the beginning of
the Seige, Despres who was substituted in his place and also wounded. The Count
de Solres. The Marquis de Leuven. The loss of the French.
Taxis. Montigni, etc.

On the French side the Marquis Bourlemonnt Brigadier of the Infantry master de
Camp of the Regiment of Picardy was killed. He was a young Officer of great
merit, and of very great hopes, he was but newly cured of those wounds which he
had received in another occasion in which he had behaved himself very
gallantly. They lost also three Captains of foot and one of Horse, seven
inferior Officers, eleven Musketeers and about fifty soldiers from the
beginning of the Siege. The Duke of Luxembourg and the Count St. Geran were
slightly wounded at the attaque with some pieces of Grenades, the others that
were wounded were Champigny, Ferraut, and several Officers of the Regiments of
Guards. Cailleres Captain of that of Navarre, the Marquis de Charmel Voluntier,
about twenty five Musketeers and thirty Soldiers more.

The King visited the fortifications, The King visits the Fortifications.
and designed the building of a Citadel with the 40000 Crowns which was imposed
upon the Town: and for that the place was of that Importance as to require a
person of an approved Fidelity, great Courage, and deep Prudence to be
entrusted with the Government; his Majesty chose the Count Bardi Magalotta a
Florentine by Birth, but more than thirty years in the French Service, in which
time having passed through the employs of Captain, of Lieutenant, of Colonel,
of the Regiment of the French Guards, of Master of the Camp of a Regiment of
Italian Foot, he was come to be Lieutenant General. The Lieutenancy for the
King was given to Monsieur Foucaut Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of
Burgundy, and the Majoralty to Monsieur de Chazerat Captain in that of Navarre.
The Baron de Quincy in recompense of those services which he had done, and
which he still continued to perform before Cambray, was made Provost of the
County, that is to say, chief of the Inhabitants.

Praises publicly and recompenseth his Soldiers.
The King publicly commended the Officers and Volunteers, who had signalized
themselves on this occasion. He recompensed Jauvelle Captain Lieutenant of the
black Musketeers, with a Commission that made him Marshal de Camp. The Marquis
de Vains Captain Lieutenant of the same Company with Commission and pay of
Brigadier of the Cavalry, Maupertuis under Captain Lieutenant of the white
Musketeers had the like. Hoguete, Barrieri, Rigoville, and Moissac, Cornets of
those two Companies had commissions and pay of Colonels of Horse. The Marshals
of Logis had their Brevets and appointments of Captains of the light Horse, and
also all the Officers of the Musketeers were recompensed either with money or
with commissions of favor or nobleness: Monsieur Vauban had the gratification
of 25000 Crowns. His Majesty ordered to the Duke of Lude grand master of the
Artillery to be divided among his Officers and Soldiers 3000 pistols to heal
their wounds. He made money to be distributed among the Troops, and particularly
to those Soldiers who had taken prisoners. He gave the Regiment of Picardy to
the Marquis of Harcourt-Beuron, and that of Harcourt-Beuron to the Marquis de
Humieres Son of the Marshal.

Rejoicing at Paris.
The news of taking this place was carried the eighteenth to the Queen at Paris,
who had been there since the fourth with the Dauphin, which gave them great joy
and caused rejoycings through that great City. The Te Deum was sung in the
Church of Nostre Dame. The Queen assisted there with Monsieur the Dauphin, and
were accompanied with all the Princes and Princesses of the Blood, and all the
Nobility, the Archbishop, Clergy, Parliament, Magistrates, Ambassadors, and
Ministers, Strangers. At night there were bonfires made through all the Streets.
The Queen complemented by the Ministers.
Monsieur Varesi the Popes Nuncio, Contarini the Venetian Ambassador, Count
Ferreri the Savoyan Ambassador, the Abbot Gondi Resident for the Duke of
Florence, Count Baglioni Resident of Mantua, and all the other Ministers of the
Potentates and Princes friends to France came to congratulate with the Queen
and the Dauphin for the important Conquest of the King.

At the same time they received the news that the Count de Estree Lieutenant
General, De Estree's Conquest in America.
and Vice Admiral of France with the Fleet he commanded in the American Seas
had retaken in December the Isle of Cayenn from the Hollanders, and had made
the Garrison prisoners of War. So great and happy successes all at once gave no
less terror to the Confederates, and astonishment to the most puissant Neuters,
than confidence to the Conquerours to design new enterprises.

Monsieur commands the Army in Artois.
After the King had given all necessary orders concerning his great designs, and
had put a strong Garrison into Valenciennes for the most part drawn out of the
Regiments of the Suitzers, he decamped on the twenty first of March, and the
same day he gave to Monsieur his only Brother the command of an Army for Artois
of four Squadrons and twenty Battalions. His Majesty chose to serve under his
Royal Highness the Marshal de Humieres: For Lieutenant Generals, the Prince of
Soubise, and the Count de Plessis: For Marshals of the Camp Monsieur le Mott
who had blocked up St. Omers, Monsieur de Albert, the Chevalier de Sourdis, and
Stoppa: for Brigadiers of the Cavalry, the Marquis Gourney, and of Bordages:
for Brigadiers of the Infantry, Aubarede, Chymenes, Souvroy, and Phiffer: for
Major General, Monsieur de Montmont Captain of the Guards: for chief Engineer
Monsieur de Choisy: for Commander of the Artillery, the Marquis de Frezeliere:
and for Intendant, Monsieur Roberto.

The King kept with himself to serve him in his Army, The Troops and Officers
about the Kings person.
the Marshals Scomberg, Luxembourg, Feuillade, and Lorges: for Lieutenant
Generals, the Duke of Lude, the Marquis of Renel, Cardonniere, the Count de
Avergne and the Duke of Villeroy: For Marshals de Camp, the Count St. Geran,
the Marquis and Chevalier de Tilladet Brothers, and the Palatine Birkenfield:
For Aides de Camp, the Chevalier Vandome, the Princes d' Harcourt and d'
Elboeuf, the Marquis d' Angeau and d' Arcy, of Chiverni, Cavois, and the
Chevalier Nogeut: For Brigadiers of the Cavalry, Jauvelle la Fit, Nonan de
Auger, Buzunvil, Rose, and Tallart: for Brigadiers of the Infantry, Rubentel,
Salis, Tracy, de Uxelles, ville Chauve and Josseaux: for chief Engineer Vauban:
for Intendant of the Army Monsieur Bretevil in the absence of Monsieur St.
Ponauge.

The Siege of Cambray.
The King encamped that night at Haspre, and on the twenty second he sat down
before Cambray. He took a turn about the place, and would view it within
musket shot. He made them draw the lines of circumvallation and
contravallation. As Soon as the news of the Siege was spread abroad, the
Peasants from all places of Picardy ran thither according to the orders they
had received, and they the more willingly obeyed because they had been for a
long time oppressed by the contributions and continual inrodes of that Garrison.
This made them very earnestly wish for the Siege ever since the beginning of
the War, and it was the end of all their desires which they expressed in the
acclamations which they gave the King in his return from the last Campain.

Cambray is the strongest place, Its fortifications.
and the most important of all the Netherlands. The Escaut runs through it and
fills all its ditches: it is also regularly fortified with Ramparts, Bastions,
Halfmoons, and with two Forts: and commanded by a Citadel of a square form,
which is separated from it; and besides its Bastions, Halfmoons, and ditches,
is placed in a most advantageous situation. The place is the more considerable
for being the capital City of Cambresis, and the Metropolitan Seat of the
greatest part of the low Country Catholics, and for having a Church filled with
many rich Gifts and of great Revenue and ecclesiastical Dignities. They say
that it was very famous even in the time of the Romans. It got a great
reputation under Clodion King of France, when he rendered himself master of it
with the loss of 50000 men who were sacrificed at the taking of it as well of
the Besiegers part as of the besieged: The particular care which Charles the
fifth took to fortify it, very much augmented its reputation, and indeed it
has been so well established in the Wars of our Age, that it has always passed
for the most formidable place in the whole seventeen Provinces. Besides, it was
a mortal scourge to the sides of France, gave no repose to Picardy, threatened
the Sein it self, and in the times of war gathered so great contribution, that
it not only supplied it self but was in a condition to furnish with necessaries
all the Catholic places in its neighborhood, and to give subsistence to
abundance of Troops, serving also in the mean time for a Refuge to all sorts of
criminals. The King being sensibly touched with the evils caused by this place
to so great part of his Realm, would by all means give a remedy thereto, and
therefore he then shut his eyes against all the assaults of the Imperialists as
we have marked, and formed the project of taking of Cambray, as well as
Valenciennes by getting into his hands Conde and Bouchain. After the taking of
those two last named places, he never left the Garrisons of the former to be in
any quiet, he put a stop to their inroads, and hindered his subjects from paying
the contributions. He made the Baron de Quincy to keep the field, to take or
scatter their Convoies, and so placed his Troops when the Winter was far
advanced in quarters that they might be in a readiness, by the Siege of those
places and by taking them in, to put an end to the causes of so many troubles.

By this means he established the repose of his own Realm, put himself in a
condition of carrying the War into his Enemies Country. He dismembered one of
the most considerable parts of the Monarchy of Spain, and facilitated the
progress of his Arms.

Don Pedro Savala a native of Biscay was Governor of the Town and Citadel.
And Garrison.
He was a man that had spent forty years of his Life in the service of the
Catholic King, and whose Age and experience gotten in the wars made him to be
very much esteemed. The Garrison was composed of about one thousand horse and of
the Regiments of the Infantry of Vaudemont, Molenbery, Tilly, one of
Hollanders, two Spanish of the old Body and one of Walloons.

His Majesty made both the City and the Citadel to be shut up within the
lines, The disposion of the Quarters.
and caused diverse Bridges to be laid over the Escaut for communication, and
then he thus ordered the Quarters. He chose his own at Avain on the side of the
Citadel, and kept with him the Marshal Feuillade. The Marshal Lorges had his on
the right side of that of the Kings in a place named Escaud'auvers on the other
side of the Town and citadel toward the Gate of Valenciennes. Marshal de
Luxemburg took his Quarters on the left hand on this side St. Sepulchers near
to Chantigneute, and Marshal Schomberg took up all that part which is on this
side the Escaut from new Town to Cantimpre.

Succors hindered.
His Majesty sent the Baron de Quincy with a Body of Horse on the side of Bavay
in Hanault in the neighborhood of Mons as much to oppose all succor as to
trouble the Commerce of those places and there to observe the enemy.

The Prince of Orange and the Duke de Villa Hermosa seeing Valenciennes taken,
Preparations to relieve Cambray.
and all there de signs which they had for to succor it rendered unprofitable,
they formed new ones together, to oppose the enterprises of the King. They did
not all doubt but that his Majesty would besiege St. Omers, and on the other
side they determined not to succor Cambray, whether it were that they imagined
that place, being one of the strongest of Europe, would of it self render all
the Endeavors of the King vain, or that they despaired to be able to relieve
it, being encompassed about as it was with Valenciennes, Conde, Bouchaine,
Dovay, and other places of the like Importance. However it was, they
rendesvouz'd their Troops in the Territory of Asnest near to Gaunt, and
published that they would oppose the designs the French might have against St.
Omers, or to revenge themselves for the loss they had received by besieging
some place of the French upon the River Lys or in the French Flanders. The
places on the fronteers secured.


These menaces of the enemy caused the King to write to Monsieur his Brother to
suspend the siege of St. Omer till he should receive new orders, and sent in
the mean time Marquis Lovuis and the Gens de Arms in Walloon Flanders and upon
the Lys to provide for the security of those places.

The besieged sally forth.
In the mean time the Governor of Cambray began on the twenty fourth of March to
give some proofs of that vigorous resistance which he intended to make. He
caused three hundred horse to make a Sally by the Gates of Selles and Cantimpre
upon the Quarters of Marshal Schomberg, separated in many Bands to the end that
they might view the besiegers without being perceived, and also give them a
means to advance further, if occasion should offer. They were not come forward
above an hundred and fifty paces, but they were encountered with a small number
of Cavaliers under the Conduct of Colonel Rose, who pursued them even to the
Palissade, killing some and taking others prisoners, where he himself was
wounded.

The lines being perfected by the continual labor of the Soldiers and of the
Peasants of Picardy, the King resolved to open the Trenches on the twenty
eighth at night. At that time arrived there a great number of Volunteers, The
arrival of the Prince of Soisons.
among which were Prince Thomas of Savoy Count of Soissons; Prince Philip
Chevalier of Savoy, The Prince of Mourges etc.

The Trenches Opened.
They resolved to make the Attacque on the Quarters of Marshal Lorges, against
two Halfmoons, one of which covered the Gate of Valenciennes, and the other was
on the left side of the same Gate. Marshal Schombergs Guards.
His Majesty caused the first Guard to be mounted in his presence by Marshal
Schomberg, the Marquis Resnel Leiutenant General, the Count St. Geran Marshal
de Camp, the Prince de Harcourt Aid de Camp, Monsieur Rubentel Brigadier of
the Infantry, with three Battalions of the French Guards and six Squadrons
under Jauvelle Brigadier of the Cavalry, followed by one of the Guards of the
Body of Noailles, one of Luxemburg, one of the white Musketeers, one of the
Croates, one of the Dauphins Regiment, and one of Orleans. The King comes into
the Trench.


The King getting away from his Train would needs see the beginning of the
works accompanied only with the Chevalier Vandome and the Prince d' Harcourt.
The besieged fired exceedingly; but they killed but four soldiers which were
cut off with one shot of a Cannon the next day in the morning. M. Fiviliades
Guard;


The twenty ninth at night the Guard was releived by Marshal Feuillade:
Cardonniere Lieutenant General, Marquis Tilladet Marshal de Camp, Marquis
Chiverny Aid de Camp, Salis Brigadier of the Infantry, with two Battalions of
the Guards of Swisses and one of Salis supported by Monsieur Le Fit Brigadier
of the Cavalry, with two Squadrons of the Guard of the Body of Duras and
Lorges, and four others of the black Musketeers, of the Dauphins, Orleans, and
Croates. A Battery raised.
The morning and all the day following a Battery which they had raised on the
River on the side of Newtown, and which had let them see plainly the
fortifications they were to attaque, began very much to incommode the Besieged.
From the thirtieth of March at night, to the first of April the Trench was
carried within an hundred and fifty paces of the Counterscarp without any loss.
M. Luxemburgs Guard.
Marshal Luxemburg was there that day, and with him the Count Auvergne
Lieutenant General, Chevalier Tilladet Marshal de Camp, Marquis de Cavois Aid
de Camp, Tracy Brigadier of the Infantry, with three Battalions, two of the
French Guards and one of Salis, and six Squadrons under Auger Brigadier of the
Cavalry, two of which Squadrons were of the Guards de Corpse of Noailles and
Luxemburg, one of the Musketeers, one of St. Aignan, one of Heaudicourt, and
one of Bligny. In the mean time the besieged performed very well their parts.
They caused every night great fires to be made upon the plain of the
Counterscarp, to discover and overthrow the enemies works.

They every day fallied forth, A Sally of the Besieged.
which they would have still continued without doubt, but that the Rains made
the earth so slippery that hindered the Guard in the Trenches from working, so
that they had nothing to do. However they lost five prisoners and one Engineer,
who being discontented with the Spaniards came and rendered himself in the Camp.

The 2 of April the Trench being finished the King was resolved to attacque the
two halfmoons. M. Fuillade his Guard: The halfmoons attacqu'd.
It was the Marshal Feuillades day, with the Count de Auvergny Lieutenant
General, the Marquis Tilladet Marshal de Camp, the Prince de Elboeuf Aid de
Camp, the Marquis de Uxelles Brigadier of the Infantry at the head of four
Battalions of the Royal Regiments and of the Dauphins, sustained by the Marquis
of Bu^enval Brigadier of the Cavalry, with a Squadron of the Life Guards, and
five Squadrons of Light Horse. These Troops not only carried the two halfmoons
but they also siezed an angle of an Horn work on the side of the Fort of
Selles. The Besieged defended themselves very manfully, and the taking of those
posts cost the French an hundred soldiers and as many wounded.

The Commander and Officers of the Town seeing on the thirteeth that the mines
were fixed to the Body of the place, The Garrison capitulate.
and fearing the like inconvenience of that of Conde, and that so lately of
Valenciennes, believing they should not stay the springing the Mine, nor that
they should be able to withstand the assault, they sent out a party late at
night, and demanded to capitulate. The Governor thought it was prudence to
conserve for his Prince a Garrison composed of so many good Troops, and he also
flattered himself with the hope that he might be able to keep the Citadel for
a long time, and make them to draw out the Siege so long that it might give
time to the Confederates to succor them, and to put some stop that way to the
Torrent of the Designs and Conquests of the King, or at least to destroy or
considerably to infeeble his Army. As Soon as the Capitulation was demanded, A
Truce.
his Majesty agreed to a Truce for twenty four hours, and the Count de Auvergne
received the hostages.

M. Luxemburgs Guard.
The Guard was releiv'd that night from the third to the fourth by Marshal
Luxemburg, the Duke de Villeroy Lieutenant General, Chevalier Tilladet Marshal
de Camp, Chevalier Vandome Aid de Camp, the Counts of Tallard and Villechanver
the one Brigadier of the Cavalry, and the other of the Infantry, with four
Battalions, half of Alsace and half on Fuziliers, and six Squadrons, one of the
Guards de Corpse and five of Light Horse.

The fourth the Marshal Luxemburg was advertised that Monsieur de Ris Commander
of the Cavalry in Cambray, and Monsieur Couaruvias Master de Camp of a Spanish
Tirce, demanded to speak with the King. The Marquis de Angeau introduced them
into the Kings Tent, who gave them Orders for the retreat of the Garrison into
the Citadel. They first of all abandoned one Gate of the Town, then the
Ramparts and the Streets, and left Cambray in the power of the French.

It was on the fifth that this order was executed, They possess the Town.
which passed very peacebly. Two Battalions of the French Guards, one of the
Guards of Swisses, one of Salis, and a Squadron of the Guards of the Body
possessed themselves of all the Posts as soon as the Garrison were gone to secure
themselves in the Citadel. Then the Hostages on either side were surrendered
and the Truce ceased.

His Majesty grants the privileges to the Town.
The Clergy and the Magistrates of the Town came to render their Homage to his
Majesty, who signed to the Capitulation and granted to the Inhabitants the same
privileges which he had granted to those of Lisle on the like occasion, and to
the Clergy the same Franchises which those of Tournay had obtained in 1667,
permitting the Archbishop to reside at Cambray, provided that he would take an
oath of fidelity, which he did. He is complemented by the Ambassador of Savoy.


The Count Ferreri Ambassador of Savoy, who that day arrived at the Camp to
reside near his Majesty, testified to him in the name of their Royal Highnesses
the part which they took in his happy successes, and he was received with all
the marks of a particular esteem.

The Cardinal d' Estree came thither also and was lodged with the Cardinal of
Bouillon, And by the Cardinal de Estree.
having rendered his Devoir to his Majesty: and after a few days that he had
resided there he was nominated to go to Rome to relieve his Brother Ambassador
there.

Monsieur being arrived on the twenty fourth of March in the Camp of his Army
at Blandeck, The Siege of St. Omers.
and having made every thing ready, he disposed himself for the Siege of St.
Omer. It is one of the principal places of Artots and of the Spanish
Nitherlands; considerable for its situation, for its fortifications, for the
inconvenience it gave to France, and for the contribution it raised from
thence. It troubled the Commerce of Calais, and divided the conquered Countries
betwixt Arraes and Dunkirk, and desolated all Boulonnois. The King had the year
past proposed to himself to deliver these Countries from all those evils which
this place caused. The King disposes things for the Siege.
To which effect he took the occasion of advantage from the Siege of Mastricht,
where the Army of the confederates were engaged, and having ordered Marquis
Louvis to assist at the Siege of Air, which Marshal de Humieres had
enterprised, and which place was carried in few days, his Majesty covered his
designs which he had against St. Omers in taking of that, publishing that he
did it to be revenged for the Siege of Mastricht, and it was under the same
pretense that at the same time he caused Linch to be taken by the same Marshal.
Having at last caused the Siege of Mastricht to be raised by Marshal Schomberg,
his Majesty ordered the Marshal de Humieres as Governor of the Countries
conquered in Flanders, to make himself master of all the Posts that encompassed
St. Omers, and to take from it all manner of communication by sending certain
Troops into the field. All this was punctually executed. The Marshal caused the
Castle of Cassel to be fortified, sent in the month of March, the last year
Monsieur de Mommont Captain of the Guards, and Brigadier of the Infantry, to
siese on Nieulet, Bac, Momelin, Clair-Marais, and other parts round about. It
was in this Action that Count Genlis was killed in forcing a Redoubt at the
head of the Regiment of the Crown, of which he was Colonel. Having at last
left the command of his Troops to la Motte Marshal de Camp, he came to the
Kings Camp, where he let his Royal Highness understand under whom he commanded,
the condition in which he had left all things.

The fortifications of St. Omers.
St. Omer is the chief City of the Spanish Artois, situate on the River Aae,
fortified with walls, Bastions, Halfmoons, Ditches, Marshes, and Lakes, where
there are little floting Islands. They believe by tradition in this Country
that this is the famous Road of Iccius, where Caesar embarked his men when he
went to war upon the Britains, and they would have the sand and gravel which is
found thereabouts to be an assured mark that the Sea did heretofore flow so far
as it. The place was first called Sithien, it changed its name, and from a
simple Castle as it was became a City in the time of St. Omer Bishop of
Terrouane. The people that inhabit it, the riches in which they abound, the
Canal for commerce named the New-Foss, and the Abbey of St. Bertin, render it as
celebrous as its Arms, and its forces.

It had within the place a Garrison of 2000 foot and 500 Horse: The Garrison.
besides the Militia and the Burguesses. St. Vegnant commanded there. But the
Prince of Robeck as Governor of the Spanish Artois had there the chief place.

Monsieur having visited the Posts and invested the place, The quarters taken
up by Monsieur.
he distributed the Quarters. He took his own called the Generals Quarter at
Blandeck, and retained with him the Marshal de Humieres, Count dis Plessis
Lieutenant General, Stouppe Marshal de Camp, with two Battalions of Navarre,
one of Humieres, and two of Phiffer; and two Squadrons of St. Germain Bauprie,
and one of Veins. He posted the Price of Soubise Lieutenant General in the way
to Arques with Monsieur de Alber Marshal de Camp, de Auberade Brigadier, with
two Battalions of Anjou, and two of Vaisseans. At Clairmarais one Battalion of
Conty under Monsieur Lare Master de Camp. At old Castle upon the old Canal, six
Companies of the Dauphins Dragoons. At Nieulet la Motte Marshal de Camp, with
two of Greeders Battalions, and one of Phiffer, six Companies of Dragoons of
the Colonel Generals, and one Squadron of the Regiment of de Aumounts. At the
Fort of Bac a Battalion of Greeders, at St. Momelin a Battalion of the Crown
under the Chevalier de Genlis, the King having gratified him with his Brothers
Regiment: At Tilque the Marquis de Trousse Lieutenant General, the Chevalier
Sourdis Marshal de Camp, the Marquis Bordages Brigadier with a Battalion of the
Royal Regiment of Roussillon, and two of Italians. At Ovatte one Battalion of
the Crown. At Tattinghen Frezelier Lieutenant General of of the Artillery with
the Regiment of Tourain which he commanded, and Bordages Regiment of Horse. At
Visque six Companies of Dragoons of the Dauphins under Monsieur de Longueval.
At Viserne two Squadrons of Gournay, who as Brigadier of the Cavalry commanded
all those who served at the Siege.

The Siege not pressed.
Thus without drawing the Lines St. Omer was invested, and Monsieur would
presently have fallen to attaque it, but that his Army being yet weak and the
great circuit of the place, and the Marshes, required a far greater number of
men, so that he was fain to stay for the coming of other Battalions and the
orders the King would give; besides, the Artillery was not yet come into the
Camp being hindered by the rains, till just then. However in the mean time they
carried the Redout of Colear and some other Posts, and endeavored to assure
the communication of their Quarters to hinder all succors.

Recruits. sent to Monsieur.
On the twenty eighth of March the Duke de Aumont Governor of Bullonois sent
him a great convoy, and after a little time came himself into the Camp of his
Royal Highness with all sorts of munitions and with above 2000 Foot and 500
Horse of the Militia of War within his government. Monsieur enforced the
quarters of Clairmarais and Nieurlet with the Infantry, and that of Tilque with
the Cavalrie.

These succors being come, Attaque of the Fort Vaches.
and the arrival of the Artillery made Monsieur take a resolution to assault
the Fort Vaches, or the Cow, which secured the most feeble places of the Town.
This Fort is on the side of the Gate of the high Bridge, which was defended
with 400 Walloons. On the twenty ninth they raised a Battery of four pieces of
Canon to batter a ruin, and to make a lodgment to sustain them there. At night
the same day the besieged made a very vigorous sally with a design to nail up
the Canon and so overthrow their Lodgment. The besieged sally.
Monsieur de Albert Marshal de Camp with 400 of the Regiment of Navarre
conducted by his Lieutenant Colonel, the Chevalier Souvray, after a very
obstinate dispute forced the besieged to reenter the place, pursuing them even
to the Counterscarp, d' Albret had one horse killed under him in this Action
and lost about twenty men. The Besieged lost double the number both killed and
wounded, the most considerable prisoners were an Aid Major and another Officer
of a Walloon Regiment, who were taken prisoners within twenty paces of their
Counterscarp.

At that time Monsieur received ten Battalions and some Squadrons which the
King sent him, Recruits sent from the King.
and the second of April the King sent to them to open the Trenches. His Royal
Highness designed two Attaques, one at Tattinghen against a corner of an horn
Work the strongest place of all the Works, and the other on the Fort Vaches.

From the fourth to the fifth at night Monsieur made the Guard be mounted for
the opening the Trench by the Count du Plessis Lieutenant General, The Trenches
opened. Guard of du Plessis.
Monsieur la Met Marshal de Camp, Monsieur d' Aubarede Brigadier of the
Infantry with two Battalions of Navarre who were placed on the right side of
the Trench, and two of Frezelier or Tourain and Phiffer on the left side backed
by four Squadrons of Gournay and Veins, and at the same time the Trench was
also opened at the Fort Vaches. Colonel Vain killed.
The Besieged did not perceive these attaques till the morning, when they
failed not to ply us with their Canon, and to shoot into our Camp, where
Colonel Vain was killed doing his duty at the head of his Squadron.

Marquis la Trousse hes Guard.
From the fifth to the sixth at night the Guard was relieved by the Marquis la
Trousse Lieutenant General, Stoup Marshal de Camp, with the Regiments of Anjou
and of the Italian Magalotti. Frezelier had that morning made ready ten pieces
of Canon at the quarter of Tattinghen which played with very good success, and
he disposed another Battery of four pieces against the Cow-Fort.

From the sixth to the seventh was the day of Prince de Soubise Lieutenant
General, Prince Soubises Guard.
with the Chevalier de Sourdis Marshal de Camp at the head of four Battalions,
The Fort taken.
two of the Queens Regiment and two of Vaisseaux.

From the seventh to the eight night Monsieur de Albert was on the Guard of the
Trench till the Attaque of Tattinghen. On the other side Count du Plessis with
the Battalions of Navarre and Anjou and the Italian, seconded by the Dauphins
Dragoons invested the Cowfort on the side of the water Gate. Monsieur thought
good to attempt that attaque, for that the fort was already in an ill Condition
by the Canon, and incommoded by a certain Lodgment which they had made there.
The Besieged who believed themselves yet in a Condition to defend it, imagined
that it was but a false Attacque. But the Dragoons commanded by Monsieur
Longevall and by the Chevalier Quevilly his Lieutenant, alighted, and with
their Swords in their hands killed all that resisted, and making prisoners some
of the Enemy, who demanded Quarter. Colonel Fairfax with one of their best
Officers were killed upon the place, and Quevilly fighting was there wounded.
In the mean time Count du Plessis with those Battalions which we nominated
assaulted the side of the high Bridge: but the Cannons which were placed there
opposed his passage. Without this Obstacle he had put a terror into the Town by
taking from them all hopes of Releif by Nieurlet and Bac, and had reduced them
to the same Extremity as they were in at Valenciennes in the attaque of the
Crown work.

The Chiefs and the Generals of the low Countries did not loose a moment in
resisting the torrent of the Conquest of France. The consultations of the
Confederates.
The Prince of Orange having assembled his Infantry and Cavalry of the
Hollanders in the Dutch Flanders he re-inforc'd them with the Regiments of
Holstein, de Orsbeck and other Hollanders which served in Treves, and with an
Army of about 12000 horse and of forty Battalions, the least of which contained
800 men, he came to Anvers with the Duke of Villa Hermosa to consult with him
the means of saving those Provinces from being wholly overrun, and to put the
Flemings out of that Consternation they were in by some considerable Action.

The King, who was not ignorant that the forces of the Confederates were much
greater than those of his Army, The King sends Succors to Monsieur.
which he had given to Monsieur, and that they might easily be able to
undertake some Siege or else to cause Monsieur to raise his Siege about St.
Omer: to prevent all their enterprises he caused Cardonniere Commissary General
of the Cavalry and Lieutenant General, to leave his Camp with twenty six
Squadrons with design to refresh themselves for some days in new Quarters, his
Majesty sending presently after them Marshall Luxemburg with two Companies of
Musketeers and nine Batalions under Tracy, and gave the Marshal order to join
all those Troops together with the Gens d' Arms which had already past to Lisle
and other reinforcements, to make head against the enemy, and to cover
Monsieurs Siege, and to give time to Marquis Louvis to provide for the surety
of the places on the Frontiers, as Lisle, Courtray and others, in all which he
so disposed things that they might be able to make a long defense in case they
were attaqu'd.

On the other side Monsieur sent also for precaution one Batalion to Bergue,
and another to Dunkirk to put those two maritime places in a condition to
defend themselves.

All these precautions of the French did very much thwart the Council that was
held at Anvers. The Confederates considered that the King being master of
Cambray, which Siege was very much advanced and Monsieur of S. Omer, his
Majesty might then reunite all his forces, and force them to a Battle or raise
their Siege if they should undertake any, as soon as they should be arrived in
the same Province under Oudenard, although they were much more strong, by
reason that the Imperialists had joined them. The deliberration of the
Confederates against theirs own maxims.
Thus the Council could not but agree to the advice of the Prince of Orange,
who would presently oppose them in their Enterprise against St. Omer,
flattering themselves to have found an occasion of revenging themselves for
being forced to raise their Siege at Maistricht by the French, of which Town
they had made themselves sure. And since Sieges had not been so prosperous to
them, they resolved now to try the Fortune of a Battle, in which they promised
to themselves better success.

Why they consented to a Battle.
The Spaniards, contrary to their ordinary Resolutions against hazarding a
Battle, were at this time persuaded that the Prince of Orange should give
Battle if he found a favourabla opportunity. For he thereby hazarded nothing of
theirs if he did it, neither the Reputation of their Arms nor the loss of their
Troops; and they might by this means of a Battle conserve their own estates at
another charge, or put a stop to an entire overthrow. The Hollanders also did
not oppose it, supposing that in case of ill Fortune, they ought always to
defend the Catholic Netherlands, against which they very well saw the King
must carry his Arms, before he could come to them.

But not to forget too long what passed before Cambray, Savella who had retired
out of the City with the Garrison into the Citadel caused part of the horse to
be lodged in the Ditches, the place not being able to contain them all, and he
caused all those as were useless to be killed, and so disposed himself and
Garrison for a vigorous Resistance. He found himself also very well provided of
all sorts of ammunition as well as of soldiers, and in a place that both Nature
and Art had rendered very formidable to the Vulgar, so that they believed this
fortress would be the Chruch yard of all the French that should endeavor to
take it. And Ris who commanded the Cavalry told the Marquis de Angeau with much
confidence when he presented him to his Majesty to capitulate about the Town,
that the Citadel would cost the King that Summers work However he durst not
accept the Challenge the Marquis made him that he would lay with him ten
thousand Crowns, that it would not hold out to the middle of the Spring, which
was already far advanced. The Truce ceases.


On the fifth of April the Hostages were rendered and the Truce ended, and the
King caused the Town on that side toward the Citadel to be barricaded, and
those streets that adjoined near it, Batteries raised.
and raised two Batteries one on the rampart of the Town and the other in the
Camp at the Quarter of the Marshal Lorges. The Attaque disposed.
These two Batteries were seconded by two attacques which they made, the one by
the plain, the other on the side of the Gate of Valencienes against two
Bastions and two halfmoons of the Citadel which looked on that side of the
City. The Trench opened.
The same night they opened the Trench after the same manner as they formerly
did, with this only difference that the King would not permit but one General
Officer to each Guard. The Army being now not so numerous by reason of the
detachment which he had sent to strengthen Monsieur, The King spares his
Soldiers.
and the place besieged looked on as a murderer, the King took all the ways he
could to spare his Soldiers, and therefore would not press the enterprise,
being more desirous to sacrifice Time in the Siege than his Troops. the first
night the Besieged witnessed great vigor and briskness, killing or wounding
with their Artillery above twenty five Soldiers in the Guard in the Trench.

M. Louvis returns to the Camp.
On the sixth the Marquis Louvis returned to the Camp from visiting the
conquered places, after he had put all things in such a condition that they
needed not to fear any surprise from the Confederates. And the Duke of Villeroy.
The Duke of Villeroy under Marshal Scomberg possessed the Quarter of Marshal
Luxemburg, who was gone to favor the enterprise of Monsieur as had been said.
That night the Besieged made two sallies to overthrow the Works, Two sallies,
but were still beaten back, and they could not hinder them from carrying on
the Trench even to the side of the Counterscarp.

On the seventh in the morning the Count d' Avergne was wounded with the blow
of a Canon on the head. Count Avergne wounded.
Vigny Captain of the Bombardiers having made ready many mortars, flung the
night following an infinite number of Bombs and Careasses into the Citadel,
The effect of his Bombs.
which as if it had been thunder-strook beat down all the top of it, and
falling into a Magazin of Granados consumed it. Those of the Citadel
endeavored to answer them in the same manner in flinging great quantity into
the Town and into the Camp, but whether the matter was not good, or that they
were ill prepared, they had no great effect. On the eight the Bombs and Mortars
continued to batter the Citadel and ruined the other Magazins, beat down their
Corpse du Guard, which was toward the Gate of the Citadel, and forced the
Besieged to retire into their casements or loop-holes: and on the ninth they
finished the communication of their Works.

An other Battery.
On the tenth there was another Battery raised upon the Ramparts on the left
side of the Town, M. de Reynel slain.
where it began to draw toward the Citadel. The Marquis de Reynel Lieutenant
General Camp-master General of the light Horse, a man of an illustrious Birth
and of great repute for his good service, and particularly esteemed for his
experience in warlike Affairs, was killed with a Canon shot as he was
discoursing with the Duke de Villeroy.

On the eleventh the lines of communication and the courts of Guards being
finished, they prepared themselves for an Attaque on a Halfmoon, which covered
the Bastion opposite to the corner of the Town toward the Gate of
Valenciennes. The besieged prevented the attaque by a brisk and vigorous sally
both of Foot and Horse, A sally.
but were repulsed by the Marquis Tilladet Marshal de Camp and d' Uxelles
Brigadier, who were on the Guard in the Trench. The Marquis of Harcourt-Beuvron
at the very same time by the order of the King and the General Officer who
commanded, The Halfmoon taken.
fell upon the Halfmoon of Picardy and carried it: Champereux and Courtine with
a good many Soldiers of that Regiment lodged themselves in the neck of the
Halfmoon. The Ground was very well disputed and the Besieged lost then above
100 men killed and wounded.

The Counterscarp taken.
On the eleventh at night to the twelfth the Marshal Scomberg relieved the
Guard. He attaqued the Counterscarp by the Kings order with the Battalions of
the Guards and theother Regiments, and lodged themselves there. The Fight was
obstinate and cost a great many Officers and Soldiers lives on either side: the
French lost among others six Officers of the Guards. Rouvray Baron of Arcancy,
Arnoue, the Chevalier Courtenay, Sautor, Reger, and Parfate; the Chevalier Boin
and Constantin were wounded.

The day after they began to pierce the Bastion with their Canon on the left
side of the Town, Another Battery.
that they might be able to approach with their mine. They also raised another
Battery to ruin the flanks and Caponniers. They also made another lodgment and
certain places for their Arms, that they might put their miners under covert.

In the mean time the King was in great pain for to know the success of the
enterprise at St. Omers; The news of the battle of Cassel brought to the Camp.
from whence he received news by the Couriers every hour, who had brought him
word that the Prince of Orange at the head of the most flourishing Army that
ever yet the States General were masters of, approached Monsieur with great
diligence, but that morning the Marquis d' Effiat, the first Esquire to his
Royal Highness whom he had expressly dispatched to the King, brought him the
news of the Victory which they had had over the Hollanders.

Monsieur having rendered himself master of the Cowfort, the seventh as we have
already mentioned knew by those parties which he had detached from his Camp, to
observe the Prince of Orange, that the Prince had quit Ypres with his whole
Army, and that he was come to Poperinghen. He resolved to go and encounter him
with his Troops, and though he seemed to be less strong, he would not however
loose the ground he had gained in that place. He left then to guard the Cowfort
and to continue the Attaques on that side, Monsieur leaves the Lines.
the Marquis la Trousse Lieutenant General, and Stouppa Marshal de Camp with
one Battalion of Burgundy, one of Languedoc, and one of the Sea-Royal, one of
Roussillon, and some Squadrons of Bordages and the Cavalry of Boulonnois. He
sent to Bac, Nieurlet and Ouattes, one Battalion of Phiffers, and one of
Greeders Dragoons, and the rest of the Militia of Boulonnois. And so being
assured of diverse Posts about the place, he left the Lines on the ninth in the
morning. He presently sent away to Bergue to advertise the Duke of Luxemburg to
join him, He meets the recruits.
and within half a quarter of a league from the Camp upon an Eminence near
Arque he found Cardonniere with twenty six Squadrons and with him Monsieur St.
Pouange. He continued his march to an high place which is between Cassel and
the Abbey of Ovattine, where he encamped. On the tenth in the morning his Army
was reenforced by the Marquis of Livourn with the Gens d' Armery, Revel with
his Brigade of Horse, and at night by Tracy with nine Battalions.

Ranges his Army in Battalia.
Monsieur found himself now at the head of 25000 Combatants 16000 Foot and 9000
Horse. He began to view his Camp and his Posts, and understood with what
diligence the Prince of Orange came toward him, he put his Army in Battalia on
this side of a little River called the Pene. He gave the command of the right
wing which he had placed between Cassel and Ovattine in the field of Ablinghen
to the Marshal de Humieres, and placed near him for Lieutenant General
Cardonnier and the Chevalier Sourdis for Marshal de Camp. He gave the left wing
which had its station on this side the Buscure to Marshal Luxemburg, who had
for his Lieutenant General the Count du Plessis, and for Marshal de Camp
Monsieur d' Albret, and the second line of the left wing he gave to the Prince
of Soubise with order to make use of the opportunities that should offer
themselves in the Battle. But you may see the order of the Battle drawn in a
scheme better than in a long discourse, which shall be annexed to this.

The Prince of Orange had received advice from the Prince of Robek, that
assured him that Monsieur had not with him above 14000 men, and that he had not
made any Lines of Circumvallation and Contravallation, and that if his
Highness deferred the time longer to succor St. Omers, it would be too late,
because there would come from the Kings Camp great store of Troops to enforce
that of Monsieurs. All these reasons obliged the Prince to part from Ypres with
his Army which consisted of 30000 fighting men, The Armies face one another.
and encamped that night being the ninth at Marie-Capel. He there understood
that the French were not above a league from him, he put his Army into
Battalia, and on the tenth about noon his Army faced that of Monsieurs in five
divisions, it was drawn up on the left side of Cassel and on this side of the
River of Pene. He then caused his right wing to make an hault near to Moulins a
post contiguous to the village of Pene, and his left wing toward the village
of Bauvincourt. It would be difficult to describe the fair show that this Army
made, The Princes Troops and chief Officers.
it is certain it was composed of above 12000 Horse and 20000 Foot, besides an
other gross Body of 5 or 6000 horse which attended continually under the
leading of the Count of Nassau, the States General of the Cavalry. The other
chief Officers under his Highness were Count Waldeck Camp Marshal General,
Count Horn General of the Artillery: Vanweblen Major General, and Mountpovillan
Sergeant Major.

The first thing that the Prince would undertake, Their enterprise.
was to relieve St. Omer on the side of Back, which seemed to be the only way
left to do it. For this end he commanded his Dragoons to sieze on the Abbey of
Pene, by which action he would cover his march which he intended to take on the
right hand.

Opposed by Marshal Luxemburg.
Monsieur who perceived the Enemy to stretch himself forth toward the right
side, ordered Marshal Luxemburg to post his Dragoons at Sainsandoux, and the
Cavalry of the second Line at Moulin, Balamberg to cut off their way to Ovattes
in case they should advance on that side, and then understanding that the
Prince of Oranges Dragoons had siezed on the Abbey of Pene, he sent the Dragoons
of Listenoy and the Regiment of Lyonnois to chase them thence: but the Prince
having reinforced them with some Foot, there began in that place a skirmish
which lasted till night, A skirmish.
till the Marshal Luxemburg forced them to retire and remained master of that
Post, leaving there Soldiers with Sergeant for to guard it. Monsieur would have
at the same time made a general Attaque, Monsieur could not execute his design.
but the advantage of the ground which the Enemies possessed, the passage of
two Rivers and the day being almost spent obliged hin to defer it.

On the eleventh in the morning the Prince of Orange very well perceived that
he was engaged to give Battle. The day before he found all the passages whereby
he should relieve St. Omers fast shut up, and he thought that he was more
strong than the Monsieur, for he was yet ignorant of the recruits that were
come to his Royal Highnesses Army; and if he had known it, 'twould have been a
shame for him and for the States General to have left his Post. The Prince
resolves to give battle.
He then resolved to take the occasion to engage, he passed the first River,
and made his Artillery advance; and made the a new assault on the Abbey of Pene,
Passes the River.
and lodging there a part of his Dragoons, he posted among some thick shrubs
near to Moulin some Squadrons of his own Guards to back diverse Battalions,
Makes a new attempt on Pene.
which by the favor of the Canon and the hedges, were to open the way for him
to come to the second River, on the other side of which the French Army was
encamped.

Why Monsieur accepts the battle.
Monsieur, who observed all these motions, was in a great impatience to come to
handy strokes, not so much in consideration of his own glory, and for the
advantage that would thereby accrue to his Majesty. He very well foresaw that
if the Prince were contented to make headagainst them without engaging in a
Battle, he might so spin out the Time in length, and by that only means render
their design against St. Omers unprofitable. He saw also that he had the
disadvantage of the ground, and the fewer forces, but the forementioned Reasons
made him shut his eyes against all others, carried on by his own courage,
having great confidence in his Troops, who testified a very great desire of
doing well. He presently prepared all things as a General that would not refuse
the Combat. He then about nine in the morning opposed to the Hollanders who
advanced, the two Battalions of Anjou right over against the Bridge of the
River, and gave order that the right wing should guard the Artillery to the
same place, which played upon the Enemies Battle till two a clock in the
afternoon. He also ordered Marshal Luxemburg to retake the Abbey of Pene, which
was on the left side where the Marshal commanded. This Post was an assured
passage for the Enemies advance, and was of very great importance. The Marshal
executed that order with the Royal Regiments and that of the Crown, one
Battalion of Stoppa's, the Dragoons of Listenoy and other Troops, Pene retaken.
and with four pieces of Canon. The Hollanders after a long resistance were
compelled to dislodg, which they did after they had put fire to the place and
rendered it unprofita- to either party.

An ill motion of the Prince.
In the mean time his Royal Highness understood that the enemy had left with the
better part of his Army the Height which was on the other side of the River of
Pene with an apparent design to pass over and to fight. This obliged him to
send away presently the Chevalier Clinvilliers with some Officers to take a
view more nearly of the front of the enemies Army, Monsieur views the passages.
which appeared but weak on the place where they faced the right wing of the
French. The Chevalier brought him word that there was in that place a stone
Bridge, by which they might pass over, for that it was not guarded at all, and
that he had seen on the other side of that Bridge some Squadrons sustained by
Battalions ill drawn up and easy to be broken. This movement of the Prince of
Orange and the Condition of these Troops offered too fair an occasion to
overcome to be neglected; and Monsieur presently made use of it.

His Army had changed something the Order of battle by these movements; as also
by the disposition of the Ground and the occasion that had engaged him to it,
some of the Dragoons on the Right having passed over to the left, and many
Battalions of the second Line being advanced into the first. Monsieur did not
only make use of the Officers of the Army and the Aids de Camp to carry Orders
and to observe the motion of the Armies, but he also employed the Gentlemen of
his house, some being ordered to go to diverse places, others to stay fixed in
certain particular posts, and another part to be about his person. The most
considerable of these were the Chevalier de Beuvron Captain of his Guards, the
Marquis d' Effiat first Esquire, the Marquis Pluvault, the Chevalier
Nantovillet, Monsieur de Grave and many others which we shall mention hereafter.

It was about two a Clock in the afternoon when Monsieur who had resolved upon
the business, M. Humieres has order to begin the battle.
sent word to Marshal d' Humieres to advance toward the enemies Front, with
order to fight if he found a favorable occasion. The Marshal having perceived
the stone Bridge and diverse places on the River easily to be passed, he let his
Royal Highness know by Chanly a good Officer of Marshal de Logis, and who very
well understood the business of war, that he thought good to send the Dragoons
of the Colonel General which he had ranged, to begin the fight, for that there
could not be offered a better opportunity. In passing the River he presented
himself before the left wing of the Prince of Orange, having with him the Gens
d' Armerie and the Kings Musketeers, having ordered to follow him two
Battalions of Navar with a design to gain the height and the Gardens in the
middle of the enemies first Line. He fell immediately within two gross
Battalions of Hollanders, A dangerous business.
seconded by nine Squadrons of Brederodes, Kinskell and others. To disintangle
himself from them he commanded the two Battalions of Navar and the Musketeers
to attacque them, The valor of the musketeers.
making the later to a light. When the Hollanders saw before them the
Red-coats, for so they called the Musketeers, they heard the commander of the
Battalion of Oalkembourg to animate his soldiers to sustain manfully but that
shock, and the Victory should be easily theirs afterward. But neither the
persuasion of the enemies Officers nor the Tempest of two vollies of their
Muskets, which they answered with their pistols, could hinder these Musketeers
from overthrowing by dint of Sword the Regiment which opposed them, whilst
those of Navar routed the other. After the defeat of these foot the Musketeers
seeing the Horse coming toward them, which backed them, returned to mount
their Horses with so great precipitation for fear of loosing the opportunity of
charging, that Chevalier Sourdis and diverse other Officers and Troops which
followed them imagined that they had been beaten back, which caused the
Chevalier Sourdis to say to them that they should not press so, as to cause
those that were advancing to believe they were routed. The Marshal seeing the
Enemies Squadrons to advance after the rout of their two Battalions, he opposed
them with the Marquis de Livourn with the Gens d' Armery, who after they had
endured the brunt of two discharges, at the nose of the muskets, with their
swords in their hands passed over the bodies of all these of the first Line.
But being willing to push on the victory farther, it was impossible for him to
make them keep their Ranks in the heat of the Combat, so that the Enemies
Squadrons falling on a sudden upon them, put them into disorder. But Revel with
his Brigade succored them very opportunely, giving them the means to put
themselves into a Body, and to diverse others of his Troops to advance as far as
a great space where there were yet two Battalions sustained by all the Prince
of Oranges Cavalry. In the mean time Cardonnier advertised the Marshal that
they saw above fifteen Squadrons to descend from the hill, The hazard of
Marshal Humieres.
who were coming to fall upon the flank of his wing, who ordered the same
Cardonnier Lieutenant General to make head against them with the Squadrons of
Conismark, and the Chevalier de Sourdis to bring on the Musketeers who had
recovered their horses.

It was then that Monsieur began to engage himself on his side. Monsieur
engages.
He caused the Infantry to advance, and ordered Marshal Luxemburg to cause his
lest wing to advance.

Marshal Humieres was still in all the dangers and perils, M. Humieres beats
the Enemy.
finding new obstacles. The two Battalions which were in the great space, one
of which was the Prince of Oranges Guards, standing firm before the Squadrons
of Curasiers and of Tilladet, and could not be broken without the Infantry. He
then commanded Crevaut with the Queens Battalions, and Desbourdes and Raousset
with those of Navar to chase them, which was executed after a most vigorous
resistance. Having put to flight those Battalions, he met within a large plain
all the Enemies Cavalry who had prepared themselves for to receive him, there
being among others one Squadron of white Horse of the Princes own Guard, and
for that Revel's Brigade had suffered much, he caused the Gens d' Armerie to
advance, who being rallied and having liberty to extend themselves on every
side, they began to charge.

Monsieur who was in the midst of it, Monsieur encourages those that fly to
return to fight.
seeing some Battalions, and some Squadrons flying before a great Body of the
Enemies Foot in the same place where he begun to fight he ran to them crying.
Do you see me, and fly? where is the honor of France? By his Example and
Valor.
At the same time he made the Battalions of Greeder and Phiffer to march, to
which he joined his own company of the Guards, and kept none about his person
but his Gentlemen and Domestics. After these orders he rallied those that
fled, and sent them back to the fight, encouraging them by his Example, and
overthrew all the Enemies Infantry, who having prevailed in the disorder of the
French, had almost took their Camp. Monsieur exposed himself very much in this
occasion, receiving one Shot from a Musket upon his Arms. The Chevalier of
Lorrain was wounded in the front, The Chevalier of Lorain wounded.
and diverse other Gentlemen and Domestics belonging to his Royal Highness were
wounded by his side.

M. Humiers knows that Monsieur is victorious.
Marshal de Humieres seeing at the disorder of the Enemies Infantry, very well
perceived that Monsieur had gotten some considerable advantage. And finding he
had nothing to fear on that side, and having assured himself on the other side
with the Brigade of Moutrevel of the second Line, which was in very good order,
he reinforced the Gens d' Armery once more which had suffered much, with the
Brigade of Revel and other Squadrons which were near it, Puts the left wing of
the Hollanders to the rout.
and charged the gross body of the Hollanders Cavalry, which after an obstinate
fight began at last to repass the River, and then to disband and fly. Monsieur
at the same time was ready with his Infantry on the left side of that
victorious Wing, and met the Marshal who came from conquering with the Cavalry
the left wing of the Enemies, where were their greatest forces, and where
fortune seemed to dispute with the bravery of his Troops.

The Duke of Luxemburg, who with his left wing had not found that resistance in
the Enemies right, and who had wholly broken them, had order from his Royal
Highness to pursue the victory with diverse Squadrons of the Colonel Generals
and some others, who were drawn from the right wing of Marshal d' Humieres, and
which the Count Plessis had the charge to conduct to him.

The dangers and bravery of the Prince of Orange.
The Hollanders Army in the confusion gained the height and the way to Cassel
and la Belle. The Prince of Orange after that he had exposed himself diverse
times, and had received several shots upon his Arms, seeing the Battle lost
without recovery retired after all his cares sad and followed by few people,
hardly knowing whither to go. He went first to Steenwood and thence to
Poperinghen, finding at this time that fortune was not answerable to his
courage.

Monsieurs march.
Monsieur advanced as far as the hill, which was on the other side of the second
River, with the Brigades of d' Aubarode and Villechauvis to stay for the
Marshal of Luxembourg, or to sustain him in case that Count Nassau should have
attaqued him with those Troops which he led. The Marshal scattered many of the
Troops who had rallied to save their Baggage, Luxemburgs Actions.
and took many Officers and Soldiers prisoners, even two leagues on the other
side Cassel. The Hollanders lost all their Baggage, Food, and Prisoners, The
Hollanders loss.
thirteen pieces of Canon, a great many Mortarpieces, fifteen Standards, one
and forty Ensigns and above ten thousand men, that is to say 3000 slain, as
many wounded or taken prisoners, and the rest run away or rendered incapable of
service.

The chief of quality that were there lost of the Hollanders were Walstein
Commander of his Highnesses Dragoons. Hollanders of quality slain.
Colonels Scaep, Arembergh, Greames, Grime, Holfwege, Hornby, Truxes, Majors
of Brederods Foot, Waldeck, Kloostet the eldest son of Colonel Kilpatrick
Governor of Bosleduc, Everwyn Lieut. Col. of the same Regiment. Colonel
Slaneberg, the Baron of Lotthen and 150 Officers more.

Wounded and prisoners.
Those that were wounded and taken prisoners were Ryswith Cornet of the Guards
of the Body, Hortman Lieutenant of the Cavalry of Valdek, Croonmain Lieutenant
Colonel of the Guards, Siber Major, Laer Captain, la Noy Lieutenant Colonel to
Prince Maurice and Major Salis Lieutenant Colonel of Holstein with the Major
of the same Regiment, Haude Lieutenant Colonel of Horn with two Captains,
Schaep Major of Girickel, the Count Warfusce and Colonel Vergne wounded, and
prisoner, as also Colonel Witttenhoue, Lieutenant Colonel Oalkemburg,
Colonel the Count of Lip, Poeduvel Lieutenant Colonel of the Brandenburgs,
Major Grime, Colonel Colonel Zobel, Colonel Maregnault wounded, and about an
100 others as well Chief as under Officers.

The defeat of this Army had been entire but for the inequality of the Ground,
the Marshes, the Hedges, the Forests, the Shrubs and the coming on of the
night.

The Troops of the enemies that behaved themselves remarkuably were among the
Cavalry those of the Regiments of the Life Guard and the Dragoons of his
Highness, The Troops that did well.
those of Valdek, Brederods, Kinskel, Skaep Krouemburg, Aremberg, Greams being
Scotch. Among the Infantry, the Regiments of his Highness Guard of Foot, that
of Prince Maurice, the Duke of Hosteins, the Prince of Brandenburgs, Courland,
Ringrave, Waldeck, Horn, Girikil, Van-Eppe, Lavergne, Kilpatrick, Wittenhove,
Oalkembourg, Toursay, Lip, Klooster, Grime, Hoffwege, Zobel, Albrunsvart,
Slaugembur and three of Zeland.

This Victory cost Monsieur about two thousand men killed or wounded and some
prisoners. Slain and wounded of the French.
Among those that were slain were Moissac Cornet of the Musketeers l' Grange
Cornet of the Scotch Gens d' Arms Maker Cornet of the English, Bossier Captain
of the Guards, the Chevalier Beauveaux Captain Lieutenant of Monsieurs Gens d'
Arms, the Marquis of Villaserre, and Benese Captains of Tilladet, l' Estoille
Captain under the Marshal Logis of the Dauphins Dragoons, Mardoliers, Tlei and
Villairs Captains of Burgundy, Sebastier Captain in the Queens Regiment, Crean,
Humiers Lieutenant Colonel, Sigoville Major and Gozon Captain in the Regiment
of Le Main. Du Chelar Major, Lantillac and Meschatin Captains in that of Anjou,
Brisset Captain in that of Geneva a Peimontois. Villars Lieutenant Colonel in
the Royal Italian Regiment. Piequemont Colonel of the Regiment of Walloons. The
Chevalier Silly a Gentleman belonging to his Royal Highness.

Prisoners, Count Carces Ensign. in the Scotch Gens d' Arms dyed of his
wounds. The Chevalier La Guetle Captain Lieutenant of the English also wounded,
Refuge Captain and Bourru Lieutenant of the Guards.

Wounded: the Marquis of Livourn, the Count de Luc Musketeer. In the Scotch
Gens d' Armerie Livry and Passage, Quartermasters. In the English, the
Chevalier Estoges under Lieutenant, The Chevalier Crolly Ensign, Obrieu
Quartermaster. In the Gens d' Armery of Burgundy the Marquis of Montgon under
Lieutenant. In that of Flanders two Quartermasters and one Brigadier. In the
Regiment of the Queens Light horse, the Marquis Sequille Captain Lieutenant. In
that of the Dauphins light Horse the Marquis Vallarceaux under Lieutenant. In
that of the Gens d' Armerie of Anjou Lanion under Lieutenant. In that of the
Colonel Generals Captain Blot. In that of the Campmaster General the Chevalier
Lussau Captain, and Ferriers Cornet. In that of the Curassiers Mouces Captain.
In that of Tilladets Catin Aid Major and the Chevalier Narbonne Captain. In
that of Sourdis Caille Captain. In that of the Dragoons Colonel General
Paynae, Chemin, Grand-Val, and Cussan Captain. In that of Listenoy Baudet;
Lajanie and La Font Captains. In that of the French Guards Malissey and other
Captains, Sage, Varennes and Fouilles Lieutenants, Jolley, Beaumont under
Lieutenants, and Nonaut Ensign. In that of Navar Lurcy, Boistiroux, Castillon,
Harlier, Denot and Riotot Captains. In the Royal Regiment Villechauve
Lieutenant Colonel and Brigadier of the Infantry, Biseiux and Valle-sablon
Captains. In that of Conty the Chevalier Frissinet, Marvel and St. Seve
Captains. In that of Burgundy the Chevalier Villairs, Talleures, St. Cloy,
Beaureguard and Thomassin Captains. In the Queens Regiment Farges Lieutenant
Colonel, Grimpier, Val Crosseau, Duval, Montgrain and Bonnet Captains. In that
of Vaisseaux Lauzier Major, La Tournelle, Boissiere, Arbouville, La Mare and
Renoir Captains. In that of Lyonois L' Estolle Lieutenant Colonel, Sercave,
Dapinat, Bellegard, Montbrison, L^ntival, Montagny, d' Enonomville, and Bony
Captains. In that of Humieres Dames Major, Codere, Francalliere, Moncabau,
Fontaines, L' Hospital. Normandy La Seine, Milon and Gosse Captains. In that of
La Maceyns de La Hay de La Motte and du Tiel Captains. In that of Anjou
Melonnier Lieutenant Colonel Desnac, Clerac, Boulay, Boulac, Scalberg,
Chautezerce, Ferriere, Pallivil, Du Long and Le Comte Captains. In that of the
Crown the Chevalier Betancourt Genlis Colonel, Servey, and the Marquis of Air
the eldest son of the Count Tavanes Captains. In the Genevian Piemontois du
Clos, St. Luce, Chosil, Matovet and St. Seriel Captains. In the Royal Italian
Regiment the Count of Serraville the Marquis Orsucci, and Rossa Captains.
Griffi, Surgilli, Validini; Marchetti and Buzzoni under Officers. In that of
Phiffer Borgilli Margdossi and Aet Captains. In that of Greeders Zegber Major,
Fabri, Courtent, Burent and Watteville Captains. Volunteers who signalized
themselves.
that of Stouppe Benselle Captain, and some of the under Officers of each
Regiment.

There were beside very many persons of Quallity who on this occasion
signalized themselves in the quality of Volunteers, as the Prince of Isenghin;
the Brother of the Count de Solre, the Marquis of Thury, Daranantum, La
Vallerie and other Gentlemen of the French Flanders. Monsieur St. Pouange,
known very well for his employ which he dispensed with to expose himself to the
peril and dangers of War, not failing by by an excess of zeal and courage to be
in the first of the Troops that fought, and did great service in retaining
those who began to be disordered and in rallying those again who were dispersed.

This is the third Battle struck in this place.
The heat of the fight lasted three hours and an half, that is to say from two a
clock in the afternoon to half an hour after five in the evening. This is the
third Battle which has been struck under Cassel by three Generals bearing the
names of Philip. The first was advantageous to the low Countries through the
ill fortune of Philip the Fair, but the other two were as glorious to France
through the courage of Philip of Valois, and through the valor of this Philip
Duke of Orleans.

The news of this Victory being published in the Camp of the King, it was
solemnised by three valleys of all the Canon and all the Musketeers. His
Majesty giving to the Marquis d' Effiaut a Diamond worth two thousand Pistoles,
The King sends to complement Monsieur.
and sent away Monsieur de Gesvres the chief Gentleman of his Chamber to the
Monsieur to testify his Joy. The news in Paris.


Merille chief Groom of the Chamber to his Royal Highness brought this welcome
news to Madame on the twelfth at night. The next day Monsieur the Dauphin
accompanied with the Princes of Conty, Madame complemented.
the Duke of Montausier his Governor and many other young Princes and Lords of
the Court, came from the Castle of St Germains to Paris to rejoice with her for
the prosperous success of the Kings Arms under the conduct of Monsieur. His
Majesty wrote to her and sent Monsieur de Gombaud one of his Gentlemen in
ordinary to compliment her, and all the Princes and Princesses of the Blood,
Ministers, Strangers, and the chief persons of the Realm came to testify their
Joy to that Princess. They made Bonfires for joy before the Palace Royal and
also through all Paris by the people. Rejoicing.


The Citadel of Cambray is pressed.
After this victory they began to press upon the Citadel of Cambray. From the
thirteenth to the fourteenth at night they enlarged the places for their Arms,
and their Lodgment to put their Artillery under covert, and the descent into
the ditch. They raised new Batteries and sprung some mines, and they prepared
and charged others.

The fourteenth in the morning the Duke of Villeroy Lieutenant General, being
on the Guard with Rubentel Brigadier of the Infantry, and the Marquis d' Angeau
Aid de Camp, two Battalions of the Dauphins making an attaque on the plain and
of the Kings Battalions from without the Town, An Halfmoon taken and retaken.
they took the halfmoon being on the left hand being wholly ruined by the
Canon. The Governor of the Citadel not being able to suffer them so to carry
it at noon day, knowing of what consequence it was in giving courage to the
French by such easy success, he detached some of the best Officers and
Soldiers, and made them retake it before the French had begun to make any
Lodgment. The same Soldiers being willing to continue their point, and to
proceed to overthrow their Works, the Duke of Villeroy repulsed them vigorously
and had almost retaken the halfmoon if they had had any Tools and Workmen to
have lodged there, and if they had not considered, that they had attaqued it
more out of an Importment of Bravery than out of any reason of War.

Taken again.
From the fifteenth to the sixteenth the Count St. Geran, Marshal de Camp,
Josseaux Brigadier and the Marquis Chiverny Aid de Camp, being on the Guard of
the Trench, with two Battalions of Picardy, they carried entirely the same
Fort, and there made their Lodgments, whilst that two Battalions of the Guards
guarded the works on the right hand. His Majesty had ordered St. Geran not to
be too wilful in the taking it, in case that he should find any great
resistance, for that post being on the left side and without the attaques, the
taking of it appeared unprofitable and he had a mind to preserve his Soldiers.
But the out Sentinels, and the small Guards being on the point of the Halfmoon,
at the only menaces which a Sergeant of Picardy made something boldly, they
which guarded the place abandoned it.

The sixteenth the Marshal Feuillade being in the Trench with the Marquis of
Cavois Aid de Camp, The Governor summoned.
the King commanded a cessation of Arms, and let the Governor understand by
the Chevalier Nogent Aid de Camp, also to the King, that he had defended the
place according to all the Laws of War, and that could be expected from a man
of valor and reputation; that the Army from which he might have expected
relief was wholly defeated without hope of getting together again, that the
halfmoons and all the out places were taken, that there had been many breaches
made, and mines sprung to enlarge them, and in conclusion he ought not to be
wilful in any longer defense of the place, which would only serve to destroy a
great many valiant men on either side, which he might avoid, whilst he was in a
condition to make an honorable and advantageous Capitulation.

His answer.
The Governor answered by a letter sent back by the same Chevalier Nogent, that
he was yet in a condition to defend the place, that when his mines should have
ruined those Bastions they would attaque, there was still one where he could
lodge himself in safety, and that at last when he should be forced to yield to
his power, he hoped that his Majesty would use his ordinary generosity toward
those Soldiers which had done but their duty.

Nevertheless on the seventeenth in the morning seeing two Bastions almost
overthrown by the mines and by the Canon, their best Halfmoons lost, the the
ditches wholly filled up, and guard in the Trench in a condition to give a
general Assault, he thought it no part of his duty to stay for it, and more to
the purpose to preserve for his party the the rest of the Garrison, and some
riches, which he saw very well could not be saved but by a capitulation,
knowing as he did the valor of the Besiegers, and that the victory would be
easily achieved in the presence of the King, who knew to come by it through
ways so short and surprising. The King also treated him as favorably as he
could wish. He permitted him and his Garrison to come forth at the breach with
their Arms and Baggage, two pieces of Canon, and guarded as far as Brussels.
His Majesty immediately sent Marquis Louvis into the Citadel. The Governor
presented himself to the King sick and wounded, who praised his brave carriage
in the defense of the place. The Garrison went forth in good condition, except
the Irish Regiments of Molemby and Tilly, who as they had performed the most
vigorous Actions, had been also the most ill treated.

The King then caused Te Deum to be sung in the Metropolitan Church, The King
enters the Town and gives thanks.
and as if Heaven would concur with Earth to fill up the measure of this
Monarchs prosperity, the Siege was finished the same day that his Majesty had
finished in his Camp the stations of the Grand Jubilee. The Archbishop of
Paris, and the Father de La Chaise Confesser to the King, upon the Question
which had been formed whether his Majesty could obtain the Jubilee in any other
place than that which was set down in the Bull, decided that there was no place
limited for the person of his Majesty, since he was not in the same Capacity as
simple Travelers.

Lent also was concluded at the same time, which was now a time of
mortification to the Confederates as well as to the Catholics. And
distributed employments.
The King gave the Government of Cambray to Cezan Major of the Regiment of
Guards, the Lieutenancy to Dreux, the Majorality to Parisot Engineer, the
Command of the Citadel to Choisi one of the chief Engineers, and the
Lieutenancy to du Fresne. And for that Cezan was Governor of Conde that
Government was given to Lerretiere. The King then gave order for to repair the
Breaches, and to raise up the walls both of the Village and of the Citadel, to
put the fortifications in a good Condition, and to fling down their works.

The news carried to Paris.
The King sent away Count Grammount to carry the welcome news to the Queen and
to the Dauphin. The twenty second Te Deum was sung in Paris in the Church of
Nostredame The Queen and the Dauphin accompanied with the Prince and Princesses
and Ambassadors of Sovereign Princes, that were used to assist there; being
present; and Bonfires were made at night through the whole Town. The Queen sends
to complement the King and Monsieur.
The Queen sent to testify her joy to the King first; and to Monsieur, for the
prosperity of this Campaign by the Vicount Nantia her Esquire in ordinary.

The King departed from Cambray on the twentieth in the morning; The Kings
departure.
passing through Bouchain and lay at Douay. The twenty first he went to Lens
and lay at night at Bethune. The twenty second he went to Terouanne, whither
Monsieur came to see his Majesty.

Monsieur after the Victory against the Prince of Orange stayed some days in
his post, Monsieurs Actions after the Battle.
as well to observe the condition of the Enemies Army, as to hinder any of
those Troops from getting into St. Omers, and also to give time for his Cavalry
to take the benefit of the Forage which they had found on the other side of
Cassell, and for his Infantry to make use of the provisions which the
Hollanders had abandoned, and was enough to serve his Army for ten days at
least. His Royal Highness sent presently into the Field where the Battle was
struck, Carts and other Carriages with Physicians Chirurgians and necessary
provisions to succor those Enemies who had need of it, and commanded no
difference to be made at that time, betwixt those unfortunate people and those
of his own Men. Monsieur did not fail to press on the Siege in the mean time.
Every day four Battalions and some Squadrons had order to enter the Trenches
and to attack the Cow-fort. A Sally.
On the tenth of April the Besieged perceiving that Monsieur had quitted the
Siege to meet with the Hollanders Army, they resolved to endeavor to retake
that Fort by a brisk and vigourous Sally which they made. But the Marquis La
Trousse who was upon the Guards gave them a repulse. Afterward in the Quarter
of du Bac and of Nieurlet, where Phiffer commanded, they intercepted the
Letters which the Governor and the Magistrates of St. Omers wrote to the
Prince of Orange which contained the sad estate they were in, being as yet
ignorant of the defeat given to the Prince. Monsieur caused a copy of them to
be taken to show to the King, and thought it convenient to permit the original
to pass, that the enemy might be informed of their straits. A new Battery.
His Royal Highness caused the Artillery to be advanced against St. Omers, and
raised a new Battery of twenty pieces of Canon before the High Bridge. The
Attacque of Tattinghen being left the same instant that Monsieur quitted his
quarters, for that he found he had not forces enough to keep that post, M. de
Humieres returns.
but Marshal de Humieres returned before the place to put all things in a
condition to redouble the Attacques. The Besieged frequently sallied forth,
taking several prisoners. On the seventeeth they made one in which Cardonniere
was wounded, Frezelier the son killed, and a good number of Soldiers; but all
those endeavors of the Besieged, how brisk soever they were, were but like the
last glimmering of a Lamp going out. For in fine Monsieur having given his Army
a refreshment and time to get in the forage and munition of the enemies, and
being assured that the Prince of Orange with the relics of his Army was
retreated between Bruges and Gaunt, returned into the Camp at Blandeck on the
nineteenth and put the greatest parts of his Troops in Battalia on the Hill of
Arques. Monsieur returns to the Camp.


On the twentieth at night the Prince de Robeck and the Magistrate of the Town
not being able longer to resist the Artillery being now no longer ignorant of
the loss of the Battle, despaired of being succored, apprehending the
Consequence of a General Assault and believing they had done all things that
Honor required of them for the defense of the place, The Town capitulates.
they demanded to capitulate. Hostages were given on either side. Surrenders it
self.
Monsieur sent Colonel Villars into the Town and the Spaniards sents into the
Camp Colonel de Fey Colonel of Foot and d' Harnoncourt Colonel of Horse.
They had yet one Counterscarp left, one large ditch, and one Rampart of Earth
furnished with Gabions, Stakes and quick Hedges; so that they might have been
able to hold out for some days longer; but seeing themselves without any hope
of relief, and being threatened that they should have no quarter if the Town
should be taken by assault, or be made prisoners of war, if they should defer
the time longer ere they rendered themselves, were persuaded to come to a
conclusion, and which they must be forced to do within a few days at the least,
and also finding that the French were not at all moved by their long
resistance, hoping thereby at last to destroy the Troops of that Garrison, which
would be a great lost to Flanders, and which might yet render them good
service. All these things considered made them resolve to capitulate. Their
demands were strongly debated, and they were resolved not to receive them but
as Prisoners of war; but Monsieur having seen the King on the twenty second at
Terouanne, returned to his Camp with orders to agree to their Capitulation upon
honorable Terms. They left the place with Arms and Baggage, two pieces of Canon
and a Guard as far as Ypres and Gaunt. The Prince of Robeck and the Count of
St. Vignant at the head of their Garrison made their Reverence to his Royal
Highness, who received them with much Civility.

Monsieurenters the Town.
Monsieur entering into the Town caused the Te Deum to be sung, visited the
Rampart, and having given the necessary Orders for the putting the place into a
good Condition, and also provided for the necessities of the prisoners and for
those that were wounded, he went to join himself to the King.

The Government disposed of by the King.
His Majesty had given the Government of the place before he had left his Camp
before Cambray in the Favor of the Marquis St. Genles Commander of Douay and
gave the Lieutenancy to Raousset Captain of Navar, and made Rochepierre
Engineer the Major, and the command of Douay to the Marquis Pierrefit an
ancient Chevalier of Lorraine.

It has been a Custom between the Kings of England and France, Complements
betwixt the King of England and the French King.
when there has been amity betwixt them, that when ever either of them
approaches near each others Coast, to send mutual Complements each to other.
The French King therefore sent to his Majesty of great Britain the Duke de
Crequi Peer of France First Gentleman of his Chamber, Duke Crequi sent into
England.
Chevalier of the Orders and Governor of Paris. He parted from Court with a
Train of above an hundred Gentlemen. The Princes who joined themselves with him
to pay their respects to their Majesty's of great Britain in particular were
the Count of Soissons, the Duke of Bouillon and the Prince of Monaco. The King
of England sent into France the Earl of Sunderland, and the Duke of York sent
my Lord Duras Captain of his Guards.

The King desires peace.
The King might probably have increased his Conquests by a fourth Siege, and all
the low Countries were in such a consternation, and their Troops in so ill an
equipage that it was no hard matter for him to have improved his victory, but
his Majesty had a mind to let all Europe understand that whatever advantage he
had got by the continuation of the War, that he had yet a stronger inclination
for Peace, and in order thereto, he wrote to the King of Great Britain as a
Mediator, that he was ready to sign the Articles of Truce, to give leisure to
obtain the means for a conclusion of Peace. After this the King distributed his
Troops into their Quarters, breaking in the mean time the course of his
victories, to let them see the disposition which he had to give repose to
Europe, and to put himself into a condition to enter upon new enterprises, if
in case the Confederates should not yield their helping hands to a proposition
so reasonable.

The King retained about his Person a part of the Troops of his Horse, The King
visits the conquered places.
and went to visit all the places on the Frontiers and his Conquests in the low
Countries. He gave to Lieutenant General Cardonniere the charge of Camp master
General of the light Horse, vacant by the death of the Marquis of Reynel, and
made a Detachment of six thousand men under his conduct, for to march on the
side of the Meuse till further orders. The charge of Commissary General, which
he had before, was given to the Marquis Montrevil Brigadier of the Cavalry.

The twenty fifth his Majesty His voyage*
came to Gravelin and that night to Dunkirk. The next day he visited the Port,
Ramparts, and all other places of the Town. The twenty seventh he went to
Bergues, the twenty eighth he returned to Callis, where he gave a private
Audience to Griffendal Envoy extraordinary from the Sweed. There he also
received the compliments made him from his Majesty of Great Britain and from
his Royal Highness the Duke of York, Receives envoys from England.
by the Earl of Sunderland and the Lord Duras, who on the twenty ninth had
their Audience of taking leave introduced by Monsieur Bonnevil.

Mounsieur returns to Paris.
Monsieur having left the King at Callis, arrived on the third of May at Paris
with those Gentlemen who followed him. Madame, Madamoselle and many other
Princes, Princesses, and great ones of the Realm, came to meet him there and to
receive him. The next day after his arrival he went to render his visit to the
Queen in the Covent of the Carmelites in the Street of Bouloir: and the fifth
he went with all his Family to St. Germans, to see again the Queen and Monsieur
the Dauphin. The same day Te Deum was sung in the Church of Nostredame for the
conquest of St. Omer, and at night Bonfires were made for joy. The Popes Nuncio
and all the Ambassadors and Ministers and very many of quality of both sexes
made their complements to his Royal Highness both for the taking St. Omers and
for his victory at Cassel. Is complemented.


The King having taken a turn about all the Sea places, went into Artois with
the Court, and staid some days at St. Omers. From thence on the ninth of May he
made his entrance into Valenciennes, and staid a while in the County of
Hainault. The fourteenth he went to Conde, where he received news of the Sea
fight which the Count d' Estree had gained over the Hollanders in the Port of
Tobago in America.

In the mean time the Confederates established their head quarters in the
Country of Vaes. They had assured themselves of the Troops of Osnabruck,
Munster and Newbourg. The brave Prince of Orange had projected great
enterprises, as well with the States General as with the Spaniards, and the
Confederates in all their marches made appear that they were contriving to
revenge themselves of so many affronts they had received by the execution of
some great design.

The King rallied all his Troops from their quarters of refreshment, The King
takes a review of his Troops.
the 22th of May took a general review of his right wing in the Fields of
Thulin, and the 23th he reviewed his left wing under Bossu in the Territory of
Keeuvrain. He found his Army more flourishing than ever, being about forty
Battalions strong and fourscore and ten Squadrons, not comprehending those
Troops which he had detached to reinforce the Army of Marshal Crequi, nor those
which were sent into the service of the Marshal Schomberg between the Meuse and
the Moselle. His Majesty left the command of those in Flanders with Marshal
Luxemburg, and went on the 27th through Quesnay, and the 28th to Cambray, the 29
to Chaune, the 30th to Lioncourt where he was received by the Prince of
Marsillas the grand Master of his Wardrobe. The 31 in the morning Monsieur met
the King at Bourget, and at noon the Queen, the Dauphin, and the Princes, and
Princesses of the Court met his Majesty at Clichy, from whence they went to
Versailles.

The third of June the Marquis of Siegnelay presented to his Majesty the
Messieures of Parliament and of the other Sovereign Courts and Magistrates of
Paris, Returns and is complemented.
who did make their set Speeches on the felicity of his Arms in that glorious
Campain. The fourth Monsieur Bonnevil introduced to his Majesty the Nuncio and
all the Ambassadors and Ministers, Strangers who testified their admiration and
joy for the swiftness and greatness of his conquests.

The Campain ended in three months.
And thus the King ended his Campain in three months, of which he employed two
in his Conquests and the other in disposing things to assure what he had got.
Time will show the Importance and consequences of these things better than we
can. All that we may say, is that after the three most considerable places in
the low Countries both for their repute and fortifications, carried with so
great promtitude, the hardest part of the work was over. By these he had
covered all his former conquests, and put the frontiers of his Kingdom in a
condition to suffer no longer from the inroads of those Garrisons, nor to suffer
any Incommodity from the War.

FINIS.

