A COPY OF The Proceedings of some worthy and learned Divines, appointed by the
Lords to meet at the Bishop of LINCOLNS in WESTMINSTER.

Touching Innovations in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England.

Together with considerations upon the Common Prayer book.

Arch Bishop of Armach.

Bish. of Lincoln. Doct. Prideaux. Doct. Ward. Doct. Brownrig. Doct. Feately.
Doct. Hacket.
portrait of a cleric

Printed at London. 1641.

Innouations in Doctrine.
1. QVaere, Whether in the twentieth article these words are not inserted,
Habet Ecclesia authoritatem in controversiis fidei.

2. It appears by Stetfords and the approbation of the Licencers that some do
teach and preach, that good works are concauses with faith in the act of
Justification. Doctor Dove also has given scandal in that point.

3. Some have preached that works of penance are satisfactory before God.

4. Some have preached, that private Confession by particular enumeration of
sins is necessary to salvation, necessitate medii; both those errors have
been questioned at the Consistory at Cambridge.

5. Some have maintained, that the absolution, which the Priest pronounces, is
more then Declaratory.

6. Some have published, that there is a proper Sacrifice in the Lords Supper,
to exhibit Christ's death in the Postfact, as there was a sacrifice to prefigure
in the old Law, in the Antefact, and therefore that we have a true Altar, and
therefore not only metaphorically so called, so Doctor Heylin and others in the
last Summers Convocation, where also some defended, that the Oblation of the
Elements might hold the nature of the true sacrifice, others the consumption of
the Elements.

7. Some have introduced prayer for the dead, as M. Brown in his printed
sermon, and some have colored the use of it with questions in Cambridge and
disputed, that preces pro defunctis non supponunt purgatorium.

8. Diverse have oppugned certitude of salvation.

9. Some have maintained the lawfulness of monastical vows.

10. Some have maintained that the Lords day is kept merely by ecclesiastical
constitution, and that the day is changeable.

11. Some have taught as new and dangerous Doctrine, that the subjects are to
pay any sums of money imposed upon them though without law; nay, contrary to
the laws of the Realm, as D. Sybthorp and D. Manwaring Bishop of S. David's,
in their printed sermons, whom many have followed of late years.

12. Some have put scorns upon the two books of Homilies, calling them either
popular discourses, or a doctrine useful for those times wherein they were set
forth.

13. Some have defended the whole gross substance of Arminianisme, that
Electio est ex fide praevisa, That the act of conversion depends upon the
concurrence of man's free will, That the justified man may fall finally and
totally from grace.

Some have defended universal grace as imparted as much to Reprobates as to
the Elect, and have proceeded usque ad salutem Ethnicorum, which the Church of
England bath anathamatized.

15. Some have absolutely denied original sin, and so evacuated the Cross of
Christ, as in a disputation at Oxer.

16. Some have given excessive cause of scandal to the Church as being
suspected of Socinianisme.

17. Some have defended that concupiscence is no sin either in the habit or
first motion.

18. Some have broacht out of Socinus a most uncomfortable and desperate
doctrine, that late repentance, that is, upon the last bed of sickness, is
unfruitful, at least to reconcile the penitent to God.

Add unto these some dangerous and most reproveable Books.
1. THe reconciliation of Sancta Clara to knit the Romish and Protestant in
one, Memorandum that he be caused to produce Bish. Watsons book of the like
reconciliation which he speaks of.

2. A book called Brevis Disquisitio printed (as it is thought) in London, and
vulgarly to be had, which impugneth the doctrine of the holy Trinity, and the
verity of Christ's body (which he took of the blessed virgin) in Heaven, and
the verity of our resurrection.

3. A book called Timotheus philalethes de pace Ecclesia, which holds that
every religion will save a man if he hold the Covenant.

Innovations in discipline.
1. THe turning of the holy Table Altarwise, and most commonly calling it an
Altar.

2. Bowing toward it, or toward the East, many times, with three congees; but
unusual in every motion, access, or recesse in the Church.

3. Advancing Candlestickes in many Churches upon the Altar so called.

4. In making Canopies over the Altar so called, with traverses and curtains
on each side and before it.

5. In compelling all Communicants to come up before the railes, and there to
receive.

6. In advancing Crucifices and Images upon the parafront or Altarcloth so
called.

7. In reading some part of Morning prayer at the holy Table, when there is no
Communion celebrated.

8. By the Ministers turning his back to the West, and his face to the East
when he pronounces the Creed, or reads Prayers.

9. By reading the Letany in the midst of the body of the Church in many
Parochial Churches.

10. By pretending for their Innovations the injunctions and advertisements of
Queen Elizabeth, which are not in force, but by way of commentary and
imposition, and by putting to the Liturgy printed secundo, tertio Edwardi
sexti, which the Parliament has reformed and laid aside.

11. By offering of Bread and Wine by the hand of the Churchwardens, of others,
before the consecration of the Elements.

12. By having a Credentia, or side-table, besides the Lords Table, for diverse
uses in the Lords Supper.

13. By introducing an Offertory before the Communion, distant from the giving
of Alms to the poor.

14. By prohibiting the Ministers to expound the Catechism at large to their
Parishioners.

15. By suppressing the Lectures partly on Sundaies in the afternoon, partly on
week days, performed as well by combination, as some one man.

16. By proibiting a direct prayer before Sermon, and bidding of prayer.

17. By singing the Te Deum in prose after a Cathedral Church way, in diverse
Parochial Churches, where the people have no skill in such Music.

18. By introducing Latin Service in the Communion of late in Oxford, and into
some Colleges in Cambridge, at Morning and Evening prayer, so that some young
Students, and the servants of the College do not understand their prayers.

19. By standing up at the Hymbes of the Church, and always at Gloria Patri.

20. By carrying children from the baptism to the Altar so called, there to
offer them up to God.

21. By taking down Galleries in Churches, or restraining the building of such
Galleries where the Parishes are very populous.

Memorandum.
1. THat in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches two Sermons be preached
every Sunday by the Deane and Prebendaries, or by their procurement, and
likewise every Holiday, and one Lecture at the least to be preached on working
days every week, all the year long.

2. That the Music used in Gods holy Service in Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches be framed with less curiosity, that it may be more edifying and more
intelligible and that no Hymns or Anthems be used where Ditties are framed by
private men, but such as are contained in the sacred Canonical Scriptures, or
in our Liturgy of prayers, or have public allowance.

3. That the Reading-deske be placed in the Church where divine Service may
best be heard of all the people.

Considerations upon the Book of Common Prayer.
1. WHether the names of some departed Saints and others should not be quite
expugned the Calendar.

2. Whether the reading of Psalms, sentences of Scripture concurring in diverse
places in the Hymns, Epistles, and Gospels, should not be set out in the new
translation.

3. Whether the Rubrique should not be mended, where all Vestments in them of
divine Service are now commanded which were used, 2. Ed. 6.

4. Whether Lessons of Canonical Scripture should be put into the Calendar in
stead of Apocrypha.

5. That the Doxologie should be always printed at the end of the Lords
prayer, and be always said by the Minister.

6. Whether the Rubrique should not be mended, where it is (that the Lessons
should be sung in a plain tune) why not (read with a distinct voice.)

7. Whether Gloria Patri should be repeated at the end of every Psalm.

8. Whether according to that end of the Preface before the Common Prayer, the
Curate should be bound to read Morning and Eveving Prayers every day in the
Church, if he be at home, and not reasonably let, and why not only on
wednesday, and friday morning, and in the afternoon on Saturdaies, with holiday
eves.

9. Whether the Hymns, Benedicite omnia opera, etc. may not be left out.

10. In the prayer for the Clergy, that phrase perhaps to be altered, [which
only works great marvels.]

11. In the Rubrique for the administration of the Lords Supper whether this
alteration to be made, that such as intend to communicate shall signify their
names to the Curate over night or in the morning before Prayers.

12. The next Rubrique to be cleared, how far a Minister may repulse a
scandalous and notorious sinner from the Communion.

13. Whether the Rubrique is not to be mended, where the Churchwardens are
straightly appointed to gather the alms for the poor before the Communion
begin, for by experience it is proved to be done better when the people depart.

14. Whether the Rubrique is not to be mended, concerning the party that is to
make his general confession upon his knees before the Communion, that it
should be said only by the Minister, and then at every clause repeated to the
people.

15. These words in the form of the Consecration, This is my body, this is my
blood of the New Testament, not to be printed hereafter in great Letters.

16. Whether it will not be fit to insert a Rubrique touching kneeling at the
Communion, that is, to comply in all humility with the prayer which the
Minister makes, when he delivers the Elements.

17. Whether Cathedral and Collegiate Churches shall be straightly bound to
celebrate the holy Communion every Sunday at the least, and might not it rather
be added once in a month.

18. In the last Rubrique touching the Communion, is it not fit that the
Printer make a full point, and begin with a new great letter at these words.
And every Parishioner shall also receive the Sacraments.

19 Whether in the first prayer at the baptism, these words, Did sanctify
the flood Jordan, and all other waters, should not be thus changed, Did
sanctify the Element of water.

20. Whether it be not fit to have some discreet Rubrique made to take away
all scandal from signifying the sign of the Cross upon the infants after
baptism, or if it shall seem more expedient, to be quite disused, whether this
reason should be published, that in ancient Liturgies no Cross was consigned
upon the party, but where Oil also was used, and therefore Oil being now
omitted, so may also that which was concomitant with it, the sign of the
Cross.

21. In private baptism, the rubrique mentions that which must not be done,
that the Minister may dip the child in water being at the point of death.

22. Whether in the last rubrique of confirmation those words be to be left
out [and be undoubtedly saved.]

23. Whether the Catechism may not receive a little more enlargement.

14. Whether the times prohibited for marriage are quite to be taken away.

25. Whether none hereafter shall have licenses to marry, nor be asked their
banes of Matrimony, that shall not bring with them a Certificate from their
Ministers that they are instructed in their Catechism.

26. Whether these words in Matrimony [with my body I thee worship] shall not
be thus altered, I give thee power over my body.

27. Whether the last rubrique of marriage should not be mended, that new
married persons should receive the Communion the same day of their marriage,
may it not well be or upon the next Sunday following when the Communion is
celebrated.

28. In the absolution of the sick, were it not plain to say, I pronounce
thee absolved.

29. The Psalm of thankesgiving of women after Childbirth, were it not fit to
be composed out of proper Versicles taken from diverse Psalms.

30 May not the Priest rather read the Commination in the Deske, then go up to
the pulpit.

31. The rubrique in the Commination leaves it doubtful whether the Letanie
may not be read in diverse places in the Church.

32. In the order of the burial of all persons, it is said, We commit his body
to the ground, in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life. Why
not thus knowing assuredly, that the dead shall rise again.

33 In the Collect next unto the Collect against the pestilence, the clause
perhaps to be mended, For the honor of Jesus Christ's sake.

34. In the Letany instead of for nication and all other deadly sin, would it
not satisfy thus? from fornication and all other grievous sins.

35. It is very fit that the imperfections of the meeter of the singing Psalms
should be mended, and then lawful authority added unto them, to have them
publicly sung before and after Sermons, and sometimes instead of the Hymns of
morning and evening prayer.

FINIS.

