ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQVIRY Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL,
Exhibited to the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, Of every Parish
within the Diocese of LINCOLN, At the Primary Visitation of the Right Reverend
Father in GOD, THOMAS, Lord Bishop of that Diocese.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

The Tenor of the Oath to be Administered to the Churchwardens and Sides-men of
every Parish.
YOU shall swear in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness, faithfully to execute
the Office of a Churchwarden within your Parish; and according to the best of
your S^^ll and Knowledge, Present such Things and Persons, as by these
Articles, and the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, you know to be
Presentable. So help you GOD.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of LINCOLN.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
IS your Church or Chapel kept in good and sufficient repair, and all things
so decently ordered and kept clean, as becomes the House of God?

II. Is there in the Church (or Chapel) a Font of Stone standing in the usual,
ancient place, with a Cover to it, for the Administration of Baptism? Is there
also a convenient Communion Table, covered with a fair Carpet of Silk, or other
decent Stuff, in time of Divine Service; and with a fair Linen Cloth at the
time of Administering the Sacrament? What Cup, Chalice, Paten, or Flagons, have
you belonging to that Service?

III. Have you in your Church (or Chapel) a convenient Seat for your Minister
to read Divine Service in, and a Pulpit with a decent Cloth or Cussion for the
same? Have any Pews or Seats been erected by any private person of his own
authority without leave from the Ordinary?

IV. Have you a large Folio Bible of the last Translation, with two Books of
Common Prayer well bound, one for the Minister, the other for the Clerk? Have
you the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority, the Book of Canons, and the
Table of Degrees allowed and prohibited in Marriage?

V. Have you a Register Book of Parchment for all who are Christened, Married,
and Buried in the Parish, in which are set down the Names of the Parties, with
the Day, Month and Year of each Christning, Marriage, and Burial? Is the
Transcript thereof every year, within one month after the 25 of March, carried
into the Bishops Registry?

VI. Have you a Paper Book in which the Names of Strangers who Preach or
Officiate in the Church (or Chapel) are set down? And another Book for the
Churchwardens Accounts?

VII. Have you a fair Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his
public Ministration provided at the charge of the Parish?

VIII. Have you a Chest for Alms, with three Locks and Keys, and another Chest
to keep the Books and Ornaments of the Church? Have you a Bier with a black
Herse-cloth for the Burial of the dead?

IX. Is the Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Pales, or Rails, and
decently kept from all annoyance or Encroachments? Are the Trees therein
preserved?

X. Is the Mansion House of your Minister, with all other Houses thereto
belonging kept in good repair? Have any of them been pulled down or defaced?
Has any incroached upon the Land thereto belonging, or felled the Trees
thereon growing?

XI. Have you a perfect Terrier of all Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards, and
Tenements belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage; also a particular Lift of
such Pensions, Tithes, or other yearly profits (either within or without the
Parish), as belong thereunto? Are any of them withheld from your Minister, as
you know, or have heard, and by whom?

XII. Have any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage been taken away, or alienated by Sale or Exchange, without License
from the Ordinary, and free consent of the Incumbent?

TIT. II. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister Episcopally ordained Deacon or Priest, according to the
Laws of the Realm of England? Is he defamed or suspected to have obtained his
Orders or Benefice by any Simoniacal compact? Has he been legally Instituted
and Inducted into his Benefice? and did he within two Months after his
Induction, publicly read in the Church, in the time of Divine Service, the 39
Articles of Religion, established in the Church of England? And did he then and
there declare his assent thereunto?

II. Has your Minister been Licenced to Preach by the Archbishop, Bishop of
this Diocese, or either of the two Universities? Does he diligently read Divine
Service, and Preach every Lords Day in the Church, unless hindered by Sickness,
or reasonable absence? And in such cases, does he procure some lawful Minister
to read Prayers, to Preach, and perform other Ministerial Duties?

III. Has your Minister (or any other who Preached in your Church) published
in his Sermons any Doctrine which is new, strange, and disagreeing from the
Word of God, and the Articles of the Christian Faith, or any thing against the
Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England, as they are now established?

IV. Does your Minister in the Morning and Evening Service, in the
Administration of the Sacraments, and in performing other Religious Offices
appointed by the Church of England, use the respective Forms in the Book of
Common Prayer, which are enjoined in this Church? And does he make use of the
Surplice when he reads Divine Service, or Administers the Sacraments?

V. Does your Minister diligently Catechize the Youth of his Parish every
Sunday and Holyday before Evening Service? Does he prepare and procure them (as
occasion is offered) to come and be confirmed by the Bishop? And does he
endeavor to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and all Sectaries in your Parish, to
the true Religion?

VI. Is your Minister a Man of sober, unblamable, and exemplary life? Is he
grave, modest and regular in his outward demeanor and Apparel, according to the
Constitutions of the Church? Or is his carriage, conversation, or company, in
any kind whatsoever, disorderly, or scandalous, and unbeseeming his Calling and
Charge?

VII. Is your Minister ready to visit the Sick, and to Baptize Infants in
danger of death, being so desired? Is any Infant, or more aged Person in the
Parish yet unbaptized by his default? Have those Children which have been
Baptized in private Houses by the Minister of the Parish, afterward been
brought into the Church? and did the Minister there certify the Congregation,
That the true Form of Baptism was by him privately before used? Or if any
Children in the Parish have been Baptized privately by any other lawful
Minister, have those Children been brought to your Church? And has the
Minister of the Parish there examined, whether such Children were lawfully
Baptized, or not? Does your Minister refuse to give the Sacrament to any in the
Parish, and for what cause? Or does he give it to such as are scandalous, or
notorious sinners, or to any Excommunicate persons? Does he duly Administer the
Blessed Sacrament three times every year at the least, whereof Easter to be one?

VIII. Does your Minister Marry any Persons in Private Houses, or such as are
under age, not having the content of their Parents and Guardians? Does he Marry
any without Banes first published three Sundays or Holydays in the Church? or
at prohibited times or hours, without License so to do? Or with the License of
any other than the Archbishop, Bishop of this Diocese, or his Chancellor?

IX. Does your Minister duly bid and observe Holy Days, and Fasting-days, as is
appointed? And does he then use the Forms of Prayer prescribed by the Church?
Has he taken upon him to appoint any private Fasts, or Religious Exercises,
without Lawful Authority? Does he, or any other (Minister or Lay person) in
your Parish, hold any Conventicles, or Religious meetings for people of several
Families to resort unto, contrary to the Laws in that case provided?

X. Is your Minister constantly resident among you, and how many weeks in the
year has he been absent from his Benefice? Has he a Curate to assist him in
his absence or presence? Is that Curate in Holy Orders, and has he a License
from the Bishop, to serve the said Cure? Does he carry himself in all things as
an able and discreet Minister, and conformable to the Church of England? Does
he serve any more Cures beside that of your Parish, and at what distance? And
does any Layman, not being in Holy Orders, presume to read Public Prayers in
the Church?

XI. Is there in your Parish any Lecturer? Is he in Orders, and duly Licenced?
Does he read Divine Service before his Lecture? And is he conformable to the
Discipline of the Church of England?

XII. Does your Minister every six months publicly denounce all such as
persevere in the Sentence of Excommunication, not seeking to be Absolved? Have
any Excommunicate Persons been received into the Church, without a Certificate
from the Ordinary of their Absolution? Or any so dying, buried with Christian
Burial?

TIT. III. Concerning Parishioners.
I. ARE there any in your Parish who are reputed Heretics or Schismatics,
refusing Communion with the Church of England? Any Impugners of the Religion
established, of his Majesty's Supremacy, or of any of the Laws, Rites, and
Ceremonies Ecclesiastical? Have any spoken or declared any thing in derogation,
or to the depraving of the Form of Gods Worship in the Church of England, and
Administration of the Sacraments, prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, as
it is now Established by Law? Are there any convicted Papists, known
Anabaptists, or Quakers, in the Parish?

II. Are there any in your Parish who lie under a common fame, or vehement
suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common Drankards,
Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods Holy Name and Word? Are there any
Excommunicate persons, or any who countenance, or keep company with them? What
punishment for any such offenses have been commuted and exchanged into a
Pecuniary Mulct or Sum of Money by any Ecclesiastical Judge, exercising
Jurisdiction within this Diocese, by virtue of any Grant or Commission? What
was the Sum of Money by them, or any of them so received and taken, and to what
uses was the same bestowed?

III. Do any of your Parish profane the Lords Day by neglecting of public
holy Duties, or by doing the works of their ordinary Calling, or using
unlawful, Recreations, or permitting their Children and Servants so to do? Do
they duly observe other Holidays, Festivals and Fasts appointed by Authority?

IV. Do all those who inhabit in your Parish, duly resort to your Church (or
Chapel) and continue there during Divine Service, Sermon, and other Holy
Duties, with that reverence, order and decency, as befits devout Christians? Or
have any occasioned riot, clamor, or fighting in the Church at any time? Is
there any Recusant, Papists, or Sectaries in your Parish? Do they, or any of
them keep any, Schoolmaster in their House, which comes not to Church to hear
Divine Service, and receive the Holy Communion?

V. Are there any in your Parish who refuse to have their Infant-children
Baptized by your Minister? or do they keep them unbaptized longer than the
Church allows? and what Infants, or more aged persons, are there in your Parish
unbaptized?

VI. Do all your Householders duly send their Children, Apprentions, and
Servants to be Catechized? And do they take care (when occasion is offered)
they should be Confirmed by the Bishop?

VII. Is there any person in your Parish so confirmed and instructed, and,
being sixteen years of age, who refuses to receive the blessed Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, at least three times every year, whereof Easter to be one?
And do all receive this Sacred Mystery with that outward gesture of humility
and reverence as becomes them, meekly kneeling upon their knees, according to
the order and custom of the Church?

VIII. Are there any in your Parish who are known or suspected to be unlawfully
Married, contrary to the Laws of God and this Church? Are there any, who being
lawfully Married, (and never Divorced) do yet live asunder? Or any, who being
lawfully Divorced, do live together again? Or being separated for Adultery,
have afterward enter married with any other during the life of their first
Consort?

IX. Are there any married Women in your Parish, who after their safe delivery
from Childbirth, refuse to make their humble and public Thanksgivings to God,
according to the appointment of the Church.

X. Are there any of your Church, who refuse to pay their Easter Offerings, and
other Duties to your Minister? Or to pay the Rates assessed on them, for the
repair and provisions of the Church?

XI. Do you know, or have you heard of any Patron or other person in your
Parish, who having the Gift of an Ecclesiastical Benefice, has made gain,
thereby upon any Bargain, either for Money, Pension, Lease, Reserve of Tithes,
or Gle^e, or other Simoniacal Compact whatsoever?

XII. Do any among you refuse to bury their Dead, according to the Rites of the
Church of England? Are there any Wills of deceased persons unproved, or Goods
not administered? Do you know of any Legacies given to your Church, on the
Cathedral Curch of St. Paul in London, or to the Poor, or to other charitable
uses, not yet received by you, or detained from you, or not applied to the
charitable uses appointed?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Officers belonging to the Church.
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly chosen according to Law? And
are there Sidemen appointed to assist them, for the due ordering of the Church?

II. Have the former and last Church Wardens given up their Accounts to those
that succeed them, together with all Moneys, and other things belonging to your
Church or Chapel?

III. Have you a Parish Clark, aged twenty years at least* who is of sober Life
and good report? Is he chosen by your Minister, and approved by the Parish? And
is he able for Reading, Writing, and Singing, as a Clerk? And his Wages duly
paid him?

IV. Does he or your Sexton take care of your Church, to keep it locked and
clean, to open the doors, and ring the Bells in due time, to call the Living to
the Worship of God; also to admonish them by Tolling of a Passing Bell for any
that are dying, thereby to meditate of their own death, and to commend the
others weak condition to the mercy of God?

TIT. V. Concerning Almshouses, Schools, and Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Chyrurgions, and Midwifes.
I IS there any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School, Founded in your Parish?
Are they so governed and ordered in the use and revenue as the Founders
appointed, according to the Ordinances and Statutes which have been made
concerning the same?

II. Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish? Is he or
they licenced and allowed thereunto by the Bishop or his Chancellor? Does he
instruct his Scholars in the Catechism and Religion of the Church of England?
Is there any Woman that takes upon her to instruct and educate any young
Maidens? Does she resort duly, and bring with her to Divine Service, upon the
Lords Day and Holidays, all such young Maidens as are committed to her care?

III. Do any in your Parish practice Physic, Chyrurgery, or Midwifery, without
License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VI. Touching Ecclesiastical Officers.
I. ARE there any Ecclesiastical Officers that exercise Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within this Diocese, that take, and receive any extraordinary Fees
for any Cause? Have abuses or offenses been presented by Churchwardens and
Quest-men? And are such offenses, being presented, suppressed or left
unpunished?

II. Have any Apparitors taken any reward for the concoaling of any offense, or
the avoiding of the punishment of the Offenders? And do they summon any without
a Citation first had?

IF you know of any other Default or Crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, you
are to present the same.

Advertisements.
I. EVery Parson and Vicar, and (in their lawful absence) the Curate of any
Parish, may join in Presentiments with the Churchwardens and Sidemen; and if
they will not Present, then the Ministers themselves (being the Persons that
have the chief care of suppressing Sin and Impiety in their Parishes) may
Present such Crimes as are against the Ecclesiastical Laws, and want due
Reformation. Can. 113.

II. THe Ministers are to take notice, that the Bishop at his Visitation, will
be ready to Confirm the Youth who shall be fitted and brought before him; and
therefore they are desired, by diligent Catechizing in the Grounds of Religion,
to prepare those under their charge, and bring them at the time appointed, to
the Bishop: For as (de Jure) he cannot, so (de Facto) he will not Confirm any,
save such who have been duly Catechized, and (by their Pastors Testimony) have
attained such a measure of Knowledge of the Principles of Christian Religion,
as may render them capable of Confirmation.

T. LINCOLN.


