An Extract out of a LETTER from a Gentleman of Quality, wherein this ADDRESS
was sent up to be Printed.
SIR,
I Send you enclosed the Address of this County, just as it is desired to be
Printed, to avoid surreptitious Copies, which I leave to your care to be done,
with all speed possible; and that we may have some Copies sent down by this
Bearer my Servant. I suppose the sale of it will abundantly pay the Printing.
And it had so good a Reception, that I would not for any Money we had been
neglectfull in it. The Parliament Commissioners were mightily displeased with
it, and the City Commissioners as well satisfied; unto whom there has been
given a Copy of our Address, and a Letter also sent to the Common Council. My
Lord General being advised aforehand by -- not to receive any Address, told
him, He would consider: But when the Gentlemen came, he received it; and not
opening the Paper, told them, He understood the scope of it was to have the
Parliament filled, which he had intelligence the Parliament would consent to,
and so hoped their desires would be answered. He told us; He would endeavor to
have the Parliament filled, and sit without interruption, gave thanks to the
Gentlemen of the County, for their kindness, and took notice how great
Obligation he had to the Gentlemen of the North; and said, He would support
both the Ministers and Gentry. Some Presents of Venison and Wine were very
acceptable to him: As likewise the appearance of the Gentry, who met him with
about 300 Horse. I wish that as many persons of quality as can, would meet and
wait on him at Barnet, where his general Rendezvouze will be on Monday next:
And if you hear of any surprise that may be offered from the Army at London,
and Sectaries, it will be very acceptable to give him notice of such Designs
and motions: Though indeed the General is cautious enough both of his Person
and his Army; for when one of the Parliaments Commissioners pressed him to come
to London with one Regiment of Horse, he replied, He understood he was
obnoxious to a great Envy, and the Anabaptisticall Party was numerous about the
Town; and judged it absolutely unsafe to go without his Army; which consists
of 5000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, all well appointed. I am confident, he will
maintain whatsoever the House will do when it is filled up; and I believe will
be against the pressing an Engagement. I am

SIR, Your humble Servant, H. C.
Northampton, Ian. 27. 1659.
The Address of the County of NORTHAMPTON, To his Excellency the Lord General
MONCK.
WE the Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, and others of the County of
Northampton, humbly conceiving that the first Force put upon the Parliament,
has been an Encouragement to open the way to all the rest, and finding that
your Excellency under God has been the principal means for repairing of the
last Interruption, are the more encouraged (having the presence of your
Excellency now among us) to desire your Assistance in the procuring these our
just Desires, as a visible means of a happy Peace, and Settlement of these
Nations.

Whereas every Freeborn Subject of England is supposed to be present in
Parliament, by the Knights or Burgesses of the place where he lives, and
thereby is presumed to consent to all things that pass in Parliament: So it is
now, that there is not one Knight for all the Counties in Wales, nor for diverse
Counties of England, and some of them the largest in England, as that of
Yorkshire, and for this County, and the Buroughs but Two of Nine.

I. Therefore we desire, That all vacant places may be supplied, whether they
became vacant by Death or Seclusion, and that those that were secluded by Force
in the Year 1648. may sit again: And that no previous Oath or Engagement may be
put upon any that is chosen by his Country, to sit and Vote freely in
Parliament.

II. That no Freeborn Subject of England may have any Taxes levied upon him
without his consent in Parliament.

III. That the Fundamental Laws of England, the Privileges of Parliament,
the Liberty of the Subject, the Propriety of Goods, may be asserted and
defended according to the first Declarations of the Parliament, when they
undertook the War.

IV. That the true Protestant Religion may be professed and defended, all
Heresies and Schisms discountenanced and suppressed; A lawful succession of
godly and able Ministers, continued, and encouraged, and the two Universities,
and all Colleges in both of them, preserved and countenanced.

V. That all the Soldiery that will acquiesce in the judgment of a Free and
Full Parliament, in the promoting and settling a happy Peace upon these
Foundations, may have their Arrears paid; and as many of them as the Parliament
shall think necessary, may be continued in the Public Service: And that as
many of them as have been Purchasers of Lands from the Parliament, may either
enjoy their Bargains, or their Money paid back with Interest, and some
considerable advantage over and above, as the Parliament shall judge may be
more expedient to the good of the Nation.

This Address was presented to his Excellency the Five and Twentieth of
January, by Colonel Benson the High-Sheriffe, attended by Forty or Fifty of the
principal Gentlemen of the County, and subscribed by above Ten thousand Hands
annexed thereunto, and three times as many more whose Names there wanted time
to engrosse.


