ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED of AND ANSWERED unto BY THE Churchwardens and Sworn
Men IN THE PRIMARY VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God, SIMON Lord
Bishop of Chichester, MDCXC.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXC.

The Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens of each Parish.
YOU shall swear truly and faithfully to execute the Office of a Churchwarden
within your Parish, and shall diligently enquire and make true Presentment of
such Things and Persons as you know to be presentable by the Ecclesiastial Laws
of this Realm. So help you God.

ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY, Unto which The Churchwardens or Sidemen are to answer in
the Diocese of Chichester.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches, Chapels, with the things belonging thereunto.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel, Can. 85.
both in the Roof and Windows, Floor and Seats, in good and sufficient repair;
and are all things therein kept in an orderly and decent sort? II. Is there a
Font of Stone in your Church or Chapel, Can. 81, 82.
with a Cover to it; standing in the ancient usual place? Does your Minister
there Baptize publicly? Is there a decent Communion Table in your Chancel;
covered in time of Divine Service with a Carpet, and when the Communion is
administered, with a fair Linen Cloth? Can. 64.
And have you a Chalice or Communion-Cup, with a Cover, and one or more
Flaggons? Have any of these been profaned by common use? III. Have you a
convenient Seat or Pew wherein to read Divine Service; a Pulpit; Can. 74, 75.83
a large Bible of the last Translation; a Book of Common Prayer published 1662;
the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority; a Printed Table of the Degrees
wherein Marriages are prohibited; a Book of Canons; and a decent Surplice? IV.
Have you a Parchment Book for the Registring of the Day and Year of every
Christning, Wedding and Burial in your Parish; and is it kept in all points,
according to the Canon in that behalf? Can. 70.

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, Houses, Glebes and Tithes belonging to
the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard well fenced, and decently kept? Has any person
encroached upon it, or made any door into it? And how long since? II. Is the
House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the Outhouses in good repair? Have
any of them been defaced or pulled down without License? Have there been any
encroachments made upon the same, and by whom? III. Have you a true Terrier of
all the Glebelands, Can. 87.
Meadows, Gardens, Orchards Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage
or Vicarage? As also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portions of
Tithes, or other yearly profits (either within or without your Parish) as
belong thereunto? Have any of them been withheld from your Minister, and by
whom, as you know or have heard? And is your Terrier laid up in the Bishop's
Registry?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister licensed by the Bishop? 8.
Has he been legally inducted? And read the 39. Articles within the time by
Law appointed, and declared his Assent thereto? Is he defamed or suspected to
have obtained either his Benefice or Orders by any Simoniacal compact? II. Is
your Minister constantly resident among you and does he preach every Lord's
Day, unless hindered by Sickness or reasonable Absence? How long in any one year
has he been absent from his Cure? who supplies it, during his absence? Does he
serve any other Cure besides, or has he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? Act
of Uniformity.
III. Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and
Evening Service, Administration of the Holy Sacraments, Celebration of
Marriage, Churching of Women after Childbirth Visitation of the Sick, Burial of
the Dead, use the Form and Words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer: and
all such Rites and Ceremonies, as are appointed in that Book, so far as you
have observed? IV. Does your Minister at the Reading and Celebrating Divine
Offices in your Church or Chapel, Can. 58.
wear the Surplice; togethe^ with such other habit as is suiteable to his
Degree? V. Does he celebrate the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper so often, Can.
21, 22, 26. Rubric before the Communion. Can. 59. Rubric before Confirm. Can.
61.
that every Parishioner may receive it thrice at least in every year? And does
he keep back such as ought not to be admitted, giving an Account of them to the
Bishop? VI. Does your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in
the Church Catechism? And does he prepare and present them, being so
instructed, to be confirmed by the Bishop? VII. Does he refuse or neglect to
visit the Sick; Can. 67, 69.
or delay the Baptism of any Infant in danger of death? Is there any Child past
infancy, or other Persons grown up, who, through your Minister's default, yet
remains unbaptized in your Parish? VIII. Has he married any Persons in private
Houses; Can. 62, 63.
or such as being under Age have not the consent of their Parents or Guardians,
or without Banns first published in the Church on three Sundays or Holy Days;
or at any other Hours than between Eight and Twelve in the Morning, unless he
had a License so to do? IX Does your Minister declare to the People every
Sunday, Can. 64.
at the time appointed in the Communion Book, the several Holy, days and
Fasting days in the Week following? And does he observe them? X. Is he a Man of
a sober, studious, Can. 74, 75.
peaceable and exemplary life? Is he grave, modest and regular in his outward
Demeanor and Apparel? Is he, in any kind, disorderly and scandalous?
TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. Does every Parishioner demean themselves Reverently in your Church or
Chapel during Divine Service and preaching the Word of God; Can. 18.
kneeling at the Prayers and Sacrament; standing up when the Creed and Gospel
are Read; saying audibly, with the Minister, the Confession, Lord's Prayer and
Creed; And making such other Answers to the public P^ayers as are appointed in
the Book of Common Hrayer? II. Is there any Person in your Parish who
lieth-under a Common fame or suspicion, Can. 109.
of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any Common Drunkards* Swearers,
or Blasphemers of God's Name? Or any that are noted to be filthy Talkers,
Railers, sowers of Sedition, Faction and Discord among their Neighbors? III.
Are there any that refuse to pay their duty for Easter Offerings; Can. 85.
or to contribute to the Rates made for repair of your Church or Chapel, or
any thing thereunto belonging? IV. Has any Legacy been left by the last Will
or Testament of any Persons, to your Church or Chapel, or to the Poor, or any
other pious and charitable use? Which has been mis-^pent or embezzelled, and
by whom? V. Are there any in your Parish, who under pretense of Liberty of
Conscience, wholly neglect all public Worship of God; neither going to Church,
nor to any Assembly that meet together according to the late Act for exempting
Their Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England, from
the Penalties of certain Laws? Act for exempting, etc.
VI. Have you any such Assembly of Dissenters in your Parish? Have they
certified the place of their meeting to the Bishop, or such others as that Act
appoints? Do they meet with their Doors locked, barred or bolted during the
time of their meeting? Have their Preachers subscribed the Articles of our
Religion, except those excepted in the Act, and taken the Oaths, and subscribed
the Declaration therein required? VII. Are there any who profess to live in the
Communion of the Church of England, Can. 112.
who neglect to come to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, being of Age fit to
receive it? VIII. Are there any living within your Parish, Can. 99.
as Man and Wife, who are within the Degrees prohibited? IX. Do you know, or
have you heard of any in your Parish, who having the Presentation of an
Ecclesiastical Living, has made any Simoniacal compact or gain thereby; either
in Money, or by reserve of any part of the Tithes or Glebe belonging to the
Benefice? X. Have any Pews or Seats been erected in your Church or Chapel,
without leave from the Ordinary? Is there any strife or contention about Seats
in the Church? Have any occasioned Riot, Clamor or Disturbance in the Church at
any time?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAve you a Parish-Clerk; Aged Twenty one years at least? Can. 91.
Is he of an honest life and conversation? Able to perform his duty in Reading,
Writing and Singing? Is he chosen by your Minister? Does he duly attend him in
all Divine Services in the Church? Are his Wages duly paid him? Or who
withholds the same from him? II. Does your Sexton perform his duty diligently,
in keeping the Church clean and decent, in tolling and ringing the Bells before
Divine Service?
TIT. VI. Concerning Schoolmasters, Schools and Hospitals.
I. WHat Schoolmaster private or public is there in your Parish? Can. 77, 78,
79.
Is he licensed by the Bishop? Does he teach his Scholars the Church Catechism?
Does he cause them to repair orderly to the Church or Chapel on Sundays and
Holy days, and there see that they behave themselves quietly and reverently
during the time of Divine Service and Sermon? II. What Hospital, Almshouse, or
Free School has been founded in your Parish? Are they so ordered in their
Revenue and Use, as the Founders appointed, and the Law of the Land allows?
III. Do any in your Parish practice Physic, Surgery, Midwifery, without
license from the Ordinary?
TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? Can. 89.
Or one of them by your Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? II. Have
the former and last Churchwardens given up a just account of the Money they have
received and laid out for the use of the Church? Ibid.
And have they delivered up the Money remaining in their hands to the succeding
Churchwardens, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel? Rubric after Commun.
III. Do they provide against every Communion appointed in your Church or
Chapel, a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and good Wine, according to
the number of Communitants, at the Charges of the Parish?
FINIS.

