ARTICLES To be enquired of Within the DIOCESE of LINCOLN, In the general and
trienniall Visitation of the right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, By Gods
providence, Lord Bishop of LINCOLN, to be held in the year of our Lord God 1641.

LONDON Printed by M. F. 1641.

Concerning the Church, the Vtensils and Ornaments thereof.
1. INprimis, whether have you in your several Churches and Chapels, the
whole Bible of the largest volume, and the book of common Prayer, both fairly
and substantially bound, the book of Homilies, a Font of stone set up in the
ancient usual place, a convenient and decent Communion Table, with a carpet of
silk, or some other decent stuff, continually laid upon the same at time of
Divine service, and a fair linen cloth thereon at the time of the receiving of
the holy Communion? And whether is the same Table placed in such convenient
sort within the Chancell or Church, as that the Minister may be best heard in
his prayer and administration, and that the greatest number may communicate?
Does your said Communion ta^le stand in the ancient place where it ought to do,
or where it has done for the greatest part of these sixty years last past, or
has it been removed to the East end, and placed Altar-wise, and by whom, and
whose authority has it been so placed? And whether are the ten Commandments
set upon the East end of your Church or Chapel where the people may best see
and read them, and other sentences of holy Scriptu^e written on the walls
likewise for that purpose?

2. Item, whether have you afternoon Sermons in your several Parish^s turned
into Catechizing, and an exposition of the same Catechism and the heads
thereof, and according to the form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, and
otherwise, and whether does every Vicar, Parson, and Curate read Divine service
according to the Liturgy printed by Authority?

3 Item, whether have you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient seat for
your Minister to read Service in, together with a comely Pulpit set up in a
convenient place, with a decent cloth or cushion for the same, a comely large
surplice, a fair Communion-cup, with a cover of silver, a flagon of silver,
tin, or pewter, to put the wine in, whereby it may be set upon the
Communion Table, at the time of the blessing thereof, with all other things and
ornaments necessary for the celebration of Divine Service, and administration
of the Sacraments? And whether have you a strong chest for alms for the poor,
with three locks and keys, and another chest for keeping the books and
ornaments of the Church, and the Register-book? And whether have you a
Register-book in parchment for Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, according to
the former custom and practice?

4 Is your Church or Chapel decently paved, and is your Churchyard well and
orderly kept without abuse? Are the bones of the dead decently interred, or
laid up in some fit place, as beseems Christians? And is the whole
consecrated ground kept free from swine and all other nastinesse, as becomes
the place so dedicated for praying, preaching, and the service of God?

Concerning the Clergy.
Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate distinctly and reverently say
Divine Service upon Sundays and Holidayes, and other days appointed to be
observed by the book of Common Prayer, as Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, and the
Eves of every Sunday and Holiday, at fit and usual times? And does he duly
observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the said Book of Common
Prayer, as well in reading public Prayers and the Letany, as also in
administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visiting the Sick,
burying the Dead, churching of Women, and all other Rites and Offices of the
Church, in such manner and form as in the said Book of Common Prayer he is
enjoined, without any omission or addition?

2 Does your Minister bid Holidays and Fasting-Dayes, as by the book of Common
Prayer is appointed? And does he give warning beforehand to the Parishioners
for the receiving of the holy Communion? and whether does he administer the
holy Communion reverently as becomes so high a mystery, and so often, and at
such times, as that every Parishioner may receive the same at the least thrice
in every year, whereof once at Easter, as by the Book of Common Prayer is
appointed? And does your Minister use the words of Institution according to the
Book? And does he deliver the Bread and Wine to every Communicant severally,
and kneeling? Whether has he admitted to the holy Communion any declared
notorious offender, or put any from the Communion, who are not publicly known
to be infamous for some notorious crime? Does he use the sign of the Cross in
Baptism?

3 Whether has your Minister married any without a Ring, or without Banes
published three several Sundays or Holidays, in time of Divine Service, in
the several Churches or Chapels of their several abode, according to the
Book of Common Prayer?

4 Does he refuse to bury any which ought to be interred in Christian burial,
or defer the same longer then he should? or bury any in Christian burial,
which by the Constitutions of the Church of England, or Laws of the Land, ought
not to be so interred?

5 Do you know of any Parson, Vicar, or Curata, that has introduced any
offensive Rites or Ceremonies into the Church, not established by the Laws of
the Land; as namely, that make three Courtesies toward the Communion Table,
that call the said Table an Altar, that enjoin the people at their coming into
the Church to bow toward the East, or toward the Communion Table, that call
upon them to stand up at the Te Deum, Benedictus, Magnificat, the Gloria Patri,
or at other times then at the Creed and the Gospel, that refuse to give the
Communion to any that will not come up and receive it at the Rails, that never
pray before their Sermons, but bid the people pray, or use any other new and
voluntary Rite or Ceremony not warranted by Law? You are to present then by
virtue of your offices and places.

6 Is your Minister a Preacher allowed? If yea, then by whom? If not, whether
does he procure some who are lawfully licenced, to preach monthly among you at
least? and what does he allow unto him?

7 Does your Minister (being licensed) preach usually, either in his own Cure,
or in some other Church or Chapel near adjoining where no Preacher is? and
how often has he been negligent in that behalf?

8 Is your Minister continually resident upon his Benefice? or how long time
has he been absent? and in case he be licenced to be absent, whether does he
cause his Cure to be sufficiently supplied with a preaching Minister? Or in
case he has another Benefice, whether does he supply his absence by a Curate
sufficiently licensed to preach in that Cure where he himself is not resident?
Or otherwise in case the smalnesse of the living cannot find a preaching
Minister, does he preach at both his Benefices usually? And if he be most-while
absent, what order does he take for hospitality or relief of the poor? declare
it particularly. And whether does he give the fourtieth part of the profits of
his Benefice to the poor, during his absence? or what provision does he make
otherwise for them?

9 Does your Minister or Curate serve any more Cures then one? If yea, then
what other Cure does he serve, and how far are they distant?

10 Does your Minister or Curate every Sunday and Holiday, before Evening
prayer, for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant
persons of his Parish, in the ten Commandments, Articles of the Belief, and in
the Lords Prayer, and the Sacraments, according as it is prescribed in the
Catechism set forth in the book of Common prayer? And does he expound and show
forth the meaning and sense of the said Catechism? And if he do not, where is
the fault, either in the parents and masters of the children, or in the Curate
neglecting his duty? And is he careful to tender all such youth of his Parish
as have been well instructed in their Catechism, to be Confirmed by the Bishop
in his Visitation, or at any other convenient time, as is appointed by the book
aforesaid? And you are to warn the Ministers to prepare them against this
present Visitation.

11 Does your Minister endeavor and labor diligently to reclaim the Popish
Recusants in his parish from their errors(if there be any such abiding in your
parish?) Or whether is your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, over-conversant with, or
a favourer of Recusants, whereby he is suspected not to be sincere in Religion?

12 Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private fasts,
prophesies, or exercises, not approved by Law, or public Authority? or has he
used to meet in any private house or place with any person or persons, there to
consult how to impeach or deprave the book of Common prayer, or the doctrine or
discipline of the Church of England? If yea, then you shall present them all.

13 Is your Minister noted or defamed to have obtained his Benefice or his
Orders by simony, or any other way defamed to be a simoniacall person, or any
way noted to be a schismatic, or schismatically affected, or reputed to be an
incontinent person? Or does he table or lodge any such in his house? Or is he a
frequenter of taverns, innes or alehouses, or any place suspected for ill
rule? Or is he a common drunkard, a common gamester or player at dice, a
swearer, or one that applies not himself to his study, or is otherwise
offensive and scandalous to his function and ministry? especially is he one
that uses uncharitably to curse, scandal and revile his own parishioners, in
his heats and choler? If yea, then present it.

14 Do you know any Minister that does perform, or any other person that does
hear Divine service otherwise performed then as it is now appointed by the Acts
of Parliament of this Realm? And do you know of any that has or does disturb
that wholesome Order so appointed by the Law to be observed in Divine service? If
you do, you must present their names.

15 Do you know of any persons that deny Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, consecrated according to the Order prescribed by the Statute, to be
rightly, orderly and lawfully consecrated and ordered? If you do, you are to
present their names.

16 When any person has been dangerously sick in your Parish, has your
Minister neglected to visit him? and when any have been parting out of this
life, has he omitted to do his last duty in that behalf, being sent for and
desired?

17 Does your Minister, Curate, or Lecturer, in his or their sermons deliver
such doctrine as tends to obedience, and the edifying of their auditorie in
faith, religion, and good life, without intermedling with particular matters of
State, not fit to be handled in the Pulpit, but to be discussed by the wisdom
of His Majesty and his Council? And if you find any faulty herein, you shall
present them. Or does he spend most of the hour in points of controversy, and
new start-up questions of Arminianisme, debarred by the Kings authority from
the Pulpit?

18 Whether does your Minister misbehave himself in preaching or praying, so
that the congregation are offended thereat? And whether does he teach publicly
opposite doctrine against the Articles and Homilies prescribed by Law in the
Church of England? Does he preach and maintain, or palliate with distinctions
and limitations, any points of Popery? Declare the points as near as you can.
Or does he make any personal invectives in the Pulpit, to the offense of
particular men, and the scandal of the Parish?

19 Whether has the form of Commination against impenitent sinners, been read
in your Church to the people, according to the book of Common Prayer?

Concerning Schoolmasters.
1 Does any in your Parish openly or privately take upon him to teach School
without license of the Ordinary? And is he conformable to the religion now
established? And does he bring his scholars to the Church to hear Divine
service and sermons? And does he instruct his scholars in the grounds of the
religion now established in this Church of England? and is he careful and
diligent to benefit his scholars in learning?

2 Does your schoolmaster teach and instruct his youth in the Catechism or
grounds of Religion? and does he instruct them in any other Grammar, Accidence,
or any other Catechism then is allowed by public Authority? and what Grammar,
Accidence, or Catechism is it that he so teaches?

Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
HAve you a fit Parish-Clerk, aged twenty years at the least, of honest
conversation, able to read and write? Whether are his and the Sextons wages
paid without fraud, according to the ancient custom of your Parish? if not,
then by whom are they so defrauded or denied?

2 Does your Clerk or Sexton keep the Church clean, the doors locked at fit
times? Is any thing lost or spoiled in the Church through his default? Are the
Communion Table, Font, Books, and other Ornaments of the Church kept fair and
lean? Does he suffer any unseasonable ringing, or any proane exercise in your
Church? or does he (when any is weak and assured to him to be passing out of
this life) neglect to toll bell, to give notice thereof to all devout
Christians.

Concerning the Parishioners.
WHether do any of your Parishioners, being sixteen years of age or upwards, or
others lodging or commonly resorting to any house within your Parish, wilfully
^bsent themselves from your Parish Church, upon Sundays and Holy Days, at
Morning and Evening prayers; or who come late to Church, and depart from Church
before Service be done upon the said days; or who do not reverently behave
themselves during the time of Divine Service, devoutly kneeling when the
general Confession of sins, the Letanie, the ten Commandments, and all Prayers
and Collects are upon any Sunday or Holiday, by themselves, their servants or
apprentises, or have otherwise profaned the said days, contrary to the Orders
of the Church of England? And whether be there any Inne-keepers,
Alehouse-keepers, Victuallers or other persons, that permit any persons in
their houses to eat, drink, or play during the time of Divine Service or
Sermon, in the forenoon or afternoon upon those days?

14 Whether is the fifth day of November kept holy, and thanksgiving made to
God for his Majesty's and this States happy deliverance, according to the
Ordinance in that behalf?

15 Whether do any of your Parish (otherwise then fathers and mothers in their
own families) hold or frequent any conventicles or private congregations, or
make or maintain any Constitutions, agreed upon in any such Assemblies? Or be
there any that do write, or publicly or privately speak against the Book of
Common Prayer, or any thing therein contained, or against any of the Articles
of Religion agreed upon Anno 1562. or against the Kings Supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical, or against the oath of Supremacy, or of Allegiance, as
pretending the same to be unlawful and not warrantable by the word of God; or
against any of the Rites or Ceremonies of the Church of England now
established; or against the government of the Church of England under the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by Bishops, affirming that the same is repugnant to
the word of God, and that the said Ecclesiastical Officers are not lawfully
ordained? Or whether be there any Authors, Maintainers, or Favorers of
Heresy or Schism, or that be suspected to be Anabaptists, Libertines,
Brownists, of the Family of Love, or of any other Heresy or Schism: Present
their names.

16 Whether do any withhold the stock of the church, or any goods or things
given to good and charitable uses?

17 Whether your Hospitalls, Almes-houses, and other such houses and
Corporations, founded to good and charitable uses, and the lands, possessions
and goods of the same, ordered and disposed of as they should be? And do the
Masters, Governors, Fellows, and others of the said houses and Corporations,
behave and demean themselves according to the godly ordinances and statutes of
their several foundations?

18 Whether have any Inne-Keepers, Ale-wives, Victuallers, or Tiplers,
received, harbored, or suffered any person to eat, drink, stay, or play in
their houses in time of Common prayer or Sermon, on Sundays or Holidayes? And
what persons were so received, harbored, or suffered? And have they sold forth
any drink or victuals at the like time? And have any of your parish loytered
or been gaming abroad at the same time?

19 Whether have any labored, wrought, or gone to cart on the Sunday or
Holiday? And have any artificers, shoe-makers, chandlers, mercers, butchers,
and the like, set open their shop-windows or doors, or used their trade or any
manual occupation upon any of those days, or sold any wares or goods
belonging to their trade, in the time of prayer, sermon, or homily, upon any
Sunday or Holiday? and who were the same that did so?

Physicians, Chirurgians, and Midwives.
HOw many Physicians, Chirurgians, and Midwives have you in your parish? How
long have they used their several sciences or offices, and by what authority?
and how have they demeaned themselves therein? and of what skill are they
accounted to be in their profession?

Touching the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
Whether you, and the Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidemen, from time to time,
do and have done your diligence, in not suffering any idle person to abide
either in the churchyard or churchporch in service or sermon-time, but causing
them either to come into the church to hear divine service, or to depart, and
not disturb such as be hearers there. And whether they have, and you do
diligently see the parishisoners duly resort to the church every Sunday and
Holiday, and there remain during Divine Service and Sermon. And whether you, or
your predecessors, Churchwardens there, suffer any plays, feasts, drinkings,
or any other profane usages, to be kept in your Church, Chapel; or
Churchyards; or have suffered to your and their uttermost power and endeavor,
any person or persons to be tippling or drinking in any Inn or
victualling-house in your parish, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon
on Sundays and Holidayes.

2 Whether does any man trouble or molest you for doing your duties? or are any
of the Ecclesiastical Judges or their Surrogates over-easie to receive
frivolous complaints against you for doing your duties, and to hold you in long
and tedious suits concerning the same? If so, you must present, and by what
Judge, Surrogate, Proctour, or Apparitour you have been troubled.

3 Whether is there any Legacy withholden, given to the Church or poor people,
or to the mending of high ways, or otherwise by the Testatours? In whose hands
is it, by whom was it given, and by whom is it withholden?

Concerning Ecclesiastical Magistrates and Officers,
Whether do you know or have heard of any payment, composition or agreement,
to or with any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge or Officer for winking at or
fearing to punish any person for any offense of Ecclesiastical cognizance, or
for suppressing or concealing of any excommunication or any other
Ecclesiastical censure of or against any Recusant, or any other offender in
the cases aforesaid? What sum of money or other consideration has been
received or promised, by or to any of them, in that respect, by whom, and with
whom?

2 Has any person within your parish paid or promised any sum of money or
other reward, either of late or heretofore, for commutation of penance, for any
crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance? If so, then with whom, when, and for what
sum of money? and how has the same been employed? You are to present these
particularly.

3 Are your Ecclesiastical Judges and their Substitutes Batchelours of the
Laws, or Masters of Arts at the least, learned and practiced in the civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws, men of good life and fame, zealously affected in
religion, and just, upright and diligent in executing their offices? Have they
heard any matter of office privately in their chambers, without their sworn
registers or their deputies presence?

4 Do you know or have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge, officer, or
minister has received or taken any extraordinary fees, or other rewards or
promises, by any ways or means, directly or indirectly, of any person or
persons whatsoever, either for the granting of the administration of the goods
and chattels of those that have died intestate, to one before another; or for
allotting of larger portions of the goods and chattels of those that have died
intestate, to one more then to another; or for allowing larger and unreasonable
accounts, made by Executours or Administratours; or for giving them Quictus
est, or discharges, without inventorie or account, to defraud Creditours,
Legataries, or those who are to have portions? And what sums of money do you
know, or have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge or Officer has taken
out of the estate of any, dying intestate, upon pretense to bestow the same in
pious uses either of late or heretofore? and how have the same been bestowed?

5 Has any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge, Officer, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within this Diocese, or any Advocate, Register,
Proctour, Clerks, Apparitours, or other ministers belonging to the same
Ecclesiastical Courts, exacted or taken by any ways or means, directly or
indirectly, extraordinary or greater fees then are due and accustomed? And
whether is there a Table for the rates of all fees set up in their several
Courts and Offices? And whether have they sent or suffered any Process to go
out of the Ecclesiastical Courts, otherwise then by law they ought? Or have
they taken upon them the offices of Informers or Promotours to the said Courts,
or any other way abused themselves in their places? You are by your office to
present the same.

6 Whether has any Ecclesiastical Judge or his Surrogates, without the
allowance of the Bishop, lately taken upon them to set up any new consistories
or courts, and to keep courts of concurrencie in Peculiars, and other and more
places then heretofore has been accustomed; and to call the people to those
concurrent courts unduly without presentiments, or other just cause, but only
to trouble the country, and to get unjust fees to their own purses? And have
they in those new concurrent courts cited the people into Peculiars, and out of
the jurisdiction, and for matters whereof they were dismissed by their ordinary
Judge before, so that they have been troubled in several places for one and
the same thing contrary to the Law? And whether are the same late-erected
consistories to the grievance of the people, and by whom have the said new
courts been lately set up, and by what authority, and where, and in what
places? Declare the same particularly.


