ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the Diocese of ELY: IN THE Second
Episcopal Visitation OF THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, PETER, By Divine
Permission LORD BISHOP of ELY.

In the fifth Year of his Translation.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, 1679.

The Tenor of the Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOU shall Swear, diligently to Enquire, and true Presentment make, of every
person now or lately of your Parish, Can. 119
which has made any default or offense enquirable by the King's Laws
Ecclesiastical, and become known unto you. So help you God, and the Contents of
his Holy Gospel.

Articles of Instruction and Direction to the Churchwardens and Sidemen, of
what they are to take more especial Notice in their Presentiments.
Concerning Religion, and the Government of the Church Established in this
Realm.
IMprimis. Is there any in your Parish who are guilty of Atheistical or
blasphemous Speeches against the Majesty of Almighty God, or Scoffers at
Religion, Artic. 1, 2* 3.
and the Souls future immortal state? Can. 11 2.
Is there any guilty of Speeches of Infidelity against the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ? Any who in their communication, or otherwise, Artic 2.
defend the Socinian or Arrian Heresy, denying the Eternal Godhead of the Lord
Jesus, or Pelagian, denying the necessity of his Grace, and of Baptism for the
washing away of Original Sin?

II. Is there any one that does affirm or teach (and who is he) that the holy
Scripture does not contain all things necessary to Salvation? or, Artic. 6.
Artic. 8. Artic. 20.
that what is contained in the 3 Creeds ought not thoroughly to be received and
believed, or that the Church has not Authority in Controversies of Faith?

III. Is there any that does affirm and teach that the Church of England by law
established, Can. 5.
is not a true and Apostolical Church, and a true member of the Catholic
Church, having in her all things necessary to Salvation? Or is there any that
does affirm and teach that the XXXIX Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops
and Bishops of both Provinces, Can. 4.
and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, A.D. 1562. are in
any part erroneous or superstitious, or such as may not with a good conscience
be subscribed unto?

IV. Is there any in your Parish that does affirm and teach that the Form of
God's Worship in the Church of England established by law, Can. A.
and contained in the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments,
is a corrupt, Popish, or any way superstitious or unlawful Worship of God, or
contains any thing in it that is repugnant to Scripture; or to the Doctrine
and Worship in the Catholic or Primitive Church?

V. Is there any that does affirm or teach (and who is he) that Baptism of
Infants according as is practiced in the Church of England, Rubric after
Baptism.
is unlawful or unnecessary, or better to be delayed, or not appointed for the
Remission of Sins, or that it may be repeated, or that Infants duly baptized
according to the Churches Order, and dying before they commit actual sin, are
not saved everlastingly through God's grace given them in Baptism?

Can. 1, and 2.
VI. Is there any who does affirm or teach, that the king's Majesty has not
the same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical which we see has been given always
to all godly Princes by God himself, Artic. 37.
both among the Jews, and in the Christian Church? Or that does any way deny or
impugn the king's Majesty's Royal Authority or Supremacy in Causes
Ecclesiastical in this Realm? Or who denies that within his Majesty's Realms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and all other his Dominions and Countries, our
Lord the king is the highest Power under God, to whom the chief Government of
all Estates, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does
appertain, without any subjection due from Him or his Subjects to any foreign
Jurisdiction?

VII. Is there any who does affirm and teach (and who is he) that the
Government of the Church of England under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, or other chief Ministers bearing office in the same, or
that the forms or manner of Ordaining and Consecrating of Bishops, Can. 9.
Priests and Deacons, established by law, contains any thing that is
Antichristian, or repugnant to the word of God, or to the practice of the
Catholic Church? Can. 8.
Or that persons so ordained Bishops, Priests or Deacons, have not sufficient
external calling, or that they ought not to be accounted truly Bishops,
Priests, or Deacons till they have some other external calling unto those
divine Offices? or that teaches that those three holy Orders abovesaid have not
been ever in Christ's Church even from the Apostles time? Pref. before Form of
Ord.


VIII. Is there any in your Parish (and who is he) that separating himself from
this Church, and from the Communion of Saints therein, and joining himself to
Conventicles, breaks the Communion of the Church of England, Can. 9.
and so the Communion of the Catholic Church, of whose Communion hers is a
part; or accounts of others as profane, and none of the godly, for their
orderly conforming themselves to the Church of England as established by law?
Or that any combining themselves in Assemblies or Congregations of the king's
born Subjects within this Land, other then such as by the Laws of this Land are
held and allowed, may truly take unto themselves the name of another purer
Church, or of the Church of England?

IX. Is there any who does affirm and teach (and who is he) that the Rites and
Ceremonies, Can. 6.
and the Rules of the Church of England by law established, are Antichristian,
superstitious, or frivolous; or any way unlawful, or such as may not be
subscribed unto, and practiced with a good conscience, Can. 10. Artic. 20.
or that the Church has no power to decree any such Rites and Ceremonies?

Concerning the Clergy, their Duty and Office.
I. IS your Parson, Vicar, Act of Uniformity, Car. II. 14.
(or also Curate) in holy Orders by Episcopal Ordination, a Priest ordained
according to the laws of the Church of England? has he been legally instituted
and inducted into his Benefice? or is he known or suspected to have obtained
his Parsonage or Vicarage by any Symoniacal Contract?

II. Did he within two Months after his Induction publicly in your Church or
Chapel upon some Sunday or Holy day in the time of Divine Service, Ibid.
openly read the XXXIX Articles' established by Authority in this Church, A. D.
1562. and then profess and publish his assent, and subscribe his name thereto
in the presence of the Churchwardens? Do you not know, or have you not heard,
that in his reading, or pretending to read those XXXIX Articles, he passed over
some one or more of them, or some part of one or more, and what part of the
Articles was it that he left unread? Did your Parson, Vicar or Curate, upon
some Lord's Day within two Months after his Induction, solemnly read in your
Church or Chapel both the Morning and Evening Prayer, as it is appointed in
the Book of Common Prayer by law established? And did he after such reading,
publicly before the Congregation, declare his unfeigned assent and consent to
the use of all things in the said Book contained, as is prescribed in the Act
of Parliament made for the Uniformity of public Prayers? And did he within
three Months after his Induction, in your Church or Chapel, in public upon
some Lord's day read a Certificate under the hand and seal of the Archbishop
or Bishop, Ordinary of the Diocese, that he the said Parson, Vicar or Curate,
did before his admission to be Incumbent, subscribe a declaration of the
unlawfulness to take up arms against the king, and of his conforming to the
Liturgy of this Church, and of his disavowing the unlawful Oath commonly
called, The Solemn League and Covenant, according as is prescribed in the
aforesaid Act for Uniformity?

Act of Parliament. Can. 47, 48
III. Or after his lawful Entrance, is your Parson or Vicar resident upon his
benefice? or if his residence be legally dispensed with, is his place supplied
by a Curate allowed by the Bishop, and a licensed Preacher, and constantly
resident among you? and what yearly stipend does your Minister allow him? And
if your Parson or Vicar be both resident himself, and keep a Curate also, does
he notwithstanding himself at least once a Month, openly read Common Prayer in
your Church or Chapel, and (if there be occasion) administer each Sacrament in
such order, manner and form, as is prescribed in the Liturgy and Canons of this
Church?

IV. Having both lawful Entrance and Residence among you; is he (your Parson,
Vicar, or also Curate) of blameless conversation, the Husband of one Wife,
(...). 3.
sober* grave, not double tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy
lucre, ruling his Children, and his own house well, sound in faith, in charity,
in patience? Or on the contrary, is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses, a
common Gamester, Can. ^5.
a profane or obscene jester, a swearer, railer, scoffer, or quarreller? Does
he set his Neighbors at variance one with another? Does he familiarly converse
with persons Excommunicate, ungodly or vicious? Does he resort to suspected and
infamous houses? Or is he himself vehemently suspected of Incontinency with any
person within or without your Parish? Or does your Curate or Minister lodge or
board at any Tavern, Inn, Alehouse, or house of any ill report?

V. Does your Minister or Curate plainly, audibly, distinctly, and reverently
read the Divine Service of Morning and Evening-Prayer, Act of (...).
without any diminution (in regard of Preaching, or any other respect)
addition, or alteration, upon all Sundays and Holy Days, not omitting also
other days appointed by the Book of Common Prayer as fit and usual times, Can.
14. Can. 15.
as Wednesdays and Fridays (with the Litanies added) and the Eves of every
Sunday and Holy day with Ember and Rogation days? And moreover, when he is at
home, and not otherwise reasonably hindered himself, and able to get two or
three gathered together, does he every day say Divine Service Morning and
Evening in the Parish Church, Rubric after Pref.
where he ministers, and cause a bell to be tolled thereunto, that the People
may come to hear God's Word, and to pray with him?

VI. Does your Minister reverently and publicly, Rubric.
at the Font only, and that without the use of a Basin, Administer the holy
Sacrament of Baptism? Can. 68. Rubric of Baptism. Can. 81.
Or does he refuse, or delay to Christen any Child that is brought to him to
Church on any Sunday or Holy Day, knowledge thereof being given to him over
Night, or in the Morning before Morning Prayer; or neglect to persuade all
these who have the use of Reason, and are still unbaptiz'd* having been seduced
by Anabaptists) to come to holy Baptism, Can. 29, 31
and does he take care for their Baptism as in the Common Prayer Book is
prescribed? In the solemn Public Baptism does he Baptize any without
Godfathers or Godmothers? Or does he then refuse or neglect to sign the Child
baptized with the sign of the Cross? Rubric.
Or does he admit such to be a Godfather or God -mother, who are either one of
the Parents of the Child, or who have not themselves received the holy
Communion? Can. 69.


VII. Does your Minister duly and reverently Administer the holy Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ our Lord, so often, at least, and at such times*
Rubric. Can. 21, 22
as every Parishioner may communicate, at the least three times in every year
in public, whereof the Feast of Easter to be one? And does he reverently and
carefully in all things observe all the Churches Order in the Celebration? Does
he give warning publicly in the Church at Morning-Prayer, the Sunday before,
for the better preparation of his Parishioners? Can. 22.
And do such as purpose to Communicate, signify their Names at least some time
the day before? and when he sees the People negligent to come to the
Communion, does he use the Churches second Exhortation? Rubric.
and when there is no Communion, does your Minister every Sunday and Holy Day
throughout the year, read so much of the Communion Service, as is appointed to
be read by the Book of Common Prayer, and at the place appointed, (if he can
thence be well heard of all) thereby professing his and the Churches readiness
to the more frequent Celebration of the Holy Eucharist, if Communicants were
not wanting?

VIII. Does your Minister wittingly admit to the receiving the Holy Communion,
Rubric.
any one such who is known to live in open and notorious sin without
Repentance? or that has wronged his Neighbor by word or deed, Can. 26.
so as that the Congregation is thereby offended, or any such betwixt whom he
perceives malice or hatred to reign, and will not be reduced by him to a
reconcilement, or to any who refuse to be present at the other public Prayers
of the Church, Can. 26, 27, 28.
or to any that be common or notorious depravers of the Book of Common Prayer,
or of any thing contained in the XXXIX Articles, or in the Book of Ordaining
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or to any that has spoken against His Majesty's
Supreme Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, except such persons do first
acknowledge to the Minister, before you the Churchwardens, his Repentance for
the same, and promise under his hand (if he can write) or otherwise by word of
mouth, Rubric.
that he will do so no more? Or lastly, to any that refuse to receive the said
Holy Communion kneeling? And of all such persons by him put from the Communion,
Can. 27.
does he give an account to his Ordinary according to Law?

IX. Does he at the Celebration of the Holy Communion in the due places
appointed by the Liturgy, take the Paten into his hands, and break the Bread,
and lay his hand upon all the Bread, and after likewise take the Cup into his
hand, and lay his hand upon it, Rubric.
and every Vessel in which there is any Wine to be Consecrated? and when that
which was Consecrated is spent, does he communicate to any persons without
Consecrating more according to the form prescribed, and does he severally
deliver the Bread and Wine to every Communicant; Rubric.
and at his delivering the same, does he rehearse the whole form prescribed in
the Communion-Book, Can. 21.
saying, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And The Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ which was shed, etc. Or does he use only some part thereof as he
lists himself? And when all have communicated, does he cover what remains
of the consecrated Elements with a fair Linen Cloth? and what remains is it
reverently eaten and drunken by some of the Communicants within your Church?

X. If any person sick or in health (especially before the Receiving the
holyCommunion,) finding his conscience troubled with any weighty matters, does
for the quieting thereof, 1. Exhortation to the Communion.
and for further comfort and counsel, unburden his conscience to his Priest or
Minister; does then the said Priest or Minister upon special confession of his
sins made, together with fruits meet for repentance having been performed (to
both which also he is by the Minister to be moved) upon his Repentance
administer unto him Absolution, Rubric Visitation of the sick. Can. 113.
together with Ghostly counsel and advice? and have you ever heard that the
said Priest or Minister has revealed or made known at any time to any person
whatsoever directly or indirectly any crime or offense confessed to him in
secret by any such Penitents whatsoever (except they be such crimes as by the
Laws of this Realm for the public concern, the Life of the said Priest may and
ought to be called in question for concealing of them?)

XI. Is your Minister a licensed Preacher, by the Bishop, or either of the two
Universities? and if so, does he then constantly (unless in case of sickness,
necessary absence, or other reasonable impediment) himself preach in your
Church or Chapel, or in some other near adjoining, where no Preacher is, one
Sermon every Lord's Day? or in such cases of impediment, or himself not being
licensed, does he procure some lawful Minister and licensed Preacher to preach
one Sermon and to perform other Ministerial Duties each such day, Can. 45, 46,
47, 49.
(besides the days of Christ's Nativity, Passion, and Ascension at the least)
or if no Sermon be, take care that one of the Homilies set forth by Authority,
be there read by a Priest or Deacon lawfully ordained on every Sunday and
Holy Day in the Year? has he in his own Sermons at any time, or in other
Discourse (as you know or have heard of) preached or maintained any unsound,
Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical, Doctrine so far as you can judge? or
spoken ought privately in contempt of Religion, or that Religion, or any part
of it, which he by his office in this Church professes?

XII. Does he or any other admitted to preach in your Church, omit before his
Sermon or Homily briefly to move and exhort the people in the form laid down in
the 55. Canon, Can. 55.
or to the same effect, (declaring for whom, and for what mercies they are to
pray, and to give God thanks) to join with him finally in Prayer for all those
mercies in that most holy and comprehensive Prayer of our Lord?

Rubric. Can. 19, 61
XIII. Does your Minister diligently Catechize the Youth of your Parish every
Sunday and Holy Day by way of Question and Answer, accordingto the Churches
public Catechism, or also further instruct them in the sense thereof, as he
shall think fit, and this after the second Lesson at Evening Service, openly in
the Church? Does he by this and all other good means and admonitions, prepare
and procure them (as occasion is offered) devoutly to come and seek to be
confirmed by the Bishop; and himself either bring or send in writing under his
hand the names of all such persons in his Parish, as he shall find by his
Examination fit to be presented to the Bishop, humbly to seek and ask that
benefit of Confirmation?

XIV. Does your Minister (if he be thought fit by his Ordinary) endeavor
privately to reclaim and reduce all Popish Recusants, and all Sectaries in your
Parish, Can. 66. Can. 67. Rubric.
to the Communion in the public and established worship of God in this Church?
Is he also ready without delay to visit the sick? And does he call upon them to
receive the holy Sacrament in their sickness? And does he administer it to
them? And is he also ready being called, without delay to baptize Infants in
danger of death? Is any Infant or more aged person in the Parish yet unbaptized
by his default? And those Children that have been baptized in private houses,
have they been so baptized by any Popish Priest on pretended necessity? or if
at home for true cause of necessity, have they been by your Minister or other
lawful Minister, baptized and afterward brought into the Church and the Order
of the Church concerning them, there duly observed?

Rubric.
XV. Has your Minister, or any other, baptized Children, churched any Women,
or ministered the holy Communion in any private house, Can. 71.
(where they have any Church or Chapel in the Parish) otherwise then by Law is
allowed in cases of necessity?

XVI. Does your Minister on the three Rogation days before the Feast of the
holy Ascension, go in perambulation of the Circuit of the Parish? And when he
so goes, does he exhort the people to give thanks to God, in the beholding of
his benefits, for the increase and abundance of his fruits upon the face of the
Earth? 2 Eliz. Injunction 18, 19.
And when there appears any fear of scarcity, does he move them to pray unto
God for his mercy and favor unto the Land, going into the Church with them,
and reading the Litany and one part of the Homily, Rubric before Litany.
set forth and appointed for that purpose of the Rogations?

XVII. Does he bid and observe the Holy Days, Can. 22.
and Fasting-days, and days of Abstinence, and other solemn days for which
particular Services are appointed, as they occur or return from time to time,
Can. 64. Rubric.
giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church, in the
time of the Morning Service the Sunday next before?

XVIII. Does your Minister always at the reading or celebrating any Divine
Office, Can. 58.
constantly wear the Surplice and other Scholastical Habit, according to his
degree if he be a Graduate, and without a Hood (only instead thereof a Tipet of
black Stuff, (not Silk) being permitted him) if he be no Graduate? And does he
wear his hair of a moderate and comely length? Is his usual Apparel decent in
fashion and in color, such as is enjoined him by the Canons of the Church?

XIX. Does he in the presence of the Churchwardens, write and record in your
Register Book, Can. 70.
the Names and Surnames of all persons baptized, married, and buried in your
Parish from time to time, yearly transmitting a Copy of those Christnings,
Marryings, and Buryings, subscribed with his own, the Churchwardens or
Overseers hands, into the Bishops Registry?

XX. Does your Minister permit any strange Minister to preach in your Church,
Can. 50. Can. 52.
who is not sufficiently licensed and Authorized thereto, or that does not
subscribe his name in your book provided for that purpose, and by whom he was
so licensed to Preach, and the day of his Preaching?

XXI. Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate celebrate Matrimony betwixt any
persons, Can. 62.
without the Banns of Matrimony first published on three several Sundays or
Holy Days in the Parish Church or Chapel where the said Parties dwell, or at
any times by Law prohibited, without special Faculty or License, in either
case, granted by lawful Authority? Or does he celebrate the same in any other
place than in the Church? and in such Church or Chapel only, where both or one
of the parties dwell (though he have License granted by the Ordinary) or in the
Church at any other time, Can. 99. Can. 100. 101, 104.
then between the hours of eight and twelve in the Forenoon? Or betwixt such
persons as are prohibited by the Laws of God, and are within those Degrees of
Consanguinity or Affinity which are expressed in the Table of Marriage; or
under the Age of One and twenty years complete, without the consent of their
Parents or of their Guardians and Governors (if their Parents be dead) first
signified unto him?

Can. 102, 103, 104. and Constitut. 1597. Tit. de Moderandis, etc.
XXII. Or have any such Licenses as abovementioned, that you know of, been
granted by any under the Jurisdiction of this Diocese, for the celebration of
Matrimony, until it do appear to the person himself, who is judge in these
cases, by the Oaths of two sufficient witnesses, one of them being known to the
Judge, or to some person whom the Judge may reasonably trust in this
particular, That the express consent of the Parents or Parent (if one be dead)
or Guardian or Guardians of the Parties (except they both were in the state of
Widowhood) is thereunto had and obtained, and until one of the Parties to be
Married have personally Sworn, that he believes there is no let or impediment
of Precontract, Kindred or Alliance, or any other lawful cause, nor any suit
commenced in any Ecclesiastical Court to bar or hinder the proceeding of the
said Matrimony?

XXIII. Has your Minister admitted any Women delivered of any Child begotten
in Adultery or Fornication, to be churched without License from the Ordinary?

Can. 48.
XXIV. Does your Minister serve more than one Church or Chapel in distinct
Parishes on one day? if so, how far distant are those Churches or Chapels
which he so serves?

XXV. Does your Parson, Vicar or Curate (if commanded by the Ordinary (openly
some Sunday denounce and declare for Excommunicate all such as stand
Excommunicate by the Law of the Church, Can. 65.
to the end that others may be admonished to refrain their Company? has he
said Divine Service whilst he knew such Excommunicate persons to have been in
the Church? or admitted such to the Communion whilst they stood so
excommunicate?

XXVI. Does your Parson, Vicar, Can. 68.
or Curate (having convenient notice given) delay or refuse to bury any that
are brought to the Church or Churchyard according to the form prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer, except such as die either unbaptized, or
Excommunicate Majori Excommunicatione, and no man able to testify their
Repentance, or have laid violent hands upon themselves?

XXVII. Does your Minister in the Parish Church or Chapel where he has
charge, (...). of Canon.
read the Book of Canons and Constitutions agreed on at the Synod holden at
London, A. D. 1603 once every year upon some Sundays or Holy Days, in the
Afternoon before Divine Service, and does he so divide the same, as the one
half may be read one day, and the other half the other day?

XXVIII. Does your Minister publicly read the whole XXXIX Articles unto the
people twice every year, Can. 2. direct. to Preachers, An. 1662.
so that they may the better understand the same, and be made more thoroughly
acquainted with the Doctrine of the Church of England, and not be so easily
drawn away from the same (as formerly) before they know what it is?

XXXIX. Is any Lecture preached in your Church? Can. 53, 54
is he or are they who preach it, Licensed so to do by the Bishop? Does every
such one, before his Lecture either read the whole public Service himself
appointed for that day by the Church in his Surplice, or at least be present at
the whole reading thereof? and is he in all respects conformable to the Laws
and Orders of the Church of England? Or does he any way endeavor to bring the
Parson or Vicar of the place into disrepute with his Parishioners?

XXX. Does every one abide in his own Calling whereunto he is called? Can. 76.
viz. Does any Layman that is not duly ordained openly read Common Prayer, or
execute any Ministerial duty in your Church? Or is there any Clergyman, viz.
any in Holy Orders, who does voluntarily relinquish those his Orders, and use
himself as a Lay man only without taking any care of the Church of God?

Concerning the Parishioners.
I. HAve you any persons or person living in your Parish that to your knowledge
live not as becomes a Christian, according to his promise and vow made in his
Baptizm; viz. denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.
living soberly, justly and godly?

II. Have you any in your Parish who wilfully absent themselves from your
Church or Chapel either at Morning or Evening Prayer upon Sundays and other
days appointed by law to be used and kept as Holy Days, or who come late to
Church or depart from thence before Service be done, 1 Eliz. c. 2.
and the blessing given? Or hate you any that upon any Holy Days keep open
shops or sell wares, or follow their bodily and ordinary labor or trade, or
permit their Servants so to do in time of Divine Service? Or have you any
Dintners, Innkeepers, or other Victualiers, or sellers of Beer or Ale, that
permit any on such times to tipple or game in their houses, Can. An. 1571.
or upon any pretense whatsoever, (except in some necessity as of sickness) to
remain in their houses in the time of Divine Service or Sermon, Forenoon or
Afternoon, upon those days? or any that will come to hear Sermons but will not
come to the Common Prayer and Worship of God appointed in this Church?

III. Are there any in your Parish of years of understanding that remain
unbaptized, or any that refuse to send their Infants to be baptized publicly
in the Church in due time (except in cases of necessity) or in such cases do
they procure them to be baptized at home in due manner according to the order
of the Church of England? Rubric of Baptism
Or are there any that send their Children away from their own Minister
(present among them) to be baptized in other Churches? Rubric.
Or any persons that being unconfirmed are not instructed in their Catechism,
or not Religiously brought up, or not brought to confirmation, or being of
years, neglect themselves to seek it upon pretense of elder age, or of having
received the Communion, or Orders, or upon any other pretense whatsoever? Or
are there any that being Sixteen years of Age, Can. 112. Can. 28. Can. 51.
do not receive the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist three times in the year,
(whereof Easter to be one?) Or that does forsake their own Parish Church to
receive elsewhere? Can. 99, (...).
Or are there any married Women, who after their delivery from the pain and
peril of Childbearing refuse in convenient time to return a public
Thanksgiving to God, according to the Order of the Church? Or are there any
that neglect to obtain the Christian burial of their dead according to the
Rites of the Church of England?

IV. Do any in your Parish entertain in their house any Sojourner, common
Guests, or other persons, who refuse to frequent Divine Service, or receive the
holy Communion as aforesaid and what are the names, qualities, and conditions
of such Sajourners?

V. Do any refuse to be uncovered during the time of Divine Service, or Sermon,
or Homily prescribed therein, Can. 18.
or devoutly to kneel when by the Common Prayer Book they are commanded so to
do? or to stand up at the Glory be to the Father, etc. and at the Creeds and
holy Gospel, and to make answer at all the Responsals appointed by the said
Book, and due reverence when the Name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned? or to say
the Creed and the Lord's Prayer in a loud voice with the Minister? Or do any in
time of Divine Service, or Sermon, or Homily, behave themselves rudely by
walking, talking, whispering, Can. (...).
laughing, or sleeping?

VI. Do any persons excommunicate intrude into your Church in time of Divine
Service, or does any other person disturb your Minister doing any part of his
Ministerial Office? or do any brawl, quarrel, challenge one another, fight or
strike in the Church or Churchyard? Or are any Plays, Can. 88.
Feasts, Drinkings, or Church-Ales kept in your Church or Churchyard?

VII. Do any Householders, Fathers, Masters, Mothers, Mistresses in your Parish
neglect to cause their Children and Servants, Apprentices, Can. 89.
or other Persons living in their House, which have not yet learnt the Churches
Catechism, to learn the same, and to come to Church on Sundays and Holy Days in
the Afternoon, there to be examined by their Minister, and instructed therein?

VIII. Is there any in your Parish, Master or Servant, Sojourner or Inhabiter,
Man or Woman, Can. 100 and Can. 115.
that lies under a common fame or suspicion or notoriety of Adultery,
Fornication or Incest or other Incontinency (having married within the degrees
prohibited by God, and expressed in a Table set forth by Authority A.D. 1563.
A.D. 1563.
) Or have you any that live together in your Parish as a man and wife, who
refuse to make known, when, where, or by whom they were married? Or any that
being lawfully married do yet live asunder without separation in due form of
Law? Qu. Eliz. Artic. 33.
Or have you any Bawds, Entertainers or Concealers of incontinent persons, or
any common Drunkards, Extortioners, Swearers, or Blasphemers of God's Name, any
sowers of Sedition, Faction, or Discord among their Neighbors, any Railers,
Revilers, common Slanderers of their Neighbors, filthy and lascivious talkers,
or which have solicited any person to unchastity? or any which have used any
Charms, Enchantments, or consultations of those called Wizards, Witches, or
cunning men or any Sorceries, (not including here such as are made Felony by
the Laws of this Realm) or which have committed perjury in any Ecclesiastical
Court and Cause?

Can. 114. Can. 112. Can. 110.
IX. Are there any Recusants in your Parish, or other Schismatically affected,
who refuse communion with the Church in her Prayers and Sacraments, who keep in
their Houses any that take upon them to be spiritual guides and instructers, or
any Schoolmaster in their Family, which come not to Church to hear Divine
Service, and to receive the holy Communion? or that labor to seduce and
withdraw others within or without the Family, from the Religion in this Church
established? or any in your Parish that retain, sell, or disperse any Popish
books or writings, or other books or writings of any Sectaries touching the
Religion, State, or Government Ecclesiastical of this kingdom of England, or
Books of Heresy?

X. Have you any in your Parish that are suspected to be Antinomians,
Anabaptists, Familists, Libertines, Brownists, Quakers, Muggletonians,
Independents, or Presbyterian opposers of Episcopal Government?

Can. 92.
XI. Did any dying in your Parish or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church
or Chapel, or to the Poor, or to any other pious or charitable purposes? What
were the Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? Are there any in your
Parish living that do to your knowledge, or as you have heard, withold any
part of the stock, goods or legacies, given to any Church or Pious and
Charitable use, any provision for free Schools, Almshouses or Hospitals (not
including here such as are of his Majesty's Foundation or Patronage) or that
employ them otherwise then according to the intent of their several
foundations, and the allowance of the Laws? Are there any Testaments or Wills
by any concealed or unproved, or any Goods unadministred or administered without
a due grant from the Ordinary?

XII. Have you any in your Parish that refuse to pay their duty for Easter
offerrings to your Minister, Can. 85, 86 Rubric after Com.
or to reckon with him then, or that refuse to contribute and pay the Rate
cessed upon them for the repair of your Church or Chapel, or for the providing
of such Books, Furniture, or necessary Ornaments as are requisite for the
performance of any of the Divine Offices there?

XIII. Do you know of any person in your Parish having the Presentation or gift
of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, Can. 40.
who has presented a Minister to it upon any Bargain, either for Money, or
Pension, or Lease, or reserve of Tithes, or Glebe, or any part thereof, or upon
any other Symonical contract whatsoever?

Concerning Churchwardens, Sidemen, Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners? or one of them by your Minister,
Can. 89.
and the other by the Parishioners? and are they sworn? Have the last
Churchwardens given up their Accounts before the Minister and Parishioners,
Can. 90.
delivering up also the money remaining into your hands, and other things of
right belonging to your Church or Chapel? and is the same delivered to you by
bill indented?

II. Does any person or persons trouble or molest you the Churchwardens for
presenting any offenders in any of the premises, Can. 115.
or for performing the duty that lies upon you in executing any part of your
office, and who are they that do so molest and trouble you?

III. Do you the Churchwardens against every Communion provide a sufficient
quantity of fine white Bread, Rubric. Can. 20.
and good and wholesome Wine according to the number of the Communicants? and do
you bring the Wine so provided in a clean and sweet standing Flagon of Pewter,
or other purer Metal, kept for that use?

IV. Do you suffer the Table for the holy Communion to be applied at any time,
to any profane or common use, as of writing, setting dead Corpse upon it at
Funerals, or others in the Church to sit upon it, or irreverently to make it a
place to lay their arms or hats upon it?

Act 1. 1 Eliz.
V. Do you the Churchwardens note them that come late to Church after Divine
Service is begun, or depart before it be ended? and do you take diligent notice
of the absent? And if upon your Complaint you receive Warrant from some of the
Justices of Peace, and any sums of money be thereupon levied according as by
law it is directed, do you distribute the several sums so levied to the poor of
your Parish according to the law in that case provided? Can. 90.
and before you at any time present any for such default in the Spiritual
Court, do you first seriously admonish them once and again?

Can. 90.
VI. Do you suffer none in time of Divine Service to stand idle, or talk
together in the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church or Churchyard, nor
children playing or crying in or about the Church? nor suffer any to bring
Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds into the Church to the disturbance of the Congregation?

VII. Are the Sidemen duly chosen? do they assist the Churchwardens in the
executing their Office? and do they join with them in framing Presentiments?

Can. 51.
VIII. Have you a Parish-Clerk aged 20 years at the least, chosen by your
Minister, of honest life and conversation, and sufficiently able to perform his
duty in reading, writing, and singing? and does he duly attend the Minister in
all Divine Offices at the Church? does he keep clean the Church, and carefully
look to it, and to the Books? and is he paid the ancient and usual wages as
has been accustomed?

Can. (...).
IX. Does your Clerk, or your Sexton (if there be any such in your Parish)
diligently look to the doors of the Church, that they be locked and opened at
due times, and that the Bells be tolled and rung at the due and accustomed
hours before the beginning of Morning and Evening Service, that the People may
he warned and invited to come to the Church? and when any person is passing out
of this life, does he upon notice given thereof coll a Bell as has been
accustomed, Can. 67:
that devout and charitable persons may thereby be warned to recommend the Soul
of the dying person to the grace, mercy, and peace of God Almighty?

X. Do they at the instance of any, make any grave in any part of the Church
(except in such Isles where some person has propriety) without the express
consent of your Minister?

Concerning Churches, and their Possessions, Ornaments, Vtensils, and other
Necessaries to the same belonging.
I. IS your Church or Chapel in good repair? are the Roofs, the Walls, the
Floors, Windows, Can. 85.
Seats (if you have them) and Doors well maintained? and all things there in
such a decent sort, without dust or any thing that may be either noisome or
unseemly, as becomes the House of God? And is your Porch and Steeple in good
repair, and Bells kept in good order by the care and oversight of the
Churchwardens at the charge of all persons occupying any Lands or Tenements
within your Parish, as well out-dwellers as inhabitants, rating all
proportionably for the Lands and Tenements they occupy therein? And is your
Church or Chappel-yard sufficiently fenced with walls, rails, or pales, as has
been accustomed, and that by the moneys cessed upon Lands and Tenements in your
Parish as aforesaid, except you have a special custom otherwise directing you?

II. Are there any Isles adjoining to your Church or Chancel which time out of
mind have been repaired by the owners of any Message in your Parish? if so, do
the owners thereof repair the same?

III. Is the Chancel of the Church sufficiently repaired and beautified by the
Minister or other person to whom that does belong?

IV. Is there any in your Parish that has converted to his own, or to any
common secular use, any Lead, Timber, Wood, Stone, or other Materials belonging
to any Church or Chapel, Parsonage or Vicarage-house, or outhouses thereof?
Have any of your Church or Chapel Bells been taken down, sold, or lessened;
And by whom?

V. Have you in your Church a decent Font of Stone with a cover, for the
Administration of holy Baptism, and the same set in the ancient and usual place
appointed for it? and have you in the Chancel a decent Table for the
Celebration of the holy Communion, Can. 81, 82
and for the Communion-Service, and a Carpet of Silk or other decent Stuff, to
lie continually upon the Table, during the time of Divine Service, and a fair
Linen cloth to lay on the same, at the time of the Holy Communion? and have
you a fair Chalice or Communion Cup of Silver, with a cover, Can. 83.
a Plate and a Flagon of Pewter, or purer Metal, the one to place the Bread on,
the other to bring the Wine unto the holy Table; or have they been prafaned by
any common use? Have you a Basin or some other decent Vessel for receiving the
offerings at the Communion Service? and have you a fair Linen cloth for
covering the consecrated Elements? Have you in your Church or Chapel a
convenient reading Seat or Pew, erected for your Minister wherein to read the
daily Morning and Evening Service, as also a decent Pulpit set in a convenient
place for the preaching of God's Word?

VI. Have you belonging to the Church or Chapel a perfect Bible of the largest
Volumn, Can. 80.
of the last Translation allowed by Authority? Have you two Books of
Common Prayer set forth according to the last Act of Parliament for the
Uniformity of public Prayers? And are they both of the largest Volumn, fairly
bound, one for the Minister, and another for the Clerk, to use at the
celebration of all Divine Offices? the Book of Homilies, Can. 70, 90
the Book of Canons and Constitutions made in the Synod held at London, 1603.
Have you hanging up in your Church a Table of Degrees in marriage prohibited
set forth by Authority, Can. 52.
A.D. 1563. a Parchment Register-book, to Register the several Christnings,
Marriages, and Buryings within the Parish? Have you a Book to set down the
names of such Strangers as preach in your Church? and another Book wherein to
write down and keep the Accounts of the Churchwardens, and an Inventory of all
things provided and belonging to your Church? Have any other Books, as the
Works of Bishop Jewel, Erasmus his Paraphrase upon the Gospel, or any other
good Books been carried out of the Church into any man's private House; or been
lost?

Can. 82.
VII. Are the ten Commandments or the Lords Prayer and other chosen Sentences
of holy Scripture set up in your Church or Chapel, as the Canon does require?

VIII. Have you a large and decent Surplice, one, or more, Can. 58.
for the Minister to wear at all times of his public Ministration? And have
you a Hood or Tippet for your Minister to wear over his Surplice?

IX. Have you in your Church or Chapel a strong Chest with three Locks or Keys
for the Alms of the poor, Can. 84.70
and a hole therefore in the upper part thereof? and is one of those Keys in
the custody of the Parson, Vicar, or Curate? And have you one other convenient
Chest, for keeping the Books and Furniture belonging to the Church? and a Bier
for the carrying of the dead to Burial?

X. Is your Churchyard well and sufficiently fenced, and kept with walls or
pales? Have any Trees been cut down, growing in the Churchyard or fences
thereof, and by whom, and for what use was it done? what private doors are made
into the Churchyard, whereby Nusances are committed, and by whom were those
doors made? Is any Encroachment made upon that ground?

XI. Have you any Lands or Tenements given or belonging to the repairing of
your Church? what is the quantity and value thereof, and in whose possession
are they?

XII. When any of those things mentioned in the 6, 7, 8, or 9 Articles above
are wanting, are they provided by the Churchwardens, at the charge only of the
Inhabitants of the Parish, according to each Inhabitants Estate, and not
otherwise? And do you the Churchwardens when you make a state for the same,
and also for the buying of Bread and Wine for Communions, and for the expenses
of your selves and Sidemen at Visitations, and to pay for scouring your Plate,
and washing the Surplice and Communion-clothes, and (if you have not a custom
to the contrary) to pay your Parish-Clerk his ancient wages? When you make, I
say at any time such a Rate, or a Rate according to the first Article for the
repair of your Church, do you give public notice in the Church to the
Parishioners of the time and place of your making them, and also of the time
and place when and where your Rate shall be offered to be confirmed by your
Ordinary? that the Objections of any may be heard, before they be by the
Ordinary ratified?

XIII Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, with all the outhouses
thereto belonging, kept in good and sufficient repair? or have any of the
said-house or outhouses been pulled down without License from the Ordinary?
and by whom? Has any person encroached upon any Orchard, Garden, Yard, or
Close belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage-house, or felled any tree thereon
growing?

Can. 87.
XIV. Have any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Ministers, been
taken away, or exchanged for other Lands, without the free consent of the
Patron, Incumbent, and License from the Ordinary? And have you a perfect
Terrier of all Glebe-lands, Meadows, Gardens, Orchards, Stocks, Implements,
Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? as also, a Note
of such Pensions, Ratetithes, and Portions of Tithes (or other yearly profits
either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? and finding no such
Terrier, do you the Churchwardens and Sidemen, together with your Minister
and others of your Parish, make a Terrier of the Premises in Parchment,
subscribed and signed by you to be kept by your Minister, and a Copy thereof
subscribed and signed sent into the Bishops Registry?

XV. Are the Bones of them that have been buried in your Church or Churchyard
kept decently, interred there, or laid up in some fit place as beseems
Christians? and is the whole consecrated ground kept free from Swine and other
filth and annoyance, as becomes a place so dedicated?

Concerning Schoolmasters, Physicians, Surgeons, and Midwives.
Can. 77, 79
I. DO any in your Parish teach or instruct Youth in any public School, or
private House, without License from his Ordinary? and does he cause his
Scholars on Sundays and Holy Days to resort to Church to hear Divine Service,
Sermons and Catechize? and does he see that they behave themselves there
orderly and reverently? and does he himself teach them the Catechism set forth
by Authority? and is he diligent to bring them up in the fear of God, in good
learning, and manners?

II. Do any in your Parish practice Physic or Surgery without a License from
the Bishop himself if at home, or in his absence, by the Ordinary upon the
place? Are your Midwives also licensed by the Ordinary?

Touching Public Ecclesiastical Officers of the whole Diocese (within the
Bishops Visitation.)
I. ARe there any Ecclesiastical Officers (within the Bishops Visitation) any
Advocate, Register, Proctor, Clerk, Can. 135.
Apparitor, Can. 138.
or other Minister belonging to the Ecclesiastical Court, that takes and exacts
any extraordinary or greater fees then are due and accustomed?

II. Has any Apparitor taken Reward or Fee to excuse any appearance before the
Ecclesiastical Court? Can. 134, 138, 123,
or has the Register sped any Act, or dismissed any person detected without
the knowledge and actual consent of the Judge? have any gifts or rewards been
taken by any for the perverting of Justice?

III. Has any person within your Parish paid or promised any sum of Money,
Can. An. 1571. and An. 1597.
or other reward for commutation of Penance for any crime of Ecclesiastical
cognizance? If so, how has the same been disposed of, to what pious and
charitable uses (as far as you know?)

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the Churchwardens and Sidemen, and also to the Minister.
IF you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance, Can.
113.
you are to present the same. The Minister of every Parish may join in
Presentment with the Churchwardens and Sidemen; and if they be not faithful
in their care to admonish and present, then the Parsons or Vicars, or in their
absence, the Curates (being the persons that should principally have care of
suppressing of sin and impieties in their Parishes) may, Can. 113.
and may find themselves in conscience obliged to present, especially the
greater crimes, and whatsoever in their conscience they know needs
reformation in their Parish, as they tender the good of the Souls of their
Parish.


