ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY Concerning certain MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL, EXHIBITED To
the Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish within the ARCH-DEACONRY OF
HVNTINGTON; For their better direction in their Presentiments in the VISITATION
OF JOHN HAMMOND, Archdeacon of HVNTINGTON.

London: Printed by James Cotterel. 1670

The Tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish
YOu shall well and faithfully execute the Office of Churchwardens (or
Sidemen) in the Parish of N. and true presentment make of such defaults and
offenses as are mentioned in the Articles given you in charge, or you know to
be enquirable by the laws Ecclesiastical of this Land. So help you God.

ARTICLES of Inquiry Within the Arch-Deaconry of HVNTINGTON.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Posessions, Furniture and
Ornaments thereunto belonging.
1. IS your Church or Chapel, with the Chancel and Steeple thereof, in good
and sufficient repair both within and without? 2. Are all things therein kept
orderly and in decent sort, free from any thing that may be either noisome or
unseemly? 3. Has any part thereof been demolished or pulled down? do you know,
or have you heard of any person who has imbezelled, or converted to his own
use any of the Bells, Lead, Timber, or Utensils thereunto belonging? 4. Have
you in your Church or Chapel a large Bible of the last translation, the book
of Common Prayer lately established, the Book of Homilies allowed by authority,
the Table of degrees wherein Marriages are prohibited, a Register-book in
parchment, for Christenings, Marriages and Burials; a Book for such strangers
as Preach, to write their Names and Licenses in, as also another for the
Churchwardens accounts? and are the same kept in all points as is required? 5.
Have you a Font of stone standing in the usual place for public Baptism? and
does your Minister therein only Baptize Publicly? 6. Have you a decent
Communion Table, with a Carpet, in the time of Divine-Service, and another
covering of white linen, at the time of administering the Sacrament of the Lords
Suppers? What cup, chalice, patten or flagons have you belonging to that
Service? 7. Have you a convenient Seat or Pew for your Minister to read Service
in, a comely Pulpit set in a convenient place to Preach the Word in, with a
decent cloth or cushion for the same? have you also a decent and comely
Surplice for the use of the Minister in his public administrations? 8. Have
you in your Church a Box for the Alms for the poor, a strong chest with locks
and keys? and are the Plate, Vessels, Carpets, Vestments and Books belonging to
the Church safely kept therein? and have you a Bier with a Herse-cloth for the
decent Burial of the Dead? 9. Is your Churchyard well and sufficiently fenced,
and decently kept? Have any encroached upon the Ground thereof, or cut down any
Trees growing therein, unless for necessary reparation of the Church or
Chancel? 10. Have you in your Parish a house for your Minister to dwell in? Is
the same, with the outhouses thereunto belonging, in good and sufficient
repair? Have any of them been defaced or pulled down without License? 11. Have
you a true and perfect Terriar of all the Glebelands and tenements belonging to
your Parsonage or Vicarage, taken by the view of your Minister and other honest
men of your Parish; as also a Note of such Pensions, ratetithes, and portions
of tithes both within and without your Parish, as belong thereunto? And is a
copy thereof delivered into the Bishops Registry? 12. Is there any Almshouse,
Hospital, or Free School, (being not of the Kings foundation) in your Parish?
And are they and their endowment preserved and employed to their right use? 13.
Have any dying in your Parish given any Legacy to the Church or Poor, which
has been mis-impolyed, and disposed of to other uses?
TIT. II. Concerning Ministers.
1. HAve you settled Minister in your Parish? If not, how long have you been
destitute? What is the living yearly worth, and who is the Patron thereof? By
whom are the fruits received, and how are they disposed of? 2. Does your
Parson, Vicar, or Curate audibly and distinctly read all Morning and Evening
Service; and in reading of the same, administration of the Sacraments,
celebration of Marriage, burial of the Dead, and in all other Offices, use the
form and words prescribed in the book of Common Prayer, without any addition,
omission, or alteration? 3. Does he diligently instruct the Youth of your
Parish in the Church-Catechism? Does he read the Canons of the Church publicly
once every year, give notice of the Holy Days and Fasting-days, of the
Communion, Banns of Matrimony, and Perambulation in Rogation-week, read the
Briefs and Excommunications delivered to him, and every year publish in your
Church or Chapel the Statute against profane swearing and cursing, according
as it is enacted: 12 Jac. cap. 20? 4. Does he at reading or celebrating any
Divine Office in your Church or Chapel constantly wear the Surplice, together
with such other Scholastical Habit as is suitable to his degree? and in
Preaching does he wear a Gown? 5. Has he at any time, that you know of,
publicly or otherwise spoken against the Order or Government of the Church of
England as is now by Law established? 6. Does he administer the Sacraments in
private houses otherwise than is by law allowed? 7. Does he permit any strange
Minister to Preach in your Church or Chapel who is not sufficiently authorized
thereunto? 8. Does he serve more than one Church or Chapel in distinct
Parishes upon one day? If so, how far distant are those Churches or Chapels
which he so serves, and what Wages and Salary has he for his pains? 9. Is
your Minister a man of a godly, sober and peaceable conversation? or on the
contrary, Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses, or does he board therein?
Is he a common Gamester, a profane Swearer, and obscene Jester, or an
intemperate Drinker? Is he vehemently suspected of Incontinency? Is he a
fomenter of suits and contention among Neighbors? Does he give himself to any
base of servile labor, or secular trade, unbefitting the duty and Dignity of
his Office? Is his apparel grave and decent, both for fashion and color, as
the Canons of the Church require? Or is his carriage and conversation in any
kind disorderly, scandalous, or unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ?
TIT. III. Concerning Parishioners.
1. DO any of your Parish make profession of any other Religion than what is
professed and established in the Church of England? Do any reproach the same
Religion, or seduce others from it? Or endeavor to alienate the hearts of the
people from their Loyalty and Obedience to the King? 2. Do any absent
themselves from the public Assemblies and Service of the Church, or not come
in the time, as well to Service as Sermons, or not behave themselves, when they
are there, with such reverence, order, decency and attention as is required; or
depart thence before the Service and Sermon be ended, and the blessing
pronounced? 3. Do any refuse to send their Infant-children to be Baptized in
your Church or Chapel, unless in case of extreme danger? Or are any children
kept unbaptized longer than is allowed? Or are there any more aged persons yet
unbaptized? Or are any children not Communicants admitted to be Godfathers or
Godmothers in Baptism? 4. Does every House-holder in your Parish cause their
children and servants to come to Church, to learn their Catechism, and to give
an account thereof unto your Minister, that so they may be brought to
understand and take upon them their Baptismal covenant, and be confirmed, and
admitted Communicants? 5. Do all Communicants in your Parish, upon timely
notice given by the Minister, thrice at the least every year (once whereof at
Easter) in that meek and reverend manner which is required, partake of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper? and do such signify their names and purpose to
Communicate unto the Minister at least the day before the celebration thereof?
6. Do any of your Parish repair to other Parishes or Ministers, of them to
receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper? Or are there any strangers, not of
your Parish, who forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours for
it? 7. Are there any living in your Parish, who have been unlawfully married
contrary to the laws of God? or any who being lawfully divorced have married
again? or any who being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by due
course of law, do not cohabit together? 8. Have any been clancularly married in
private houses, or in the Church without license, the Banns not being thrice
published; or by license or without, neither of the persons so married dwelling
at that time in your Town? 9. Do any married Women in your Parish after their
delivery from the danger of Childbirth, refuse in due time to make their
public thanksgiving in your Church for so great a mercy, or to pay their
accustomed duties as is required? 10. Do any profane the Lord's day, by working
in their ordinary callings, by tippling, gaming, or any unlawful exercises or
pastimes? 11. Do any walk, talk, or stand idle in the Churchyard, or
Church Porch, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon; Or at any other time
quarrel, braul, smite, or lay violent hands upon one another either in the
Church or Church-yeard? 12. Have any irreverently used your Minister, or spoken
slanderous or reproachful words against him to the scandal of his vocation, or
interrupted him in his administrations? 13. Do any refuse to pay the Rates
assessed upon them for the repair of the Church or Chapel, and the providing
of Books, Utensils, and other necessary Ornaments for the same? 14. Are there
any in your Parish Blasphemers of Gods Holy Name, any common Drunkards or
Swearers, any commonly known of suspected to be guilty of fornication,
adultery, incest, or any other notorious crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance?
Declare who they are, that they may be punished according to their deserts.
TIT. IV. Concerning Churchwardens.
1. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen? Have the
former and last Churchwardens given up their accounts to the Minister and
Parishioners, and also delivered up to their Successors the moneys remaining in
their hands, together with all things else belonging to your Church or Chapel?
2. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel provide
a sufficient quantity of sine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the
number of Communicants?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks.
HAve you a Parish-Clerk chosen by your Minister aged twenty years at least? Is
he of ability to perform his duty? and does he perform the same in all respects
as is required of him? Are his accustomed Wages duly paid unto him? or do any
withhold the same from him?
IF you know any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance not
expressed in these Articles, you are likewise to present the same, and therein to
take the assistance of your Minister.

The Minister of every Parish may join in Presentment with the Churchwardens
and Sidemen: And if they will not present such enormities as require
reformation, the Minister himself, (being the Person that should have the chief
care for the suppressing of sin and impiety in the Parish) may present the same.

FINIS.

