A Fairing for Young Men, OR The careless Lover.
Who is resolved in his mind, upon a merry strain,
To Love, but not long, unless his Love, loves him again;
He wishes all Batchelors to be ruled by this Song,
And then their Sweet-hearts should not fool them so long.

To the tune of, He that has most Money, he is the best Man.

LIst you brave youngsters that live in the City
and likewis you Country Lads hearken a whil
Here are some Uerses, I hope they will fit ye;
which when you have heard may cause you to smil
I loved a Maid once but she did deceive me,
and for the loss of her I Will not complain,
No beauties of Freedom shall ever bereave me,
For I cannot love if not loved again.
My Love for beauty I needs must commend her,
and for her carriage it seemed very fair
But such a politic Wit did attend her
that I had like to be caught in fools snare,
For by experience be sure I can tell thee,
false love will puzzell, and trouble thy brain,
Then let not fond smiles, and glances compel thee
To love and not be beloved again.
She in my company often consented,
for to be merry, and pass time away,
And for a while I rested contented,
though in her carriage she seemed very coy
But when I perceived her subtle delusion,
her humors no longer I then would maintain
For it is a madness and breeds a confusion.
To love and not to be beloved again.
The more you seek to a Maid, she will slight you
strive for to please her as well as you can
The more you entreat her, the less she will requite you
such fools some maidens do make of a Man:
Then thy'l fly from you, thinking to prove you,
but for their absence never complain,
The more then you slight them, ye better they will love you
For J le never love if not loved again.
The second part,
to the same tune

SOme like the wind will be always changing,
and yet with fancies will lead you along:
When that their minds on others are ranging,
thinking to charm you with their falls tonng,
They Will kiss you, they will clip you, they will tell you a story
when al your time will prove labor in vain,
At last they will leave you, and take in, t a glory:
But jl'e never love if not loved again.
Batchelors all that hear this my Ditty,
take my advise and be ruled by me,
Slight your coy Lasses in Country and City:
then to your humors they will quickly agree,
The more you creep to them, ye sooner they will leav you
keep a whil from them, you will hear them complain
Tell them you will leav them, if once they deceiv you
Then if you will love them they will love you again.
Lasses there be to that will fawn upon you,
and make you believe they do love you so dear,
When it is to try what they can get on you,
to feast their chops with Wine and good Cheer,
On shall be namelesse did serve them all finely,
for to a Tavern he led them away,
Called for good Cheer and welcomed them kindly,
And left these Lasses the reckoning to pay.
Have a care, have a rare Young men be careful,
Maids are too cunning for you now a days,
Some will be sullen, and some will be cheerful,
some are too nimble, and some have delays,
Some Maids are wanton, and some Maids are civil
but jl'e choose a Maid that means honest and plain
For some are to cunning I think for the Devil,
But jl'e love that Maid that will love me again.
She that loves truly be sure will nere leav theee
but faithful and constant will always remain,
And of thy Estate she will never deceive thee,
but give thee good counsel the same to maintain;
She Will nere put you off with so many denyals,
as some their be that delights in that strain,
To wast your means and your time upon trialls;
But if you love her she will love you again.
You Young Men al I have sent you a Fairing
they that are honest hearts hear it away,
And for to give it your loves be not sparing,
for it is good counsel and truth I dare say,
Young Men be careful but be not deceitful,
let not your sweet-hearts have cause to complain
If they prove constant then prove not ungrateful,
But if they love you then love them again.
C.^.
FINIS.
London, Printed for Francis Greve dwelling on Snow-hill.


