THE GOLDEN BOOK OF St. John Chrysostom, Concerning the EDUCATION OF CHILDREN.

Translated out of the Greek BY I. E. Esquire

LONDON, Printed by D. M. for G. B^del and T. Collins, at the Middle Temple
Gate in Fleetstreet, 1659.

To my Most Incomparable Brothers GEORGE EVELYN Of Wotton in Surrey and RICHARD
EVELYN Of Woodcot in Surrey, Esqrs.
My Dear Brothers,
AMongst the very many diversions which I have experimented to mitigate and
attemper the sorrows which do still oppress me, for the loss of my Children,
and especially of that One, so precious to me. I have found nothing that has
afforded me a greater consolation then this: That it pleased God to give me
opportunities and such a subject to work upon, as I cannot but hope he has in
mercy accepted. And truly when I seriously contemplate the felicity of all
those which are Well out of this miserable world, I find the grief which we
conceive for their absence to be a mere (...), and does nothing at all concern
them whom we mourn for, that have served God, their Generation with honor,
and left a memorial without reproach. You have, Brothers, both of you lost
Children, but none of them for whom you had reason to be so sensible as my
self; because they died Infants, and could not so entirely engage your
affections, as if they had arrived to years of more maturity, and the Spring
had flattered you with the expectation of a fruitful harvest as me it did.

But because we are all obnoxious, and that Cuivis potest accidere, quod
cuiquam potest, be assured, That of all the afflictions which can touch the heart
in this life, one of the most superlative is the loss of a hopeful child; and
till I had the experience of this my self, I have often wondered That David
should suffer himself to be so far transported for the death of a Rebel, that
had violated all the Relations which ought to be betwixt a Son and a most
indulgent Father. I know well that another cause might contribute to the
effect, but all who shall read that sad story, cannot but impute as much to his
paternal affections as by man could be expressed. These are, Brothers, the
contingencies (which since we can never be exempted perfectly of) have caused
me to seek the remedies which I presume here to have at last encountered, and
which I here likewise affectionately present unto you. Let us make our Children
fit for God, and then let us not be displeased whenever he takes them from
us. Deus nobis illos educandos non mancipio dederat. There are a multitude of
other precepts, that I might recollect out of the consolatory Writings which
are at hand, Plutarch and Cicero, Seneca and others. But all their Topics (S.
Hierom and some few Christians only excepted) are most of them derived from
Philosophy, the pride and courage of another Institution, and afford us but
uncertain consolations in the wiser estimate of things. So that hereby we may
be less troubled in wanting the writings of Diogenes, Clitomachus, Carneades,
Possidonius upon the same Subject; there being nothing capable truly to compose
the mind of a good man for the absence of his friend or of his Child, like the
contemplation of his undoubted felicity.

It is that which I therefore endeavor here to secure, in offering to you this
Golden Book of S. Chrysostom, which having afforded me so great a consolation,
I cannot but ^hope may be likewise acceptable to you, and useful to as many as
have either bin touched with the like resentiments, or that do establish for an
infallible Maxim that saying of Plato, De Legib.
(...) That those who are well and rightly instructed, do easily become good
men. And the thing is verily of so great importance, That some have taken
Education for Religion it self; All for another Nature; which he that shall
read of the Laconick Discipline, will not easily dispute. This is certain, That
were this one thing well secured, Princes would have good Subjects, Fathers
good Children, Wives good Husbands, Masters good Servants, God would be
sincerely served, and all things would be well with us. And here I would now
end, did not my Affections a little transport me, and the hopes that you will
yet indulge it, if whilst I erect to my dear Child no other Monument, I show to
the world how nearly I concurred with the Instructions of this Golden Book
(before I had seen it) and what may be expected from a timely Education, if
(now that we may both read and have it) we with diligence pursue it.

I cannot with S. Augustine, Conf. lib. 9. cap. ^.
say of my son, as he of his, Annorum erat fere quindecim, and ingenio
praeveniebat multos graves, and doctos viros. But this I can truly affirm, He
was little above five years old, and he did excel many that I have known of
fifteen. Tam brevi spatio tempor a multa compleverat. He was taught to pray as
soon as he could speak, and he was taught to read as soon as he could pray. At
three years old he read any Character or letter whatsoever used in our printed
Books, and within a little time after any tolerable Writing hand, and had
gotten (by heart) before he was five years of age seven or eight hundred Latin
and Greek words, as I have since calculated out of his (...), together with
their Genders and Declensions. I entered him then upon the Verbs, which in four
months time he did fectly conjugate, together with most of the irregulars
excepted in our Grammar; These he conquered with incredible delight, and
intelligence of their use: But it is more strange to consider, that when from
them I thought to set him to the Nouns, he had in that interim (by himself)
learned both the Declensions and their Examples, their exceptions, Adjectives,
Comparisons, Pronouns, without any knowledge or precept of mine, insomuch as I
stood amazed at his sedulity and memory. This engaged me to bring him a
Sententiae Pueriles and a Cato, and of late Comeniu^* the short Sentences of
which two first, and the more solid ones of the last, he learned to Construe
and Perse, as fast as one could well teach and attend him: for he became not
only dextrous in the ordinary rules by frequent recourse to them (for indeed I
never obliged him to get any of them by heart as a task, by that same
carnificina puerorum) upon occasions, but did at this age also easily
comprehend both the meaning and the use of the Relative the Ellipsis and
Defects of Verbs and Nouns unexpressed Quid in illo virtutum, quid ingenii,
quid pietatis invenerim* vereor dicere ne fidem credulitatis ^xcedam. Hier. ad
Marcell. Epitaph.
But to repeat here all that I could justly affirm concerning his promptitude
in this nature, were altogether prodigious, so that truly I have been sometimes
even constrained to cry out with the Father, as of another Adeodatus, Horrori
mihi est hoc ingenium. For so insatiable were his desires of knowledge, that I
well remember upon a time hearing one discourse of Terence and Plautus, and
being told (upon his enquiring concerning those Authors) that the Books were
too difficult for him, he wept for very grief, and would hardly be pacified:
But thus it is reported of Thucydides, when those noble Muses were recited in
his hearing, at one of the most illustrious Assemblies of Greece, from whence
was predicted the greatness of his Genius. To tell you how exactly he read
French, how much of it he spoke and understood, were to let you only know,
that his Mother did instruct him without any confusion to the rest. Thus he
learned a Catechism and many prayers, and read diverse things in that Language.
More to be admired was the liveliness of his judgment, that being much
affected with the Diagramms in Euclid, he did with so great facility interpret
to me many of the common Postulata, and Definitions, which he would readily
repeat in Latin and apply it. And he was in one hour only taught to play, the
first half of a Thorough Basse, to one of our Church Psalms upon the Organ Let
no man think that we did hereby crowd his spirit too full of notions. Those
things which we force upon other children, were strangely natural to him for as
he very seldom affected their toys; to such things were his usual
Recreations, as the gravest man might not be ashamed to divert himself withal.
These were especially the Apologus of Aesop; most of which he could so readily
recount, with diverse other Stories, as you would admire from whence he produced
them: But he was never without some Book or other in his hand. Pictures did
afford him infinite pleasure, above all a Pen and Ink with which he now began
to form his Letters* Thus he often delighted himself in reciting of Poems and
Sentences, some whereof he had in Greek, Fragments of Comedies, diverse Verses
out of Herbert, and amongst the Psalms, his Beloved, and often repeated, Ecce
quam Bonum: and indeed he had an ear so curiously framed to sounds, that he
would never miss infallibly to have told you what Language it was you did read
by the Accent only, were it Latin, Greek, French, Italian or Dutch. To all I
might add, the incomparable sweetness of his countenance and eyes, the clean
fabric of his body and pretty Adresses: how easily he forgot injuries, when at
any time I would break and cross his passions, by sometimes interrupting his
enjoyments, in the midst of some sweet or other delicious things which allured
him; that I might there^^ render him the more indifferent to all things* though
these he seldom quitted without rewards and advantage. But above all, extremely
conspicuous was his affection to his younger Brother, with whose impertinencies
he would continually bear, saying he was but a child, and understood no better.
For he was ever so smiling, cheerful and inperfect good humor, that it might
be truly verified of him, as it was once of Heliodorus, Hi^rom
Gravitatem morum, hilaritate, frontis temperabat. But these things were
obvious, and I dwell no longer on them: There are yet better behind; and those
are his early Piety, and how ripe he was for God. Never did this Child lie in
bed (by his good will) longer then six or seven Winter or Summer; and the first
thing he did (being up) was to say his French Prayers, and our
Church-Catechism; after Breakfast that short Latin Prayer, which having
encountered at the beginning of our Lillies Grammar, he had learned by heart,
without any knowledge or injunction of mine, and whatsoever he so committed to
memory, he would never desist till heperfectly understood; yet withal this,
did he no day employ above two hours at his Book by my order; what he else
learned was most by himself, without constraint or the least severity,
unseene, and totally imported by his own inclination. But to return, Wonderful
was it to observe the Chapters which himself would choose, and the Psalms and
Verses that he would apply upon occasions, and as in particular he did to some
that were sick in my family a little before him; bidding them to consider the
Sufferings of Christ, how bitter they were, and how willingly he endured them.
How frequently would he pray by himself in the day time, and procure others to
join with him in some private corner of the house apart? The last time he was
at Church (which was, as I remember at Greenwich) at his return I asked him
what he brought away from the Sermon; He replied, That he had remembered two
good things, Bonum Gratiae, and Bonum Gloriae, which expressions were indeed
used, though I did not believe he had minded them.

I should even tire you with repeating all that I might call to mind of his
pertinent answers upon several occasions: One of the last whereof I will only
instance, when about Christmas a Kinsman of his related to us by the fire side
some passages of the presumptuous fasting of certain Enthusiasts about
Colchester, whilst we were expressing some admiration at the passage, That,
says the Child (being upon the Gentleman's knee, and as we thought not minding
the discourse) is no such wonder, for it is written, Man shall not live by
bread alone, etc. But more to be admired was his perfect comprehension of the
sacred Histories in the Method of our Golden Auth^r so as it may be truly
affirmed of this Child, as it was once said of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Quod a puero Sacras liter as noverat Nor was all this by rote only (as they
term it) for that he was capable of the greater mystery of our salvation by
Christ, I have had many infallible indications. And when the Lords day
fortnight before he died he repeated to me our Church-Catechism, he told me
that he now perceived his Godfathers were dis engaged; for that since he
himself did now understand what his Duty was, it would be required of him, and
not of them for the future. And let no man think, that when I use the term
Dis-ingaged, it is to express the Child meaning with a fine word; for he did
not only make use of such phrases himself; but would frequently in his ordinary
discourse come out with such expresions as one would have admired how he came
by them; but upon enquiry, he would certainly have produced his authority, and
either in the Bible, or some other Book showed you the words so used. How
divinely did this pious Infant speak of his being weary of this troublesome
world (into which he was scarcely entered) and whilst he lay sick, of his
desires to go to Heaven; that the Angels might convey him into Abraham's
bosom, passionately persuading those that tended him to dye with him; for he
told them that he knew he should not live: And, really, though it were an Ague
which carried him from us (a disease which I least apprehended finding him so
lively in his Intervals;) yet the day before he took his leave of us, he
called to me, and pronounced it very soberly; Father (says he) you have often
told me that you would give me your house, and your Land, your Books and all
your fine things; but I tell you, I shall have none of them, you will leave them
all to my Brother. This he spoke without any provocation or passion, and it did
somewhat trouble me, that I could not make him alter this conceit which in
Another would be esteemed prophetic. But that I may conclude and show how
truly jealous this child was. Least he should offend God in the least scruple,
that very morning, not many hours before he fell into that sleep which was
his last, being in the midst of his Paroxcisme, he called to me, and asked of
me whether he should not offend, if in the extremity of his pain, he mentioned
so often the name of God, caling for ease; and whether God would accept his
prayers if he did not hold his hands out of bed in the posture of praying?
Which when I had pacified him about, he prayed, till his prayers were turned
into eternal praises. Thus ended your Nephew, being but five years, five
months and three days old, and more I could still say. Nam quem Corpore non
valemus recordatione teneamus, et cum quo loqui non (...) de eo loqui nunquam
desinamus. But my tears mingle so fast with my Ink that I am forced to break
off here, and be silent -- I end therefore with that blessed Saint, Munera tua
tibi confiteor Domine Deus meus, Creator omnium, multum potens reformare nostra
deformia: Nam ego in illo puero, praeter delictum nihil habebam. Quod enim
enutriebatur a nobis in disciplina tua. Tu inspiraveras nobis, nullus alius.
Munera tua tibi confiteor -- Cito de terra abstulisti vitam ejus, et securior
eum recordor. Dear Brothers, indulge me these excesses: It is not a new thing
which I do, St. Hierom wrote diverse Epistles which he inscribed his Epitaphs;
and never was a Paula or Estochium dearer to him, then this your Nephew was to

Dear B. B. Your Most Affectionate Brother, and most humble Servant I. E.

Grot. ad Patrem. Carere Liberi^ durum non est, nisi (...) qui habuerunt.
EPITAPHIUM. R. Evelyn, I. F.
Q efcit hoc sub marmore,
Ur a ^uiescit quicquid est amabile,
Patres quod optent, aut quod orbi lugeant
Genas decentes non, ut ante, risus
Lepore condit amplius.
Morum venustas, quanta paucis contigit
Desideratur omnibus.
Linguae Latina, Gallica.
Quas imbibit cum lacte materno, tacent
Tentarat Arts, Artiumque principiis,
Pietatis elementa hauserat.
Libris inhaesit improbo labor
Ut sola mors divelleret.
Quid indoles, quid disciplina, quid labor
Possint, ab Uno disceres.
Puer stupendus qualis hic effect senex
Si fata v^tae submin^st^assent iter!
Sed al^ter est^visum Deo.
Correptus ille febricula levi jacet:
Jacent tot una spes parentum.
Vixit ANN. V. M. V III super D.
Eheu! delicias breves.
Quicquid placet mortale non placet diu,
Quicquid placet mortale ne placet nimis
To the READER.
I Advertise the Reader, that this Golden-Book of St. Chrysostom is not to be
encountered amongst any of his Works formerly published; but has (amongst other
Fragments of that incomparable Author) bin lately produced out of a M. SS. in
the Cardinals Library at Paris, by the industry of Father Francis Combefis of
the Order of the Friars Preacher, and there printed the last year. 1656.

THE Golden BOOK OF St. John Chrysostom, Concerning the EDUCATION OF CHILDREN.
SO soon as ever a Child is borne, the Father bestirs himself, not that he may
rightly take order about his Education, but that he may magnificently set him
forth, and adorn him with Jewels and Rich Apparel. O vain Man, Wherefore do
thou this? Be it that thou thy self art clothed with all these things, why
do thou instruct thy Child, as yet free from this madness, in these trifles?
For what purpose do thou put that Ornament about his neck? He needs the care
of a diligent Tutor, who may compose and regulate his manners, he has no need
of Gold. And thou do nourish him a lock of hair behind like a Girl,
effeminating thy Son even from the very cradle. Softning thus the vigor of his
Sex, engraftest into that tender age a superfluous love of riches, and do
persuade him to the pursuit of those things which are totaly unuseful. Why do
thou spread for him so large a snare? Wherefore do thou so charm him with the
love of corporal things? If a man (says he) wear long hair it is a shame unto
him. 1 Cor. 11. 14
Nature will not endure it; God has not indulged it; ^tis a thing altogether
forbidden; it is the Practice of Gentil superstition. But many there be who
hang gold in their ears, I would that were wholly forborne even by the female
Sex, you infect boys with this pest also; nay and there are very many who
deride these discourses as if they were small matters; I tell you, they are not
small matters but exceeding great, and very considerable. A maid when in her
mothers chamber she has learned to long after these various tires and
ornaments of women, being gone out of her Fathers house, becomes impertinent to
her husband, and very troublesome, putting him to more charges then the very
Publicans. I have already told you, that it is therefore a difficult thing to
reform a vice, because there is no body which takes the care of Children, no
body discourses to them about Virginity, no body concerning Modesty, no body of
the contempt of Riches and Glory, and no body speaks to them of those blessed
Promises which are made in the Scriptures.

If therefore Children be from their Infancy deprived of Governors, what will
become of them? If some from the Womb even to their old and decrepit age,
having been instituted, are not yet arrived to perfection, what will not they
perpetrate, who from the beginning of their life have accustomed themselves to
hear such discourses! Now indeed that their children may be instructed in the
Arts, Letters and Eloquence every one does studiously contend; but that they
may cultivate their minds few, or none are at all solicitous.

I will never desist to beseech, to entreat, and to beg of you, That before all
things ^lse whatsoever, you would now compose the manners of your children. For
if thou will be truly indulgent to thy child, declare it in this, thou ^^alt
not lose thy reward. Hear what S. Paul says, ^ Tim. 5. 15
If they continue in faith, and charity, and holiness with sobriety. And
though thou art conscious to thy self of never so many evils, the rather seek
out some consolation for them. Make a Champion for Christ. I do not speak it
that thou should Caelibat him, send him into the Deserts and make him a Monk;
I say not so; I wish it indeed and would with all my heart, that every man
could receive it; but since that may seem a burden too great for him to
support, I do not compel. Bring up a Champion (I say) for Christ, and whilst he
remains in this world, instruct him from his very cradle. If whilst he is yet
young thou imprint good principles in him, no body shall be ever able to efface
them when he becomes more firm, being then as the wax which has received the
impression. As yet thou have him trembling, fearful and revering thy very
looks, thy words and every little beck. Treat him as thou should at the
beginning. If thou have a good child, thou will have the first benefit of him,
and then God. Thou labourest but for thy self. It Is reported, that when Pearls
are first taken up, they are only little drops of water, so that he which
receives them being sk^lful, pl^cing the drops in ^is hand, and exquisitely
turning them in his palm, renders them perfectly round and polished. But when
once they have attained their perfect shape and are become hard, they are no
more to be molded to every man's fancy; for that which is soft is every way
flexible, being not as yet compacted, and therefore is easily drawn which way
one pleases; but that which is hard, as having once attained a disposition to
st^ff^esse, is with difficulty to be moved, or susceptible of any other form.

Let then every one of us (who are Parents) as we behold Painters adorning
their Pictures and Statues with so much exactness, be diligently studious
about these wonderful Statues. For when Painters have once designed a Picture,
they work every day about it to bring it to perfection; the same do Statuaries,
abating what is superfluous, and adding whatsoever is deficient. So you also
like so many Statuaries, b^nd all your endeavors, as pr^paring those admirable
Statues for God; take away that which is superfluous, add that which you find
wanting: consider every day how they abound in Natural Endowments, that you may
timely augment them; what Natural Defects you espy, that you may accordingly
abate them: But with all sedulity and above all things, be careful to
exterminate unseemly speeches, for this custom begins extremly to inf^ct the
minds of youth; yea and before he have ess^yed it, teach him to be sober, to be
vigilant and assiduous in his devo^io^s and upon whatsoever he says or does to
put the Seal upon it. Imagine thy self a King who have a City to govern, the
Mind of thy Child; for really the mind is a City; and as in a City some are
Thieves, some live honestly, some labor, and others transact all they do
foolishly; just so it is with the discourses and cogitations of the mind, some
of them strive and militate against injuries, like as in a City there are
soldiers; some of these thoughts provide for the Body and^Houshold, like the
Senators of a City; others command in Chief, such as are Governors; some speak
lascivious things, such as shameless men, others more modest, such as are
modest persons: Some again are effeminate, as Women be amongst us; others
discourse more indiscreetly, like children; some domineer as if over Vass^ls,
because they are domestics; others ^s over the freeborn because they are
noble and ingenuous We must therefore of necessity have Laws, that we may
e^terminate t^e^e evil cogitations and cherish those which are good; but never
let us permit the evil ^o rebel against the good. For as in a City, if one
should constitute Laws giving liberty and impunity to Thieves, it would soon
subvert all: And if the Soldiers pursue their fury without respect to what is
fit, all things fall to confusion; and if every one quitting his due order,
take upon him to prosecute that which belongs to another, by this usurpation
and avarice he violates and utterly spoils the whole Government. It is truly
no otherwise in that which we have spoken.

The Mind of a Child is therefore a City, a City newly built and furnished, a
City full of new inhabitants, and as yet wholly unexperienced. It Is an easy
matter to instruct and model such: for those which have been at first possessed
and grown up with evil principles, such as are many old persons, are truly with
great difficulty reformed though neither is that impossible (for even they
themselves may be converted if they will) but such as are totally ignorant,
will with ease embrace the Laws which you enjoin them.

Establish Laws therefore in this City, and for those who are Denisons of it
formidable, and severe Laws, which if any shall dare to violate, approve thy
self a Governor and revenge it; for it is to no purpose to enact Laws, unless
Punishment be also inflicted: Make Laws then, and look diligently to your Work;
for know, that we impose Laws upon no less then the Universe it self: To
day we build a City, let the four Senses be the Bullwarks and the Ga^es, and
let all the rest of the Body be as the Walls. Now these Gates, are the Eyes,
the Tongue, the Ears and the Nose, and (if you please) also the Touch. Through
these overtures it is that the Citizens go out and in at; that is to say, by
these Ports it is that our cogitations are corrupted or amended.

Go to then, And first let us go to the Gate of the Tongue, since this is of
all the rest the chief and the greatest Port; let us now prepare for it the
doors and its bars, not of wood nor of iron, but of Gold, for the very City
it self which is thus built, is of Gold, and not any man, but he that is the
King of the Universe shall keep his Court in this City, if thus you prepare it:
and you shall perceive by the process his speech, in what parts of this City
to consig^ him a Palace. Let us therefore make the Doors and the Bars for it
of Gold I say; namely the Oracles of God, as the Prophet speaks. Psalm. 119.
103.
The words of God are more delicious then honey or the honey comb, Psalm. 18. 11
above Gold and much precious stone. Let us teach them to have these things
continually in their mouths and wheresoever they stir, and that not slightly,
nor perfunctorily or seldom, but without ceasing. Nor is it yet sufficient that
the doors be overlayed with Gold, but they must be framed altogether of solid
gold, and having the precious stones fixed one against another without. Let the
Cross of our Lord be the bar of these Gates, which is indeed every where
inchased with stones of price: let this then be put athwart the middle of the
Gates; and when we shall thus have made the doors fast, solid, and of Gold,
and shut to the bolt, let us then make them worthy Citizens; namely by
instructing the Child to speak gravely and piously, banishing all strangers out
of Town, lest otherwise a certain impure and infected rabble enter, and commix
themselves with our Citizens, such as are reprochful words, injurious and
foolish, filthy speeches, secular and worldly, all these let us eject; nor,
besides the King only, permit any to pass these Gates; but to him, and to all
his Retinue let them be still opened, according as it is said of it, Psalm. 117.
20
This is the Gate of the Lord, the Rightious shall enter into it. And with the
blessed Paul, Ephesians. 4. 29*
If there be any word which is good to the use of edifying, that it may
minister grace to the hearers. Let their talk be giving of thanks, modest
songs, and let them always be discoursing of God* and of that Philosophy which
is from above.

But which way shall we now effect all this? and from what Topics shall we
instruct them? If we become severe Judges of the actions which they do; for in
a child there is an extraordinary facility. How? He contends not for wealth nor
for glory: He is yet a child: not for a Wife, not for Children, not for an
House; therefore what occasion has he to injure or traduce any one? He only
contends with his equals. Appoint him a Law immediately, That he wrong none,
that he defame none, that he do not swear, that he be peaceable; and if you
shall perceive him to transgress this Law, Chastize him some^imes with a
stern countenance, sometimes with sharp reproofs, such as may go to the quick,
and upbraid him, and now and then sooth and flatter him with promises. Treat
him not always with blows, nor accustom thy self so to chastize him; for if
thou art used to correct him every day, he will soon learn to despise it, and
having once learned to do so it utterly marres all: rather cause him always to
fear the rod, not always to feel it: shake indeed the scourage, but touch him
not with it, neither from threats proceed to the work: But let him not know
that your words are only menaces; for then threatenings are only proper, when
children believe they will proceed to deeds: For if the Offender once
understand this economy, he will soon contemn it: Let him therefore expect to
be chastized, but yet let him not be chastized, lest it extinguish his
reverence; rather let it remain like a glowing fire, and every where burn up
the thorns, or like a keen pickaxe, let it dig to the very bottom. And when
once you perceive that you have gained any fruit by fear, remit a little, for
there is due even to our very natures some relaxation. Teach him to be modest
and courteous; but if you perceive him to do any injury to his servant, connive
not at it, but check even your child though free; for he that shall see he is
not permitted to reproach his very Lacquey, will much less dare to injure or
miscal one that is freeborn and his equal. Lock up his mouth from ill
language; if you find him accusing of any, stop the mouth, and convert your
tongue against her own errors.

Admonish his mother, his Paedagogue and his servant, that they still speak and
inculcate the same things to the child, that they may all of them be his
keepers together, and diligently observe that none of those evil cogitations
proceed from his mouth, and those golden portals.

Do not imagine that the thing requires so much time, provided that from the
beginning thou press it earnestly upon him, threaten, and do constitute so
many Guards over him. Two months will be sufficient, all things will be
redressed, the business established, and pass into very nature it self.

By this means will this gate be made worthy for the Lord, when there shall be
neither filthy speech, scurrility nor folly, or any such thing, but all as
becomes such a Master. For as those who train up their children to serve the
State in the Wars immediately instruct their Warlike Youth in the Art of
shooting, to put on the Corslet, and manege the great Horse, their age and
stature being no impediment. How much rather then those which are entered into
the heavenly Militia, ought they to provide themselves with these Accoutrements
for the serservice of their King? Learn him therefore to sing Praises to God,
that he have no leisure for impurer Songs and foolish discourses.

And be this Gate thus guarded, and such Citizens el^cted; the rest let us
destroy within, as the Bees do the drones, not suffering them to go forth, or
once to buz at home.

But now let us proceed to the next Gate; What is that? even that which is the
next, and of near affinity with it, I mean the Hearing; for that Gate indeed
has Citizens which pass out from within, but none that have admission through
it; but in this they enter in from without, and there are none which by it do
sally forth.

This therefore has great affinity with the other; For if no filthy nor
polluted thing be suffered to climb up by this Portal, there will be no great
difficulty to preserve the other; since he which does not hear filthy and
wicked things, does not likely speak wicked things: but if these lie open and
common to all, the danger will be great, and give disturbance to all that are
within. This then peradventure were first to have been spoken of, and the
Entrance to have bin secured.

Let Children therefore hear nothing impertinent, neither of their Domestics,
nor their Governors, nor their Nurse: For as Plants have then most need of
care, when they are young and tender, so have Children. Provide them careful and
virtuous Nurses, that a good Foundation be laid at first, and that from their
very infancy they receive nothing of ^vil. Let them then never hear any foolish
and ^ldwives fables: Such a person (says he) gave such a one a kiss; the
Emperors Son, and his little Daughter did this, and this; permit them to hear
none of these matters; but other things they may hear, so they be related
without any Circumlocution, and with all fidelity. They may indeed hear the
discourses of their servants, and those which wait upon them; but it is not
fitting to mix with all promiscuously, and with the Domestics in general: but
let them be known what they are, as it becomes them whom we take as assistants
for the framing of these artificial Statues.

For if it be necessary that being skilful Architects, and building a Palace
for the Prince, we admit not all the servants in Common, to be our associates
in the Edifice; shall we now when we are erecting a City, and making Citizens
for the King of heaven admit of all rashly to the work? let those servants
which are indeed fitted for it be taken to our assistance: and in case we can
find none, enquire after ingenuous person for a Stipend, such a one as is
virtuous; and commit rather all things to him, that he be taken in as a
Co^djutor of the work.

Let them by no means therefore hear such idle Fables; but when the child is to
have relaxation from his Task (for the mind is much delighted to stay a little
upon old Stories) discourse f^eely to him, and withdrawing him as much as
possible from Childish sports, remember thou bringst up a Philosopher, and a
Champion, and a Citizen of Heaven. Discourse therefore with him, and tell him,
Once upon a time at the beginning, a Father had two Sons, both of them
Brothers. Here pause a little: then go on, They came both out of the same
Belly, one of them was the E^der; and the other the Yong^r. The first was a
Husbandman, and his brother was a Shephard that used to lead out his Flock
upon the Downs and amongst the thickets (sweeten then your discourse with some
pretty diversion, that the child may take delight in what you say, and least it
become tedious) The other sowed seed in the ground and planted trees. But upon
a time they went to serve God, and the Shephard taking the very best Lamb of
all his Flock, offered it up to God. Is it not a thousand times better to
discourse these things to them, then ^o amuse them with I know not what wonders
of the Golden Fleece* and the like? Then encourage his attention again; for the
narration it self is a very serious matter, there is nothing in it false, all
is out of Scipture. Now because he offered to God the firstling and prime of
his flock, there came presently fire down from he^ven and snatched up all that
lay upon the Altar.

But the Elder Brother did not behave himself in this manner, but out he goes,
and reserves for himself the best and first fruits of his labors, offering the
second and the worst to God: and God accordi^gly had no respect unto it* but
slighted and turned from it; letting it lie still upon the Ground; when as the
others he received up to himself. Just as it happens with those who are the
Stewards and Bailiffs over our farms, when they come to present their fruits:
One of them his Master honors, and brings him in to the house, the other he
lets stand regardlesse without. Just so it fell out here. But what followed
this now? Why, the Elder Brother became dejected, and as one that saw himself
despised and not approved of, walks melancholy out. And God says to him,
Wherefore art thou so sad, know thou not that thou did offer to God, why
then did thou me that Injury? What had thou to complain of? How comes it to
pass that thou offredst the refus^ to me? Here if you think fit to descend more
to his capacity, you may and, That he having nothing at all to reply, held his
peace and answered not a word.

A little after this, spying his Younger Brother, he says to him, Come, prithy,
let us walk a little out in the fields; and when they were there, surprising
him treacherously, and being stronger, he kills his poor Brother, and thought
that he should conceal it all from God. But God comes to him, and asks him,
Where is thy Broeher? What can I tell, replies he, Am I my Brothers keeper?
Then says God to him, Behold thy Brothers blood cries to me from the Earth.

Let the Mother sit by whilst the mind of the child is moulding with these
discourses, that she now and then interpose, and praise that which is
recounted. But what followed all this? God took him up into heaven, and he
being dead, lives above for ever. By this means the child will begin to learn
the Doctrine of the Resurrection; for they use to relate such stories in
Fables: They made her (says one) a Demi-Goddess, and the child believes it,
and though he ^now not what a Demi-God is, yet he imagins it something which is
more then a man, and he wonders presently at the hearing of it: How much more
then when he shall hear of the Resurrection, that his Soul ascended into heaven,
and that God immediately took him up? But as for the Murderer, having lived
many years after, miserably unfortunate, and continually in fear and trembling,
he suffered innumerable evils, and was punished every day. Speak to him
conce^ning the punition with terror, not gently. That he heard God say, Thou
shall be groaning and trembling upon the face of the Earth. The child indeed
knows not what this signifies at first: But say it however. As you, when you
st^nd perplexed before your Master, shortly to be whipped, tremble and fear; so
he lived all his lifetime, after he had thus offended God. And hitherto shall
suffice for the first.

Afterward, one evening as you are at Supper, talk of this again to him, and
let his Mother repeat the same things; and then when he has heard it several
times over, require it of him. My Son, recite me the Story, and, the more to
encourage him, when you find he has retained* it, you shall propose him some
reward. The mind will indeed upon the first narration of this History, gather
some fruit by you, as you make the deduction. After this, say thus, Do you see,
child, what a horrible thing it is to envy ones. Brother? Do you perceive what
a crime it is to think one can hide any thing from God? for he sees all things;
yea, even those things which are committed in secret.

So that sowing this Doctrine only in the child, thou will have no need of a
Paedagogue, since the fear which the Deity does hereby work in him, will
affect the child beyond any other apprehension whatsoever, and extremely move
his mind.

But this is not all, you shall lead him also to Church, and then especially
when this Less^n is read: How you shall perceive him to exsult, dance and
rejoice, that what every body does not know he does, out-running in h^s
understanding the words of the Minister, and arguing that he knows that
already, and receiving wonderful fruit by it. And by this the thing will
become sufficiently fixed in his memory; There are many other advantages to be
reaped from this Narration.

Let him be taught therefore by you, that from the very beginning, from the
death of this child, we are instruct^d not to grieve when we are ^fflicted,
seeing he who was thus accepted, was by death received up into Heaven; When
this Narration shall be well rooted in the mind of the child, introduce
another, as that of other two Brothers, and say, There were also other two
Brothers, an Elder also and a younger; The Elder of them was a Hunter, the
younger was a keeper and a lover of home; and this has somewhat of more
delight in it then the former (as being full of more variety of emergencies;
and the Persons which manage it being more in years then the former.) Now
these were also two Brothers, and both of them twins: But when they were born
the Mother loved the younger, but the Father was more fond of the Elder who was
wont to pass his time abroad in the fields: but the younger kept altogether at
home; Upon a day, his Father being now very aged, said to him whom he loved,
Son, Seeing I am now an old man, go thy way I pray and prepare for me some
Veni^on: That is, take me a Ro^buck, or an Hare, and bring it to me, that when
I have eaten of it I may bless thee: But to the younger he said nothing at all.

Now the Mother oover-hearing all that the Father said* calls her youngest son,
and says to him, Son, Since thy Father has commanded thine elder-Brother to
bring him some Venison, that eating of it he may give him his blessing: Hearken
what I say to thee, H^sten immediately to the flock, and fetching thence some
young fat kids, bring them hither to me, and I will make such as thy Father
loves, and thou shall carry it to him, that when he has tasted of it, he may
bless thee; For the Father was dark through extremity of Age.

Now when the younger had brought her the Kids, his Mother stewed them, and
putting the viands into a dis^, delivers it to her Son who carried it in: And
she also clad him with the skins of the Goats, least he should be discovered,
seeing he was smooth, but his brother was all hairy and rough; that by this
means it might be concealed, and his Father not discern the imposture, and
thus accoutr'd in she sent him; now the good old man supposing him to have been
the Elder, having eaten the meat, Blessed him: And when he had made an end of
blessing him, in comes the Elder brother bringing the Venison: but perceiving
what had h^pned, roaring out aloud he wept lamentably.

Observe now what a world of benefit t^is will produce, and do not recount all
the story at once: but see what profit will spring from this. For in the first
place, children will learn to reverence their Parents, perceiving how they
contended for the blessing, and will rather endure a thousand stripes, then
once to hear their Father curse them.

If you fill their thoughts with such like stories, so as they may imagine them
worthy of belief (as indeed they are very truths) how will it not affect and
fill them full of reverence? By this also they will learn to contemn gluttony
(for that is likewise to be told them) and that he gained nothing by heing the
first borne and the Eldest, since by the intemperance of his belly, he betrayed
the excellency of his birthright.

Now when the child shall have thoroughly remembered this, upon some other
evening, thou shall require him to repeat this story of the two brothers. And
if he begin to speak of Cain and Abell, recall him, and say, I do not mean
this, but that of the two other, whom the Father gav^ his blessing to; thus
giving him some hints, but without mentioning the names, and when he has
recited it all, add as follows, and say,

Mark now what happened after this, This also sought to have slain his brother,
and for that end expected only his fathers decease, which the Mother coming to
hear of, and fearing it, caused her son to flee away. Much Philosophy, far
exceeding the apprehension of the child, may be hence (with a little
condescension) implanted into the Spirit of the child, so that the Narration be
skilfully and dxteronsly handled: Thus therefore let us tell him.

This same Brother went his way, and came to a certain place having no body
with him, not so much as a servant, no Fosterer no Attendant, nor any person
besides. Being arrived to the place, he prayed, and said, O Lord, give me, I
beseech thee bread and clothing, and save me; and having said thus, overcome
with sorrow he fell asleep; and there he saw in a dream a Ladder reaching up
from the earth to the Heavens, and the Angels of God as^ending and descending,
and God himself standing at the top of all. Then he said, Bless me, and he
blessed him, and called him Israel.

It comes happily into my mind, and now I remember, that from the very Names
another Instruction may be inserted, and what is that? ( viz.) That from the
appellations we presently introduce a certain emulation of Virtue in children.
Let none therefore be forward to name their children for the memory of their
Fathers, or Mothers, or Grandfathers: but of the Righteous, of the Martyrs,
Bishops and Apostles. Be this also their emulation, let this child be called
Peter, that John, and another by the Apellation of some Holy man, and talk not
to me of the Gentilnames; for ( believe it) it is no small reproach, and worthy
of derision, when in a Christian Family some heathen Ceremonies are performed,
and they light up the lamps, and watch which of them shall first go out and be
spent, with other the like fopperies, which bring no little detriment to those
which practi^e them; For do not imagine that these are small matters or trifles
which are done.

This therefore I require of you, that you impose the names of the R^ghteous
upon your children, for it was the custom in the beginning ( not without
reason) that they called their children by the names of thetr Ancestors, it
being a kind of Consolation against Mortality, that he which was gone seemed
still to live, by reason of his name: but now this custom is quite out of
request.

Truly we see that the R^ghteous did not so call their children, for ^b^aham
beg^t Isaac; Jacob, and Moses were not called after their Anc^stors names, nor
do we find any of the Just so c^lled. O what an example will he^e be of Virtue,
of Consolation, and of Exhortation. And moreover neither do we find any other
cause of changing names besides this only, That it may be a Monument of
Virtues. Thou, says he, shall be called Cephas, which is being expounded,
Peter, Why so? Mat. 16. 18.
Because thou did Confess. Genesis 17. 5
And thou shall be called Abraham, Genesis 32. 28.
Why so? Because thou art a Father of Nations. And Israel, because he did see
God. Hence therefore let us begin our care over our Children, and institute
their lives.

But as I said, He saw a ladder reaching to the heavens and touching it: let
the names therefore of the Saints enter into your houses, by the Appellations
of your children, that by this means it may not alone compose the manners of
the Children, but of the Fathers also; when he shall remember himself to be the
Son of John, of Elias, of Jacob; seeing those names were circumspectly and
piously imposed, and for the honor of those that are departed.

Thus therefore let us Court the affinity of the R^ghteous rather then of our
Progenitors. This likewise will be very beneficial both to us and to our
children: Nor because the Instance is small, think it to be small; for the
supposition is exceeding profitable. But as I said, Let us pr^ceed to that
which follows. He spied a Ladder fixed, he sought for a ble^^ing, and God did
bless him: He traveled to his Kindred, and became a Shepherd to his Kinsman,
then treated with him concerning a Wife, and of his return: And here also there
will result a world of advantage, observe but what a deal he will learn. That
being Nobly born, he despise no man, not to be ashamed of Poverty, that he bear
Adversi^y courageously, and then all the rest. A^^er this, when he is a little
older, relate t^ings that are more terrible; but being as yet tender, impose
not such a burden on him, lest thou too much terrify and abash him: But when
he has at^ained to fifteen years old, or shall be grown bigger, let him hear of
the pains of Hell, and when he is about ten, or eight, or less, tell him what
happened at the Deluge, of Sodom, of Egypt, which examples are full of
sever^ty, and acquaint him with all these particulars at large. Being then
grown bigger, instruct him in matters of the New Testament; of Grace, of Hell.
By these and sundry other Narrations and familiar Ex^^ples guard and secure his
Ears.

But if any man come in with a false Tale, by no means (as I said) let him be
admitted. If you find a servant speaking filthily before him, chastise him for
it immediately, and be thy self a severe and bitter Censor of whatsoever evil
they do. But if by chance thou espy a young maid (yea rather let there no such
approach him) let her not so much as light the fire; unless it be some old
woman, which has nothing to attract a young Man: From a young maid, I say, ^^ie
rather then from the fire, and by this means it will come to pass, that he
which hears nothing impertinent, will speak nothing impertinent. Thus therefore
let them be brought up.

But we proceed now to another Port. The Smelling, For this also brings a very
great inconvenience with it, unless timely barred; such are Odours and Incense;
there being nothing which more dissolves the ^rame and tenor of the mind,
nothing that more softens it, then if thou be affected with sweet smells: What
then says he? Ought one to take pleasure in dirt? I do not say so, but neither
with this, nor that.

Let none therefore bring him sweet Ointments, for as soon as that once affects
the Brain, it effeminates and softens all the rest: Hence also Lusts are
incited, and in that do lurk innumerable snares. Therefore lock up that Gate
securely. For the faculty of Smelling is to breath the Air, not to receive
Perfumes. Some there are which peradventure will deride all this, as though
whilst we discourse of this nurture, we trouble our selves about trifles: But
in truth the matter is not small; but the very Basis, Instruction and
Institution of the whole world, that these things be duly performed.

There is likewise another Gate, more specious then the former, but of
exceed^ng ^^fficulty to guard, namely, that of the Eyes, as being raised on
high, set in the front, and beautified. This has many smaller Leaves, by which
it not only sees but is seen, if it be gallantly framed. Here then there is
great necessity of Laws, one of the principal whereof let be, never to send the
Child to the Theater, lest thereby he receive an entire overthrow at once, both
by the Ears, and by the Eyes: and le^ his Attendant observe this especially in
the Markets, and whilst he passes through the by-Lanes and Streets, careful
that he never fall into that debauchery.

Now to the end he may receive no harm by being seen, there are diverse things
to be considered. Deprive him of all over-costly Apparel and superfluous
Ornaments, let him wear his Hair modestly short, and if the Boy take it
hainously, as if he were disfigured by it, teach him this first, That it is the
greatest Ornament.

Now that he may not gaze, sufficient to preserve him will be those stories of
the Sons of God, which happened on the Daughters of Men, and of the Sodomites,
Hell, and such like instances. Here then must the Governor and he that waits
on him, be wonderful careful and sollicitous, show him therefore other
beautiful obj^^ts, drawing away his eyes from these things: Such as are the
Heavens, the Stars, the Flowers of the Earth, the Meadows, fair Books, etc.
These therefore let him delight his eyes withal; and there are many other
objects besides, which are very inoffensive: For it is a Port extremely
difficult to guard; for as much as it has a fire burning within, and a kind of
natural necessity as I may say. Teach him some Divine Verses. And thus, unless
he be inwardly incited, he will not care to be seen abroad. Be sure that he
never bath with women, it is a very wicked custom: neither permit him to haunt
their company.

Let him often hear the whole History of Joseph, and now learn the things which
concern the Kingdom of Heaven: What a Garland there is laid up for those which
are Chaste. Promise him a beautiful Wife, and that you will make him your Heir*
but menace all the contrary, if you find him disobedient: And talk thus to him.
We shall never procure you, Son, a virtuous Wife, unless you show a great deal
of circumspection and an access of Virtue. If you persevere, I will quickly
marry you: But especially if he be taught to abhor filthy speeches, he has
gained from above a very excellent Foundation of Modesty: Discourse to him of
the pul^hritude of the Mind, make him resolute against Women. Tell him it is a
disingenuous thing to be despised of a lavish maid, and that much more
circumspection is required in a youth. When any man speaks, he is known; but he
that sees only is not known: For this is a very quick Sense, and one si^ting
amongst many persons is able to take which of them he pleases with one only
dart of his eye. Let him therefore have no converse with woman-kinde, his
Mother only excepted: Suffer him to be hold no Woman. Give him no Gold, let
nothing that is sordid once enter into him: but teach him to contemn pleasure,
and all such like things.

There is yet another Gate behind, which has no resemblance to the former; but
which goes through the whole body. We call it the Touch. Indeed one would
imagine it shut, yet as if it were of all the rest the most open, it admits
entrance to all. Let us neither suffer this to be acquainted either with soft
clothing or bodies; render him more hardy, we are bringing up a Champion, and
let us seriously mind it: permit him neither to use soft coverings, nor soft
garments, and thus let matters be ordered.

Go to then, and entering into this City, let us prescribe Laws, and make
Ordinances: For now the Gates are in posture: And in the first place take we
diligent notice of the Houses, and of the Lodgings where the Citizens remain,
those which are circumspect, and those which are dissolute.

They report, that the place and habitation of Anger is the Breast, and the
Heart, which is in the Breast, Concupiscence in the Liver, and the
Understanding in the Brain. The first is both a Virtue and a Vice. Sobriety and
Modesty is a Virtue; Rashness and Morosity a Vice. Likewise the V^rtue of
Concupiscence, is Chastity, Luxury a Vice. The Virtue of the Intellect is
Prudence, the Vice, Folly. Let us therefor have a care that Virtues be
produced in those places, and that they bring forth such as are good, not evil
Citizens. For these affecti^ns are as it were the very parents of all our
cogitations.

But let us now proceed to the Tyrant, Anger* For neither is that to be
altogether cut off in a Youth, nor upon all occasions to be used: But thus let
us instruct him from the Cradle, That being injured he bear it patiently, and
that when they perceive another man wronged, they stoutly revenge it, and
according as the person is depressed, in a due and conveent manner take his
part. But how should this be? when they are trained up to it in their own
servants. Being under-valu'd, are not impatient, being disobeyed, are not
outrageous; but rather vindicate that which is committed against others: But in
these Cases let the Father be always A^biter, and when they transgress the
Orders it behooves him to be sharp and severe, as when they perform and observe
them rightly, to be kind and gentle, enticing and alluring the Child with many
rewards: For with this method God governs the world, by the fear of Hell, and
the promises of the Kingdom; and so should we our Children, permitting them to
be vexed now and then, for the exercise and trial of their Patience, that they
may learn how to govern their Passions amongst the Domestics.

And as in a wrestling place, before they play the Prize, they daily exercise
with their companions, that making their party good with them, they may the
more easily vanquish their Antagonists: So should a Child be educated at home.
And let his Father or his Brother frequently cross his humors above all the
rest, and exceedingly contend for the victory, or else some other defend him
that he may be exercised in that other person; thus the servants may
occasionally provoke him, right or wrong, that so he may be taught every where
to moderate and qualify his Passion; seeing if the Father only incite him, it
will be no such great matter: For the very name of Father praepossessing the
mind, does not suffer him to turn again and make head; but let his companions
and servants, and such as are ingenuously born do it, that by them he may be
taught moderation.

There is yet another. What is that? When ever he is angry, put him in mind of
his proper Passions: When he is offended against a Servant, whether he himself
never committed a fault, and what he would be, if he were in his place: But in
case he fi^d him striking the Servant, meet him with revenge; and if he
extremely wrong him, chastise him again for it; never suffer him to be too soft
and remiss, nor over churlish and morose; in as much as he is a Man, and should
be affable and courteous. Sometimes indeed he may have a worthy occasion for
his Anger, as if hereafter he should have Children of his own, or himself be a
Master of Servants, in such a condition Anger were very useful. Then only it
is unprofit^ble, when we revenge our selves. And therefore Paul never made use
of it himself, but for their sakes only who suffered the wrong. Thus Moses
seeing his brother injured, Exodus ^^* 12.
had recourse to his anger, and that stoutly; Number. 1^. 3.
being yet of all men the most meek: but when afterward he was himself injured,
he did not revenge it, but fled away. These Discourses inculcate into him. For
whilst we are thus trimming the Gates, they have great need of such plain
narrations. But when entering into the City, we begin to Discipline the
Citizens, 'twill then be fit to discourse to them of sublimer matters. But let
this Law be fixed in him, that he never revenge himself being injured or
wronged, nor ever permit him to despise another who suffers the like.

His very father shall become better, who by teaching him in these matters, may
himself be instructed; or in case he do it for no other end, he shall become
better then himself, least he set a bad example before his child. And therefore
let him learn to be despised, and to suffer contempt, exacting nothing of the
servants, because himself is Freeborn: but upon many occasi^ns serve rather
himself. Let his servants take care only of such things, as he cannot so
handsomely perform in person: For instance, a Gentleman should not be his own
^ook; for it is not decent that quitting those Studies which become a
Gentleman, he should give his mind to this inferior employment. But if there be
occasion to wash his feet, never let him make use of a servant, let himself do
it. And by this means, thou shall render him ingenuous, mild, and amiable to
the servants. Nor permit any body to bring him his cloths, nor in the Bath to
use any Ceremony to him; but let him perform there all necessaries himself.
This will make the youth robust, not disdainful, but affable and meek. Teach
him also those things which concern Nature, What a Servant is, What a Freeman.
Say to him, Child, There was heretofore no Servants in the days of our
Forefathers, 'twas Sin that introduced Servitude: But because one was
irreverent toward his father, Genesis 9. 25.
there was this punishment infl^cted upon him, That he should be his Brothers
servant; beware, therefore, lest thou become the servant of servants: For if
you be implacable and furious as they were, and in all things follow their
example, and h^st nothing of virtue more then them, neither sha^^ thou have any
thing of excellency or pre-eminence above them.

Strive therefore that thou may become their Master, not upon this account,
but by thy manners and education, least being Freeborn thy self, thou become
their servant. Perceive you not how many Fathers have disinherited their
children and adopted their vassals in their stead? take heed least any such
thing should happen to you. Truly, I neither desire nor wish it. They are as
yet either of them in your power. And in this sort qualify his passion;
persuading him so to deport himself to his servants as to his Brothers. And
thus instruct him concerning the Laws of Nature, repeating to him the words of
Job, Job 31. 13*
If ever (says he) I despised the cause of my man^servant, or of my
maid^servant when they contended with me: What the^ shall I do when God makes
enquiry, and when he visi^^th, what shall I answer him? (...). Job 31. 31.
Are they not fashioned in the Womb as I am? For we are made in the same womb.
And again, If my Maidens often said, Who shall give us to be filled with his
flesh, I being very ^ild. Think you that of Paul was for nothing? 1 Timothy 3. 5.
He who knows not how to govern his own house, is not fit t^ rule in the Church.

S^y therefore, (...).
if at any time his Style be lost, or his Pen be broken by the Servant: Be not
presently in Choler, nor mis-call him, but be rather gentle and easy to be
entreated. Thus from smaller things thou shall with ease support greater
l^sses. Or if a Bookstring be spoiled, or a brazen Clasp, Boys take the losses
of these things impatiently, and had rather lose their very lives, than suffer
so great an injury to go unrevenged, Here therefore let their asperity be
mitigated: For well you know, that he who on these accidents is patient and
contented, will easily, being a Man, undergo all other disasters.

When he has then gotten ^ Table Book made of some curious wood, pure and
white, adorned with Brazen-Chains, and finely polished brazen Pins, shining
like any Silver, or the like toys; and that the Boy which attends him happening
to lose any of them, you perceive him not moved at it, it is an evident and
certain indication of Philosophy and great wisdom. Nor do thou upon this buy
him new immediately, lest thou extinguish his Passion; but when you shall
perceive he bears the want of it handsomely, and is not much concerned with it,
then repair his losses.

Believe it, we do in this no trifling matter. The discourse concerns no less
then the polity of the world it self. If he have a younger Brother, instruct
him to suffer him to be preferred in honor before him. ^ut if he have none,
then some Servant: For even this likewise is a point of the greatest
Philosophy. So therefore mitigat^ and assuage his Anger, that it may suggest to
us m^^k cogitations: For when he shall let his affections run out upon any
thing, when he shall need no man's service, when he shall envy no man's being
preferred in honor before him, what room will there be left for Anger?

It is now time that we speak of Concupiscence. Here also Chastity is twofold,
and the violation of it a double loss. I conceive that young Men should neither
be dishonestly loved, nor dishonestly love young Maids. Physicians say, That
presently after the fifteenth year, youths are vehemently inflamed with the
Lust of Concupiscence. How shall we now fetter this beast? what is there to be
done? what Bridle shall we put on it? I know of no other, then the fear of He^^
it self. First therefore, let us be careful that he neither see nor hear any
thing which is filthy; nor by any means suffer an ingenuous Youth to frequent
the Theater. But if he seek for these pleasures, if you know of any his
contemporaries which deny themselves that vanity, show them to him, that by
their example he may be reduced: For there is nothing in the world which does
sooner redress it, then Emu^ation, no, not any. And in every thing else let us
observe this rule* especially if you perceive him to be of an emulous
disposition. It is a great deal more effectual, then either fear, or promises,
or whatsoever else.

To these let us devise some other innocent divertisements, bring him to Holy
Men, grant him relaxation, and give him rewards, that thereby his mind may be
the (...) troubled at it; And in stead of these Spectacles, propose to him some
pleasant Story; Talk to him of Meadows, of sumptuous Buildings, and afterward
wheel off your Discourse with an Application. Tell him, These Spectacles, Son,
are for base and servile persons, to behold naked Women speaking immodestly.
Promise me that thou will not hear nor say any thing that is dishonest, and I
permit thee to go: But it cannot be, it is impossible, that thou should
there hear nothing which is vile. The things that are there acted, are unworthy
thy Eyes (my Son.) And in saying this* let us kiss and embrace him, that he may
perceive how dearly we love him.

With all these stratagems let us entice him. What then? As I said already, let
a young Maid never approach him, nor do any service about him, but some ancient
Maid or Woman that is well stricken in years. Discourse to him concerning the
Kingdom, and of such as have been illustrious for their Chastity; as well
those without the Pale, as amongst our selves; and with these let us
perpetually fill his ^ars: Nay, if we have Servants that excel in Chastity and
Sobriety, propose them likewise for Examples, seeing it would be a great
reproach, that a Servant should be modest, and that a free person, a Gentleman,
should be sordid.

There is yet another Expedi^n^, and what is it? Let him learn to Fast, if not
always, yet twice a Week* Wednesdays and Fridays at least: Cause him to
frequent the Church. And when the Father walks with him abroad, toward the
Evening, at the time that the Shows are done, and the Theaters dissolved, let
him show him those that are coming away, and laugh at the old Fools, who as
yet have not the discretion of Striplings, and at the young Men who are fired
with filthy lusts. Then let him ask the Boy, What he thinks all they have
gained? Truly nothing at all but shame, infamy, and damnation. This will prove
of no small importance to Chastity, that he abstain both from the Spectacles,
and from the Discourse.

But besides all this, let him be taught another thing, and that is, That he
pray to God with all diligence and compunction. And say not to me, That these
things are not employments for a Child, a Child is not capable of this: Yes, a
Child, especially, if of a quick understanding, and encouraged, is very capable
of it. Amongst the Anci^^t, we find many such Examples; as Daniel, and Iaseph;
and tell not me that Joseph was seventeen years old, but consider (...) that
age for what he (...), and that he was more (...) of him then of all his (...)
was not (...) himself the Younger* (...), Da^iel Dan. 13. 45.
but twelve years old, was not Solomon also of the same age when he made that
wonderful Prayer? 3 Reg. 3. 4.
Did not (...), ^ Reg 3. 1.
being but a very ^oy* teach his Master? Let us (...) then be disco^raged. If
any one indeed be a Child in Understanding, he is not capable of this, not if
he be a Child in Years.

Instruct him therefore to pray with much comp^n^tion* and to watch likewise,
as much as will stand to health, and by all means let there be imprinted on
him, being a Child, the Character of an Holy Man* For he that is not addicted
to swearing, nor being provoked to return injuries, to reproach no body, to
^ate none; but g^ves his mind to Fasting, and is assiduous in his Prayer, shall
from these be ^ufficiently furnished to Chastity. And in case thou destine him
to a secular life, provide a Wife betimes, nor defer it till he be enrolled
amongst the Soldiers, or that he has attained to some office in the
Commonwealth, before thou consider of it; but settle his thoughts first, and
then proceed to secure his glory, which is but a worldly business. Do thou
imagine it of so small a concernment to Marriage, That a Virgin be joined to a
Virgin? Truly, it does not a little concern also the very Wi^es Chastity, not
to speak of the Young-Mans also: Shall not this render their affection the more
pure? and which is above all this, will not God himself be then more
propitious, and fill that Marriage with a thousand Benedictions? when they thus
meet together as he h^s commanded, and will make them cordially to love one
another?

Whilst he is detained by this affection, he will laugh at all other Women; if
when you commend the Virgin for her beauty and virtue, and all other
endowments, you shall then add, That she will never endure him, if once she
but understand him to be an idle person: Hereupon as touched in his highest
concernments, he will put forth his utmost diligence. ^en. 29. 28.
For if that Holy Man, being deceived of his Wife, so loved her, as ye^ to
serve seven years more for her, nay fourteen years; how much more should we?
Tell him, That all that belong to the Virgin, the Father, the Mother, Servants,
all the Neighbors and Friends, are strict obs^rvers of his behavior and
actions, and all will relate it to his Virgin. With this obligation bind him,
'twill prove an ^ffectual preservative to the Child. So that in case it should
not be so convenient to give him a Wife very young, let him yet be espou^^d to
one at least from the the first; this will make him strive to e^cel in
Goodness, ^his alone is sufficient to ba^ish all Vice.

There is likewise another excellent guard to Chastity, That he perpet^ally
frequent the Bishop of the Church, an^ from him receive many encouragements;
and of this let his Father glory to all that hear it: Let the Virgins seeing
him, look on him with a reverend esteem: Besides, the discourses, and the awe
of his Father, the promises which are made, and with these the rewards
reposited for him of God, with all those benefits which the Chaste shall be made
partakers of, will extremely hinder and repre^s all lubricity in this kind.

To this you may add the the gallant achievements in War, and in Pe^ce, and to
these things studiously direct your discourse, continually declaiming against
Vice, and Luxury, and bringing it into contempt. It will much conduce to the
repute of Chastity and all these particulars, wonderfully restrain the mind of
the young Man, and produce in us most chaste cogitations.

There is one more yet remaining, let us therefore now proceed to that which is
the chief of all, and which keeps all entire; and what is that? Namely,
Prudence. Here must be infinite care used, that he be discreet, and that he
abandon and banish all folly; and this is a special and grand point of
Philosophy; that he comprehend those things which are Divine, and what there is
laid up for the future: Of Hell, and the things which concern the Kingdom of
Heaven, ^ince the beginning of Wisdom is the ^ear of the Lord. Eccl. 1. 16.


Let us therefore establish point of Prudence in him, That he be also
intelligent in humane affairs: what Riches are, what Glory, what Power, to the
end he may learn how to contemn them, and set his affections upon things which
are of highest concernment. Let us often remember him of the good Instructions
which have been given him; and say, Son, Fear God alone, and besides him fea^
none other. And thus he will ^merge a prudent and a gracious person. There i^
nothing in the world that renders a Man more a Fool, then t^ese Vices; the Fear
of God is alone sufficient (...) Wise, and to have such a Judgment in secular
and humane affairs as is necessary. This, this is the very sum and top of all
Wisdom, That he be not taken up with impertinent and childish vanities. Teach
him therefore that Riches avai^ nothing, worldly Glory nothing, Power nothing;
nothing, Death; nothing, this present Life: Thus he shall indeed become a Wise
Man. And if educated in this manner we conduct him to his Nuptials, consider
how noble a portion thou bring to his Bride.

But let us now celebrate the Marriage, not with Pipes, and Harps, and Dancing;
with these kind of things to disgrace the Bridegroom thus educated, it is
highly incongruous: Let us rather invite Christ thither, such a Bridegroom is
worthy of him; let us bid his Disciples: These things well become him. And now
let him henceforth thus learn to instruct his own children, and so educate
them; and they theirs; and thus it will become a Golden Chain indeed.

Let us also promote him to Offices in the Commonwealth, such as he has
abilities to undergo* and such as do not minister ^o Vice. Or whether it be any
charge in the Army, let him learn to gain nothing sordidly: Or whether he
patronize the Cause of those which are wronged, or what ever else he
undertakes. That his Mother learn likewise to instruct and di^^^pline her
Daughter after the same manner, and to ^vert their thoughts from superfluous
Attires and Fashions, from the World, and from whatsoever else are the proper
marks of lewd Women and Strumpets.

Let him manage all things by this Rule, and wean (...) well the Youth as the
Maid from pleasure and ^briety: For even this also will be of great effect
toward Chastity; there being nothing which does more molest and trouble young
Men, then Concupis^ence, nothing more young Women, then haughtiness and lux of
Apparel.

Thus therefore let us order and compo^e all these things* that so we may
please Almighty God, w^^^est we bring him up such Champions, and that we and
our Children may (...) promises, which he has made to them that love him* and
all this through ^h^ Grace and Benig^^^ of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with
the Father and ^he Holy-Spirit be Gl^^y and Honor now and ever, and (...)
Eternal Ages. (...).

FINIS.
NOT^S upon some Passages.
(...), etc. And thou do nourish him a lock* of ^air behind like a Girl,
etc. Go^r in Rituali^ ^ive Euc^olo^io Graecor^m, recites an Office in (...), or
the deton^ion of a Child: but it was neither Mona^hal nor Cl^rical, but the
common Cut; and it seems the custom was introduced to avert the Gentile
superstition. Athan^s^^^ qu^^st. 28. di^tor. and interpretat. Para^olarum
Ev^ng^l* (...). The Heathen (Greeks) were wont to shave the crowns of their
Children, and to have their locks to hang down, which after a space of time
they did consecrate (...) (Devils) Idols. This heathenish superstition* which
the Latin and Greek humane Authors attest, S. Chrysostom here intends, and the
later Greeks did transfer into Christianism, either by consecrating them, as
First Fruits unto the true God, or as signifying their surrendering themselves to
the service of God: or rather, uncovering their head, as the Apostle enjoynes
that sex: and there was to that end not only (...); but also for the other sex,
(...). This primary To^s^re was with the God^ather. And of old they consecrated
their first shorn locks to Apollo, (going often in person to D^lphos) to
Aescu'apiu^, or their Country Rivers, as (...) testifies. Plut. in vit. These.
And Martial, lib 1. ep. 32. H^s tibi P^oebe vovet t^tos ^ vertice crines
Encolpus, domini centurionis amor,
Grata* pudens meri ti (...) praemia p^^i*
Quam primum longas Phoebe recide comas,
Dum ^ull^ teneri sordent lanugine vultus
Dumque decent fusae lactea colla jubae,
Utque tuis longum dominusque puerque fruatur
Muneribus, tonsum fac cito, sero virum:


But their beastly Ca^ami^s with their monstrous heads of hair were in great
esteem amongst the luxurious Romans; whence that of the Poet, -- Si nemo
tribun^l
Vendit Acersecomes --
Juven. lib. 3. Sat. 8. Which when they grew old they used to color, as
appears by that witty Epigram, In Lentinum* Men^iris ^nvenem tinctis, ^entine,
capi^^is:
Tum subito corvus, qui modo ^yg^us (...)?
Non omnes fallis, scit te Pros^rpin^ canum,
Personam capiti detra^et illa tuo.
Mart. l. 3. ep. 3^^ Which I add in reproof of some old men in our days, who to
the reproach of gravity, and that reverend blessing, being now descending to
the Sepulcher, do yet mentir^ juvenem, and would be thought boys. But of these
customs, let the Readers consult Papini^^, Festu^ Pompeiu^, I^nius; and the
most learned Salma^iu^. I pass them over.

(...), etc. A maid when in her moth^rs Chamber she has learne^ to long after
these various tires and ornaments of women, being go^e out of her fathers
house, becomes impertinent to her husband, and very tr^ublesom, etc. This
reproof is parallel to that of the Satyrist, but with less acerbity, more
modesty and gravity.

-- Expectas ut no^ (...) adultera Larg^^
Filia; quae nun qu^m maternos dicere moech^^
Tam cito, nec tanto poterit contexere cursu,
Ut non ter decies respiret? Consci^ matri
Virgo fuit* ceras (...) hac di^tan^e pu^illa^
Implet, and ad ^oechum d^t ^isdem ^erre ci^aedis.
Si^ natura jubet; (...) and citius ^os
Corrumpunt vitior^m exempla dom^stica magni^
Cum subeant animos au^toribu^ --
Juv. Sat. 14. So true is that of the Orator, Plus homines exemplo quam peccato
noc^nt. And especially Parents whose lewd examples children are many times too*
prone to imitate.

(...), etc. It Is reported that when pearls are first taken up, they are only
little drops of water etc. And it was only a report, taken up by S. Chrysostom
to metaphorize his discourse: But it is apparently true of Glasses, which from
a fluid metal receive their figure from the will of the blo^er of them, which
is afterward firm, and not to be new molded. The French have an expr^ssion,
I^ a prin^ son pli, A tender twig soon yields. Hence that of Persi^^ Udum, et
molle lutum es* nunc, nunc proper andus et acri
Fingendus sine fin^ rota --
Sat. 3.

Children are r^sae Tabulae, or rather cer^ae, apt for every inscription and
impression

(...), And upon whatsoever he says or does to put a Seal. Crucis co^^ignatio,
as Combefis; and the acception of this word in the Mixobarbarou^ Greek, is in
that sense, as in the Latin Ecclesiastical Writers Signaculum, and signare.
But to skrue it so high as 2. Cor. 1. 22. (...), etc. And has sealed us, etc.
is farther then will be evinced upon any probable grounds of reason. That in
this place it may ^ignifie no ^ore then what was before expre^^ed, (...), I am
at an indifference, if not prop^nsion to believe; comparing it with a sentence
of very near affinity in Nil^^, a great admirer of S. Chrysostom, (...). Thus
men should consecrate all their undertakings.

(...). For it is to no purp^se (...) Laws, unl^sse punishment be also
infli^^ed, etc. Conformable to that of the Lyric^ Nullis pollui^ur ^^st^ (...)
stupris;
Mos, and (...) maculosum (...)*
Laudantur ^^mili prole Pue^perae.
Culp^m (...) premit com^s.
Hor. lib. 4. Od. 5.

Such was the Lex Iulia de Adulteriis severely inflicted upon the offenders;
for Si non supplici^ culp^ reciditur?
Quid leges ^ine moribus
Vanae proficinnt? --
Hor. l. 3, od. 24.

(...), Such are called Mestiso's. The Israelites were to be a pure and
separate people. Exodus 12. 38. (...), etc. And a mixed mu^titude ^ent up, etc.
Numb. 11. 4. (...), etc. And a mixed multi^u^^ that ^as among them lusted a
lust. Such a one was the Blas^hemer, Levit. 24. 10. He was Hybrida, of an
Egyptian Father and Israelitish* mother Nehem. 13. 3. (...). It was upon
hearing the Law that they were separated from Israel all the mix^d multitude*

(...). (...) ^^thers. It seems to be an employment about you^^ Nobility; S.
Chrysoost^m th^^ chief Bish^p of (...) seem^ to direct the Education of the
children of (...) and Gentry of great quality, he mentions a garb of
attendants: Their (...). This office he sets down as the first Impression
(...), and (...). I suppose a Nurse and F^^^erfather taken into the house.

^

(...), Ou^run^ing in his understanding the words of the Minister, etc. Not
occupantem, Legent^m, as Comb^^is. The Author speaks of a child (if I
understand aright) that has been instructed by Narra^ions from his father and
mother, not yet arrived to those years that he has learned to read; for it is
a question, whether the Greeks, were so very forward in putting their children
to read and write as we now are. Besides, (...) does not signify to read,
though (...) do: but agnosco, To own or declare that I knew such a person
formerly. Record^r, to call to mind: Here it is either by gesture in the
Church, importing that he knew the History before, or afterward to recount to
his Parents when he comes from Church.

(...)) Called also (...), called (...). The (...)* I suppose bound up the
Tabella, and fast^ned the Style too; for which use was sometimes (as appears
(...) celebrate the m^rriage, not with Pipes, and Harps, and dancing, etc.
Pertinent to which passage is that incomparable Homily of this Father, Tom. 5.
li^. 25. p. 331. Edit. Savil. too long to recite, but most worthy the reading;
and such a Wedding was that of Cana in Galilee, at which our B. Savior was
present, Ioh. 2.

To conclude, there is (...). Chrysostom. Savil. Tom. 7. page 823. but it does not
contain any part of this work; yet points it to other places of this Father,
where upon the same subject are used Phrases harmonious to some of these.

FINIS.

