LVIS DE CAMOENS


SPAIN gave me noble Birth: Coimbra, Arts:
LISBON, a high-plac't love, and Courtly parts:
AFRIC, a Refuge when the Court did frown:
WAR, at an Eye's expense, a fair renown
TRAVAYLE, experience, with noe short sight
Of India, and the World; both which I write
INDIA a life, which I gave there for Lost
On Mecons waves (a wreck and Exile) tossed
To boot, this POEM, held up in one hand
Whilst with the other I swam safe to land:
TASSO, a sonet; and (what is greater yet)
The honor to give Hints to such a wit
PHILIP a Cordial, (the ill Fortune see!)
To cure my Wants when those had new killed me
My Country (Nothing -- yes) Immortal Praise
(so did I, Her) Beasts cannot browze on Bays.
THE LUSIAD, OR, PORTUGALS Historical Poem: WRITTEN In the PORTINGALL Language
BY LUIS DE CAMOENS; AND Now newly put into ENGLISH BY RICHARD FANSHAW Esquire;

HORAT. Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori;
Carmen amat quisquis, Carmine digna facit.
LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's-Arms in St Paul's
Churchyard, M. DC. LV.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM EARL of STRAFFORD, etc.
My good Lord,
I Can not tell how your Lordship may take it, that in so uncourted a language,
as that of PORTUGAL, should be found extant a Poet to rival your beloved
TASSO, How himself took it, I can; for he was heard to say (his great JERUSALEM
being then an Embrio) HE FEARED NO MAN BUT CAMOENS: Notwithstanding which, he
bestowed a Sonet in his praise. But, admitting the TUSCAN SU. periour; yet, as
He (with ^ome anger) of GUARINI, when he saw, by the unquestionable Verdict of
all ITALY, so famous a LAUREATE as himself by that man's PASTOR FIDO outstript
in the Dramatick way of Po^try; SE NON HAVUTO VISTO IL MIO AMINTA -- (because
indeed the younger, for a Lift in this kind, was beholding to the Elder): So,
and for the same cause, might my PORTINGALL have retorted upon Him with
reference to his own Epick way; IF HE HAD NOT SEEN MY LUSIAD, HE HAD NOT
EXCELLED IT.

Since then I find, HORACE, in the days of old, held himself accountable to his
potent friend LOLLIO for the profits of those vacant hours, which he past in
his proper Villa, whilst LOLLIO lay Ledger in ROME about that which was the
great Domestic glory of the ROMAN NOBILITY of those Times;

Trojani belli Scriptorem, maxim Lolli, Hor. lib. 3. Epist. 2.

Dum Tu declamas Romae, Praeneste relegi:
Whilst thou (Great LOLLIO) in ROME do plead,
I, in PRAENESTE, have all HOMER Read:
How much more obliged am I to bring unto your Lordship this TREASURE-TROVE,
which (as to the second life, or rather Being, it has from me in the
English-Tongue) is so truly a Native of YORKSHIRE, and holding of your
Lordship, that, from the hour I began it, to the end thereof, I slept not once
out of these Walls?

And, if the same HORACE proceed;

Qui, quid sit pul^hrum, quid Turpe, quid utile, quid non,
Before ac melius Chrysippo and Crantore, dicit:
Who, what is Right, what not, what brave, what base,
Clearer and better then the STOICS, says:)
Whether this Poet also (however dis-figur'd in the translating, yet still
reteining the old materials, both Political and Moral, on a truer and more
Modern Frame of Story and Geography then that of HOMER

-- Et, quamvis plebeio tectus Amictu,
Indocilis privata loqui)
shall not be valuable upon the like account, I appeal to your Lordship, whose
devoted (since he turned Englishman) he is, by the title I have already
mentioned, and by as many more, as I am

From your Lordships Park of Tankersley May 1. 1655. MY LORD, Your Lordships
humble servant RICHARD FANSHAW.

Petronii Arbitri SATYRICON: page 48.
MUltos, inquit Eumolpus, O juvenes, carmen decepit. Nam ut quisque versum
pedibus instruxit, sensumque teneriorem verborum ambitu intexuit, putavit se
continuo in Helliconem venisse. Sic forensibus Ministeriis excercitati,
frequenter ad carminis tranquillitatem, tanquam ad portum faciliorem
refugerunt: credentes facilius Poema extrui posse, quam controversiam
sententiolis vibrantibus pictam. Caeterum neque generosior spiritus vanitatem
amat, neque concipere aut edere partum men's potest, nisi ingenti flumine
literarum inundata. Effugiendum est ab omni verborum (ut ita dicam) utilitate,
and sumendae voces a plebe summotae, ut fiat, Odi profanum vulgus and arceo.
Praeterea curandum est, ne sententiae emineant extra corpus rationis expressae,
sed intexto Vestibus color niteant. HOMERUS testis, and Lyric^, Romanusque
VIRGILIUS, and HORATII curiosa faelicitas. Caeteri enim aut non viderunt viam
qua iretur ad carmen, aut versum timuerunt calcare. Ecce belli civilis ingens
opus! quisquis attigerit, nisi plenus literis, sub onere labetur. Non enim res
gestae versibus comprehendendae sunt (quod long melius historici faciunt) sed
per ambages Deorumque ministeria, and fabulosum sententiarum tormentum
praecipitandus est liber spiritus: ut potius furentis animi vaticinatio
appareat, quam religiosae orationis sub testibus fides: Tanquam si placet hic
impetus etsi nondum recepit ultimam manum.

Orbem jam totum victor Romanus habebat:
Qua mare, qua terrae, qua sidus currit utrumque:
Nec satiatus erat. Gravidis freta pulsa carinis
Jam peragrabantur. Siquis Sinus abditus ultra,
Siqua foret tellus quae fulvum mitteret aurum,
Hostis erat: fatisque in tristia bella paratis
Quaerebantur opes. Non vulgo nota placebant
Gaudia: non usu plebeio trita voluptas.
Aes Ephyraeum laudabat miles: in uda
Quaesitus tellure nitor certaverat ostro:
Hinc Numidae lapides illinc nova vellera seres,
Atque Arabum populus sua despohaverat arva.
Ecce aliae clades, and laesae vulnera pacis.
Quaeritur in Sylvis Mauris fera: and ultimus Hammon
Afrorum excutitur: ne desit bellua dente
Ad mortes pretiosa: fames premit advena classes:
Tigris, and aurata gradiens vectatur in aula,
Ut bibat humanum (populo plaudente) cruorem.
Heu pudet effari, perituraque prodere fata!
Persarum ritu male pubescentibus annis
Sur^ipuere viros, exectaque viscera ferro
In venerem fregere: atque ut fuga mobilis aevi
Circumscripta mora properantes differat annos:
Quaerit se natura, nec invenit: omnibus ergo
Scorta placent, fractique enervi corpore gressus
Et laxi crines, and tot nova nomina vestis,
Quaeque virum quaerunt. Ecce Afris eruta terris
Citrea mensa, greges servorum, ostrumque renidens
Ponitur, ac maculis imitatur vilibus aurum:
Quae turbant censum, hostile, ac male nobile lignum
Turba sepulta mero circumvenit, omniaque orbis
Praemia correptis miles vagus extruit armis.
Ingeniosa gula est: Siculo scarus aequore mersus
Ad mensam vivus perducitur: inde Lucrinis
Eruta littoribus condunt conchylia caenas:
Ut renovent per damna famem: jam Phasidos unda
Orbata est avibus, multoque in littore cantum
Solae desertis aspirant frondibus aurae.
Nec minor in campo furor est: emptique Quirites
Ad praedam strepitumque lucri suffragia vertunt.
Venalis populus: venalis curia Patrum:
Est savor in pretio: senibus quoque libera virtus
Exciderat: sparsisque opibus conversa potestatas:
Ipsaque majestas auro corrupta jacebat.
Pellitur a populo victus Cato: tristior ille est
Qui vicit, fascesque pudet rapuisse Catoni.
Namque hoc dedecus est populi, morumque ruina.
Non homo pulsus erat, sed in uno victa potestas,
Romanumque decus: quare tam perdita Roma
Ipsa sui merces erat, and sine vindice praeda.
Praeterea gemino deprensam gurgite praedam,
Faenoris ingluvies, ususque exederat aeris.
Nulla est certa domus: nullum sine pignore corpus:
Sed veluti tabes tacitis concepta medullis,
Intra membra furens, hiris latrantibus errat.
Arma placent miseris; detritaque commodo luxu
Vulneribus reparantur: inops audacia tuta est.
Hoc mersam caeno Romam, somnoque jacentem
Quae poterant arts sana ratione movere,
Ni furor, and bellum, furoque excita libido?
Tres tulerat fortuna duces, quos obruit omnes
Armorum strue diversa feralis Enyo.
Crassum Parthus habet: Libyoo jacet aequore Magnus:
Julius ingratam perfudit sanguine Romam.
Et, quasi non posset tot Tellus far Sepulchra,
Divicit cineres: hos gloria reddit honores.
Est locus exciso penitus demersus hiatu,
Parthenopen inter, magnaeque Dicharchidos arva,
Cocyta perfusus aqua, nam spiritus extra
Qui furit effusus funesto spargitur aestu.
Non haec Autumno tellus viret, aut alit herbas
Cespite laetus ager: non verno persona cantu
Mollia discordi strepitu virgulta loquuntur:
Sed chaos, and nigro squallentia pumice saxa
Gaudent ferali circumtumulata cupressu;
Has inter seeds Ditis pater extulit ora,
Bustorum flammis and cana sparsa favilla:
Ac tali volucrem Fortunam voce lacessit.
Rerum humanarum, divinarumque potestas,
Fors cui nulla placet nimium secura potestas,
Quae nova semper amas and mox possessa relinquis:
Ecquid Romano sentis te pondere victam?
N^c posse ulterius perituram extollere molem?
Ipsa suas vires odit Romana juventus,
Et quas struxit opes, male sustinet, aspice late
Luxuriam spoliorum and censum in damna furentem.
Aedificant auro sedesque ad sydera mittunt.
Expelluntur aquae saxis: mare nascitur arvis,
Et permutata rerum statione rebellant.
En etiam mea regna petunt, professa dehiscit
Molibus insanis tellus, jam montibus haustis
Antra gemunt: and dum varios lapis invenit usus,
Inferni manes coelum sperare jubentur.
Quare age, Fors, muta pacatum in praelia vultum
Romanosque cie, ac nostris da funera regnis,
Jampridem nullo perfundimus ora cruore,
Nec mea Tisiphone sitientes perluit artus,
Ex quo sullanus bibit ensis and horrida tellus
Extulit in lucem nutritas sanguine fruges.
Haec ubi dicta dedit dextrae conjungere dextram
Conatus, rupto tellurem solvit hiatu.
Tunc Fortuna levi defudit pectore voces:
O genitor, cui Cocyti, penetralia parent
Si modo vera mihi fas est impune profari,
Vota tibi cedent, nec enim minor ira rebellat
Pectore in hoc, leviorque exurit flamma medullas.
Omnia quae tribui Romany arcibus, odi;
Muneribusque meis irascor: destruet istas
Idem, qui posuit moles Deus, and mihi cordi
Quippe cremare viros, and sanguine pascere luxum.
Cerno equidem gemina jam stratos morte Philippos,
Thessaliaeque rogos, and funera gentis Iberae.
Jam fragor armorum trepidantes personat aures.
Et Libyae cerno tua Nile gementia claustra
Actiacosque Sinus, and Apollonis arma frementis.
Pande age terrarum sitientia regna tuarum;
Atque animas arcesse novas. Vix navita Porthmeus
Sufficient simulacra virum traducere cimba,
Class opus est. Tuque ingenti satiare ruina
Pallida Tisiphone, consisaque vulnera mande.
Ad Stygios manes laceratus ducitur orbis.
Vix dum finierat, quum fulgure rupta corusco
Intremuit nubes, elisosque abscidit ignes.
Subsedit pater umbrarum, gremioque reducto
Telluris, pavitans fraternos palluit ictus.
Continuo clades hominum venturaque damna
Auspiciis patuere Deum, namque ora crueuto
Deformis Titan vultus caligine texit.
Civiles acies jam tum spirare putares.
Part alia plenos extinxit Cynthia vultus,
Et lucem sceleri subduxit. rupta tonabant
Verticibus lassis montis juga, nec vaga passim
Flumina per notas ibant morientia ripas.
Armorum strepitu coelum furit and tuba Martem
Sideribus transmissa ciet; jamque Aetna voratur
Ignibus insolitis, and in aethera fulmina mittit.
Ecce inter tumulos atque ossa carentia bustis
Vmbrarum facies diro stridore minatur.
Fax stellis comitata novis incendia ducit;
Sanguineoque recens descendit Juppiter imbre.
Haec ostenta brevi solvit Deus. Exuit omnes
Quippe moras Caesar, vindictaeque actus amore
Gallica projecit, civilia sustulit arma.
Alpibus aeriis, ubi Graio nomine pulsae
Descendunt rupes, and se patiuntur adiri,
Est locus Herculeis aris sacer; hunc nive dura
Claudit hiems, canoque ad sydera vertice tollit:
Coelum illinc cecidisse putes. non solis adulti
Mansuescit radiis, non verni temporis aura:
Sed glacie concreta rigens, hiemisque pruinis
Totum far potest humeris minitantibus orbem.
Haec ubi calcavit Caesar juga milite laeto,
Optavitque locum, summo de vertice montis
Hesperiae campos late prospexit, and ambas
Intentans cum voce manus ad sidera, dixit:
Juppiter omnipotens, and tu Saturnia Tellus
Armis laeta meis, olimque onerara triumphis:
Testor ad has acies invitum arcessere Martem,
Invitas me far manus, sed vulnere cogor,
Pulsus ab urbe mea, dum Rhenum sanguine vinco,
Dum Gallos iterum Capitolia nostra petentes
Alpibus excludo: vincendo, certior exul:
Sanguine Germano, sexagintaque triumphis,
Esse nocens coepi, quanquam quos gloria terret,
Aut qui sunt, qui bella volunt? merc^dibus emptae,
Ac viles operae; quorum est mea Roma noverca,
Ut reor, haud impune; nec hanc sine vindice dextram
Vinciet ignavus. victores ite ferentes,
Ite mei comites, and causam dicite ferro.
Namque omnes unum crimen vocat, omnibus una
Impendet clades. reddenda est gratia vobis:
Non solus vici. quare, quia poena trophaeis
Imminet, and sordes meruit victoria nostra,
Judice fortuna cadat alea sumite bellum,
Et tentate manus, certe mea caussa peracta est.
Inter tot fortes armatus nescio vinci.
Haec ubi personuit, de coelo Delphicus al^s
Omnia laeta dedit, pepulitque meatibus auras.
Nec non horrendi nemoris de part sinistra
Insolita voces flamma sonuere sequenti.
Ipse nitor Phoebi vulgato laetior orb
Crevit and aurato praecinxit fulgure vultus.
Fortior ominibus movit Mavortia signa
Caesar; and insolito gressu, prior occupat haustus.
Prima quidem glacies, and cana juncta pruina
Non pugnavit humus, mitique horrore quievit:
Sed postquam turmae nimbos fregere ligatos,
Et pavidus quadrupes undarum vincula rupit,
Incaluere nives, mox flumina montibus altis
Vndabant modo nata: sed haec quoque jussa putares.
Stabant and vincta fluctus stupuere pruina:
Et paulo ante lues jam concidenda jacebat.
Tum vero malefida prius vestigia lusit,
Decepitque pedes. passim turmaeque virique,
Armaque congesta strue deplorata jacebant.
Ecce etiam rigido concussae flamine nubes
Exonerabantur, nec rupti turbine venti
Deerant aut tumida confractum grandine coelum:
Ipsae jam nubes ruptae super arma cadebant,
Et concreta gelu Ponti velut unda ruebat.
Victa erat ingenti Tellus nive, victaque coeli
Sidera, victa suis haerentia flumina ripis:
Nondum Caesar erat: sed magnam nixus in hastam
Horrida securis frangebat gressibus arva:
Qualis Caucasea decurrens arduus arce
Amphitryoniades, aut torvo Juppiter ore,
Quum se verticibus magni demisit Olympi,
Et periturorum disjecit tela Gigantum.
Dum Caesar tumidas iratus deprimit arces:
Interea volucer motis conterrita pennis
Fama volat, summique petit juga celsa Palati:
Atque hoc Romano attonito fert omnia signa:
Jam classes fluitare mari, totasque per Alps
Fervere Germano perfusas sanguine turmas.
Arma cruor, caedes, incendia, totaque bella
Ante oculos volitant, ergo pulsata tumultu
Pectora per dub^as scinduntur territa causas.
Huic fuga per terras illi magis unda probatur.
Et patria est Pontus; jam tutior est magis arma
Qui tentata velit: fatisque jubentibus actus.
Quantum quisque timet, tantum fugit: ocyor ipse
Hos inter motus populus, miserabile visu,
Quo men's icta jubet, deserta ducitur urbe.
Gaudet Roma fuga, debillatique Quirites
Rumoris sonitu maerentia tecta relinquunt
Ille manu trepida natos tenet, ille penates
Occultat gremio, deploratumque relinquit.
Limen, and absentem votis interficit hostem.
Sunt qui conjugibus maerentia pectora jungant,
Grandevosque patres: onerisque ignara juventus
Id pro quo metuit tantum trahit omnia secum
Hic vehit imprudens, praedamque in praelia ducit.
Ac velut ex alto quum magnus inhorruit Auster,
Et pulsas evertit aquas non arma ministris,
Non regimen prodest: ligat alter pondera pinus,
Alter tuta sinu tranquillaque littora quaerit:
Hic dat vela fugae Fortunaeque omnia credit.
Quid tam parva queror? Gemino cum consule Magnus
Ille tremor Ponti, saevi quoque terror Hydaspis
Et piratarum scopulus: modo quem ter ovantem
Juppiter horruerat; quem fracto in gurgite Pontus,
Et veneratus erat submissa Bosphorus unda
Proh pudor! Imperii deserto nomine fugit,
Ut Fortuna levis Magni quoque terga videret.
Tergo tanta lues Divum quoque numina vidit;
Consensitque fugae caeli timor, Ecce per orbem
Mitis turba Deum, terras exosa furentes
Deserit; atque hominum damnatum avertitur agmen
Pax prima ante alias niveos pulsata lacertos
Abscondit galea victum caput, atque relicto
Orb fugax Ditis petit implacabile regnum.
Huic comes it syncera Fides, and crine soluto
Justitia, and maerens lacera Concordia palla.
At contra, seeds Erebi qua rupta dehiscit,
Emergit late Ditis chorus horrida Erynnys,
Et Bellona minax, facibusque armata Megaera:
Laethumque Insidiaeque, and lurida mortis imago.
Quas inter Furor, abruptis ceu liber habenis
Sanguineum late tollit caput, oraque mill
Vulneribus confossa cruenta casside velat.
Haeret detritus laeva Mavortius umbo,
Innumerabilibus telis gravis: atque flagranti
Stipite dextra minax terris incendia portat.
Sentit terra Deos, mirataque sydera pondus
Quaesivere suum, namque omnis regia caeli
In parts diducta ruit: primumque Dione
Caesaris acta sui ducit. comes additur illi
Pallas, and ingentem quatiens Mavortius hastam:
Magnaque cum Phoebo soror, and Cyllenia proles
Excipit, ac totis similis Tyrinthius actis.
Infremuere tubae, ac scisso Discordia crine
Extulit ad superos Stygium caput. hujus in ore
Concretus sanguis, contusaque lumina flebant.
Stabant aerati scabra rubigine dentes;
Tabo lingua fluens, obsessa draconibus ora
Atque intertorto laceratam pectore vestem
Sanguineam tremula quatiebat lampada dextra.
Haec ut Cocyti tenebras, and Tartara liquit,
Alta petit gradiens juga nobilis Apennini,
Unde omnes terras, atque omnia littora posset
Aspicere, ac toto fluitantes orb catervas:
Atque has erumpit furibundo pectore voces:
Sumite nunc gentes accensis mentibus arma;
Sumite, and in medias immittite lampadas urbes.
Vincetur quicunque latet; non foemina cesset,
Non puer, aut aevo jam desolata senectus.
Ipsa tremat Tellus, lacerataque tecta rebellent.
Tu legem Marcelle tene: tu concute plebem
Curio, tu fortem ne supprime Lentule Martem.
Quid porro tu Dive tuis cunctaris in armis?
Non frangis portas? non muris oppida solvis,
Thesaurosque rapis? nescis tu Magne tueri
Romanas acies? Epidauria moenia quaere,
Thessalicosque sinus humano sanguine tingue.
Factum est in terris, quicquid Discordia jussit.
Out of the Satyr of Petronius Arbiter, page 48.
YOung men, young men, (said Eumolpus) this same thing called Poetry has
deceived many: for if a man have but set a Verse upon it is feet, and swathed
his weaker matter with a winding about of words, he thinks himself presently
over head and ears in Helicon* Therefore, those who have got the practice of
pleading or declaiming in public, have frequently fled to the tranquillity of
versifying, as to a gentler port: believing it easier to compile a Poem, than
an Argument embelish'd with little sparkling Sentences. But neither does a more
generous spirit affect a tympany, nor a mind conceive, or can be delivered of
this birth, that overflows not with a mighty torrent of learning: There must be
a flying all cheapness (as I may say) of words, and such language culled out as
is above the common people. This is to hate the lay vulgar, and to make them
know their distance. Moreover there must be a Care that the Sentences do not
hang ont like tassels from the body of the matter, but shine woven thereinto
like gold into a silken-garment; witness HOMER, and the Lyricks, and Roman
VIRGIL, and HORACE his curious faelicity. For others either saw not the way of
Poetry, or (seeing) feared to tread it. Behold a great Task, THE CIVIL WAR?
Whoever will touch that burden (unless abounding with letters) shall sink
under it. For not things done should be comprehended in verse, (which is much
better performed by Historians) but the free spirit must throw it self headlong
in digressions, and in personatings of Gods, and in fabulous ornaments upon the
rack of invention: that it may seem rather an ebullition of some prophetic
truths, amidst a world of pleasant extravagancies, from a breast inflamed with
fury; than a deposition, as of sworn witnesses to tell the truth, all the
truth, and nothing but the truth: As for example, this rapture, though it have
not received the last hand.

Now conquering Rome did all the world control,
From East to West, from one to the other pole:
Yet was not satisfied. The plough'd-up Sea
With brazen keels, was made her common way.
If any nook were hid, if any Land
(Which yellow Gold afforded) lay beyand,
It was a foe, and covetous anger seized
Whatever wealth. No vulgar pleasure pleased:
No worn plebeian joy. The Soldiers disht
Their meat in Silver: and (from Rivers fisht)
The Purple of the Land rivall'd the Sea's.
Here Lybian stones, there silks (the new disease)
And their perfumed fields, ARABIANS fleece.
Lo other spoils and wounds of injured Peace!
In woods is sought the Mauritanian beast,
And (...) farthest Hammon hunted, least
That Monster should be wanting, which is slain
Because his tooth sells dear, instead of Grain.
Armenian Tigers our Corn-fleets import,
To be led stalking in a gilded Court:
And quaffe (the people clapping) humane blood.
I blush to speak, and broach Fates violent flood.
In Persian guize (years ripening to their harm)
They grub man up, and with a knife disarme
The apt for Venus wars: and, whiles this checks
Time's horse in his full speed, lost nature seeks
And cannot find her self: so all approve
Male Concubines, and which, like Geldings move
Broke to a pace: Love-locks and Clothes which speak
All Countries, and no man. Behold they break
Numidian ground! a Citrian board comes out
On painted Carpets placed, and round about
A Troop of waiters stand: and, drowned in wine,
Upon the floor wallows an herd of Swine.
A Tree which did a Patrimony cost,
Fetched (for the ruin of a Land) to boast
A new Nobility, did counterfeit
With spots the cheaper gold: On which were set
By the Earth-rounding- Soldier (that now hurled
His Arms aside) the spoils of all the world.
His throat had wit. A Terbot, that did dive
In Corsick Seas, rose at his Board alive;
There Oysters pulled out of the Lucrine lake,
Only for Sauce to lure his hunger back.
Now Phasian waves are of their birds bereft:
And the dumb banks (save winds) have nothing left
To sing amongst the widowed leaves: As dire
Is the field's fury: The base Romans hire
Their votes out for the chime, and touch of Gold:
A venal people: venal Senate sold
Favor: even Age let her free virtue fall,
And right by bribes was justled to the wall?
And Majesty lay flat, with gold sought out,
Cato himself repulsed was by the rout.
He that o'recame more sad, who blushed to see
That Cato should have fewer votes than he.
For 'twas the people's, and the time's disgrace:
'Twas not a man, but virtue lost the place,
And the old Roman honor: here then lies
Rome her own Merchant, and own merchandise.
Besides now use on use, men's principals
So swelled, it overwhelmed them. No man calls
His house his own. None uningag'd: but debt
Like to a lingering disease, does fret
Into their barking bowels, being pained
They cry to Arms: and wealth with riot drayn'd
Must heal with wounds: safe WANT sets on fire.
Cast in this sleep, and rolling in this mire
What reasons can make Rome, but war and blood?
Which till they are felt, are never understood.
Fortune had raised three Captains, all which feel
In several ways Enyo's mortal steel.
In Asia Crassus; Afric Pompey slain:
Ungrateful Rome great Julius blood did stain
And Earth, to poize her load by portions just,
(Greatness found this respect) divides their dust.
A wide-mouthed vault descends to Hell's black-hall,
'Twixt great Dicarchis fields, and Naples wall,
Lav'd with Cocytus streams, whence all the heath
About is blasted with a Sulfurous breath:
Where Autumn is the mother of no fruits,
Out of the Summers Turf no glad herb shoots,
No tender sprigs, inspired by vernal songs,
Are heard to warble with melodious tongues:
But Chaos, and rocks sweating with black dew,
Delight in Canopies of fatal hue.
Here Pluto rose in funeral flames and smoke,
And with these words light Fortune did provoke;
Divine-and- humane-things-commanding- Power,
Fortune, that likest no height that is too secure,
That love new things, and (gained) discard'st them straight,
Shrink'st thou not yet beneath the Roman weight,
Unable longer to support the Tower
Of Romes recoyling Greatness? Their own Power
The Roman youth abhor, nor bear the piles
Of wealth they raised. See their vast Lux of spoils,
And riches cursed into a punishment!
They build in Gold, and to the Firmament
Exalt their seats. Here Seas with stones expel,
There let them in with Sluices, and rebel
Against inverted Nature. Not I'scape:
The earth delv'd through for their wild Heaps does gape;
The Mountains shovell'd down: the caves now groan
There, whilst for several uses they dig stone.
The Infernal Ghosts are bid to hope for day:
Then Fortune turn thy smiles to dreadful fray:
Possess with rage the Roman breasts, and throng
Our Realms with funerals. Methinks it is long
Since these black jaws have been with Gore imbrew'd,
Since my Tisiphone has bathed in blood
Her thirsty limbs: since Sylla's sword was drunk,
And horrid Earth nursed fruits from humane trunk.
This said, and striving to give her his hand,
With reaching up he brake the cleaving Land:
Then Fortune thus from fickle bosom says,
O Sire, whom all on that side Styx obeys,
If without danger I the truth may tell,
Thy wish is granted thee: nor to rebel
Have I less mind then thou: or boyles my womb
With a less rage. All I bestowed on Rome
I hate, and am fallen out with my delight:
The God that raised these walls, the same shall slight.
The sweet of burning Towns, of sucking blood,
Is by me also fully understood.
I see Philippi with two Chiefs there slain:
Thessalian tombs: and funerals of Spain.
The clash of Arms now strikes my trembling ear:
The groans of Libya: and her Nile I hear:
And Actian waves: and SOL cry, on. Expand
The thirsty Kingdoms of thy silent Land:
And get more Furys help. A boat's too small
For Charon to waft over his souls withal:
It asks a FLEET: and pale Tisiphone
With the great ruin do thou gorged be:
With ragged tushes chaw the tender wounds:
The mangled world descend^ to Stygian sounds:
Scarce had she spoke, when (cleft with lightning sheen)
Trembles a cloud, and darts squeezed, fire between.
The King of Shades into earth's bosom sunk:
And from his Brother's thunder frighted, shrunk.
Forthwith the fates of men, and ills to come
Heaven shows by signs: for the deformed Sun.
Veils with a mist his blushing face, as far
From giving countenance to a civil war.
The Moon at full (to leave them groaping) pops
Her light out too. The palsey'd Mountain-tops
(Supported with weak necks) come thund ring down.
Nor wandering Rivers run in channels known,
To dye a natural death. Armies appear
In the Air, and Trumpets (even in his own sphere)
Alarm Mars. Now hotter Aetna burns,
And thunderbolts for thunderbolts returns.
Lo! Amongst the Tombs and disinterred bones,
The Ghastly shadows send up baleful groans!
A blazing-Star draws an unusual train:
And a new Jove descends in bloody rain:
Heaven soon these signs expounds: for Caesar drove
With his own speed, and sweet revenges love,
Threw down the Gallick, Civil Arms took up.
On cloudy Alps, where, winding to the top,
The rocks made passable by Grecian hands,
A Temple sacred to Alcides stands.
It Is thatched with crusted Snow, and blends its gray
Head to the Stars: how like the milky way!
It thaws not with the Sun's Meridian rays,
Nor with the Spring's warm breath: but paved with lays
Of Ice and feathered Rain, the Heaven it bears:
For it both threatens and supports the spheres.
When He (the Soldier glad) these cliffs did tread,
And touched his wishes, from the Mountains head
Stretching his voice, (the Latian fields surveyed)
And both his hands to Heaven, thus Caesar said.
All powerful Jove, and thou Saturnian Land
Triumphant often, safe always by my hand,
Witness I come unwilling to this war,
Unwilling Clash: but such my proud wrongs are,
Expuls'd my Country, whilst I paint with blood
The Rhine, whilst I the Galls the Alps exclude,
Threatening again the Capitol. Exiled
Farther by conquering more: the Germans foiled,
And sixty triumphs are my crime. But who
Denounce this war? Blind with our beams a crew
Of trading Souls step-children to my Rome,
But they (I think) shall know too upon whom
Nor shall mechanic hands bind these with cords.
Go mine: Go victors: plead the Cause with Swords.
We all are in one fault: one shame threats all:
You c^nquer'd too. If punishment must fall
On them that beat, if this our triumph be,
Let the Dye fall, and Fortune judge for me.
Take up the war they throw you: try your force:
If overcome, my case can be no worse.
But armed, and with such men, that never can hap:
This said, the Delphick bird her wings did clap,
(An Omen good) and in a wood beside
A Bay Tree crackling in strange fire was 'spy'd.
APOLLO'S self shone brighter then he used,
And had a golden glory circumfus'd.
Stronger then Omens, Caesar did advance,
And with unwonted pace first snatched a Lance.
First bound with ice, and candyed with the driffe
The earth was quiet with dull horror stiff:
But when the Troops the clouds gives off, did take,
And trembling horses the waves fetters brake,
The heat snows melted; straight new rivers burst
Out of the hills: these also straight were forced
To make a stand: whilst (lo) new ice appears,
And liquid late make work for Pioneers.
Then first deceived the feet the slippery ground,
And tript them up, Men, Arms, and wohle Ranks, (round,)
In heaps deplored? big clouds with tempest's stroke,
Their burdens threw. Nor blasts with whirle-winds broke,
Were wanting there, or vollyes of gross hail.
The concrete rain fell rattling on the Mayle,
Like showers of Arrows from a Parthian bow:
The Earth was overcome with a deep snow:
The Lamps of heaven overcome; with Crystal bit
The Rivers overcome; Caesar not yet:
But leaning on his spear, that would not yield,
With secure steps he brake the horrid field:
As when Alcmena's son marched apace,
Down Caucasus: or with an angry face
When Jove descended the Olympian hill,
With Giants blood Phlegrean plains to fill.
'Mean while swift Fame is born with frighted wings,
And perching on the Capitol, sad things
Tells the affrighted Romans: that the Maine
Is swarmed with ships: The Alps of a light flame
With Troops, yet reeking with Sicambrian gore,
Arms, Blood, Death, Fire, and War is drawn before
Their eyes from head to foot: which makes them err,
And see their danger double through their fear.
This flies by land, this by, and that to Sea,
So for no land his native changes he.
He Is safest now, the Chance of war that tryes,
And follows fates instinct: He farthest flies
Whose fear is longest winged: (A grief to say!)
The people led by wild amazement, stray
They know not whither: Rome delights in flight,
And scared Quirites their sad mansions quite;
At the bare rumor of approaching Arms,
Those clasp with trembling hand their tender barnes:
These in their bosoms hold their Houshould-Gods:
And hurry from their desolate aboads:
And in their prayers kill the absent Foe:
There are that to their wives sad bosoms grow,
And bedrid parents: youths impatient heat
Takes only her, on whom his soul is set.
Some all, and to the war unwisely sweep
The prey, for which it is made. --
-- As when the deep
Is plough'd up by Northwinds, and her roul'd hills
Are knocked together: And the Seamen's skills
Avail not now, one binds the splitting mast,
Another to the quiet shore does have,
A third to Sea and Fortune trusts with all.
What talk I of small things? the General
With both the Consuls The great Pompey, He
Terror of dire Hydaspes, and the Sea,
The Pirates rock, whom (thrice triumphing late)
Jove trembled at, lest he should shake his state:
Whom Pontus (having crushed it is watery braves)
And Bosphorus adored with crouching waves:
(Oh shame) deserting the State's rudder, fled:
That fickle Fortune might to have seen be sed
Even Pompey's back. A flight authorized so,
Involved the Gods, and Heaven his back did show*
See a mild troop of Gods (loathing the rage
That regins in mortals) take a pilgrimage,
From a damned crew of Earthlings: And first Peace
(Beating her snowy Arms) her vanquished face
Hides with a cask, and flying from the light,
Seeks the hushed mansions of eternal Night:
With Her pure FAITH, and JUSTICE, (her sword br^ke)
And CONCORD in a rent and mourning Cloak.
On the other side where Hell's wide jaws respire,
Grim Pluto's train springs rife: Erinnys dire,
And fierce Bellona, and flame-girt Megeare,
And Death, and Fraud, and multiplying Fear.
Amongst whom Rage, like Bacchus (his reins broke)
Runs headlong, and with bloody helm does Cloak
A thousand ugly faces dug with wounds
With heavy shafts: a Martial Target sounds
Worn with his left, and from his right hand hurled
A blazing firebrand terrifies the world.
The stars are posed: lightheaded Atlas reels;
Wondering to miss the weight that poys'd heaven's wheels.
The factious Gods come down on earth to side.
And Venus first her Caesar justify'de,
Pallas with her, and Mars that shakes a whol^
Oak for a spear^; and with his Sister, SOL:
And ATLAS GRANDSON and Alcides (found
Like him in all his acts) The trumpets sound,
And DISCORD with torn hair, her Stygian head
Advances from a dell, her dim dies shed
Instead of tears a blotted shower of blood:
Two tire of brazen grinders rusty stood:
Her tongue o'reflows with gore: her snaky locks
Hang down over her face: and through her Frocks
Wide-gaping Rent, thrusting a bloody hand
About her head she tossed a flaming brand.
She leaving Hell, and where sad rivers join,
Touched the high top of noble Appennine:
From whence each realm and sea she might command,
And view the Troops that roll on every Land:
Then burst into these words, with fury warm,
Arm all the world with fell intentions: arm:
Sho^t flames in midst of Towns (who e're he be
That stands a Newter, is the Victor's fee.)
Fight Boys, fight Maids, fight Old men near your end.
Quake Earth, and shattered stones rebel. -- Defend
The laws Marcellus. -- Do thou Curio preach
Up tumults. -- Lentulus do not impeach
Thy Martial spirits working. -- What make thou
Julius the while freezing in Armor? now
Enter the gates, or scale the walls, and break
The Roman Fisk. -- Pompey art thou too weak
To keep Rome's Towers? to EPIDAMNUM pass
The Ominous Scene, and dye Thessalian grass
With Roman blood. To all that DISCORD said,
EARTH cried It Is done: and her command obeyed.
The Translator's POSTSCRIPT.
HEre PETRONIUS breaks off abruptly, thereby as well as in many imperfect
places of his own Copy, proving as good as his word, that he had not added
thereto the last hand. In which thing alone I have translated him to the life,
for neither have I added mine to the English: only making so much use thereof,
as to show the Rule and Model, which ( indubitably) guided our CAMOENS in the
raising his GREAT BUILDING, and which (excep^ himself) that I know of, no POET
ever followed that wrought in great, whether ancient, or modern. For (to name
no more) the Greek HOMER, the Latin VIRGIL, our SPENCER, and even the Italian
TASSO (who had a true, a great, and no obsolete story, to work upon) are in
effect wholly fabulous: and LUCAN (though worthily admired) is as much censured
by some on the other side, for sticking too close to truth. As FABIUS for one;
-- LUCAN full of flame and vigor, and most perspicuous in his Sentences: yet (
that I may speak what I think) rather to be reckoned amongst the ORATORS then
the POETS. And SERVIUS for another, with less manners in his expression; That
which I said, that the Art of Poetry is forlidden to set down a naked story, is
certain: for LUCAN deserved not to be in the number of POETS, because he seems
to have compiled a HISTORY, rather then a POEM. Amounting to the same which is
objected above in the Introduction to this Essay (which glanceth particularly
at LUCAN) and mended (as the Author thereof conceived) by the Essay it self,
which is of a mixed nature between Fable and History.

TORQUATO TASSO. in his 6 Part. fol. 47.
VASCO, te cui felici ardite Antenne
Incontro al Sol, che ne riporta il giorno,
Spiegar le vele, e fer cola Ritorno,
Dove egIi par che di cadere accenne:
Non piu di Te per aspro mar sostenne
Quel, che fece a CICLOPE oltraggio, and scorno:
Ne chi turbo l'Arpie nel suo soggiorno,
Ne die piu bell Subjetto. a Colte pen.
Ft hor quella del colto, e buon LUIGI
Tant' oltre stende il glorioso volo
Che j tuoi spalmati Legni andar men lunge.
Ond' a quelli, a cui S'alza il nostro polo,
Et a chi ferina incontra j suoi vestigi,
Per lui del corso tuo la fama aggiunge.
VASCO, whose bold and happy ships against
The Rising Sun (who fraights them home with day)
Displayed their wings, and back again advanced
To where in Seas all Night he steeps his Ray:
Not more then Thou on rugged Billows felt,
He that bored out the Eye of POLYPHEME;
Nor He that spoiled the HARPYES where they dwelt,
Afforded Learned Pens a fairer Theme.
And this of Learned and honest CAMOENS
So far beyond now takes it is glorious flight,
That thy breathed Sails went a less Journey, Whence
To Those on whom the Northern Pole shines bright,
And Those who set their feet to ours, The boast
Of thy Long Voyage Travails at his Cost.




THE LVSIAD OF Lewis Camoens.
First Canto.
STANZA. 1.
Arms, and the Men above the vulgar File,
Who from the Western Lusitanian shore
Past even beyond the Trapobanian-Isle,
Through Seas which never Ship had sayld before;
Who (brave in action, patient in long Toil,
Beyond what strength of humane nature bore.)
Among Nations, under other Stars, acquired
A modern Scepter which to Heaven aspired.
2.
Likewise those Kings of glorious memory,
Who sowed and propagated where they past
The Faith with the new Empire (making dry
The Breasts of ASIA, and laying waste
Black AFFRICK'S vicious Glebe; And Those who by
Their deeds at home left not their names defaced,
My Song shall spread where ever there are Men,
If Wit and Art will so much guide my Pen.
3.
Cease man of TROY, and cease thou Sage of GREECE,
To boast the Navigations great ye made;
Let the high Fame of ALEXANDER cease,
And TRAIAN'S Banners in the EAST displayed:
For to a Man recorded in this Piece
NEPTUNE his Trident yielded, MARS his Blade.
Cease All, whose Actions ancient Bards expressed:
A brighter Valor rises in the West:
4.
And you ( my TAGUS'S Nymphs) since ye did raise
My Wit t'a more then ordinary flame;
If I in low, yet tuneful Verse, the praise
Of your sweet River always did proclaim:
Inspire me now with high and thundering lays;
Give me them clear and flowing like his stream:
That to your Waters PHOEBUS may ordain
They do not envy those of HYPPOCRENE.
5.
Give me a mighty Fury, Nor rude Reeds
Or rustic Bag-Pipes sound, But such as War's
Loud Instrument (the noble Trumpet) breeds,
Which fires the Breast, and stirs the blood to jars.
Give me a Poem equal to the deeds
Of your brave Servitors (Rivals of MARS)
That I may sing them through the UNIVERSE,
If, whom That held not, can be held in Verse.
6.
And you, a present Pawn to PORTUGALE
Of the old Lusitanian-Libertie;
Nor the less certain Hope t'extend the Pale
One day, of narrow CHRISTIANITY:
New Terror of the moorish Arsenale:
The foretold Wonder of our Centurie:
Given to the World by GOD, the World to win,
To give to GOD much of the World agin.
7.
You, fair and tender Blossom of that Tree
Beloved by Him, who died on One for Man,
More then whatever Western MAJESTY
Is styled MOST CHRISTIAN, or CAESAREAN.
Behold it in your Shield! where you may see
ORIQUE'S Battle, which ALPHONSO wan,
In which CHRIST gave for Arms, for you t*emboss,
The same which He himself bore on the Cross.
8.
You (powerful King), whose Empire vast the Sun
Visits the first as soon as he is born,
And eyes it when his Race is halfway run,
And leaves it loath when his tired Steeds adjourn.
You, who we look should clap a yoke upon
The brutish ISHMAELITE, become your scorn;
On the Eastern TURK, and GENTIL who still lies
Sucking the stream which watered PARADISE.
9.
That Majesty which in th*s Brow appears
(This tender one) suspend for a small time,
Already such, as in your perfect years
When FAME'S immortal Temple you shall climb
Those milder eyes, with which you banish Fears,
Bend to the ground: on which, by numerous Ryme,
You Will see in me a Passion overgrown,
To make the Portugal-Atchievemenes known.
10.
You Will see a strange love to my Native-soyle,
Not moved with Vile but high immortal Meed:
For, to be compted is a Meed not vile
The Trumpet of the Nest where I was bred.
By That, their names drawn great, and laid in oil
You Will see, of whom you are the Sovereign Head:
And judge, which is the greater Honor Then
To be King of the World, or of such Men.
11.
Hear me, I say, for not for Actions vain,
Fantastic, Fabulous, shall you behold
Yours praised, though foreign Muses (to obtain
Name to themselves) have even feigned names extold.
Your Subjects true Acts are so great, they stain
And credit all the Lies of others told.
Stain RHODOMONT, that puff ROGERO too,
And MAD ORLANDO, grant their deeds were true.
12.
For These, I give you a fierce NUNNIO
Who King and Country propt, almost alone.
An EGAS, a Don FUAS, whose worths to show
I wish my Voice could reach great HOMER'S tone.
For the twelve Peers, I other twelve bestow
That past to ENGLAND, and MAGRIZZO one.
The illustrious GANIA in the Rear I name,
Who robbed the wandering Trojan of his Fame.
13.
Then (if to Match with CHARLES THE GREAT of FRANCE,
Or one you seek to rival CAESAR'S name)
The first ALPHONSO see, who with his Lance
Eclipses whatsoever outlandish Fame!
And Him, who by successful Valiance
Rescued and snatched his Realm from civil Flame!
The second JOHN, unconquered by the sword!
The Fourth and Fifth ALPHONSO, and the Third!
14.
Nor shall my Verses in Oblivion leave
Those CHIEFS, who, in the Kingdoms of the Morn,
Their name in Arms unto the stars did heave,
By whom your ever-conqu'ring Flag was born:
Matchless PACHECO: Two ALMEYDA'S brave,
Whom weeping TAGUS will for ever mourn:
Terrible ALBURQUERQUE: CASTRO bold:
And more, whom death had not the power to hold.
15.
And whilst I These do sing, and dare not you,
Great King (for I aspire not to that height)
Take you your Kingdoms reins your Hand into,
And furnish matter for a loftier flight,
Whilst your new worth may meet a Vein as new.
Your numerous Fleets, and Armies ponderous weight,
Let the World groan with, and their terror ^eize
The AFRIC- Land's, and ORIENTAL- Seas.
16.
On you with fixed eyes looks the cold MOORE,
In whom he reads his ruin prophecy'de:
The barbarous GENTILE (viewing you) is sure
You Will yoke his neck, and bows it to be ty'de.
The silver THETYS offers you in dow're
All her blew Realm, and does the same provide.
Took with your Face (where love is mixed with Awe)
She seeks to buy you for her Son-in-Law.
17.
In you, out of their Blissful Bowers Above
Your Grandsires souls (both famous in their way,
The one in golden peace, which Angels love,
The Other in bloody War) themselves survay.
In you they hope their glories shall improve,
Their Virtues be recoynd with less Allay:
And wide they sit, to keep for you a room
In Heaven's eternal Temple against you come.
18.
But now, because your time creeps slowly an
To rule your People, who much wish it so;
Play with the new Attempt of a bold man,
That up with you this Infant- muse may grow;
And you shall spy ploughing the Ocean
Your ARGONAUTS, that they may also know
You see them tossed upon the angry Brine:
And use your self to be invoked betime.
19.
They now went sailing in the OCEAN vast,
Parting the snarling Waves with crooked Bills:
The whispring Zephyre breathed a gentle Blast,
Which stealingly she spreading Canvas fills:
With a white foam the Seas were overcast,
The dancing Vessels cutting with their Keels
The Waters of the Consecrated DEEP,
Where PROTHEUS'S Flocks their Rendezvouses keep.
20.
When in the HEAVEN OF HEAVENS the Deities,
That have of humane things the Government,
Convene in glorious Council, to advise
On future matters of the ORIENT.
Treading in Clusters the Diaphane skies
Thorough the Milky way their course they bent,
Assembled at the THUNDERER'S command
By Him That bears the Caduceian Wand.
21.
They leave the patronage of the Seav'n spheres
Which by the HIGHEST POWER to them was given:
The HIGHEST POWER, who with an eye-brow steers
The Earth, the raging Ocean, and the Heaven.
There, in a moment, every one appears;
Those, where BOOTES's waine is slowly driven,
Those, who inhabit South, and where the Sun
Is born, and where his golden Race is don.
22.
With an austere and high Majestic grace
Upon a Crystal Throne, with stars imbost,
Sublime THE FATHER ^ate (worthy that place)
By whom the Bolts, dire VULCAN forged, are tossed.
An Oderiferous Air blew from his face,
Able to breathe new life in a pale Ghost:
A Scepter in his Hand, and his Head crowned
With one stone, brighter then a Dia^ownd.
23.
On glittering chairs (imbroyd'red richly over
With infinite of Pearls and finest Gould)
The other Deities were placed lower,
As Reason and the Herald Order would:
The Seniours first, to honor them the more,
And after them those who were not so old:
When thus the most high JOVE the silence brake,
With such a voice as made OLYMPUS shake.
24
Eternal dwellers of the Tower divine,
And Impirean-Hall with starred Vault;
If the much Virtue of the valiant Line,
Of LUTUS be not worn out of your Thought;
You needs must know what the great FATES design
To crown the former Wonders Those have wrought,
That they shall darken with their evening-Glory
The ^ssyrian, Persian, Greek, and Roman story.
25.
Your selves were witnesses, with what a poor.
And naked Army it was given to Them
To take from the well-fix't, and numerous MOOR
All that sweet TAGUS waters with his stream.
Then against the stout Castilian-Warriour
Heaven still beheld them with a favoring beam:
And still in fine with glory and Renown
The hanging Trophies did their Churches crown.
26.
I speak not ( Gods) of that more ancient name
Which with the Queen of Nations they did get
When (led by VIRIATUS) so great fame
They wan, whilst They and hostile ROME were met.
I pass their other Clash with that proud Dame
(Which it is impossible you should forget)
When a Bandito did their Truncheon bear,
Who feigned himself inspired by a tame Dear:
27.
See now, how trusting to uncertain Waves
In a frail Bark, through ways untrod before
(Fearless of horrid Boreas, and the Braves
Of the fierce Southern wind) they throw at more!
How (having yoak't before that Sea which laves
AFFRICK'S North-side, and yoakt her Southern-shore)
They bend their purpose and their forces turn
To win the Cradle of the budding MORN.
28.
To Them is promised by eternal FATE
(Whose high decrees no Power can ere revoke)
To be perpetual Porters of that Gate
Through which the Sun first guides his silver spoke.
They Have spent at Sea the bitter Winter s date;
The men are harast, and with Travail broke.
It Is now high time (as it appears to me)
To show them that new Land where they would be.
29
And therefore, since they have (as you have seen)
So many dangers in this Voyage past;
Tossed through so many Seas and Clymates been;
Of so sharp adverse Winds felt many a Blast;
I purpose now they shall as friends be in
The AFRIC - Land refresh't with some Repast;
And, having victual d there their wearied Fleet,
Proceed in their long course as it is meet.
20.
Thus JOVE: when in their course of Parliament
The Gods replied in order as they Sat,
And to and fro by way of Argument
Upon the matter calmly did debate.
Then FATHER BACCHUS stiffly did dissent
From what great JOVE proposed; As knowing, that
His Fame in the EAST must suffer an eclipse
Should there arive the Lusitanian-ships.
31.
He of the FATES had understood, from SPAIN
How that a warlike People was to come
Thorough the middle of the OCEAN,
Which all the Indian-Coast should overcome,
And which, with modern Victories, should stain
All old ones, whether foreign, or their own.
It grieved him sore, those Actions should be drowned
Which still in NYSA made his name resound.
32.
He looks on INDIA as his old Acquest,
From whom nor Time, nor deeds by others don,
Had rob d the style of CONQ'ROUR OF THE EAST,
By All That taste the streams of Helicon.
But now he fears that Glorie's near it is West,
In the black Water of Oblivion
To set, should their desired Port obtain
The valiant PORTINGALLS That Plough the Main.
33.
Fair VENUS holds up the contrary Theme
Affected to the Lusitanian-Nation,
For the much likeness she observed in Them
To her old ROME, for which she had such passion,
In their great hearts, in the propitious beam
Of their to-AFFRICK-fatal constellation,
And in the charming music of their Tongue,
Which she thinks Latin with small dross among.
34
These things did CYTHEREA move: But more
Because from FATE of truth she heard it sed
That at those LANDS her Altars should adore
Where this Victorious People should be spread.
So one, to keep what was his own before,
The Other, to gain new honors to her head,
Contest and stickle for their several ends,
And Both are backed and favored by their Friends.
35.
As when the fierce South Wind, and fiercer North,
Have got into the thickest of a WOOD,
Breaking the Boughs to force a passage forth
Through matted shades, impetuous and wood;
The Air that yells, and all the mountain roar'th,
The Leaves are scattred, and the strong Rocks moved:
Such was the tumult which amongst the GODS
Was raised then in the Supreme Aboads.
36.
But MARS, who, with more cordialness did take
Then any of the rest, the GODDES'S part;
Whether it were for old Affection-sake,
Or for this valiant People's own desert
(His look confessed him vexed before he spoke)
Amongst the GODS upon his feet did start.
His heavy Target, at his shoulder hung,
(Displeased* and dreadful) he behind him flung.
37.
Lifting a little up his Helmet-sight
(It Was Adamant) with confidence enough
To give his Vote himself he placed right
Before the Throne of JOVE, armed, valiant, tough:
And (giving with the butt end of his Pyke
A great thump on the floor of purest stuff)
The Heavens did tremble, and APOLLO'S light
It went, and came, like color in a fright.
38.
And thus he said; O Sire, whose will (whatever)
All which thou have created must obey:
If These, who seek another Hemisphere,
Thou would not have to perish in the way,
Whose deeds and Valor once thou heldst so dear,
And did of old ordain what they assay:
Then hear no more (since you are a Judge upright)
Reasons, from one who sees by a false light.
39.
For if sound Reason did not plainly show
It self here vanquished by excess of Fear,
'Twere prop*rer BACCHUS should his pains bestow
For LUSUS'S Race, who was his Minion dear.
But let this spleen of his at present go;
"It Is an ill stomach rising at good cheer:
"And envy never found the way in fine
"To do Man right, or what the GOD'S design.
40.
And Thou (the Father of great Constancy)
From the determination thou have took
Recoyle not. "It is imbecility
"When once a Thing's begun, then back to look.
But ^ince in speed the winged MERCURY
Outstrips the Winds, a Shaft, the swiftest Brook.
Let Him now show them to some Country, where
They may refresh, and news of INDIA hear.
41.
The powerful Father having said the same,
Gave with a nod the SOVEREIGN Assent
To that which MARS said here with greater flame,
And over All his holy Nectar sprent.
Straight through the milky way, by which they came,
The GODS to their respective Stations went,
Making a low obeisance to the Throne
As they past by in Order one by one.
42.
Whilst this in the HIGH-COURT is passing now
And beautiful OF HEAVEN Omnipotent;
The warlike People the salt Ocean plough
Leaving the South, and face the Orient,
'Twixt MADAGASCAR'S Isle, where all things flow,
And ETHIOPIA'S barren Continent.
'Twas in that month, when SOL the Fishes fryes
To which feared BRONTES turned two DEITIES.
43
So pleasantly they went before a Wind
As those That now had got the Heaven to friend.
Serene the Air was, and the Weather kind:
No Clowd, nor ought that danger might portend.
The PROMONTORY PRASSUS left behind,
Which ancient ETHIOPIA does defend,
NEPTUNE disclosed new Isles which he did play
About, and with his billows danced the Hay.
44.
VASCO DE GAMA (a most valiant Guide,
Born and picked out for that great Enterprise,
Of a high Soul, and strongly fortify'de,
Who FORTUNE to him by his Boldness ties)
Stands off, to leave this Land upon one side,
Thinking, that uninhabited it lies;
And on his course determines to proceed:
But otherwise the matter did succeed.
45.
For straight, out of that Isle which seemed most near
Unto the Continent, Behold a number
Of little Boats in company appeer,
Which (clapping all wings on) the long Sea sunder!
The men are rapt with joy, and, with the mere
Excess of it, can only look, and wonder.
What Nation's this (within themselves they say)?
What Rites? what Laws? what King do they obey?
46.
Their coming, thus: in Boats, with finns; nor flat,
But apt t'o're-set (as being pincht and long)
And then they would swim like Rats. The Sails, of Mat
Made of Palm-leaves, wove curiously and strong.
The Men's Complexion, the self-same with that
HE gave the Earth's burnt parts (from Heaven flung,)
Who was more brave, then wise; That this is True
The Po does know, and LAMPETUSA rue.
47
The Clothes, they came in, were a Cotton- Plad
With diverse Colors stripd, and white the ground;
Which some cast queintly under one arm, had;
Others, about their Middles straightly bound;
All else from the waste up remained unclad:
Their weapons, Skeyns, and crooked Faulchions: Round
Terbants upon their heads; and, as they rowed,
Resounded Timbrels in an antic Mode.
48.
Waving their hands and kerchers, These made sign
To those of LUSITANIA to stay:
But the swift Prows already did incline
To come to Anchor in the Island's Bay.
Land-men, and Seamen in this work All join,
As all their labors should have end that day.
They haule the Roapes; strike, strike, the crew resounds:
The salt Sea (stricken with the Anchor) bounds.
49.
They were not Anchored, when the uncouth Folk
Already by the Cordage did ascend.
Their jovial countenances welcome spoke,
To whom the Lordly Chief did (courteous) bend.
Bids straight the Boards be spread, the Bottles smoke,
With that rich juice which is the Poet's friend.
Ours power it into Bowls, and All They fill
The burnt by PHAETHON spare not to swill.
50.
They ask (and still the cheerie Bowl goes round)
In the Arabick-language, WHENCE THE FLEET?
Who, and of whence, the men; and WHITHER BOUND,
And through what Seas It came where now they see it?
Hereto the valiant LUSITANIANS found
Such answers as were proper, and discreet:
We are the PORTUGHESES of the WEST,
We go to seek the Countries of the EAST.
51.
All the great OCEAN have we sailed, and crossed,
To the Antartick from the Artick Strand
Gone all the Round of AFFRICK'S spacious Coast;
We have felt many a Clyme, seen many a Land.
We serve a potent King, who has ingrost
His Peoples loves so, that, at his command,
With cheerful faces, not vast Seas alone,
But we would pass the Lake of ACHERON.
52.
And it is by that command we travel now
To seek the Eastern Land which INDIES laves:
By that this distant Ocean-Sea we plough,
Where none but Monsters sailed the horrid Waves.
But now it is reason, We should likewise know
(If Truth have found a Harbor in your Caves)
Who you are? what this Land in which you dwell?
Or, if of INDIA you can Tidings tell?
53
We are (one of the Isle replying said)
Strangers unto this People, Law, and Place;
The Natives being such, as Heaven has made
Without the light of Reason, or of Grace.
We have a Law of TRUTH, which was convay'd
To Us from that New-light of ABRAM'S Race,
Who houlds the World now in subjection due,
By Father, GENTILE; and, by Mother, JEW.
54.
This little Isle (a barren healthless Nook)
Of all these Parts is the most noted Scale
For such as at QUILOA'S Traffic look,
Or to MOMBASSA, and SOFALA, sail.
Which makes Us here some inconvenience brook,
To gather, for a mortal life, and frail:
And (to inform you in one word of All)
This little Isle Men MOZAMBIQUE call.
55.
And now (since you come seeking through long toil
INDIAN-HYDASPES, and the Spicy Strand)
You shall have such a Pilot from this Isle,
As through the waves the way does understand.
'Twere also good, you here reposed a while,
And took in fresh provisions from the Land;
And that our Governor did come Aboard,
To see what else may need for Him t'afford.
56.
This the Barbarian, and retreated then
Into his Boats with all his company,
Departing from the Captain, and his Men,
With demonstrations of due Courtesy.
Mean time APOLLO in the Sea did pen
The golden day, and down to sleep does lie
Leaving his Sister so much Torch to burn
As may suffice the World till he return.
57.
With unexpected joy their hearts on floate,
Blithely they pass the Night in the tired Fleet;
To think that in a Country so remote
The news so long desired they should meet.
Within themselves they ruminate, and noate
The men's odd fashion, and admire to see it,
Or how a People of their damned way
Could take such root, and bear so vast a sway.
58.
The silver Moon's reverberated Ray
Trembled upon the Crystal Element;
Like Flowers in a great Meade, at middle May,
The stars were in the azure Firmament.
The furious Winds all hushed and sleeping lay
In drowzy Hyperborean Caves dark-pent
Yet those of the Armada do not sleep,
But in their turns accustomed watches keep.
59.
And when AURORA left her Spicy Bed,
Shaking her deawy locks the Earth upon;
And drawing, with a lilly-hand, the red
Transparent Curtains of the waking Sun,
To work go All; over the Decks to spread
The shadowing Sails, and all their Streamers d*on,
To entertain with feasting and with joy
(Advancing in his Barge) the Isle's VICEROY.
60.
Merrily sailing he advanced, to see
The Lusitanian-Frigates in the Road,
With fresh provisions from the Land: For He
Still hopes, they are of that inhumane Brood,
Which, from their mountains near the CASPIAN SEA,
The fruitful Lands of ASIA overflowed;
And, by permission of the POWER DIVINE,
Usurpt the Empire of GREAT CONSTANTINE.
61.
The Captain, with a mien benevolent,
Receives the MOORE, and all his company.
Things of great price he does to Him present,
For such Occasions carried purposely:
Gives him Preserves, and gives him of that queint
Unusual liquor which gives jollity.
The MOORE receives it all in courteous part,
But what he Eats and Drinks most glads his heart.
62.
The nimble Lusitanian Mariners
Upon the shrowds in admiration hung,
To see a mode so different from theirs,
And barbarous gibbrish of that broken Tongue.
No less confused the subtle MOORE appears,
Eying their color, habit, and ships strong.
Then, asking all things; This, amongst the rest,
If happily they came from TURKEY, pressed.
63.
Moreover, to behold desires He
The Books of their Religion, Law, and Faith:
To see, if with his own the same agree
Or that of CHRIST (as he suspects) he says.
And (that he All may note, and All may see)
He prays the Captain, show him what he has
Of Arms, which by his Nation used are
When with their Enemies they go to War.
64.
To whom the valiant Captain made reply
By one well ver^ed in that Bastard-Tongue:
Illustrious Lord, I shall to thee descry
My Self, my Faith, and the Arms I bring along.
Neither of Turkish-blood nor breed, am I;
Nor of a Country that delights in wrong.
In fair and warlike EUROPE was I born,
I seek the famous Kingdoms of the MORN.
65.
We worship HIM, who is by every Nature,
( Invisible, and visible) obay'd,
HIM, who the Hemispheres, and every Creature,
(Insensible, and sensible) has made:
Who gave Us his, and took on Him our feature:
Whom to a shameful death his own betrayed:
And who from HEAVEN to Earth came down in fine,
That Man, by HIM from Earth to HEAVEN might climb.
66.
Of this GOD-MAN sublime, and infinite,
The Books which thou desir st I have not brought,
For that in Books we need not bring that Writ,
Which (written in our Hearts) we have by rote.
For the Arms, whereof thou have desired to git
A sight, with all my heart I do allow't,
To see them as a Friend; For well I know,
Thou never wilt wish to see them as a Foe.
67.
This having said, the ready- Officers
He does command to show the Magazeen.
Out come the Backs, and Breasts, glittering and terse;
Fine Mayles, safe Coats, with quilted plates between;
Bucklers, where various Imagerie appears;
Ball, Lead, and Iron; Muskets of Steel sheen;
Strong Bows, and Quivers with barbd Arrows wedged;
Sharp Partesans; and Halberts double edged.
68.
The morter-pieces come; and with them came
(Confounding where they light) Grenades dire;
Yet would he not permit the sons of Flame
Unto the dreadful Cannon to give fire.
For valiant spirits (which are still the same
With generous) to boast their utmost Ire,
To few, and timid souls, cannot endure
"To be a LION among Sheep, it is poor.
69.
But now the MOORE from what he heard and viewed,
(All which he did observe attentively)
Conceived within his Breast a certain feud,
A root of Envy, and Malignity;
Yet no such thing his outward gestures showed:
But, with a smiling hollow Courtesy,
He with himself resolves to treat them fair,
Till he his purpose may by deeds declare.
70.
Pilots the Captain at his hands does pray,
His Ships as far as INDIA to guide:
Assuring him they shall with ample pay
For all their pains therein be satisfy'de.
The MOORE consents; but still the poison lay
Close, where it was, invenoming his side:
For, had he power of blasting with his breath,
Instead of Pilots, he would give him death.
71.
So great the hate was, and so great the spite,
Which to the strangers suddenly he took;
Knowing they follow that unerring light,
The SON OF DAVID holds out in his BOOK.
"O the deep secrets of that INFINITE
"Into the which no mortal eye can look!
"That They, whom THOU to be thy friends have chose
"Should never be without perfidious Foes.
72.
The trech'rous MOORE, when he his fill had seen,
Departs from the Frigates with his Crew
(As false in heart, as flattering in his mien)
And feigned Regards on all the Seamen threw.
Through the short Traverse of the humid Green
The Boats had quickly cut, when, wellcom'd to
The shore, and met by an obsequious Train,
To his known House they wait him back again.
73.
The famous THEBAN from the ethereal Hall
( He, in his Thigh, whom JOVE his Father bore)
Seeing this meeting with the PORTINGALL
Is an abomination to the MORE;
Has in his Brain a Stratagem, which shall
(He hopes) destroy him quite upon that score.
Now whilst this plot is forging in his head,
Unto himself these angry words he sed;
74.
Is it already then by FATE ordained,
That so great Victories, and so renowned,
Shall by the men of PORTUGAL be gained
On warlike People, and on Indian Ground?
And I (son of the HIGHEST, unprofan'd
With carnal mixture, and in whom are found
Such rare Indowments) must I suffer FATE
To a mere man my honors to translate?
75.
Unto the son of PHILIP it is true
Such pow're the GODS did in those parts afford,
'Twas one with Him, to See, and to subdue,
And MARS himself did homage to his Sword.
But can it be endured, that to so Few
FATE such stupendous puissance should accord,
That that of MACEDON, of ROME, and MINE,
The LUSITANIAN GLORY should outshine?
76.
It must not, nor it shall not. For before
This Swabber shall arrive the wished Land,
I Will spin him such a Webb on yonder shore,
That he shall never see the Eastern-strand.
I Will down to Earth, and spur the enraged MORE:
"The Iron cooles that suffered is to stand.
"And who so means a business sure to make,
"He by the foretop must occasion take.
77.
Thus saying (vexed, and little less then mad)
Upon the Affrick-shore he did descend,
Where, in a humane shape and visage clad,
To neighboring PRASSUS he his course does bend.
The shape he took on him (thereby his bad
And false design the better to commend)
Was of a MOORE in MOZAMBIQUE known,
Old, wise, and with the GOVERNOR all one.
78.
And (entering to his Patron when he spy'de
The fittest season to infuse his guile)
He tells him; These, who in the Harbor ride,
Are men That live by robbery and spoil:
That Fame, from Nations ranged on the Seaside,
With hue and cry pursued them to their Isle,
Of whom these Vagabonds a Booty made
When they had anchored with pretense of Trade.
79.
Moreover I would have thee know (quoth He)
These bloody CHRISTIANS (as I understand)
With Flames and Pyracies have filled the Sea,
As well as with their Robberies the Land;
And that they have it in design, how We
May be reduced too to their proud command:
How they may rob us of our goods, and lives,
And take for Slaves our children, and our Wives.
80.
And this I know, to morrow by day-breake
To come on shore for water they intend,
Armed, with their Captain: Can Men plainer speak?
"They mischief mean, to fear it, who pretend.
Thou, armed with thine, the same advantage take;
Them in close ambush quietly attend:
Who, thinking to catch thee at unawares,
Will come with ease to fall into thy snares.
81.
And, should it so fall out, that by this feat
They should not wholly be destroyed, and slain;
Another Plot (the which will give thee great
Content, I Am sure) I have within this Brain.
Send them a Pilot, skill d so in deceit,
And how to lay an undiscerned Train,
That he may lead them blinded, where they may
Be killed, wreckt, severed, or quite lose their way.
82.
This said by Him, who played so well the MOORE
Whom years and Fraud made wise to obviate Harms;
Thanking him much for his advice mature,
About his Neck the ZEQUE throws his arms.
And from that instant bids his Bands be sure
To be all ready for the Morn's Allarmes.
That so, when land the LUSITANIAN should,
He may convert their water into blood.
83.
Farther (to effect that other false device)
A Moorish Pilot he did ready git,
Subtle, dissembling, and in mischief wise,
To whom so great a Trust he might commit.
Him, through such Seas, where such and such Coast lies,
He bids to guide the Lusitanian Fleet,
That, should the danger in one place be past,
It may be sure to perish at the last.
84
Now visited the Apollinean Ray.
The Nabathean mountains with a smile,
When GAMA with his men themselves array
To go and fetch fresh water from the Isle.
Placed with good order in the Boats are They,
As he had known of the intended guile;
And in a sort he did so: "For the Wise
"Have a divining soul that never lies.
85.
Moreover for the Pilot he had sent
To land before, in need whereof he stood;
To which the sound of Warlike Instrument
Was all the answer he had understood.
For this, As likewise, to be confident
Of a false Nation being never good,
He went as well provided as he could
With no more people then three Boats could hold.
86.
But the keen MOORS (pickeering on the Strand
To keep them from the Fountain's thirsted draught,
With Buckler on one Arm, and dart in hand,
Another with bent Bow, and poisoned Shaft)
Stay for the valiant PORTINGALLS to land,
In secret Ambush others hid with craft:
And send (to make them think the business sure)
A small Forlorn, as Faulkners throw their Lure.
87.
On the white Beaches the black Warriors prance,
Waving and vap'ring all the Level over;
And with heaved Target, and with threat'ned Lance,
Dare the bold PORTINGALLS to come on shore.
The noble people have not patience
To see the dogs grin at them any more.
But spring in Covey, with such equal have
One could not say which landed first, or last.
88.
So a brisk Lover in the bloody PLACE
(His beauteous Mistress by in a Balcon)
Seeks out the Bull, and (planted face to face)
Curvets, runs, whistles, waves, and toles him on;
But the stern Brute, even in a moment's space
(His horned Brow lowed to the Earth) does run
Bellowing about like mad; and (his eyes shut)
Dismounts, strikes, kills, and tramples underfoot.
89.
Lo, from the ships the Flames out of the hard
And furious Cannon rolled, to Heaven rise!
The Bullets murder, whom the Sound but scared:
The hissing Air, struck, bandies back the noise.
The MOORS hearts melt in them, they are so feared;
And the same passion chills their blood to Ice.
Now He, That lay in hidden ambush, flies:
And He, That ventured the Encounter, dies.
90.
The Lusitanian People rest not here:
But, following their success, destroy and slay.
The Wall-less-Town, and timber-Houses there,
They waste with fire, and flat with Cannon lay.
His sally now the MOOR repents full deer,
For which he thought a cheaper price to pay.
Now he blasphemes the War, curses ill luck,
The Old devil, and the dam that gave him suck.
91.
The flying MOORS their Javelins backward threw
Faintly, through fear, and haste of their Retreat.
The Flint, the Stake, the Stone in folio flew.
" Anger makes all things weapons, when it is heat.
Now, to the Victor leaving the Isle too,
Unto the Continent they frighted get.
The Sea's small Arm, that does their Isle embrace,
They cut and traverse in a little space.
92.
Some leap with their best goods into the Boats;
Some with their natural Oars swim to the shore;
This sinks into the crooked waves, then floats;
That puffs the Sea out, he new drank before.
The ^owred Bullets from the Cannon-Throats
The brutish peoples brittle Vessels tore.
Thus did the PORTINGALLS in fine chastise
The falshoodof malicious Enemies.
93.
To the Armada Victors they return
With the rich spoils and booty of the War.
Water they may have now to serve their turn
At their own time without control, or bar.
The MOORS (fresh smarting with their losses) burn
With greater malice then before by far:
And, seeing so much unrevenged shame,
Set their whole Rest upon the After-game.
94.
The Governor of that infamous Land
To sue for Peace (as if repenting) sent.
Nor do the LUSITANIANS understand
That, under show of peace, worse war is meant:
For the desired Pilot (underhand
Instructed in his treacherous intent)
In token of the Peace which he did crave
He sends to be their Pilot to the Grave.
95.
The Captain (who already understood
*It Was time to go his discontinued way,
And that the weather and the wind are good
To carry him for wished INDIA)
Receives the Pilot with a cheerful mood:
And the Envoye, who did his answer stay,
Dispatched in haste (his mind is in the sky)
To the large Wind lets all the Canvas fly.
96.
Departed in this wise, the azure Waters
Of AMPHITRITE cuts the warlike Fleet,
Attended by a Troop of NEREUS'S daughters
(sweet Friends, and no less constant, then they are sweet)
The Captain (thought-less of those devilish matters
Which in his Brain the subtle MOOR does knit)
Touching all INDIA, and the Coasts they past,
Informs himself by Him from first to last.
97.
But the MOOR well instructed in deceit
(To whom his lesson spightful BACCHUS gave)
Prepares for Him, e're he to INDIA get,
New Ills, either of Thraldom, or a Grave.
Giving account of Indian Harbors yet,
He shows him All that ever he did crave;
That (judging Truth what he in that confessed)
The valiant People may not doubt the rest
98.
And then he tells him (with the same intent
With which false SYNON witcht the men of TROY)
There is an Isle, not far from where they went,
Which ancient CHRISTIANS from all times enjoy.
The Captain (who to all he told him lent
Attentive Ear) at this so sprang with joy,
That he conjured him with a golden spell
To guide him speedy where those CHRISTIANS dwell.
99.
This very thing the trech'rous MOOR designed
Which the deluded CHRISTIAN does entreat,
Those, who possessed this Isle, being ^he blind
Disciples of the filthy MAHOMET.
Here death, and certain Ruin, he shall find
(As he believes) for a far more strong and great,
Then MOZAMBIQUE, is this Isle; by name
QUILOA: frequent in the mouth of Fame.
100.
To It the joyful Fleet he did incline.
But She, whose Altars in CYTHERA steam,
(Seeing him go astray from his right line,
To meet a death of which he does not dream)
Permits not those in so remote a Clyme
To perish, whom she does so much esteem:
And puts them, with contrary winds, besides
The Place to which the trayt'rous Pilot guides.
101.
Then the base MOOR, when he did plainly find
He could not work the Villainy he meant;
Spawning another mischief in his mind,
And always constant to his black intent:
Tells him, that, since the waves are so unkind
To put them by the Port to which they bent,
There lies another Island hard before,
Where mixed live the CHRISTIAN, and the MORE.
102.
Likewise in this the shameless Villain ly'de
(As his Instructions were in fine to do)
For not a Christian-Soul did there reside
But All of MAHOMET'S detested Crew.
The Captain (who in all believed his Guide)
Made a short task to bring his ships thereto:
But (his protecting Angel saying, nay)
Past not the Bar, and anchors in the Bay.
103.
This Isle lay to the Continent so near
That a small Chanel only ran between:
In front thereof a City did appeer
Upon the Margent of the OCEAN green:
Fair and Majestical the Buildings were,
At a far distance plainly to be seen:
Ruled by an aged King. MOMBASSA, all
The Isle; the Town too they MOMBASSA call.
104.
And near the same the Captain being come
Is much rejoyc't: There looking to behold
People, That had received their Christendom,
As the false Pilot promised him he should.
When lo, Boats coming from the King, with some
Provisions to the ships! For He was told
Of such a Fleet by BACCHUS long before
Taking the figure of another More.
105.
Such the Provisions were, as Friends send Friends,
But there is poison hidden in the Bait.
Of Enemies their thoughts are and their ends,
As will be too much manifested straight.
"O the perpetual danger which attends
"The lot of Mortals! O uncertain State!
"That, where our trust seems to be anchored sure,
"We are not safe, although we are secure.
106.
"By Sea; how many Storms, how many Harms,
" Death in how many several fashions dressed!
"By Land; how many Frauds, how many Allarms,
"Under how many wants sunk, and oppressed!
" Where may a frail man hide him? in what Arms
"May a short life enjoy a little Rest?
"Where Sea, and Land, where Guile, the Sword, and Dearth,
"Will not all arm against the least worm o'th Earth?
End of the first Canto.
Second Canto.
STANZA. 1.
NOw was the glorious Guilder of the Pole,
Who into hours distinguishes the DAY,
Come to his temperate and desired Gole,
From Mortals hiding his celestial Ray;
And GOD NOCTURNUS to descending SOL
Of THETYS'S private Chamber turned the Kay:
When to the ships the faithless People rowed
Which were new-anchor'd in MOMBASSA'S Road.
2.
Amongst them One (who had it in command
To Sugar over the poison) thus began.
Undaunted Captain, That with Keel have span'd
The spaces of the briny OCEAN;
The noble King of this renowned Land
At thy arrival is an o'rejoy'd Man:
The sum and height of whose Ambition is,
But to behold and serve thee with what is his.
3.
And, for he longs indeed thy Face to see,
As One's, whose name Fame glories to repeat;
Within the Bar, without suspicion, Thee
With all thy ships to come; he does entreat.
Also, because thy Men must wearied beee
Through so long Toil, and so excessive great,
He says, thou may refresh them on the shore
Which humane Nature does delight in more.
4.
Moreover, if thou seek for Merchandise
Produced by the Auriferous LEVANT;
Cloves, Cinnamon, and other burning Spyce;
Or any good or salutiferous Plant;
Or, if thou seek bright Stones of endless price,
The flaming Ruby, and hard Adamant:
Hence thou may All in such abundance bear,
That thou may bound thy wish and Voyage Here.
5.
The Captain by the Bearer did return
His humble thanks unto the King, and said;
Because the Sun already did adjourn
His Royal pleasure was not straight obayd:
But at the first disclosing of the Morn,
Whereby the Anchors might be safely weighed,
With all assurance he would Enter, since
He was obliged to more for such a Prince.
6.
He asks him afterward, if in the Isle
Are CHRISTIANS, as the Pilot certify'de;
The subtle Messenger, (who smelt the Wile)
Most of the Isle believe in CHRIST, reply'de.
With this, all jealousy he did exile,
And wise suggestion of the soul decride
In the strange Captain; Resting now secure,
In a false Nation, and a Sect impure.
7.
Yet, out of such as (having been condemned
For faults and horrid mischiefs done at home)
Had their lives given them only to the end
For desp rate services with Him to come,
Two of the prime and craftiest Heads, to send
With the deceiptful MOORS, he picked* By whom
To spy the Town, and what their strength might be,
And note those CHRISTIANS, whom he yearns to-see.
8.
And He by them sent presents to the King,
Through which the Friendship to himself pretended
Might be soft, pure, and without wavering,
Nothing of which was by the King intended.
Now was the wicked and perfidious Ging.
Gone from the ships, and through the waves contended.
The two of the Armada, with a faign*d
Alacrity, on shore were entertained.
9.
And when they had delivered to the King
The Presents, with the message, which they brought,
They walked the Town: But no discovering
The half of what to have observed they thought*
For the suspicious Moors, not every thing
Would show to them, which They to see besought.
"Where malice reigns, there Jealousy does nest,
"Which does suppose it in Another Breast.
10.
But He, who has perpetual Youth, and Mirth
In his plump Cheeks, ruddy with blood and wine,
And from two mothers took his wondrous birth;
Who for the ships spun all this snare so fine;
Disguised into a Creature of the Earth,
Was in a House within the City's line,
Feigning himself a man of Christian lore,
And decked an Altar where he did adore.
11.
On It, the picture of that Shape he placed
In which the HOLY SPIRIT did alight:
The picture of the Dove (so white, so chaste)
On the BLESSED VIRGIN'S head, so chaste, so white.
The SACRED TWELVE sat figured all aghast,
More wondering at themselves, then at the sight;
As Those, who knew, what only did inspire
Their various Tongues, was those fallen TONGUES OF FIRE.
12.
The two Companions (carried by design
Where BACCHUS was in this deceitful guize)
Their knees devoutly to the Earth incline,
And raise their hearts to Him That Is in the skies.
Gums of the oderiferous and divine
PANCHAYA; Gums, in which the PHOENIX dies,
LYEUS burnt: from whence it does ensue,
That the false God came to adore the true.
13.
Here entertained and carest that night,
With all good Treatment, and Reception fair,
Were the two Christians: heedless of the slight
By which with holy show deceived they were.
But when the Sun displayed his glorious light
(Having dispatched before him through the Air
Old TYTHON'S youthful Consort, to proclaim
With Blushes to the world her Gallant came.)
14.
The MOORS return, who to the City went,
With Orders from the King for entering There:
With them, the Couple whom the Captain sent,
To whom the King appeared a Friend sincere.
So that (assured there is no Evil meant
To PORTINGALLS, which he should need to fear,
And that CHRIST has some Sheep amongst those Wolv^s)
To enter the salt River he resolves.
15.
His own ENVOYEES say, they saw on shore
Religious Altars, and a holy Priest;
That they were nobly treated, and did snore
Till fair AURORA left her rosy nest,
Nor ought but joy, and welcome more, and more,
By King, or People, could they see expressed:
So that to doubt a thing so fair, and clear,
No ground of reason did to them appeer.
16.
Therefore the noble GAMA did receive
With open arms the MOORS That came aboard:
For wariest minds it is easy to deceive
When words and deeds so seemingly accord.
His Ship is crammed with faithless folk, who leave
The Boats which brought them, ty'de to it with long Cord.
Blithe they are all, as Those that understand
They have the Prey as sure as in their hand.
17.
Weapons, and Ammunition of the War,
They have on Land prepared secretly;
That, when the Ships are anchored past the Bar,
They may invade them, bold, and suddenly,
And, by this treachery, resolved they are
To ruin Those of LUSUS totally;
Making them (unexpected) to pay, so,
The score which they in MOZAMBIQUE owe.
18.
Hoysting the holding Anchors, the ships Men
In the accustomed Nautick clamor joined.
To third the Barr's Land-marke they board it then,
Giving the fore-sails only to the Wind.
But fair DIONE (never absent, when
The gallant Folk need her in any kind)
Seeing so near so cruel a surprise,
From HEAVEN to The Ocean like an Arrow flies.
19.
She calls together NEREUS'S snowy daughters,
With all the azure Flock That haunts the deeps;
(For, being born from the salt-Sea, the Waters
In her obedience as their Queen she keeps)
And, telling them the Cause that thither brought her,
With all in Squadrons to that part she sweeps
Where the ships are, to warn them come, no nigh,
Or they shall perish fundamentally.
20.
Now through the Ocean in great haste they flunder,
Raising the white foam with their silver Tails.
CLOTO with bosom breaks the waves in sunder,
And, with more fury then of custom, sails;
NISE runs up an end, NERINE (younger)*
Leaps over them, frizled with her touching Scales:
The crooked Billows (yielding) make a lane
For the feared NYMPHS to post it through the Maine.
21.
Upon a TRITON'S back, with kindled Face,
The beauteous ERICYNA furious rode.
He, to whose fortune fell so great a grace,
Feels not the Rider, proud of his fair load*
Now were they almost come upon the place
Where a stiff gale the warlike Navy blowed.
Here they devide, and in an instant cast
Themselves about the Ships advancing fast.
22.
The Goddess, with a party of the rest,
Lays her self plum against the Am'ral's Prow,
Stopping her progress with such main contest
That the swollen sail the Wind in vain does blow.
To the hard Oak she rivets her soft Breast,
Forcing the strong ship back again to go.
Others (beleagu'ring) lift it from the Wave,
It from the Bar of Enemies to save.
23
As to their Storehouse when the Houswife Ants,
Carrying the unequal Burdens placed with slight
To their small shoulders (lest cold Winter's wants
Surprise them helpless) exercise their might;
This tugs, that shoves, one runs, another pants;
Strength far above their size, they All unite:
So toil the Nymphs, to snatch and to defend
The men of LUSUS from a dismal end.
24.
The ship (enforced contre) goes back, back,
In spite of those she carries, who with Cries
Handle the Sayls. They fume, their wits they lack;
From side to side the shifted Rudder flies.
The skillful Master from the Poop does crack
His Lungs in vain, for in the Sea he spies
A horrid Rock just just before the Ship,
Threatening a Wreck should she advance a step.
25.
Here the rude saylors raise a Cry indeed,
As they are busy at their work. The MORE
This hideous clamor strikes with such a dread,
As when in horrid fight the Cannons roar.
From them the cause of all this fury's hid:
Nor whom t'approach know They, or what t'implore.
They think their treachery is made appeer,
And that for it they must be punished here.
26.
Lo! in the twinkling of an Eye some dart
Themselves into their speedy Boats agin:
Others betake them to their swimming Art,
Making the Sea leap up as they plump in.
They vaut over the ship-sides from every part,
So mainly are they frighted with the din:
Advent'ring rather to the OCEAN, so,
Then to the hands of a provoked Foe.
27.
As Froggs (in ancient Ages Lycian-Folkes,
Confined to live in Water, they deny'de)
If, basking heedless on the Banks, or Rocks,
Some Person on the sudden they have spy'de,
Skip back again, and fill the Pond with croakes,
Flying the danger which they have descride;
And (scaping to their Sanctuary known)
Show above Water their black heads alone.
28.
So fly the MOORS. And so the Pilot (who
To this great peril had misled the Ships)
Thinking his Treason was discovered too,
Into the briny water, flying, skips.
But that fixed Rock to escape and to exchue,
Which the sweet life might drive out of their lips,
The Admiral threw straight an anchor out;
And close to her the others likewise do it.
29.
Th'observing GAMA, seeing the great fright
And unexpected of the MOORS; withal
The Pilots sudden and accusing flight,
Found what the brutish Folk hatched in their gall:
And seeing, how in spite of wind, in spite
Of Tide (both with him) and in spite of all
Their Art, the Ship would not advance a head
(Holding it for a miracle) thus sed.
30.
O great, undreamt of, strange deliverance!
O Miracle most clear and evident!
O fraud discovered by blind Ignorance!
O faithless Foes, and Men devlishly bent!
"What Care, what Wisdom, is of suffisance
"The stroke of Secret mischief to prevent,
"Unless the SOVEREIGN GUARDIAN from on high
"Supply the strength of frail Humanity?
31.
Well into Us has PROVIDENCE infused
What little safety in these Ports is known:
Well have we found how much we were abused
With shows of Friendship, and Religion.
But since to humane Prudence is refused
To pierce intents, and where such masks are on;
O thou (GUARDIAN DIVINE) to guard Him daigne,
Who without Thee does guard himself in vain.
32.
And since thy heart is touched with so great Ruth
For a poor People wandering on the Seas,
As of thy goodness (whence alone it does
Proceed) to save us from such Wolves as these;
Unto some Haven now, where there is Truth,
Resolve to lead us for a little Ease;
Or show us to the long desired Coast,
If for thy honor we desire it most.
33.
These pious words the fair DIONE heard
And (to compassion being moved thereby)
Goes from among the NYMPHS, who sad appeared
That they must loose so soon her company.
Now does she pierce the Stars; now in the therd
Sphere, she is entertained: whence by and by
(Having reposed her) she does forward move
Toward the Sixth, where is her Father JOVE.
34.
And (ruffled with her motion) now so fair,
So fresh, so gay, so lovely is her look;
That Stars, and Heaven, and circumfused Air,
And All That see her are with passion took.
Her Eyes (the Nests of CUPID whom she bare)
Breathed such quick Spirits, and such fire they struck;
They burn the World again like PHAETON,
And to the torrid turn the frigid Zone.
35.
And (to bewitch her Sovereign Sire the more,
Whose dearling she was always, and his joy.)
She comes to JOVE, as she had done of yore
In the Idean Grove to Him of TROY.
The Huntsman who the Horns (transformed) wore,
For seeing thus that other GODDESS coy;
Had he seen this, had never been torn asunder
By his own dogs: But di'de of love, and wonder.
36.
The golden Tresses on her shoulders fell,
Whose whiteness smuts the Fleece of nnfaln Snow:
Her Breasts (and those even their own milk excel)
Played with by unseen CUPID, trembling go:
Her Cesto's white does mounting flames expel,
Which, that Boy kindling, those white bellows blow:
Of this fair Pyle the Pillars smooth, and round,
Desires, like Ivy, have about them wound*
37.
Those parts, of which Shame is the natural Screen,
In a thin Veil of Sarcenet she does fold;
Not wholly showed, nor wholly left unseen,
Not Prodigal, nor niggard, of that Gold.
But this transparent Curtain draws between,
To double the desire, by being controlled.
Now HEAVEN is filled with jealousy, and love:
This moved in MARS, in VULCAN that did move.
38
And then, discov'ring in her Angels face
A Sadness tempered with a little smile,
Like some nice Dame, who by the rude embrace
Of heedless Lover got a bruise, or soil;
She Is pleased and angry in one instant space,
And one while chides, and laughs another while:
So spoke the GODDESS who admits no Peer
Less sad, then Minion, to her Father deer.
39.
O powerful Father, I had always thought
That, for such things on which my heart were set,
Kind I should find thee, affable, and soft,
Though some opposer should the same regret.
But since I see, without neglect, or fault
Of mine, thy love is bated in the heat;
What remedy? let BACCHUS have his will:
In fine, his luck was good, and mine is ill.
40.
This People (who are mine, for whom I por^
These tears out, which I see in vain distill)
The more I love, I seem to hate the more;
Thou being resolved to break me of my will.
For Them I weep to thee, for them implore,
And against my Fate in fine am fighting still.
Well then, because I love them they re misused,
Il hate them, then they will be better used.
41.
But let them dye by brutish Peoples hands;
For since I was -- and here with pearly drops
(As when the morning's-dew on Roses stands)
Making a salt Parenthesis, she stops:
As if her words obeyed not her commands,
Through melting pity of the men's mishaps.
Then (going to proceed where she gave over)
The mighty THUND'RER lets her say no more.
42.
And, moved by that dumb Rhet'rick (which would move
A Tigers flinty Breast) with the same Face
Of cheerfulness, with which he does remove
The Clouds from that of HEAVEN, and Tempests chase,
He wipes her Tears, and (kindling with new love)
Kisses her Cheek, her white Neck does embrace.
Who, had he hated PORTUGAL before,
Would now have loved it merely on her score.
43.
And (pressing her loved face with his) SHE burst
Into fresh Tears, and faster then before:
As when, a child being beat by mother cursed,
The more one moans it, it will sob the more.
Now, to allay this Passion, He is forced
To tell her much which he till then forbore:
And, with these words, out of the secret womb
Of pregnant FATE, rips many things to come.
44.
Fair daughter mine, fear no adversity
Which to thy LUSITANIANS may betide;
Nor Any, to have greater povv're with me
Then the svveet Tears which from these clear Springs glide
For, let me tell thee ( daughter) thou shall see
Both GREEKS and ROMANS (so much magnify'de)
Forfeit their ancient Honors by the New
Acts, which this People in the East shall do.
45.
For if the Eloquent ULYSSES fled,
The SIRENS Song, and dire CALYPSO'S spell;
And if ANTENOR with his ship did thread
The Illyrian-Sleeve, and reached TIMAUUS'S Well;
And if 'twixt SCYLLA, and CHARIBDIS dread,
Pious ENEAS with his Navy fell:
How much worse dangers pass Thine daily over,
Who, sailing round the world, new worlds discover?
46.
Thou shall see (daughter) Cities, and strong Ports,
And lofty Walls, which These shall build, and found;
Thou shall see warlike TURKS, and their proud Forts,
By These destroyed and levelled with the ground:
The INDIAN KINGS (secure in their free Courts)
By a more potent KING Thou shall see bound.
He, in conclusion holding All in awe,
Unto that LAND shall give a better Law.
47.
This very Man, who now, through so much fright
And misty Error, stumbles to the YND,
Thou shall see NEPTUNE tremble at his sight,
Curling his waves without a breath of wind.
O wonderful, nor seen by mortal Wight,
The Winds locked up, and yet a Storm to find:
O valiant People, and for great things made,
Who makes the ELEMENTS themselves afraid.
48.
That LAND, which water late to Him deny'de,
Thou shall behold it a commodious Port,
Where in their way to rest them shall abide
The Ships that (weary) from the WEST resort.
All this wyl'd Coast in fine (which now has try'de
By wicked treachery to cut him short)
Shall pay him Tribute; knowing they must down*
If they withstand the LUSITANIAN CROWN.
49.
And Thou shall see the ERYTHREAN, lose
It Is native red, and pale with Terror look:
And see the potent Kingdom of ORMUS*E
Twice taken, twice subdu'de unto their yoke:
And see the furious MOOR stand in a Muze
With his reverberated Arrows struck:
That he may learn, if against Thine he fight;
His Treachery on his own pate shall light.
50.
The famous Fort of DIO Thou shall see,
Being twice besieged, thy People twice defend.
T^ere will their prowess manifested be,
There will their name in Arms to HEAVEN extend,
There will they bring great MARS under their Lee
With deeds which, told, would set the Hayr on end.
There will the falling MOOR blaspheming ban,
And dam with his last breath the ALCORAN.
51.
Thou shall see GOA taken from the MOOR,
GOA, That by her loss at last shall gain;
When, on the wings of Conquest made to soar,
She, as the QUEEN OF ALL THE EAST shall reign.
The stubborn GENTILES (who the Sun adore)
High and triumplant then, she shall restrain
With a rough Bitt, and All who in that LAND
Against thy People dare to lift a Hand.
52.
Slenderly manned, and in poor order put;
Thou shall see held the Fort of CANANOWR;
And shall see won the City. CALICUT,
In People infinite, boundless in pow*r;
And in COCHIN shall see such honor got
By one, shall stand in battle like a Tower,
That never Lyre a Victor did resound,
Who so deserved to be with Laurel crowned.
53.
Never was so LEUCATE of a flame
With shocking Fleets, when gilding with their Trim
The Actian waves) Hence young OCTAVIUS came,
Bringing Italian powers along with Him;
Thence ANTHONY (with a fresh Victor's name
Barbarians from the ORIENT, from NYLE'S brim,
And from the farthest BACTRIA; and (the bane
Of All!) the Egyptian Mistress in the Train.
54.
As thou shall see the Sea, and neighboring Shores,
Fire with thy Peoples Battails. Who, in bands
Shall coupled lead IDOLATERS with Mores
(Triumphing over many Tongues and Lands)
And (GOLDEN CHERSONESUS'S precious stores
To farthest CHINA conquered by their hands
With the EAST'S outmost Islands, in the end
Make all the OCEAN to their TAOUS bend.
55.
In so much (daughter mine) that, at the rate
This Nation's valor passes humane bound,
The WORLD has not to match them in debate,
From silver GANGES, to th'HERCULEAN SOUND;
Nor, from the Northern Ocean, to that straight
Which the affronted LUSITANIAN found;
Though all the ancient HERO'S (deifide)
Should rise again to have the mastry try'de.
56.
This having said, his consecrated Poast
(The son of MAY) down to the Earth he sends,
To find some peaceful Port upon that Coast
Where the Armada may repose with Friends.
And (lest the valiant Captain should be lost,
If longer time he at MOMBASSA spends)
He gives his Legate farther in command
To show him in his sleep that friendly Land.
57.
Now swift CYLLENIUS cuts it through the Air:
Now to the Earth his winged feet declined.
Badge of his office, the black Rod he bare:
This HELL'S sad Prisoners does release, and bind:
This lays asleep the Eye oppressed with Care:
Whisking with this he does outstrip the Wind:
His Hat of maintenance upon his Crown:
And thus he comes into MELINDE's Town.
58.
With him he carries 'FAME, that she may tell
The Lusitanian prowess, and rare parts:
"For an illustrious Name is a strange Spell
"To attract Love, and good Report has darts.
Thus he prepares their way with a sweet smell,
And takes up lodgings in the Peoples hearts.
Now all MELINDE is on fire, to see
What kind of men these valiant souls should be.
59.
From thence he parts to MOMBASSA straight,
Where, what to do, the Ships uncertain stand;
To bid them, without question or debate,
Leave that Foes Harbor, and suspected Land.
"For wicked plottings of infernal hate
"In vain are Force and Courage to withstand:
"In vain, to extricate our selves, is Wit,
"If HEAVEN do not both prompt, and second, it.
60.
Now sable NIGHT had finished half her Race,
And in the Heaven the Stars with borrowed light
Supplied the Moon's, as She her Brother's, place;
And sleeping now was Mortals whole delight.
The Illustrious Captain (who had all that space
Been kept awake about the last day's fright)
Gave then to his tired Eyes a little sleep:
The rest by Quarters did their Watches keep:
61:
When in a Vision he did HERMES see.
And fly ( he bid him) LUSITANIAN fly
The Ambush of a wicked King, which He
Has laid, to make thee yet obscurely dye:
Fly, for the wind and Heaven Both favor Thee.
Thou have the Ocean calm, serene the sky,
And not far of another King, to friend,
On whose reality thou may depend.
62.
Look for no better entertainment here,
Then what was given by THRACIAN DIOMED;
Whose Horses (used to bloody Provendere)
He with the Bodies of his strangers fed.
Th'infamous Altars of BUSIRIS (where
His Guests inhumane humane offerings bled)
Unless thou quit it, look for in this place:
Fly a perfidious and a cruel Race.
63
Steer straight along the Coast, and thou shall light
Upon a Country where more Truth resides;
Close there, where burning SOL at constant hight
The night and day with equal line divides.
Then shall a King receive with much delight
Thee, and thy men; and give to you (besides
Safety, and Treatment worthy of a King)
One, who the Fleet shall unto INDIA bring.
64.
Thus HERMES; and the Captain (parting) woke.
He, rowz'd out of his Nest in a great fright,
Perceives the circumfused darkness broke
With a shot Ray and stream of divine light.
And (seeing it imports Him, and his Folk,
From that infamous LAND to take their flight)
Commands the Master, with a spirit new,
To hoyse the sails unto the Wind that blew.
65.
Set sail (he cride) set sail to the large Wind:
Heaven is our Guide, and GOD our course directs.
These Eyes saw the Express, he was so kind
To send from his high Court to guard our steps:
At this, the Mariners before, behind,
As with one motion spring upon the Decks.
They towe the Anchors in to the ship-side
With that rude strength which is the Sea-mans pride.
66.
The self-same time they did their Anchors weigh,
(Hid in the mask of night) the trech'rous MORE
Sawing their Cables hushed and silent lay,
So to destroy them being run ashore.
The CHRISTIANS (though there shone not the least Ray,
Yet) in their heads the Eyes of Lynces wore.
The other, finding how they were awake,
With Wings, and not with Oars, away did make.
67.
But now did the sharp Keels go cutting through
The liquid Element of silver pure:
The Wind ('it was a side-wind) gently it blew
With motion calm, and steady, and secure.
Discoursing, on their dangers past they chew
As they sail on: for it is not easy sure.
To pass in silence a deliverance
So great, and brought about as 'twere by chance.
68.
The burning Sun had finished one Career,
Began another, of his annual Race;
When, as far off as they could ken, appeer
Two Vessels creeping on the Water's face.
Knowing they must be MOORS, who coast it there,
Forthwith ours veer their Sails to give those chase.
One (as more nimble, or as frighted more)
To save her People ran herself ashore.
69.
Her Fellow (not so light to make away)
Into the hands of those of LUSUS falls,
Without or MARS to board her; or, to play
On her bruiz'd sides black VULCANS horrid Balls:
For (she being weakly manned, nor built for Fray)
At sight of his own Men the Master falls.
His courage, and his sails (His wisest course)
Had he resisted, he had fared the worse.
70
Then GAMA (who did this but to procure
A Pilot for the INDIES so long sought)
Amongst those MOORS thought to have found one sure,
But found he was deceived in that thought.
There Is not a man of them, That can assure
Under what part it is of the heav nly Vault.
This All can tell him; That MELINDE'S nigh,
Where he may find a Pilot certainly.
71.
The goodness of that KING the MOORS extol,
His bounteous nature, and his Breast sincere,
The greatness like the goodness of his Soul,
With other parts, which win him love, and fear.
The Captain easily believes the whole,
Concurring with that very Charactere.
HERMES had given in his sleep before:
So goes, bid by the dream, and by the MORE.
72.
That gladsome season 'twas, in which returns
Into EUROPA'S Ravisher the Sun;
Putting new lights in both his gilded Horns
Whilst FLORA pours out AMALTHEA'S one.
And now that glorious Planet turned the Morn's
Red finger, to that moving Feast; whereon
HE, who was dead the soul-sick world to heal,
To it is Redemption rose to put the Seal:
73.
When, to that distance from the which their Eyes
Might reach MELINDE, the Armada came;
Adorned with Tapistrie triumphant-wise,
As that day's holiness it well became.
The Standart trembles, and the Streamer flies,
The Scarlet- Wast-cloaths at a distance flame,
The Drums and Timbrels sound. Thus they that BAR,
Like CHRISTIANS enter, and like MEN OF WAR.
74.
With People hid is the Melindian shore,
That come to see the joyful Fleet. More kind
Are These, more humane, and of truth have more,
Then Those of all the Countries left behind.
The Lusitanian Navy drops, before,
The heavy Anchors, which fast rooting find.
One, of the MOORS they took, is sent on Land:
To let the KING their coming understand.
75.
The KING (who was already by report
Of those of LUSUS'S gallantry possessed)
The Captain's so frank entry in his Port
Takes as a favor from so brave a Guest:
And with true heart, and in most courteous sort
( Both individual from a noble Breast)
Bids the man pray them much to come on Land,
Where they shall have his Realms at their command.
76.
The offer as real is as it appears,
The words full of unfeigned Sincerity,
Which the KING sent the noble Cavaleers,
Who had past so much Land, and so much Sea.
He sends them more, Live-sheep aboard, fat Steers,
And Poultry crammed by Houswifes industry,
With all such Fruit as then in season was:
And the good will the Present did surpass.
77.
The well-pleased Moor, who with this Errand went,
The Captain pleased received, with what he brought;
And instantly another Present sent
Unto the KING, far fetched, and dearly bought:
Illustrious Starlet (color of content)
Brancht Coral fine, for Nobles greatly sought:
Of double nature under water soft
And velvet-horn'd, hard-pen'd when it is aloft.
78
Sends more, one dext'rous in the Arabick-Tongue,
To treat a firm League with the ROYAL MORE,
Excusing him he did not leave his strong
And lofty Ships, to kiss his hand on shore.
Unto the noble KING, led through a Throng
Presents himself the fit Ambassadore;
And with these words (which PALLAS herself dips
In her own Nectar) disunites his lips.
79.
Most high and mighty King, to whom the pure
And incorrupted JUSTICE from Above
Gave, to restrain the rough and haughty MOOR;
Nor more to force his Fear, then win his love:
As to the strongest Port, and most secure
Of all the EAST, Hither we fly; to prove
What FAME reports, and find in It and Thee,
A certain Port in our necessity.
80.
We are not Men, who, spying a weak Town
Or careless, as we pass along the shore;
Murder the Folks, and burn the Houses down,
To make a booty of their thirsted store:
But (by a KING we have, of high renown,
Sent from fair EUROPE, never to give ore
Our compassing the World, till we have found
The wealthy INDIA) thither are we bound.
81.
How stony yet some Race of People was!
What barbarous guize! what style of a Man-Hater!
To bar not their Ports only (let that pass)
But the cold Hospitality of Water!
To whom have we done wrong? wherein (alas!)
Have we discover d such a savage nature,
To make so many of so few afraid?
That Traps and Pitfals should for us be made.
82.
But Thou (O gracious KING) from whom, to have
True dealing we are sure; and hope, we may
That certain help too, which ALCINOUS gave
Unto the wandering Prince of ITHACA:
To Thee secure we come, as boldly crave
Of Thee, conducted by the Son of MAY:
For, since JOVES Harbinger was ours; it is clear,
Thy Heart is large, is humane, is sincere.
83.
Nor think (O KING) out noble Chief declined
Coming, to see and serve thee persnally,
For any thing he scrupled of unkind;
Or hollow dealing possible in Thee:
But the true reason, why he stayed behind,
Was, that in all he might obedient be
Unto his KING; who gave him this command
In Port, or Road, never to go on Land.
84.
And, because subjects are the self-same Thing
With Members governed by the Head, or Crown;
Thou, bearing here the Office of a KING,
Would not that Any disobeyed his own.
But, he does promise an acknowledging
Of thy great Grace and favors now bestown,
With all That can by Him and His be done,
So long as Rivers to the Sea shall run.
85.
Thus He harangu'd: And, with one Voice, the whole
Presence (comparing notes there where they stand)
The matchless courage of the men extol,
Who traverse so much Sea and so much Land.
But the wise KING (revolving in his Soul
The PORTINGALLS'S obedience to command)
In Scales of wonder and of reverence weighed
A KING, who so far off could be obeyed.
86.
Then answers (gracious) with a Brow serene
Th Ambassador, to whom inclined he seemed.
Wipe all suspicion from your Bosoms clean;
Let no cold Fear be harbour*d there, or teemed:
For such your worths are, and your deeds have been,
To make you over all the world esteemed.
And They who injured you, We will be bold,
Know not what price Virtue and Houor hold.
87.
That all your People do not come on shore
Observing the respect due to our Port,
Though in our own regard it grieve us sore,
Yet our esteem of them is greater for it.
For if your Rules permit it not, no more
Shall we permit, that (only to comport
With our desires) such loyal excellence
Should lose it self, or suffer Violence.
88.
But when to morrows light shall come, to greet
And show, the WORLD; with our own Barges, We
Shall go in person to the warlike Fleet,
Which we so many days have longed to see.
And, if it need any convenience meet,
Through shatt'ring storms, and keeping long at Sea,
A Pilot it may have, and Victnals here,
and Ammunition, with intention clear.
89.
This was his language, And LATONA'S Boy
Into the Ocean dived. The Messenger
(Returning with this Embassy of joy)
To the Armada rows with merry cheer.
Out of all Breasts is bauisht black Annoy,
Seeing the proper remedy is here
To find the Land whereof they sail in quest:
So all that night they keep a double Feast.
90.
There wants not there the artificial star
Like trembling Comet (nor less cause of wonder)
The Gunners do their Part, making the Air,
Water, and Earth, resound with Mortalls's Thunder.
The CYCLOPPS (practicing for the other War
On JOVE) with Bullets rend the Clouds in sunder.
Others on lofty Cornets (singing) played:
And These with Music did the SPHERES invade.
91.
They answer from the shore at the same time
With Squibs that crack amongst the Rout: In gyres
The whizzing Vapors up to HEAVEN climb:
The Imprisoned Powder with a bounce expires:
Heaven's brazen Vault echoes the Voyces's chyme:
The Sea's clear Glass reflects the joyful fires:
The Earth is not behind them. In this sort
Both sport in earnest, and Both fight in sport.
92.
But now the restless Heaven, wheeling about,
To their day-labours mortals does incite;
And MEMNON'S mother (fair APPOLLO'S scout)
Sets bounds to sleep by her arriving light;
With her approach dull shadows, Put to rout,
In a cold sweat upon the Flowers light;
When the MELINDIAN KING (embarked) plide
To see the Ships That in his Harbor ride.
93
The shores are crowned with people (of a fire
To be Spectators only of the show)
The Scarlet Coats flame with the dye of TIRE:
The glossie Silks with all May's flowers do blow.
Instead of Arrows (part of Warr's Attire)
And of the horned Moon-imitating Bow;
Palm in their hands, in sign of Peace, they bear:
Which on their Heads victorious HEROES wear.
94.
In a Canoe (which was both long and broad,
And glissend in the Sun with Cov'rings, made
Of mixed Silks) MELINDE'S KING is rowed*
Waited by Princes amongst their own obay'd.
In rich Attire (according to the mode
And custom of that Land) he comes arayd.
Upon his Head he wears a Terbant, rolled,
Of silk and Cotton, with a CROWN of gold.
95.
A Roabe, of Scarlet-damask, (high-extold
By Them, and worth the wearing of a KING)
About his Neck a Collar of pure gold:
The work worth twice the substance of the Thing.
A Velvet sheath a dagger keen did hold,
With Diamond-hilt, hanged by a golden string.
Sandals of Velvet on his Feet he wore,
With gold and pearl imbroydred richly over.
96.
Over Him a round Silk- Canopy he had
Advanced aloft upon a gilded Pole;
With which a Boy behind to burn forbad
Or trouble the Great KING, the beams of SOL.
Music ith'Prow, ^o merry that 'twas mad,
Grating the Ear with a harsh noise. The whole
Consort, is only crooked Horns, wreathed round,
Which keep no time, but make a dismal ^ound.
97.
No less adorned, the LUSITANIAN
From the Armada in his Boats does dance,
To meet Him of MELIND^ with a Train
Whom much their clothes, but more their deeds advance:
GAMA comes clad after the use of SPAIN,
But wears a Cassock ala mode de France:
The Stuff, a Florence-Satin; and the dye,
A perfect Crimson, glorious in their Eye.
98.
The Sleeves have golden Loops, which the Sunshine
Makes too too bright and slippry for the Eyes:
His close Camp-Trowzes lac't with the same mine,
Which Fortune to so many men denies:
Points likewise of the same, and Tagging fine,
With which his Doublet to his Hose he ties.
A Sword of massive Gold; in Hanger tide:
A Cap and Plume; the Cap set a toe side.
99.
Mong'st his Camrades, the noble Tyrian dye
(Not liv'ry-wise, but) sparcled here, and there,
The several Colors recreate the Eye:
So do the different Fashions which they wear.
Such their inamel'd Clothes Variety
(Comprised in one survey) as does appear
The painted Bow, in watercolors laid,
Of JUNOS Minion, the Thaumantian Maid.
100.
The rattling Trumpets, now, their joy augment
As, other times, they had their courage done.
The Moorish Boats covered the Sea, and went
Sweeping the Water with their silks Anon.
The Clouds of HEAVEN the thundering Cannon rent,
And with new Clouds of Smoke put out the Sun.
Before the Blow the winged lightning flies:
The MOORS'S hands stop their Ears, the lids their Eyes.
101.
Into the Captain's Boat the KING does come
(Folding him in his Arms) And He agin
With such respect and reverence, as become,
Does both receive, and speak unto, the KING.
A while with wonder and Amazement, dumb,
The MOOR on GAMA stands considering,
As He That highly does esteem the Man
Who came so far to seek the Indian Stran.
102.
Then makes him a large proffer, of whatever
To do him good his Kingdom can afford;
And that he freely would demand it there
As his own goods, if ought he lackt aboard.
Adds, though till now he saw the LUSIANS never
Yet he from FAME had heard much of their SWORD;
And how, in other Parts of AFRICA*
They have had wars with People of his way.
103.
And how through all that spacious LAND resown
The glorious Actions of that NATION,
When they therein did gain that Kingdom's Crown,
Where the HESPERIDES of old did won.
And most of That, which to the KING was known
(Although the least the PORTINGALLS had done)
He spread out thin in words, and magnifide:
But to the KING de GAMA thus reply'de.
104.
O great and gracious KING, who do (alone)
The Lusitanian People's sad estate,
(By NEPTUNE'S rage, and adverse Fortune, thrown
Into so many streights) Commiserate:
The KING OF KINGS (who, from the eternal Throne,
Turning HEAVEN round, did the round Earth create,
Since Mercy is his chiefest Attribute)
Reward thee for it, for We cannot do it.
105.
Thou only, of all Those APOLLO blacks,
In peace receiv'st us from the Ocean vast:
In Thee, from peril of Eolian Wracks,
We find a Refuge kind, sincere, and fast.
Whilst the Sun lights, whilst Night his presence lacks,
In HEAVEN'S blew Meade whilst Stars take their repast,
Where re I go, in either Hemisphere,
Thy Name, and Praises, shall be ^ounded there.
106.
This humbly said, toward the Fleet they row,
(The KING requesting that he now may see it).
Ship after Ship about it round they go:
That he of All may note all he thi^ks meet.
Lame VULCAN walks on ^ynstocks to and fro,
With which the Guns salute him from the Fleet.
The Trumpets play unto him in shril notes:
The MOORS with Cornets answer from the Boats*
107.
But when the generous King had ceast to Noate
All That he would, nor heard with little wonder
Th'unusual Instrument with the wide Throat
That speaks so big, and tears the Clouds in sunder;
He bids them (in the Sea anch'ring the Boat)
Suspend their (...), as they had done their thunder:
That he may know at large of brave DE GAME
Those things, which lightly he had heard from FAME.
108.
The MOOR does into several questions run,
With gust inquiring, sometimes of the great
And famous Wars between our NATION,
And Those who do believe in MAHOMET.
Now of the LAND we dwell in, which the Sun
Bids last good night, when he makes have to set;
Now, of the NATIONS which therewith confine;
Now of his ploughing through the Gulphs of Brine.
109.
But rather, valiant Captain (quoth the KING)
Make us a full and orderly narration
Under what Part of the C^LESTIAL RING,
Under what Clyme ye have your Habitation;
Also your ancient Generation's spring,
And, of a REALM so potent the Foundation;
With the successes of your Wars: For (though
I know them not) that they were vast I know.
110
Tell us besides, of all that tedious maze
Through which thon have been tossed with angry flaws
On the salt Seas, observing the strange ways
Of our rude AFRIC, and the barbarous Laws.
Tell; For the Horse of the new Sun, the DAY'S
Imbroydered Coasts with golden traces draws,
Postilion'd by the MORN: The Wind's asleep,
And the cursed Billows couch upon the DEEP.
111.
And if the Winds and Seas are hushed, to hear
The story thou shall tell: no less are We.
Who would not lend your Acts a greedy Ear?
Who has not heard of LUSUS'S Progeny?
SOL (who the Brain of man does purge and clear)
Drives not his Coach thus nigh us as you see,
To have MELINDIANS thought so dull a Breed,
As not to value an Heroic deed.
112.
A daring War the haughty GIANTS made
Upon OLYMPUS permanent and pure:
Rash THESEUS, and PERITHOUS, did invade
Grim PLUTO'S Kingdom horrid and obscure.
If such high Boys as these the world has had,
It Is not less hard, nor will less Fame procure,
Then the attempting HEAVEN and Hell by Them,
That others should attempt the Watery Ream.
113.
DIANA'S Templebuilt by TESIPHON
(Rare Architect!) HOROSTRATUS burnt down:
To be talked of, though for a Thing ill done,
And dye defamed, rather then live unknown.
If on so false, and vile Foundation,
The sweet desire deceives us of Renown;
How much more lawful is it to seek a name
By deeds deserving everlasting FAME?
End of the second Canto.
Third Canto.
STANZA. 1.
Now what illustrious GAMA, near the Line,
Informed that KING, report CALIOPE:
Breathe an immortal Song, and voice divine,
Into this mortal Breast, tha^'s big with Thee:
So, never the great God of Medicine,
(To whom thou ORPHEUS bar'st) love CLYCIE,
Court DAPHNE more, or call LEUCOTHOE Friend,
Since Thou in Beauty do them All transcend.
2.
Thou, Nymph, promote my pious just desire
To pay my Country what to It I owe;
That the whole world may listen, and admire
To see from Tagus AGANIPPE flow.
Leave PINDUS'S flowers: For (Lo!) the MUSES'S Sire
Bathes me in Sacred dew from top to toe.
If not, I swear thou have some jealousy
ORPHEUS (thy joy) should be eclyps'd by me.
3.
To hear the noble GAMA, In a Ring
Gathered was all th'attentive Company;
When (having sat a while considering)
Raising his manly Visage, thus said He.
Thou do command me to unfold (O KING)
My noble NATION'S genealogy:
Thou bid'st me not to tell a foreign story,
But of my Own thou bid'st me tell the glory.
4.
Upon Another's Praises to dilate
Is usual, and that which Friends does raise:
But of One's Own the Praises to relate,
Will prove (I fear me) a suspected praise.
Besides, to praise ours to the worth, the date
Would first expire of six the longest days.
But (to serve Thee) a double fault I Will do:
I Will praise my own, and crop their praises too.
5.
Yet what in fine does animate me, is,
I Am sure of Lying I shall run no danger:
For of such deeds say what I can, I wis
I shall leave more to th'utterance of a stranger.
But (to pursue that method in all this
Thy self prescrib*d, nor seem in all a Ranger)
First, of the Territory large I Will tell;
Then, of the bloody Battles that befell.
6
Between the Zone where Cancer bends his clutch
(To the bright Sun a Bound Septentrionall)
And that which for the Cold is shunned as much,
As for the Heat the middle Zone of all,
Proud EUROPE lies: whose North, and parts which touch
Upon the Occident, have for their Wall
The OCEAN; and, with unreturning Waves,
Her South, the SEA-MEDITERRANEAN laves.
7.
Upon the East she neighbors ASIA:
But that cold River with the doubling stream
(Which from Riphean Mountains plough his way
To the Meotick Lake) divides Them:
So does that furious and that horrid Sea
Which with their Fleet th incensed GREEKS did steme;
From whence the Sayler now with his mind's eye
Sees the name only of once glorious TROY.
8.
Where she is most beneath the Artick Pole
The Hyperborean Mountains she does see;
And those, where EOL raigns without control,
Owing to blustering their Nobility.
The Sun, That spreads his luster through the Whole,
His rays have here such imbecility,
That a deep snow is still upon the Mountains,
The Sea still* frozen, frozen still the Fountains.
9.
Here SCYTHS, and TARTARS, in great numbers, live;
Who were engaged in a sharp war of old,
About their Pedigrees prerogative,
With those who then th'EGYPTIAN-LAN^ did hold.
But, where the justice of the Cause to give
Being hard by erring Mortals to be told,
To get more certain information, look
In the Clay-Office from which Man was took.
10.
In that far Nook (to name of many some)
Are the cold LAPLAND; NORWAY comfortless;
SCANDIA that triumphed over triumphant ROME
(Which her proud ruins to this day confess).
Here, whilst the waters are not stiff, and numb,
With Winters Ice glazing the BALTICK-SEAS,
That Arm of the SARMATICK OCEANE
Sails the brave Swede, the Prussian, and the Dane.
11.
Betwixt this Sea, and TANAIS, live strange Nations:
RUTHENI, frozen MUSCOVITES, LIVONIANS,
That were in former Ages the SARMATIANS,
And, in th'HERCINIAN FOREST, the POLONIANS.
Held of the GERMAN EMPIRE are ALSATIANS,
SAXONS, BOHEMIANS, HUNGARS, or PANNONIANS:
With diverse other, whom the RHINE'S cold waves,
The ELIVE, the MOZELL, and the DANOW laves.
12.
'Twixt wandering ISTER, and that NARROW-SEA
Where, with her life, fair HELL left her name,
The warlike THRACIANS dwell: who lay a plea
To MARS his Sword, as from whose loins they came.
Here HAEMUS, and ORPHEAN RHODOPE,
Obey the OTTOMAN; and (to the shame
Of Christendom) BYSANTIUM'S noble Seat,
A proud affront to CONSTANTINE THE GREAT.
13.
The next in order MACEDONIA stands,
Bathed with the Actian (now LEPANTO'S) Sea:
And likewise you, O admirable LANDS,
Where Wit, and Manners, were in high degree;
Which bred those solid Heads, and valiant Hands,
Those streams of Eloquence, and Poetry,
With which Thou (famous GREECE) unto the skies
As well by Letters, as by Arms did rise.
14.
DALMATIANS follow Them: and, in that Bay
ANTENOR chose for his new City's Syte,
VENICE (like VENUS) rises from the Sea;
From low beginnings swollen to that proud hight.
That Sea, an Arm of Land does over lay,
Which the whole WORLD subjected by its might.
That Arm (no less then GREEC^) to HEAVEN soared
With the two wings of LEARNING, and THE SWORD.
15.
It Is walled by nature, part, where it does join
Unto the ALPS thick shoulders: NEPTUNE bars
The rest with his salt waves: The APPENINE
Cuts ith'middle: where your LYBIAN MARS
Wan him such Fame. But now, since the divine
Porter has got it (impotent in Wars)
It Is stripped of the vast power it had before:
"So much is GOD delighted with the pore.
16.
Pass we from thence to FRANCE, so much of old
With CAESAR'S triumphs through the World renownd.
It Is watered with the ROYAL SEYN, the cold
GAROON, the pleasant LOYRE, the RHINE profound.
Now those high Mountains in the clouds behold
Which still the lost PYRENE'S name resound:
From which, being fired (as ancient Books have told)
Rivers ran down of Silver, and of Gold.
17.
Lo! here displays it self illustrious SPAIN,
As Head there of all EUROPE: In whose strange
Successes of their Wars, and ways of reign,
FATE'S wheel gave many a turn, wrought many a change.
But never Force, or Fraud, shall fix a stain
(Through Fortune's humor always given to range)
But SPAIN will find a time to wipe it out,
And make her blasted honors freshly sprout.
18.
She faces TING^TANIA: and There
(As if to make the Mid-land Sea an Isle)
The well-known STREIGHTS to close their jaws appear
Innobled with the THEBAN'S latest Toil.
With diff*rent Nations she her head does rear
( Sea-girt three sides, the fourth with Hilly Pyle)
Of such Nobility and Valor All,
That each pretends to be the principal.
19.
She has the ARRAGONIAN, so renowned
For conquering twice stubborn PARTHENOPE:
Those of NAVAR: ASTURIANS, who did bound
The MOORS, broke in upon us like a Sea.
She has the shrewd GALLEGO, many-crownd
CASTILIAN, whom his Star reserved to be
SPAIN'S great Restorer and her Lord: SEVILIA,
GRANADA, LEON, MURCIA, with CASTILIA.
20.
The LUSITANIAN KINGDOM here survay,
Placed as the Crown upon fair EUROPE's Head:
Where (the Land finishing) begins the Sea,
And whence the Sun steps to his watery Bed.
This, first in Arms (by gracious HEAVEN'S decree)
Against the filthy MAURITANIAN sped:
Throwing him out of Her to his old Nest
In burning AFRIC; nor there let him rest.
21.
That, That, the loved EARTH where I was born!
To which if kinder HEAVEN do so dispose
That I (this Task performed) alive return:
With It, my dying Eyes, there let me close.
From LYSUS (which the Latins LUSUS turn)
Old BACCHUS'S Camrade, or (as some suppose)
His Son, was LUSITANIA'S name derived,
When in that Country his Plantation thrived,
22.
Here was that Shepherd born, who in his Name
(As well as in his Actions) did write MAN:
Whom none must hope to equal in his Fame
Since that of ROME he to eclipse began.
This Spot, through shuffling of light Fortune's Game,
TIME (who devours his children) saw, Anan,
On the WORLD'S Theater a great Part play
Raised to a Kingdom: and it was this way.
23.
There was in SPAIN a King (ALPHONSO hight)
Who made so close a War upon the MORE,
That (what with policy, and what with might)
Many he slew, and many a Town he bore.
This KING'S sublime Renown taking her flight
From Streights Herculean to the Caspian Shore,
Diverse (affecting an immortal name)
To Him and Death to offer themselves came.
24.
Others (more fired with an intrinsic love
Of Christian Faith, then Honor popular)
Flock from all Corners: willing to remove
Both from sweet Country, and from private Lar.
But, when their names, by Actions raised above
The vulgar pitch, they All advanced in War;
The famed ALPHONSO, for such gallant deeds,
Would have them reap proportionable meeds.
25.
Amongst These HENRY (says the History)
A younger son of FRANCE, and a brave Prince,
Had PORTUGAL in lot, in the World's eye
Not then so glorious, nor so large, as since.
And the same KING did his own daughter tie
To Him in Wedlock, to infer from thence
His firmer love: as giving, in her hand,
The Livery and Seisin of that LAND.
26.
He (when against the Offspring of the Hand-
Maid HAGAR mighty Conquests he had won,
Gaining in much of the adjacent LAND,
And doing what was comely to be done)
Obtains from Him, who does high Heaven command
In a short time (to guerdon All) a Son:
Who (adding to his Father's worth, his own)
Shall first erect the LUSITANIAN THRONE.
27.
HENRY was now come from the HOLY LAND,
And Conquest of enslaved JERUSALEM;
Having seen consecrated IORDAN'S Strand,
That saw the flesh of GOD bathed in his stream;
For, GODFREY finding nothing could withstand
After JUDEA was subdued by Him,
Many, who in that War had given him Aid,
Their wished return to their Dominions made:
28.
When, come to the last Exit of his Age
The famous FRENCHMAN (to a wonder brave)
Pulled by DEATH'S hand down from this mortal Stage,
His Spirit, unto Him, that gave it, gave.
His Son remained in tender ^upillage,
True Copy of his Sire that is in the Grave:
Then whom more excellent the world had none,
For such a Father must have such a Son.
29.
But old Report (how true I cannot say:
For things so distant with much night are spread)
Tells, how the Mother, taking all the sway,
Scorned not to stoop unto a second Bed:
And, for herself an After-Game to play,
Her Fatherless-Son disinherited:
Claiming for Hers the Land, and Princely Pow're,
As given her by her Father for a dow're.
30.
Then young ALPHONSO (so the Prince they call,
Inheriting his Grandsire in his Name)
Despairing by fair means of PORTUGAL,
For that the Mother, and her Groom, the same
Usurp, and mean from Him to give it All:
(His bosom boiling with a Martial flame)
By force to seize it in his mind revolves,
As briskly executes what he resolves.
31.
The blushing Plains of ARADUCA groan,
With one-same blood of War intestine did;
In which the Mother (whose deeds spoke her none)
The Son her love, and his own LAND deny'de:
Now stands against him in battalion,
And cannot see (being blinded with her pride)
How much she sins against HEAVEN, and natural Love:
But in her Breast the sensual swims above.
32.
O Witch MEDEA! PROGNE, with blood-stain!
If for their Fathers, not their own misdeeds,
By you your children in Revenge were slain,
Behold, TERESA'S Sin even yours exceeds!
Incontinence, the sacred Thirst of Reign,
These are the Causes whence her Crime proceeds.
SCYLLA her aged Father slew through one:
Through Both TERESA goes against her Son.
33
But the brave Prince a perfect conquest had
Over an ill mother, and a Father-in-Law.
Forthwith, the Victor, all the LAND obay'd
That did before their swords against him draw.
Then (by his Wrath his judgment oversway'd)
Fast laid in Irons he his Mother saw:
Which GOD'S avenging Hand did soon pursue.
"Such Reverence is to all Parents due.
34.
Lo! proud CASTEEL unites her Forces all
(To be revenged for sad TERESA'S wrong)
Against the few-in-People PORTINGALL:
But, though his Troops be weak, his Heart is strong.
His mortal Head with Shield Angelical.
Hid in the day of Battle from a throng
Of falling darts, not only firm he stands
Their shock, but routs the formidable Bands.
35.
Yet, not long after, was this valiant Prince
In the same ARADUCA (his chief Nest)
Blockt up with avast Army, to which, since
Their late defeat, the angered Foes increast.
But by his faithful Tutor EGAS, thence
(Offering himself to death) he was releast.
Else (of all needful matter ill bested)
He in that straight had surely perished.
36
But the best Servant ever Master found,
Seeing his rince can no resistance make,
That he should hold of Him the Country round
To the CASTILIAN KING did undertake.
He (having honest EGAS MONIZ bound)
The dreadful siege did presently forsake.
But the Illustrious youth cannot afford
To pay low Homage to another Lord.
37.
The time prefixed was arrived now
When the CASTILIAN MONARCH made account
To do him homage that the Prince would bow
As to his Founder, and Lord Paramount.
EGAS (who knew that would not be, and how
Because of Him CASTEEL rely'de upon it)
Resolves his broken promise, at the rate
Of his sweet life's expense to expiate.
38.
And, with his children, and dear Wife, he went
T'unpawn and to redeem his morgag'd Faith,
Barefoot and bareleg'd, and with eyes so bent
To The Earth, as would move pity more then wrath.
If my rash confidence thou have intent
To scourge as it deserves (O KING) he says;
Lo, here I bring thee of mine own accord
A life, in lieu of ill-accomplisht word!
39.
Lo here (to piece out mine) the innocent
Lives, of my Wife and Babes, before thy Eyes!
If Bosoms generous and excellent
Accept so frail and dire a Sacrifice.
Lo here the guilty Hands, and Tongue! invent
All sorts of pains and deaths to exercise
On These: such as may prove fierce SCINIS dull
In mischief; and out-roare (...)'S Bull.
40.
Just as before the Heads-man one condemned,
Who does in life his death anticipate,
And now upon the Block his Neck extend,
For the fear d stroke which must dispatch him straight:
So EGAS looked, expecting the worst end
Could be pronounced by KING'S deserved Hate.
But the KING seeing such stupendous Faith,
Mercy at length could more with him, then Wrath.
41.
O great, and Portingal-Fidelitie,
Paid by a Subject to his Prince! What more
Performed the PERSIAN in that Project high,
When Nose and Face he carbonado'd over;
Which made the great DARIUS (sighing) cry,
His brave ZOPYRUS, such as he was once,
He Had rather have, then twenty BAEILONS?
42.
But now the Prince ALFONSO did provide
The happy Host of LUSITANIA
Against the MOORS, who, on the other side
Of TAGUS'S delectable River, lay.
Now in the famed ORIQUE'S Champion wide
The proud and warlike Troops he does array,
Just in the beard of the confronted MOOR:
As rich in couraege, as in numbers poor.
43.
His Trust is not in Flesh, but placed all
In the eternal GOD, That Heaven does steer:
For the baptized Army was so small,
To his one man an hundred MOORS there were.
Those, who consider things by Reason, call
It madness rather, then the effect of clear
And sober heat, on such vast Heaps to run,
Where there is an hundred Horsemen to his one.
44.
Five MOORISH KINGS he has that day defy'de
Of whom the Chief has ISMAR to his name:
All with the style of SOLDIER dignify'de,
By which is purchased immortal Fame.
Each had his Mistress fighting by his side,
Like that, as beautiful, as warlike, DAME
Who helped so long to prop up falling TROY;
And Those, who streams of THERMODONT enjoy.
45.
Now did AURORA, beautiful and clear,
Out of the Welkin chase the golden Fry:
When MARY'S son, ALPHONSO'S heart to cheer,
Appeared to him upon the Cross on high.
Whom worshipping, That thus vouchsaft t'appeer,
All of a fire with Faith) the Prince does cry,
Not to me LORD, but to the INFIDEL:
Not unto me, who know thy power so well.
46.
This miracle of mercy so inflamed
The POTINGALLS, and did their minds erect,
That they the gallant Prince their KING acclam'd,
Whom with such cordial love they did affect;
And ( drawing up before the Foe) proclaimed
To HEAVEN, and to the World, their new Elect:
Crying alowd; THE ARMY, CROWN AND ALL,
FOR GREAT ALPHONSO KING OF PORTUGAL.
47.
As a fierce Mastiffe in in the woody CHASE
(Whom Shouts, and Hunters Instruments incite)
Attacks a Bull, the which his Trust does place
In his sharp Horns's irrefragable might;
Now fastening on his flank, now on his Face,
More nimble at the turn, then strong in fight;
Till, tearing out his Throat, down falls the Beast,
The groaning Mountain with his weight oppressed:
48
So the new KING (with courage no less new
Inflamed by GOD, and by the People, Both)
Upon the barbarous Host, before him, flew
With his bold Troops, impetuous, and wroth.
With this, the dogs take up a Howl and rue-
Full Cry, the people rowze, the Alarm goes:
They snatch their Spears, and Bows, the Trumpets sound;
Loud Instruments of war go bellowing round.
49.
As when a fire in Stubble dry begun
(The whistling Boreas happening then to blow)
Fanned by the Bellows of the Wind, does run
To the next which Field, Furzes overgrow;
And there a knot of Sheepherds (who upon
The grassie ground sweet slumbers undergo)
Wak't by the crackling flames in the thick Brake,
Snatch up their Hooks, and to the Village make:
50
So the surprised MOORS, and thunder-strook,
Catch up their weapons, which lie round about.
Yet fled not, these; but to their Arms they took,
And spur d their warlike Barbs, resolved and stout*
The PORTINGALL incounters them unshook,
He makes his Lances at their backs come out.
Some drop half-dead, some tumble dead outright,
Others invoke the ALCORAN, and fight.
51.
Most terrible Incounters, there, resound;
Enough to shake in its firm seat a Rock:
When those fierce Beasts, the Trident-strooken ground
Produced (with their more furious Burdens) shock.
No Nook exempt, the war is kindled round,
Vast wounds are giv*n, Neither has cause to mock:
But those of LUSUS, Armours, Males, and all,
Break, cut, hack, batter, penetrate, and maule.
52.
Heads from the shoulders leap about the Field;
Arms, Legs, without or Sense, or Master, fly.
Others (their panting entrails trailing) wheeled;
Earth in their bloodless cheek, death in their Eye.
The impious Army now the day does yield:
Rivers of Blood flow from their wounds, whereby
The Field it self does lose its color too,
And into Crimson turns the verdant hew.
53.
The PORTINGALL victorious does remain,
Reaping the Trophies and the wealthy Prey.
Having discomfited the MOOR of SPAIN,
Three days the GREAT KING on the place does stay.
In his broad Shield (which he till then bore plain)
A Badge eternal of this glorious day,
Five small Shields azure he does now include,
In sign of these five Kings by Him subdu'de.
54.
In these five Shields he paints the Recompense
For which THE LORD was sold, in various Ink
Writing his history, who did dispense
Such favor to him, more then Heart could think.
In every of the Five he paints Five-pence,
So sums the Thirty by a Cinque-fold Cinque;
Accounting that which is the Center, twice,
Of the five Cinques, which he does place Cross-wise.
55.
Some time after he gave this grand defeat
The Illustrious KING (whose Thoughts to Heaven soar)
To take in LEYRIA marched; which Those, He beat,
Had took from Him a little while before.
To boot, the strong ARRONCHEZ he does get:
And, with her pleasant Vale, the evermore
Glorious SCABELICASTRO (Santarene)
Which Thou, sweet TAGUS, waterst so serene.
56.
Unto these noble Towns reduced, he soon
Adds MAFRA, dared by his victorious Wings;
Then, in the famous Mountains of the Moon
Cold SYNTRA (forced) to his obedience brings:
Syntra, in which the NAYADES do run
From the sweet Snare, hiding themselves in Springs.
But LOVE has Nets will there too serve their turn:
And in the water will his wild fire burn.
57.
And Thou, fair LISBON (worthy to be crowned
Of all the Cities of the WORLD the Queen)
Which that great Prince of Eloquence did found,
Who by his wit TROY-TOWN had ruin d seen;
Thou (whom obeys the Ocean-Sea profound)
By the brave PORTINGALLS were t taken in,
Helped by a potent Fleet, which at that time
Happened to come out of the Northern Clime:
58.
Thence, from the German ELVE, and from the RHENE,
And from the Brittish-Sea-commanding THEAMES,
Sent to destroy th'usurping SARACEN,
And free their sister JORDAN'S captive streams.
These, entering TAGUS'S pleasant mouth, and then
With great ALPHONSO joined (whose Glory's beams
Attract all Hearts, but those his name appalls)
A Seige is laid to th'ULYSSEAN WALLS.
59.
Five times the Moon did hide her horned head,
And other five her face at full displayed;
When by main force the City entered
The will of the Beleaguerer obayd.
Fierce was the Battle, much the blood there shed,
As needs they must be (circumstances waigh'd)
Between rough Conquerours, That all things dare,
And conquered People driven to despair.
60.
Thus She, was after some few Months expense
Compelled to stoop to this new Victor's law;
Whom in old time to their obedience,
With all their might cold Vandals could not draw:
Whose power (which owned no bound, stuck at no Fence)
EBRE, and GOLDEN TAGUS, trembling saw:
And BETIS they did so entirely tame,
They did that Land VANDALUSIA name.
61.
If noble LISBON could not stand it out,
Where is that City so resolved, and strong,
That can resistance make to such a stout
And warlike people (FAME'S immortal song)
Now all ESTREMADURA'S at his Foot,
OBIDOS fair, ALENQUER proud (among
Whose pleasant Groves runs many a River sweet,
Murmuring, as if too good to wash their Feet)
And TORRESUEDRAS.
62.
You likewise, O ye fair TRANS-TAGAN LANDS
(Which golden CERES with her Bounty crowns)
He, who brings more then Mortal strength, commands
Out of your Forts, and Arms. And you (the Clowns
Of AFRICA) who plough'd them with your hands,
Hope not to reap the Fruits: For the good Towns*
Of MOURA, SERPA, YELVES, by assault
Are taken, and ALCACER OF THE SALT.
63.
Lo! now that noble City (certain Seat
Of the brave Rebel in old time, SERTORIUS;
Where still his far-fetcht Water pure and neat,
To serve the place b'an act so meritorious
Through Arches on Two hundred Pillars set
Does pass, with Royal restoration glorious)
Even Her, the bold GERARDO'S prowess brings
To own, and serve, the LUSITANIAN KINGS.
64.
Against the City now of BEYA,
To take revenge for spoiled TRANCOSO'S Town,
ALPHONSO goes; who cannot rest a Day
For ymping a short life with long Renown.
Before this City long he does not stay;
And (storming it b'a part that is beaten down)
Enraged enters: where, of all that breathes,
His hungry Steel he in the Bowels ^heathes.
65.
Jointly with these, PALMELA does he win;
Fishy CIZIMBRA too: nor wins alone,
But (his good star assisting him therein)
A potent Army there has overthrown.
The Town saw his intent, so did her King:
Nor was he backward to relieve the Town.
Careless he marched along the Mountain-side,
Little imagining what did betide.
66.
'Twas He of BADACHOZ (a haughty MORE)
Four thousand furious Spirits were his HORSE,
Of INFANTRY innumerable store,
With gilded Arms ( Gallants, and Warriors)
But, as in May a jealous Bull (before
He is perceived) rushes with all his force
Upon a Travailer, and runs him over,
(Twice mad, both as a Beast, and as a Lover):
67.
Just so ALPHONSO, from an Ambush close,
Assaults the people that securely past;
Strikes, overturns, and kills; The Field he mows;
The MOORISH KING flies for his life in have.
Struck with a Pannick fear, the Remnant throvvs
Away their Arms; and follows him as fast:
They That made all this Havoc, being a Force
( Good God!) consisting but of sixty Horse.
68.
The Victory without delay, the great
And indefatigable KING pursues,
Causing his Drums through all the Realm to beat
(Conquering of LANDS he as his Trade does use)
Besieges BADACHOZ, and soon does get
The end of his desire: For there he shows
So much of Soldier, and a Soul so high;
That keep, It must the others company.
69.
But the great GOD (who keeps his Rods in store,
For such as merit them, till his own time;
Whether, for Sinners to amend, before
They fall: or CAUSES, Man can not divine)
If he, till now, the valiant KING forbore,
And (through all dangers leading) gave him line:
Yet now, he will no longer let him be,
From his imprisoned MOTHER'S curses, free*
70.
For lying in this City weakly manned,
The LEON-MEN besiege th'ill-guarded Walls,
'Cause he that Conquest took out of their Hand,
Being of LEON, and not PORTUGAL'S.
Here dear did Him his Pertinacy stand,
As in the World out oftentimes it falls:
For in a furious Sally (his leg burst
Against an IRON) he to yield was forced.
71.
O famous POMPEY! Be not Thou in pain
To see thy Glories's sad Catastrophie;
Or that just NEMESIS should pre-ordain
Thy Father-in-Law to triumph over Thee;
Though frozen PHASIS; and BOOTES'S Wayn;
The Land under the BURNING AXLE-TREE;
And strange SYENE, where no oblique Sun
A Shadow casts, and all the day is Noon;
72.
And ENI^CHIANS fierce; and ARABS rich;
And COLCHOS, famous for the Golden Sheep;
And CAPPADOCEANS; and JUDEANS, which
Abolisht Rites so obstinately keep,
And soft SOPHENA, scruft with pleasures Itch;
And (with SILICIAN-ROBBERS on the DEEP)
ARMENIA, That two Rivers boasts, which came
From PARADISE; All trembled at thy name:
73.
And though, in fine, from the ATLANTICK-SEA
To SCYTHIAN-TAURUS with erected Crown,
Victorious: Wonder not, that thou should be
In the PHARSALIAN BATTLE overthrown.
For high and great ALPHONSO thou shall see
Bear All before him, and at last bourn down.
By a Cross-match of FATE were Both undon,
Thou by a FATHER-IN-LAW, He by a SON-.
74.
The noble KING thus scourged by HEAVEN, at length
Restored was to his PORTUGAL again.
There (after he had been; by a vast strength
Of MOORS, in SANTAREN besieged in vain;
And, after that the Corpse of St. VINCENTH
The Martyr, from that Head of Land in SPAIN
Which by his name to all the world is known,
Translated was to th'ULYSSEAN TOWN.)
75.
To carry on the Work by Him begun,
The old man (weary) does his Son command
With men and warlike preparation
To march into the ALENTEIAN-LAND.
SANCHO (to prove himself his Fathers Son)
Like a strong stream let loose, passes beyand:
And makes the River of GUADALQUIVEER
Run Moorish blood, That wont to run so clear.
76.
Flesht with his winnings, the young Gamester grows
Now Covetous; and cannot rest, before
He in a second Battle overthrows
(In sight of BEIA) the beleagu'ring MORE.
Nor long with this design in labor goes
E're he the ^ays by Him desired Wore.
The MOOR (on both sides justled to the Wall)
Resolves at once to be revenged for all.
77.
Now, from the Mountain which MEDUSA star'd
Out of that Body which the HEAVEN sustayn'd,
From AMPELUSA'S Promontory, hard
They march; from TANGER, where ANTEUS reigned.
Of AVILA the dwellers are not spared:
Does likewise march (well- armed, and choicely trained)
At the harsh Mauritanian Trumpet's sound
Of noble JUBA all the Kingdom round.
78.
With this huge mass of men his inroad made
The great MIRAMOLIN in PORTUGAL.
Twelve Moorish Kings he carried in his Aid,
Amongst whom He wears the Crown Imperial.
These, having in their march by Parties preyed,
And, where they could, destroyed the Country all,
In SANTAREN Don SANCHO close impound:
But a sad Seige it will for them be found.
79.
Furious assaults the incensed MOOR does make:
A thousand Stratagems in practice puts.
In vain huge Stones from horrid Engines brake:
In vain the Mine is hid, and the Ram buts.
ALPHONSO'S Son is everywhere awake,
Here his Care Sheilds, and there his courage cuts.
So what with these, and what with martial Art,
Stopped is each Meuse, and guarded in each part.
80.
But the old man (whose burdened Lims, and Head,
With years, and Cares, obliged him to repose)
Retired into that City, whose fair Mead
To sweet MONDEGO'S streams its verdure ows;
Hearing his Son is close beleaguered
In SANTAREN by blind and barbarous Foes,
Flies from that City to his Aid: For Age
Cramps not his wonted speed, nor cools his rage.
81
He, with his Troops inured to warlike Feats,
Thund ring the Rear, and his Son salying out;
The PORTINGAL (who now of custom beats)
In a short space the MOORS does wholly rout.
With Terbants, Cassacks, Faulchions, Coverlets,
Cloaks with wrought Capes, the Field is strewn about:
Horses, and their Caparisons (rich Prey)
And by the Horses their dead Masters lay.
82.
The Lusitanian Bounds the rest forego,
Put to a hasty and disordred flight.
The great MIRAMOLIN, he flies not though:
For before he could fly, he fled the light.
To HIM, who did this Victory bestow
Are rendered thanks and Praises infinite:
For in so great, and so apparent odds,
The part man acts is the dumb show to GOD'S.
83.
This was the great ALPHONSO'S latest wreath
Of Victory (a Prince of vast Renown)
When He who forged it with his Sword (his breath
Deserting him) exchanged his MORTAL CROWN.
The hand of sickness ush'ring that of death,
Touched his weak Body, and so pusht it down.
Thus, whom so many had paid Tribute to,
Paid the last tribute unto Nature due.
84.
Him did the lofty Promontories moan:
With all their streams the widowed Rivers wept,
And (overflowing the Fields, newly sown,
With rueful Tears) the next years Harvest swept.
But through the world his living FAME is blown:
And, where he reigned, his name so fresh is kept;
That there each Hill, and every ecchoing Plain,
ALFONSO calls, ALPHONSO -- But in vain.
85.
SANCHO succeeds ( valiant, and in his Spring)
True Copy of his Sire, examine d well
By the Original, alive yet being
When he with barbarous blood made BETIS swell;
And overturned the Andalusian King
Of the accursed Race of ISHMAEL:
But better; when at BEJA'S siege he made
Them feel the weight of his Victorious Blade.
86.
After he ware the LUSITANIAN CROWN
(Some years elapsed since he to reign began)
Before the City SILVES he sat down
Then in possession of the AFFRICAN*
Assisted was he to take in this Town
By Strangers from the Northern Ocean,
With Men, and Arms, for ASIA bound: to join
In rescue of distressed PALESTINE.
87.
They sayld, to second in the Holy Cause
RED FREDRICK; who with a potent Host
To the defense of that plagued City draws,
By which the LORD OF LIFE his own life lost:
When GUIDA with his Troops (having their jaws
Parcht up with drowth) to the GREAT SULTAN forced
Were to surrender, where the Miscreants
Have prepossest the Springs which GUIDO wants.
88.
But the fair Navy (forced upon our shore
By adverse Winds, though SANCHO*s prosperous Star)
Assists him willingly against the MORE,
Since one and to other is a Holy War.
As thy great Father, LISBON took before;
Just so, and with the same Auxiliar,
From the fierce dwellers take Thou, SILVES: This
Also, a noble Realm's METROPOLIS.
89.
And, if from the MAHUMETANS thou have
So many trophies; neither did thou let
The men of LEON (though in Mountains placed,
And nursed in bloody Battle) quiet set:
Till thou a Yoke upon the Neck had cast
Of their proud TUI, adding a Coronet
Of Towns her Neighbors, on which Thou did^t pu^
(Renowned SANCHO) thy triumphant Foot.
90.
But death (like a bold Thief) did Him assault
In his Career of glory. He was heyr'd
B'a Son whom many Virtues did exalt:
Second ALPHONSO, of our Kings the Therd.
In his Reign was ALCACER OF THE SALT
Subdu'de again in spite of the MOOR'S Beard;
By whom late took, it is now re-took, with great
Destruction of them, and four Kings's defeat.
91.
ALFONSO dead, The Second SANCHO came
To hold the Scepter; Tame, and negligent:
To that degree both negligent, and tame,
That for the shadow of Himself he went.
Then did Another (fitter for the same)
Wrest from his hands that pow r, he was content
To delegate. And why? He having none
Himself, his Minion's Crimes were called his own.
92.
No, no, our SANCHO was not of that mood
Lewd NERO was, who married with a Boy;
And after (with less guilt he shed her blood)
His mother AGRIPPINA did enjoy:
Nor (like the self-same NERO) piping stood,
Then clapped his hands to see his burning TROY:
Nor did his daughter, like one King, devour:
Nor change his Sex like the other Emperor.
93
He did not over his People tyrannize,
Like Those who Kings in SYRACUSA were:
Nor hyr'd he men, strange Tortures to devise,
Like PHALARIS, one of the Tyrants there.
But the proud Realm, which too indulgent skies
Had used to Kings, who would endure no Peer;
That likewise to such niceness did arrive
T'indure no King, who had his Peer alive.
94.
Therefore BOLONIA'S Earl the Helm did guide:
Which he did after in his own right hold,
When his still-sloathful Brother (SANCHO) died.
He (named ALPHONSO, and surnamed the Bold)
After he had the Kingdom pacify*de;
And all sharp humors settled, or controll*d;
Thinks, how he may enlarge it by his merit:
Too small a Circle for so great a spirit.
95.
Of the ALGARVES'S land (the conquering
Whereof was given him with his Queen in dower)
He gains in much, outing the Moorish King;
On all whose Actions now cursed MARS did lower.
But out of PORTUGAL did wholly fling
(By Prudence part, and part by martial power.)
That pertinacious People, and did chase
From that good Land which LUSUS left his Race.
96.
Now, DENIS! worthy his own Parentage:
And for whom such a Father should make room.
DENIS! Who strikes (in the way of Patronage)
The fa me of ALEXANDER'S bounty, dumb.
The Land got breath, and flourisht in that Age
(Mild ^eace, and, with peace, Justice from Heaven come)
With Constitutions, Laws, and Customs right:
Of a calm Kingdom LUMINARIES bright.
97.
He, was the first That made COYMBRA shine
With Liberal Sciences which PALLAS taught;
By Him, from HELICON the Muses Nine
To bruize MONDEGO'S grassie brink were brought;
Hither transferred APOLLO that rich Mine,
Which the old GREEKS in learned ATHENS wrought;
Here Ivy-Wreaths with Gold he interweaves,
And the coy DAPHNE'S never-fading leaves.
98
Now noble Cities from the ground ascend,
Castles, and warlike Fortresses secure;
Scarce any Corner but this Prince does mend:
Convents he builds, and Towns he does immure.
But ATROPOS (the Best must have an End)
Shearing his golden Third in years mature,
His Son succeeds; not dutiful (the Fourth
ALPHONSE) but of high courage, and much worth.
99.
On proud CASTEEL he still with Scorn did look:
Yet free from malice as 'twas free from fears,
Only men have a custom, in that Nook,
To dread no power for being more then theirs.
For when the MAURITANIAN undertook
HESPERIA'S second Conquest; and appears
Just ready now CASTILIANS to invade:
The brave ALPHONSO powers in to their Aid:
100.
Never SEMIRAMIS with such an Host
Did swarm HYDASPES'S banks, his Sands out-number;
Nor ATTILA (He, who Himself did boast
The Scourge of GOD, and was the fright, and wonder
Of ITALY) so many GOTHS ingrost
And Northern People: As of MOORS were under
The AFFRICK-MOOR (with Those GRANADA yields)
At that time mustred in Tartessian Fields.
101.
Then the CASTILIAN KING (who saw so great
And vast a pow r, against his Country bend;
Nor weighed his life, but the entire defeat
Of SPAIN it self (once lost) did apprehend)
Help from the valiant PORTINGALL t'intreat,
His dearest Consort to that Court did send:
His Wife from whom the Embassy is sent,
And his dear daughter* unto whom it went.
102.
Virtuous MARIA, and as fair as good,
Enters her Father's Palace (glorious dame!)
Lovely, in Grief; nor, though the water stood
In her sweet eyes, did that suspend their flame.
Her Angel's Tresses with a golden flood
Coverd her Ivory shoulders. When she came
Before her Sire ( He overjoyed and kind)
It rained down right, and thus she brake her mind.
103.
As many Nations as all AFRIC bred
(A People barbarous and inhumane)
Has the great King of the MOROCCO'S led
To take possession of illustrious SPAIN.
So vast a power never marched under one Head
Since the dry Earth was compast by the Main.
It terrifies the living where it rolls,
And even alarums their dead Father's Souls.
104.
His frighted subjects to protect and skreen,
He, whom thou have my Lord and Husband made,
Stands with small strength exposed to the keen
And thirsty edges of the Moorish Blade;
And I shall soon deprived of all be seen,
If thou afford him not thy present aid:
A sad and private Woman, Husbandless.
Without a Crown, or Him, or Happiness.
105.
Therefore (O King) for very fear of whom
The streams of hot MALUCO do congeale;
Succor, O! quickly to the succor come
Of miserable and despised CASTELE.
If that dear smile be an assenting dumb,
If that thy fatherly affection seal.
Run Father; if thou do not, by the MORE
I fear thou wilt find it overrun before.
106.
This with the self-same tone MARIA said
To King ALPHONSO on her trembling knees,
With which sad VENUS once her Father prayed
For her ENEAS tossed on Lybian Seas;
At which, with sense of the deep moan she made,
Such tender pity did JOVE'S bowels seize,
(Indulgent Sire!) he let his Thunder fall,
And (grieved she asked no more) granted her all.
107.
Straight armed Squadrons, glittering in the Sun,
Are mustred in the Fields of EBORA:
Scowr'd is the Sword, the Lance, the Murrion:
In rich Caparisons the Horses neigh.
The Trumpet shrill, with pendant Banner done,
Rowzes from peaces down (where long they lay)
Their tickled Hearts to disaccustomed Arms;
And concave Drums go thundering fresh Alarms.
108.
Amongst them and above them All appeers
Higher by head and shoulders then the rest
(And where He goes the Royal Standart veers)
Valiant ALPHONSO with erected Crest.
His very look, it animates and cheers
(If there are any) even the Co^ard's Breast.
Into CASTEEL thus marching is he seen
With his fair daughter, the Castilian Queen.
109.
The two ALPHONSO'S in conclusion joynd,
In wide TARYFA'S Fields confronting stood
The endless numbers of the people blind
For whom too narrovv are both Plain and Wood.
Of ours not one so hardy, but did find
Somevvhat of cold and shivering in his blood,
Save only such as clearly understands
CHRIST fights the battle with his People's hands.
110.
Derided are the thin-spread Christian-Bands
By Bond-Mayd HAGAR'S Progeny unclean;
Who, by anticipation, all their lands
Divide amongst the Army Hagarene,
Which by false Title in possession stands
Of the illustrious Name of Saracene:
Just as Another's noble Land they boast
Now, for their own; reckoning without their Host.
111
As that big-bon'd and barbarous Giant (whom
King SAUL so feared, and all his Army worse)
Seeing a simple Swain against him come,
Only with Peebles armed, and a clean force,
With haughty language (arrogant and grum)
Scorns the poor Boy, and sends him to his Nurse;
Whom rounding with his sling, He taught at length
The difference betwixt Faith, and humane strength.
112.
So the perfidious MOOR (advancing) cracks
Over the Christian Host; nor understands
What POWER it is that their weak Powers backs,
Which Hell with all its Fiends in vain withstands.
Helped by that POWER, He of CASTEEL attacks
MOROCCO'S King, who there in Chief commands:
The PORTINGAL (who sleights their whole Armada)
He takes to Task the Kingdom of GRANADA.
113.
Now crack the Lances, and the Swords cry clink
Upon the Armours, Powers incountring Powers;
Invoking (when they stand on danger's brink)
Theirs MAHOMET, and St. IAGO ours.
The struck strike Heaven with Cries, making a sink
And standing Pool with thick (...) showers:
Where some (half dead) lie drowning where they stood
In too much n^w, who fell for want of blood.
114.
With so great bloodshed did the PORTINGAL
Make Spoil and Havoc of the GRANADINE,
That in small space he kills, or routs, them All,
'Spight of their Mayles and breast-plates of steel (...).
His hungry Blade which will to supper fall
In FEZ, if in th'ALHAMBRA it did dine)
The brave CASTILIAN helps to end the Fray:
Who has the MAURITANIAN at a Bay.
115.
The burning Sun was making his retreat
To THETYS'S grotts, and the bright Evening Star
Drawing that glorious day to it is red Set,
Whose memory no time shall ever bar:
When the two Kings consummate the defeat
Of the MOORS'S Powers assembled in this War,
With so much Tragic slaughter, as no Age
Beheld before, or since, on the World's Stage.
116.
Not a fourth part rough MARIUS slew, of Those
That lost their lives in this day's Victory,
When water dashed with blood of their dead Foes
He made his Army drink, which then was dry:
Nor He of CARTHAGE (sworn, a child, to oppose
With Fire and Sword the Pride of ITALY)
When he so many Knights killed famous ROME,
That their Rings taken did to three Bushels come.
117.
And if Thou (noble TITUS) could alone
So many souls to black COCYTUS send,
When thou the Holy City did unstone
Of that stiff People, never to be weaned
From their abolisht Rytes: This GOD did own,
And christened it his Act, that what was penned
By the OLD PROPHETS might be verify'de,
And JESUS said too, whom they Crucify'de.
118.
After this great and prosperous event
(ALFONSO come to PORTUGAL again,
There to enjoy in peace and sweet content
The spreading Glories he in War did gain)
A black and lamentable accident
(Worthy in FAME'S Memorials to remain)
Was on a miserable Lady seen,
Who, after she was dead, was made a Queen.
119.
Thou, only Thou (pure LOVE) with bended bow,
Against whose Force no breast whatever can hold,
As if thy perjured Subject, or Sworn Foe,
Did cause her death whom all the World condol'd.
If Tears (which from a troubled Fountain flow)
Quench not thy Thirst, as has been said of old;
It is, that such is thy tyra^nick mood,
Thou love thy Altars should be bathed in blood.
120.
Thou were (fair YNES) in Repose, of LOVE'S
Reflected Fires fost'ring the sweet heat, young;
In that sweet Error, that worse Fates removes,
Which Fortune never suffers to last long:
In sweet MONDEGO'S solitary Groves,
Whose streams no day but thou did weep among:
Teaching the lofty Trees* and humble Grass,
That Name which printed in thy bosom was.
121.
Thy pensive Prince, with thine did sympathize
Remembrances, which in his Soul did swim,
Bringing thee always fresh before his Eyes,
When, from thy fair ones, bus ness banished Him:
By night, in dreams; that cheat him with sweet lies:
By day, in thoughts; that pencil thy each lim:
And all he mused, and all he saw in fine,
Were dear IDEA'S of thy Form divine.
122.
Of other Ladies fair, and Princesses
The tend'red Matches he did vilify;
For, of a Heart it is hard to dispossess
True Love, that has had time to fortify.
Upon these highly amorous passages
The Father looking with an old man's Eye
(Enraged with what the common people sed
And his Son's resolution not to wed)
123.
YNES determines from the World to take,
His Son from Her to take, and to remove:
Believing, with her blood's ill let-out Lake,
To quench the kindled flames of constant love.
O! that sure Sword (which had the power to make
The Moorish Rage strike sail) what Rage could move
Thee, from the honored Sheaths, where thou did rest,
To be new sheathed in Lady's gentle Breast?
124.
The horrid bloodhounds dragged her to the King:
Whose bowels now to mercy stood inclined.
But ill-Advisers with false reasoning
To her destruction re-inflam'd his mind.
She (with Heartbreaking language which did spring
Only from sense of Those she left behind
In solitude, her Prince, and children dear,
Whose Grief she more, then her own death did fear:)
125.
Lifting unto the azure Firmament
Her Eyes, which in a Sea of Tears were drowned;
Her Eyes, for one of those malevolent
And bloody Instruments her hands had bound;
And then, the same on her dear Infants bent,
Who Them with smiling innocence surround
By whom poor Orphans they will straight be made
Unto their cruel Grandfather thus said.
126.
If Beasts themselves ( wild Beasts) whose use, and way,
By Nature's dire instinct, is not to spare;
And vagrant Birds, whose business it is, to prey,
And chase their Quarrey through the yielding Air;
The world has seen take Babes exposed, and play
The tender Nurses to them with their care,
As NINUS'S mother once it did befall,
And the Twinn-Founders of the Roman Wall:
127.
O Thou, whose Superscription speaks thee, Man
(That the Contents were suited to the Cover!
A feeble Maid thou would not murder than
Only for loving Him, who first did love her)
Pity these Babes (the babes about him ran)
In thy hard doom since I am spot all over.
Spare, for their sakes, their lives, and mine: And see
Whiteness in Them, though thou will not in Me.
128.
And if (subduing the presumptuous MORE,
How to give death with fire and sword thou know,
Know, to give life too, to a damsel poor,
Who has done nothing why it should be lost.
Let my hid Innocence thus much procure:
Exile me to some sad intemperate Coast,
Cold SCYTHIA, or burned LYBIA, to remain
A weeping Tomb, and never more see SPAIN.
129.
Plant me where nothing grows but Cruelty,
Amongst Lions, Bears, and other Savage Beasts:
To see, if They that mercy will deny
Which I in vain implore from humane Breasts.
There, in firm love to Him for whom I dye,
I Will breed his Pieces, thou here see, their guests
And my Companions; to slide off with Those
Part of the burden of their mother's woes.
130.
Fain would have pardoned her the gracious King,
Moved with these words, which made his Bowels yearn:
But Fate, and whisp'rers (That fresh Fuel bring)
They would not pardon. It Is those men's concern
(Having begun) to perpetrate the Thing.
They strip their steel out of the Scabbard (stern).
Out Villains! Butchers! What? employ your spights,
Your swords, against a Lady, and called Knights?
131.
As at the breast of fair POLIXENA
Condemned to death by dire ACHILLES'S shade
(The last dear stake of Aged HECUEA)
Revengeful PYRRHUS bent his cruel Blade;
But with a look that drives ill Ayrs away
(Patient, as any Lamb) The Royal Maid,
On her mad Mother casting up her Eyes,
Presents her self a Sacrifice, and dies:
132.
So gentle YNES'S brutish Murderers,
Even in that Neck (white ATLAS of that Head
Whose stars, thought set, had influence over the powers
Of Him, That crowu'd her after she was dead)
Bathing their thirsty Swords, and all the flowers
Which her fair Eyes had newly watered
(Mindless of the ensuing Vengeance) stood
Like crimsoned Hunters reeking with her blood.
133.
Well might Thou PHOEBUS from an Act so dire
(PYROUS starting) have reverst thy look;
As from THYESTES'S Table, when the Sire
Dined on the Son, the Uncle being the Cook.
You, hollow Vales (which, when she did expire,
From her cold lips the dying accentstook)
Hearing her PEDRO named with her last breath,
Formed PEDRO, PEDRO, after YNES'S death.
134.
Like a svveet Rose (with party-colours fair)
By Virgin's hand beheaded in the Bud
To play vvithal, or prick into her Hair,
When (severed from the stalk on which it stood)
Both Scent and beauty vanish into Air:
So lies the Damzel without breath, or Blood,
Her Cheeks fresh Roses ravished from the Root
Both red and white, and the svveet life to boot.
135.
This Act of horror, and black night obscure,
MONDEGO'S daughters long resented deep;
And, for a lasting Tomb, into a pure
Fountain, transformd the Tears which they did weep.
The name, they gave it (which does still endure)
Was YNES'S loves, whom PEDRO there did keep.
No wonder, such sweet Streams water those Flowers:
TEARS, are the substance; and the Name, A-MOURS.
136.
It was not long ere PEDRO found the way
To that Revenge which in his breast did boil;
For, taking in his hands the Kingdom's sway
He takes it on the Murd'rers (who changed soil)
With license of another PEDRO. They
(Partners in mischief) having made that vile
And bloody pact, AUGUSTUS did with those
He was new Friends with, of exchanging Foes.
137.
A rigorous Chastizer was this King
Of Thefts, of Murders, and Adultries blind,
The Ill to condign punishment to bring
Was the delight and banquet of his mind.
Restraining Cities with rough discipline,
From Vice and Insolence of every kind,
He gave more Robbers their deserved meed
Then wandering THESUS, or ALCIDES, did.
138.
From the just PEDRO, and severe (Behold
How Nature sometimes can prevaricate!)
Sprang the remiss, the Careless, the sheep-sold
FERNANDO: who set all of a Flame straight.
Whence the CASTILIAN entering uncomptrold,
Went wasting so the weak disnerved State,
That at last gasp it lay: For its seen often,
"A soft KING makes a valiant People, soft.
139.
Whether it were GOD'S Judgment, for his sin
Of taking from her Husband LEONORE,
And marrying Her; besotten with her win-
Ning looks, and by his Flattring Casuists more;
Or that faint Vice (through custom soaking in
Into his Breast, thence breathing through each pore)
Made him all Pap within: For, it is as true,
" Unlawful fires make Valiant KINGS soft too.
140.
" Lust often has brought great men to great mishap:
GOD that permitting, and ordaining thus.
Witness th'ABETTORS of fair HELEN'S Rape:
King-TARQUIN, and Triumvir-APPIUS.
Why could not holy DAVID judgment escape?
Why was destroyed the TRIBE illustrious
OF BENJAMIN? DINAH cost SICHEM deer:
Nor (SARAH only wished) went PHARAOH clear.
141.
Then, whether manly Bosoms melt, or not,
With fires that are not kindled from Above;
ALCMENA'S Son (who ware a Petticot
To please OMPHALE) well may serve to prove:
And ANTHONY, who lost the fame he got,
And the World's Crown for CLEOPATRA'S love.
And Thou of CARTHAGE, in full conquest stayed
By stumbling on a mean Appulian maid.
142.
But who is priviledg'd from the sweet snare
Which Love so subt'ly weaves, and hides it (oh!)
In Damask Roses, in bright auburn hair,
Transparent alablaster, and warm Snow?
Who, from the poisoned Arrows of the Fair?
From a MEDUSA'S head (I term it so)
That turns the hearts of them whom she does tame,
Not into Stone (then it were well) but flame?
143.
Who sees a crystal Brow, a piercing look,
A lushious, and Seraphick excellence,
(Transforming Souls into it) That can brook
The object, or pretend the least defense?
All That have swallowed LOVE'S bewitching Hook,
With poor FERNANDO'S frailty will dispense:
And some (as when MARS seen in courser snares
The Gods did once) even wish his case were Theirs.
End of the third Canto.
Fourth Canto.
STANZA. 1.
AFter a pitchie, and a dripping night,
Poor Travailers confounding in their way,
A glorious Morn (succeeding) glads the sight;
And, with the longed-for Sun, returns the day:
After the whistling winds have spent their spite,
On the calmed Sea the wanton Dolphins play:
So the afflicted Kingdom it befell
When soft FERNANDO bade the world farewell.
2.
And if ours wished a Champion, to fulfill
Their Vengeance upon Those, from whom alone
(Using remiss FERNANDO'S favors ill)
They make account that all their Ills are grown.
Now they I have one according to their will,
Putting illustrious JOHN into the Throne,
As PEDRO'S only Son they could come at:
And his true Son, though Illegitimat.
3.
That this was Heaven's Ordinance divine
By most clear Tokens evident became,
When a young girl, speaking before her time,
In EBORA distinctly formed his name.
And as a Herald-Angel sent in fine
The Portingall Successor to proclaim
Lifting i'th'Cradle Body, Hand, and Tone,
Cried, PORTUGAL FOR THE NEW KING DON JOHN.
4.
Such, at this time, was the confused Estate
Of the poor Realm, and the mad People's spleen;
That (to disburthen their conceived Hate)
Flat Cruelties in every part were seen:
Killing the Kin, and all that did relate
To the adult'rous Earl, and to the Queen,
With whom her lewdness (they affirmed) was more
In widowhood, then it had been before.
5.
But true, or false, the scandal which they gave
Forfeits his Head (and rightly) to the Axe.
He dies for it in her presence: Others have
The self-same sauce. It catches like fired flax.
One, whom religious Orders could not save,
Thrown from a Steeple like ASTIANAX:
A Second, Orders, Sex, nor the Altar's Horn:
A third dragged naked, and to mamocks torn.
6.
In long forgetfullness may now be laid
Those horrid Massacres, which ROME beheld,
By bloody SYLLA, and fierce MARIUS, made,
When one another they by turns expelled.
Then LEONORE (whom th'unrevenged shade
Of her dear Count with open fury swelled)
Invites CASTEEL, who did her daughter wed:
Saying, the CROWN belongs to her head.
7.
Her daughter BEATRICE was she, as due
To whom, he of CASTEEL that Crown might clame:
Reputed daughter of FERNANDO too,
With the permission of her mother's Fame.
Into the Field CASTILIA therefore drew,
To seize the Kingdom in his Consort's name,
Amassing men (our Spot to overwhelm)
From every Province of his spacious Relm.
8.
Troops came (on this occasion) from that LAND
To which one BRIGUS gave his name of yore:
From Lands recovered (by their GREAT FERNAND,
And greater CID) from the usurping MORE.
Nor those, who high in MARS his favor stand,
Who with their Ploughs (laborious) travail over
The Hills of LEON, slowly did advance:
The ancient Terror of the Moorish Lance.
9.
The VANDALS came, who to this day confide
In Valor which of old they made appeer.
SEVILIA came (ANDALUZIA'S Pride)
So sweetly watered by GUADALQUIVEER.
The noble ISLAND (which was colonied
Sometime by TYRIANS) was not wanting here,
Who, on their Banners in those days of yore
The famous Pillars of ALCIDES bore.
10.
Came likewise Troops from old TOLEDO'S Reame,
Whose nimble Tongue the neatest Spanish trolls:
And TAGUS clasps her with his amorous stream,
Which from the Hills of CUENCA sweetly rolls.
Nor fear kept you from being joined to Them,
Sordid GALLEGOS (refractory Souls!)
That arm your selves again, those swords to oppose,
Of which already ye have felt the blows.
11.
Likewise black Furies of the war drives an
The BISKAYNER, A mortal enemy
To Complement; nor of a Heart, that can
From any stranger brook an injury:
He of GUIPUSCUA, and th'ASTURIAN:
Famed for their Yron-Indies far and nigh:
These (armed with their own Mines) conducted are
To serve their LORD in the denounced War.
12.
JOHN, from whose manly Bosom's bristles, grew
That courage, SAMPSON borrowed of his hairs,
Though all his men amount but to a Few,
To play the best of a bad Game prepares.
Nor, that he is unresolved what to do,
Calls the chief Counselors in his Affairs;
But, to observe how every one inclines:
"For among many there are many minds.
13.
There want no such, as, even against that Cause
They follow, Reasons do insinuate:
Whose sense with a Castilian Byas draws
From all that is Portingal degenerate.
Whom Fear so freezes, and so overaws,
That natural love it does exterminate.
Their King, and Country, they deny: and would
With PETER too, for fear deny their GOD.
14.
Don NUNIO (to be sure) was none of Those:
But though his Brothers (whom he deerly loved)
Take the other side, and big the danger grows,
Them whose Faith staggers sharply he reproved;
And at these People with their I's, and No's;
Laying his Hand upon his Hilt (more moved
Then Eloquent) these words abruptly hurled:
Threatening the Earth, the Ocean, and the world.
15.
What? Amongst the Portingal-Nobility
Shall there be any less then Sons of MARS?
What? in this Realm (victorious far and nigh)
Shall there be born, That shun defensive wars?
That will their Hearts, their Hands, their Heads deny
At such a pinch, their Fortunes, and their Stars?
Or who, for any cause that can be thought,
Will see their Country in subjection brought.
16.
What? Are not you then of those worthies bred,
Who (fierce and valiant as the Swords they wore)
Under the great HENRIQUEZ Standart led,
O'rethrew this warlike Nation once before?
When Them so many routed Squadrons fled,
So many Flaggs, that (besides thousands more
Of lesser Rank, amongst the opulent Pr^y)
Sev'n potent Earls our Prisoners were that day?
17.
With whom, perpetually were trodden down
These, That are now so dreadful in your view,
By DENIS, and, his Son, of high Renown,
But with your Sires, and Grandsires? and if you
Were (by the Sins, or weakness, of the CROWN)
Kept under, in FERNANDO'S days; Renew
Your strength with the new King: "For it is not strange
"(You see) for People with their Kings to change.
18.
Ye have one now, that, if your courage rose
Equal with his You lifted to the Throne,
Ye might overthrow the World, how much more Those,
Whom ye have often already overthrown?
And if, in short, with Him ye cannot lose
Those fears, that seem to have turned you into stone;
Stand but like stones (I ask you not one stroke)
Whilst I alone resist a foreign yoke.
19
I only, with my Tenants, and with this --
(And at that word he pulled out half his Blade)
Will save from force, and all that shameful is,
This Land, which hitherto has lived a Maid.
By the King's fire, and mine (lighted at his):
Our Countrey's Tears: By Faith (by you not vvaigh'd):
Not only These upon their knees I Will bring,
But All that ever shall oppose my King.
20.
As when, despairing now, the Youth of ROME
(All that survived CANNAE'S fatal Field)
Stood ready (rallyed in CANUSIUM)
Themselves unto the Conqueror to yield,
But young CORNELIUS does amongst them come,
And swears them All upon his sword, compelled;
That they the Roman wars shall never leave,
Till life leave them, or Those their lives bereave:
21.
So NUNIO animates, whom he did force.
Whose boyst'rous Rhet'rick such quick flame imparts,
Chiefly the Tail and sting of his discourse,
As thaws those fears that had congeal d their hearts.
And presently they call to Horse, to Horse,
Tossing about their heads Lances, and Darts.
They run: and live (with open mouth they cry)
The famous King that gives us Liberty!
22.
Amongst the fiercer Commons, some up-cry
This war, by which their Country is assoyl'd:
Others scowr up their Armours, and supply
What with the rust of peace was eat, and spoiled:
These, stuff old Murrions; Those, new breast-plates try:
Each takes those Arms, he has most skill to wield.
With several colored Garments, others flaunt:
Others, Love- Motto's, and devices paint.
23.
With all this well-appointed Company,
Does valiant JOHN from fresh ABRANTES go:
Abrantes, which injoys abundantly
The streams, from CUENCA'S frozen Caves that flow.
The well-arm'd Vanguard is commanded by
One, who was fit t have led against a Foe
Those Oriental Forces without Count,
With which King XERXES past the HELLESPONT.
24.
DON NUNIO ALVAREZ, I mean: the true
And fatal scourge of proud CASTILIANS,
No less, then once the valiant HUN was to
The ancient GAULLS, and the ITALIANS.
Another Knight (to whom much praise is due)
Leads the right wing of LUSITANIANS:
As skillful to conduct, as bold in fight,
OF VASCONCETOS MEM RODRIQUEZ, high^.
25.
The other wing, that corresponds with this,
ANTONIO VASQUEZ of ALMAAD commands,
Who after Conde of Abranchez is:
And He comes up with the Sinestre Bands.
In the R^er-Gard the Standart none can miss,
Where (Circling PORTUGAL) CASTILIA Stands;
With JOHN, accomplished in every part:
Who makes a dunce of MARS in his own Art.
26.
Trembling upon the Battlements, and even
Cold (betwixt hope and fear suspended now)
Wives, Mothers, Sisters, Mistresses, are seen.
Prayers they prefer: Fasts, Pilgrimages, vow.
Our Troops (advancing with undaunted mien)
Down by the Foe they sit them, brow to brow;
Received with shouts, which rock the Firmament:
Yet one, and the other, doubted the event.
27.
The vocal Trumpets challenge, and accept:
The Drumms, and whistling Fifes in consort join.
The dusty Field the s^ourisht Ensigns swept,
Where all the Colors of the Rainbow shine.
It was the time, when, CERES'S fruits being reapt,
She lends her Lab'rers to the God of Wine:
When (into Libra entered August's Sun)
Plump BACCHUS put sweet Must into the Tun.
28.
Castilian Trumpets did the Onset sound,
Loud, furious dismal, terrible, and hoarce
Heard it ARTABOR'S Mount, and underground
Her way did frighted GUADIANA force:
Heard it the DVVERE, and ALENTECHO round:
TAGUS looks back, then hastens on his course:
And Mothers (who that baylefull noysedid hear)
Claspe to their Breasts their tender Babes for fear.
29.
How many Cheeks were there discolourd seen,
Whilst to the Heart the friendly blood repaird?
"In great Incounters greater is I ween
"The fear of danger, then the danger feared:
"But, when the first brunt's over, Rage, and Teen,
"Desire of honor, and to Plume the Beard
"Of a proud Foe; These take away the sense
"Of losing limbs, or dearest life's expense.
30.
On either side the first Battalions move:
The doubtful war on either side began:
These fighting for their Country, which they love;
Those, to possess another's if they can.
The great PEREYRA, first his force did prove:
Summing an Armie's valor in one Man.
He shocks, strikes down, in fine he makes, their Grave,
And with their Corpses sows the Land they crave.
31.
Now through the darkened Air barbd Arrows fleet,
Javelins, with other shot, fly whizzing round;
Under the fiery Coursers's iron Feet
The Earth does tremble, and the Vales resound:
Lances are cracked, and (dropping thick as Sleet)
The Horsemen armd come thundering to the ground.
Upon feirce NUNIO'S Few, fresh Foes are pact:
Their Art, to multiply; his, to abstract.
32.
Lo now his Brother's swords against him bent
(Cruel, and ougly)! But He wonders not.
For they, who'gainst their King, and Country went,
Would never stick to cut a Brother's Throat.
Of these Revolters many did present
Themselves in the first Ranks: And who so hot
To kill their Friends, as They? so kindred Hoasts
Of yore incountred in Pharsalian Coasts.
33.
O CATALINE, and Thou Sertorius bold,
Noble CORIOLANUS, with the rest,
Who'gaynst your Country drew your swords of old
From an Impious, though provoked, Breast!
If in the dark Abyss of PLUTO'S Hold
Ye find your selves with FURIES'S whipps oppressed,
Tell them (to cloak the horror of your sin)
Some Portingalls sometimes have Traitors bin.
34.
Ore whelmd with growing Foes's impetuous flood,
Now were the foremost of our Squadrons burst,
There NUNIO, like a rampant Lion, stood,
Whom in her neighb ring Mountains CEUTA nursed;
But now he is invirond with a wood
Of HUNTERS spears, ore Tetuan plains that courst;
Those All are bent at Him, His Brows He draws,
Nor is it Fear, but Anger makes him pause.
35.
Musty he looks, naught pleased with the sight,
Yet (his wild Nature, and undaunted he art
Incompetible with ignoble flight)
Himself amongst the thickest he does dart:
So with the blood of Aliens dies our Knight
The Lusitanian Grass. Some fall, some start
Even of his own. For, where there is such odds,
Strength often fails, and firmest Virtue nods.
36.
JOHN saw how hard brave NUNIO was put to it:
(For, as a wise and careful General,
His Eye was in all parts, in all his Foot,
His Presence, and his words, gave life to All)
As a She-Lyon, and a Nurse to boot,
That finds, whilst Hunger, Her from home did call,
(Leaving her whelps unto themselves) a bold
Massylian shepherd lurcht them from her Hold;
37.
Raving she runs, and grinds her Teeth, and rends
The SEVEN BROTHER MOUNTAINS with her Voice:
So JOHN, so runs he (to assist his Friends)
To the Head Squadrons with some soldiers choice.
O brave Camrades, noble as are your Ends,
(How in your matchless Valor I rejoice)!
Defend your Country, and defend your Lands:
The Hope of Freedom in your Lances stands.
38.
See me, your King, your Fellow, and your Head,
Amongst Darts, amongst Arrows, and thick Pikes among,
Rush on the Foe! Nor are you sent, but led.
Show, fighting, to what Country ye belong.
The irrefragable Warrior sed;
Who, four times poysinga sharp Lance, and strong;
Throws it with force: and through this Throw alone
Many a Soul out of her House is thrown.
39.
For (lo!) his men with honorable shame
Are kindled new and with a noble Ire.
Who shall bet most at MARS his bloody Game,
Is the only Thing to which they All aspire.
They Vye, revye, and dip their steel in flame:
Break stubborn Mayles, nor leave thick Plates entire.
Thus wounds they give, and wounds they take again,
Nor does it grieve them, slaying, to be slain.
40.
Many are posted to the Stygian Wave,
Into whose Bodies entered Steel, and death.
Of St. IA GO there the MASTER brave
Dies fighting stoutly to his last of breath.
Another MASTER dire of CALATRAVE
Pulls Troops down with him to the shades beneath.
The Renegade PEREYRAS likewise dye
Reneaguing HEAVEN and their Destiny.
41.
Went thousands of the Vulgar without noat,
And nobles too, unenter'd in FAME'S rolls,
Where that lean dog still gapes with triple throat,
Which never can be filled with humane souls.
And (more to humble them, who, when on float,
Thought the whole World must stoop to their controlls)
The high Castilian Standart now does fall,
And kiss the foot of that of PORTUGAL.
42.
With deaths, with groans, with blood, with gashes dire,
The battle cruel above measure grows.
The multitude of men, that here expire,
Makes all the Flowers in color like the Rose.
All fly, or dye: Now out of breath was Ire:
Now Valor lost an Arm for want of Foes:
Now routed sees himself CASTILIA'S King,
And quits the purpose he from home did bring.
43.
The Field he leaves unto the Conqueror,
Glad that he did leave him his life too.
The poor remainder follow: To whom Fear
Gave wings, not Feet: nor did they run, but flew.
The loss of so much men, and Treasure there,
Profoundly in their silent hearts they rue:
Hiding the smart, the sorrow; and the soil,
To have Another triumph in their spoil.
44.
Some Him with open mouth blaspheam'd, and cursed,
Who first invented War mankind to quell;
In whose obdurate Breast Ambition first,
And Covetise of others goods did dwell;
Nor cared for feeding his hydropick Thirst
How many silly souls were pack't to Hell;
Who taught the way to shorten humane lives,
To orphan Children, and to widow Wives.
45.
Victorious JOHN upon the place stays out
In martial glory the accustomed days:
With Offerings then, and Pilgrimage devout,
To Him, That gave the Conquest, gives the Praise.
But NUNIO (minding what he was about,
As He That knows, a lasting Fame to raise,
No way like Arms, which all the world command)
Passes his Troops to the Trans-Tagan Land.
46.
To Him his stars so favorable were,
That the success applauded the design:
For he both conquers, and the spoils does wear
Of Andalusian Countries That confine.
The Betick Standard of SEVILIA there,
Under which diverse neighboring great ones join,
With small resistance at his feet soon falls,
Quelled by the force, and name, of PORTINGALS.
47.
With these, and other Victories oppressed
A tedious while were the CASTILIANS brave,
When Peace, and now by both desired Rest,
The vanquished People from the Victors have:
After the KING OF HEAVEN, for ever blessed,
To the Foe-Kings in holy marriage gave
Of ENGLISH SISTERS the unequalled pair,
Illustrious, lovely, beautiful, and Fair.
48.
But long that Breast, inured to bloody Broile,
To live without a Foe, could not sustain;
So (having none upon the Land to toil)
Goes to extend his Conquests ore the Maine.
This is our first of Kings, who does exile
Himself from SPAIN, to make the AFFRICANE
By force of Arms perceive the difference great
Betwixt CHRIST's Law, and that of MAHOMET.
49.
Behold on curled THETYS'S silver flood
Their wings a thousand swimming Eagles beat,
To catch the swelling wind (a moving wood)
Where the World's utmost bounds ALCIDES set,
MOUNT AVILA he takes, and the Walls good
Of noble CEUTA, outing MAHOMET
With his blind Worship: and secures all SPAIN
From Treason of another JULIANE.
50.
Death envies so great Bliss to PORTUGAL
As to enjoy the Ages it desires
This worthy Prince; and takes him from Earth's Ball,
To add a new Voice to the Angells's Quires.
But that GOOD POWER, which Him to Heaven did call,
Left his large offspring to supply their Sire's
Lamented want: PRINCES, who shall command,
Augment, and with new Virtues deck the Land.
51.
King EDWARD was not of the happiest, though,
The while that He the Regal Throne did fill:
"For moody TIME goes blending joy with woe:
"And with alternate Hand gives good for Ill.
"Who ever Happiness did constant know?
"Or FORTUNE with one face continue still?
Yet to this KINGDOM she, and even this KING,
More of her honey gave, then of her sting.
52
He saw his Brother Captive (good FERNAND)
Who had a Soul so public, and so brave,
That, for his Troops, distressed in AFFRICK-LAND,
Himself a Pawn unto the MOORS he gave.
Where, when his ransom was in his own Hand,
He (born a Prince) would rather dye a slave:
Then that for Him we CEUTA should restore
Freedom he lovd, but loved his Country more.
53.
CODRUS, because the Foe should not overcome;
Deviz'd a noble Stratagem to dye:
To save the martial discipline of ROME
Did RFGULUS to Death with Torments fly:
Ours, distant fear to keep his Country from,
Invites himself to endless slavery.
CODRUS, nor CURTIUS (so much wondered at)
Nor loyal DECII, did so much as That.
54.
But EDWARD'S only Son, ALPHONSO hight,
(A lucky Name to our HESPERIA)
Who, the proud threatenings of Barbarian night
In bord'ring Lands, low as the dust did lay;
Would have been doubtless an unconquered Knight,
Had he forborne t'invade IBERIA.
AFRIC will tell you, 'twas impossible
To overcome a King so terrible.
55.
To pull the golden Apples was his hap,
Which none before him, but ALCIDES bit,
On the feirce MOOR he such a Yoke did clap
From which they cannot rest their Necks out yet.
The Palm and Laurel green his Temples wrap,
Of Victories, he at the Seige did git
Of Pop'lous TANCER, Strong ALAGER'S Towers,
And tough ARZILA, over the Barbarous Powers
56.
Infine, the ever-conqu'ring PORTINCALL'S
(The succors beaten) entering These by force,
Threw to the ground the adamantine walls,
And All that thwarted their Victorious course.
Wonders (deserving Pens whence liquor falls
Immortalizing with it is Nectar source)
Wrought private Swords in this Exployt of fame:
Exalting more the Lusitanian name.
57.
But after taynted with Ambition,
And Rule's sweet Thirst (though sour to Him at last)
FERNANDO he invades of ARRAGON,
About the Kingdom of CASTILIA vast.
Of the proud NATIONS (which depend thereon)
A numerous Host, to oppose him, is a masst,
From CADIZ to the lofty PERYNEE:
All which the King FERNANDO did obey.
58.
The young PRINCE JOHN disdayns it should be said,
He is the only idle Man in SPAIN;
And therefore. his ambitious Sire to aid
Resolves forth with: nor is his Aid in vain.
The Battayle's bloody period, undismayd,
He sees; and with a brow serene and plain.
The warlike Father put to total Rout,
Yet leaves the Son the Victory in doubt.
59.
For the sublime and truly Royal son
(Gay Knight undaunted, consident, and high)
Having vast spoil to the Adversary done,
Stays one whole day the Field to justify.
Thus was OCTAUIUS CAESAR overthrown,
And Victor his companion ANTHONY:
When They or Those, who noble JULIUS killed,
Revenged themselves in the Philippick Field.
60.
ALPHONS o mounted to high Heaven serene;
The Prince, That then the Scepter swayd of right,
Was Second JOHN, who made of KINGS fifteen
He (to attain to Glory's utmost hight)
Began a Task, exceeding strength terrene
(Whose weight is now by my weak shoulders born)
To seek the Cradle of the purple MORN.
61.
He sends fit Messengers from his own Court
Through SPAIN, FRANCE, celebrated ITALY:
There to imbarque in that illustrious Port
Where was interred, of old, PARTHE NOPE.
NAPLES; which Fortune made her Tennis-Court,
By several NATIONS held successively,
To place it glorious (no more change to feel)
In sovereign SPANIARDS, who can fix her wheel.
62.
Away they sail through the CALAERIAN DEUP;
Pass by the RODIAN ISLAND'S sandy Bay:
Along the Coast of ALEXANDRIA keep,
For POMPEY'S death infamous to this day.
They travayle MEMPHIS, and those Lands which steep
Themselves in NYLE. To ETHIOPIA
They mount, which EGYPTS upper part does lock,
Where CHRIST has feeding an out-lying Flock.
63.
The ERYTHREAN SEA they likewise crossed:
Which, dry-foot past the seed of ISRAEL.
The NABATHEAN MOUNTAYN'S sight they lost,
So named from the Son of ISHMAEL.
The oderiferous SABEAN-COAST
(Inricht with Tears which from the Mother fell
Of fair ADONE.) and BLESSED ARABIA trac't
Throughout (the STONY balking; and the WAST;)
64.
The PERSIAN GULF they enter. To This near,
Great BABEL'S Ruins are yet visible.
Swift TIGRIS mingles with EUFRATES here:
Brothers, That with their Fountain's glory swell.
Hence they proceed in quest of INDUS clear:
From which great things Posterity shall tell,
Of Troops, that through long Seas shall pass thereto:
Which, even by Land nigh TRAIAN durst not do.
65.
Of INDIA, TARFE, and CARMANIAN HILLS,
The strange and uncoth Nations they beheld:
Noating the several Customs, several Skills,
Which several Regions do produce, and yield.
But from such Distant parts (joynd to the Ills
Of so rough journeys) Men return but seld.
In fine, there did These dye; they stuck fast there:
For back they come not to their Country dear.
66.
Seems, gracious HEAVEN reserved for Thee alone,
EMANUEL, and for thy great desert
So hard a work: For Thee with thoughts high-flown
Inspired, and cut out fit to act this part.
MANUEL (succeeding JOHN, both in the Throne,
And in the haughty purpose of his Heart)
When first he took on Him the Kingdoms Charge,
The Conquest undertook oth' OCEAN large.
67.
He, as a person, whom the noble thought
Of the obligation he inherited
From his Fore Fathers (who entirely sought
The Realm's advancement) hourly combated;
When PHOEBUS, quitting the supernal Vault,
Unto the low ANTIPODES was fled,
And setting stars (which in his place arose)
With twinkling eyes invited to repose:
68.
Extended now upon his golden Nest
(Such are the Beds where thoughts tumultuous brood)
And there revolving in his silent Breast
The obligation of his place, and blood:
Slumber possessed his Eyes, nor dispossessed
His Heart of Cares, which made that station good:
For his tired Lidds whilst sleep (resisted) shutts,
MORPHEUS a thousand shapes before him putts.
69.
So high above ground seems he lifted here,
That his proud Crown the Firmament does pierce:
From whence new worlds before his eyes appeer,
Nations of numerous people strange and fierce:
And yonder (to the springing MORNING near)
As through the Air his visual Rays disperse,
He sees, far off, from high and ancient Mountains,
Melt down a pair of deep and crystal Fountains
70.
With Birds of monstrous Forms, wild-beasts and Flocks,
One of those Mountains was inhabited;
Where thousand savage Trees with leavie Locks
The intercourse of people hindered
The shaggie Forest, and the craggie Rocks's
Inextricable Knots, demonstrated,
That to those days of ours from ADAM'S sin,
No humane Foot had ever trod therein.
71.
Out of these Waters (as to Him appears)
Addressing toward him their hasty pace,
Two Fathers rise, both wondrous struck in years,
With Rustic both, yet venerable, Face.
Their Snowy Curles distill in silver Tears
Which bathe their Bodies down in every place.
Taun'd were their Skins, and rusty: Their Beards kept
Rough and unshorn, with which the ground they swept.
72.
The Temples of their heads, were trimly bound
With health-restoring Druggs, and Fruits unknown.
The one looked weather-beaten and halfe-drownd,
As if a longer voyage He had gone;
And (fierce, even at his Fountain) underground
Seemed to have stolen from a remoter one:
As from Arcadian plains ALPHEO sly
TO ARETHUSA'S bed in SICILY.
72.
This (as the more authorized of the Twain)
Spoke thus (far off) unto the King* O Tho^
For whose high Crown, and Empire sovereign,
Much World is kept, that is h^d from the world, now.
We (through the Earth so famed, whose Necks in vain,
Strave others wholly to their yoaks to bow)
Are come to wish thee send some Men That may
Receive large tributes, we to Thee must pay.
74.
I am illustrious GANGES: born and nursed
In PARADISE: where is my mother-spring.
My Mate (That from the Cliffes thou see, does burst;
Nor other Cradle knows) is INDUS KING.
Yet a severe War shall we cost thee first:
But Thou (persisting) in the end shall bring,
By Victories prodigious, to the Bitt,
All these viewd Nations humbly to submit.
35.
The Holy and illustrious River, sed
No more: But in a moment vanished Both.
EMANUELL wakes surpised with a strange dread,
And earthquake in his Bosom. PHOEBUS goes
In the mean time his glittring Cloak to spread
Over the WORLD, buried in down, and sloth.
AURORA came: who, when she forth does rush,
Strikes Lilies pale, and makes the Roses blush.
36.
The KING in have to council calls his Lords,
To them the figures of the Vision shows;
To them repeates the Holy Elder's Words:
Whence in them all great admiration grow's.
A NAVY is resolved on by the BOARD'S
Unanimous Voate: In which (magnanimous) Those,
Whom he shall find to plough the OCEAN blew,
Must seek new Nations out, and Clymates new.
37.
I, who despayr'd to see put in effect
What had so long been tumbling in my mind:
(For my presaging Soul could nere be checked
From prompting great things to me of this kind)
Comprize not for what cause, for what respect,
Or for what merit, he in me could find;
But the good King was pleased to pick out me
To be this weighty enterprize's Key.
38.
And with Entreaties, and with sugard phraise
(Which are the pow'rfullest commands of KINGS)
He said to me. "Through deep, and rugged ways,
"VIRTUE attains the best and noblest things.
"A Life well lost, or hazarded, to Bays
"Of everlasting Honor persons brings:
"For (if to sordid Fear it never bends)
"The shorter it is, the Farther it extends.
39.
You have I chose (and all the rest set by)
To a Task fit for you to undergo:
A Task Heroic, difficult and high,
Which (for my sake) you will think light, I know.
I could not suffer more: but thus reply,
O my dread LIEGE! through swords, through fir^, through snow,
For Thee to venture, only is Annoy
When I consider life is such a Toy.
90.
One, following, Cries: O Son! (the only gage,
The prop, the stay, the comfort and the joy,
Of this my weak unprofitable Age,
Which Floods of bitter Tears drown in Annoy)
Why leave thou me in this sad equipage?
Why will thou go, and leave me (my dear Boy!)
To make the greedy Seas thy Sepulchere,
And Fishes feed That take their pastime there?
91.
Another (with loose Hayr) O my deer Mate,
Without whom Love tells me my root must pine!
Why will thou go, and venture at this rate
That life to GULPHS, which is not thine but mine?
How can thou change, for so uncertain Fate,
The chaste embraces of thy constant Vine?
Our loves, our joys (in vain how sweet!) must They
To Sea? and with this wind be blown away:
92.
In these and other speches of this kind
(Which from deer love, and soft compassion rose)
Old men and children (to like Ruth inclined
By different Ages) imitated Those
The neigbring mountayns in dull consort join:
And, melting, bare the burden of their woes.
The golden Sands the Silver Tears bedewed:
Which seemd to strive with them in multitude.
93.
WE (not so much as lifting once our Eyes
On Wife, or Mother: though our Souls it grinds)
Whereby in vain laments to Sympathize,
Or change the purpose of our fixed minds)
T'embarque our selves, conceived it was most wise,
Without those Farewells to which custom binds:
Which (though it be Love's most indeering way)
Galls more, both Those That go: and Those that stay.
94.
But an Old man of Venerable look
(Standing upon the shore amongst the Crowds)
His Eyes fixed upon us (on shipboard) shook,
His head three times ore cast with sorrows clouds:
And (streining his Voice more, then well could brook
His aged lungs: It rattled in our shrow'ds)
Out of a science practice did Attest,
Let fly these words from an oraculou's Breast.
80.
Put me on Tasks as great as those of yore
Suborned EURISTEUS to ALCIDES gave;
The fruitful HYDRA, ERIMANTHIAN BORE,
The HARPIES dire, NEMEAN LION brave.
In short, to visit the infernal shore
Where Styx moats PLUTO'S House with its black Wave:
For Thee (O KING) worse dangers, and worse Toyls,
My Spirit leaps at, nor my Flesh recoyles.
81.
With sumptuous Boons; and words, that those exceed;
My good will He does praise, and gratify:
"For Virtue, spurred with praise, doubles her speed;
"And is inflamed to Enterprises high.
To second me in this Exployt, agreed
(Obliged by Nature's, and by Frendship's Tie,
Thirsty alike of Honor, and of Fame)
My dear and loving Brother PAUL DE GAME.
82.
NICH'LAS COELLIO makes a Third: for pains
Most indefatigable. And These are
My two Supporters strong of Hand, and Brains:
Experienced both, both no less bold in war.
I get me a young Crew of sturdy Swains,
Whose budding Valor itcht for martial jarr:
All metled Lads; And so, it well appeers,
That came to such a business Volunteers.
83.
These too have gifts from MANUEL'S hand, t'equip
Themselves, and make the love they bear him more:
And with the praising bounty of his Lip,
Are armed against All, hard Fates can have in store.
Thus manned KING PELIAS that prophetic ship
In which (through Euxine Seas, unsayl d before)
With AESON'S Heir the venurous youth of GREECE
He sent to COLCOS for the Golden Fleece.
84.
Now in the famous Port of LISBON-TOWN
(Where golden TAGUS mingles his sweet Flood
With the Salt OCEAN, and his Sands does drown)
With noble longings, and transported mood,
The SHIPS lie ready. There no sullen frown,
No frosty Fear, benmms the youthful blood:
For both the Seamen, and the Land-men there,
Will go with me about the WORLD, they swear.
85.
Upon the shore the strutting soldiers sail
In clothes of several color, several cut,
Their minds, more brave: bent to extend our pale,
And plant in lands unknown their daring foot.
The gentle wind breathing a tempting Gale,
On the tall Ships the Standarts open and shutt.
The Ships expect, for this new Navigation,
To be (like ARGO) made a Constellation.
86.
We (fitted and provided thus, with All
That such a Voyage does require and crave)
To fit our souls for death devoutly fall:
Which Sailors see in every rounding Wave.
From Him, whose presence Beatificall
Is all the Food that Saints and Angels have,
Favor we beg, for to prepare our way,
And to conduct us with his heavenly Ray.
87.
Thus of that Temple took we a long leave,
Which (on the Margent of our Ocean placed)
From the blessed City did it is name receave
Where GOD was born (a Gem in Clay enchac't)
I promise thee (O KING) how we did heave
Our Anchors from that shore, when I recast;
With doubt of ever seeing it again,
Scarce can my bridled eyes from Tears refrain.
88.
The Inhabitants of LIS^ON, that sad day
(For Friendship some, and some for Kindreds Ties)
Others, as mere spectators, flockt: dismay,
And solitariness, writ in their Eyes.
And we (whom thousand Priests upon our way
Did bring with Psalms, and all solemnities
Of grave procession) praying to our GOD,
Went to take shipping in the Noble Road.
89.
In so long Voyage, and so doubtful ways,
The gazing people give us All for lost,
This, by their ^eares the softer sex bewrays:
The Men by Sighs, as they would yield the Ghost,
Sisters, and Mothers; And poor Wives (always
Where there is most of love, there fear reigns most.)
Increase the doubt upon the general score,
That she shall never see our Faces more.
95.
O Glory of commanding! O vain Thirst
Of that same empty nothing, we call Fame!
O Ignis fatuus, kindled and nursed
With vulgar breath (and this we Honor name)!
What Plagues, what stings, what secret scourges cursed,
Torment those Bosoms which thou do inflame!
What deaths! what dangers! what impetuous storms!
What cruelties on them thy Hand performs!
96.
Fell Tyrant of the souls! life's swallowing VVave!
Mother of Plunders, and black Rapes unchaste!
The secret miner, and the open Grave,
Of Patrimonies, Kingdoms, Empires vast!
They call thee noble, and they call thee Brave:
(Worthy to have other names upon thee cast!)
They call thee Fame, and Glory sovereign:
Titles, with which the foolish Rout is taken.
97.
What new disaster dire intendest Thou
To lead these Kingdoms, and these Folk into?
What deaths, what Horrors must they swallow now,
Under pretense to spread Religion true?
What holdings forth of golden Mines, and how
Great Kingdoms shall be conquered by a Few?
What Fames do thou advance? what Histories?
What Palms? what Triumphs? and what Victories.
98.
But Thou (the lignage of that Fool, who twice
Undid thee by his disobedience:
Not only when he lost thee PARADISE,
Into this Vale of Tears exild from thence;
But when by growth of his infectious Vice
He forfeited thy second Innocence,
And Thee, out of a golden exile hurld
Into an Iron and contentious world.)
99.
Since with this sweet and pleasing vanity
Thy giddie Brain is so bewitched, and drowned;
Since bloody Rage and Inhumanity,
Valor, and Brav'rie, in thy language sound;
Since thou do value, and esteem so high,
The disesteem of life, which we are bound
To cherish, and in great account to have it:
(Since so much fea^'d to loose it, He who gave it)
100.
Have thou not, close at hand, the ISHMAELITE
To cut thee work out, more then thou can do?
If for the sacred Law of CHRIST thou fight,
The ARABIAN'S false one does not He pursue?
Has He not thousand Cities, Infinite
Of Land, if Power's avail, if Wealth's one too?
Has not He got in Arms a mighty Name,
If Honor, and not Booty be thy Aim?
101.
Leave thou a growing Foe just at thy door,
To go and seek another Foe so far,
Dispeopling an old Realm, wasting her store,
Quitting thy Country, and thy private LAR?
That flattering Fame to Heaven may make thee soar,
Through waves uncertain seekst thou certain war?
In thy swollen Style in words at length to find,
ARABIA, PERSIA, ETHIOPIA, YN'D?
102.
Accursed be He, who first sorsook the Ground,
And fastened canvas wings to a dry Tree!
Worthy, in endless darkness to be bound;
If that, which I was taught, RELIGION be.
May never Judgment, solid and profound,
May never Happy Veyn in Poetry,
Retrive his memory, adorn his Fame:
But dye, with Him, his Glory, and his Name.
103.
The son of IAPET stole from PHEBUS'S Carr
Fire, which in humane Breast he did infuse;
Fire, which the world did kindle into War,
Plagues, and debaucheries (a great abuse!)
PROMETHEUS, had it not been better far
For Us, and for the world (which we misuse)
Thy noble Statute had excused that fire,
Which made it with Ambition's wings aspire?
104.
Then had not the much pitied youth been driving
His Sire's gilt charet; nor that great contriver
Through th'empty Air sayld with his Son ( This giving
The sea a name, He Fame unto a River)
Nothing so high, nothing so barrd the living,
Through Fire, Sword, Water, Calm and Cold: what ever:
Which MAN projecteth, and attempteth not,
A strange Condition! an unquiet Lot!
End of the fourth Canto.
Fifth Canto.
STANZA. 1.
THe reverend Father stood inculcating
These Sentences; when We to a serene
And gentle Gale expand our Canvas wing:
When from the loved Port our selves we reane:
And sails unfurling make the Welkin ring
(After the manner of Sea- faring Men)
With BOON VOYAGE. Immediately the Wind
Does on the Trunks his Office and his kind.
2.
The ever burning Lamp, that rules the day,
In the Nemean Brute began to rage;
And the great world (which does with time decay)
Limpt in his Sixth infirm, and crooked Age:
Thereof (accompting in the CHURCH 'is way)
Of Sol's incessant Race the THOUSAND stage
Four hundred, Ninety Seav'nth, was running when,
In all their trim the Ships to sail began.
3.
Now by degrees out of our sight did glide
Parts of our Co^ntrey, which abode behind.
Abode deer TAGUS: and we then did hide
Fresh SYNTRA (About this our eyes did wind)
In the loved Kingdom likewise did abide
Our Hearts, whose st^ings could not be thence untwind,
And, when as all the Land did now with draw,
The sea and Firmament was all we saw.
4
Thus went we opening those seas, which (save
Our own) no Nation opened ere before:
See those new Isles, and clymates near; which brave
PRINCE HENRY showed unto the world before
The Mauritanian Hills, and Strand, which gave,
ANTEUS birth, who there was King of yore,
Upon the left hand left (for there is none
Upon the right, though now suspected, known)
5.
We the great Island of MADERA pass,
Which from its Wood's abundance took the name;
The first, which planted by our Nation was,
Of which the worth is more then the great fame:
Nor (though the last place in the world it has)
Does any, VENUS loves, excel the same:
Who (rather) were it Hers, would lay aside
For This, CYTHERA, CYPRUS, PAPHOS, GNIDE.
6.
We leave adust M SSILIAS barren Coast,
Where AZENEGUES'S lean Herds take their repast:
A People, That want water to their Roast;
Nor Herbs it self in any plenty taste:
A LAND in fine, to bear no Fruit disposed*
Where Birds in their hot stomachs Iron waste:
Suffering of all things great Necessity:
Which ETHIOPIA parts from BARBARY.
7.
We pass the Bound that hedges out the Sun
When to the frozen North he bends his way:
Where people dwell, whom CLYMENE'S rash Son
Deny'de the sweet Complexion of the day.
Here NATIONS strange are watered one by one
With the fresh Currents of black SENEGA.
Here ARSINARIUS Aloof is seen,
That lost his name: confirmed by Us CAPE GREEN.
8.
CANARIAN ISLES (the same men called of old
THE FORTUNATE) declined: After These
Among the Daughter-Islands we did fall
Of aged HESPER, termed HESPERIDES.
Locks, in the which the Fleets of PORTUGAL
To wonders new before had turned the Keys.
There did we touch with favorable wind,
Some fresh provisions for our Ships to find.
9.
It Is Name the Isle on which we Anchor cast
Did from the warlike St. IAGO take.
The Saint That holp the SPANIARD in times past
Such cruel havoc of the MOORS to make.
Thence, when the North renewed his kinder blast,
We cut again the circumfused Lake
Of the salt Ocean; And that Storehouse: leave,
From which Refreshment sweet we did receive.
10.
Winding withal about your Afric shore,
Where to the EAST (like a half moon) it bends;
About JALOFO'S Province (which does store
The world with BLACKS, whom, forced Aboard, it sends.)
The large MANDINGA that affords the Ore
The which does make Friends Foes, and of Foes Friends;
(Which sucked GA^MEA'S crooked water laves
That disimbogues in the Atlantic Waves)
11.
We pass the GORGADES, peopled by fair
Sisters, in ancient time residing there:
Who (robbed of seeing) did amongst them share
One only Eye, which they by turns did wear.
Thou only, Thou (the Net of whose curl d Hair
Caught NEPTUNE, like a Fish, in his own Were)
Turn d of them all at last the ugliest Lout,
With Vipers sow'dst the burning sands about.
12.
Ploughing in fine before a Northern Wind
In that vast GULF the Navy went embayd;
LEONA'S craggie mountains left behind,
The CAPE OF PALMS (so called from Palmie shade)
And that great RIVER, where the Sea (confined)
Against the shores, which we had planted, brayed:
With the Isle that boasts his name, who would not trust
Till in the side of GOD his Hand he thrust.
13.
There lies of CONGO the wide-spreading Ream,
By Us (before) converted to CHRIST'S Law;
Through which long ZAYRE glides with crystal stream:
A River, this, the Ancients never saw.
In fine through this vast Ocean from the Team
Of known BOOTS I apace withdraw;
Having already past upon the Maine
The BURNING LINE that parts the World in twain.
14.
There we before us saw by it is own light
In this new EPICICLE a Star new:
Of which the other Nations never had sight,
And (long in darkness) no such matter knew,
The world's Antartick Henge (less gilt, less bright,
For want of Stars, then the Artick) we did view:
Beneath the which, a question yet depends,
Whether more Land begins, and the Se^ ends.
15.
Past in this sort those equinoxiall clymes
By which his steeds twice yearly drives the sun;
Making two Summers, VVinters, Autumns, Primes,
Whilst he from one to to'ther Pole does run:
Now tossed, now calmed (A sufferer in all Times:
By want, and plenty, equally undone.)
I saw both BEARS (the little and the Great)
Despite of JUNO in the Ocean set.
16.
To tell thee all the dangers of the DEEP
(Which humane Judgment cannot comprehend)
Sudden and fearful storms, the Air that sweep;
Lightnings, that with the Air the Fire do blend;
Black HURRACANS; thick Nights; THUNDERS, that keep
The World alarmed, and threaten the last End:
Would be too tedious: indeed vain and mad,
Though a brass Tongue, and Iron lungs I had.
17.
I saw those things, which the rude Mariner
(Who has no Mistress, but Experience)
Does for unquestionable Truths aver,
Guided belike by his external sense:
But ACADEMICKS (who can never err,
Who by pure Wit and LEARNING'S quintessence,
Into all NATURES secrets dive and pry)
Count either Lies, or coznings of the Eye.
18.
I saw (as plain as the sun's midday light)
That fire the Seaman saints (shining out fair
In time of Tempest, of feirce winds despite,
Of over-clowded Heaven's. and black despair:)
Nor did we all less wonder (and well might,
For it was a sight to bristle up the Hair)
To see a sea-born Clowd with a long Cane
Suck in the sea, and spout it out again.
19.
I saw with these two eyes) nor can presume
That these deceived me) from the Ocean breathed
A little Vapor, or a eriall Fume,
With the curld wind (as by a Turnor) wreathed.
I saw it reach to Heaven from the salt spume,
In such thin Pipe, as those where springs are shea^hed;
That by the Eye it hardly could be deemed:
Of the same substance which the Clouds it seemed.
20.
By little this and little did augment,
And swelled beyond the Bulk of a thick Mast.
Streightning and widening (like a Throat) it went,
To gulp into it self the water fast.
It waved upon the wavy Element.
The top thereof (impregnated at last
Into a Clowd) expanded more, and more,
With the great load of Water which it bore.
21.
As a black Horse-leech (mark it in some Pool!)
Got to the Lip of an unwary Beast,
Which ( drinking) sucked it from the water cool,
Upon another's blood it self to feast;
It swells and swells, and feeds beyond all Rule,
And stuffs the paunch; a rude, unsober, Guest:
So svvell'd the Pillar (with a hideous Crop)
It self, and the black Clovvd which it did prop.
22.
But, when that now it is full, the Pedestal
Draws to it self, which in the Sea was set;
And (fluttering through the Air) in shovv'rs does fall:
The couchant Water with new water wet.
It pays the waves the borrowed Waves, but all
The Salt thereout did first extract and get.
Now tell me, SCHOLARS, by your Books; what skill,
Dame NATURE used these waters to distill?
23.
If old PHILOSOPHERS (who travayld through
So many Lands, her secrets out to spy)
Had viewd the Miracles which I did view,
Had sailed with so many winds as I;
What writings had they left behind! what new,
Both Stars, and Signs, bequeathed to Us! What high
And strong Influxes! What hid Qualities!
And all pure Truths, without allay of Lies!
24
But when that Planet (which her Court does keep
In the first sphere) five times with speedy Race
Had, since our Fleet was vvand'ring on the DEEP,
Shevv'd sometimes half, and sometimes all her Face:
A quick-eyd Lynx cries, from the Scuttle steep,
LAND! LAND! with that, upon the decks apace
Leaps the transported Crew: their Eyes, intent
On the Horizon of the ORIENT.
25.
At first the dusky Mountains (of the Land
We made) like congregated Clouds did look:
Seen plain, the heavy Anchors out of hand
We ready make: Approached, our sails we struck,
And (that we might more clearly understand
The parts remote in which we were I took
The ASTROLABE, a modern Instrument:
Which with sharp Judgment SAGES did invent:
26.
We disembarke in the most open space:
From whence, themselves the rasher Land-men spread
(Greedy of Novelties!) through the wyld Place:
Which never Stranger's Foot before did tread.
But O (not passing the Land's sandy Face)
To find out where we are, with Seamen bred
Stay taking the Sun's height by th OCEAN curld;
And with my Compass trace the painted World.
27.
We found, we had already wholly past
Of the halfe-Goate, half Fish, the noted Gole:
Between the same, and that cold Country placed
(If such there be beneath the SOUTHERN Pole.
When, lo! (locked in with my Companions fast)
I see a NATIVE come, black as the Cole:
Whom they had took perforce, as in the Wood
Getting out Honey from the Comb he stood.
28.
He comes with borrour in his looks: as He
Who of a snare, like this, could never dream.
He understood not Us, neither Him We:
More savage then the brutish POLYPHEME.
Of COLCOS'S glistring Fleece I let him see
The mettle which of mettles is supreme:
Pure Silver; sparckling stones (continuing suite;)
But in all these was unconcerned the Brute.
29.
I bid them show him lower prized Things
Beads of transformed crystal; a fine noise
Of little Bells, thridded on tawdry strings,
A red Cap, Color which Contents, and joys.
Straight saw I by his looks and beckonings,
That he was wondrous taken with these Toys.
Therewith I bid them they should set him free:
So to the Village nigh away went He.
30.
But the next morn (whilst yet the skies were dim)
All naked, and in color like the shades,
To seek such Knacks as had been given to Him,
Lo, by the Craggs descending his Camerades!
Where now their carriage to us is so trim,
So tractable, and plyant; as persuades
VELOSE with them to venture through the Cover,
The Fashions of the Country to discover.
31.
VELOSO says, his pledge shall be his Blade,
And walks secure in his own Arrogance,
But, having now away a good while stayed
And, I out-prolling with my countenance.
To see what signs for our Advent'rer made,
Behold him coming with a vengeance
Down from the Mountain-top toward the ships!
And faster homeward, then he went, he skips.
32.
The long-boate of COELLIO made have
To take him in: but, ere arrive that could,
An ETHIOPIAN bold his weapon past
Full at his bosom, least escape he should.
Another, and Another too: Thus chac*t
VELOSE and those far off That help him would,
I run, when (just as I an Oar lift up)
A Troop of Negroe's hides the mountain-top.
33.
A Clowd of Arrows, and sharp stones they rain,
And hayle upon us without any stint:
Nor were These uttered to the Air in vain,
For in this leg I there received a dint.
But we (as pricked with smart, and with disdain)
Made them a ready answer, so in print,
That (I believe in earnest) with our Rapps
We made their Heads as crimson as their capps.
34.
And now (VELOSO, off, with safety brought)
Forthwith repair we to the Fleet agin,
Seeing the ougly Malice, the base Thought,
This false and brutish people hid within:
From whom of INDIA (so desired) naught
Of Information could we pick, or win,
But that it is remote, So once more I
Unto the Wind let all the Canvas ^ly.
35.
Then to VELOSO said a Jybing lad
(The rest all laughing in their sleeves) Ho! Friend
VELOSE: the Hill (it seems) was not so bad
And hard to be come down, as 'twas t'ascend.
True (quoth the Advent'rer bold) However, I had
Not made such haste, but that the DOGS did be^d
Against the Fleet: And I began to doubt me
It might go ill, that you were here without me.
36.
He tells us then, he past no sooner was
The Mountain's top, but that the people black
Forbid him any farther on to pass
And threat to kill him if he turn not back;
And (turned) they lay them down upon the grass
In Ambuscade, whereby they Us might pack
To the dark Realm, when we in haste should sally
To rescue Him, before we well could rally.
37.
The Sun five times the Earth had compassed
Since We (from thence departed) Seas did plough
Where never Canvas wing before was spread,
A prosperous Gale making the top-yards bow:
When on a night (without suspect, or dred,
Chatting together in the cutting Prow)
Over our Heads appeared a sable Clowd,
Which in thick darkness did the Welki^ shroud.
38.
So big it looked, such stern Grimaces made,
As filled our Hearts with horror, and appall,
Black was the Sea, and at long distance brayd
As if it roared through Rocks, down Rocks did fall.
O Power inhabiting the Heav'^s, I said!
What divine threat is? What mystical
Imparting of thy will in so new form,
For this is a Thing greater then a Storm*
39.
I had not ended, when a humane Feature
Appear d to us in the Air, Robustious, r^lli'd
Of Heterogeneal parts, of boundless Statu^e,
A Clowd in's Face, a Beard prolix and squallid:
Cave-Eyes, a gesture that betrayed ill nature,
And a worse mood, a clay complexion p^llid:
His crispt Hair filled with ^arth, and hard ^s (...),
A mouth cole-black, of T^eth two yellow Tire.
40.
Of such p^rtentous Bulk was this COLOSSE,
That I may tell thee (and not tell amiss)
Of that of RHODES it might supply the loss
(One of the WORLD'S Seav'n Wonders) out of this
A Voice speaks to us: so profound, and gross,
It seems even torn out of the vast ABYSS.
The Hair with horror stands on end, of me
And all of us, at what we hear, and see.
41.
And this it spoke. O you, the boldest Folk
That ever in the world great things assayd;
Whom such dire Wars, and infinite, the smoke
And Toil of GLORY have not weary made;
Since these forbidden bounds by you are broke,
And my large Seas your daring keeles invade,
Which I so long enjoyed, and kept alone,
Unplough'd by foreign Vessel, or our own.
42.
Since the hid secrets you are come to spy
Of NATURE and the humid Element;
Never revealed to any MORTAL'S Eye
Noble, or Heroes, that before you went:
Hear from my mouth, for your presumption high
What losses are in store, what Plagues are meant,
All the wide OCEAN over, and the LAND,
Which with hard War shall bow to your command.
43.
This know; As many Ships as shall persever
Boldly to make the Voyage you make now,
Shall find this POINT their enemy for ever
With winds and tempests that no bound shall know:
And the first FLEET OF WAR that shall indeaver
Through these inextricable Waves to go,
So fearfulan example will I make,
That men shall say I did more then I spoke.
44.
Here I expect (unless my hopes have ly'de)
On my discov'rer full Revenge to have;
Nor shall He (only) all the Ills abide,
Your pertinacious confidences crave:
But to your Vessels yearly shall betide
(Unless provoked, I in vain do rave)
Shipwracks, and losses of each kind and Race;
Amongst which, death shall have the lowest place.
45.
And of the first that comes this way (in whom
With height of Fortune, height of Fame shall meet)
I Will be a new, and everlasting Tomb,
Through GOD'S unfathomed judgment. At these Feet
He shall drop all his Glories, and inhume
The glittering Trophies a Turkish Fleet.
With me conspire his Ruin, and his Fall,
Destroyed QUILOA, and MOMBASSA'S Wall.
46.
Another shall come after, of good fame,
A Knight, a Lover, and a liberal Hand;
And with him bring a fair and gentle dame,
Knit his by LOVE, and HYMEN'S sacred Bond.
In an ill hour, and to your loss and shame,
Ye come within the Purlews of my land;
Which (kindly cruel) from the sea shall free you,
Drowned in a sea of miseries to see you.
47.
Sterv'd shall they see to death their Children dear;
Be Got, and reared, in so great love. The black
Rude CAFRES (out of Avarice) shall tear
The Clothes from the Angellick Lady's back.
Her dainty limbs of Alablaster clear
To Heat, to Cold, to Storm, to Eyes's worse Rack
Shall be laid naked; after she has trod*
(Long time) with her soft Feet the burning Clod.
48.
Besides all this; Their Eyes (whose happier lot
Will be to escape from so much misery)
This Yoke of LOVERS, out into the hot
And unrelenting Thickets turned shall see.
Even there (when Tears they shall have squeezed and got
From Rocks and Deserts, where no waters be)
Embracing ( kind) their souls they shall exhale
Out of the fair, but miserable, Iayle.
49.
The ugly Monster went to rake into
More, of our Fate; when, starting on my feet,
I ask him, Who art Thou? (for to say true
Thy hideous Bulk amazes me to see it)
H^E (vvreathing his black mouth) about him threvv
His savvcer-Eyes: And (as his soul would fleet)
Fetching a dismal groan, replide (as sorry,
Or vexed, or Both, at the Interrogatory.)
50.
I am that great and secret HEAD of LAND,
Which you the CAPE OF TEMPESTS well did call;
From STRABO, PTOLOMEE, POMPONIUS, And
Grave PLINY hid, and from the ANCIENTS all.
I the but-end, that knits wide AFFRICK'S strand;
My Promontory is her Moun'd and Wall,
To the ANTARTICK POLE: which (nevertheless)
You, only, have the boldness to transgress.
51.
Of the rough sons oth'EARTH, was I: and Twin,
Brother to Him, that had an hundred Hands,
I was called ADAMASTOR, and was in
The War against Him, That hurls hot VULCAN'S Brands.
Yet Hills on Hills I heapt not: but (to win
That Empire, which the SECOND JOVE commands)
Was GENERAL at Sea; on which did sail
The Fleet of NEPTUNE, which I was to quayle.
52.
The love I bare to PELEUS'S spouse divine
Imbarqu'd me in so wild an Enterprise.
The fairest GODDESS that the Heavens inshrine
I, for the Princess of the Waves despise.
Upon a day when out the Sun did shine,
With NEREUS'S daughters (on the Beach) these eyes
Beheld her naked: straight I felt a dart
Which Time, nor scorns, can pull out of my Heart.
53.
I knew't impossible to gain her Love
By reason of my great deformity
What force can do I purpose then to prove:
And, DORIS called, let Her my purpose see.
The Goddess (out of fear) did THETYS move
On my behalf: but with a chaste smile she
(As virtuous full, as she is fair) replide,
What NYMPH can such a heavy love abide?
54.
How ever We (to save the sea a part
In so dire War) will take it into thought
How with our honor we may cure his smart.
My Messenger to me thus answer brought.
I, That suspect no stratagem, no Art,
(How easily are purblind Lovers caught)
Feel my self wondrous light with this Retur^*
And fanned with Hopes, with fresh desire do (...).
55.
Thus fooled, thus cheated from the war begun,
On a time (DORIS pointing where to meet)
I spy the glittering form, in the evening dun,
Of snowy THETYS with the silver feet.
With open Arms (far off) like mad I run
To clip therein my Joy, my Life, my Sweet:
And ( clipped) begin those orient Eyes to kis,
That Face, that Hair, that Neck, that All that is.
56.
O, how I choke in utt'ring my disgrace!
Thinking I Her embraced whom I did seek,
A Mountain hard I found I did embrace
O'regrown with Trees and Bushes nothing sleek.
Thus (grapling with a Mountain face to face,
Which I stood pressing for her Angel's cheek)
I was no Man: No but a stupid Block
And grew unto a Rock another Rock.
57.
O Nymph (the fairest of the OCEAN'S Brood)!
Since with my Features thou could not be caught,
What had it cost to spare me that false good,
Were it a Hill, a Clowd, a Dream, or Thought?
Away fling I (with Anger almost wood,
Nor less with shame of the Affront distraught)
To seek another World: That I might live,
Where none might laugh, to see me weep, and grieve.
58.
By this my Brethren on their Backs were cast,
Reduced unto the depth of misery:
And the vain Gods (all hopes to put them past)
On Those, That Mountayns pyl'd, pyl'd Mountains high.
Nor I, that mourned far off my deep distaste,
"(HEAVEN, HANDS in vain resist, in vain FEET fly.
For my designed Rebellion, and Rape,
The vengeance of pursuing Fate could escape.
59.
My solid flesh converteth to tough Clay:
My Bones to Rocks are metamorphosed:
These legs, these thighs (behold how large are they!)
Over the long sea extended were and spread.
In fine into this CAPE out of the way
My monstrous Trunk, and high-erected Head,
The GODS did turn: where (for my greater pain)
THETYS does Tantalize me with the MAYN.
60.
Here ends. And (gushing out into a Well
Of Tears) forthwith he vanish from our sight.
The black Clowd melting, with a hideous yell
The OCEAN sounded a long way forthright.
I (in their p^esence, who by miracle
Had thus far brought us, even the ANGELS bright)
Besought the LORD to shield his Heritage
From all that ADAMASTOR did presage.
61.
Now PHLEGON and PYROUS pulling come
(With other Two) the Charet of the DAY:
When that high LAND (to which this Giant grum
Was turn*d) does to our Eyes it self display.
Doubling the point, we take another Rumb;
And (coasting) plough the Oriental Sea.
Nor had we plough'd it long, when underneath
A little) in a Second Port we breath.
62.
The People That this Country did possess
(Though they were likewise ETHIOPIANS All)
Did more of humane in their meens express,
Then Those, into whose hands we late did fall.
Upon the sandy Beach, with cheerfulness
They meet us, and with Dances Festival.
With them, their Wives: and their mild Flocks of Sheep
Which fat and fair, and frisking they did keep.
63.
Their Wives upon straw-Pillions (black as Jet)
Slow-paced Oxen (like EUROPA) ride:
Beasts, upon which a higher price they set
Then all the Cattle of the Field beside.
Sweet madrigalls (in Ryme, or Prose complete,
In their own Tongue) to rustick-Reed apply'de,
They sing in Parts, as gentle Shepherds use,
That imitate of TYTIRUS the Muse.
64.
These (and no less was written in their Faces)
Love and Humanity to Us afford:
Bringing us Hens, and Muttons, in the places
Of Merchandises which we had Aboard.
But, for (in fine) our men could spy no traces
(By any Sign they made, or any word
From their dark Tongue) of what we wished to know:
Our Anchors weighed, to Sea again we go.
65.
Now had we given the to^her demi wheel
About black AFRIC, And (the burning Hoope,
That girts the World, inquiring with my Keel)
To the ANTARTICK POLE I turned my Poop^.
By that small Isle (such emulous Thoughts we feel)
Discovered by a former Fleet, we Soope;
Which sought the CAPE OF TEMPESTS, and ( that found)
Pitched here a CROSS* our then DISCOV'RIE^'S Bound.
66.
Thence, many nights, and many sadder days,
Betwixt rough Storms, and languid Calmes, we grope
Through the great Ocean, and explore, new ways:
No Lanthorn to pursue, but our high Hope.
One time above the rest (as danger Plays
At Sea the PROTHEUS) with strange Waves we cope.
So strong a Current in those parts we meet,
As ev*n obstructs the passage of our Fleet.
67.
More violent without comparison
(As our reculing Vessels plain did show)
The Sea was, That did there against us run,
Then the fresh Gale, that in our favor blew.
NOTUS (disdaining much to be outdone
By That; and, as he thought, on purpose too
To affront Him) puffs, blusters, reinforces
His angry Blasts: and so we pass THE COURSES.
68.
The Sun, reduced the solemnized Feast,
On which, a KING laid in a Cratch to find,
Three Kings did come conducted from the EAST,
In which ONE KING, three KINGS at once (...) joined.
That day took we another P^rt (possessed
By People, like to Those we left behind)
In a great River: Giving it the Name
Of that great-day when thereinto we came.
69.
Here fresh Provisions of the Folks we take:
Fresh Water from the River. But* in sum,
No guess concerning INDIA could we make,
By People, unto Us as good as dumb.
See ( King) how many Countries we did rake
Without a door found out from that rude (...),
Without descrying the least Track, or (...),
Of the so much desired ORIENT!
70.
Imagine, Sir, in what distress of mind,
How lost we went, how much perplexed with Cares,
Broken with Storms, and All with Hunger pined,
Through Seas unknown, through disagreeing Airs,
(So far from hope, the wished LAND to find,
As, even with hoping, plunged into despaires)
Through Climates rul*d by other heavenly SIGNS;
And where no Star, of our acquaintance, shines.
71.
The food we have too, spoiled; and what we crave
As nutriment, even turned into our Bane:
No Entregens, no news, to make us wave
Our Griefs; or feed us with a hope, though vain.
Think Thou, if this choice band of soldiers brave
Were other then of Lusitanian strain,
They had obedient held to this degree
Unto their King, and his Authority?
72.
Think Thou, they had not risen long ago
Against their GENERAL (cross to their desire)
Turning Free-booters, forced to be so
By black despair, by Hunger, and by Ire?
If ever Men were try'de, These are: since no
Fatigue, no suff^rings, were of force, to tire
Their great and Lusitanian excellence
Of loyalty, and firm Obedience.
73.
Leaving, in fine, the sweet fresh water Flood,
And the salt Waves returning to divide;
Off from the Land a pretty space we stood,
Our whole Fleet bent into the Ocean wide:
Lest the cold Southern wind (increasing) should
Impound us in the Bay and furious Tide
Made in that Quarter by the crooking shore,
Which to SOFALA sends the golden Ore.
74.
This part (and the swift Rudder straight up resigned
To good St. NICH'LAS, as in case deplored)
Toward that Part we steered, where the Wind-
Possessed Waves against the Beaches roared:
When the 'twixt hope and fear suspended mind,
And which confided in a painted Board,
(Fallen from small hope to absolute despair)
Looked up by an Adventure rare.
75.
'Twas thus. When to the Coast so nigh we drew
As to see plain the Country round about:
A River broacht into the Sea we view,
Where Barks with Sails went passing in and out.
To meet with Men, That Navigation knew
Surpised us with great joy, thou can not doubt:
For amongst Them, of things from Us so hid,
We hoped to hear some News: and so we did.
76.
These too are ETHIOPS: yet it should appear
They had in better company been bred.
Arabic words we picked out here and there,
By which was reached the scope of what they sed.
A kind of Terbant each of them did wear,
Of Cotton fine, pres't close unto his head:
Another Cotton-cloth (and this was blew)
About those-parts that should be kept from view.
77.
In the Arabick-Tongue (which They speak ill,
But FERNAND MARTYN understands though)
They say; in Ships as great as these we fill,
That Sea of theirs is travers't to and fro;
Even from the rising of the Sun, until
The Land makes Southward a FULL POINT, and so
Back, from the South, to East: conveying, thus,
Folks, of the color of the DAY, like Us.
78.
If with the sight of These so joy'd we were,
The news they give us makes us much more glad.
This (for the signs by us collected there)
We call THE RIVER OF GOOD SIGNS. We add
The Landmark of A CROSS, the which we rear,
Whereof some number in our Ships we had
For such Intents: This bar the fair Guides's name
Who, with TOBIAH unto GABAEL came.
79.
Of Slyme, scales, shellfish, and such filthy stuff,
(The noisome Generation of the DEEP)
The Ships (that come therevvith sordid, and rough,
Through so long Seas) there do we cleanse, and svveep.
From our kind Hosts we, had supply'de, enough
Of the Provisions usual (as sheep,
And other things) with smooth, and jocund mien,
And as clear hearts: which through their eyes were seen.
80.
But the high pregnant Hopes, we there embraced*
Bred not a joy unmixt with some Allay.
To ba lance it, in the other scale was placed
A new disaster by R^AMNUSIA.
"Thus gracious Heavens their Boons have interlaced:
" These are the interfearings, This the way,
"Of humane Things. Black sorrow holds the Dye:
" Light joy fades in the twinkling of an Eye.
81.
And this it was. The loathsom'st, the most fell
Disease, that ever these sad eyes beheld,
Reft many a life, and left the Bones to dwell
For everlasting in a foreign Field.
Who will believe ( unseen) what I shall tell?
In such dire manner would the gumms be swelled
In our men's Mouths; that the black flesh thereby
At once did grow, at once did putrify.
82.
With such a horrid stench it putrifide,
That it the neighboring Air infected round.
We had no circumspect PHYSICIAN try'de:
No Lady-handed SURGEON was there found.
But by a CARVER might have been supply'de
The last. 'Twas handling of a dead-man's wound.
The rawest NOVICE, with his Instrument
Might cut, and never hurt the PATIENT.
83.
In fine, in this wild LAND, adieu we bad
To our brave Friends (never to see them more)
Who in such Ways, in such Adventures sad,
With Us an equal burden ever bore.
"How easily a burying place is had!
"The least wave of the Sea, any strange shore,
"Serve, as to put our Fellows's Relics in,
"So of the bravest Men that e're have bin.
84
Thus, from this fatal Haven we disjoine
With more of joy then what we brought, and less:
And (coasting upward) seek some farther sign
Of INDIA, to make out our present guess.
At MOZAMBIQUE we arrived in fine;
Of whose false dealing, and hard heartedness,
Thou must have heard: as also of the Vile
And barbarous dealing of MOMBA^SA'S Isle.
85
Then to the Sanctuary of thy Port
(Whose soft and Royal Treatment may suffice
To heal the sick, to cheer the Alamort,)
We were conducted by propitious Skies.
Here sweet Repose, Here sovereign support,
Here Quiet to our Breasts, Rest to our Eyes,
Thou do impart. Thus (if thou have attended)
Thou have thy wish; my NARRATIVE is ended.
86.
Judge now (O King) if ever Mortals went
Upon so long, upon so desperate ways.
Think Thou ENEAS, and the eloquent
VLYSSFS travayl d so much World, as These?
Durst either (of the watery ^lement,
For all the Verses written in their praise)
See so much through his Prowese, through his Art,
As I have seen, and shall, or the eighth part?
87.
THOU, who did drink so deep of HELICONE,
For whom sev'n Cities did contend in fine,
Amongst themselves, RHODES, SMYRNA, COLOPHONE,
Wise ATHENS, Chyos, Argos, SALAMINE,
And THOU, whom ITALY is proud to own,
Whose Voice, first low, then high (always divine,
And sweet) thy native MINCIUS (hearing) fell
Asleep, but TIBER did with glory swell:
88.
Sing, and advance with praises to the sky
Your DEMIGODS, stretching your twanging lungs
With WITCHES; CIRCES; GIANTS OF ONE EYE;
SIRENS, to rock and charm them with their songs:
More, give them (both with Sayls, and Oars) to fly
CICONIANS; and that Land, where there mates Tongues
With LOTO touched, makes them forget they are slaves;
Give them, to drop their pilot in the waves:
89.
Project them winds (carried in haggs) to take
Out, when they list, Amorous CALYPSOES bold;
HARPIES, their meat to force them to forsake;
Hand them to the Elysian shadows cold:
As fine, and as re-fin'd, as ye do make
Your ales (so sweetly dreampt, and so well told)
The pure and naked Truth, I tell, will git.
The hand, of all the Fabrics of your Wit.
90.
Upon the Captain's honyed lips depends
Each gaping Hearer with fresh Appetite;
When his long Story he concludes and ends,
Fraught with high deeds, with Horror, and delight.
The vast Thoughts of our KINGS, the King commends*
And their Wars, known where're the Sun gives light*
The NATION'S ancient V^lour he extols:
The loyalty, and Brav'ry, of their Souls.
91.
The PEOPLE tell (with admiration struck)
To one another, what they noted most.
Not one of them can off those People look,
That came so far, That such dire Seas have crossed.
But now the Youth of DELOS, who re-took
The reins, which LAMPETUSA'S Brother lost,
Turns them, to sleep with THETYS in the DEEP:
The KING leaves that, in his own House to sleep.
92.
"How sweet is PRAISE, and justly purchas't GLORY
"By one's own Actions, when to Heaven they soar!
"Each nobler Soul will strain, to have his story
" Match, if not darken, All That went before.
" Envy of other's Fame, not transitory,
"Screws up illustrious Actions more, and more.
"Such, as contend in honorable deeds,
"The Spur of high Applaeuse incites their speeds.
93.
Those glorious Things ACHYLLES did in War
With ALEXANDER sank not half so deep,
As the GREAT TRUMPET That proclaimed them, fat
And near; He envies this, This makes him weep.
The Marathonian Trophies Larums are,
Which suffered not THEMISTOCLES to sleep:
He said, no Music pleased his ear so well,
As a good Voice, that did his praises tell.
94.
VASCO DE GAMA takes great payns, to show
Those NAVIGATIONS which the World up-cryes
Deserve not in such gorgeous Robes to go,
As his, which does astonish Earth, and Skies.
True: But that WORTHY (who did foster so
With Favors, Gifts Rewards, and Dignities
The MANTUAN MUSE) made that ENEAS sing,
And set the ROMAN GLORY on her wing.
95.
SCIPIOS, and CAESAR'S, Portugal does yield;
Yields ALEXANEDRS, and AUGUSTUSSES:
But with those liberal Arts it does not guil'd
Them though, which would file off their roughnesses.
OCTAVIUS made count Verses in the Field,
Fiillng up so the blanks of Business,
Forsaken FULVIA will not let me lie
Through CLEOPATRA'S charms on ANT^ONY.
96.
Brave CAESAR marches conquering all FRANCE;
Nor was his Learning silenc't by his drum:
But (in this hand a Pen, in that a Lance)
To the eloquence of TULLY he did come.
SCIPIO (whose Wit in other's Socks did dance)
Wrote plays, even wirh that Hand, which had saved Rome.
Our HOMER doted ALEXANDER so,
That th'ILIAD was his constant Bedfellow.
97.
All, That have ere been famous for COMMAND,
Were learned too; or loved the Learned All:
In LATIUM, GREECE, or the most barbarous Land,
But only in unhappy PORTUGAL.
I speak it to our shame; the cause no grand
POETS adorn our Country, is the small
Encouragement to such: For how can He
Esteem, That understands not POETRY?
98.
For This, and not for want of Ingenie,
VIRGIL and HOMER, are not born with Us:
Nor will ENEAS, and ACHYLLES, be,
(This feirce, He pious) if the World hold thus,
But (which is worst of all) for ought I see,
FORTUNE has shapt our Lords, so boisterous,
So rude, so careless to be kn^wn, or know,
That they like well enough it should be so.
99.
Thankt let the Muses be, by our DE GAME,
To my deer Country that my zeal was such,
As to commend her noble Toils to FAME,
And her great deeds with a bold hand to touch:
For He, That Is like him (only in his name)
Deserves not of CALIOPE so much,
Or TAGUS'S Nymphs; That They their golden Loom
Should leave, to carve his ANCESTORS a Tomb.
100.
Love to my Brethren, and to do things just,
Giving all ^ ortingal-Exploits their dues,
To serve the Ladies, to procure their gusts,
Are the only spurr, and interest of the MUSE.
Therefore, for fear of black Oblivion's Rust,
Heroic Actions let no man refuse:
For by my hand, or some more lofty strain,
VIRTUE will lead him into HONOR'S Fane.
End of the fifth Canto.
Sixth Canto.
STANZA. 1.
THe Pagan King could never entertain
The NAVIGATORS well enough he thought,
The friendship of the Christian King to gain
Of men, whose courage had such wonders wrought.
It troubled him, his lot should be, to reign
So far from EUROPE, with all good things fraught:
And that his happy Station had not bin
Where HERCULES the Mid-Land-Sea let in.
2.
With Games, Masks, Revels, Gambals on the Green;
With Moorish-Dances (their sport natural);
With jovial Fishings (such as EGIPT'S Queen
Pleased the outwitted ANTHONY withal,
When Carbonadoed Fish were hanged unseen
On her dropped Hooks he treats the PORTINGALL
Each day; with Bauquets, of unusual Fare;
With Frits, with Fowls, with Flesh, with Fishes rare.
3.
But now the Captain (seeing time spend fast,
And that the fresh Wind wooes him to be gone)
From the indulgent Land taking in have
The Appointed Pilots, and Provision,
Resolves to quit it: of the Ocean vast
Having no little Portion yet to run.
His leave now takes he of the PAGAN free,
W^o prays from All a lasting Amity.
4.
He prays them more, that Port (such as it is)
That all their Fleets would visit, when they pass:
For, greater good he does not wish, then this;
To give such men his Realm, and all he has.
And whilst he breathes, whilst, what he has, is his;
Whilst the least sand is running in his Glass;
He will be always ready to lay down
For such a King, and People, Life, and Crown.
5.
GAMA went not behind, in Complement;
And, weighing Anchor without more delay,
To the rich Kingdoms of the ORIENT
(Which he so long had sought) pursues his way.
Now a direct and certain Course he went:
The Fleet, this Pilot means not, to betray.
Which (therefore) from the hospitable shore
Goes now securer, then it came before.
6.
The Oriental Billows they divide
Now in the Indian Seas: and (spying than
The Alcove, whence PHOEBUS rose as from a Bride)
See their desires fullfill'd within a span.
But spightful THYONEUS (grudging the Tide
Of Happiness, which then to smile began
On PORTINGALS, who well had earned the same)
Repines, fumes, curses, and with Rage does flame.
7.
He saw the Stars unanimous, to make
Of LIS^ON, a new ROME; and that in vain
It was for Him to hope (alone) to shake
That, which the SUPREME POWER did ordain.
Desperate, in fine, OLYMPUS does forsake,
To seek below what There he could not gain
Enters the humid Realm; and to the Court
Of Him, that bears the Trident, does resort:
8.
In the abstrusest Grottoes of the DEEP,
Where The Ocean hides his head far under ground;
There, whence to play their pranks the Billows creep,
When (mocking the loud Tempests) they resound,
NEPTUNE resides. There, wanton Sea-Nymphs keep;
And other Gods That haunt the Seas profound:
Where arched Waves leave many Cities dry,
In which abides each watery Deity.
9.
The never fadom'd Bottom does expand
A Level, gravelled o*re with Silver fine;
Where lofty Turrets rise from drayned Land,
Of Massive stuff, Transparent, crystalline:
To which, the nearer you shall hap to stand,
The less will you be able to define
If it be crystal which your Eye su^vays,
Or diamond, which cast such glorious Rays.
10.
The Gates are Massive Gold, richly imbost
With ragged Pearlez in their Mother-shell;
In goodly Sculpture wrought, of wondrous cost,
On which vexed LIBER'S eyes did feed and dwell.
Where first old CHAOS (in it own self lost)
Varied with proper shadows, does excel.
Then the FOVVR ELEMENTS (transcribed fair
From that foul) Copy in their Colors are.
11.
There active FIRE got highest on the wing,
Which without matter did it self sustayn,
Till (to give Soul to every living Thing)
By bold PROMETHEUS from the Sun it was taken.
Next subtle AIR with the invisible Ring,
Gaping for places (importuning, vain)
Now vacant in the world, which that does not
Step straight into, though nere so cold, or hot.
12.
Warted with Mountains (then) was the low EARTH
In her green gown shadowed with fruitful Trees:
Giving those Creatures, to which she gave hirth,
Such sustenance as best with each agrees.
The carved WATER serves her for a Gyrth,
And brancht (like Veyns) ore all her Body is:
Innumerable sorts of Fishes breeding;
Men with her Fish, Earth with her moysturc feeding.
13.
Another door upon it carved has
The War, between the Gods, and Giants bold,
Beneath great ETNA crushed TIPHOIUS was,
Whence crackling flames in sulphur Ba^ts are rolled.
NEPTUNE himself stood here, of breathing Brass,
Striking the ground, in that contention old,
When the first Horse, to the rude world, gave He;
And PALLAS the first peaceful Olive Tree.
14.
LYEU.s's Choler would not let him stay
To view the rest; and, passing through this Gate,
The GOD, who (told of his Approach) did stay
At the inner Court, receiv d him there in state:
Accompanied with Nymphs in bright Array;
Of whom, each seems to wonder, with her Mate,
To see the Water's King, paid one in fine,
Of many Visits made the King of Wine.
15.
NEPTUNE (quoth he) O! never think it strange,
That BACCHUS comes thy succor to implore:
"For highest powers, and most secure of change,
"'It Is envious FORTUNE'S pride, to triumph over.
Call all thy Peers that in the Ocean range,
Ere more I speak (if thou will hear me more)
Down-weight of misery they shall discern.
Let them All hear the wrongs which All concern.
16.
NEPTUNE (presuming it some hideous thing
He would impart) does TRITON straight command
To call the DEITIES inhabiting
The frigid Waves, on one; and t other hand.
TRITON, who vaunts himself son of the King
By SALACEE (adored in LUSUS'S Land)
Was a great nasty Clown with all that boast:
His Father's Trumpet, and his Father's Poast.
17.
His thick bush-beard, and his long hair (which hung
Dangling upon his shoulders from his head)
Were spungy Weeds; so wet; they might be wrung:
Which never Comb seemed to have harrowed.
The nitty points thereof, were tag'd, were strung
With dark blew Mussels, of their own filth bred.
He had (for a Montera) on his Crown
The shell of a red Lobster overgrown.
18.
His Body naked, and his genitals,
That he might swim with greater speed, and ease:
But with Maritine little Animals
By Hundreds, covered, and all hid, were these;
As Crayfish, Shrimps, and other Fish that cravvles,
(Receiving theirs from the pale Moon's increase)
Oysters, and Periwinckles with their slyme;
Snayles, with their Houses on their backs that climb.
19.
His great wreathed Shell, to his black mouth apply'de,
With all the might he had, he now did sound;
Whose shrill and piercing noise (heard far and wide
Over all the Sea) from wave to wave did bound.
Now all those Gods (without excuses) high d
To the bright Palace, from their Quarters round,
Of that moist God, who built the Walls of TROY,
Which angry GREEKS did afterward destroy.
20.
Old Father OCEAN first (with all the sons
And Daughters, he begat, environed) went:
NEREUS (That married was to DORIS) runs,
Who peopled all the Crystal Element:
The Prophet PROTHEUS (his Flocks left for once
To range the bitter Meade at full content)
He likewise came; but He already knew
What, FATHER BACCHUS to the Ocean drew.
21.
Another way came NEPTUNE'S snowy Wife
(URAN and VESTAS daughter sovereign)
Grave in her Gate (yet had her Graveness life)
And with a Face, that calmd the wandering Main.
A Robe of Lawn (whose Spinster had a strife
With Her, That with MINERVA strove in vain)
Of her bright limbs was the transparent Lid:
For they had too much beauty to be hid.
22.
Fair AMPHITRITE (then the flowers in May
Fresher, and sweeter) would not wanting be:
The Dolphin (who advised her to obey
The love of the Seas KING) with Her brought She.
The Sun in all his glory, yields the Day
To either's Eyes (more worth then all they see).
They marched hand in hand (an equal pair)
For Both, the Spouses of one Husband, are.
23.
That Queen (who, flying ATHAMAS run mad,
Came so to compass an immortal State)
Went; and with Her her pretty Infant had.
( Him too, the Gods did to their Ranks translate)
Toying before his Mother tript the Lad
With painted Cockles, which salt Seas create:
Whom when the looser sand molests and harms;
Fair PANOPEA bears him in her Arms.
24.
Likewise that God, who had been once a Man,
And, though a powerful Herb he chanced to taste,
Was changed t'a Fish; so from that loss began
A glorious life, turned Deity at last;
Came adding water to the Ocean,
Still weeping the lewd Tricks by CIRCE past
On his loved SCYLLA ( He beloved by This):
" Hate, where it springs from love, so mortal is.
25.
Seated (in short) the Powers that rule the seas
In the great Hall, majestic, and divine;
On gorgeous Cushions first the Goddesses,
The Gods in carved Chayres of crystal fine,
The King with gracious gestures All did please;
His Throne deviding with the King of Wine.
The House is filld with that rich sea* bred mass,
Which does Arabian Frankincense surpass.
26.
When now the whisprings of the Gods were ceast
And ceremonies done between the Kings:
Burst THYONEUS began from hidden Breast
To power the Cause out of his sufferings.
Knitting his brow a little (which confessed
His leaded Heart hung heavy on the strings)
He, that with other's weapons he may slay
The men of LUSUS, thus his cards did play.
27.
PRINCE, who ( of right) from one to the other pole
The angry sea do awe, and do command,
Thou that all earthly creatures do comptroll,
And bridlest Nations with a roape of sand;
And (Father OCEAN) Thou whose Billows roll
About the world, and circumscribe the Land,
Least those meet Bounds which are for All decteed,
It Is proper dwellers should presume t'exceed.
28.
And you, SEA-GODS, that wont not to permit
Your Kingdom's high perogatives be broke;
But, whosoever dared to trespass upon It,
Felt, what it was, your vengeance to provoke:
What tameness this? what dull lethargick Fit?
Who had such power to stay your Anger's stroke,
Ready (with cause) upon mankind to fall,
Frail as the Glass, yet venturing at All?
29.
You saw, with what unheard of Insolence
The highest HEAVENS they did invade of yore:
You saw, how (against Reason, against sense)
They did invade the SEA with Sail and Oar:
Actions so Proud, so daring, so immense,
You saw; and We see daily more, and more:
That in few years (I fear) of Heaven and Sea,
Men, will be called GODS; and but men, WE.
30.
You see a little Generation now
(Called by the name of one that served me too)
With haughty Bosom, with undanted Brow,
Both you, and me, and all the World subdue.
You see, your Sea with winged Oak they Plough.
Farther, then ROMAN EAGLES ever flew.
You see, your Wealth how they propose to drayn,
Your Statutes cancel, and your walks profane.
31.
When first the MYNIAE went about (ye know)
To cut a way through the forbidden Flood,
How BOREAS, and his Fellow AQUILO,
(With all the rest) the Trespass then withstood?
If They so stormd, if they concerned were so,
That, as their own, your wrong they understood;
You (whom it touches in a nearer way)
Why sit ye still? for what do ye delay?
32.
Nor think (O Gods) that, for your sole concern,
And for the great Affront which put I see
On you, I have forsook the COURT SUPERN:
But for That likewise which is offered me.
For, all those Honors which my sword did earn,
When (as the World, and you, can witness be)
INDIA I quell*d, and quelled the ORIENT,
I by this People see trod down, and rent.
33.
For the HIGH RULER, and his Fates (who deal
The under-world, as pleases best their mood)
Have marked these men for Glory, Power, and Weal,
Greater then ever, in the Ocean-Flood.
And ( Gods) from you I must not now conceal,
That they teach sorrow, even to Gods. It Is good:
We too, are slaves to their prepostrous Will;
Which gives Ills to the Good, Goods to the Ill.
34.
Now therefore from OLYMPUS am I tossed,
To seek some Cure, some Balsome for my wound:
To see, if that esteem, I there have lost,
May happily within your Seas be found.
More would have said: But Tears the passage crossed,
Which (trickling down his Cheek in Ropes, that bound
His words) with sudden fury did inspire
And set the watery Deities on fire.
35.
So rough the billows of their Anger went,
So swiftly and so high their rage did mount;
That no mature advice it did consent,
Permit no pawse, no weighing, no discount.
Orders from NEPTUNE are already sent
To mighty EOLUS, that without Count
He slipped the struggling Winds from their strong Caves,
And let no Vessel live upon the waves.
36.
PROTHEUS rose twice to speak, and went about
His judgment in the matter to propound:
Nor Any who were present, made a doubt
But that it was some Prophecy profound.
But still a rising tumult put him out,
And in their sense the Gods did so abound,
That THETYS stuck not to exclaim; Will you
Be teaching NEPTUNE what he has to do?
37.
Then does the proud HIPPOTADES enlarge
From their close prison the enraged Winds;
And them with animating words discharge
Against the Men of never-daunted minds.
For a thick clowd hides Heaven (as with a Targe)
And ARGUS'S hundred Eyes, that guild it, blinds.
The swelling blasts have in a trice overthrown
Towers, Mountains, Houses. -- But of that Anon.
38.
Whilst in the DEEP was held this Parliament,
The wearied Fleet (yet free from sad dismay)
Before a gentle Wind pursuing went
Thorough the tranquil Ocean their long way.
That Time it was, when from the ORIENT
Removed is the Lamp that rules the Day:
Those of the first did lay them down to sleep,
And others come the second Watch to keep.
39.
Conquered they come with sleep, and (ill awake)
Repose their nodding heads against a sail.
Their Clothes (thin, thin) but weak resistance make
To the Night's Air, which blows a nipping Gale.
Yawning, they stretch their Limbs; themselves they shake;
With their Sealed Eyes to open can scarce prevail.
Cures against sleep they practice, they devise:
Tell thousand Tales, tell thousand Histories.
40.
What better spur (said one) to post away,
Or pastime to deceive the hours, that creep;
Then by some pleasant Tale, wherewith we may
Knock off the leaden shackles of dull sleep?
Quoth LEONARDO then (who, whilst a day
He has to live, will faith to CUPID keep)
A pleasant Tale? then what can do so well
As one of Love? and That, my self will tell.
41.
Reply'de VELOSO; it is not fit, not just,
To treat soft subjects in so hard extremes.
For a Sea-life (replenisht with disgust)
Permits not love, permits not melting Theames.
Our Story be of WAR, bloody, Robust;
For we (the Wefts, and Pilgrims of the streams)
Are only born to horror, and distress:
Our future dangers whisper me no less.
42.
To This they All agreed: and prayed VELOSE,
What he commended, that himself would do.
I shall (quoth He); then listen to my Prose:
I promise you an old Tale, and a true.
And (to incite, with apt examples, Those
That hear me, great Beginnings to pursue)
Of our own Contrymen shall treat my story:
And let it be the Twelve of ENGLAND'S glory.
43.
When JOHN the son of PEDRO ruled our Land
(Temp'ring his People's mouths with a soft Bit)
After he had with a victorious Hand
From potent neighbor's jaws delivered it;
In merry ENGLAND (which, from Cliffs that stand
Like Hills of snow) once ALBION'S name did git)
ERYNNIS dire rank seeds of strife did sow,
Whence Lusitanian Laurels chanced to grow.
44.
'Twixt the fair damsels of the ENGLISH COURT,
And Barons bold That did attend the same,
A hot dispute, beginning but in sport,
To end at last in down-right-earnest came.
The Courtiers (though the Courtship is but short
That gives reproachful terms to any Dame)
Said: They would prove, that such, and such of Them,
Had been too lavish of their Honor's gem.
45.
And if with Lance in Rest, or Blade in Fist,
To take their parts they had, or Knights, or Lords;
That They, in open Field, or closed List,
Would do them dye, with Spears, or else with Swords.
The weaker Sex (unable to resist
With deeds, and less to swallow such base words)
Condemning Nature, That deny'de them force,
Unto their Kin, and servants, had recourse.
46.
But their Accusers (mark you?) being great
And potent in the Kingdom; neither Kin,
Nor humble servant, durst their Cause abet,
As their Fame's Champions, which they should have bin.
With beauteous Tears (which, from their blissful seat,
Might all the Gods to their assistance win)
Distilling down each Alablaster Cheek,
Unto the DUKE OF LANCASTER they seek.
47.
This puissant Branch, of ENGLAND'S royal Tree,
Had warred against CASTEEL with PORTUGAL;
Where his Camrades's great Hearts he try'de did see,
And their good stars which bare them out in All;
Like proof of their respect to Dames had He,
When to that Land his daughter he did call;
With whose bright Beautie*s beams our Monarch struck,
The virtuous Princess for his Consort took.
48.
He (loath to give them aid with his own Hand,
Lest, so, he should foment a civil flame)
Says: when I past to the IBERIAN LAND,
To the CASTILIAN CROWN to lay my claim;
Such heavenly parts in PORTINGALLS I scand,
Such Courtship, Courage, such high thirst of Fame,
That they alone (unless I much mistake)
With fire and sword your just defense can make.
49.
To them then ( injured Ladies) if you please
Ambassadors from me (for you) shall go,
Who, with meet Letters and smooth Sentences,
The wrong which you sustain to them may show.
Let Letters likewise from your selves, your Seas
Of ^ears indeare; and from your Pens let flow
Nectar of Words, to charm them to your Aid:
For there is your Tower, There all your hopes are laid.
50.
Th'experienc't Duke the Dames this counsel gave,
And straight to them Twelve valiant Knights did name;
And, that each Dame may know her Champion brave,
Bids them cast Lots, their number being the same:
And, by this way of Lottry when they have
Descry'de which Knight belongs unto which Dame;
To her own Knight, in varied phrase, each writes;
The King, to All; the Duke, to King, and Knights.
51.
The messenger arives in Portugal:
The Novelty does ravish all that Court:
The gallant King would be the first of All,
Might it with Regal Majesty comport.
Each Courtier longs, it to his chance would fall
In such a brave Adventure to consort;
And each one's glory does in this consist,
To hear his name from the Lancastrian List.
52.
In the old loyal City there, whence took
Was the eternal name of PORTUGAL^;
He, to the Rudder who thereof did look,
Bad fit a Frigate light, with Oar, and Sail.
Armours and Clothes (delays they cannot brook)
All, of the fashion that did then prevail,
The Twelve provide: Helms, Crests, Knots, Motto's neat.
Horses, and gay Caparisons complete.
53.
Leave from that King is had, their sails to losen
And pass out of the celebrated DWERE,
By Them that had the honor to be chosen
Of famous JOHN OF GAUNT, who knew them there.
A better, or a worse, in all the dozen
(For skill, or force) there was not: Peers they were.
But one (MAGRYS^) in whom new thoughts did rise,
Bespake his valiant Fellows in this wise.
54.
Brothers in Arms, There has been long in me
A strong desire through foreign Lands to range;
More Streams, then TEJO'S, and fresh DWERE'S, to see;
Strange Nations, Cities, Laws, and Manners Strange.
Since in the World then many Wonders be,
And now I find this purpose cannot change;
I Will go before by Land (with your good leave)
To meet in ENGLAND, traversing the SL^.
55.
And if (arrested by his Iron Mace
Who is the period of each mortal thing)
I hap to fail the appointed time and place;
To you small damage can my failing bring.
Fight for your selves, and (...) to, in that case.
But in my aug'ring Ear a Bird does sing;
Chance, Rivers, Mo^ntains (all their malice meeting)
In LONDON-TOWN shall not prevent our greeting.
56.
This said, about his valiant Friends he cast
(In fine) his Arms; and, licenc't, went his ways.
He past rough LEON: both CASTEELS he past:
Towns, won by Lusitanian Arms, survays:
NAVARRE: With Pyrenean Mountains (placed
'Twixt SPAIN, and France, as if to part their Frays):
Survay'd (in fine) all that is rare in FRANCE,
To BELGIAS great Emporium does advance.
57.
Here (whether sickness 'twere, or fresh Adventer,
Advancing not) He many days did stay.
But our lev'n Worthies the salt Ocean enter,
And to the Northern Climate plough their way.
Arrived in the first Port, to the great Center
Of populous ENGLAND ( London) travailed They:
Lodged by the Duke upon the Bank of THAMES;
Eggd on, and complemented by the Dames.
58.
The day was come, and now the hour at hand,
When with the dozen ENGLISH they must fight:
The King secured the Lists with an armed Band:
In complete Steel begins to cloth each Knight:
Before each Dame (her Honor's Shield) did stand
A SPANISH MARS in dazeling Armor bright:
Themselves in Colors, and in Gold did shine,
With thousand Jewels, joyful and divine.
59
But she, to whom MAGRISO (who was not
Arrived) fell; in mourning Raiment came;
Because to have, it was her hapless lot,
No Knight, to be the Champion of her fame.
However: the Elv'n (before they leave the Spot)
That they will so behave themselves, proclaim;
As that the Ladies shall victorious be,
Though of their number wanted two or three.
60.
Upon a high Tribunal took his place
THE ENGLISH KING, with all his Court about.
The Combattants by Three and ^hree did face,
And four, and four, their Foes; as it fell out.
The Sun, from GA^ES, till he ends his Race,
Sees not another Twelve more strong, more stout,
More highly daring, then those ENGLISH were,
Who the lev'n PORTINGALLS confronted there.
61.
The golden Bitts the foaming Palfreys champ:
Upon the glitt ring Arms, the Sun curvets,
As when rolled Cak^s of Ice reflect his lamp,
Or (mingling Rays) on Dan^ers gems it beats.
Now in the Ladyes's hearts some little damp
(The Troops prepared to charge) the odds begets
Of Twelve t elev n; when (Lo!) incontinent,
A murmuring uproare round the Scaffolds went*
62.
Unto that common Center, where the Rout
Began this tumult, every Face inclines.
Enters a Knight on Horseback, armed throughout,
As one, who battle presently designs:
Salutes the King; the Dames; faceth about,
And, with the Elev'n, the great MAGRISO joins.
His greedy Arms upon his Friends he throws
( Sure Card) to lay them next upon his Foes.
63.
Then she that well perceiv*d this was the Knight
Who came her honor to defend and raise,
Clothes too with Helle's Fleece; which (more then bright
Virtue) the brutish soul loves, and obays.
The signal given, the Trumpets blasts, incite
The warlick minds, inflamed with rage and praise.
Spurrs are clapped to, Reyns slackned in a trice,
Spears coucht in Rest, Fire from the struck ground flies.
64.
The furious Genets seem, in their Career,
To make an Earthquake with their thundering Hooves.
The Shock, in All that then Spectators were,
At once Fear, Pleasure, Admiration, mooves.
This, does not fall, but fly (dismounted clear);
That, Steed, and all ( He better Horseman prooves):
One, his white Armor in Vermillion washes:
One, with his Helmet's plumes his horse-croop lashes.
65.
There fell asleep for ever, more then one*
And a short step from life to death did make*
Here, runs a Horse (the Man struck down) alone:
There, stands a Man, whose Horse the Foe down struck.
The English Honor tumbles from it s Throne:
For two or three of them the Lists forsake.
With Shields, Arms, Maile, Those who to Arms appeal,
And Hearts of Spanish mettle, have to deal.
66.
To lay out words in counting every gash,
Each cruel thrust in that most bloody Fight,
Is of those Prodigals of Time, and Trash,
That tell you stories which they dreamt last night.
Suffice it, I inform you at one dash,
Through courage high, through never-equall'd might,
The Victory went on the Ladies's side:
Ours crop the Bays, and They are justifide.
67.
With Balls the Duke, with Feastings, and with joy,
Treats the twelve Victors in his Palace fair;
With Cooks, the Bevy of bright Dames employ
Nets, Hounds, and Haulks, in Water, Earth, and Air.
For These, their brave Compurgators, would cloy
Each day, and hour, with thousand banquets rare,
Whilst they in E^GLAND are content to roam,
Without reverting to their dearest Home.
68.
But great MAGRISO (if we trust reports)
Great things abroad still greedy to behold,
Clung to those parts: where at the Gallick Courts
Highly he served the Flandrian Countess bold.
For there (as one unpracticed in no sports,
To which Thou MARS inur'st thy Scholars old)
He, hand to hand a FRENCHMAN in the Field
(Like ROM^'S TORQUATUS, and CORVINU^) killed.
69.
Another of the Twelve launcht out, into
HIGM GERMANY: where with an ALMAN He
Had a fierce Combat, who by means undue
Thought to have shorn his thread of destiny.
VELOSO come to a full point; the Crew
Pray him, he would not with such brevitie
Pass the French Duel, but be more exact
Therein: as likewise, in the German Fact.
70.
Just here (to drink his words, they list*ning All)
The Master (Lo! (who in the Sky did peep)
His whistle sounds. From every Corner crawle
The Saylors, half-awake; and half-asleepe;
And, for the wind augments, he bids them fall
The Top-sayles, climbing to the Scuttle steep.
Awake (he said) open, and unseale, your Eyes:
From you black clowd, ye see, the Wind does rise.
71.
Not fully lor'd the windy Top-sayles were
When a great Gust upon a sudden came.
Strike, cried the Master, (so that all might hear)
Strike, strike, the Main-sheet; thrice he did exclame.
The hasty winds (for Tyrants have no Ear)
Ere struck it could be, rushing thwart the same,
Rend it to rags, with such a hideous rash,
As if (the World destroyed) the Poles did clash.
72.
Then did the Men strike HEAVEN with a joynt-groane,
Themselves with horror struck, and pale dismay:
For (the Sail split) the Vessel, hanging prone,
A power of Water scoops up from the Sea.
Lighten (the Master cries with mournful tone)
Lighten the Ship: if ye would live, obey,
Run others to the Pump (we are at the Brink
Of perishing) unto the Pumpe: We sink:
73.
Unto the Pumpe th*undanted Soldiers ran:
To which no sooner come, their parts to do:
But the Ship (stagg'ring like a drunken Man)
Their heels tript up, them to the Larbord threw.
Not three the sturdiest of the Sayl^rs can
Manage the Helm, with all their strength put to.
The Ship is bound with Ropes in every part:
The Land-men lose their strength, Seamen their Art.
74.
Such the impetuous winds, that to have shown
More force, and fury, they could not devise;
Had they at once from all the Quarters blown
To throw down BABELI, which did threat the skies.
The AMMIRALL upon the overgrown
Mountains of water, shrinks into the size
Of her own cock-boat: wondering her self, how
She did to live in such a sea till now.
75
The second ship (in which was PAUL DE GAME)
Had her main mast snapt in the midst and broke:
The people in her (almost drowned) the name
Of Him, that came to save the world invoke,
With like vain Echoes to the Air, exclaim
In the Third, all C^ELLIOS daunted folk;
Although that master so good order took,
That, e're the storm ariv'd; her sails were struck.
76.
Now All to Heaven are hoysted by the fury
And rage of NEPTUNE, terrible and fell:
Now to the bottom of his waves All hurry,
As if their keels would knock the Gates of Hell.
The East, West, South, and Northern winds (to woory
The worcester d by turns) from every corner swell.
Her self with Torches the deformed Night
(With which the Pole is all on fire) does light.
77.
The Halcion along the rattling shore
With strayned voice cries in a doleful Key,
Rubbing with this the overplayst'red soar
Of her own loss; by like tempestuous sea,
The amorous Dolphins hide them, which before
Did friske and dance about the watery sea;
Flying the cruel storm in Caves obscure,
Nor in the very bottom are secure
78.
Never such red-hot Thunderbolts were made,
Rebelling Giants to confound and awe,
By that foul Smith, who (by his fair wife prayed)
Forged a ri^h Armor for his son in law:
Nor ever (by the Thunderer displayed)
That frighted pair such flakes of lightning saw
In the great FLOOD ( they only left to mourn)
Who stones to people (a hard race) did turn.
79.
How many mountains did the waves uncrown,
Bouncing against them like a batt'ring Ram!
How many aged Trees the wind rusht down,
Which by the Cable-roots at once up came!
Little thought They, the earth swept with their crown,
To turn their Heel^s to Heaven in the low dam,
As little thought the sands, which there were hid,
To floate upon the top, as then they did.
80.
VASCO DE GAMA (seeing his Hopes crossed,
Just at the Butt and end of h^s desire,
Seeing the Billows now to Hell go post,
Now with fresh fury unto Heav'^ aspire:
Confused with horror giving All for lost,
Seeing no humane Fence against such Ire)
To that HIGH POVV'RE (who is the sov'rain Aid,
And can Impossibilities (thus prayed.
81.
^rotector of the Quires Angelical,
Whom Heaven, and Earth, and angry seas obey;
Thou, who the Read-sea made a double wall,
Through which thy flying ISR'ELL to convay;
Thou, who did keep and save thy servant PAUL
From open Rocks, and Shelvs that hidden lay.
And sav d'st (with His) from Cataracks down hurled
The second PLANTER of the drowned WORLD:
82.
If we have past new dangers numerous
Of other SCYLLA'S and CHARIBDESSES;
Other dire Syrts, and Quicksands, infamous
ACROCER AUNIAN ROCKS in other seas;
Why, in the Close, do thou relinquish us?
Why, throw us off, after such scapes a These,
If with our labors thou art not offended,
If thy sole service be thereby intended?
83.
O happy men, whose lot it was to dye
On whetted point of Mauritanian Lance;
Whil st, smeared with beawteous dust of AFRIC
The CHRISTIAN FAITH they (fighting) did advance
Whose glorious deeds remain in History,
Or carved in everlasting Verse perchance,
Who losing a short life; a long, did git:
Death sweetened with the Fame attending it.
84.
Whilst this he says, contending Winds (that roar
Like two wild Bulls when one with the other copes)
Augment the horrid Tempest more and more,
And ( rattling) whistle through the Spiny Ropes.
The flashing Lightning never does give over;
The thundering such, that there are now no hopes
But that HEAVEN'S Axles will be straight unbuilt:
The ELEMENTS at one another tilt.
85.
But, see, the amorous star, with twinkling Ray,
Conspicuous in the EASTERN HEMISPHERE!
Fair Harbinger, and Usher of the Day,
It visits Earth, and Sea, with forehead clear.
She, from whom armed ORION slinks away,
And who this Star sits guiding in her Sphere;
Spying what Risk her dear Armada ran,
At once with Anger, and with fear, grew wan
86.
Here has been BACCHUS (says she) I am sure:
Will he never leave this rancour? but in vain.
He shall not wag the Ruin to procure
Of mine, but I will have him in the Train.
She stoops like Lightning from OLYMPUS pure
Upon the troubled Kingdom of the MAYN;
Her Nymphs to crown them (as for wagers) bids
With waking ROSES that new open their lids.
87.
With thousand-colourd Garlands she commands
Their flowing locks a little be comptroll'd:
( Who would not judge, LOVE there, with his own hands,
Inamell'd painted flowers upon true gold?)
Her purpose is, to fetter in those ^ands
The inamourd Winds, where there they wander bold:
The Faces of those loved Nymphs to show them
(More fair then Stars) to charm and to subdue them.
88.
And so it proved. For she no sooner did,
But presently they faint, they dye away.
Under their wings their bashful heads they hid:
In humble posture at those feet they lay.
The slip, Those take them up in; is the third
Of that bright Hair, which scorns the mid-day's Ray.
Then, to her servant BOREAS, thus did say
His sweet and bosom friend, ORYTHIA.
89.
Fierce BOREAS, This is not the way to prove
That e're thou lov'dst, as thou pretend'st to do;
For meek, and soft as his wings down, is LOVE:
And fury ill beseems a Lover true,
Either this madness from thy mind remove.
(What shall I say? could thou endure a shrew?
I shall be frighted with it, we must sever:
" Fear choler may engender, but love never.
90.
Fair Galatea likewise lays the case
To blustering NOTUS, who, full well she knows,
Has many a long sigh fetched for that sweet Face,
And is at her devotion does suppose.
The Raunter (scarce believing such a grace)
His heart, too ample for his bosom grows.
The pleasure of his Mistress to fulfill,
He thinks it a cheap bargain, to sit still.
91.
The others take the other winds aside,
And her too boystrous lover each reproves.
They give them to the Queen of Beauty, tide,
Calm as the Lambs and gentle as her doves.
She gives them back to them, and (their faith tryde)
Promised return eternal of their loves:
Worn on the Nymphs's white hands, e're thence they stir,
In the whole voyage to be true to Her.
92.
Now rising SOL with gold those Mountayns lips
Which GANGES ( murmuring) washes: when a Boy
From the tall Am'rall's scuttle shows the ships
LAND, to the prow; with that (late storm's Annoy,
And half their Voyage, over (each heart skips,
Reprieved from its vain fears. For now with joy,
The Pilot (whom MELINDIANS to them put)
Cries: if I err not, LAND of CALICUT.
93.
This is that Land (I Am sure) for which you are bound:
This, the true INDIA, which we see before:
Then (if your vast desires one world can bound)
Quiet your Hearts, ye have what ye explore.
Now GAMA could not hold, when as he found
(To his high joy) the ^ilot knew the shore,
With Knees sticht to the decks, Hands spread to Heaven,
Eternal thanks by him to GOD are given.
94.
Thanks he did give to GOD (and well he might)
Who was not only pleased, to Him to show
That LAND, which he had sought through so great ^ight,
And for the same such shocks did undergo:
But snatched him with strong Hand that very night
From watery Grave, through winds that raged so,
Through Thunder's stroke, through blasting Lightning's beam
As one awak't out of some horrid dream.
95.
By dreadful dangers, by such Brunts as these,
By such Herculean labors, and vast toils,
They That in GLORIE'S Schools take their degrees,
Acquire immortal Laurels and fat spoils;
Not wholly leaning, against rotten Trees
Of ancient Houses, not, on empty Styles;
Not, on rich Couches, wrapped in Sables soft,
Of the Muscovy Merchant dearly bought.
96.
Not, by newfangled dishes exquisite;
Not, by eternal Visits tedious;
Not, by successive pleasures infinite,
Effeminating Bosoms generous;
Not, by a never quenched Appetite:
Whereby, old Wantons FORTUNE makes of us
To that degree, We know not how to rise,
Or step, to any Virtuous Enterprise.
97.
No, but by tearing out of Horror's mouth
Honors, which we may truly call our own;
By clothing Steel, incountring Hunger, Drowth,
Watchings, high winds* and Billows overgrown;
Conquering dull cold, in Bosom of the South,
The Other extreme of the inflamed Zone;
Gulleting in, corrupt and putrid meat,
The Spice, and Sauce, with which the Valiant ^t.
98.
And, by accustoming a Face (where doubt
Sat once) secure, serene, fearless of Harm,
To march through Bullets whizzing round about,
And taking here a leg, and there an Arm.
These (HONOR'S Brawn) make a man proof througho^,
Make him scorn Money, and false Honor's charm:
Money, and Honors, which light FORTUNE made;
Not VIRTUE; who is just, solid, and stayed*
99.
SHE, shapes an understanding round, and clear,
EXPERIENCE the Hammer and the File:
SHE constant sits (as in a Throne or Sphere)
Regarding busy Mortals with a smyle:
SHE (where discretion does a Kingdom steer,
Nor partial Favor merit does beguile)
Is suddenly caught up, High Rooms to fill:
Not, by her seeking; but, against her will.
End of the sixth Canto.
Seventh Canto.
STANZA. 1.
VVEllcom, O wellcom (Friends) to that good LAND
Which by so many has been coveted,
'Twixt INDUS, and the silver GANGES'S strand,
In the Terrestrial Heaven that hides his head.
Valiant and Happy men, put forth a Hand
To crop the Lawrells which from others fled:
For ( lo!) ye see; before your faces, lo!
The Territory where all Riches flow.
2.
To you I speak, ye sons of LUSUS old;
Who, of the world compose so small a stake.
What talk I of the world? of that small fold
Beloved by him, who the round world did make.
You, whom from conquering of Nations rold
In Vice not only dangers did not take;
But neither Avarice, or want of love
To Holy CHURCH, whose Head is crowned Above.
3.
You (PORTINGALLS) as stout, as ye are Few;
Who never care how small your numbers be:
You, who are Usurers of losses: you,
Who frail life chaffer for eternity
Thus PROVIDENCE was pleased That him (who drew
The shortest lot) we of more use should see
T'extend the Faith, then all the CHRISTIAN KINGS:
"So much thou (CHRIST) exaltest little Things!
4.
The haughty GERMANS, a great Flock (behold!
In a large pasture, into Fastions broke;
Who (not to be r^strayn'd within one Fold,
Nor yet content to justify with stroke
Of Argument what sev^rally they hold)
Some for, and some against the Roman Yoke,
Their fatal pistols in that Quarrel span,
Which should be all discharged at OTTAMAN.
5.
See ENGLAND'S Monarch, styling himself yet
For deeds long past KING of the HOLY TOWN,
The filthy ISMAELITE possessing it
(What a reproaching Title to a CROWN!)
How in his frozen Confines he does sit,
Feeding on empty smoke of old Renown;
Or gets him new, on Christian Foes alone,
Not, by recov'ring what was once his own!
6.
Mean time an UN^ELEIVER is for Him
Head of JERUSALEM on earth, whilst love
Of ^arth, has made him an unusefull lim
Of the JERUSALEM which is Above.
O^ the FR^NCH then, what shall we say, or deem,
Who (call d MOST CHRISTIAN) does his style disprove.
^ho does not only ^n her Aid not come:
But ev n invites the scourge of CHRISTENDOM?
7.
To CHRISTIAN'S Lands findst thou thy Title good
(Having so fair a Kingdom of thine own)
Not, to CYNIFIUS, and NYLE'S sev'n fold Flood,
Old Enemies to true Religion?
There should thou vent the heat of thy French blood,
Against the Rejectors of the Cornerstone.
LEWIS, and CHARLES, left thee their Name and seat:
Not that which styled one SAINT; the other GREAT
8.
In the last place, what shall we judge of Them,
Who by base sloth, and Riot (rather Rot)
Shorten their days, drowned in their own wealth's stream,
Their ancient Valor, buried, and forgot?
From Lux, Oppression springing; from this stem,
Dissensions in a people given to plot:
I speak to Thee (O ITALY) brought lo
With thousand Vices. and thine own worst Foe.
9.
Ah, foolish CHRISTIANS! are you, happily,
Those Teeth which CADMUS did to Earth commit,
Self-Bane (for Children of one womb ye be,
And All one heavenly Father did begit)?
The HOLY SEPULCHER do ye not see
Possessed by dogs? how Those, themselves can knit,
To wrest from you your old Inheritance,
And on your shames their name in Arms advance?
10.
Ye see it is a principle of state,
A rooted custom, in the HAGA^ENE,
Armies on Armies to accumulate
Against the people That on CHRIST do lean^.
But, amongst you, does sow rank seeds of Hate,
And Tares of strife, the Enemy unclean.
How can ye sleep secure, how can ye close
Your Eyes, having both them, and y^u, your Foes?
11.
If love of power, and empire uncomptroll'd.
Set you a work to conquer others Lands;
Both HERMUS and PACTOLU^'S streams behold,
Rouling into the Ocean golden sands!
ASSYRIA spins, and LYDIA, thrids of gold;
AFFRICK'S rich Mines employ her Negroes hands.
Against THE TURK let Booty league you all:
If not, to see THE HOLY CITY Thrall,
12.
That Hellish project of the IRON AGE,
Those Thunderbolts of War (the Cannon-Ball)
At TURKISH GALLEYS let them spit their Rage,
And batter prou*d CONST^NTINOPLE'S Wall.
Thence, to their Holes in Caspian Cliffes, engage
The frighted monsters back again to craw'l,
And Scythian Wains, that in your EUROPE build,
With barbarous spawn her civil Countries filled.
13.
The THRACIAN, GEORGIAN, GREEK, ARM ENIAN,
Cry out upon you, that ye let them pay
( Sad Tribute!) to the brutish ALCORAN
Their Christian-children, to be bred that way:
To scourge the arrogant MAHUMETAN
Your hands unite, your heads together lay.
Unwise, ungodly, Glory; cease pursuing:
By being valiant to your own undoing.
14.
But whilst ( mad People) you refuse to see,
Whilst thirst of your own blood diverts you All;
Christian-Indeavours shall not wanting be
In this same little House of PORTUGAL.
Strong places upon AFFRICK's Coast has she;
In ASIA a Style Monarchical;
Dominions in AMERICA she has;
And, were there more Worlds, Thither she would pass.
15.
And turn we to behold in the mean while,
To our Seafaring Worthies what befell;
After that gentle VENUS, with a File
Of BEAUTI^S, the enamored Storm did quell:
After they came in si^ht of that vast soil,
Sought with a purpose so unchangeable,
The CHRISTIAN FAITH into the same to bring;
To introduce new Laws, and a new King.
16.
No sooner come at that new Land, a sort
Of little Fisher-barks they light among,
Directing them the way into the Port
Of CALICUT, whereto the same belong.
Thither they bend their Prows (being the Court
Of MALABAR) A City fair, and strong:
In which a King his Residence did hold,
Who, round about, a spacious LAND comptrold.
17.
On this side GANGES and the YND beyand
A large and famous Province is marked forth;
On the South bounded by the Ocean-Strand,
By the Emodian Mountain on the North,
Sundry both Laws and Kings obeyth this Land,
Sundry pretended Deities ador'th:
Some, beastly MAHOMET; some, Idols dead;
Some, Living Creatures in that Region bred;
18.
In that long Mountain, which all ASIA laces
(Running athwart so vast a Continent,
And borrowing several names of several places
Through which it runs) Two Fountains have their vent;
Whence YND, and GANG^S (starting for two Races
At the same Post, and at the same length spent)
Dye in the INDIAN SEA: Now This, and Ihey,
Make the true INDIA a Pen-Insula.
19.
'Twixt these expiring Rivers's Mouthez wide
From the broad Country a long point extends,
In fashion not unlike a Piramide,
Which (fronting CEYLAN'S Isle) in The Ocean ends.
And where (first thrust out of the Mountain-side)
The great Gangetick Arm a Richness lends,
Tradition says; the Folk, That there did dwell,
Of dainty flowers were nourisht with the smell.
20.
But the Inhabitants THat now are found
(In names and manners differing from the old)
Are DELIIS, the PATANS, who most abound
In People, and in Countries which they hold;
The DECANIES, the ORIAAS; That found
Their hopes of being saved, in what they are told
Of sounding GANGES. Then, BENGALA'S Land;
With which can none in Competition stand.
21.
CAMBAYA'S Warlike Kingdom (this of yore
Held great KING PORUS, as the fame does go):
The Kingdom of NARSINGA; powerful more
In Gold, and Jewels, then against a Foe.
Here (from the INDIAN OC^AN'S Billows hoare)
Discerned is of Mountains a long Row;
Serving for Natural Walls to MALABAR,
Inroads of those of CANARA to bar.
22.
GATE the Countrey's Natives call this Ridge:
From foot whereof skirts out a narrow Down,
Which ( backed by that) is by a natural Seige
Of angry Seas affronted. Here the Town
Of C^LICUT (undoubted Sev'raign Liege
Of all her Neighbors) reares he^ lofty Crown:
Seat of the EMPIRE, Fair, and Rich; and Him
That Is Lord thereof, they style the SAMORIM.
23.
The Fleet arriving close to that rich strand,
A PORTINGALL is sent in a long-Boat^
To let the Pagan Monarch understand
Their coming from a Regi^n so remote.
He (through the River entering the Land,
Which enters there the Sea by a wide Throat)
With his strange Color, Physnomy, Attire,
Makes all the flocking Multitude admire.
24.
Amongst the Rout, which Him did swarm to see,
Comes one, trayn'd up in the ARABIAN'S Lore,
Having been born in Land of BARBARY,
There, where ANTEUS was obeyed of yore.
Whether, the Lusitanian People, He
Knew merely as a neighbor to that shore;
Or (bitten with their Steel) was sent so far
On FORTUNE'S errand by the chance of War:
25.
The Messenger with jocund Face survay'd,
He, in plain Spanish gave him thus the Hail;
How, to this World, in name of Heaven ( Cam'rade)
So distant from thy native Portugale!
Opening a passage through rough Seas (he said)
Which never mortal Wight before did sail,
We come to seek of INDUS the great stream,
Whereby to propagate the GOSPEL'S beam.
26.
Astonished at so great a Voyage stood
The MOOR his name MONSAYDE) briefly told
Their sad disasters on the azure Flood,
And hair-breadth Scapes, by this same LUSIAN bold.
But since, his main Affair (he understood)
Unto the King alone he would unfold;
He tel^s Him* He at present is not there:
Being retired into the Country near.
27.
So that (until the News at Court have bin
Of their prodigions passage through the MAYN)
Please him, to make his homely Nest, his Inn;
With Victuals of the Land he will entertain
Him There: and, being well refresht therein,
Himself will bring him to the Fleet again.
For that, the World has not a thing more sweet;
Then in a distant Land when Neighbors meet.
28
The PORTINGALL with Bosom not ingrate
Accepts the Offer, kind MONSAYDE made.
As if their friendship were of ancient date,
With Him, he eat, and drank, as he was prayed.
Toward the Ships (that done) return they straight:
Which the Moor knew, when he the Build survay'd.
They climb the Am*ral: where both Man and Boy,
Receive MON^AYDE with a general joy.
29.
The Captain (rapt) Him in his Arms did squeeze,
Hearing the Music of the Spanish Tongue;
And (seated by him) Shreives him by degrees
Touching the Land, and things thereto that long.
But, as in THRACIAN RHODOPE the Trees,
And Bruits, to hear his golden Lute did throng
Who did his lost EURIDICE deplore:
So thronged the common-men to hear the MORE.
30.
He thus begins. O men! whom NATURE placed
Near to the Nest where I my birth did take;
What Chance, or stronger Destiny, so vast
So hard a Voyage, made you undertake?
For some hid cause from TAGUS are ye past,
And unknown MINIUS, through that horrid Lake
On which no Bark before did ever floate,
To Kingdoms so concealed, and so remote.
31.
GOD, GOD has brought you: He has (sure) some grand
And special buis'ness here for you to do.
For this alone, he leads you by strong Hand
Through Foes, Seas, Storms, and with a heavenly Clew.
INDIA is this, with several Nations manned:
Great NATURE'S bounty All beholding to
For glist'ring Gold, for sparkling Stones of price,
For oderiferous Gums, for burning Spice.
32.
The Province ye are anchored now upon,
Is called MALABAR. In the old way
It worships Idols: The Religion
That bears in all these parts the greatest sway,
Held it is, by several Kings: yet only one
Ruled it of old, as their Traditions say.
The last King, was SARAMA PERIMAL,
Who in one Monarchy possessed it All.
33.
But, certain strangers coming to this Ream
From MECHA in the Gulf of ARABIE,
Who brought the Law of MAHOMET with Them
(In which my Parents educated me)
It so befell, with their great skill, and stream
Of Eloquence, These to that hot degree
This PERIMAL unto their Faith did win,
That he proposed to dye a Saint therein.
34.
Ships he provides and therein (curious)
For Off rings lades his richest Merchandise;
To turn Monastic, and Religious,
There, where our (...) PROPH^T lies.
Having no Heir, left of the Royal House;
Before he parted, he did cantonize
His Realm. Those servants, he lov*d best, he bring^
From want, to wealth; from Subjects, to be Kings.
35
To one, COCHIN; to another, CANANOUR;
CHALE, t'a Third; t'a Fourth, the PEPPER-I^LE;
To This, COULAN; To That, gives CRANGANOUR;
The rest, to them who most deserved his smile.
One young m^n only (who had mighty power
On his Affections) was forgot the while.
For whom was left poor CALICUT alone,
A City since; Rich, great, by Traffic grown.
36.
This gives he Him: and (to eke out the same)
A shining Title Paramount the Rest.
That done, his Voyage takes; his life to frame
So, as to reign hereafter with the Blessed.
And hence remained of SAMORIM the name
(By which imperial pow*r, and heigth*s expressed)
To that young man and to his Heirs: from whom
This (who the EMPIRE now injoys) is come.
37.
The NATIVES'S manners ( poor, as well as rich)
Are made up all of Lies, and vanity.
Naked they go: only a Cloth they stitch
About those Parts which must concealed be.
Two Ranks they have, of People; Nobles, which
Are NAYR^S styled: and Those of bas^ degree
Called POLEAS. To Both the Law prescribes
They shall not marry out of their own Tribes.
38.
And Those That have been bred up to one Trade,
Out of another may not take a Wife;
Nor may their Children any thing be made,
But what their Parents have been all their life*
To touch a NAYR^ with their Bodye's shade,
A scandal is to his Prer^gatife.
If themselves chance to touch them as they meet,
With thousand Rytes himself he washes sweet*
39.
Just so the JEWISH PEOPLE did of yore
The touch of a SAMARITAN Eschew.
But, when ye come into the Country, more,
And things of greater strangeness ye shall view.
The NAYRES only go to war: Before
Their King* they only stand a Rampire true
Against his Foes. A Sword they always weild
With their right hand, and with the left a Sh^ild.
40.
Their Prelates are called BRAMENS (an old name,
And (amongst them) of great Pre-eminence):
Of his famed Sect, who Wisdom did disclame,
And took a style of a more modest sense.
They kill no living thing, and highly blame
All flesh to eat with wondrous abstinence:
But other flesh their Law does not forbid,
Yet They as prone thereto, as if it did.
41.
Their Wives are common: but are so to none
Save those, who of their Husbands's Kindred are.
(O blessed lot, blessed Generation,
On whom fierce jealousy does wage no war!)
These are the Customs, but not these alone,
Which are received by Those of MALABAR.
The LAND abounds in Trade of all things; Isle,
Or firm-Land yields from CHINA unto NYLE.
42.
Thus did the MOOR recount. *But Gossip FAME
Crying the News about the City went
Of a strange people come, with a strange name:
To be informed the truth when the King sent.
Now, through the gaping streets, invirond came:
With either Sex, and Ages different,
The noble Men dispatched by the King
The General of the Fleet to Him to bring.
43.
And He (thus licenc't by the SAMORIM
To disembarque) departs without delay,
The noblest of his LUSIANS hon'ring Him
As his bright Trayn ( himself more bright then They)
The sweet variety of colors trim
Dazles the ravished people all the way,
The compast Oar strikes, leisurely the water
Of the Sea first; of the fresh River after.
44.
Upon the Key a potent Officere,
Whom in their Tongue the CATUAL they call,
Begirt with NAYRES, stood to welcome There
The brave DE GAME with Pomp unusual:
Whom in his Arms himself to land did bear,
Then points him to a Cowch Pontifical:
On which ( their custom of most ancient date)
Upon men's shoulders he is born in state.
45.
Thus He of LUSUS, He of MALABAR,
Move to the place where them expects the King.
The other PORTINGALLS, and NARYES are
Their Infantry advancing in a Ring.
The multitudes (like Baggage in a War)
Confused, pester one and the other Wing.
They would ask questions, but have not the power:
Their mouths were stopped for that in BABEL'S Tower
46.
Ride talking GAMA, and the CATUAL,
Of things which the Occasion ministered:
MONSAYDE the Interpreter of All,
As understanding what by each is sed.
Thus marching, and ariving where the tall
And sumptuous Fabric did erect it is head
Of a rich TEMPLE in the Citie's Center,
At the large two leaved door abrest they enter.
47*
There stand the Figures of their Deities
Carved in cold stone, in dull and stupid wood:
In various shapes presented to the Eyes,
In various postures as the Feind thought good.
Some, in yet more abominable wise,
(CHIMERA-like) with shapes repugnant stood.
The CHRISTIAN^ (used to adore GOD- Man) derid^
To see Men Beasts, and Monsters deifide.
48.
One's humane Head a pair of Horns disgraces
(JUPITER HAMON stood in LYBIA so):
Another had one Body, and two Faces,
(Thus the old ROMANS did old Janus show):
A Third, with hundred Hands, fifty embraces
(Like BRIAREUS) pretends at once to throw:
A Fourth He grinns with a dogs Face (the plain.
Adored ANUBI^ in M^MPHITICK FANE).
49.
Here, by the barbarous people of that Sect
Their Superstitious Worship being paid;
Their course, without digression Both direct
To where the King of these vain GENTILES stayed.
The Trayn augments; through Those, who the aspect
Of the strange Captain to behold, assayed.
Women, and Boys, from all the Houses gaze:
These tyle the Roofs; Their Eyes, the Windows glaze.
50.
Now they approach with slow and solemn pace
The beautiful and oderiferous Bowers,
Which barred the prospect of the Royal Place;
In structure sumptuous, though not high in Towers.
For They their nobler Buildings interlace
With fanning Groves, and aromatic Flowers.
Thus lived enjoying that rude ^eople's King
In City* Country; and in Winter, Spring.
51.
On the fair Frontispieces, Ours descry
The subtlety of a Daedalian Hand,
Fig'ring the most remote Antiquity
In lasting Sculpture of the INDIAN-LAND.
So lively are presented to the Eye
Those Ancient Times; That They, who understand
From learned Writers what the Actions were,
May read the Substance in the Shadow There.
52.
Appears a copious Army, which does tread
The Oriental Land, HYDASPES laves.
By a sleek ruddy Warrior was it led,
Fighting with leavy Javelins curled in waves.
NYSA stood by her Founder: by Her, slid
The River's self,. washing her winy Caves.
So right the God, that THEBAN-SEM^LE
(Had she been present) would have cry'de; ' It Is H^E.
53.
Farther, a vast Assyrian multitude,
That drank whole Rivers e're they quenched their thurst.
A Woman Captain, with rare Form indude;
And of a Valor, great, as was her Lust.
By her side (never cold) her Palfrey chewed
The foaming Bit, and (fiery) paw'd the ^ust,
(Her NINUS'S Rival) with whom yet 'twas done
More innocently, then she loved her Son.
53.
Yet farther; trembled in the fancied wind
The glorious Ensigns, GREECE triumphant bore
(The worlds THIRD MONARCHY) spreading from YND
One con'qur'ing wing to the Gangetick shore.
A young man led them, of a boundless mind,
From head to foot wi^h Lawrells covered ore:
Who would not be (so high his Thoughts did rove)
The son of PHILIP, but the son of JOVE.
54.
The LUSIANS feasting with these Acts their eyes,
The CATUAL unto the Captain said,
The time draws near, when other Victory^s,
Shall blot these out, which thou have now survayd,
Here shall be graven, modern Histories
Of a strange people, that shall us invade.
Such our deep Sages find to be our doom,
Poring into the things which are to come*
55.
By the black Art they do moreover tell;
That, to prevent so great approaching Ill
By humane wisdom, it is impossibel:
'For vain, is earthly wit, against Heaven's will*
But, say withal; Those strangers shall excel
So much in Martial and in civil skill;
That through the World it will in after story,
Be sed: The Conqu'rers are the Conquerds glory.
56.
Discoursing thus they enter the gilt Hall,
^here leanes that EMPEROR magnificent
On the rich Cowch (which take it work, and all)
Could not be matched beneath the Firmament.
His Face and posture (that Majesticall;
And this secure) his Fortune represent:
His Robes are cloth of gold: A diadem
Upon his head, with many a flaming gem.
57.
An old man (at his elbow) with grave mien
Upon the knee did ever and anon
Of a hot plant present him a leaf green;
Which, as of custom, he would chaw upon.
Then did a Bramen of no mean esteem,
Approach DE GAMA with slow motion;
To presant Him unto the MONARCH great:
Who there before him, nods him to a seat.
59.
DE GAMA seated near to the rich Bed
( His Eyes keeping off) with quick and hungry,
The SAMORIM upon the Habit fed
Of his new Guests, their uncouth hew, and Guyse
With an emphatick Voice from a deep head
(Which much his embassy did authorize
Both with the King, and all the People there)
The Captain thus accosts the Royal ear.
60.
A potent King (who governs yonder, where
Hev'n s ever-rolling wheels the day adjourn*
Benighting earth with earth; that Hemisphere
Which the sun leaves mourning till his Return)
Hearing from FAME (which makes an Eccho^ there)
How this IMPERIAL CROWN by Thee is worn.
(The sum'd up Majesty of INDIAN LAND)
Would enter with thee into Friendship's Band.
61.
And (through long windings) to thy COURT send me,
To let the know; that whatsoever stores
Go on the Land, or go upon the sea,
From TAGUS there, to NYL^'S enriched shores:
All that by Zeland Merchants laden be:
By tributary Ethiopian-MORES:
From seething River, or from frozen Bar:
Heapt up and centerd in his Kingdom, are.
62.
Then if thou will, with leagues and mutual Ties
Of Peace and Freindship (stable and divine)
Allow commerce of superfluities,
Which bounteous NATURE gave his Realms an^ Thine,
(For Trade brings Op^lence and Rarieties,
For which the Poor do sweat, the Rich do Pine)
Of two great fruits, which will from thence redound,
His shall the glory; thine, the Gain be sound.
63.
And (if it so fall out, that this fast knot
Of Amity be knit between you two)
He will assist thee in all adverse lot
Of War, which in thy Kingdom may ensue,
With Soldiers, Arms and Ships; and coldly, not,
But as a Brother in that case would do,
It rests, that thou resolve me in the close,
What he may trust to touching this propose.
64
This was the Errand of the Captain bold,
To whom the Pagan Monareh answered thus:
Ambassadors from such far parts, we hold
No little honor to our Crown, and Us,
Yet shall not in this case our will unfold)
Till with our COUNCIL we the thing discuss:
What this King is, informing our self well,
The people and the Land whereof you tell.
65.
In the mean time repose you from the Quoyle
Of labor past, and nauseating Seas:
Whom we will back dispatch, within a while,
With such an answer as shall not displease.
Now Night (Task mistress of all earthly Toil)
Gives humane labors wonted stint; to ease
Exhausted lims with sweet Vicissitude:
Eyes, with the leaden Hand of sleep subdude
66.
In the most noble lodgings of the Court,
The PRIMERE MINISTER of INDIAN LAND
(With the Applause of people of each sort)
Did feast DE GAMA, and his valiant Band:
The CATUALL (that he may make report
To his dread Liege, who gave him in command
To find it out; which way the strangers came,
What Laws, what Faith, what Country, and what name)
67.
Soon as he spies the fired Axel-tree
Of the fair Delian youth the day renew,
Sends for MONSAYDE; upon Thorns, to be*
At large informed of this NATION new.
Prompt and inquisitive, he asks if He
Can give him full Intelligence and true,
What th^se strange people are (for he did hear*
That to his Country they are neighbors near.)
68.
A punctual account, of every thing
He knew of them, he charged him to afford;
As that which was a service to the King,
Whereby to judge of the proposed accord.
MONSA^DE answers: That which I can bring
Of light thereto, is spoken in a Word.
Thus much I know; they are of yond same SPA^N,
Where PHE^US, and my Nest, bathe in the Mayn.
69.
By them a certain Prophet is adored,
Born of a pure and incorrupted Maid,
Conceiving by the Spirit of the Lord,
The Lord of life, by whom the world is swayd.
Of them, that which my Parents did Record,
Was that of bloody War the noble Trade
To it is full pitch by their strong Arm is wound:
Which to our cost their predecessors found.
70.
Them (armed with virtue above humane strain)
They threw out of their delectable Seats
By golden TAGUS, and fresh GUADIANE,
Through glorious and memorable Fea^s:
Nor so content (ploughing the stormy Mayn
Toth' Afric side) even in our own Retreates
Let us not live secure: but pull us out
From our Strong walls, and there our Armies rout.
71.
Nor have they shown less strength of Hand and Brayn,
In whatsoever other wars did chance
With many warlick Nations of their SPAIN,
And some that fell down by the way of FRANCE.
So that, in fine, no story does remain,
That ever they were quelld by foreign Lance;
Nor for those HANNIBALS (I will be bound)
As yet, was ever a MARCELLUS found.
72.
But if this Information (as I make
Account it does) appear to Thee too short,
Of them, let them inform thee. Thou may take
(So do they hate a lie) their own report.
Go view their Fleet, their Arms, and how they rake
With founded Brass, which tames the strongest Fort:
And it will please thee, of the PORTINGALL
To see the civil Arts, and Martial.
73.
To see the things the MOOR exalted so,
Now the IDOLATER is of a flame,
Calls for his Barge in have, for he will go
To view the ships in which DE GAMA came.
Together from the covered shore they row*
Covering the sea, the NAYNES do the same.
They climb the strong and goodly Ammirall:
By her long side aboard does hand them PAUL.
74.
Her waste-cloaths Scarlet, and her Banners are
Of the rich Fleece which by a worm is bred:
In them are painted glorious deeds, in War
Achieved by valiant Hands of WORTHIES dead.
Here a pitcht-Field and there a single jar;
Fierce one, and the other: Pictures full of dread!
From which, since them the Pagan first did spy,
He never could recall his greedy Eye.
75
To know, the Things he sees, he does beseech.
But first, DE GAMA prays him sit, and prove
A little of those delicacies, which
Those of the Sect of EPICURUS love.
The foaming Goblets with the Liquor rich,
Devised by NOAH, swell, their banks above.
The Pagan sits; but cannot Eat (he says)
Truth is, it crossed a praecept of his Faith.
76.
The Trumpet (which in Peace does represent
War, to the Fancy) rends the Air. In Thunder
The fired Diabolick-Instrument
Speaks audibly to it is infernal Founder.
The Pagan observes All: but (most intent
On the Defunct) seems to confine his wonder.
To those brave Deeds, which in a little Sphere
Are by Mute Poetry described there.
77.
He starts upon his Feet; with Him (betwixt
Whom, he was placed both the DE GAMES: and, from
VASCOS ride side COELLIO. The MOOR fixed
His Eyes, upon the warlike Transcript dumb
Of an old man, who in his Face had mixed
Something divine, nor, till the World's one Tomb,
Shall ever dye. Clad in the Greekish mode.
A Bough in his right hand, what he was showed.
78.
His right hand held a Bough -- But O blind man
I! That (unwise, and rude) without your clew
( Nymphs of MONDEGO, and the Tagan Stra^)
A course so long, so intricate, pursue.
I lanch into a boundless Ocean,
With Wind so contrary; that, unless you
Extend your favors, I have cause to think
My brittle Bark will in a moment sink.
79.
Behold how long, whilst I strain all my powers
Your TAGUS singing, and your PORTUGALE;
FORTUNE (new Toils presenting, and new Sow'rs)
Through the World draggs me at her Charets-Tayle):
Sometimes committed to Seas's rolling Towers,
Sometimes to bloody dangers Marteale!
Thus I (like desperate CANACEE of old)
My Pen in this, my Sword in that hand hold.
80.
Now by declined and scorned poverty
Degraded, at Another's Board to eat.
Now (in possession of a Fortune high)
Thrown back again, farther then ever yet.
Now escaped, with my life only, which hung by
A single Third (ev^n that a load too great):
That it is no less a wonder, I am here,
Then JUDA'S King's new lease of fifteen year.
81.
Nay more ( my Nymphs) I thus being made an Isle
And Rock of want (surunded by my Woes)
The same, whom I swam singing all that while,
Gave me, for all my Verses, but course Prose.
Instead of hoped Rest for long Exile,
Of Bays to thatch my head (which bald now grows):
Unworthy scandals they therein did hayle,
Which laid me in a miserable Jayle.
82.
See, Nymphs, what learned Lords your TAGUS breeds!
What Patrons of good Arts we live among!
Are these the favors, and are these the meeds,
For Him That makes them glorious with his Song?
What Precedents are these, what likely seeds
To raise in future curious WITS and strong,
To register the Acts of all those men,
That merit Fame from an immortal Pen?
83.
Then in this Flood of Ills let it suffice
That your sole grace and favor I obtain;
And chiefly here, where such Varieties
Of honorable deeds I must explain.
Give it me only yo^: For (by your Eyes)
On any, that deserves it not, one grain
I will not spend: not flatter DUXES, nor KINGS,
Pain of ungrateful to your sacred springs.
84.
Nor think, O Nymphs, I Will waste your precious Fame
On Him, who to his King and Countrey's weal
Prefers h^s private interest (The same
Will from the Throne, yea from the Altar, steal).
No, no Ambitious man shall hide his shame
Under my leaves, who mounts, that he may deal
More largely to his Lusts, and exercise
His Office, not, but his impieties.
85.
No man, That stalks with popularity,
Thereby to catch the Prey he has designed:
Who, with the erring Vulgar to comply,
Changes as often as PROTHEUS, ^or the Wind.
Nor (MUSES) fear, that ever sing will I
Whom, wi^h grave Face, grave case, grave pace, I find
(To please the King in the new Place he is in)
Fleece the poor People to the very skin.
86.
Nor Him, who finds it just (and so it is)
The King's Laws should be kept in every thing:
But does not find it just (and that is amiss)
To pay the sweat of those that serve the King.
Nor Him, who says his Book, and thinks with This
(Though unexperienc't) he has wit to bring
All to his Rules: and, with a niggard Hand,
Rates services, he does not understand.
87.
Those (and those WORTHIES only) will I sing,
Who their dear lives have ventured and laid down,
First for their GOD, and after for their KING;
To be repaid with use in due renown.
Help me APOLLO, and the Muses's Ring,
With doubled Rage their Laurel d heads to crown:
Whilst (almost tired) I here take breath a while,
So with fresh Spirits to renew my Toil.
End of the seventh Canto.
Eighth Canto.
STANZA. 1.
ON the first Figure stuck the HAGARENE,
Which in the waving Flag did come and go:
Upon a leavie staff it seemed to lean,
With a long combed Beard, white as the snow.
Who this grave Warrior is, and what should mean
That same device he bears, he longs to know.
PAUL tells him: whose wise words which here ensue,
MONSAYDE rendered, who both Idioms knew.
2.
These FIGURES all (which, moving, seem alive)
As fierce and warlike as they show, for here;
By the bright fame that does of them survive,
In truth, and Fact, more fierce and warlike were.
They stand far off in time: Through perspective
Of clear WITS yet, they ^oom both great and near.
This thou now see, is LUSUS, from whom Fame
Gives to our Kingdom LUSITANIA'S name.
3.
He was that THEBAN'S Son, or else Camrade,
Who in so many Lands did Laurels gain.
Following the Wars (which he did make his Trade)
This LUSUS built at length a Nest in SPAIN,
With those delicious Fields so well apaid
(The Elysian once) 'twixt DWERE, and GUADIAN^;
That there he set up his long Rest. He gave
A Name, to Those; and Those, to Him, a Grave.
4
The leavy staff (he bears for his Device)
The Thyrsus is, That BACCHUS self did bear;
Which is to Us, a letter of Advice
And this was his own Son, or Friend as dear.
See Thou Another, who long Seas did slice
With wand*ring Keele, and Lands by TAGUS there,
Where he a Fane to PALLAS sacred calls,
And is the Author of eternal Walls?
5.
It is Ulysses: who that Temple founded
For Her with Eloquence his Tongue that gilded.
If he in ASIA here fair TROY confounded,
In EUROPE there great LISB^N has he builded.
Who may this other be, which dead and wounded
That sows the ^ield (his sword with both hands weilded)
Death and Destru^ion on great Hoasts that flings;
Where painted Eagles fly with true ones wings?
6.
Thus said the Pagan. Thus replies DE GAME.
This, thou now see, a keeper was of Ewes*
(And know, that VIRIATUS was his name)
But, better then a Hook, a Sword could use.
With this, he did affront the Roman Fame,
Invincible: nor Fame once got, did loose.
No, ROME had ne*re with Him, nor shall (that is more)
That luck, with PYRRHUS which she had before.
7.
By Valor not, but creeping treachery,
They robbed him of* his life. Why do thou wonder?
In desperate Cases MAGNANIMITY
It self, does tear it is proper laws in sunder.
Behold Another (for Indignity
Receiv*d) with Us that did his Country thunder!
To gain immortal Honor he chose well
With whom to do it, if he must rebel.
8.
With Us, behold, He likewise puts to flight
Those Birds that are the Favorites of JOVE!
So long ago, Nations of greatest might
Knew how to yield, when against ours they strove.
See with what wyle, and artificial Slight,
Our People he to fight his Quarrel drove,
The inspiring Hind, that helped him with Advice!
He, is SERTORIUS: she, is his DEVIC^.
9.
Behold that other Flag! There painted, see,
Of our first Kings the great Progenitor!
We make him an HUNGARIAN; but, there be,
That do affirm, he was a LORRAIGNOR.
After that overcome the MOORS had he,
GALLEGOS, and the LEON-WARRIOR,
Went holy HENRY to the Holy War:
To sanctify the Trunk whence our Kings a^e.
10.
Surpised with wonder, who is this (demands)
Tell me, who this is (cries the CATUALL)
That does, so many ^roops, so many Bands,
Destroy and scatter with a Force so small?
So many Battles strikes with his own hands?
With whose fierce R^ms so many strong Towers fall?
That fights in blood up to the Saddle-bow,
Whilst Flags and CROWNS fall at his feet like snow?
11.
It Is first ALPHONSO (does DE GAME return)
Who from the MOOR all PORTUGAL did take.
FAME by the waters of black STYX has sworn
Ne*re more to sing of ROMAN for his sake.
He, loved of Heaven, with love of Heaven did burn;
Whom GOD the scourge of MOORS (his Foes) did make:
Their Throne and Walls broke down to let CHRIST in,
And nothing left there for his Heyrs to win.
12.
Had CAESAR fought, had ALEXANDER GREAT,
With such thin Troops, so slender, and so short,
Against such numerous Armies, as were beat
By this brave King, of every kind, and sort:
Believe*t nor He, nor He, with JOVE had eat;
Nor their proud Fames made such a loud report.
But leave his Acts (too glorious to unfold!)
His Vassails deeds are worthy to be told.
13.
This, whom thou see upon his pupil (broke)
All patience lost, casting an angry Face;
Bidding him rally up his scatt'red Folk,
And turn again to justify the place;
Turns the young man, turns the old man That spoke,
And turns with, them the day in a small space:
EGAS the name, which the brave old man has,
Tutor of MARS, myrrour of Subjects faith.
14.
There, how he marches with his children, look,
(Barefoot, and Ropes about their Necks) to his end;
Because the young man, as he undertook,
To pay CASTEEL low Homage could not bend!
He raised the Seige with Craft, and Oaths he took,
When vain were Arms the Rampire to defend.
He pays the forfeit with his Babes, and Wife:
And, to preserve his Master, gives his life.
15
Less did that CONSUL, who through folly was
Caught at the CAUDINE GALLOWS in a Trap,
When Him insulting Samnites forced to pass
Under that shameful yoke they there did clap.
He, (brave and constant) did himself disgrace,
To save his Army in so sad mishap:
This gives to shame, and death, himself, his deer
Chil^ren, and guiltless Spouse: the last goes near.
16.
See thou this man, who from an Ambuscade
Beats up a King, besieging a strong Town,
The Leaguer's raised, the King his prisoner made:
A deed great MARS could wish had been his own!
See him again (now Head of an Armade)
Massacring MOORS upon the watery Down!
Boarding their Galleys, carrying clear away
PORTUGAL'S maiden Victory at Sea!
17.
It is DON FUAS ROUPINIO; on the Land,
And on the Ocean, gaining equal Fame:
Which from the fired Galleys (near the Strand
Of AVILA) shines glorious in their flame.
See, how content he fa^ls by the same Hand,
The Fortune altered, but the Cause the same!
Like Palm (deprest in vain) through shafts of MORE
His happy Soul to Heaven triumphant soars.
18.
See thou not, landing there in strange Attire
From a great Navy, Troops A^xiliar;
Not without which, our first King did acquire
LISBON (their Prologue to the Holy-War)!
Of these, did HENRY (famous Knight*) expire.
Behold Palms sprouting from his Tomb! They are
CHRIST'S supernatural Badge, for Him to wear
Who, born a GERMAN, dyed a Martyr there.
19.
See a Priest brandish (not in vain) his Blade
Against ARRONCHEZ, with revenge sharp whet,
To quit for LEYRIA, which They taken had
Who couch the Spear in Rest for MAHOMET!
It Is PRIOR TEUTON. -- But, a Seige is laid
To SANTAREN. Look, how Secure, and Great,
That FIGURE plants upon her scaled wall
The ever-winning Cinques of PORTUGA^L*
20.
Behold once more (where SANCHO overthrows
In a fierce war the ANDALUSIAN MOORE.)
He kills the Alferez charging through the Foes,
And makes SEVILIA'S Standard mat the floor.
MEM MONIZ it is; (How like his Sire he shows,
The Phoenix of his Ashes?) worthy sure
The Royal Flag, and This; who his, did put
Up, with his Hand; the Foe's feld at his foot.
21.
See Him, that by his Lance descending slid
With the two Centenells's two heads by night,
To where he has his men in ambush hid,
With whom he gains the Town by force and slight!
That takes for Arms the Knight, who take that did,
And the cold Heads in one hand of the Knight.
He, That achieved this unexampled deed,
His name, is GERRARD: Surname, without dreed.
22.
Do thou not see a wronged CASTILIAN
By their ninth King ALPHONSO (for old gall
To those of LARA) to the MOORS That ran,
Making himself a Foe to PORTUGAL?
ABRANTES with those Infidels he wan
With whom into our Country he did fall:
But a bold PORTINGALL, with a small Force,
Here takes him prisoner; routed Foot and Horse.
23.
DON MARTIN LOPEZ is the man, that crops
The Laurels he was grasping. But behold
An Apostollick Warrior, That chops
For Lance of Steel his Crosiers staff of gold!
See, how erect the stagg'ring minds he props!
How hot to fight the MOOR, his men grown cold!
Behold his Vision in auspicious skies,
With which the few he has, he fortifies!
24.
Then SEVILL'S King, and He of CORDOUA,
With other two, Lo routed! Nor alone
Routed, but slain! The strength that got this Day,
Was not of Man: GOD claimed it as his own.
See now ALCACER has no more to say,
Though, lined with steel, her Battlements of stone.
To MATTHEW (LISBON'S Bishop) she submits:
Who Sprigs of Palm into his Miter knits.
29.
Behold a Master poud'ring from CASTEEL
(A PORTINGALL by Birth) ALGARVES Land
How he does conquer, his devou^ing Steel
Incount'ring none that can the same withstand.
Strong Towns (by broad day scaled) see, what they ^eel:
Such his good star, so certain is his Hand.
Big with Revenge (Lo!) TAVILA he takes,
And makes it smart for the SEV'N HUNTERS'S sake^.
30.
See, how of SYLVES Master he became
By Stratagem! (the MOOR paid dearer for it)
CORREA DON PELAYO is his name,
In whom (to envy) Wit and Force consort.
But the PAYR-ROYAL thou o reseest of FAME,
That did such Fears in French and Spanish Court.
By Justs, and Tournaments, and Duels, there,
Immortal Laurels they did win and wear.
31.
Lo, by the name of KNIGHTS ADVENTURER^,
Into the Kingdom of CASTEEL they come;
Where, in BELLONAS sports, not one but bears
The prize away (they prove true jests to some)!
See, dead, the prow'd Castilian Cavaleers,
That challenged one of them by sound of drum!
RIVERS GONZAGUE was He. Propt with his Sword,
His Gyant-Fame did LETHE'S River ford.
32.
Mark well that Knight, by FAME so loved and sung,
That her old Theames are scorned, are out of date!
Of his dear Country, by one third that hung,
On his strong shoulders he sustayn'd the weight.
See, where (with Anger did) a peale he rung
To a cowd People, and degenerate,
That they a stranger's yoke might from them fli^g,
And take the sweet one of their native King.
33.
See, through this Counsel, and his prowes^ too,
Guided by GOD, and his good star alone,
What was imp^ssible in humane view,
The vast Castilian Army overthrown!
See, through his Valor, f^rce, and care, a new
Clear Victory (inferior unto none)
Over a People, fierce as numerous, Here
'Twixt GUADOANA and (...)
30.
See thou not There how almost routed is
The Lusitanian Host, through the retreat
Of this Religious Leader (whom they miss)
The Assistance of the Lord of Hoasts t'intreat?
See, with pale haste he is now found out by his,
Who tell him, there is no dealing with so great
A Power; that he himself would look thereto,
And with his presence cheer his fainting Crew!
31.
But see, with what a holy carelessness
He answers them; It Is yet too soon to go:
As who, by Faith, already did possess
The Victory which GOD will straight bestow.
POMPILIUS thus (his Kingdom in distress
By sudden inroad of a potent Foe)
To Them That bring him the ill News, replies;
And I (ye see) am offering sacrifice.
32.
What his name is thou long'st to know (I see)
That with such boldness on his GOD did seize:
The LUSITANIAN SCIPIO it should be,
Were not a greater NUNIO ALVAREZ.
O Country blessed in such a Son as He,
Indeed thy Father! whilst SOL compasses
This Globe of NEPTUNE, and of CERES yellow,
To mourn again, thou never shall own his fellow.
33.
Victorious, see, in the same war, and Cause,
Another Captain of a Squadron small!
He routs Commendum'd Knights, and lays his paws
On the great Prey they marched away withal.
See where his reeking Blade again he draws,
Rescuing his Friend from Foes That lead him Thrall:
His Friend, a martyr for his loyalty!
PEDRO RODRIGUEZ LANDROAL was He.
34.
See yon Faith-breaker, paying an old score
And the base pelf he up at interest took!
GIL-FERNAND-ELVAS plays his Auditore,
And with the Debtor's death crosses the Book.
Here drowns, in their Castilian Owners gore,
The SHERREZ- Fields (their sacks they may go look).
But see PEREYRA; who, like Lightning thrown
Upon the Foe's Armada, shields his own!
35.
Behold, how poor sev'nteen of PORTUGAL
(Upon a Mountain) brave resistance make
Against four hundred of CASTEEL, That wall
Them in on every side, to sweep the Stake!
But (to their cost) these find a crew so small
More then Defendants in that bloody Wake.
A deed deserving everlasting Rimes:
Match it elsewhere, in old or modern Times.
36.
Of Ours (I grant) three hundred did engage
And rout a thousand ROMANS, in that Time
When VIRIATUS came upon the Stage,
And his Fame lightened through each wondering Clime.
Whence Those, who followed him in that brave Age,
Left to their Race this Legacy sublime,
Never to fear a Foe for multitude:
Which, that we do not, pretty well we have showed.
37.
Two Princes here (PEDRO, and HENRY) see
Generous Progeny of our first JOHN!
The one, sorc'd FAME into HIGH GERMANI^
To lacquay him (defrauding death of one):
The Other, to trumpet Him through the wide S^A
For it is discov'rer; and (his Pen by thrown)
Makes entered CEUTA see on the other side
His Lance can prick the bladder of her Pride.
38.
Behold the Earl DON PEDRO, holding out
Two Seiges, against the power of BARBARY!
Behold another Earl, as strong, as stout,
As MARS himself, and fam^d for Chevalrie!
Who, not content (with Foes claspt round about)
ALCACER to defend most gallantly,
Of his KING too the precious life defends;
And (as his Bulwark there) his own expends.
39.
Many a FIGURE, in these Flags that wants,
The PAINTER (truly) ^id to add intend,
But Pencils he does lack, lacks Oil, and Paints:
" Meed, Honor, Favor, are Arts's Life, Nurse, Friend.
The fault in our degenerating Plants
From those high Trunks of which they do descend.
Of Vanity we see sufficient Flowers:
But where is the good Fruit of their Ancestors?
40.
Those truly noble Ancestors of theirs
(From whom this swelling greatness had it is Rise)
For VIRTUE'S love, digested bitter Cares,
And of their Houses to inhance the Price.
Blind! to intaile (with wealth) sloth on their Heirs
(VIRTUE supplying fuel unto Vice)
Disfig'ring them to boot: For, in this case,
"The Founder's Glory is his Seed's disgrace.
41.
Others there are, with wealth, and Power that flow
Above their Banks; nor nobly born, nor fair.
The fault of KINGS: who on one Minion throw
(Sometimes) more then a thousand worthier share.
Of These would thou behold the Pictures? No:
It is a vanity their Friends can spare.
As monstrous Creatures MYRRORS fly, or break:
So these men hate the PICTURE that does speak.
42.
I not deny, but some (whom I could name)
Derived from great and worthy Ancestry;
By high and honorable Parts proclaim,
And correspond with, their nobility:
Who, if the light of their Forefathers Fame
Their brighter Virtue do not clarify;
Yet, keep it in they do. But, of this Crew,
The PAINTER tells me there are very few.
43.
Thus PAUL DE GAMA blazons those great deeds
Which there in various Ink are written fair;
Which by a Master's hand (whose skill exceeds)
In so clear Perspective there painted are.
The intentive CATUAL distinctly reeds
The History, as legible, as rare:
A thousand times he asked, a thousand heard,
The Battails delicate which there appeared.
44.
But cleft was now the Sun's ambiguous light
Between the one and the other Hemisphere;
In neither was it day, in neither night,
But morning's twylight here, and Ev'nings there:
When, from the warlike Ship, the FAVORITE
And noble NAYRES, to the City steer
To court dull sleep; which broods all living Things
Of sable Night under the downy wings.
45
Mean time the famous Augurs of the Land
(Who falsely think, or so are thought at least,
To see by magic all things beforehand
In entrails of a sacrificed Beast)
Do their black office, at the King's command,
To scrutinize, what shall befall the EAST
By the arrival through the hansell d Maine,
Of these unheard of Guests from unknown SPAIN*
46.
Of Lies the Father shows them here signs true;
That a strong ^oake, which they should never remove,
Their endless Bondage, shall, this People new,
The^r wealth s consumption, and their people's prove.
The frighted AUGURS with pale horror flew
To tell the KING, that which infernal JOVE
Made legible by their astonished Eyes
In the red letters of the Sacrifice.
47.
Confirming This, T'a Priest (a zealous one,
And p^llar of the Law of (...),
Whose Bosom with that Gall did overrun
Wherewith both Sects against CHRIST's Law are set,
In that false Prophet s shape, who from the Son
Of Bond-mayd HAGAR did descend) the yet
Enraged BACCHUS, and who never cleers
His filthy stomach, in a Dream appeers.
48.
And, guard you, guard you, People mine (quoth He)
From Ills provided for you by the Foe,
That cuts a passage to you through the Sea:
Guard you, before the danger nearer ^row.
Th amazed MOOR starts from his Rest, to see
Who gave him this ^larum. Thinking Tho,
It Is but a Dream (like common Dreams, in deep
Of Night) returns into the Arms of sleep.
49.
BACCHUS returns, and says. Know thou not (MORE)
The great Law-Give^, who the ALCORAN
Showed thy Forefathers, without which Thy store
Would fail, and half thy Flock be CHRISTIAN?
Rude, do I watch for Thee, and do thou snore?
Well, those white Guests (I'^ have thee to know, than)
Shall bring great damage to that Law, my Pen
Delivered over unto stupid Men.
50.
Now whilst this People's strength is not yet knit,
Think how ye may resist them by all ways.
For, when the Sun is in his nonage yet,
Upon his morning Beauty Men may gaze;
But let him once up to his Zenith git,
He strikes them blind with his Meridian Rays:
So blind will ye be, if ye look not too*t,
If ye permit these Cedars to take root.
51.
This said: both he, and sleep, vanish at once.
The MOOR remains: rockt in his Bed with fright.
Th'infused poison working in his sconce*
He starts, and to his servants cries a light.
When the new light (which does precede the Sun's)
Disclosed it self Angelical, and white:
The Chief of that vile SECT he did convoke,
To whom his Dream in every point he spoke.
52.
Then several, and cross Reasons they discourse;
As they from others, or themselves, dissent.
Secret way-layings, open Fe^d, and Force,
And several ways of each they do invent.
But, when those seemed too fine, and these too course,
To take a middle way is their intent.
To do their buis'ness with an^ther's Hand,
They mean to bribe the Grand^s of the Land.
53.
With Gold, and other Presents underhand,
The ruling men they to their Party gain;
Giving them speciously to understand,
These Guests will put a period to their Reign:
That of lewd Vagabonds they are a Band,
Who, plying to and fro the Western Main,
Live on Pyratick spoil, without (in fine)
Or KING, or LAWS, or humane, or divine.
54.
O how a Perfect KING it does behove
To choose his FAVORITES and COUNCIL such
As are lin*d through with VIRTUE, and her love;
As feel of (...) a true inward touch!
For He (who in the highest Orb does move)
Of things remote can only have so much
Intelligence, whereby to judge, as They
That are his outward Organs will convey.
55.
Nor even on VIRTUE let him so much do^e,
T'adore't in picture, or without Control
T'imploy't; as some, who in a simple Coat
Have trust an Hypocrite (a preying F^ule)
And, if a Saint indeed, he will speak by rote
In worldly matters: For the D^ve like soul
Seeld with an ANGE^L'S Quill, has Eyes to find
The way to Heaven, but to the Earth is blind.
56.
But here, these avaritious CATUAL^,
Who did that Pagan-Kingdom rule and sway,
Bribed by infernal People to play false,
The Portingal-Dispatches did delay.
Now the wise Leader of the PORTINGALS,
Of all the Indian Prince can do, or say,
Caring for nothing back with him to bring
But news of this discov'rie to the King:
57.
In this alone takes pains. For well he knew,
When he should carry back this news alone,
That Navies, Arms, and soldiers would ensue
From MANUEL, who fills the Regal Throne;
With which to CHRIST, and Him, he would subdue
The Globe of Earth, and Sea: That Himself s one
Sent out but as a Dove, as a Line hurld,
To spy, and sound, this OCEAN, and this WORL^.
58.
Resolved he is, the Pagan King to find,
And pray dispatch, that he may take his leave;
Which now he sees, those spightful People mind
(If they can help it) he shall never receave.
The King, who with suggestions of that kind
Was shook and startled you must needs conceave
(Too credu^ous to every AUGUR'S word,
Much more to All, and when the MOORS concurred):
59.
Freez'd with this fear has his ignoble Breast.
On the other side the sacred Thirst of Gain
(A Vice in Him that is Paramount the r^st)
K^ndles a fire which thaws that Frost again.
For his advantage he sees manifest,
If he with clear intentions entertain,
and with firm Acti^ns cherish, and pursue,
The League which PORTUGAL invites him to.
60.
His COUNCIL then commanded to attend,
He found no One that did in this comply:
Because on Those, who should their judgments spend,
Money had done it is office pow'rfully.
For the magnanimous Captain he does send.
To whom (arrived) with a Majestic Eye;
If, here, the pure and naked Truth, to me
Thou will confess; I pardon thee (quoth He).
61.
I am assured, the Embassage thou have done
To me in thy King s name, is merely coined:
For that, nor King, nor Country do ^hou own,
But ( vagabonding) sayl'dst with every wind.
From farthest SPAIN'S remotest Region
Would any King, or Prince (in his right mind)
A single ship much less a Navy send,
Through so inc^rtain ways to the WORLD'S end?
62.
And, if thy King support his Majesty
Which great and potent Realms, which he commands;
Thy unknown Truth to prove and testify,
What precious presents knit this friendship's bands?
"In resents rich, in sumptuous Gifts and high,
" Kings speak their loves: Their Rhet'rick's in their Hands.
A Hand, that gives not Any falsifies:
Nor will a Sea-man's testing it suffice.
63.
If banished from thy native soil thou be
(As many a man has been of great Renown)
Welcome, by JOV^, both to my Realms, and me:
"For to the Valiant every Land's his own.
Or if, a Pyrat, thou infest the Sea;
Spare not through fear, or shame, to make that known:
"For in all times, a vital breath to draw,
"NECESSITY has been exempt from Law.
64.
He said. DE GAMA (finding this new Face
Of Things, is from the greedy CATUALLS;
Suborned, by ISHMAEL'S malicious Race,
The Royal Ear to poison with things false)
With such a high assurance, as the Case
Requir d, instead of fresh Credentials,
(Which VENUS ACIDALIA did inspire)
To his wise Breast (surcharged) thus gave fire.
65.
If the gilt Cup of Lies (which MAN betrayed
Out of his Paradise) had not pledged bin
By our first Parents, and by them convayd
From hand to hand through foul original sin;
Till in the hand of MAHOMET it stayed,
Who sucked the very dreggs that were therein:
Most mighty King, thou never had received
This Calumny by that damned Sect conceived.
66.
But, in as much as there is no good that is great
Done withour great Contract; and Actions tall
(For man his bread in his Brows sweat must eat.)
That stand on tiptoe, are tript at by All;
Therefore they brand me for a Counterfeit,
Therefore do Thou my Truth in question call,
Although so clear, that see it needs thou must,
Did thou not credit whom thou should MISTRUST.
67.
For, if I lived by robbing on the Sea,
Or (wreck of Fortune) banished my dear Home;
What need I go so far to s^ek my Prey?
For unknown Mansions need I hither roam.
What gain, what hopes, could make me in this way
To tempt the fury of the waves that foam,
Antartick colds, Heats of the burning line,
Where Aries hangs, the Equinoxial sign?
68.
If on great Gifts of estimation high
The credit due to me thou pin and cast;
My coming now was only to descry
Where NATURE has thy ancient Kingdom place:
But to my Country, and Dread Liege, if I
Through Fortune's goodness get, long Seas re-past;
At my return I promise thee (O King)
That such CREDENTIALS never man did bring.
69.
If unto Thee an uncouth thing it show,
That, where her farthest Arm HESPERIA flings,
A King should send me to thee, Thou should know
That nothing possible is hard to Kings.
Then Kings of PORTUGAL^ (if this be so)
May be allowed, for spreading of their wings,
Something of greater, and of larger scope,
Then what is given for common Kings to hope.
70.
Know, that for sev^ral Generations past
Our Kings have firmly purposed in their hearts,
With all those Toils and Dangers to contrast
Wherewith Heroic deeds whole NATURE thwarts:
And (Enemies to sloth) of The Ocean vast
Piercing into the undiscovered Parts,
Aspired to know the end of it, and where
The farthest Countries, which it washes, were.
71
The worthy Project of the learned Branch
Of that victorious King, who, to displant
From his dear Nest, did through the Sea first lanch,
Of AVILA the last Inhabitant
He joining one unto another planch,
(As far from Idle as from Ignorant.)
Discovered all those Parts, which lighted are
By Argo, Hydra, the Altar, and the Hare.
72.
Gathering fresh courage then from the event,
In that those first endeavors proved not vain,
Discov'ring farther new Advent'rers went
Successively the secrets of the Maine.
The Inhabitants of AFRIC, That frequent
Her SOUTHERN CAPE, and never saw CHARLSWAYN,
Were seen by These: leaving behind each Isle,
And Continent, which Both the Tropicks broyle.
73.
With this so high Resolve, and fixed therein,
Our Nation quelled, and triumphed over Chance:
Till I, now ending what Those did begin,
The farthest Pillar in thy Realm advance.
Breaking the Element of molten Tyn,
Through horrid storms I lead to thee the Dance;
From whom (to carry to my King) I ask
Only a sign that I have done my Task.
74.
This is Truth ( King) For, for so doubtful gain
So inconsiderable a Content,
As (were it other) I could hope; so vain
A lie, and formal, I would scorn t'invent.
No, on the restless Bosom of the MAYN,
To set my Rest up, I would first consent
Forever; and by ^yracy to get
An unjust living out of others swet.
75.
So that, O KING! if my great Verity
Thou hold (as it is) for single and sincere;
Dispatch me to my Prince with brevitie,
Hold me no longer from my C^untry dear.
But if the scruple still remain in thee,
Ponder the Reasons I have rendered Here;
I lay them in thy piercing judgments scale
Secure: "For great is truth, and will prevail.
76.
The King marked all along the Confidence
Which DE GAME even proved his discourse.
A full assurance of h^s Innocence,
A perfect credit did this speech enforce.
He weighs the copious Words's magnificence,
The Authority with which they fetch their source:
Thinks now the CATUALL deceived is;
But He is bribed: and so he thinks amiss,
77.
Added to this, his avaritious Eye
Upon the gainful Trade of PORTUGAL
Makes him obey; and rather to comply
With the brave Captain, then the Moorish gall.
In short, he bids DE GAMA presently
Get him aboard his Fleet; and, without all
Suspect of harm, whatever Merchandice
To send ashore to sell, or truck for Spice.
78.
In fine, he bids him send of every thing
That in Gangetick Kingdoms is not met;
If ought that fits them from that Land he bring
Where the Land ends begins the ^cean great
Now, from the awful presence of the King*
Illustrious GAMA parts; to entreat
The CATUALL, That of the Ports had charge,
(His Own from shore) to order him a Barge.
79.
A Barge he prays from this illustrious Lord:
But this is more, then he is well content
(As ruminating mischief) to afford:
Pretending this and that impediment.
Yet (as in order to his going abord)
Far from the Royal Court with Him he went,
Where he (unnoted by the King) may write,
To Avarice what malice did indite.
80.
He tells him, yonder afar off, that He
Has imb^rcation fitter for his turn;
Or that to morrow it may better be,
If he till then his going will adjourn.
Now did abused GAMA plainly see,
By this put off unto another morn,
The great one too is in the Moorish plot:
Which t I that instant he suspected not.
81.
This CATUAL was one (and first) of Those
That were corrupted by that crooked Sect:
And whom the SAMORIM (that loved him) chose
Th Affairs of all his Empire to direct.
In Him alone those devils now repose.
To bring their plotted Treason to effect.
He (who consents to break his Master's faith)
Steps not an inch beside their chalked path.
82.
To be dispatched DE GAMA begs, and prays,
But begs in vain, in vain he prayers lets fall:
Protests the Embargue; now will this please (he says)
The noble Successor of PERIMAL.
Why these Impediments, why these delays,
When he should fetch the Goods of PORTUGAL?
Since, what commands the Sovereign of a Land,
None has authority to countermand.
83
The bribed CATUALL small reckoning made
Of this Protest: rather in spightful mood
Some never-heard of Treason (to be waigh'd
Out of the Stygian dam) within did brood.
Or, how he may imbrew his cursed Blade
In those detested veins, consid'ring stood:
Or, how the Ships he may blow up, or burn.
That they may never into SPAINI return.
84.
That Is it (even that they never see SPAIN more)
For which the MOORS infernal Junta bribe:
That so they may not wealthy INDIA'S shore
Unto the Kiug of PORTUGAL describe.
In fine DH GAME goes not: the REGIDORE
Forbids, in favor of that barbarous Tribe.
Nor without his permission can it be:
For a stop laid on all the Boats had He.
85.
To all the Captain's importunities,
The Pa^an bids him in a word, command
(For the more ready truck of Merchandise)
To have his Ships brought close up to the Land.
It is the way of Thieves, and Enemies
(He says) at distance with their Fleets to stand.
"No sign so sure of one that Ill intends
"As to suspect ill dealings from his Friends.
86.
Wise GAMA understood by half a word,
The Cause the CATUAL did never desire
To have the Ships, was, that with fire and Sword
He openly might wreake on them his Ire.
'Twas time (he thought) he now himself bestir'd,
That he assemble now his Wits entire.
His Fancy musters, to defeat all plots:
All things he fears, and all things counterplots.
87.
As of a Mirror, the reflected light,
Of burnisht Steel, or Cristal without stain,
Which struck by SOL (as if in fell despite)
Strikes the next man it meets, or Thing again:
And (moved by nimble Hand of some young spright
About the House, who is in gamesome vain)
Skips on the Floor, the Roof, the Wall, the Chair;
And has you here, and There, and every where.
88.
So shot the wav ring Fancy to and fro
Of circumspect DE GAMA; imagining
That possibly the Boats, COELLIO
Might to the shore (as he had ordered) bring.
Back to the Navy (if that were) to row,
He sends to Him forthwith advertising;
On Him, or That, lest ought attempted be
By the MOORS cruel Infidelity.
89.
Such should be All, who in war's Trade profound
Would imitate and match illustrious men;
Fly like the Needle all the Compass round,
First divine Dangers, and prevent them then,
With martial skill try every depth, and ground,
And for the Foe's one fence play show Him ten;
Believe all is, that may be: For (in brief)
"To say, I thought is ugly in a (...).
90.
The MALABAR protests, that he shall rot
In prison, if he send not for the Ships.
He ( constant, and with noble Anger hot)
His haughty menace weighs not at two chips.
All, that base malice dares or do, or plot,
When her black trailing bowels forth she rips,
A lone he will bear, e're he will dis-ensure
His King's Armada which he has secure.
91.
All that long night, and part he there was held
Of the next day, when to the SAMORIM
He means again to go: but was withheld
By a strong Guard placed in the entry dim.
The Pagan (seeing how he still rebelled,
And fearing lest the King should punish Him
In case he knew, as know he must e're long,
If this restraint proceed, the barb rous wrong)
92.
Bids him then send for, and expose to sale,
Not some, but all the Merchandise he brought*
That men may buy and truck in open scale:
"For where free Trade is barred there war is sought,
DE GAMA (though he pierce through this thin veil
And plainly views the Evil of his Thought)
Consents thereto: because he well does see
That with his Goods he buys his liberty.
93.
Th'agreement is, that Boats the Pagan find
Such as are fit to Land the Merchandise,
For to send his the Captain does not mind
To be embarked, or sunk by Enemies.
To fetch such Spanish wares, as Vend in YND,
Are soon dispatched, the Indian Almadies.
The Captain to his Brother writes, to lade
The Goods with which his Ransom must be paid.
94.
Landed they are: which wondrously does please
The CATUAL'S infamous Avarice.
Therewith does DIEGO stay, and ALVAREZ:
With power to truck, or sell them at a price.
That ( more, then KING, Prayers, Hon^r, or All these,
Upon a soul infected with that Vice)
A Bribe can do, the Pagan here does show:
Who, for the Goods did let DE GAMA go.
95.
For Those, he lets Him go: before he quit
The Pawn, on which he now has laid his hand,
Meaning a better penny thence to git
Then if he kept the Captain still on Land.
He (escaped out of the Trap) thinks it no wit
On the other side, to come within command
Again: but (safely got aboard his Fleet)
In his own Nest takes sleeps secure, and sweet
96.
At leisure then he walks upon his Decks
To see what Time and Patience will bring forth.
No Ruler has he there to make him vex:
Imperious, bribed, without or shame, or worth.
Now let the judging Reader mark what Rex
The Idol Gold (which all the World ador'th)
Plays both in ^oor and Rich: by Money's Thurst
All Laws and Ties (Divine, and Humane) burst.
97.
Slain by the Tracian King, to seize a vast
Entrusted Treasure, POLIDORO was
When stern ACRYSIUS thought his Daughter fast,
A Shower of gold did pierce a Tower of Brass.
The yellow Bracelets of the Foes, did cast
Such tempting beams on the TARPEIAN LA^S,
That she, for Those, the Tower of ROM^ unbarr'd:
Who brained her with the Bribe for a reward.
98
This strongest Forts subverts, and overth^ows:
Makes Kindred, Kindred; and Friends, Friends bet^ay.
This noblemen ignobly does dispose:
Delivers Captains to their Foes a Prey.
This blasts of pure Virginity the Rose:
Trampling on Fame and honor by the way.
This bribes even LIBRALL ARTS (it is power is such)
Makes JUDGMENT have no sight, CONSCIENC^ no touch.
99.
This, in unheard of Senses Text does take:
This makes and unmakes Laws in the same case:
This perjures Subjects, and This KINGS does make
Stoop to the Lure, like Eagles from their place.
Even golden minds (of those That All for sake
For GOD) this Antichimist does debase
To vilest mettle: with this Diffrence though,
That still These glister with a holy show.
End of the eighth Canto.
Ninth Canto.
STANZA. 1.
LOng in the City the Two Factors lay,
Without dispatching off the Merchandise.
So many rubbs are scattered in their way
By the false INFIDELS, that no man buys.
All, These design thereby; is to delay
INDIA'S Discov'rers There (whom they call spies)
Arrived till they the Fleet of MECMA see,
With which this other overwhelmed may be.
2.
At the far end o'th'ERITHREAN SEA
Where (calling it by his dear Sister's name)
The goodly City of ARSINO^
(Which afterward to be called SU^Z came)
Was founded by EGYPTIAN PTOLOME,
The Port of M^CHA lies: which has it is fame
From MAHOM'S superstitious Lavatory,
Promising Heaven through watery Purgatory.
3.
GIDDA the Port is called, in which did meet
The Trade of that RED SEA and flourisht most:
The Gain whereof was not a little sweet
To EGYPT'S Sultan who then rul d that C^ast.
From hence to MALA^AR a warlike Fleet
Of INFIDELL^ the Indian Ocean crossed
Each year; in that EMPORIUM to find
Health-giving Drugs, and Spices of each kind.
4*
The Ships expected by the MOORS, are These,
With which (not only great, but built for Fight)
Them, who supplant their Traffic in those Seas,
To wrap and burn in crackling flames and bright.
In this Sure Card themselves they so much please,
That, all they wish to gorge their Appetite,
Is, that the Strangers will but stay so long
Till from famed M^CHA come this Navy strong.
5.
But the GREAT GOVERNOR of Heaven and Earth
(Who, for what He before all Time did doom,
Likewise decreed fit means, which to the birth
Should bring the same when the full Time should come)
Kindled unlikely love on the cold Hearth
Of a MOOR'S breast (MON^AYDES) sending whom
Before, He to DE GAMA gave advice
Of All, and for his payns had PARADISE.
6.
This man (of whom the MOORS had no suspicion,
Being one himself, but on the contrary
To all their secret junta's gave admission)
Did to the Captain this foul play descry.
He visits often the Fleet, and repetition
Makes of his visits often, though far it lie:
To heart he lays the danger it is in,
Through the black Project of the SARACIN.
7.
He tells the cautious GAMA of the Fleet.
Which from ARA^IAN MECHA comes each year.
And how those Coun^rey men do thirst to see t,
As a sure Engine to destroy him there.
That it comes stuffed with Soldiers, and in It
Does horrid Thunderbolts of VULCAN bear:
So that consid'ring, how his own is brusht.
It may thereby be overpowr'd and crushed.
8*
DE GAMA, besides this, considering
That now the time it self calls him away;
And that for better answer from the King
(Who loves the MOORS) he may till doomsday stay:
Sends one ashore, the Factors summoning
To come aboard forthwith; and, lest that They
Be stopped, if their intent perceived should be;
Commands them do it with all secrecy.
9.
But long it was not e're a rumor went
(And it fell out to be a rumor true)
That the two Fact^rs were to prison sent,
'Cause from the City they by stealth withdrew.
The Captain, seeing which way the world went,
Seized (by Reprisal) without more ado
Some, That were then aboard his ship, lined well
With Preci^us Stones which they desired to sell.
10.
Grave Citizens, and wealthy were These all;
Well known, and well allide in CALICUT:
Therefore, to see them bound for PORTUGALI,
Into an uproare did the City put.
For straight to work the sturdy Seamen fall:
The Capstone roles, their s^v'ral strengths set to it
In several manners: some the Cable halling,
With the Bar others their hard bosoms galling.
11
This, hangs by the main-yard; and now untyes
The flowing Sail, with a great cry displayed:
When to the SAMORIM with greater cries
Is told how hastily the CAPTAIN waigh'd.
Their Wives and Children (trust up in this wise
That are) a noise, as they were murdered made
In the KING'S hearing; screaming they should lose,
These their dear Fathers: their dear Husband^, Those.
12.
The Lusitanian Merchants; with the Ware,
(There Is no delaying) freely he remands,
Although thereat the MOORS do stamp and stare,
Or else his own must visit uncouth Lands.
With all excuses, to make things look fair,
Sends to his King. DE GAME (who understands
The Restitution, better then the Cringe)
Returns some BLACKS, and gives the ships their swinge.
13.
He coasts it homewards, fully satisfy'de
That he in vain solicits with that King
A peace and friendship, to be ratify'de
By mutual Trade, as he proposed the thing.
But, having now that noble Land descry'de
Which lay much hid under the Morning's wing,
For his dear Country with this news is bound:
Carrying sure signs of that which he has found.
14.
He carries MALABARS, retained by Him
Perforce, of Those, who the stopped Factors brought
Aboard from the enforced SAMORIM.
He carries burning Pepper, which he brought;
Nutmegs (the whichthe^r own dry'de flowers up trim)
From BANDA; the black Clove (for which is sought
MOLUCO'S ISLE) and Cinnamon, through which
C^YLAN is noble, beautiful, and rich.
15.
All these provided by the diligence
Of good MONSAYDE, whom he carries too:
Who fired with Evangelick influence
To have his name writ in CHRIST'S book does sue.
O happy AFFRICAN! whom PROVIDENCE
DIVINE, out of infernal darkness drew;
And, so far from thy Country, found a way
To thy true C^untrey to reduce thee, stray.
16.
Thus vanish from the spicy Territory
The happy ships, whose Prows directly stand
OF GOOD HOP^ pointing at THE PROMONTORY
( South-Bound of NATURE fixed by her own Hand);
Bearing the evidence and welcome story
TO LISBON of the Oriental Land:
Once more committed to the rude annoy
Of Seas uncertain betwixt fear and joy.
17.
That they are going to their Country dear,
To their dear Parents, and Aboads at last,
To tell their wondrous Navigation, there,
The various Nations seen, and Dangers past;
That now the Harvest of their Toils is near,
The Fruits of their Adventure ripe to taste;
Is such a joy as cannot be expressed
By their faint Tongue pent in their narrow Breast.
18.
But CYPRUS'S Queen, who by the King of HEAVEN
Was made the LUSITANIANS'S Patroness,
And for a Guardian Angel to them given,
To whom she many years has proved no less;
Glory, for which they have so bravely striv'n,
Amends for their so well endured distress,
Means them by way of earnest beforehand;
And in sad Seas the Pleasures of the Land.
19.
Having a while revolved in her thought
The world of Sea which they have back to pass,
The world of Woes, that God on them had brought
In AMPHIONIAN THEBES twice-born that was*
It is her purpose, joys, so dearly bought
With Griefs, to fill them in an ample glass;
To cook them some delights, find them some nest,
Where in the rolling Empire they may rest.
20.
In fine an Inn of pleasure by the way
To bait and strengthen tired Humanity:
To give her gallant Seamen (not their Pay,
But) the use here of fair ET^RNITY.
She means to tell't her Son, and well she may;
For, with his shafts it is, she makes the high
GODS, stoop to the base ground: and, with ^is fire,
Unworthy mortals to bright Heaven aspire.
21.
This well digested, she resolves in fine
There, in the middle of the briny frost,
To have in readiness an Isle Divine,
With flowers on green inameld and imbost:
For she has many in those Seas, which join
To that blessed Land which our first mother lost;
Besides those sweet ones in the Midland Seas,
Impounded by the Gates of HERCULES.
22
There will she have the Aquatick maids prepare
To these rare men their graces to impart;
All that are honored with the name of Fair
(The glory of the Eye, Bane of the Heart)
With Balls, and Banquets blithe and debonayre:
For she inspires into their breasts the dart
Of secret love, that they with all their might
Of their Gallants may study the delight.
23
Such once her Project, for the man she bare
To TROY'S ANCHISES near to SIMOIS'S flood;
To get him welcome in that City fair
Which in the compass of an Oxe-hide stood.
Her boy she seeks (for, without Him, her rare
Beauty is nothing) CUPID given to blood:
That, as to Him of yore she recommends
Her sailing son, so now, her sailing Friends.
24.
She yoaks those Birds unto her Coach of gold
Which sing their own sad Dirge with long white necks:
And those, into the which was turned of old
PERISTERA, That gathered flowers by pecks.
The flying Goddess These in Rings enfold,
Exchanging kisses with lascivious Beaks.
She, where she passes, makes the Wind to lie
With gentle motion, and serenes the sky.
25.
Over Idalian Mountains now she hung,
The winged Boy residing in that Land,
To get an Army up of Bow-men young.
For a great War which he has then in hand
Against the rebel WORLD; where late have sprung
Much Weeds, as he is given to understand:
Loving those things, wherewith it is richly stored,
To be made use of, not to be adored.
26.
He sees ACTEON hunting, so inclined
To that mad sport, and brutal exercise,
That a deformed wild-beast to follow (blind)
The Beauty of a humane Face he flies:
And (to torment him with a Fair Unkind)
Shows stripped DIANA to his gazing eyes.
Now, let him take good heed he do not prove
A Prey, even to those Hounds he does so love.
27.
He sees the great ones of each Land, that none
Have Public Good so much as in their Eye:
Sees they love nothing but themselves alone;
Which is part Intrest, and part Philautye.
Courtiers he sees (men That besiege a Throne)
How for true Doctrine they vent Flattery.
It Is husbandry these like not in a King
To weed the Flowers out of his Corn in Spring.
28.
He sees, how Those that owe a v^wed love
To Poverty, and Charity to Men,
Love Riches only, and to floate Above,
Pretending justice, and a Conscience clean.
They tell the People, what does Them behove;
OBEDIENCE, in the deed, the Tongue, the Pen.
Laws they set up in favor of the CROWN,
Laws in the People's favor they pull down.
29.
He sees, in fine, none love that which they should
But only what complies with some vain lust:
Therefore his hands can he no longer hold
From punishments that may be sharp, yet just.
His Captains pricked, his Soldiers are inrol'd
Fit for a War which undertake he must,
With the misgovern'd World: whereby to quell
All that persist against him to rebel.
30.
Swarms of these little Hov'rers (newly flown)
At sev^ral works, busy as Bees, are all:
Some whetting Arrow-Heads on blo^dy Hone,
Others the shafts of Arrows shaving small.
Working they sing, and sing of love alone,
And then that Love it is Seraphical:
In Parts; and in the burden all do join;
The Ditty excellent, the Tune Divine.
31.
On the immortal Anviles (where their Arts
They use, the steeled points to forge, and fit)
Instead of Embers there are burning Hearts,
Which bring their Bellows with them (panting yet):
The streams, with which they temper their steeled d^rts,
Tears, which from miserable LOVERS flit:
The sparckling flame, the never^quenched fire,
(Which burns, and not consumes them) is desire.
32.
Some of these Archers exercise their Hand
On the hard Bosoms of the Vulgar rude;
The bored Air hiss't (by this we understand
The sighings of the wounded multitude*);
For Sugeons, Nymphs to Cur^ them ready stand,
With Sovereign Virtue to this end indu'd:
Who, to the Hurt not only life can give,
But make, even them that never were born to live.
33.
Some of these Nymphs are fair, and some are not,
According to the Nature of the Wound:
Into the blood if once the Taint be got,
Often ugly Treacle gives the Patient sound.
There are, whom Spells and Philters do besot;
Nayl'd to their Seats, they wiss not how and b^und:
Where this is, LOVE has used against frail Hearts
Unlawful weapons, shooting poisoned darts.
34.
From these raw Soldiers, out of rank and life,
A thousand rash, and senceless Darts are sped:
A thousand senceless loves are born the while
In the low People, to be pitied.
Even amongst Those in highest Forms, of vile
And horrid Love are thousand (...) read:
BIBLIS, and MYRRA, for one sex; for the other,
Th'ASSYRIAN SON, and the JUDEAN BROTHER.
35.
And you (Great Lords) by shepherdesses mean
Under the yoke of LOVE have often been brought;
And you (great Ladies) with rude Clowns unclean
In VULCAN'S subtle Nets have often been caught:
Some, watching the dim fall of the Serene;
Some, pitchie Night, o re Tiles, or Walls to vaut.
Though for these sordid fires (if right we did)
More then the Son the Mother should be chid.
36.
But the swift Coach now softly on the Green
The white Swans (ballanc't in their Harness) put;
On which DIONE (in whose Cheek is seen
The Snow-mixt Rose) sets light her milky foot.
The Archer meets her with a jocund mien
Who shoots at HEAVEN, and does not miss the But.
With Him in Squadron his SUB-CUPIDS move,
To do their Homage to the QUE^N OF LOVE.
37.
She (not to spend the precious time in vain)
Snatching her Child up, confidently said;
Dear Son, in whom, and whose strong Arm, I reign;
And the Foundations of my Power are laid;
Son, in whom all my strengths always remain;
Who feared st not Them; That made great JOVE afraid;
I have a special buis'ness to be done,
In which I greatly need thy power my Son.
38.
The LUSITANIANS, harast out, behold!
Who are my Care of long Antiquity;
Because my Friends (the Fates) to me had told,
Wheree're They go, my worshipped name should fly.
And, for they imitate my ROMANS old
In all Heroic Actions, therefore I
Resolve, for them to do a Guardian^s duty,
And raise the Posse of the Realm of Beauty.
39.
And, since the malice of the God of Wine
Spun them new troubles upon Indian-ground,
When from the furies of the swelling Brine
They crope out weather-beaten, and half-drown^d;
Therefore in middle of the Sea (in fine)
Which they their bitter enemies have found,
And near that INDIA, I would have them breathe,
And of their Labors the first fruits ^eceave.
40.
As wanton Fishes then therein are struck,
So do Thou strike the fair NEREIDES;
That on these LUSITANIANS they may look
With amorous eyes, who carry home the Keys
Of their discovered World. Sick with the Hook
Let them on shore an Isle; an Isle (in Seas
Immense) which I have decked with all the Flowers
Or ZEPHYRUS breathes, out; or FLORA, powers.
41.
There with a thousand dishes delicate,
With oderiferous Wines, and R^ses sweet,
In crystal Palaces immaculate,
In lilly sheets (they whiter then the sheet)
In fine with thousand joys past Vulgar rate,
Let the obliging Nymphs their Heroes meet
(wounded with love) and yield up Nature's treasure,
To be all ransackt at the Victor's pleasure.
42.
In NEPTUNE'S Realm (to which I owe my birth)
A fair and manly Offspring would I have;
To serve for pattern to the Bastard-Earth,
Which with rebellious Heart thy power does brave:
That men may know, From Thee, the Foe of mirth
Hypocrisy, nor walls of brass can save.
Ill can it be resisted on the Land,
If in the Sea burn thy immortal Brand.
43.
She had not ended when the Wag her Son
Prepares himself to do as he was told:
Calls for his Ivory Bow, ingrav*d upon,
Whose Arrow-points are tagg'd with heads of Gold.
Ravished with joy the CYPHIAN PARRAGON
Sets the Boy by her, in her Coach, which troll'd,
The rains enlarged to those Birds, whose Song
The death of PHA^THON laments so long.
44.
But we do want a certain necessary
Woman, to broke between them CUPID said;
Whom, though to Him she had been often contrary,
Yet, of his side, he had as often made:
Rash Boaster, who both Lies and Truths does carry,
Sister to Them that did the Gods invade,
Who with a th^usand Tongues spreads where she flies,
That which she saw but with a hundred eyes.
45.
Her find they out, and make her go before:
Who with a rattling Trumpet does proclaim
The Praises of the Navigators more
Then of all else she e're vouchsaf't to name.
Now in the hollows of the Rocks did roar,
And the hoarse Waves, the piercing voice of FAM^.
Truth she relates, and Truth esteemed to be,
For with the Goddess went CREDULITY.
46.
Bribed with this Praise, this excellent Report,
The Gods (whom BACCHUS so inflamed had erst
Against these gallant men, in NEPTUNE'S Court)
With passion for them are a little pierced.
The female Breasts (that quit with less effort
The prejudices they received at first)
Now call it an ill Zeal, a cruel mind,
Which to such Virtue made them prove unkind.
47.
The bloody Boy strikes while the Iron's hot.
Shafts, follow shafs, the Sea roares with his shoots.
Some, through the fickle Waves point blanck are shot:
Some, hit on Rocks; nor, to be rocks, it boots.
Down drop the Nymphs, each has her deaths wound got,
All dart out burning sighs from their heart-Roots;
No Face yet seen: "For Shafts, which LOV^ lets fly,
"Kill in the Ear as sure as in the Eye.
48.
With doubled force the Lad, that tamed was never,
Makes the two horns meet of his Ivory Mo^n.
More, then of All, he ayms at THETYS'S Liver:
For more then All has she against him done.
Now not ^ne shaft is left in all his Quiver
In all the Sea NYMPH left alive not one*
Or if (being hurt) they live, it is for This,
That they may feel how sweet such dying is.
49.
Make room, ye azure Billows of the DEEP:
Lo! VENU^ comes, and brings the Medicine with her!
The pregnant Sails on NEPTUNE'S surface creep,
Like her own Swans, in Gate, out-chest, and Fether.
That their desires like equal pace may keep,
And neither to great LOVE complain of either,
The Men's bold fires shall press chaste HYMEN'S bands;
The Female-Blush do (...)'S QUEENS commands.
50.
All the fair Quire of the NEREIDES
Is now prepared, and in a lofty Dance
(After their loving custom) through the Seas
To the Isle by VENUS showed, at once advance.
The skilful Goddess there erudiates These
In all she did, when LOVE her Breasts did lance.
They, whom the Son had conquered, are not nice
To listen to the Mother's sweet advice.
51
The lofty ships went cutting the vast Sea
In their long Voyage to their Country dear,
Least that, they had, should fail them by the way,
Prolling about for water fresh, and clear.
When (to their sudden joy) at break of day
The enamored Isle does to them All appear.)
Straight MEMNON'S mother, delicate and fair,
Spread all her sweetness through the purged Air.
52.
They see Aloof the Island fresh, and green,
Which VENUS carries floating on the Main,
Just as the Wind does their white Sails; and seen
The ships are from the Isle too, but not plain.
For, lest by Them o'reshot it should have been,
Making her Wish, and Preparations, vain;
(What cannot VENUS ACIDALIA do?
She moved it plum in the Armada's view.
53.
But fixed it; when she saw, They saw, and sought
The Island with their Keels: so, on the Floods
Was DELOS fixed, when forth LATONA brought
APOLLO, and the GODDESS OF THE WOODS.
Thither through sliced Seas their way they wrought
Where a calm Bay the crooking shore includes,
Whose gliss'ning Sands with interfused vains
Of purple Cockles CYTHEREA stains.
54.
Three goodly Mountains with a graceful pride
Thrust their majestic Heads into the Air
(With green imbroydred Hangings beautify'de)
In this gay Isle delicious, fresh, and fair.
From their three Tops three crystal Springs did glide,
Lacing the Liv'ry their rich Margents ware.
Jumping on Peebles while their Crystals brake:
Such Music never Waterworks did make.
55.
In a pure Valley which those Hills divides,
As by appointment the three Currents meet,
Shaping a Table with proportioned sides,
Broad, and beyond imagination, sweet.
A Frenge of Trees hangs over it, and prides
It self, in so clear Glass it self to greet:
Now prancks its locks therein, and now retires;
Now looks again, and its own form admires.
56.
A thousand gallant Trees to Heaven up-shoot
With ^pples, odoriferous, and fair:
The Orange-tree has in her sightly fruit
The color DAPHNE boasted in her Hair:
The Citron-tree bends almost to her Root
Under the yellow burden which she bare:
The goodly Lemmons with their button-Caps,
Hang imitating Virgins fragrant Paps.
57.
The savage-trees (That do the Forest there
With leavie-Haire innoble and adorn)
Are, ^oplars of ALCIDES; Laurels, dear
In vain unto the GOLD^N GOD UNSHORN;
Myrtles of VENUS; the proud Pine severe,
That CYBELE for meaner love did scorn.
The speared Cypress, from this vale of Vice,
Stands pointing at CELESTIAL PARADISE:
58
The fruit POMONA gives, NATU^ bestows
Here lib'rally, and in the kinds all good;
Better then elsewhere it in Gardens grows,
It Is here undrest, unplanted in the Wood;
The Cherry, that begs outside from the Rose;
The Mulberry, stained with true-Lovers blood;
The Peach, translated from its Mother-soile
In PERSIA, and made better by Exile.
59.
Th'ingenuous Pomgranat shows his Heart,
With which Thou, Rubie, losest thy esteem:
From her loved Elm the Vine does not depart,
Her Clusters loading Him, some red, some green:
And, Pear pyramidall, if loath thou art
To dye before thy time, hide thee between
The Leaves; for to anticipate thy Fate
Ten thousand feather'd-Minstrels lie in wait.
60.
The fine and noble Carpets then (which there
Lie to be trod on by the meanest Plant)
Make those of PERSIA, course; and pleasanter
These of the gloomy Valley All will grant.
NARCISSUS, there, over the water clear
Hangs his sick head, who what he had, did want.
There flaunts the Grand-child-Son of CYNARAS,
For whom Thou, PAPHI^N QUEEN, cry'st yet, alas!
61.
It was not easy to be understood
(The self-same colors seeen in Skies, and Bowers)
Whether AURORA lent the Flowers blood,
Or borrowed complexi^n of the Fl^w'rs
There, Z^PHYRUS and FLORA painting stood
The Vi'let, with the Pale of Paramo^rs;
The Flow'r-de-lis, with blew; the lovely Rose,
Just such, as in a Virgin's cheek it blows.
62.
The Lilly, white; in whose pure snow the print
Sits of the Morning's Tears: and Marjor^me:
The doleful ay, read in the Hyacint;
A Flower LATONA'S son loves for the name.
FLORA bets high POMONA knows no stint,
She Vyes with Flowers, with fruits This sees the Game:
Nor Flowers, and Fruits, are All that place affords;
The Earth has Beasts besides, and the Air Birds.
63.
Along the Lake the snowy Swan did sing,
Him PHILOMELA answers from a Bough;
ACTEON drinks out of the crystal Spring,
Nor fears the shadow of his horned Brow.
Here the close Hare (to whom her fear gives wing)
Starts from her Form; or, from a Brake the Row:
The wanton Sparrow, there, to his dear Nest
Bears in his Bill the little Chirpers feast.
64.
The sec^nd ARGONAUT^ now disembarke
From the tall ships into an EDEN green.
There, in this Isle, this Forest, or this Park,
The fair Nymphs hide, with purpose to be seen.
Some touch the grave Theorba in shades dark,
Some the sweet Lute, and gentle Violeen:
Others with golden Cross-bows make a show
To hunt the Bruits, but do not hunt them though.
65.
Thus counseled them their Mistress, and her Art's:
That so, the more their own desires they Master,
And seem a flying prey to their sweethearts,
It might make them to follow on the faster.
Some (who are Conscious that their skins have darts,
And put their trust in naked Alablaster)
Bathe in Diaphane streams, their Roabs by-thrown,
And ask no Ornament, but what is their own.
66.
But the bold Striplings setting on the sand
Their nimble feet, which longed to touch the ground.
(For not a man of them but came a land
To see what Savage Game might there be found)
Dreamt not to find Game ready to their hand,
In that sweet Forest (without snare, or Hound)
So Debonayre, so tender, so benign,
As was there hurt by means of ERICINE.
67.
Some (who with Guns and Cross-bows make account
The Royal Stag, and Lordly Buck, to slay)
Through the sharp Bushes resolutely mount,
And lofty Forest; where no Foot-path lay.
Others in Shades (which PH^BUS'S Arrows blount)
Walking, or resting, while the Heats away
By those sweet Brooks, which (stumbling as they past
Over white Peebles) to the Sea did have.
68.
When suddenly, through the Green-wood leaves,
Variety of Colors they descry;
Colors, which soon the judging eye perceives
Are not of Roses, or fresh Flowers the dye:
But, of fine wool; or That, the rich worm weaves:
Of which LOV^ makes his Lure, and Sawces high;
Of which their Garments Humane Roses make,
To make the Bird sell for the Feathers sake.
69.
Amazed VELOSO with a loud voice cried;
Strange Game (my masters) in this Forest rise:
The ancient Poets Tales are verified,
And this Isle s sacred to the D^ITIES.
Nay, what to humane-fancy is denied
To hope, or comprehend, see with your Eyes!
And see, what wonders, what great blessings then,
The world and Nature hide from vulgar men!
70.
Chase we these Goddesses; it shall be seen
If they be Real or Fantastical.
This said (more swift then Bucks over Pastures green)
Through the rough Brakes and Woods darted they All.
The Nymphs went flying the thick boughs between,
Yet not so Swift, as Artificial.
Skreeking, and laughing softly in the close,
They let the Greyhounds gain upon the Does.
71.
One's golden Tresses up the wind did blow,
The light coats of Another as she fled:
The desire, kindled by the naked Snow,
Upon the dainty Prospect (greedy) fed.
This falls on purpose, and whilst she does go
To rise (with kindness, more then Anger, red)
He that pursues, falls over her; like one
That rubs the Mistress when his Bowl is gone.
72.
Others (who Game in other Parts did seek)
Chop on the G^ddesses that bathing were.
These suddenly begin a fearful shreek
As if they wondered to see Mortals there.
Some (sliding through the Laund their Bodies sleek,
As who should say; shame less, then force We fear)
Scud to the Cops, exposing to the Eye
What to the greedy Hand they did deny.
73.
There is, That (hiding with a Veil of Glass
(DIANA-like) if not her Lims, her blushes)
Sinks where she stands: There is, That (on the grass
Snatching her Clothes that lie) shoots through the Rushes.
Amongst the Rest, an eager Lad there was,
Rayments and all, into the Bath that brushes
(For, whilst he stripped, he feared to lose the Game)
To quench in water his tormenting flame.
74.
As a rough Water-dog, to fetch and seek
That Is us d, and wait upon his Master's gun,
Seeing him lay the Steel-Cane to his Cheek,
Aimed at a Duck, or Teal, to him well known;
Before the blow, into the stream or creek
(Sure of the Quarry) does impatient rnn,
And, barking, swims: The Lad so, from the shore
Swam to the Nymph whom L^ve had shot before.
75.
Another (LEONARD) whom Books adorn,
Stout, noble, handsome, amorous, and young;
On whom GOD CUPID had not cast one scorn,
But all his gall into his potion wrung;
So that he well might think, he was not born
To any luck in loving; yet, among
His faults, 'twas one, that on he still would play
(As Gamesters use) in hope 'twould turn one day.
76.
'Twas here his fortune, in pursuit to fall
Of fair EPHYRE (LOVE'S own sister-Twin)
But one, who would give dearer then they All,
What Nature gave to Her to give agin.
On Her, He (spent with running) loud does call.
O Cruelty, lodged in too fair an Inn,
If to thy Shrine (quoth he) I Am vowed whole,
Stay for my Body, since thou have my soul!
77.
All (out of breath, and weary) Nymph divine,
Are yielding to the pressing Enemy.
Through Briars and Thorns Thou only still fly'st Thine:
Who told thee, I am I, that follow thee?
If thou were it told it by that star of mine,
Which, wheresoever I fly, shoots after me;
Ah! do not credit That: For when as I
Did so, thou can think how it would lie.
78.
I tire with tyring Thee, my spirits wast;
And if thou fly, thereby to fly my touch,
I can assure thee (fair one) stay thou may,
And yet I never the near, my star is such.
Stay, if thou please; and see but (if thou stay'st)
The slight of hand, the which my Fate (so much
In vain deplored) will find at last, to rear
A Wall, between the Sickle and the Ear.
79.
O fly me not! So may Time never fly
Thy Beauty out of sight. For, do but turn;
Dashed with the beams of thy Majestic Eye,
No saucy fire in me will dare to burn.
What KING could break the force of destiny?
What ARMY conquer it? and mine has sworn
To thwart me still. Yet stay: I Am happy than:
And thou shall do what KINGS, nor ARMI^ can.
80.
With my malignant star do Thou take part?
To help the stranger is not nobly done.
Carriest Thou with thee my Grief-loaden heart?
Send it me back, and thou will faster run.
That Soul of mine, grown heavy with long smart,
Hanged in those Tresses which outshine the Sun,
Does it not clog them? Or, since it came there,
Has it changed mood, and weighs but for one Here?
81.
With this hope only thy white feet I trace,
That either Thou her weight will not endure,
Or she, by being in that heavenly place,
Will change her luck, and better stars procure.
And, if that change, fly never such a pace,
LOVE can hit flying I am very sure;
And, if he hit, Thou't stay; and, on this score,
If thou do stay, of Heaven I ask no more.
82.
The fair Nymph now fled not so much to sell
The Jewel dear, for which the Lad pursued her;
As, the sweet Tunes to hear, that from him fell,
And amorous laments with which he wooed her.
Her Eyes (now bathed in smiles and tractabell)
Turned upon Him, who with his charms subdued her;
All melted in pure love, languidly sweet,
She lets her self fall at the Victor's feet.
83:
O what devouring Kisses (multiplied)
What pretty whimp'rings, did the Grove repeat!
What flattering Force! What Anger which did chide
Itself, and laughed when it began to threat!
What more then this the blushing MORNING spied,
And VENUS (adding Here Is to the NOON'S heat)
Is better tried, then guessed, I must confess:
But Those who cannot try it, let them guess.
84.
For first with all the Rites of wedlock joined
Were the loved Seamen to th'AQUATICK POWERS:
What gentle Tongue, and what white Hand could bind,
The Nymphs had added in those sacred Bowers.
And now their Lovers heads they crowned (kind)
With gold, and Laurel, and abounding Flowers:
Promise, to keep them company for ever;
Whom life, or death with honor, shall not sever.
85.
The Chief of them (whom all the rest went after,
And did obey in all things her behest,
Of URANUS and Holy VESTA Daughter,
As by her Face was easy to be guest,
Filling with wonderment both Earth, and Water)
The Illustrious Captain, worthy of the Best,
With grave and Royal Ceremonies took:
Showing her Greatness in her Pomp and Look.
86.
HIM (whom she first acquainted with her name,
Then, in a kind exordium mixed with state,
Gave him to understand she Thither came
By the immutable decree of Fate;
To Him of the promiscuous Globe and Frame
Of the vast EARTH, and OCEAN, to relate
Parts undiscovered, by Prophetic Spirit:
Which He alone, and his brave SPANIARDS merit)
87.
Taking up with her by the hand, she led
Unto a Mountain's top, high and divine;
Where a rich Pyle erected the proud head,
Of crystal all, with massive gold and fine.
Here all the live-long day they rioted
In full delight. and sports to sports that join.
Within the Palace she injoys her love:
The others theirs within the flowery Grove.
88:
Thus, the fair Bevy, thus the Valiant Crew,
Divide the How'rs by innocent, by chaste
Delights, and such as Mortals never knew,
In recompense of so long labors past.
And thus the meed, to such high Actions due
Of noble Prowess; even the World at last
Pays (in despite of Envy) with the sound
Of a great Name; which Time, nor Place shall bound.
89.
For these fair Daughters of the OCEAN,
THETYS, and the Angellick pensil'd ISLE,
Are nothing, but sweet Honor, which These wan;
With whatsoever makes a life not vile.
The privileges of the MARTIAL MAN,
The Palm, the Lawrell'd Triumph, the rich spoil;
The Admiration purchac't by his sword;
These are the joys, this Island does afford.
90.
So those false Godships which ANTIQUITY,
To all illustrious Men a zealous Friend,
In Starry Heavens created, to which she
Made them on towering wings of Fame t'ascend,
For honorable Acts they did, for free
And noble Sufferings (VIRTUE'S path, the end
Whereof, is smooth and pleasant like our Isle,
Though it self craggie, steep, and full of toil.)
91.
What meant they, but an Immortality
Given by the World for Actions Sovereign,
To such as ARTS, or ARMS, advanced t'a high
And heavenly pitch, being born of humane strain?
For JOVE, APOLLO, MARS, and MERCURY,
AENEAS, ROMULUS, the THEBANS TWAIN,
JUNO, DIANA, CERES, PALLAS; All
Dwell (as you do) in brittle Earthen Wall.
92.
But FAME (the Trumpet of deeds great and good)
Gave them new Names and Titles on the Earth;
GODS of the whole, and GODS of the half-blood,
GODS by Adoption, and GODS by Birth.
If ye love Fame then, if make These ye would,
(As Men) your patterns, though (as Gods) your Mirth,
Fly Sloth; by which the SOUL, which Heaven gave
To be the BODY'S Queen, becomes its Slave.
93.
Curb, with a Bit of Iron, AVARICE;
AMBITION curb, to which you are too too prone;
And curb the black and detestable Vice
Of TYRANNY, and base OPPRESSION.
"For these vain Honors, this false Gold, give price
"(Unless he have it in himself) to none,
"Better deserve them, and to go without;
"Then have them undeserved, without doubt.
94.
Either in peace promote impartial Laws,
That so great Fish devour not the small Fry;
Or (armed) tear out of the Great TURKS jaws
The Christians prey, on which he stretched does lie.
The Kingdom's greatness, by this means ye'll cause;
Nor lessen, but augment, your own, thereby.
In Riches merited ye will abound;
And with true Honor have your Temples crowned.
95.
And to your KING ye so pretend to prize,
Ye shall bring honor; now, with Councels grave:
Now, with your Swords, which will immortalize
You, as they have done your Forefathers brave.
I ask you not Impossibilities:
" He That will, always can. Then, each shall have
A HERO'S place: or (if that more may move)
Be Denizen'd into this ISLE OF LOVE.
End of the ninth Canto.
Tenth Canto.
STANZA. 1.
BUt now the Larissean Lasses Friend
(Who for a wealthier Lover did foregoe
The God of Verse) his setting Steeds did bend
Over the great Lake of silver MEXICO;
SOL'S burning Rays FAVONIUS did suspend
With that cool breath which makes, where it does blow,
Becalmed Jesamines erect their heads,
And naked Lillies sit up in their Beds:
2.
When the fair Nymphs and Lovers, two abreast,
Now Friends and well contented, hand in hand
Toward the Palace bright their steps addressed,
Which upon Pillars of pure gold did stand;
To a most splendid and Opiperous Feast
All summoned thither, by the Queen's command
Who had prepared it for them, to repair
Consumptive Nature with delicious Fare.
3.
There, in rich Chaires of substance crystalline
They sit by Two's and Two's, Gallant and dame.
At the upper end, in other of gold fine,
Sits the fair GODDESS with renowned DE GAME.
With Viands delicate in sauce divine
(Such as to CLEOPATRA'S Board never came)
Are heapt the dishes of red burnisht gold:
Part of the Treasure which their Seas infold.
4.
The fragra^t Wines not only are above
Faler^ian Liquor of Italian growth,
But that choice-Nectar sent about by JOVE
When Rebel Giants felt IMMORTALS wroth.
In Di'mond-Cups (tempting to mirth, and love)
The Ruby sparckles: bubbles the curled froth
With the powered spring. Thus, of their L^vers true
The greatest F^e, the watery Nymphs subdue.
5.
A thousand pleasant Arguments they touch,
Still-laughters pass, quick witty Repartees,
'Twixt dish and dish; whereby, without too much
Of Those, to whet the appetite to These.
Musical Instruments not wanting (such,
As to the damned spirits once gave ease
In the dark Vaults of the Infernal Hall)
Joined with a SIREN'S Voice Angelical:
6.
The fair MUSE sang, and with her shrill Accents
(Which from the lofty Battlement rebound)
In equal harmony the Instruments,
Keeping just time, their softer Notes confound.
A sudden Silence curbs the Winds, ind^nts
With the hoarse waves to whisper under ground.
And the bruit Creatures in their Houses (made
By Nature's hand) asleep are sung and played.
7.
With a sweet Voice she raises to the skies
Rare men to come into the world; whose clear
Ideas were beheld by PROTHEU s wise
In a Diaphane and Fantastic Spher^,
Which in a Dream JOVE showed to his shut Eyes;
And after, He, by Prophecy appear
Made it humid Realms: where this Nymph (took
Therewith) got the brave story without book*
8.
Matter for Buskin it is, and not for Sock,
In the VAST LAKE that which the Mermaid heard;
Beyond what POPAS knew, or (...):
This King ALCINOO'S, That Queen DIDO'S Bard*
Now, my CALIO^E, I Thee invoke
To my last Labor: begging, for reward
Of all I write (which I in vain pretend)
I may come off with a good tang in the end:
9.
I sink into the Vale of years; and, past
My Summer's pride, to Autumn speed amain.
And my Wit (more then years) MISFORTUNES blast;
Which Wit I own not now, nor boast my Vein.
Sighs blow me to that Port, where all must cast
The Anch^r never to be weighed again.
Yet, great Queen of the MUSES grant that I
May close my NATION'S Poem e're I dye.
10.
The SIR^N sang, how from the Tagan shore,
Through Seas first opened by De Gama, now
Should Navies come; which all within the Rore
Of Indian Seas shall to that Empire bow:
And how ^ach Pagan King, who the sweet Lore
And yoke those Guests will bring, shall from them throw;
With fire and sword by their brave Arm so bit
Shall be, that they shall yield to Death, or It.
11.
She sang of One, who (being dignified,
With the High Priesthood of all MALAEAR)
Because, the knots of Friendship he had tied,
He would not break with men so singular;
Shall let his Fields and Cities be destroyed
With fire and sword, and all the rage of war,
Before him, By the potent SAMORIM:
So hateful shall those strangers be to Him.
12.
And sings, in BETHL^M there, how shipped shall be
The Sovereign remedy of this Disease;
The great PAC^ECO knowing not, that He
Carries with Him the Pelian Lance through Seas.
But the Sea shall; when, to such great Guests she
Unused, shall feel his weight: The groaning Trees
Of his proud ship shall know it, which two foot more
Shall draw of water, then it did before.
13.
But, treading now the Oriental Strand,
And left, the Pag^n King of spoyld COCHIM
To^yd, of PORTINGALS with a small Band,
Upon the salt and crooked River's Brim;
Rout shall he, at the pass of CAMBALAND,
The Infernal NAYRES, That there set on Him:
Turning with fear the burning ORIENT cold,
So much done with so little to behold.
14.
The SAMORIM shall raise an Army new;
The Kings shall come of BIPUR and TANORE
From Highlands of NARSINGA; what they will do
For their chief Lord, making large Brags before.
All the armed NORTH he shall assemble too,
Which lies 'twixt CALICUT and CANANORE,
Of both Religions, against the True that band,
The MOORS by Sea, the PAGAN POWR'S by Land.
15.
And once more All defeats on Land and May^
The bold PACHECO, Thunderbolt of War;
The multitude unnumberd of the slain
Amazing all the Realms of MALABAR.
The undespairing Emperor again
Shall have to try his Fortune militar;
Rating his Men, pouring vain prayers and tears
To his vain Gods That have nor eyes nor ears.
16.
Your Troops shall passes now no more defend,
But burn the PAGA^'S Houses, Towns, and Fanes.
The Dog (enraged to see they make no end
Of laying flat his goodly Towns) ordains
His Men, whom he does prodigally spend,
PACHECO'S then divided in two Lanes,
To charge between them. He together brings
His Jaws, and makes two Pincers of his Wings.
17.
In person then the SAMORIM shall come
To see what is done, and reinforce his men.
Dashed (by a shot which through the Air does humme)
In his high Chair with blood he shall be then.
That Force, nor Policy can overcome
This Warrior; now he shall to see begin.
Treasons, and Poisons base he shall invent;
Which Heaven (PACHECO'S keeper) wi^ prevent.
18.
That a sev'nth time he shall return, she sings,
To fight the brave unconquered PORTINGALL;
Whom no Toyls tire, who dreads no dreadfu^l Things,
Yet this a little discompose him shall.
To horrid battle the fell Tyrant brings
Engines of Wood, dire and unusual,
To board the Caravels upon the Mayn,
Which he till then shall have assayed in v^in.
19.
Mountains of Fire shall on the water float
The little Navy to consume with flame.
The great PACH^CO (like himself) this hot
And fierce Bravade shall in a trice make vain.
No Master in the Art of War (That got
Never so high upon the wings of Fame)
With all his Palms can near this WORTHY come:
Pardon me noble (...), and nobler ROM^.
20.
For with a hundred men, or little more,
Unto the end so many Battails fought;
With such high Stratagems unseen before,
On Warlike-Hoasts so many wonders wrought;
Seem either Fables dreamt by men that snore,
Or that cel^stial Quires (with Prayers down brought)
Their Champion in those Exigencies Aid
With Wit, Slight, Force, and courage undismayd.
21.
He, who in Marathonian Fields of old
Over vast DARIUS'S powers victorious was;
Nor He, who, with three hundred SPARTANS bold,
Of famed THERMOPILEE maintained the Pass;
Nor ROME'S young COCLES, who at bay did hold
All the proud Tuscan power, till cut he has
The Bridge behind him: nor old FABIUS is
Or wise, or valiant, when compared with This.
22.
But at this point, her high and rattling tone
The Nymph abasing, made it hoarse and sad;
And with low Voice (drowned in her Tears did moan
Of so strange Val^ur a Requital bad.
O BELISARIUS (said she) That art One
Who by the MUS^ will still in price be had;
If MARS himself affronted were in Thee,
Here is a man that may thy Comfort be.
23.
Here thou a Rival have, as in thy Deeds,
So in their cruel and unjust return;
In Thee, and Him, misused VIRTUE bleeds:
In Thee, and Him, does begging VALOR mourn:
Both Bulwarks of your KINGS, Both of your (...):
Both dye in HOSPITALS ragged and torn.
This those Kings do, whose justice is their will;
Their Evidence what MALIC^ shall instill.
24.
This those Kings do, who (with smooth Tales misled
Of Flatterers, by whom asleep they are sung,
Give the Rewards by AJAX merited
Unto the fraudulent ULYSSES'S tongue.
But it is revenged at full, when, hand o'rehead,
They deal their B^ns those SYCOPHANTS among:
By whom, of their ill choice they will be made
Ashamed first, and afterward betrayed.
25.
But Thou, That such a man could leave, to SCORN
And WANT, O KING unjust in this alone!
If Thou, to build his Fortunes were it, not born;
He was, to give to Thee a potent Throne.
And (credit me) whilst PH^US'S locks unshorn
To light the Earth and Heaven shall be known,
Like that Sun glorious shall PACHECO be,
And Thou in this Eclipse thy Majesty.
26.
Another, lo! (proceeding in her Song)
Comes, with a Regal Title, and his Son;
Who, on the Sea shall do such things e're long,
As by no ancient ROMAN were outdone.
They Both, shall win by armed Hand and strong
Wealthy QUILOA, and shall sack it, won:
Placing therein a mild and loyal King
For a false Tyrant, whom they out shall fling.
27.
Also, the City of MOMBASSA (Crowned
With sumptuous Houses, and aerial Spires)
Shall by them Both be levelled with the ground,
For an ^ld fault which a new r^d requires.
But, afterward, upon the INDIAN SOUND
(Covered with Ships and Artificial Fires
T'o'rewhelm the PORTINGALLS) with Oar, and Sail,
Al^ne the young LORENZO shall prevail.
28.
The CARACKS of the potent EMPERORE
(Peopling the scorched Air with Iron Ball
Which from the burning Brass, like Thunder, roar)
Tear shall he, Canvas, Rudder, Mast and all.
His grappling-hooks thrown resolutely over
Her lofty Decks, Himself their Admiral
Shall enter first; and clear, with Lance and Sword
Four hundred MOORS she will have then aboard.
29.
But GOD (whose secret doom is over All:
Best judge, of what is his service, and Man's good)
Shall bring him then, where Wit nor Pr^wess shall
Have power to stop his Foes prevailing Flood.
Near CHOUL (where cheaply yet he shall not fall:
The purpled Sea there boiling over with blood)
He will be forced, to leave his life behind,
By Fleets of EGYPT and CAM^AYA joined.
30
There shall ennumerable Enemies
(Who, with great force alone, great (...) (...))
The Wind that fails, Danger that multiplyes,
Upon the Sea; against him All conspire.
Now from their Graves let all the Ancients rise,
A pattern to behold of noble Ire:
They shall behold another SCEVA, s^ill'd
How to dye piecemeal, but not how to yi^ld.
31.
Robbed of a Thigh (which an unlucky shot
In splinters with it through the air shall bear)
Still does he use his Arms; These fail him not,
Nor his great Heart, incapable of Fear:
Until another Bullet breaks the knot
Wherewith his Soul and Body married were.
The prison open, she escapes: and straight
Does find her self in a triumphant state.
32.
SOUL, go in Peace; from furious War retire,
In midst of which Thou inward Peace shall find.
The BODY, Him who got it will inspire
With high revenge, when he shall see it disjoined.
I hear a rumbling storm, I see the fire
Of Sacres, Drakes, and Basilisks, combined
With fell and home-destruction to rebuke
The fierce CAM^AYAN and black (...).
33.
Behold! the Father comes a mad man like,
In whom for ma st'ry Grief with Fury vy^s;
Whilst at one time paternal love does strike
Fire on his Heart, pumps water from his Eyes.
A noble Anger whispers him, his Pyke
Shall blood his Foes, so that the Tide shall rise
In their drowned Decks knee-deep: (...) shall be^,
INDUS shall see his Bl^ws, and (...) ^ar.
34.
As a Corrival'd Bull, That (practicing
For a fierce duel) fences with the Oaks;
Or, at the Trunck of a broad Beech, does fling
In Thrusts, and with his Horns the Air provokes:
So DON FRANCISCO (e're his Fleet he bring
In swollen CAMBAYA'S Gulf to desperate strokes)
On DA^UL'S wealthy City whets his Blade,
The Mountain of her Pride a Level made.
35.
Then enters (horrid with her blood) the Ba^
Of DIO: famed for Sieges, and pitcht-Fields.
The great but Coward-Fleet his lo^k does fray
Of CALICUT: which Oars for Lances weilds.
That of (...) YAZ (which makes away
More slow) with Bolts of VULCA^ he unbuilds;
To the low b^ttom of the OCEAN sent:
Cold mattrice, of the humid Element.
36.
^ut that of MIR HOZEM (which with close bords
The rowzed wrath of the Avenger stands)
Shall swimming see, in the Ocean of their Lords,
Hands without Bodies, Bodies without Hands.
The rage-blind Victors, waving their bright Swords,
Shall seem to toss so many flaming Brands.
What there shall be perceived by Ears, and Eyes,
Will be Smoke only, Iron, Fire, and Cries.
37.
But ah! Of a defeat great MARS might boast
(Bound for his Native- Tagus back again)
The Fame and glory shall he lose almos^
By a sad traverse I foresee too plain.
The CAP^ OF STORMS (which in it is Desert Coast
His Bo^s and Memory shall ay retain)
Shames not to ravish from the world a Soul
Whole INDIA could not, and EGYPT whole.
38.
By savage CA^RES, there, shall that be done
Which dext'rous Enemies could not perform:
And by rude Clubbs (hardened with fire) alone,
What Arrows S^ow'r could not, Bullet's storm.
GOD'S secret judgments are not to be known.
Vain GENTIL^S (being a ^ook above their f^rm)
Call it ill Fate, cross Fort^ne, star maline;
Being solely, purely, (...) DIVINE.
39.
O! What new light begins there to bud
(The SIREN said, and raised her Voice thereat)
From the Melindian Sea, died with the blood
Of LAMO, OC^A, BRAVA, all laid flat
By great DE CUNIA; who through all the Flood
Which laves the Southern-Isles and Shores (but That
Of MADAGASCAR chiefly) the wide mouth
Of FAME shall fill, and threat the unknown South.
40.
This light is of those flames and glittering Arms
Wherewith the stubborn PERSIANS of ORMUZE,
Spu^ning the yoke, and valiant to their harms,
Fierce ALBURQUERQUE afterward subdues.
There shall the hissing Shafts (like living swarms)
Turned in the Air, their shooters Helmets bruize;
That they may see, with Eyes though never so dim,
How GOD will fight for Them, that fight for Him.
41.
The MOUNTAINS then of SALT will not be able
To keep those Bodies from corruption
Which on the Coasts shall lie out (miserable)
Of CALAYAT, MASCATE, and GERUN;
Until the easy yoke and honorable
They learn (with all their fierceness) to put on:
Forced by the Conquerours, to pay to Them,
Rich Tribute of their Pearls of BAHEREM,
42.
What glorious Palms do I see weaving There,
With which his forehead VICTORY will crown
When without shadow or least touch of fear
He shall win GOA'S Isle of bright renown!
But then (the Storm obeying) will not bear
So great a Sail, and takes that Bonet down:
To reattempt the thing in fitter season.
"FORTUNE and MARS fear Valor joined with Reason.
43.
And (see) he does it; charges undismayed
Through walls, through Pykes, through Bullets, and through fire:
Opens the quilted Squadro^s with his Blade
Of MOORS and PAGANS knit in Leagues entire!
His gallant Soldiers in more blood shall wade
Then Lions pined, Bulls pricked with love and Ire;
Upon the Feast (as pat as by design)
Of EGYPT'S Virgin Martyr, KATHERIN^.
44.
Nor Him shall Thou (though potent) escape, and fly,
(Though sheltred in the Bosom of the Morn)
MALACCA (and the Apple of her Eye)
Proud of thy wealthy Dower as her firstborn.
Thy poisoned Arrows, those Auxiliary
CRYSES I see (thy Pay That do not scorn)
MALACCANS amorous, valiant JAVANS,
Shall all obey the LUSITANIANS.
45.
More Stanza's had the SIREN in the praise
Of the illustrious ALBULQUERQUE sung;
But she remembers one harsh Act, which weighs
Him down, though through the world his Fame be rung.
"A great Commander (whom to crop bright Bays
"On precipitious Cliffs his Fate has hung)
"Should to his Men a Camrade rather be,
"Then a Judge made up of Severitie.
46.
But in a time of Famine, and hard Toil,
Of Sickness, Arrows, and of thundering Ball,
Of Season sad, of discommodious soil,
And the poor Soldier patient under All;
It seems to me of Savage Breasts the style,
Of an in humane and insulting Gall,
To make a Man for such a fault to dye
As Love and humane frailty qualify.
47.
Incest's detested Brand it shall not be,
Nor boyst'rous Rape upon a Virgin pure,
Nor blot injurious of Adultery,
But with a Slave lascivious and obscure.
Then whether fired with Zeal, or jealousy,
Or else to keep his bloody hands in Ure,
Against his own he give his rage the reins,
With a black Action his white Fame he stains.
48.
With his CAMPASPE ALEXANDER spied
(...) took, and upon Him bestows
Her cheerfully: being not his Soldier tried
Nor serving at a S^ge of desperate Foes.
That sour ARASPAS in the Rays is fride
Of his fair Charge PANTH^A, CYRUS knows;
Having professed to be her G^rdian true,
And that no ill desire should Him subdue.
49.
But the illustrious PERSIAN, seeing love
Is in the fault ('against whom there is no defense)
Acquits him straight, and only dot^ remove,
Where he may serve him well in recompense.
The Iron BALDWIN (much his Rank above)
By stealth Espouses JUDITH; yet the offense
Her great Sire pardons (needing such a man)
And gives them FLANDERS, whence those Earls began.
50.
But her long Song the Nymph continuing,
Of SUAREZ (who his Standard does display
On the red coast of ARABIE) did sing:
ABASIAS hindmost shore, and BAR^ORA
(Neighboring ZEYLA'S Emporium) fear the Thing
She feels; nor less then Mecha, and GIDDA,
Filthy MEDINA quakes, where MAHOM^T
In his Steel-Hamac lies in a cold swet.
51.
Also the noble Isle of TAPOBRANE:
For by that name it was as famed of yore
As by another now it is Sovereign
Of the hot fragrant Bark, of which 't has store.
Of which, she to the STANDART LUSIANE
Shall pay sweet Tribute: when (percht prowdly over
COLUMBO'S highest steeple) that shall be
More feared by Her, then by her Neighbors, she.
52.
Through the Red Sea SEQUEYRA a new way
To Thee, vast Land of PRESTER JOHN, shall show;
CANDACE'S Nest, and Here Is, who, to survay
The Wisdom of great SOLOMON, did go.
From Cisterns watered, He, shall see MACUA:
Shall see her neighboring Port of ARCHICE:
And cause new Isles to be discovered, which
With Modern wonders shall the World enrich.
53.
MENESES comes the next, whose sword shall serve
In AFRIC for the wreaths he here shall wear.
He proud ORMOOZ (That from her faith will swerve)
A double Tribute shall constrain to bear.
Thou GAMA too (who wilt it well deserve
Which two exiles) the third time thou come there
(An Earl, Viceroy, and Admiral) the Land,
Which thou have now discovered, shall command.
54.
But then that rude Necessity (which none
Can escape, who from a humane womb does spring)
Arrests thee in thy Robes, and painted Throne,
Where thou shall out the person of thy King.
Straight will another MEN'S (old alone
In wisdom) have the Sovereign managing
Of the Affairs: (And Happy HENRY shall
Behi^d him leave a name perpetual.
55.
For he shall quell not only MALABARS,
Razing PANANE and COULET'S walls,
Incountring Cannon, clapping on Petars,
And hurling wildfire in sulphurous Balls;
But (armed with Virtues past the Sphere of MARS,
Quell the SOUL'S Enemie's sev'n Generals*
Quell Avarice, quell foul Incontinence,
In a young man the sum of excellence.
56.
His Stars now calling Him to tread on Them,
Thou, valiant MASKARENIAS should succeed:
But (if usurpt on) know, a Diadem
It self, thy brighter honor will not need.
Thy courage, Admiration and Esteem
(Although not love) even in thy Foes shall breed,
If unjust FORTUNE shall deny the might,
VIRTUE will give the merit, LAW the Right.
57.
Great Actions in the Kingdom of BINTAN
Thou shall perform, MALACCA'S Foe: her score
Of Ills in one day paying, which That ran
Into, for many a hundred year before.
With patient courage, more then of a man,
Dangers, and Toils, sharp Spikes, Hills always hoare,
Spears, Arrows, Trenches, Bulwarks, Fire and Sword,
That thou shall break, and quell, I pass my word.
58.
Mean while Ambition, Avarice to boot,
In INDIA setting up with open face
Against GOD, and his justice, are a Root
Of discontent to thee, but not disgrace.
"To trample on weak Right with a proud Foot,
"Presuming on the power, and upper place,
"No Conquest is: He conquers with Renown
"Who dares be just even though it lose a CROWN.
59.
Yet I deny not, but SAMPAYO shall
Be of rare Valor for all this; on Seas
Showing himself a thundering GENERAL,
Which he shall people with Foes Carcasses.
In BACANORE begins he to appall
The MALABAR, that he may after tease
(Prepared with that rough Prologue to submit)
Bold CUTI^LE, and his numerous Fleet*
40
Even that of DIO (so resolved and great
That his at CHOUL will give it self for lost)
By HECTOR OF SILVEYRA shall he beat,
And to peccavi turn their furious boast.
The LUSITANIAN HECTOR: who shall get,
Upon the always-arm'd Cambayck Coast,
A name, that He does GUZARATS annoy,
No less then GREEKS the HECTOR did of TROY.
41.
CUNIA is fierce SAMPOYO'S successor.
The Ship of State he long does wisely steer.
Of CHALE he erects the lofty Tow*r,
Whilst famous DIO quakes to be so near.
The strong BAZAIN shall render to his power,
But with much blood; MELIQUE groaning here
To see a way over his proud Rampire made
By the sole dint of Lusitanian Blade.
42.
After Him comes NORONIA, whose good Star
From DIO the fierce RUMES packing sends:
DIO, which the through-practis'd Breast in War
Of ANTHONY SILVEYRA well defends.
Death's Writs upon NORONIA served are:
When a brave Branch of Thine (O GAMA!) bends
His shoulders to the Government; the fright
Of whose great name shall turn the red Sea white.
43.
Out of thy STEPHEN'S hand shall take the rain
One in BRASILE before high fame that wan;
The great French Pyrat overcome and slain,
Who shall be terror of that Ocean.
Made after General of the INDIAN MAI^
The no less proud, then fortifide DAMAN,
He enters first: where, having made a breach,
It Is closed with Flames, and Shafts, his way t'impeach.
64.
To Him CAMBAYA'S King, proud above measure,
Of wealthy DIO gives the famous Fort;
Against the GREAT MAGUL, mighty in treasure,
To aid him his Domini^ns to support.
Then does he in his yet unquencht displeasure,
The Pagan King of CALICUT take short
That would have past him: with no little loss
Sending him home again by weeping cross.
65.
Destroy shall He the City REPELIM
Making her King with many quit the place,
And after by the Cape of COMORIM
Perform a deed that shall the Nine disgrace.
The Navy Royal of the Samorim,
That thinks it may to all the world give chase,
With fire and sword he overcomes, and breaks.
In B^ADALA shall his Blade play Rex.
66.
INDIA, thus weeded with his Sword of Foes,
He comes to rule with Scepter afterward;
Finds dangers none, finds none so bold to oppose.
All hush, All tremble like a Lark that is dared.
Only BATICALA a longing shows
To fare as well as BEADALA fared.
She Is filled with blood and Trunks in dead heaps cast:
With fire and Ball disfigured and defaced.
67.
This shall be MARTIN, or a little MARS,
From whom his Deeds he will take, as well as name:
As stout for execution in all wars,
As wise to play the fairest of his Game.
CA^TRO succeeds; advancing to the stars
Of PORTUGAL the Standart and the Fame.
Fit successor to MARTIN: DIO'S Fort
The ^ne shall raise, the other shall support.
68.
Fierce P^RSIANS, Abassins, RUMES (who boast
Their name from ROM^) complexions various,
And various M^des (for to this Leaguer post
A thousand Nations keen and furious)
Heaven to the world accuse with labor lost,
That so few men should nestle in their House.
In blood of PORTUGALLS, by their n^ faith
They swear, their turned up whiskers they will bathe.
69.
Drakes, horrid Basilisks, Engines of Wood
As bad as either, secret Mines and Plots,
Has MASCARENIAS with his Men withstood,
Meeting their certain Deaths with willing Throats:
When, in the utmost stress of Flesh and Blood,
CASTRO (their Freer) his two Sons devotes,
That everlasting Honor they may gain,
And Sacrifices to their GOD be slain.
70.
FERNAND (this lofty Cedar's highest Bough,
Where with a hideous crack a close Mine sprung
Th'unrooted Wall into the Air will blow)
Shall in a sheet of Fire to Heaven be flung.
ALVAR, when Winter swathes the Earth in Snow,
And has on humid Gates cold Padlocks hung;
These burst, through dangers to seek dangers goes,
And fights the Elements to fight the Foes.
71.
Lo, now the Father follows with full sail,
And the Remainder of the Lusian force!
He with strong Hand and Head of more avail,
Gives a brave lucky Battle to the MORES.
Where no way is, he makes one with his Flail;
And where there is, the Rampires are his doors.
Such that day's Feats, so terrible the Blows,
They will not stand in Verse, nor lie in Prose.
72.
Then (lo!) he to the great CAMBAYAN KING
Presents himself a Victor in the Field:
Pale Fear into the Face of him does fling,
And of his furious Horse, which ground shall yield.
Nor HYDALCAN shall from the Conquering
Army, with all his might, his Country shield.
DABUL sacked on the Coast; In*land PONDA
Scapes not it self, by being out of the way.
73.
These, and the like, into all Quarters hurled,
(All worthy wonder, and Fame's strongest blast)
Making themselves brave MAR^S in the W^rld,
The joys of VENUS'S Isle shall fitly taste;
Trayling triumphant Standarts through the curled
Amphitheater of the Ocean vast:
And they shall find those Nymphs, these f^rnisht Bords,
Which are the Harvest of Victorious Sword^.
74.
Here the NYMPH ended: And the others All
Give their applause with an Harmonious noise;
Congratulating this grand Nuptial:
Where, look how many Hearts, so many joys.
THOUGH FORTUNE STANDS UPON A TOTTERING BAL^
(They all reiterate as with one Voice)
RENOWNED PEOPLE YOU SHALL NEVER LACK,
WEALTH, VALOR, FAME, till the WORLDS HENGES CRACK:
75.
When now Corporeal Necessity
Sufficed with noble Nutriment they had;
And seen the Acts the Nymph did prophecy
In Musical Poetic Raptures clad:
THETYS, adorned with grace and gravity,
(That she of glory may new quilats add
To the high bliss of that triumphant day)
Unto the Happy GAMA thus did say.
76.
The SUPREME WISDOM has vouchsafed thee, Knight,
The grace to see with thy corporeal Eyes
What the vain Science, what the erring Light,
Of miserable Man cannot comprize.
Thou, with the rest, up this dark Cops forth-right
Follow me, strong and constant, stout and wise.
This having said, she hands him through a Wood,
Steep, thick with Thorns, and hard to flesh and blood.
77.
They marched not long, when of the arduous Hill
They gain the top; where an inameld Flat
(In a Field Em'rauld) powdered Rubies fill,
Making them think old PARADIC^ was That
Here, in the Air a GLOBE, (by wondrous skill
So framed with Thorough Lights) they contemplat,
That th'unresisted Eye the Center sees,
As plainly as the superficies.
78
The matter of it did their Eyesight pose:
That it consisted yet discerned they well
Of Orbs, which the Divine Hand did compose,
And in the middle did the Center dwell.
Rouling, it so^etimes fell, and sometimes rose,
And yet it never r^se, it never fell:
Throughout one Face, throughout its peri^d,
Begins throughout. In fine, the Works of GOD.
79.
Infinite, perfect, uniform, self-poiz'd;
Brief, like the (...) that made the same.
Seeing this admirable Globe, surpised
With wonder and desire was our D^ GAM^.
To whom the GODD^ thus; Epitomized
I show thee here the UNIVERSAL FRAM^,
That thou may read, in Print and Vol^me small,
Whether Thou go, and shall go, and Thine shall,
80.
The WORLD'S great Fabric thou do ^eer descry
Heavenly and Elementall: for just so
'Twas made, by that All-wisd^me, that All-eye,
Which no beginning knew, no end shall know:
Which interweaved in each part does lie,
And round the fair Work like a B^rder go:
It Is GOD: But what GOD is, poses Man's wit,
Nor can short Line fathom the IN^INIT.
81.
This, which is first, and does (as in a Nest
Of Boxes) all the other Orbs comprize,
Darting such radiant Beams, as Mortal Breast
Cannot conceive, much less behold Man's Eyes;
Is called the EMPYREAN, where the blessed
Enjoy that g^d, the World wants similies
To cast a shadow of, and which g^d None
Can understand, except it self alone.
82
There is no true, no glorious GOD, but There:
For SATURN, JANUS, JUNO, JOVE, and I,
Vain Creatures only, and blind Figments were
Betwixt Man's pride, and Man's Id^latry,
To stick as Stars in the Poetic Spher^:
From whence again w' are borrowed, by and by,
For to distinguish the true Stars in Heaven,
To which ASTRONOMERS our Names have given.
83
As likewise because HOLY PROVIDENCE
(Which shadowed is by JUPIT^R in Verse)
Does by a thousand Ministers dispense
His Gifts to the supported UNIVERSE,
And sacred Prophets often impart their sense
In mystic Parables which they rehearse;
And tell us Men are favored by the g^d,
By the ill spirits hurt, unless withstood:
84.
Now comes THE POET, who would teaching please,
And pleasing teach, and mix varie^y;
And He the self-same Names bestows on These
The HEATHENS did upon their Genii
And feigned Gods; for I can show with Ease,
That ANGELS even in holy Poet^y
Are called Gods; nor Sacred Writ denies
That ev*n the Ill this glorious Name belyes.
85.
In fine ALMIGHTY GOD (who rules the round
World, by his Second Causes) He commands.
But (to return to open the profound
And heavenly Operations of his Hands)
Within this Sphere, where the pure Souls abound
In endless Bliss (which sphere unmoved stands)
Another runs so s^iftly, and so still,
It Is not perceived: It Is the FIRST MOVABIL.
86.
The motion rapt of this FIRST MOBIL draws
All the rest after, which with it are linkt.
The hurried Sun from his own bent and laws
Makes Night and day by this RAPT ORB'S instinct.
The NINTH moves next, so curbed, with so great pawse,
That whilst SOL'S lamp (which never is extinct)
Ends it is true course about the ZODIAKE
Two hundred times, This but one step does make.
87.
Behold the EIGHTH goes under That, imbost
With Sleek and radiant Bodies! These ^kewise
Besides the motion rapt with which they post.
Move on their proper Axe with twinkling Eyes.
See with how rich a Belt this Orb is crossed!
How broad, how glittering with Embroyderies!
Where the twelve Starry Animals do make
The S^n's twelve Houses in the ZODIAKE.
88.
Behold in other Parts what knots of Gold
This FIRMAMENT displays! the DRAGON there
Behold! CHARLES-WAYN, and CYNOSURA cold!
ANDROM^DA, and her old Sire se^ere!
CASSIOPEA'S sparckling eyes behold!
And turbulent ORION, Sea men's fear!
Behold the SWAN, which dying is not mute,
The HARE, the DO^, the SHIP, and the sweet, LUTE.
89.
Under this great and spangled Canopy,
Lo, in the SEV'NTH dull SATURN takes his place!
Propitious JOVE enthroned in the SIXTH sky:
Next (Foe to Man) MARS rides with fiery Face:
Placed in the MIDDLE is the WORLD'S GREAT EYE:
The QUEEN OF BEAUTY the THIRD ORB does grace:
Eloquent HERMES rules the SECOND SPHERE:
Three-shapt DIANA marches in the Rear.
90.
In all these PLANETS motions different
Thou may perceive, some speedy, and some slow:
Now climbing nearer to the FIRMAMENT,
Now stooping closer to the Earth below,
As seemed best to the OMNIPOTENT,
Who made the Fire and Air, the Wind and Snow:
Those (closed within the Heavens) each other enter,
And both the Waves, and Earth: the common Center.
91.
Upon this Center is the seat of MAN:
Who, not content in his presumptuous pride
T'expose to all Earth's Mischiefs his life's span,
Trusts it to the unconstant Ocean wide.
Behold the various Parts that Ocean
With interfused dangers does divide!
Where various Nations dwell, various Kings reign,
Who various Worships, various Laws maintain.
92.
See CHRISTIAN EUROPE, higher by the head
In Arms and civil Arts then all the rest!
See untilled AFRIC, covetous, ill-bred,
Wanting even things whereof she is possessed,
With her great CAPE (by you discovered)
Which NATURE toward the South-Pole addre^0*
See all this Neck with People infinite
Almost, who neither do nor know what is right!
93.
See the great Empire of MONOMOTAPE,
With naked savage People black and grim;
In which the good GONSALVO shall not escape
A cruel death for CHRIST, who died for Him!
In this blind HEMISPHERE (short of the CAPE)
The Mettle grows for which pale Mortals swim
Through Seas of Sweat, and Blood. See that great Lake
From whence, with QUAMA, NYLE this way does make!
94.
Behold the NEGROES Houses, without doors,
Whom both the Poverty of their Straw-nests,
The Laws, and justice of their King secures,
And the black Candor of their Neighbors Breasts.
Lo, a vast Army of these brutish MOORS,
Like a dark Band of Stares (devouring Guests)
Against SOFALA'S battered Fort will bend
Their strength, which NAYA bravely shall defend.
95.
See there the very Spring, and Head of NYLE,
Which fled (though dearly sought) the ANCIENTS eyes!
See how it laves (spawning the CROCODYLE)
The ABBASIN, who upon CHRIST relyes!
See where (a better Fence then Walls) a File
Of Hills they man against their Enemies!
See MERO^, an Isle of ancient Fame:
Which now NOVA the Natives of it name!
96.
In this Inland a Son of Thine great fame
Shall win against the proud CIRCASSIAN;
And DON CRISTOVAL shall be that Son's name:
But against Fate can stand no mortal man.
See, see, that way thy shattered Navy came
MELINDE'S dear and hospitable stran!
Mark well the RAPTO (Natives called OBE)
Which at QUILMANC^ rouls into the Sea.
97:
See the Cape called of old AROMATA,
But GUARDAFU which now the Dwellers call;
Where the RED SEA (so famous) does Embay,
Died with her Bottome's shade! This is the Wall
Or running Boundarie, which ASIA
Divides from AFRIC: And the principal
Cities, that on the Affrick-side are seen,
Are ARCHICHO, MACUA, and (chief) SUANQUEN.
98.
See farthest SUEZ, HEROPOLYS of old,
City of Heroes (so do some conceave)
Others, that this was the ARSION^ hold:
But EGYPT'S Navies it does now receave!
The very place great MOSES past, behold,
When with his R^d he did the Waters cleave!
ASIA begins. Her self she does present
In limits vast, in K^ngdoms opulen^.
99.
Mount SINAI see, and tremble every ^im,
From whence when MOSES came his face did s^ine!
See TORO, and GIDDA, in wealth that swim,
Yet want Spring Water pure and crystalline!
See the Streight's other jaw, having for B^im
The Realm of dry ADEN; which does confine
With Mountains of ARZIRA, which (they tell)
Are all one Rock, whereon Rain never fell.
100
Behold the THREE ARA^IAS, so wide-spred,
All Tawny-Moors, All Thieves therein that dwell:
Whence come the Horses for the Warrior bred,
Of noble Race, Fleet, lasting, terrible.
Behold the Coast by which thine Eyes are led
T'another Gulf (the Persian) there to swell
Into a CAPE; which by FARTAQUE'S nam^
(Owed to the there known City) shuts the same*
111.
See famous DOFAR, which did ever boast
The sweetest smoke to make the Altar steam*
Mark here (where ROSOLGAT your eye has lost
And barren shores) begins ARMUZA'S Ream!
It lies extended all on the Seacoast,
And shall fit FAME with an immortal Theme,
When TURKS'S fierce Fleet, and blushing Moons dismayed,
Shall see unsheathed CASTELBRANCO'S Blade.
112*
Behold the CAPE OF ASA^OR, they call
At present MOSANDAN who sail that way;
At bottom of the Gulf, which has for wall
Rich P^RSIA here, There BLESSED ARABIA!
Mark well BAREM, an Island bord'red all
With Pearls, whose color mocks the springing day.
In the salt waves commanded by her eye
The famous TIGRIS and EUPRATES dye*
113.
The noble Empire of great P^RSIA see,
Always on horseback, always in the War:
Who think it base to have Artillery,
Or Hands not hardened with the Cymetar!
But mark the Isle G^RUN, what a proof she
Is of the power of TIME to make, and ^ar!
Of ORMUZE City (which was o^ce elsewhere)
She now the glory and the name does bear.
104.
Here DON PHELIPH OF MENESES shall
Approve himself a glorious Man at Arms,
When with a very few of PORTUGAL
He shall at LA^A quell whole Persian swarms.
Likewise shall SOUSA on their Quarters fall,
Give them bold charges, give them sharp Allarms,
And the Reversio^ of that Sword, whose dint
Struck fire before, on razed AMPAZA'S flin^.
105.
But let us leave the Straight, and Cape well known
Of JASQUES (called CARPELLA anciently)
Wi^h all that Land (which Nature does not own
By any Act of Liberality)
Whilom CARMANIA, Habitation
Of the old ITIOPHAGUES. Now wipe thine Ey,
And see famed INDUS, born in yonder Mountain,
Near which flows GANGES from a higher Fountain:
106.
See here, where Nature prodigal has bin,
The Kingdom of ULCINDE; and the long
Bay of JAQUETE, where the Waves flow in
With speed incredible, as fast out-throng!
CAMBATA see, where this Gulf does begin,
In wealth and people infinite and strong!
A thousand Cities here un-nam'd I leave,
Which shall the yoke of PORTUGAL receave.
107.
See where the celebrated Indian shore
Runs Southward to the CAPE of COMOR^E
(Called in old time COREE) which lies right ore
Against CEYLAN (TRAPROBANE anciently)
Along this Sea the LUSIAN (who, with more
Forces shall be dispatched after Thee)
Lands, Victories, and Cities shall obtain,
In which they many Ages shall remain.
108.
Behold in various Countries (placed betwixt
These Rivers) Nations almost infinite:
Some Pagans, some Mahumetans (well mixed)
To whom the Devil did their Laws indite!
Behold NARSING^'S Realm, to which is fixed
A holy Relic of a blessed Wight,
St THOMAS'S body, who was not deny'de
To thrust his Fingers into J^SUS'S side!
109.
Here stood the City called MELIOPOR^,
Beautiful, wealthy, and magnificent;
The Idols ancient she did adore
As still do those of her profane descent:
Far was she seated then from the Seashore,
Whenas the Gospel through the whole world sent,
THOMAS came preaching there; and did the same
In all the Provinces through which he came.
110.
Arrived preaching, and administering
Life to the dead, and health unto the sick;
The Sea chanced hither on a day to bring
A floating Tree, unmeasurably thick.
For a vast Pyle in hand desires the King
To frame a Beam of this prodigious stick;
And makes account on shore to drag it then,
By force of Engines, Elephants, and Men.
111.
So heavy it is, All these have not the might
To stir the Log that on the Water lies.
But the true CHRIST'S true Nuntio has a slight
To do it without trouble, without noise.
He draws it to him like some Matter light
With a small Cord, which to the Trunk he ties:
Wherewith a sumptuous House for GOD to raise,
To stand a pattern for succeeding days.
112.
Full well he knew, with lively faith if He
Should say unto a Mountain deaf, Remove;
Even that deaf Mountain would removed be:
As CHRIST once said, and THOMAS now does prove.
This do the people stand aghast to see,
The BRAMENS know it must be from Above:
Seeing his Miracl^, seeing his life,
These fear the fall of their prerogatife.
113
They are the HEATHENS PRI^STS, in whom alone
Envy the bowels of her Gall has shed.
A thousand plots and Tra^ns they think upon,
How THOMAS may be silenced, or be dead.
A horrid Act performs, as ere was known,
The Chief of These That wear the Triple-thred:
Which proves, "No Foe so bl^dy, so sever^,
"As Hypocritick Ver^e to sincere.
114.
He murders his own Son, and charges it
Forthwith on THOMAS who was innocent:
False witness brings ( There nothing hard to git)
Through which, the Man's condemned incontinent.
The Saint (having no way to be acquit,
But by Appeal to the OMNIPOTENT)
Resolves, in presence of the King and Court,
To work a Miracle of the great sort.
115.
He bids the Corpse be laid in view of All,
That it may rise and be examined There
Touching the questioned Fact, and whom that shall
Accuse, let him be held the murderer.
In name of JESUS crucified, in the Hall
They see the Youth stand up, record to bear:
Who (thanking THOMAS for his life) descride
His Father to have been the Homicide.
116.
This struck such fear, that straight his Christendom
The King receives, and many with the King.
Some kiss the Hem of THOMAS garment, Some
The praises of the God of THOMAS sing.
The BRAMENS swell with such an odium,
Through Envy's now imposthumating sting,
That (thereunto persuading the blind Rout)
They vow to put so bright a Taper out.
117.
One day, as preaching to the same he was,
They feigned a quarrell'mongst the multitude
(For CHRIST himself has signed him now his Pass
To climb to Heaven by way of Martyr-hood)
A shower of Stones, which GOD'S commission has,
Flies in his Face: who all their Tempest stood.
One (whose Bloud-thirstiness could not abide
Delay) with cruel Spear did broach his side.
118
GANGES and INDUS did Thee, THOMAS, weep;
Wept thee the Countries all which thou had trod:
But, holy Shepherd, wept thee most thy sheep,
Whom thou did deck with Faith, (the Cloth of GOD).
Only the ANGELS holy day did keep
For Thee, whom God did comfort with his Rod:
Laughing, and Singing, These thy Soul transport
With golden sails to her celestial Port.
119.
You then, who claim the honor (like this Saint)
To be the great Ambassadors of GOD;
(Pray give me leave) why are ye lame, and faint,
When with your Errand ye should go abroad *
If, you are the Salt oth'Earth, and at home taint
(No Prophet being esteemed in his Abode)
Who now shall salt (I bayte you Paganism)
So much of Heresy, so much of Scism.
120.
But tread we light a bog so dangerous,
Returning to the Coast from whence we strayed.
With this great City and illustrious,
Begins the GULF GANGETICK to be made;
NARSINGA, next, lies rich and populous;
Next ORYXA her cloth of gold does lade;
Famed GANGES at the bottom of the Bay
To the Salt Realm does Silver Tribute pay:
121.
GANGES, in which his Borderers dye lav'd;
Holding it as a certain principle
That (be they never such Sinners) they are saved,
Bathed in those streams that flow from Sacred Well.
The City CATHIGAN would not be wav d,
The fairest of BENGALA: who can tell
The plenty of this Province? but it is post
(Thou see) is Eastern, turning the South-Coast.
122.
The Realm of ARRACAN, That of PEGU
Behold, with Monsters first inhabited!
Monsters, which from a strange commixtion grew:
Such ill effects often Solitude has bred.
Here (though a barbarous misbegotten Crew)
Into her way was erring Nature led
By an invention rare, which a Queen framed,
To cure the Sin, that is not to be named.
123.
Behold the City of TAVAY, with which
The spacious Empire of SIAN begins!
TENASSERI! QUEDA: with pepper rich
For which the praise she from all other wins!
MALACCA see before, where ye shall pitch
Your great Emporium, and your Magazins:
The Rendezvous of all that Ocean round
For Merchandises rich that there abound.
124.
From this ('it is said) the Waves impetuous course;
Breaking a passage through, from Main to main,
SAMATRA'S noble Isle of old did force,
Which then a Neck of Land therewith did chain:
That this was CH^RSONESE till that divorce,
And from the wealthy mines, that there remain,
The Epithet of GOLDEN had annexed:
Some think, it was the OPHYR in the Text.
125.
But, at that Point does CINGAPUX appear:
Where the pincht Straight leaves Ships no room to play.
Here the Coast, winding to the Northern Bear,
F^ces the fair AURORA all the way.
See PAN, PATANE (ancient Realms that were)
And long SYAN, which These, and more, obey!
The copious River of MENAM behold,
And the great Lake CHIAMAY from whence it is rolled!
126.
In this vast Tract see an Infinity
Of Names and Nations to your WORLD unknown!
LAOS, in Land and men That potent be!
AVAS, BRAINAS, in those long Hills o'regrown!
In yon far MOUNTAINS other Nations see
(GUEOS they are called) and savage every one!
They eat Man's flesh, and paint their own in knots
With fire, as ye do Rooms with watring-pots.
127.
The River MECON (which they Captain style
Of Waters) see; CAMBOYA on his brink!
He overflows the Land for many a mile:
So many other Rivers does he drink.
Set times he has of flowing (like cool NYL^):
The near Inhabitants brutishly think,
That pain and glory, after this Life's end
Even the brute Creatures of each kind attend.
128.
Upon his soft and charitable Brim
The wet and ship-wrackt SONG receive shall He
Which in a lamentable plight shall swim
From sholes and Quicksands of tempestuous Sea,
(The dire effect of Exile) when on Him
Is executed the unjust Decree:
Whose repercussive LYR^ shall have the Fate
To be renowned more then Fortunate.
129.
Here, (mark it!) runs the Coast that is called CHAMPA,
Whose Groves smell hot of Calambuc^ wood:
Here CAUCHINCHINA, and here AYNAM'S Bay;
Both One and to Other little understood.
Here the great Empire (famous for large sway,
And its vast Wealth's unfathomable Flood)
Of CHINA runs: calling all this her Own
From burning Cancer to the frozen Zone.
130.
See the stupendous Monster of a WALL
'Twixt this and the TARTARIAN EMPIR^ set:
A witness to the World perpetual
Of Regal Power immeasurably great!
The KING these have, was born no Prince; nor shall
Reign after him the Children he shall get:
But one chose by the People of Renown
For qualities proportioned to a CROWN.
131.
Much of the WORLD being now concealed from Y^u
A time will come when it shall all be showed.
But by all means the Islands thou must view,
Where Nature seems most cost to have bestowed.
This, shadowed half, which CHINA answers to,
(By which, at distance flanking it, it is Wood)
JAPAN is, yielding the best Silver-mine:
Which the Evangellick Furnace shall refine.
132.
Through all these Oriental Seas behold,
Sown infinite of Isles that have no name!
TIDORE see! TERNATE, whence are rolled
(Holding black Night a Torch) thick Plumes of Fame!
See Trees of burning Cloves, that shall be sold
For LUSIANS blood, and watered with the same!
Here are those golden Birds, which to the ground
Never descend, and only dead are found.
133.
See BANDA'S Isles, inameld curiously
With various Colors which the red fruit paints;
With various Birds, from Tree to Tree that fly,
To take their tribute of the NUTMEG-PLANTS!
Behold BORNEO likewise, in which dry
Coagulated Liquor never wants
From a fat Tree which CAM^ORA they name,
For which this Isle is in the Book of FAME!
134.
There (look you!) is TIMO^, that ^ends the Wood
Called Saunders, Physical and Od^rous.
See SUNDA, painted at half face, so broad
That the South Side lies now quite hid from Us!
The Natives here (and Those who from abroad
Travail the Land) of a miraculous
River report; which, where it slides alone,
The wood that falls therein, converts to Stone.
135.
In that (which TIME, I told you, made an Isle;
Which likewise trembling flames with smoke expels)
Two wonders see, a Fountain that runs Oil;
And Balsamum that from Another wels,
Sweeter then that, ADONIS Mother vile
Weeps in the BLESSED ARABIA where she dwells.
And see, how having these (which none else have)
She with soft silk too, and fine Gold is brave!
136.
See in CEYLAN a mountain whose proud Head
Above the Cloudy Region does appear!
The Natives count it holy for the tr^ad
Of a Man's foot which on a Stone is there.
In the MALDIVA ISL^S a Plant is bred
(Of virtue under-water) which does bear
The COCO-APPLE, against working Bane,
An Antidote approved Sovereign.
137.
Against the RED^SEA'S mouth SOCOTO^A
Famed for the bitter Aloes behold!
See other Isles of sandy AFRICA,
Whose Coast too ye shall conquer! Hither rolled
That Lump is, which Divine PANCHAYA
Out-smels: of unknown birth, more rare then Gold.
Behold St LAWRENCE his renowned Isle,
Which otherwise they MADAGASCAR style!
138.
Thus have thou all the Regions of the EAST,
Which by Thee given unto the WORLD is now:
Opening a way with an undaunted Breast
Through that vast Sea which none before did plough.
But it is likewise reason, in the WEST
That of a LUSIAN too one Action Thou
Should understand; who (angry with his King)
Atchieves a great and memorable Thing.
139
See there another WORLD, (...) from ^he (...)
Extends it self to the opposed ^le,
And shall be one (...) ^oud ^o have (...) forth
The Ore, that imita^s the b^ms of SO^!
Your Friend CA^EEL (as (...) of her worth)
Shall throw the Coll^ on this ragg^d (...):
Where various (...) dwell, various Kings reign,
Who various ^rships, v^rious Law^ maintain.
140
But PORTUGA^L shall have her sh^re there too,
Marked with red wood, and ^ANTACRUZ called th^n;
Descried by the first Fleet, she after you
Shall send, by Tempest thrown upon t^t (...).
Along this Coast (to find out, and to view
The end thereof) shall wander MAG^LLAN;
Who in reality of Fact shall be
A PORTINGALL, but not in loyalti^.
141.
When he shall thus have past above half way
Toward the POLE ANTARTIC^ from the LINE;
Men of Gigantick bulk he s^ll survay,
Inhabiting the parts which the^e adjoin;
And (farther on) that STRAIGHT, which shall for ay
Be honored with his name. This leads in fine
T^ a new Sea, and by a new Land btings,
Which the South Wind wi^ hide with his cold wings.
142.
Thus far, O (...) ye are allowed
Your Nation's future Actions to survay,
Which through the Sea by you left open, her proud
And never wearied Ensigns shall display.
Now then, since ye have found not to be bowed
Under Herculean labors, is the way
To please your Angell-Spouses bright and fair,
That knit immortal Garlands for your Hair.
143.
Ye may embarque (for Wind and Weather fit,
And the Sea courts you) for your Country dear.
Thus said she to them; and they forthwith qu^t
The Isle of Love, the Harbor of good cheer.
Noble Provisions they take out of It;
Take their desired desirous (...) to bear
Them company: Whom nothing shall divorce,
Whilst in the Heavens the Sun shall run his course.
144.
Thus went They ploughing the appe^sed MAIN
With always prosperous Gale, and always fair;
Till sight long wish^, much longed for, they obtain
Of that dear Earth where first they sucked the A^r.
Sweet TAGUS'S Mouth they enter once again:
Where to their King, and Master (whom they fear
And love) for having sent them, the Renown
They give; and add new titles to his CROWN.
145.
No more, my MUSE, no more; my Harp's ill strung,
Heavy, and out of tune, and my Voice hoarse:
And, not with singing, but to see I Have sung
To a deaf people and without remorse.
Favor (that wont t'inspire the POET'S t^ngue)
Our Country yields it not, she minds the Purse
Too much, exaling from her gilded Mud
Nothing but gross and melancholy blood.
146.
Nor know I by what fate, or duller Chance,
Men have not now that life, and general gust,
Which made them with a cheerful countenance
Themselves into perpetual Action thrust.
You then, O KING! whom Heaven reserved to advance
At this time to the Throne to scour our Rust;
Behold (mark else what other Nations do)
The Best of Subjects do belong to You!
147.
Behold how cheerfully, a thousand ways,
Like fearlesse Lions and wild Bulls they run;
Exposed to watch whole Nights, to fast whole days,
To fire and sword, the Arrow and the Gun:
To torrid Regions, and to frozen Bays,
To MOORS, and People that adore the Sun;
To unknown perils a new World to find;
To Whales, to shipwracks, to tempestuous Wind!
148.
To do and suffer All for You prepared;
And to obey in the remotest Land
(Though never so bitter, and though never so hard,
Without Reply, or stop) what You command.
With You they will charge the Devil and his Guard
Even to the Gates of Hell, did You but stand
A mere Spectator by: and never fear
But they will make you too Victorious there.
149.
Then warm and glad them with your present Rays,
Sweetly majestic, and severely kind:
Their shoulders of their heavy Taxes ease:
Thus, thus, the path to Honor you shall find.
Men of Experience to your Council raise,
If with Experience they have goodness joined:
For such have a more certain Rule to tell
The How, the When, the Where to do things well.
150.
In their respective PLACES countenance All;
But choose Men rightly qualified thereto.
Let REVEREND CHURCHMEN to their Prayers fall,
That GOD would bless the Government in you;
And (for the NATION'S sins in general)
To Disciplines and Fastings: for the true
CHURCHMEN (exempted from Ambition's heat)
Seeks neither to be Rich, nor to be Great.
151.
Your NOBLES and your GENTRY highly prize,
For they their boiling blood undaunted spend,
Thereby not only Christianitie's,
But even your Empire's limits to extend:
And He who to a Clyme so distant flies
Your Royal Service duly to attend,
O'recomes two Enemies; the Living first,
Excessive Toil the second and the worst.
152.
Great Sir, let never the astonished GALL,
The ENGLISH, GERMAN, and ITALIAN,
Have cause to say, the fainting PORTUGAL
Could not advance the GREAT WORK he began.
Let your ADVISERS be experienced All,
Such as have seen the World, and studied man.
For, though in SCIENCE much contained be,
In special Cases PRACTICE more does see.
153
PHORMIAN (an elegant Philosophar)
You may have read how HANNIBALL did fool;
When, in his presence, of the ART OF WAR
He made a long Discourse by Square and Rule.
No, no, the brave PROFESSION MILITAR
Is not learnt, SIR, by Fancy in the School,
Dreaming, contemplating, to spelling held;
But seeing, sweating, fighting in the FIELD.
154
But I, who speak in rude and humble Rym^,
Not known nor dreamt of by my (...) at all;
Know yet from mouths of little ones sometime
The praise of GREAT ONES does completely fall.
I want not honest studies from my Prime;
Nor long Experience since to mix withal;
I want not Wit (such as in this you see)
Three things, which rarely in Conjunction be.
155.
An Arm (to serve you) trayn'd in War have I,
A ^oul (to sing you) to the Muses bent:
Only I want acceptance in your Bye,
Who owe to VIRTUE fair encouragement.
If HEAVEN afford me, This; and you, some high
And brave EXPLOYT; worthy a Monument
Of Verse, a^ my prophetic Thoughts presage
By what I see now in your tender Age:
156.
Making MOUNT-ATLAS tremble at your sight,
More then at that of dire MEDUSA'S Head;
Or putting in AMPLEUSIAN FIELDS to flight
The MOORS in FEZ and black MOROCCO bred;
I Will gage my MUSE (then in esteem and plight)
You in such manner through the WORLD shall spread,
That ALEXANDER shall in you respire,
Without envying the MEONIAN LYRE.
FINIS.

