THE Christians WAY TO HEAVEN: OR, What He must do to be Saved?

By a Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCC.

My dear Friends
I Here offer to you a plain Sermon in Print. that it may stay longer with you,
than it could do by the Preaching. It does contain, in short, the main Duties
of our Holy Religion which we hope to be saved by, and which we ought at all
Times to have present to our Minds. May the good God of Heaven bless it to your
Edification, as, I Pray, he may do the rest of the Endeavors of

Your Faithful Servant in Christ Jesus.

THE Christians Way TO HEAVEN.
ACTS XVI.xxx, xxxi. xxx. Sirs, What must I do to be Saved?

xxxi. And they said, Believe on the Lord, Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
Saved, and thy House.


WHEN the Apostle St. Paul and his Companion Silas had, upon account of the
uproar of the Multitude against them, been commanded to Prison by the
Magistrates, and had their Feet made fast in the Stocks; God Almighty was
pleased to show a very great Miracle for their Deliverance. For upon their
Praying and Singing Praises unto God, there was suddenly a very great
Earthquake, so that the Foundations of the Prison were shaken; and immediately
all the Doors were opened, and every ones Bands were loosed. This put the
Keeper of the Prison into a violent Consternation, upon the supposed loss of
his Prisoners; so that he would, had he not been prevented, have laid violent
Hands upon himself. But his Fear abated upon St. Paul's assuring him they were
all there, and the Sense of the miraculous Occurrence so awakened him into
Religious Thoughts; that it put him upon enquiry (...) these good Men taught,
that their Religion was from God who had done so great a Miracle in favor of
it; he did heartily believe, that that Salvation of Men's Souls in another World
which they Preached, would be the Lot of all those good Persons who followed
the Doctrines they were Preachers of; but still he was ignorant of those
Precepts he was to Practice in Order to this Happiness, and That was the Reason
that with so great Earnestness he cried out; Sirs, What must I do to be Saved?
That is, I have now a mind to be a Christian, and to enter into that Covenant
with God, which he has been pleased to offer to Mankind by Jesus Christ; of the
Truth of whose Mission, and the Sincerity of whose Promises I am verliy
persuaded; but I beseech you to inform me of the Conditions of this Covenant,
which I am a perfect Stranger to, and to tell me what I am to do on my Part in
order to attain that Happiness, which God promises to confer on his. To this
the Apostles answer, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved,
and thy House: That is, you shall obtain this your desire of Everlasting
Happiness, if you steadfastly believe, and sincerely practice the Precepts of
that Religion, which was declared to the World by Jesus Christ; and which you
shall learn by our Instruction. For it is plain, that by this the Apostles did
not mean a bare belief, but a performance of the other Duties likewise
recommended by the Gospel Dispensation. For in the next Words it is said, That
they spoke unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all that were in his House;
ver. 32. That is, they instructed him in the Principles of the Christian
Religion, and explained to him what he was to believe and practice in this
Gospel Covenant, that he might be Partaker of those Promises he was desirous of.

Now in discoursing to you upon these Words, I shall draw up in a narrow
Compass all the General Rules and Obligations of the Christian Religion, which
will be useful for you upon these two Accounts.

F rst, Because by this you may see your whole Duty at one View, which will be
serviceable to you, in reducing into an easie-Method what you have Read and
Heard in good Books and Sermons; and will be more especially useful to them,
who have not Time, or Money, to Read, or Buy large Treatises en these Subjects.

Secondly, Because by having these Terms of Salvation (...) ^^^dencies, or
uncomfortable Reflections upon Danger of your Miscarriage in a Future State;
for when you fully understand upon what Conditions every Man may certainly be
saved; you need not trouble your selves to wait for any particular Marks of
Assurance, which after all, a Man may be deceived in. But no Man has Reason to
distrust, that God Almighty will not Reward him with Eternal Happiness, when he
is sure he has discharged those Conditions which God in his Holy Word has
promised Eternal Happiness to.

Now these Conditions or Qualifications for Salvation, I shall reduce to as few
Heads as conveniently I can, and speak to them in their Order.

I. You cannot be saved, unless you believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the
main Articles of Faith contained in it. For the Scripture says expressly, I.
Condition, To believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not
shall be damned, Mark 18.16. Therefore you must believe, that there is Deuteronomy.
4.25. 1 Cor. 8.4. Isa. 45.5. John 17.3.
one only Isa. 48.12. Genesis 21.33. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Eternal, Genesis 17.1. Mat. 3.9. Ephesians. 3.20.
Almighty, Romans 16.17. 1 Timothy 1.17. Job. 11.7.
All-wise, and Exodus 34.6. Luke 1.50. 2 Cor. 1.3.
Merciful God, who Created Exodus 31.17. Acts 17.24.
all Things by his Almighty Wisdom and Power, and Governs For the Providence of
God, see Psalm 37. Prove. 11.31. Job 36.6. Mat. 6.28.
them by his Providence; that he has sent his only Son Christ Jesus into the
World to Redeem by his Blood John 8.42. 1 Timothy 1.15. Ephesians. 1.7.
, the forfeited Souls of sinful Mankind; and you must believe, that there is
the Holy Spirit Joh. 24.16. Romans 8.14. 1 John 5.14.
of God the Comforter, which our Savior promised to send, which does
continually put into our Mind, good Desires, does keep us from Temptations 2
Pet. 2.9. Romans 8.26. Rev. 12.10.
, does sanctify Tit. 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.11.
all good Men's Hearts, and render them acceptable unto God. You must steadfastly
believe, that the Holy Scriptures are the 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 2.21.
inspired Word of God; and particularly, that the Miracles and Doctrines of our
blessed Savior were really true, and such as they are there Recorded to be.
Now unless you cordially believe these Things, you can have no pretense to
enter into Covenant ^ith God in this Christian Dispensation, (...) ^^^posed by
Jesus Christ; for otherways you are Infidels, and though you should outwardly
join your selves in Communion with Christ's Flock, yet you will receive no more
Benefit by that, than if you were Mahometans or Pagans. Therefore in the first
Place, you must take Care to have a firm Belief of these Things, and to be
always ready to give an Answer to every Man, that asks you a Reason of the
Hope that is in you; that is, to believe the Doctrines of Christianity upon
rational Grounds, not to stick to them only upon the Prejudice of your
Education, but because upon full search and enquiry, you find all the Reason in
the World to believe them. Whenever you find any unbelieving Thought to rise up
in your Minds, which the Devil will never be wanting upon occasion to suggest;
use your utmost endeavor to shake off that ungodly Doubt, by confronting it
with some indubitable Truth, or by getting further Information of abler
Christians; John 5.39. Acts 17.4. Romans 15.4.
but above all by constant reading and studying God's Word, and by fervent
Prayer to him to help your unbelief; for you may be assured, that ten to one
more Infidels are made by a neglect of Reading the Scriptures, and of daily
Prayers to God, than by all the poisoned Books and Discourses, which are
levelled against our Religion. And I would have you observe further, (which is
a great Argument for you to settle in your Hearts a firm Belief of all the
Gospel Truths) that there is hardly any wickedness which Men commit, or any Sin
they fall into, but it proceeds chiefly from some kind of Infidelity or other;
because they do not rightly believe of the Providence of God, or his Justice,
or Mercy, or Veracity, but have got into their Heads some fond Notion of their
own concerning these Attributes, which may better agree with their vicious
Lives, than that Idea which God has given of himself in his Holy Word.
Therefore be sure to be well Principled, and to have true Notions of these
Matters; use your utmost endeavors firmly to Believe, and fully to understand
all that the Holy Scriptures say concerning them; for this is the Foundation of
all true Religion, and unless this be rightly laid, all the other Building,
which may be raised afterward, falls to the Ground and comes to nothing.

II. After the believing of the Gospel Truths; II. Condition. To a^^ (...)
in the next Place in order to your (...) Covenant with Christ; you must leave
off gross and apparent Sins. For a Man whilst he lives a lewd and vicious Life,
can have no hopes of Salvation; such, by the whole Tenor of the Gospel, being
excluded from it. The Apostle St. Paul gives you a long Catalogue of such Sins,
as are inconsistent with Salvation. Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest,
which are these; Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like; of which I tell you
before, as I have told you in time past, that they which do such things shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19.20.21. Therefore, if you would have
any hope of going to Heaven, you must leave off a wicked Course of Life; you
must take Care to repent of, and to forsake such Sins as will shut you out from
thence. You cannot expect to go thither, whilst you live in a State of Adultery
or Uncleanness; if you are not just in your dealings, and do not make
Satisfaction and Reparation for all the Wrongs and Injuries you have done; if
you live in a course of Drunkenness; if you are guilty of profane Swearing and
Cursing; if you live Quarelsomely and Contentiously with your Neighbors; if
you be proud and haughty, malicious and revengeful. Therefore it behooves you,
not only to be careful to avoid Drunkenness, Incontinency, and other fleshly
Sins, but to divest your selves of Pride and Malice, and other Sins of the
Mind; for these spiritual Vices are as much inconsistent with a State of
Christianity as the fleshly; they do as much mischief in this World, and make a
Man as unqualified for the other; and you may further take Notice, that the
most wicked Beings of all God's Creation, I mean the Devils in Hell, have no
Sins of the Flesh to answer for, and yet they shall undergo the most terrible
Damnation for their Pride and Malice, and other Sins of the Mind; which too
many Men do look upon, in themselves at least, as hardly any Sins at all.

III. In order to your Salvation you must take Care not only to avoid a settled
Course of Wickedness, or a Life of Viciousness, III. Condition. To avoid every
single Sin we know to be such.
but to root out of your Hearts every single Sin ye find there. There are a
great many Men, that for the generality live good and virtuous (...) ^ut yet
there is some bosom Sin they indulge them^^^^^^ (...) to part with all the rest
to retain that. Thus there are several who can without any great difficulty
refrain from Intemperance, or Covetousness, or Pride, or Contention, so they
may but enjoy their Lust. To another Covetousness is the only Darling; and he
can be content to be chaste and sober, in hopes that God will excuse him from
being hard and griping. Mistake not; God Almighty does expect to be loved with
all the Mind, and all the Soul and all the Strength, Mat 12.30. We must perfect
Holiness in the fear of the Lord. 2 Cor. 7.1. And we are taught, that he who
shall keep the whole Law, and offend in one Point, he is guilty of all, James
2.10. That is, he shall as effectually be damned for that one Sin unrepented
of, as if he had been guilty of many more Sins. Therefore do not Cheat your
selves, and Fool your selves out of your precious Souls; by thinking you shall
ever go to Heaven, by serving of God by halves. God Almighty will either have
your whole Souls or none, he will never suffer you to make him a sharer with
the Devil. Don't think it will avail you to say, it is but one Sin, for that
one is fatal. For Sin to the Soul, is like a strong Poison to the Body, a drop
of it is as killing as if you drank a Gallon. So that upon the whole, you have
no way to secure your Salvation; but by forsaking every known Sin, though never
so small in your Opinion; if you know it to be Sin, you must know it to be
damnable, and that there is no Salvation to be expected whilst you continue in
it. Therefore you must frequently examine your Consciences, and strictly survey
and look into every Corner of your Soul, and whatever Sin you find there
dispatch it without any Quarter; and do not put it off from Time to Time, as
being unwilling to part with it, but take the first opportunity to Repent of
and amend it; beg God Almighties Pardon for the former Commission of it, and
his Grace for the Future to avoid it.

IV. Condition. To Practice all the Gospel Virtues.
IV. The next step you must make in order to be saved, is to Practice the Gospel
Virtues; which you find laid down in Gods Word for your Christian Performance,
For Christianity does not consist only of a few Negative Precepts, it does not
oblige you just only to avoid Sin, but it engages you to the Performance of
several Virtues and Graces; which unless you make your selves Masters of, you
cannot be qualified for Heaven. Don't be cheat^^ (...) good Man, as when they
say, such a one is a good Man, because, he does no Body any harm; as if 'twas
enough to be Religious, not to be mischievous. For a Man may abstain from this,
upon account of good Nature and a Gentleman-like Education: And besides, this
singly of it self is no great matter of Virtue, and is no more then what Stocks
and Stones and tame Beasts may pretend to, for they likewise do no Body any
harm: But true Christianity has in it more Spirit and Vigor, it is a Life of
Action; and those who pretend to it, must not only avoid all ill Things, but
they must do a great many good ones.

You must Learn therefore to Practice the Christian Grace of Humility;
Humility, Mar. 20.26.
you must have as mean Thoughts as possible you can of your selves, upon
Consideration that all you can boast of does proceed from the free Gift of God;
you must not despise the meanest of your Fellow Creatures, but rather glorify
your gracious God, who has been pleased to bestow on you more liberal Talents;
and lastly, you must show to all a meek and courteous Behavior; considering
that they proceed from the same common Stock, and do partake of the same common
Nature with you, and that Christ condescended to Die for the poorest as well as
the greatest.

You must likewise adorn your Souls with Patience, Patience, Luke 21.19. James
5.8. 1 Pet. 2.20.
and bear your Afflictions with a true Christian Magnanimity and Fortitude; and
with a perfect Resignation to the good Will of God, considering that he sends
those Sufferings out of a pure fatherly kindness and Correction, to wean us
from the World, and to bring us higher unto him; to give us Demonstration of
our Legitimacy in Grace, and that we are not Bastards but Sons.

We must Learn likewise to forgive our Enemies, to do good to them that hate
us, Forgiveness, and Love of our Enemes, Mat. 5.24.
and pray for them that dispitefully use us and persecute us; considering that
we have for this the express Command and Example of our blessed Lord, and that
a meek and a peaceable Disposition is the greatest Ornament of a Christian, and
does not only conduce to the Peace and Quiet of the World, but to a Man's own
Satisfaction; whilst Malice and Revenge ^o r^^k the Soul with continual Torment
and turn* Society (...)

You must likewise endeavor to make your selves eminent in other Acts of
Charity. Charity of Opinion, 1 Cor. 13.4.
You must be charitable in your Opinions and Censures of other Men: You must
not be too forward in beleiving slanderous Reports, nor too busy in relating
other Men's failures; you must have a care of denouncing Damnation upon all who
differ in Religious Matters from you, but let your Love go with them with whom
your Opinion cannot.

You must according to your Abilities be liberal to the Poor, Charity of
Relief, Deuteronomy. 15.7. Psalm. 41.1. Luke 14.13. Prove. 28.27
considering that God has made us, who are in a better Capacity, Stewards for
them; that the Scriptures assures us, That he who is merciful to the Poor,
lends to the Lord; and therefore we may be sure, when God Almighty has
engaged himself to be our Debtor, he will repay us with the greatest Interest

Our Religion obliges us yet further to a higher Duty, Mortification and
Self-denial, Mat. 5.29. Romans 8.13. Col. 3.5.
and which does run a little more contrary to the stream of our natural
Inclinations, and that is to Mortification and Self-denial. And to mortify our
Members, and to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, Tit. 2.12. is not
without Reason enjoined us. For though we may live an ordinary Life of Virtue
without undergoing these severer Duties, yet it is very difficult to do it; and
if we do not restrain and abridge our Appetites oftentimes in lawful Things,
they will be apt to grow so Headstrong, that we shall hardly be able to keep
them from unlawful. Besides, since God Almighty has designed this World only as
a State of Probation for the other, where there are none of these sensual
Enjoyments to be found, it is but reasonable we should be something weaned from
those lower Pleasures, that we may be able to relish those high and exalted
ones which are designed for us hereafter. These, and all other Virtues which
are perscribed to you by God's Word, you must exercise your selves in, in this
your Christian Warfare; you must run this Race which God has set before you, if
you would obtain the Crown which is laid up for you. And to do this the better,
let this be your constant Rule* to do every Thing with readiness which you
(...) ^^^^fore Men, that is, to endeavor to show the best Example in Religion,
which without Ostentation and Vanity you possibly can; and lastly, to do all
the good you can in your Generation, if you do this sincerely, though it may be
with a great deal of Imperfection, God Almighty in his goodness will accept
this imperfect for a complete Obedience.

V. Next in order to your Salvation you must be diligent in observing the
Ordinances, V. Condition. To observe the Ordinances of Christ and his Holy
Church.

Public Prayer, Isa. 50.7. Luke 18.8. Acts 3.1. Mat. 21.13. as well as Private.

Morning and Evening, Mat. 7.7. Luke 18.1. Romans 12.12. Ephesians. 6.18. Psalm.
119.164.


which either Christ himself or his Holy Church has instituted for the
furtherance of Godliness and true Religion. Therefore you must be constant in
the Duty of Prayer, as well Public as Private. You must at least twice every
Day, Morning and Evening, betake your selves to your Closets, or some private
Place of your Houses; and there Pray to God to forgive you whatever Offenses
you have committed, and to beg his Grace and Protection for the Time to come.
If you neglect this Duty, you live the Lives of perfect Heathens, you quite put
your selves out of Gods Favor and Care which good Christians lay claim to, and
have nothing but your bare Baptism to distinguish you from the Profane Pagans.

You must likewise, at least upon Sundays and Holidays attend the Public
Service of the Church; Benefit of Public Prayer, John chapter 3. 2 Chronicles. 20.
for the Apostle Taxes the forsaking the Assemblies as a great fault, Heb.
10.25. And in the Public Congregation we may expect our Prayers to be sooner
heard, when they are joined with the united Prayers of so many good People.

You must likewise be very diligent and attentive in hearing the Word of God,
Hearing the Word and that from our own Ministers, Romans 10.17. Luke 8.18.
as it is Preached by his Ministers, for the Scripture tell us, That Faith
comes by Hearing, Romans 10.17. And therefore you ought not to flight this great
means of your Salvation. Neither must you indulge your selves in silly Fancies
in liking, or not liking your Ministers Phrase or Action but you ought chiefly
to mind the Substance of (...) meanest Minister of the Gospel, if you hear him
with that soberness you ought; for let me tell you, the fault of your not
profiting does not so much lie in unedifying Ministers, as in unpractising
Congregations. Nor must you run about, gadding to other Churches to hear others
you are better pleased with; for besides, the great fault you commit in
discouraging your own Ministers endeavors; you cannot expect that God should
afford the same Blessing to the hearing of the Word out of the Method he has
prescribed, and from those to whom he has not given Charge of your Souls.

You must likewise be constant in Reading Gods Word, Reading the Holy
Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. Joh. 5.39. Acts 17.11.
or getting it read to you, for this is the most considerable Motive you can
make use of to a good Life: Because then you here God Almighty himself speaking
to your Consciences, whose Authority will prevail much more with you than our
Preaching; and besides, by this you may examine the Doctrine which we Teach,
and see that we do not impose upon you, but Preach to you what is agreeable to
that excellent Rule.

You must furthermore, as frequently, as conveniently you may, Frequent
Receiving the Lords Supper.
Receive the Holy Sacrament of our Lords Body and Blood; for whilst you Live in
a constant neglect of this, you have little pretense to be Christians, because
our blessed Lord has commanded all his Followers to do this in remembrance of
him; and if you will not thus remember him, and show this Token your Communion
with him and his Church; you do in effect deny your Baptismal Vow, and turn
Renegoado's to the Religion of Christ. This is the Oath of Fidelity to your
heavenly Prince, which he has required of you frequently to renew, which if you
refuse, you cast of all Allegiance and Subjection to him, and turn Rebels to
his Administration. Whilst you neglect this, you deprive your selves of the
Grace of God's Holy Spirit, which is plentifully conveyed by a due receiving
this Holy Sacrament; you leave your Souls defenseless against all the Assaults
of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil which may attack them; and defraud your
selves of the Seal of Gods Pardon for Sin, which is fully given to all worthy
Receivers.

You must also religiously observe all the Feasts and Fasts of the Church,
Religious observing Sundays and Holidays
not only by coming to Church on Sundays, Fast-days, and Holidays, but by
dedicating besides, some considerable part of them to your Religious Exercises
in Private.

You must lastly take Care to bring your Children, as soon as may be, Bringing
Children to Public Baptism.
to partake of the Holy Sacrament of Baptism, not at Home, as is the vain and
irreligious Fashion of some, but to Church where the Sacrament may be more
solemnly administered, and where your Children may partake of the ^oynt Prayers
of the Congregation of God's People: And when you have done so, you must see
them well instructed in the Principles of the Christian Religion, and that they
come to take their Religion upon themselves, which their Sureties in Baptism
promised they should, Catechism and Confirmation.
when the Bishop does administer the Sacred Ordinance of Confirmation.

VI. Lastly, in order to Salvation, VI. Condition. To Watch against all
Temptations and Failures.
you must take Care to Exercise another Duty, which is particularly recommended
by our Savior, as a guard to all the rest; and that is Watchfulness, Mat.
24.42. and 25.14, Acts 20.31. Though you have truly repented of your Sins, and
got into a Habit of Virtue and a Religious Course of Life; yet if you have not
a great guard upon your selves, you will insensibly relapse again into your
former Condition. For you must needs think that the Devil will use the utmost
of his spite and cunning, and will play his main Batteries upon those, who
have forsaken his Cause, and are obedient to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. The
Holy Scripture informs you, that he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. And you may reasonably suppose, that he will
devour none so easily, as those Christians who live off of their Guard.
Therefore when you have forsaken a Course, of Sin, and are arrived at a
tolerable Perfection of Virtue and Godliness, don't sit down secure, as if
there was nothing more to be done; for in your Christian Warfare there is Work
enough to go forwards in, as long as you live. It requires ^ great deal of
Diligence and Circumspection to keep all Temptations and to maintain your
Integrity in a vicious Age when Wickedness is ofttimes applauded, and Virtue
meets with so great discouragements. But there is hardly any standing at a stay
in a Religious Course; you will either go forwards or backwards, and therefore
be watchful, that you do not move the wrong Way; and this you cannot be sure
of, unless, as long as you live, you be improving in Virtue. I do not doubt,
but many Christians are in a salvable State, that are subject to many
Imperfections and Failures; but, as they live on, they must still go forwards
in the Conquest of these. A sincere Penitent who is just come out of a
flagitious Course of Life, has enough to do to fence against the gross Sins he
has so much been accustomed to; but God expects from one, who has been long
habituated to a Course of Godliness, that he should be very watchful against
all human Imperfections whatsoever. Such a one must not think so easily to be
excused from Sins of Ignorance, when after a long Exercise in hearing and
reading God's Word, he might have better informed himself of his Duty; he
cannot so well plead Sins of Infirmity, when his Nature has very considerably
lost its bias to Sin by a long Course of Virtue. Therefore good Christians
must be going forwards in a State of Virtue as long as they live, they must be
still bettering and improving their Natures, more and more informing their
Understandings in Religious Truths, and rectifying their Wills; they will find
Work enough to watch against all imprudent and offensive Actions, against idle
Words, against sudden Anger, against coldness and some involuntary Excursions
in Devotion. And for an encouragement to this Progress, God Almighty will not
only Reward them with a bare saving their Souls, but will liberally bestow on
such the Ten Talents, Luke 19.24. He will advance them according to their
Improvement in Piety, to one of the highest Thrones in the Heavenly Kingdom;
For one Star differs from another Star in Glory, 1 Cor 15.41.

And now let me speak a Word or two, by way of Exhortation and Inference from
what has been said.

First, Let me apply my self to the more mature and elderly Sort among you,

You have long since been instructed in the Principles of the ^hristian
Religion, you have had the Catechetical Instructi^^ of the Church in (...)
Years, and therefore you ought not only to know your Duty, but to be
considerable Proficients in it. It is a shame for you to be ignorant of those
Christian Doctrines, which the Children are taught to understand; and then to
Learn the Way to Heaven, when you have hardly Time perhaps before Death to do
it in. Oh! What a killing Speech is it to hear a Man say, he did understand his
Religion when he was Young? Wretched Sinner! What have thou been doing all this
Time? You that ought to have been the Teacher of Religion to others, do thou
want the very first Instructions of this Duty thy self? How can thou answer
it to God, to retain thy Trade, thy Debts, and every thing else in Mind, and
only to have forgot thy Religion? If there be any such among you, get out of
this wicked carelessness as soon as you can, apply your selves to the reading
the Holy Scriptures and other good Books, come constantly to Church, and Mind
what is there said, and be ashamed to continue in such Ignorance any longer.

As for you who have not been so very negligent as to forget your Duty, but yet
nevertheless in despite of your Knowledge, and under Conviction of your own
Consciences do live in constant breach of it; free your selves with all speed
from this hazardous State, and venture not your Souls in a State of Sin, which
you know to be damnable, one moment longer. How can you Answer it to the Mercy
of God, to continue in a Course of Wickedness, when he has given you so much
Time to Repent in? How can you answer it to your own Consciences, which are
continually upbraiding you with a neglect of your Duty? How can you Answer it
to your Children and Families, to whom you should give an Example of Piety and
Religion; but you set them a Copy only of Profaneness and Wickedness?

As for those good Persons among you, who have been mindful of the one thing
necessary, and taken Care for their Souls; who have acquainted themselves what
they are to do to be saved, and have made their Practice conformable to their
Knowledge; let me beseech you, my dear Brethren, to pay God your continual
Thanks for this great measure of Grace bestowed upon you, to be modeft and
humble in your virtuous Accomplishments; and to ascribe all your spiritual
Strength to the goodness of God, to endeavor more and more to improve in
Grace, and like St. Paul* to forget th^s^ (...) are before, and pressing
toward the Mark, for the prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 3.13.14.

2. And for the close of all, Let me apply my self to the Younger sort among
you.

Let me beseech you to bear in mind the good Instructions and Christian
Information, which you receive from your Pastors and Friends in your Youth; and
let what you Learn in those tender Years remain fresh in your Memories under
the Hoary Head, Let me beseech you to enter upon a Religious Course of Life
betimes, because now you have all the Advantages in the World to go forwards in
it. You have no inveterate Habits, and old Customs of Sinning, to conflict
with, which oftentimes render all the endeavors of a riper Age, ineffectual.
Your Nature now is tender and pliable, and as it takes its bent in this Age, it
does for the most part stand for ever. Therefore this is the Time to give it a
virtuous Impression, and a true Bias to Holiness, before the Devil takes
Possession of it, and warps it the contrary way. Think how pleasing and
acceptable to God an early Piety is, and what an affront it is to Dedicate only
the Dregs of your Life to his Service, and the Flower of it to the Devil.

Endeavor to settle in your Minds now you are Young, a true Taste of Godliness,
and of the Excellency of the Christian Religion; which above all other
Religions which ever were in the World, does more especially recommend it.
Weigh in your Hearts seriously the admirable Rewards which it promises to those
who perform the Conditions of the Gospel, and be not led aside by the Vanities
of this World, to forfeit those exceeding Glories of the other. And when you
are fully informed, What you must do to be Saved, take Care that you do not
miss of that Salvation, whereof you know the Methods of obtaining.

FINIS.

