ARTICLES TO BE Ministered, Enquired of, and Answered, CONCERNING Matters
Ecclesiastical: IN THE VISITATION OF JOHN FEILDING, Archdeacon of the
Arch-Deaconry OF DORSET. 1683:

LONDON, Printed for Obadiah Blakegrave. 1683.

The Churchwardens Oath.
YOUR Oath is, That you the Churchwardens for your parts, and you the
Sides-men for your parts, shall well and faithfully execute your several
Offices for your Parish (so long as you shall continue in your Offices)
according to the Use and Custom there, and the Law in that behalf; and also
duly and truly present such Crimes and Offenses punishable by the Laws
Ecclesiastical of this Land, which shall come to your knowledge or notice; all
Favor and Affection, Hatred and Malice, or sinister Respect set apart, so help
you God, etc.

And We deliver you these Articles for your Directions.

ARTICLES TO BE Ministered, Enquired of, and Answered unto, CONCERNING Matters
Ecclesiastical: In the VISITATION of JOHN FEILDING, Archdeacon of the
Arch-Deaconry of DORSET, 1683.
Concerning the Kings Majesty's Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical.
HAVE You any in your Parish that oppose, or gainsay any part of His Majesty's
Supremacy in all Causes Ecclesiastical, as set forth inche second Canon?
Articles of the Church of England.
1. HAVE you any in your Parish that affirm, that the Church of England, as now
by Law established, is not a True and Apostolical Church; and that it does not
teach and maintain the Doctrine of the Apostles, as set down in the 3 Canon? 2.
HAVE you any in your Parish that oppugn or speaks against the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawful use of them, as coutrary to
the 6 Canon? You shall present their Names. 3. HAVE you any in your Parish that
impugn the Government of the Church of England, under the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty, by Archbishops and Bishops, as at present established, and that it is
contrary to the Word of God, as contrary to the 7 Canon? 4. HAVE you any in
your Parish that affirm. That the Book of Common Prayer, as now by Law is
established, contains in it any thing that is Superstitions, and contrary to
the Word of God, and therefore that Godly Men ought not to approve and
subscribe to the same, contrary to the 4 Canon? You shall present their Names.
5. WHETHER have you any in your Parish that Separate from the Church of
England, and the Public Worship thereof, and that come not to Church until
Divine Service be ended, and the Psalm or Sermon do begin, as contrary to the 9
and 12 Canons? 6. IS there any in your Parish that does maintain such
unlicensed Preachers that refuse to subscribe the Forms of Gods Worship
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, contrary to the 10 Canon? And whether
have you any in your Parish that of late have followed any strange Preacher
Unlicensed, Suspended, or Schismatical, from Parish to Parish? Present their
Names, and the Places to which they go and resort.
Of Divine Service.
1. IS the present Form of Divine Service used by your Minister upon Sundays
and Holidays? And are the Lords days and other Holydays kept in your Parish,
according to the Orders of the Church of England prescribed in that behalf, by
frequenting the Public Worship, as is enjoined in the 13 and 14 Canons? 2.
WHETHER is there any Man or Woman that uses not due reverence in the Church in
time of Divine Service and Sermon? And whether is there any Man that covers
his head in the time of Divine Service, except for some Infirmity? And, whether
do all persons present in the Church or Chapel, kneel reverently upon their
Knees when the General Confession, Litany, and Prayers are read, and stand up
at the saying of the Creed, according to the 18 Canon? 3. IS there any in your
Parish that lurk or tipple in Taverns, Alehouses, or that stand idle and loiter
in the Churchyard in time of Divine Service, as forbidden in the 19 Canon?
Of the Sacraments.
1. IS the Sacrament of the Lords Supper duly administered in your Parish, at
the least thrice a year, Easter being one? And does the Minister give warning
thereof at Morning Prayer the Sunday before such time? And do the
Churchwardens provide a sufficient quantity of Bread and Wine for the same, as
by the 20, 21, 22 Canons is required? 2. HAVE you in your Church a convenient
Table, with a fine Linen Cloth to cover the same in time of Administration of
the Lords Supper, as Cannon the second? And is the Wine brought to the table in
a clean Flagon or Pot, of Pewter or purer Metal, as is required in the said
Canon? 3. DOES your Minister admit any notorious Offenders, or Schismatics, or
any Excommunicate persons, for such as live in open contention with their
Neighbors, to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, contrary to the 26 and 27
Canons? Or, does any refuse to come to the Sacrament, contrary to the 57 Canon?
4. IS the Sacrament of Baptism duly administered in your Church or Chapel,
according to the form thereof, and the direction of the Book of Common Prayers?
And is there a Font of Stone placed at the lower end of the Church for that
purpose, as required in the 81 Canon? 5. HAVE you any in your Parish that
refuse to bring their Children to be Baptized by the Minister, according to the
Book of Common Prayer? Declare their Names, and how long they have done so. 6.
WHETHER does your Minister refuse to sign the Children with the Sign of the
Cross, when they are Baptized, according to the Book of Common Prayer, as is
required by the 30 Canon? And does he Christen and Bury as is required by the
68 and 69 Canons?
Of Ministers.
1. DOES your Minister, when he reads public Prayers, or adminestreth the
Sacraments, wear a comely Surplice with Sleeves, as is required by the 58
Canon? 2. DOES your Minister visit the Sick, as is required by the 67 Canon? 3.
DOES your Minister use the form of Thanksgiving for Women after Childbirth?
And whether have any Married Wives refused to come to Church, according to the
Book of Common Prayer, to give God Thanks after Childbirth, in such usual and
decent manner as has been anciently accustomed? If any be faulty, you shall
present their Names. 4. DOES your Minister catechize the Youth and more
ignorant persons of the Parish, in the Creed, and Lords Prayer, and the Ten
Commandments, as is required in the 59 Canon? 5. DOES your Minister pray for
King Charles the Second, Queen Catharine, and the rest of the Royal Family, as
required by the 55 Canon? 6. HAS your Minister more Benefices than one with
Cure, and upon which does he reside? And has he a sufficient and able Curate,
to teach and instance the People, as is required in the 41 Canon? 7. WHETHER
does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate frequent Taverns and Alehouses, or is given
to Drunkenness, Dicing, Carding, or other unlawful Games, as are forbidden by
the 75 Canon?
Of the Church and Church yard.
1. WHETHER have you the Bible provided of the New Translation, and of the
large Volume, and the Book of Common Prayers, as now by Law is established, as
is in the 8 Canon required? 2. WHETHER have you a convenient Seat for your
Minister to read Divine Service, and a decent Pulpit set up in a convenient
Place? Have you also a decent large Surplice? Have you also a fair Cup of Gold,
Silver, or other purer Metal, and a Cover agreeable to the same; and all other
necessary things for the Celebration of Divine Service, and Administration of
the Sacraments, as the 83 Canon requires? 3 WHETHER is your Church or Chapel,
with the Chancel thereof, and Churchyard, kept in good Reparation, and in a
decent and comely fashion, as well within as without, as becomes the House of
God, as is required in the 85 Canon? 4. IS your Parsonage or Vicarage-House
kept in good Reparations, and all Houses thereunto belonging? 5. HAVE you in
your Parish a Register-book provided, wherein may be written the day and year
of every Christening, Wedding, and Burial, as is required in the 70 Canon?
Of School Masters.
HAVE you any Man that teaches School either in public or private House, not
having License from the Bishop of the Diocese or his Ordinary, as required in
the 77 Canon? And does the Licensed Schoolmaster bring his Scholars to hear
Sermons, as in the 79 Canon is required?
Of Excommunicate Persons.
HAVE you any Excommunicate Persons in your Parish? And whether does your
Minister read Divine Service or Prayers, when any Persons he knew to be
Excommunicated was present in the same Church at that time among the
Congregation? And whether has he not caused the Churchwardens, or some other
Person, to put them forth, or to cease from saying any Divine Service during
such Excommunicate Persons being thereat? 2. WHETHER has your Parson, Vicar,
or Curate received any Excommunication, Suspension, or Aggravation from his
Ordinary or his Substitute? And has he published the same according to the
tenor thereof, the next Lord's Day or Holy Day following the receipt.
Of the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
WHETHER were your Church wardens chosen in the Easter week, as is required in
the Canon? And by the consent of the Minister and Parishioners, as is in the 89
Canon required? and (...) they give up a just Account of what Moneys they had
received, and how disbursed? And at ^^^ir going out of their Office, did
deliver up to the Parishioners what Moneys and other things belonged to them?
Of Parish Clerks.
HAVE you a Parish-Clerk, chosen by the Minister, suffi^^ent for his Reading,
Writing, and a competent skill in Singing? And does he receive his accustomed
Wages, as is required in the 91 Canon?
Of Marriages.
1. IS there any Married in your Parish that are within the degrees prohibited
by the Laws of God, and expressed in a Table, and set forth by Authority 1563?
And have you the said Table set up in your Church, as is required in the 99
Canon? 2. HAS your Minister Married any under the Age of One and twenty years,
without the consent of their Parents, Guardians, and Governors, as is required
in the 100 Canon? 3. HAS your Minister Married any Person or Persons not
having first published the Banns, according to the Book of Common Prayer, or
obtained License from rich as have Episcopal Authority, or the Vicar General of
the Bishop, as in the 181 Canon?
Wills.
WHETHER you have in your Parish any Person or Persons who died and have not
their Wills proved? Or whether they died Intestate (that is to say, made no
will) as far as you have heard? You shall present such Executors, or such as
have been faulty herein.
Parishioners.
ARE there any in your Parish that are, or by common Fame or Report are
Committers of Aduitery, Fornication, or Incest; or that are common Drunkards,
Swearers, and Blasphemers of the Holy Name of God, Simonaical Persons,
Fighters, Brawlers, or Quarrellers? You are to present them, as is required in
the 106 Canon.
Burials.
HAVE you buried in your Parish Church or Churchyard, any Excommunicated
Persons, or known Kecusants, or such as have been Felons de se? And does your
Minister bury the Dead according to the Form prescribed in the Book of Common
Prayer, as is required in the 68 Canon?
All these Things and Persons you are conscionably to present upon your Oaths,
knowing that the discharge of your Duty in your several Places, is or may be a
means to reform such Disorders and Persons in your Parish, and prevent the
Judgdments of God from falling on the same: In which, help you God.

John Feilding Archdeacon. Henry Jones Official.



