ARTICLES OF INQUIRY Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL; EXHIBITED To the
Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish, within the Diocese OF
LICHFIELD and COVENTRY; In the SECOND Triennial Visitation OF THE Right
Reverend Father in GOD JOHN By Divine Providence LORD BISHOP OF LICHFIELD and
COVENTRY, In the Seventh Year of his Consecration, Anno Domini, 1668.

LONDON, Printed for John Place. 1668.

The Oath to be Administered to the Churchwardens, and Sides-men of every
Parish.
YOU shall Swear to enquire with the best diligence that you may, And present
every person of your Parish (as far as you are bound by Law) that has done any
offense in your Parish, contrary to the known Ecclesiastical Laws of this
Kingdom now in force, or omitted any Duty therein required. And this you shall
do, without favor or hatred; So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

ARTICLES OF INQUIRY Within the DIOCESE OF LICHFIELD and COVENTRY;
Inquiries about the Church and Churchyard.
I. IS your Parish Church and Chancel decently kept for Gods honor? Are the
Roofs, Walls, Pavements, and Windows well repaired? Are the Ten Commandments,
Lords Prayer, and the Creed, drawn out in fair Letters, in convenient Places?
and are the Kings Arms set up.

II. HAVE your late Churchwardens made Leavies for the reparation of the
Church, and other holy uses? And are there any that refuse to pay the
proportion levied upon them?

III. IS there a Font of Stone decently covered, standing toward the lower end
of the Church, for the Administration of Baptism? Is there a comely Table
placed conveniently in Church or Chapel for the use of the Lords Supper? Is
there a comely Carpet of Silk or good Stuff for that holy Table, with a fair
Linen Cloth to spread upon it in the time of Administration? And is there an
handsome Cup of silver for the Wine, and a Cover of silver to the same to put
the Bread on? And is there one or more Flaggons of Powter or better metal for
that use?

IV. ARE your reading Desk and Pulpit conveniently set up, and placed, for the
use of public Prayer and Sermons? And has your Pulpit a Cushion, and comely
covering before it?

V. IS there in your Church the Common Prayer Book of the largest Volume, set
forth by Authority of this present Parliament? And is there the Bible in Folio,
fairly bound, of King James's Translation? Is there a decent Surplice, (one or
more) for your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, to wear in the time of all
public Ministrations?

VI. ARE the Tombs, Monuments, Gravestones of the Dead in your Church, or
Churchyard, preserved, and not suffered to be broken, taken down, or removed.

VII. IS there a Book of Parchment, wherein be Registered the Christnings,
Marriages, and Burials in your Parish? Is there a strong Chest, with three
Locks, wherein to preserve your Church Furniture? And a Box for Alms, placed in
a fit place for the Relief of the Poor?

VIII. IS the House and Outhouses of your Minister in good and sufficient
repair? Does he preserve the Gardens, Orchards, and Glebe belonging to him, and
the Trees growing in the said places, without imbezelling, changing, or any way
damnifying them?

IX. IS the Churchyard decently kept, and well fenced to keep out Beasts.

Inquiries about the Parson, Vicar, Curate, and Lecturer.
I. HAVE the abovenamed received Episcopal Ordination, according to the Laws
of the Kingdom?

II. CAN you tell who did present your Parson, or Vicar, to his Benefice? Have
you heard, or known, that he came in Simoniacally? Was he inducted into his
Benefice before sufficient witness? And did he read the nine and thirty
Articles before or at Morning or Evening prayer? And did he give his consent to
them?

III. HAS he read the Book of Common prayer as it is enjoined by the late Act
of Uniformity for public Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, etc. on
some Sunday before the four and twentieth of August, Anno. 1662. And by the
additoinal Act for such as were disabled before the Feast of the Nativity of
our Lord, Anno. 1663. and did, and does he wear the Surplice while he performed
that Office, and other Offices mentioned in that Common Prayer Book?

IV. HAS he published his consent unto the said Book on some Sunday before the
time abovementioned, openly in time of Divine Service, and has he subscribed
to the Declaration as it is expressed in the 77. page of the abovenamed Statute,
and manifested it to the Congregation openly?

V. DOES he read the full Service, according to the direction of the
Common Prayer Book, on every Sunday and Holy Day, at Morning and Evening
Prayer? or does he negligently omit any part of it.

VI. DOES he Preach a Sermon on every Sunday, or procure a Sermon then to be
Preached? Or else sometimes read one of the Homilies which the Church has
appointed? And does he often on Sundays and Holy Days before Divine Service,
instruct his Parishioners in the Catechism in the Church.

VII. DOES he read the Service appointed for the fifth of November, thirtieth
of January, twenty ninth of May? and does he keep the yearly Perambulation and
Rogation days before or at the Feast of our Lords Ascension?

VIII. IF your Parson or Vicar keep a Curate, is he of godly Life and
sufficient Learning? Is he allowed by the Bishop, and can you tell whether the
said Curate have a competent allowance according to the value of the Living?

IX. DOES your Parish maintain a Lecturer? Is he a Virtuous and Orthodox
Divine? Is he Licensed by the Bishop? Does he read the full Divine Service of
Common Prayer once a Month at the least, wearing a Surplice?

X. HAVE you a Parson, Vicar, or Curate in your Parish, or Hamlet? If not, how
long have you been without one? and who is the Patron that should present one
to the Ordinary?

XI. DO you observe, to your best understanding, that your Parson, Vicar,
Lecturer, or Curate, do Preach the true Word of God? Or do they, to your
judgment, (having consulted with other grave Parishioners,) vent dangerous
Opinions, derogating to the Glory of God, and a pious Life? Do they teach
Sedition directly against his Majesty, his Laws, and Government, or do you
note, that indirectly they cast out Seditious glances against the Civil State,
or Government Ecclesiastical?

XII. DOES your Minister celebrate the Lords Supper in the Church, according to
the Service of the Common Prayer Book, often every year? Does he repulse them
from it that are scandalous by the sentence of the Laws? Does he Baptize such
Infants of his Parish, according to the Service of the Common Prayer, as upon
warning given before, are brought on Sundaies or Holy Days to the Church with
Godfathers and Godmothers, and upon lawful Summons does he Baptize Infants
at home in case of danger and necessity.

XIII. DOES he visit the Sick at their Houses, when he is required, upon lawful
Summons? Does he Pray with them, Exhort them to faith and repentance, and
comfort them? Does he give them the Holy Communion, that profess faith in
Christ, and sorrow for their sins if they require it; and does he Exhort them
to Brotherly love, and works of Charity, if they be able to bequeath a portion
to pious uses?

XIV. DOES he prepare the young Men and Maidens of the Parish to be confirmed
by the Bishop? Does he Marry any clandestinely, and at due hours in the Church,
and that upon Banes thrice published on Sundaies or Holy Days; or License
obtained from the Spiritual Court? And does he bury the Dead according to the
Book of Common Prayer?

XV. IS your Minister, Lecturer, Curate, a man of sober, chaste, just,
unblameable Life? and spare not to present him, or them, that are not every way
examples of Godliness?

XVI. DOES your Minister with the Churchwardens take care duly every year, to
send in the names of all such in his Parish, as have been Baptized, Married,
Buried, Excommunicated, that they may be enrolled in the Bishops Registry?

XVII. DOES your Minister maintain peace with his Neighbors? and study to keep
them in peace as much as in him lies? Does he take diligent care to reduce all
Sectaries, Seperatists, and Refractory persons to the obedience of the Doctrine
and Government of the Church? And does he offer himself, being an able Learned
man, to confer with Popish recusants to convert them, and to bring them into
the Bosom of this Church?

Inquiries about the Parishioners.
I. DO all your Parishioners of due Age resort to the Divine Service and
Sermons in your Church on Sundays and Holydays? and on Wednesday and Friday
mornings, if conveniently they can?

II. DO they or any of their servants occupy themselves in bodily Labors on
Sundays or Holy Days? do they open their Shops and sell Wares on those days? or
do Vintners, Victualers, Innkeepers, or others, receive any into their Houses
to tipple and wast time idly on those days? only they may receive Travelers
that are upon a Journey in necessary occasions.

III. DO your Parishioners in the time of Divine Service, Sermon, or Homily,
behave themselves reverently? Men and Youths with their Hats off, both Sexes
giving due attention, none disturbing holy Duties, by talking, walking,
removing, going out, or using any other offense? and do they all kneel, stand
up, make answers in time of Divine Service, as you find it appointed in the
Rubricks of the Common Prayer Book?

IV. SUCH as may be discerned to be Papists, Heretics, Schismatics,
Anabaptists, Seperatists, Quakers and the like, are not only to be presented,
but twelve pence is to be levied on every such person, and so many of them for
every Sunday as absent themselves from the Church, and to be employed to the
maintenance of the Poor, whereof account is to be made to the Justices of the
Peace.

V. SUCH are to be presented as are known, or much suspected to be Incestuous,
or to be married in Incestuous or unlawful degrees of Blood; likewise you ought
to present known Adulterers, Fornicators, Blasphemers, common Swearers,
Drunkards, Sorcerers, or resorters to Sorcerers.

VI. ARE there any above the Age of sixteen years in your Parish, and
especially that have been examined by your Minister in the Catechism before,
that do not come to the Lords Supper, to partake it reverently upon their knees
three times every year at the least, the Feast of Easter, or the time
thereabout, being one?

VII. ARE there any in your Parish, that keep their Children unbaptized?
enquire diligently, and return the Parents or Governors names, and the list of
those Children by such names as you can learn. And are there any that cause
their Children to be baptized privately, by any whom your Minister does not
allow, and whose name they will not declare, nor bring those Children, baptized
in that private sort to the Church in time of public Service, that their
baptism may be known to the Congregation that it was complete and lawful?

VIII. DO all Women that have been safely delivered come to the Church in due
time to partake of the Common Prayer, and do such Women pay their accustomed
Duties?

IX. DO your Parishioners bring their dead to be decently Buried after the
Service of the Church in their own Parish grounds? or if they carry the Dead
away to be Buried in some other place, whether they be Lodgers or other
Strangers, do they first obtain leave of the Minister of the Parish, and have
his certificate?

X. DO any of your Parish usually frequent other Parish Churches, and absent
themselves from their own?

XI. ARE there any that keep private Conventicles contrary to the Statute of
this present Parliament in their Houses, or abroad, which are resorted to, by
those especially that are known or suspected for Sectaries, or any way
disaffected to the present Church of England?

XII. DO your Parishioners pay their Easter Offerings, and accustomed duties,
called Vicarage Tithes, or by any other name, to their Minister?

XIII. ARE there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish, that
are not proved by a lawful Judge? or do you know or hear of any goods
administered without due grant from the Ordinary?

XIV. WHAT Legacies have been given to pious uses in your Parish, which are
utterly defrauded or not employed to the Right use according to the Will of the
Donor?

XV. ARE your Seats and Pews in the Church decently kept? And are the
Parishioners placed in them without offense and contention?

Inquiries about Church Officers, and other Persons.
I. IF any Stranger come to Preach in your Parish Church or Chapel, on Sundays
and Holy Days, at Christnings, Funerals, Marriages, or any other occasion, let
the Churchwardens demand to see his Orders and License to preach which he had
from the Bishop; and if he can show none, let them inhibit him from Preaching.

II. DID your late Churchwardens suffer excommunicated Persons to be Buried in
any part of your Church, Chancel or Churchyard?

III. DOES your Parish Clark, and Sexton (if you have any such) do their duties
obediently and diligently? Are they of honest Life and Conversation? Is your
Parish Clark duly chosen by the Minister? And is he allowed by the Ordinary?
Can he write and read? Does he make Responsions to the Hymns and other
Suffrages to the Liturgy?

IV. IS there a School public or private in your Parish? Is the Schoolmaster,
(and Usher if he have one) allowed by the Bishop or his Chancellor? Does he
breed his Scholars Religiously? and does he teach them the Church Catechism? Is
there any who pretend to be a Minister, and is a Nonconformist, who does keep
a School for young Scholars in his House in the name of some other person?

V. HAVE you any Physician, Surgeon, or Midwife in your Parish, that
practice without License?

VI. ARE your Churchwardens duly chosen in the week after Easter day, and
after the custom and manner of the Parish?

^^^ HAVE your late Churchwardens, having surrender^d their places upon the
Election of new ones, given up their accounts to the Parishioners? and are
their accounts allowed? or have they falsified their trust? wherein? and how
much?

VIII. ALSO have the said Churchwardens been diligent to repair the Church, to
keep it decent and comely? Hade they preserved the Font for Baptism fit and
handsome for that use? likewise have they looked carefully to the Communion
Table, to the Plate, and all Vtensils pertaining to it? And have they provided
such fine white Bread and good Wine, as was fit for the Sacrament, according to
advice taken with the Minister.

LEt the Churchwardens and Sidemen inquire Diligently what Answers they will
and can give, according to the Ecclesiastical Law ^ow established, to all these
particulars upon Oath, as far as they are bound by Law, setting the feat of God
and the good of his Church before their Eyes.

FINIS.

