More Cheap Riches: OR, HEAVENLY APHORISMS; VIZ. A Third, or rather true First
Part of the POCKET COMPANION Completed.

Being 300 Golden Sayings more: Faithfully Copied out of the Manuscripts of Mr.
H.C. (that eminent and faithful Servant of God, many years ago Deceased.)

By N. C. Master of Arts of Emanuel College in Cambridg.

Zach. 4.10. For who has despised the Day of small things? etc. -- (...).
-- et inest sua gratia parvus.
LONDON, Printed by D.M. for J. Rothwell at the Fountain in Cheapside. 1660.

Friendly Readers;
IF you be so to your own Souls, I shall neither care, nor question whether you
be so to me or no.

Let not, I pray, the Plainness, nor the Commonness of some of these Heavenly
Aphorisms render null the Total.

Are you Learned and knowing men? then you know that a^^ know not all of these.
Non omnia noscimus Omnes.

Neither are your selves unconcerned herein: you may be reminded of what you do
know, to do it. Etiam sapientissimus est commonefaciendus.

Is a Masterpiece expected, that every man likes? we must please the best, not
the most: Haud pluribus placendum: sed purioribus.

Is not this Piece ingenious enough, or sufficiently quaint and curious? What?
will you put up no Coin but milled Pieces? Nor eat wholesome Food, because the
Dishes are not bedect with Flowrs, or adorned with Orange and Lymond Pieles?
Jeanus raro stomachus vulgaria temnit.

Are there some small Defaults or Imperfections in Writer or Printer? It Is as
honorable to pardon; as comfortable to be pardoned: Humanum est errare: Divinum
ignoscere.

If you have a ripe, cordial Pippin or Pearmain that is a little perished in
one or two places, will you throw it wholly away? I trow not; no more then eat
it wholly: but you will chew the Best, and eschew the Worst. -- Et sort tua
contentus: Et. sic hic. --

Are the Phrases too homely for these our critical Times? Here is more Wisdom
then Words. The best is at the Bottom: like sugered Wine; Potiora latent, quam
patent.

Is it needless in this bookish Age to cast in these Mites into the Treasury?
Why? They are of the Remains of an eminent and godly man, whom, whosoever knew,
shall require none Encomiastick, no more then the Work needs an Apologetick:
Quippe Opus Authorem plaudat, and Author opus.

Besides these 300 make up his 200 Golden Sayings complete 500 in all, of his
own, besides the 300 Silver ones of mine. Whereby he that has an honest, wise,
diligent heart, may make haste to be rich, and yet be innocent; yea, be the
more innocent and wise too: Prudens, ut Serpens: innoxius utque Columba.

Well: Shall they all be counted such ordinary and common Notions, that some
that are extraordinary amongst them shall not make superabundant satisfaction
in Lieu of the rest? Verily, any man of a modest Wit, and moderate Spirit,
shall find some special benefit by every fifth Aphorism of them: or else I have
misplaced some against my will.

-- Si non: his utere mecum. Thus hoping (friends) that you will be civil in
your Demands, and praying, That you may not need to be hired to do your selves
a Courtesy, I must embolden my self to encourage you to bestow a Groat or Six
pence upon your own or any of your poor Friends Souls (who probably will be
glad of it after you have read it; if you be rich enough to spare it them)
withal, assuring you, that if you practice it, you shall never repent the Price
thereof; and that if you accept of what is best in it, you shall not need to
except against what is worst thereing. Furthermore expect not great things, but
respect what good things ye find here; and (in short) I shall (if the LORD give
Life and Leave) pacify your Inquisitive Appetites with an Obriza, more
industriously Elaborate. Despise not the Day of small things, and then you
shall see greater things then these, with him in the Gospel ( John 1. last) and
with

Your Friend without Guile (whether you be your own or no) NOT. CHURCH.
From my Chamber in Cambridge. 1659.
HEAVENLY APHORISMS.
1. A Good Book is to be read, or heard with great Attention.

2. A wicked Man is the Devils Looking-glass, wherein he sees his own Image
reflected.

3. The greatest Favors have been shown to the Saints most humbled.

4. The Absence of God is the Desire of the Wicked here, and the Curse of the
Damned hereafter.

5. Good Motions to the Reprobate are as Sparks to the Water, soon quenched.

6. Graces must be still evermore tried and repaired, 2 Timothy 1.6. 2 Cor. 13.5.

7. Those that let their Virtues decay without Fear, shall die without Favor,
Ezekiel. 33.12, 13.

8. Some men are in bondage to Sin, and some to Opinion, both are under
Vassalage.

9. The weight of Cares and Pleasures clogges the Soul; the weight of
Afflictions presses the Mind.

10. Those that are old in Knowledge should be old in Gravity and Sobriety. See
1 Cor. 13.11.

11. The chief cause of the Wickedness of Youth, is want of timely and prudent
Correction, Prove. 13.24. and 19.18. and 23.13, 14.

12. Many are discontent at their estates, because they see their own
Discommodities, not others, Psalm. 37.1, 16.

13. A Christians Care in all Companies should be either to do good, or receive
good, Gal. 6.10. Heb. 13.16.

14. The causes of distraction in Prayer, is, because our Minds are at other
times too much estranged from God.

15. We should observe where we profit most in Conference, and there often to
Visit, Mal. 3.16.

16. The Remembrance of Death will beat down High-mindednesse and
Earthly-mindednesse, Psalm. 39.5. Psalm. 49 6, 7, etc.

17. We should labor to get Heavenly Wisdom, and having gotten it, well to
employ it, Prove. 4.5. with Luke 12.48.

18. The Truth of Grace manifestly appears by the growth of Grace, Isa. 22.3.
Phil. 1.6.

19. Let us labor for Conscience: for the Devil has great Knowledge and
Science: Therefore called Demon.

20. We should first be Good, and then we should labor to do Good like God
himself. Psalm. 119.68.

21. Worldly Men desire Worldly Comfort; but the truly Religious desire
Spiritual comfort, Psalm. 4* 6, 7.

22. Private Prayer is a note of Sincerity, if it be done sincerely, from a
sincere Heart, Prove. 15.8, 29. Prove. 21.27.

23. Known Hypocrites be hated of God and Man; of Man, for making a show, of
God for having but a show.

24 The World cannot abide Zeal, and God rejects Luke-warmness, Rev. 3.16. Let
us consider, which to follow, 1 King. 18.21.

25. Every Accusation is not a Condemnation, as in Job, Daniel, Christ, etc.

26. A Man must be convicted by Law, before he be put from the Sacrament.

27. Many Professors have fallen; but an humble Man I never heard of to be an
Apostate. See Prove. 28.14. 1 Cor. 10.12.

28. We carry corruption about us the best of us; therefore we should be
content to bear any Cross, or Trouble, Micah 7.9,

29. Those that have been grievous Sinners, need grievously to lament and mourn
for Sin, that they may avoid grievous Yellings in Hell.

30. Death is unwelcome to the ungodly rich man: Hope, Wealth, Soul and All
goes.

31. Wicked men lightly esteem God and his Word and People: Good men basely
esteem the Profits and Pleasures of this Life, which the Worldling makes his
God.

32. If we cannot do what good we would, let us do what good we can, Genesis 4.7.
2 Cor. 8.12. and Chap. 9. ver. 7.

33. Envy goes beyond Covetousness, as we see in Herodias.

34. All this Life is our seeds-time, the Day of Judgment is the Harvest.

35. They that most mind God are most godly: See Psalm. 1.1, 2. Psalm. 10.4. Ps.
119.97. and 164 verses.

36 Sin, which is a Pastime to a Fool, makes a good Man groan and grieve, and
cry, O wretch that I am! Romans 7.

37. Some cry out against Pureness, because they love Profaneness; and some cry
out against Profaneness, because they love Pureness.

38. Either God will have our whole Hearts, or else the Devil.

39. The World and our Corruptions are the Devils Harbingers to take up as much
of our Hearts as they can for Him.

40. Idle Books are as Scrapps to be thrown to the Dogs; good Books are as
Meat for the Children.

41. There is a Necessity of being mocked, for either we shall be mocked of the
World for Holiness, or of God for Wickedness, Eccles. 11.9.

42. The poorest Believer is better guarded then the greatest Monarch; for they
have the Protection of Angels, Heb. 1. last.

43. God promises Remission to them that repent for Sin; but promises not
Repentance to them that continue in Sin, Ezekiel. 33.11. Isa. 55.7.

44. We must use the pure Means with pure Hearts, if we mean to grow.

45. The heavy Burden of Repentance is not to be laid on the shoulders of
weak, feeble Old Age.

46. At Death the Souls of the godly go to the Lord, and their Bodies with
good Report to the Grave: as for the Wicked it is not so with them: See Psalm.
1.4, etc.

47. The using Wealth and Pleasures moderately is lawful: but to set our Hearts
and Love upon them is unlawful, Prove. 30.8. Eccles. 3.12, 13. 1 John 2.15.

48. To some God stands at the Door and knocks; but to some, He opens the
Heart, as of Lydia, Act. 16.

49. We are apt to be deceived; therefore it is often said, Be not deceived,
Gal. 6. Deuteronomy. 11.16. Ephesians. 5.5, 6, etc. James 1.26.

50. Thieves at the Gallows pray, and read, and sing Psalms, exhort Others,
and speak good Words; if they should do so at Liberty, some would call them
Puritans.

51. If we have Christ, we have all things; if we have not Christ, we are
Usurpers of all things, 1 Cor. 3.

52. Conference with those that are run into Error, is dangerous; Their words
fret as a Canker, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.

53. Those that love the Truth, shall be preserved from Error, 2 These. 2.10,
11, 12, etc.

54. The Rain falls from the Mountains, and makes fruitful the Valleys; so
Grace rests not on the proud, but on the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.

55. A covetous Worldling is like a sumpter-Horse, that at Night has the
Burden of the Treasure taken away, and is left with a galled Back.

56. We are all Sinners; but there is a Difference of Sinners, some are
repentant, some unrepentant Sinners; some Sinners shall be saved, some damned.

57. If we can find our selves changed throughout, it will be a Consolation to
us all our Days, let the worst that can, befall us.

58. Mortified Christians, are somewhat rare Creatures.

59. Many pray by Heart, but not with the Heart.

60. Some wicked men say to God, depart from us (Job 21.) God meets with them
and says, depart from me ye cursed, Mat. 25.

61. The breaking of Vows and Covenants with God is fearful, because God
regards not such, Heb. 8.9. again, God has no pleasure in them, Eccl. 5.4. see
Aph. 404, etc.

62. Let us remember our Vows in Baptism, and the vows we have made in our
Troubles, Psalm. 50.14, 15, 23.

63. Many bewail their Losses, but there was never any Loss to be compared to
the Loss of Gods Image, which Adam had, but lost it, and all our Care should be
to repair it.

64. The Image of God is Knowledge, Col. 3.10. Righteousness and true Holiness
(or the Holiness of Truth) Ephesians. 4.24.

65. He that has the Lord for his Portion shall be sure never to be undone.

66. So long as the faithful are in their ways, and in the compass of their
callings, they have the protection of Angels, Psalm. 91.

67. The first Adam fell by Eating. Genesis 3. The second Adam overcame by
Fasting, Mat. 4.

68. We ought to be earnest with God to give us his Spirit; He has made a
Promise to those that pray, Luke 11.13. This Spirit will lead us into all
Truth; John 16.13.

69. He that has found sweetness in God, will leave his sweet sins.

70. This 70 is the Age of Man, Psalm. 90. His Infancy, like a Dream; his Youth,
like a Frenzy; his Manhood and Middle-Age, Labor and Misery; his Age,
Weakness; and his End, Sorrow.

71. Our Life is a Moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. our Days few and evil, Genesis 47.9.
Therefore to remember our Ends, and beware of Pride and Covetousness. See Aph.
16.

72. There is no Knowledge, nor Invention in the Grave, Ecclesiast. 9.10. And
what man lives and shall not see Death? Psalm. 89.48.

73. He that hungers earnestly for Grace, does but meanly esteem the World.

74. We ought to arm our selves, as for the Death of Friends, so for the
Falsehood of them; both will grieve us.

75. Many set light by Death, forgetting Hell, that follows Death; we need not
fear the Prison, if we can escape the Execution.

76. Good Motions must go with Endeavors; when they are brought to Actions
give God all the glory.

77. We must first be good, and then we shall do good, see Aph. 20.

78. It Is better to fall into an Inconveniency then a Mischief; to suffer some
Loss, rather then to sin.

79. Some men wonder at Others for being so expert in the Scripture, when they
scarce once a Week themselves read a Chapter in the Scripture.

80. If we meet with a true-hearted Nathan, or angry Shimei, we shall hear of
our Faults.

81. The only way to stop scandalous and clamorous peoples mouths, is to carry
our selves uprightly and virtuously.

82. Malice and Anger makes some reveal that, which Love and Friendship made
them keep secret.

83. Where there is no Preaching, the People are very rude and barbarous, Prove.
29.18. with Jer. 8.9. and Mal. 2.7.

84. Some find no Comfort in their Lives, because they want Soundness in their
Hearts; their Conscience will not let them have these outward Comforts, and
their Covetousness keeps them from inward Comforts.

85. We can never suffer for that which we do not love. See Church-Incense.

86. We may try our Affections, whether they are good, or bad by this, if we
are more apt to pray, read, heaer, etc. then our Anger, Joy, Sorrow and Care is
good: else away with these Affections, fight against them.

87. An heavenly Affection and an heavenly Conversation make a man fit for
Salvation.

88. He that commits his weightiest Affairs to God, by humble, fervent Prayer
is very like to speed, or else the more patiently to bear his Cross.

89. The Preservation of a wicked man is but a Reservation, unless he repent.

90. There is as much Difference between a sound Christian and a mere
Worldling, as there is between a glass of cold water, and a glass of Aqua vitae.

91. There is nothing so sure as God and his Promises.

92. The cause of Distraction in Prayer is because our Minds at other times
are too much estranged from God: the remedy is to walk more closely with God in
Affection, then shall we pray with less Distraction.

93. It is necessary to bid one another Take heed.

94. If two men walk in a Room, they see no Motes, except the Sun do shine and
then they espy many; so before the Holy Ghost do shine into our Hearts we see
not our sinfulness and manifold Corruptions.

95. Pride and Wantonness, Envy and Covetousness, are four Diseases in a carnal
man's Eyes.

96. Some men are feasted, and made much of a little before they are destroyed,
as Haman, Amnon, Belshazzar, etc.

97. The way to get Compassion is deeply to meditate on the Distresses of
Others, and go to visit them.

98. Some cry out of show, yet come short of Hypocrites that have show: these
both want soundness.

99. The Reason that there is such a general Coldness in Religion is, because
there is so little holy Conference.

100. Humility lets other Graces into our soul: take away Humility and farewell
all Life of Grace.

101. The Thoughts of our blessed God do surmount other Thoughts, as God
Himself surmounts other Things.

102. This Life is miserable: the godly see their spiritual Miseries; wicked
men see only bodily Miseries.

103. A through Change in Heart and Life, and Fruitfulness in Grace gives a
good Evidence of Sincerity.

104. When we meditate of Heaven, let us stay and rest our Thoughts there,
being loath to let them sink to Earth again.

105. Our Hearts should be so set upon God, that we should break through All
impediments to come unto Him.

106. It is better to obey doubtfully, then to disobey doubtfully.

107. We hate Punishment, because it is contrary to our Nature; but love Sin,
which is contrary to Gods Nature; by this we may try our selves, whether we
love best, God, or our selves.

108. Spiritual Pride causes the Lord to withhold his Graces from us.

109 Ministers are to be reverenced in the Hearts of men for their Holiness,
not for their Silks, nor Titles, nor great Livings.

110. The best Man in the Parish, is not the richese Man, but the holiest Man.

111. We are to put difference between Reproofs to amend and Reproaches to
shame.

112. The Conscience of a wicked Worldling, we know not how it pricks Him, no
more then we do the Shoe that wrings his Foot, or the Tingling in the Ear,
which none but a man's Self hears.

113. He that makes haste to be Holy, has an holy Hastiness.

114. It Is a matter of Commendation, to have Knowledge and Speculation: it is a
matter concerns Salvation to have good Conscience and Conversation.

115. God reserves his Consolations till we need them; as we keep Aqua vitae.

116. We can hardly speak of God^ Essence, unless we name some of his
Properties also (as holy, great, good blessed, etc.)

117. The World is a very dangerous Enemy, it makes of a Professor a Demas;
nay, a Judas, if it conquer.

118. The godly are jealous of Themselves, and suffer Others to try them: the
ungodly do neither.

119. Then are our Prayers good, when we begin begging in the sense of our
Wants, and end in finding Gods Mercy.

120. To pray and hope for; to love and long for the Appearing of Christ, is
the Property of a Saint.

121. Ignorance of God is accompanied with Unthankfulness: how can he be truly
thankful, that knows not God?

122. We are to labor to have a share in Gods Mercy; then All His Attributes
are for us, else they are against us.

123. Love endeavors to enjoy the thing beloved: here is Comfort, if once we
can find God loves us (there will be Enjoyment.)

124. Often Prayer with God, and seldom company with wicked men is the only
way to thrive.

125. The strong are to pray for the weak, that they fail not; the weak are to
pray for the strong, that they fall not.

126. The Justice of God takes place, when his Mercy is abused.

127. Some men act the part of two men, in profane Company they would not be
thought to be religious; in religious Company, they would not be thought to be
profane.

128. Virtue stands between two Extremes.

129. Hypocrites have no Approbation of themselves for want of Sincerity: nor
of others because of Inconstancy, for they break out One time, or Other.

130. There is Mercy to be showed both in Giving and Forgiving. (and for Giving)

131. There is a Love of Mercy of God to us, and a Love of Duty of us to Him.

1^2. Wrangling Persons are offensive to whomsoever they jar withal; to the
learned they are a Grief, to the ignorant a Snare, to the indifferent a Trouble
of Conscience.

133. A good Affection makes a good Construction.

134. We must love bad men with a love of good will, wishing their good: we
must love good men with a love of Approbation, approving their Courses, and
desiring their Company.

135. When men look on Eternity, then they begin to be wise.

136. It Is the Property of Love to descend, rather then to ascend.

137. There is Knowledge in the Brain, but saving Knowledge is joined with Care
and Conscience; for example, most know Gods Name should not be taken in vain;
but few know this with Care and Conscience.

138. Inward Sincerity, and outward Integrity must go together.

139. If we read the Scripture without distinctions, we do as they that walk in
the dark, they know not whether they go: for example, God hears not Sinners,
John 9. We must distinguish Sinners, penitent and impenitent; and so in diverse
Other things.

140. We are to take Counsel, lest we neglecting it do smart.

141. The Children of God have more joy then Worldlings, Psalm. 4.3. last.

142. The invisible God has an invisible secret Curse for the Wicked, and an
invisible secret blessing for the Godly, which we see not with the Eye.

143. Unfeigned Thankfulness is the Property of a Saint, Psalm. 145.10.

144. God has given us Understanding and Affections; to help these he gives
Instruction and Exhortation: Instruction breeds clear Understanding,
Exhortation breeds good Affections.

145. Learning lives, and Virtue shines Folly beggs, and Ignorance pines.

146. Christ's Word should dwell in us richly, in all wisdom. In some it is
scanty, in others it is not in wisdom, though they have variety of Scriptures in
their mouths.

147. To abstain from gross Sins, to live civilly, to have the show of
Holiness will not serve, except we have the power of Godliness.

148. He that makes the barren Woman a joyful Mother of Children, can make our
barren Hearts fruitful in Graces.

149. We are as Meat in Summer: If it has not Salt, it will stink: so unless
we have Grace, we shall stink before God.

150 We are commanded to be Students; and all our Study must be for Quietness
here, and for eternal rest hereafter: ponder 2 These. 4.11. Heb. 4.11.

151. When we come to meditate we should first pray to God to tie up Satan,
and enable us to mind the only thing which we are about.

152. Reverend Preachers have the tongue of the Learned, Isa. 50. We should go
to such to resolve our Doubts. Pride or Ignorance causes the Neglect of this.

153. When we see Others of our Rank go before us in Grace, we must think they
have been more earnest in Prayer then we have been.

154. Recreation to our Labor should be moderate, like Salt unto our Meat.

155. A miserable thing for a man to outlive his Happiness: A Wicked man at the
End of this Life, all his Happiness is gone.

156. Our Faith must be examined by our Consolation and Sanctification.

157. The tallest Trees have their Roots deepest in the Earth; and the greatest
men have most earthly Minds.

158. The Grasse-hopper in the Storm flies to the Hedge for Succor, but when
the Sun shines, hopps away; so do many in Adversity flee to the Lord, but in
Prosperity run from Him.

159. Set your hearts on your way, Hagg. 1.5. We must like Travelers keep our
selves in the right way, and mind it. Set your hearts on your way.

160. It must be Death, or Villainy, that makes me cast off an old Friend.

161. The ancient Patriarks not affecting gorgeous Buildings were contented to
dwell in Tents, Heb. 11.9, 10. See chapter 13.14.

162. Our whole Life should be a Life of Faith, 2 Cor. 5, 7. Gal. 2.20. 1 Pet.
1.5. Hab. 2.4. The Just shall live by Faith.

163. Faith overcomes all Difficulties in Gods service, viz. That may hinder
our Obedience, Genesis 12.1. to 6. Jos. 6.6. Judge. 7.7. Luke 5.4, 5.

164. Outward Worship the Devil may have; but I desire to worship God in Spirit
and Truth, as Joh. 4.34.

165. Our God a consuming Fire: Our God, our good and merciful God, a consuming
Fire to the wicked, 2 Cor. 1.3. Heb. 10.31. and chapter 12. ult.

166. He that now mokes the Child of God, shall one Day be made a
laughing stock to God, Men and Angels, if unrepentant.

167. When once we have felt the power of godliness, the Sabbath will not be a
burden to us.

168. When I have sinned, I find my self troubled in Mind: Blessed be God for
this Trouble, I were miserable without it.

169. When public means fail, we must be more earnest in using private; as
Barge-men labor with Oars, when the Wind serves not the Sail.

170. In this World are good men and bad. In Heaven all good, in Hell all bad.

171. Goods be so called, not that they make a man good, but in regard that he
may do good with them.

172. We sin oftenest in Company and at Meats; Lord, let thy Grace assist me
when I have most need of thy help.

173. Only by Pride comes Contention, I will labor for Humility, so shall I
have much Peace and Quietness.

174. God is wonderful in All his works; but the common Use and Sight of them
makes us forget Admiration

175. Worldly men like Spunges, all their Lifetime receiving in goods, at
Death All wrung out.

176. I am still employed about my Trade, but Lord teach me the Trade of my
Way, the Way of thy Statutes.

177. They that reject the Word of the Lord have no wisdom; they then that
embrace Gods Word, are truly-wise.

178. The way to an holy Life is not to go from the Company of Men: but by
laboring to be a new Man.

179. Adams Estate was not so good as a regenerate man's Estate: for he has a
Mediator, which Adam had not.

180. We bid our Children not come near the Brink of the River; we our Selves
should avoid the Occasions of Sin.

181. Psalm. 55.21. Because they have no Changes, therefore they fear not God.
This makes their Prosperity their ruin.

182. In evil Company I am brought to consider Satan's Malice in those where he
rules; and Gods Mercy in drawing Me from a natural Estate.

183. I have a thousand things to grieve for, a thousand things to rejoice in.
For my Life is spent in the Intercourse of these two.

184. I see many men have good civil Parts; but are unsavory for want of true
Grace.

185. The Devil believes, because he feels: Wicked men will not believe till
they feel.

186. Those that fight a single Combat are contrary to Christ: Christ died to
save men's Lives; these live to take away men's Lives.

187. The Baptizing of Children, the holy Trinity, the Catholic Church, the
Sabbath of the New Testament, with many other things, be proved by Consequence;
not expressed directly in Syllables.

188. The way to get honor, is to honor God, but most men take a contrary
Course.

189. The forgetfulness of Gods Presence, the main cause of all Sin and
Wickedness: the Persuasion of Gods Presence, the Ground of true Holiness and
Obedience.

190. When I consider Gods Mercies: when I consider my Sins: I say, It Is thy
Goodness, I am no destroyed:

191. Christ is Alpha and Omega: Be not like the worldling to make him Omega
only: but let him be to thee Alpha: begin all things in his Name.

192. In the things of this World we chose the best: So we should in
Spirituals: The best God, the best Book, the best Company, the best Knowledge:
herein we are Wise, or Fools in our Choice.

193. In Prayer we must have a Feeling of our wants and Earnestness:
Earnestness makes our Prayer availeable.

194. A man may be banished from good Books, and good company: but never from
private Prayer.

195. Envy is Contrary to Charity: it weeps at others Prosperity, and rejoices
at others Adversity.

196. Jer. 6.16. Enquire for the old way: not the old Religion of cursed
Antichrist, but the way of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, the way of
Holiness.

197. Job 22.30. The innocent deliver the Island: but the wicked pull down Gods
judgments with violence. Add Strength O Lord to our zeal, Prayers, and Holiness
of Life.

198. I have been unconstant in good things, but He that is Jehovah and changes
not, can make me like Himself.

199. To him that has, shall be given. Lord, give me true Grace, though at
first it be little, I know it will not long be so.

200. The Afflictions of the Godly are but for a Time: light, momentary, ending
at Death: But the wicked shall be tormented beyond Time. Their misery begins at
Death.

201. Judas his Repentance was not true; for it was worldly sorrow in the
Apprehension of Justice, without Hatred of sin, or desire to glorify God; I
desire all the contrary.

202. Many mock at Professors and in Disgrace call them men of the Spirit.
These are far from Grace: for if any man have not the spirit of Christ the same
is none of his, Romans 8.

203. Take heed at Death you do not merit
An heavy doom to scoff at Spirit.


204. Restraint from Liberty is grievous to our Nature; we should therefore be
thankful for our Liberty, pity those in Bonds, and remember them in our
Prayers, etc. Heb. 13.3.

205. David used Study, Prayer, Conference, All good Means, which made him a
good Man; so should we do if we would be men after Gods own Heart.

206. The consideration of Gods Power is an help in Misery: And they that
depend thereon shall have a blessed Issue. So Abraham.

207. Mortification is not in restraining Grace, nor in Contemplation, nor in
hard usage of the Body: but in subduing self will.

208. They that fight a single Combat are both murderers: He that is killed
in affection, the other in action; the one goes to Hell speedily, the other
goes after, without unfeigned Repentance.

209. To look up to God for assistance in all good Duties, and to give God all
the Glory, when they are performed, is the part of a sound Christian.

210. Private Prayer, a note of a true Christian: few Hipocrites open their
Corruptions to God: fewer pray earnestly and heartily against Hypocrisy.

211. The same Ends that make Hypocrites profess Christ: the same Ends shall
make them fall from their Profession. Whatsoever I have, Lord give it me in
Truth.

212. They that mind earthly things their End is Damnation; What care ought I
to have of my Mind and Thoughts, that the World choke not the good seed of Gods
Word?

213. While I have time, I will do all the good possibly I can: for I am not
sure of to morrow. Lord make me wise to Salvation. Teach me so to number my
Days, that I may apply my Heart unto Wisdom.

214. Dartings of Satan are without our Inclination, and without Premeditation.

215. A lazy Jade would rather have a foul Stable, then a fair Way. And
sometimes a better Horse too.

216. Many bewail their Losses, but never any Loss to be compared to the Loss
of Gods Image; which Adam had, but lost by Sin.

217. All our Care should be to repair Gods Image, it is Knowledge Coll. 3.10.
Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.

218. We see diverse good Men of diverse Opinions; it is because in Adam we lost
our knowledge, and the best know but in part.

219. Whetting makes the Knife hot, bright, and sharp: and Exercise makes a
Christian amiable, zealous and serviceable.

220 That is a good Religion, whose Foundation is true Humility; whose Building
up, is in Sincerity, and whose Conclusion is with Perseverance.

221. Many times we fail of our intended choice: as we say, The gray Mare is
the better Horse.

222. If we cannot fit our wives to our minds, we must fit our minds to our
wives, 1 Cor. 13. lat. end.

223. Sound Faith is Applying, Gal. 2.20. Justifying, Romans 5. Sanctifying, Act.
26 Saving, Ephesians. 2.

224. We should labor for heavenly knowledge, because 1. The things we learn
are excellent, 2. They are holy and pure. 3. We are naturally blind and
ignorant.

225. Three great Comforts to the godly in Trouble 1. Nothing is without Gods
Providence, Mat. 6. and Chap. 10. Again, God will lay no more on then he will
enable us to bear, 1 Cor. 10. and All shall work for the best, Romans 8.

226. There are four helps against hard Censuring of others, and five to
preserve our Neighbors good Name.

227. (1.) To pass by Infirmities, as God himself does,, Mic. 7. (2.) To do as
we would be done by. Mat. 7, (3) To look on the good in them, which we are
about to conceive or sprak evil of. (4.) To stand for a man's Innocence behind
his Back. (5.) And to consture things doubtful Charitably.

228. Three ways to get a good Name. (1.) To seek Gods Glory. (2.) To avoid
Sin: and (3.) Not to Censure others unjustlie.

229. Our Exercise in Trouble is (1.) To walk by Faith. 2 Cor. 5. (2.) To Pray
for Comfort. Psalm. 51. (3) To remember the Days of Old. Psalm. 77. And (4.) To
wait on God. Psalm. 123. Psalm. 130.

230. In holy Conference, (1.) Our Corruptions are mortified, (2.) Our Graces
increased, (3.) Our Affections enflamed, (4) Our Prayers furthered, (5.) Our
union strengthened (6.) Our Purpose of godly Life sweetened.

231. The Providence of God is, (1.) His taking notice of all things. (2.) His
upholding all things. (3.) His disposing all things.

232. True Christians differ from Others, (3.) In their Privileges. (4.) In
their Rewards:

233. Carnal joy is like Lightening four ways, (1.) It Is but a flash. (2.) It
blasts our Graces, (3.) A Darkness follows it. (4.) After it runs an Horror
like Thunder.

234. Godly resolutions are (1.) conditional, as if God gave Grace, etc. (2.)
They proceed from Love. (3.) They are Sincere and Lasting.

235. There are four ends mar a good work when, it is done; 1. For Vainglory.
2. For Merit. 3. For Feaer only. 4. For hope of Worldly Reward: we may
super-add 5. when it is repented of.

236. By Six Reasons it appears there is a God, and by seven Arguments Atheism
is damned for ever.

237. 1. By the Conscience in Man. 2. By the Devotion in Man. 3. By Gods
glorious works. 4. By Gods fearful judgments. 5. By Gods numberless and
precious Mercies. 6. By the due and timely accomplishment of the Prophesies:
and 7. By the Consent of all men well in their wits.

238. In the Spiritual Combat observe we, (1) The Certainty of the Onset,
(2.) The Power of the Foe, (3.) Our own weakness. (4.) The Danger if overcome.
(5.) Gods Aid, (6) our Assurance of Conquest, (7.) The Reward of Perseverance.

239. Outward things not over-eagerly to be sought: (1.) Oftentimes it is hard
to get them, (2.) It Is as hard to be content with them. (3.) It Is uncertain we
shall keep them, (4.) It Is sure we shall be taken from them.

240. (I may superadd: they are by care a Burden to our Minds: a Snare to our
souls, hindering us from better things: Our greater store makes our Grief the
Greater at Parting: And we have the more to be accountable for.)

241. We are to rejoice at the Conversion of rich men; because, 1. They may
shelter Others, 2. They may read, hear, and study more, and get Knowledge to do
good, 3. Their Example may draw Others to love and embrace Religion.

242. A three fold Rule for good Works; they must be done. 1. In Faith, Romans
14.23. 2. In Uprightness of Heart, 1 Samuel 12.24. 3. Aiming at Gods Glory, 1
Cor. 10.31.

243. Natural men are dead in four Respects, 1. Bound as Lazarus. Job. 11.44.
2. Without spiritual Motion, 3. Insensible of their Sins, or Gods Wrath, 4.
Stinking: So be Wicked men in the Eyes of God and the godly.

244. God hears not his Childrens Prayers immediately, that they may be seven
times the better by their Afflictions, as Gold by the Fire.

245. 1. To try their Faith ^^d Patience, 2. To make them more humble, 3. More
earnest in Prayer. 4. More weaned from the World. 5. More fellow-feeling of
Others Grief. 6. To esteem his Grace more, 7. To give Him the more Glory.

246. Our Preparation for CHRIST stands in four things, 1. Watching. 2.
Believing, 3. Repenting, 4. Diligence.

247. We ought to serve God upon a three. fold Obligation; for he has 1.
Created us, 2. Redeemed us. 3. Preserved us.

248. We ought to serve God upon a four fold Advantage. It Is 1. Honorable, 2.
Profitable, 3. Comfortable at Death: and 4. Easy* Mat 11. last.

249. Without the Fear of God we cannot serve Him: The Fear of God is to depart
from Evil, and to do Good.

250. Three marks of true Fear. (1.) It is clean: Psalm 119. (2.) It springs
from Love, (3.) It makes us eschew secret Sin, like Joseph, who had Privacy,
Importunity, and Opportunity. Genesis 39.

251. God often takes from his Children that which is their Chief joy; but
Faith will overcome natural Affections.

252. The Examples of the Saints are threefold. (1.) Extraordinary. as Phineas
and Elias. (2.) Sinful, as their failings, (3.) Good, as in holy Duties; in
these last only, they are imitable, 1 Cor. 11.1.

253. The falls of the Saints teach us, 1. No man is without Sin, 2. We must
with them repent of Sin, 3. We must be Watchful, because they fell. 4. We must
be Merciful, as our Heavenly Father, to forgive them that offend us.

254. Examples do show us, that Godliness is no Novelty, 2. No Impossibility.

255. Pleasures must be used for God, viz. 1. To fit us for our general or
particular Calling, 2. To raise our minds higher, 3. To fit us to leave this
World, seeing its Vanity.

256. We should Catechize Children, because, 1. Without a Foundation, no
Building can be raised.

257. 2. That they may be able to give a Reason of their Faith.

258. 3. That they may be fit to pr^fit by Sermons after-ward.

259. 4. God sets down the Manner of a Catechism, Heb. 6.2, 3.

260 5. If we do not teach them Gods Catechism: The Devil will teach them his
to be sure.

Apocrypha is not canonical Scripture upon a Various account.

261. The End of Malachy speaks of John the Baptist, and Matthew next of all
speaks of him, Mal. 4.5. Mat. 3.1. and chapter 11.14.

262. The Apocrypha is erro^ Tobit 6. The Devil is said (...) ^ven away with
Smelling: The story of Judith is fabulous, Eccl. 46.13. Samuel prophesied after
his Death.

263. The Apocrypha is impious; the Book of Machabees commends a man for
killing Himself.

264. It Is mendacious and tells lies* In the Song of the three Children, the
Flame ascended forty nine Cubies: And in the story of Susanna, Daniel is
termed a young Child.

265. The Church of God has not received them for Canonical: though Antichrist
has to uphold his Filthiness.

(...) Devil has five notable devices.

266. If he can, he labors to keep us in Ignorance.

267. If he fail therein, he will keep us from Practice.

268. If he fail therein, he will keep us from Reverence, and make us
presumptuous.

269. If he fail therein, he will keep us from Cheerfulness.

270. If he fail therein, he will keep us from Perseverance, that we may fall
short of our Work, and our Wages.

271. Many hope well: yet would be non-plust; if any should ask them, What
Ground have you for your Hope?

272. Hope is taken three ways. 1. For the Object of Hope, 2. For the Grace of
Hope, 3. For the Ground of Hope.

273. Three sorts have no Hope: 1. Those in a natural Estate. 2. Those which
are Hypocrites. 3. Presumptuous Sinners.

274. Four sorts have Hope. 1. Those who rely on God, though Means fail, 2. Who
will not use Unlawful means, 3. Who rest on God in the use of means, 4. That
leave the things present for Hope of things future.

275. Means to get Hope are, 1. To repent of our Sins, 2. To acquaint our
selves with Scripture, Romans 15.4. 3. To look to former Experience. 4. To Pray
to the God of Hope.

276. Effectual Prayer must be thus. 1. We must not regard Wickedness. 2. We
must be true Worshippers. 3. Feel our Wants, 4. Be Fervent. 5. Pray in Christ's
Name, 6. With zeal for Gods Glory. Psalm. 79.7. Be Merciful to the Poor, and
hear their Cry.

277. God will hear his Children. 1. Because of his Goodness, 2. Because of his
Promises, 3. Because all Flesh shall come to him, Psalm. 65.

278. God hears, 1. Our Prayers. 2. Our Desires, 3. Our Meaning. 4. Our
Miseries, 5. Others for us. 6. Us for Others, 7. Christ for all.

279. The way to grow in Grace is. 1. To use the pure Means, 2. With a pure
Heart, 3. Vnweariedly.

280. A man thinks his Jesting a witty Ornament; but God accounts it foolish
and uncomly, Ephesians. 5.

281. I see in some Wicked Swearers the Tyranny of Sin: I thank God for freeing
me not only from Hell, but also from the Cruelty and Dominion of Sin.

282 After I have Prayed, me thinks God says; According to thy Faith, be it
unto thee. I therefore labor to believe, that God will grant what I desire;
nay, more then I can ask or think upon.

283. Oh! That I could always have an humble Soul, Then God would dwell with
me (yea in me) and I should be capable of Grace, and content with any thing: I
should be Wise, Gracious, Peaceable, Gentle, Holy, Heavenly-Minded. LORD, give
me humility, and then I shall sincerely serve THEE.

284. The Charriots of Israel, and the Hors-men thereof, are the Faithful,
whose Prayers and Tears prevail more then Weapons of War. Therefore an Ancient
says; Better is one Saint Praying, then twenty Soldiers fighting. Job says
the innocent shall deliver the Island: How much then is every Nation beholding
to the godly, that live amongst them?

285. Some hear much, reform nothings: Profess Religion, but deny the Power
thereof. LORD, give me Soundness, that I may walk uprightly before thee, though
with much Hardness: I know I shall not want Opposition: the Devil, my
Corruption, and the Scoff of the Wicked. Yet I desire Courage and Resolution:
for thy Yoke is easy, and thy Burden Light unto him that has thine holy
Spirit. Mat. 11. last.

286. I have lost and forgot many sweet Meditations for want of Writing: I
therefore will henceforth Write them for fear of Forgetting: I will Write them
for the good of Others: But LORD write THOU them in my Heart, by the Blessed
Spirit, that I may have Good of them my self.

287. As I walked through the Corn-Field, I considered thy Bounty of God
toward Man; the great Increase God gives: and I was made mindful of the
Resurrection: Our Bodies must first Dye before they quicken.

288. Some thinking to come by Riches a more speedy way then God has
appointed, come to lose their Lives; and some thinking to come to Heaven a more
easy and broad way then God has appointed, lose their Souls.

289 Moses lift the Serpent in the Wilderness, that the Israelites being stung
might look up to it and be cured: Moses was therein (as in other things) an
Instrument of their temporal good as well as spiritual; so should the godly be
to each other, mutual Helps for this Life, as well as for a better.

290: There were Serpents in the Wilderness even amongst Gods Israel: Are there
Serpents, biting Serpents even in Gods Church? I will not look to live at case;
I will labor to be Watchful. He that flies from our Church to Amsterdam,
because we have Corruptions, is like one in Gravesend-Barge, who because there
is swearing, fil^hy talk, and idle Songs, he leapes into the Thames: Every
regenerate man has Remainders of Sin; so, no doubt, shall every Reformed
CHURCH; till that time come, that no unclean thing shall enter. Let me enjoy
the Means; be sorry for things amiss; and pray for what I cannot help.

291. Singing Psalms is a Duty of every Christian, because it stirs up zeal, is
a Part of Gods Worship: I will therefore make Conscience of this Duty, which
Christ himself practiced: If through Forgetfulness or Lumpishness I omit it,
yet I will not mock at Others that do it.

292. We must Sing with Grace, exercising the Graces of God wrought in our
heart; we must show the desires of our Hearts, and Remember Gods Benefits: Our
Songs must be Spiritual, such as are penned by the Holy Spirit, such as are for
our spiritual good, such as will make us more spiritual; we cannot but be more
spiritual, if we use to sing Psalms aright, we must sing to God with Reverence
of His Presence, which understanding, and aiming at Gods Glory.

293. I have run into an Error for want of taking heed; having been told of my
Error, I have been taught what to eschew another time: Quae nocent, docent:
Those things that hurt me shall instruct me; One fault shall prevent Another,
not fore-run Another; so I shall grow the better for my Failings.

294. When I come in the Country, and hear the Faults of Citizens spoken of,
or any where hear the Faults of professors mentioned, then I learn what to
eschew; I would gladly deal by Religion, as men by their Wares, Persuade men to
it.

295. I find when I err in Judgment, or am loose in Speech, or seem to
countenance profaneness in Company, the Bites of my Conscience drives me to
Humiliation, my Humiliation breeds Peace; I gain by my Sins; but shall I
therefore Sin? God forbid. I may not do evil, that good may come of it. I
desire to make a good use of my Sins past, that they may prevent Sins to come.

296. I have often discoursed with them that had good Knowledge in the works of
Nature, as also of Curious Arts: This I do not discommend, I would I could come
near them: But there is One thing Necessary, which I have a longing desire to
Know, which is JESUS CHRIST and Him Crucified.

297. Gods Gifts be without Repentance. Whom He loves he loves to the End. If
once I have Assurance He does favor me, I may be sure He will not utterly at
any time forsake me.

298. The coming of Christ, among the Secrets of God, more necessarily
Concealed, then Revealed: For the godly are the better prepared; but the wicked
will not take warning, though an Angel should warn them from Heaven.

299. I expect after my Health, Sickness; after Sickness, Death; after Death,
Judgment: My only Desire is, to give the LORD all my Heart in Health, that H^
may be my Comfort in Sickness, my Life in Death, and my Savior at the time of
my Account.

300. LORD, Teach me to number my Days.

LORD, Teach me to number my Sins.

LORD, Teach me to number thy Mercies.

LORD, Teach me to number thy Judgments.

LORD, Teach me to number thy Promises.

The First shall teach me Wisdom.

The Second shall teach me Humili^^.

The Third shall teach me Thank^^lness.

The Fourth shall teach me Fear.

The Fifth shall teach me Hope.

FINIS.

