ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQVIRY Concerning Matters ECCLESIASTICAL,
Exhibited to the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, Of the DIOCESE of
Bath and Wells, At the Triennial Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in
GOD, PETER, Lord Bishop of that Diocese, Anno Dom. 16

Printed in the Year 1679.

YOU shall swear, That you shall well and truly execute the Office of a
Churchwarden. And that upon due Consideration had of these Articles given you
in charge, you shall diligenty Enquire, and make true Presentment, so far as by
Law you ought, of every Person inhabiting or resident within your Parish, who
has committed any Offense, or omitted any Duty therein mentioned enquirable
into, or punishable by the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Kingdom: And this you
shall do as in the sight of God, uprightly and truly, without favor or malice,
hope of reward, or fear of displeasure. So help you God.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of BATH and WELLS.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and sufficient repair? Canon 85.
Are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile, or Slat; the Windows well
glazed, the Floors well paid, the Seats well fastened, and conveniently
placed, and all things so decently ordered as becomes the House of God? II.
Has the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chapel, or any part thereof, been
pulled down, or any of the Lead, or Bells, formerly belonging thereunto, been
imbezelled, sold, or made away? In whose hands or custody does the same, or
part thereof, remain? Declare what you know or have heard herein. III. Is there
a Font of Stone, Injunct. Eliz
with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a convenient place toward the lower
part of your Church, for the Administration of Baptism? And is there in your
Chancel a decent Communion Table for the Administration of the Lords Supper,
with a Carpet of Silk, Can. 81. Can. 82.
Stuff, or fine Woollen Cloth; and another covering of white and pure Linen to
spread thereupon? Rub. Com. Can. 20.
And have you a fair Communion Cup or Chalice, with a cover of Silver; and one
or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging? IV. Can. 82.
Have you in your Church or Chapel a convenient Seat or Pew for your Minister
to read Divine Service in, a Pulpit with a comely Cloth or Cussion for the
same, a Bible of the last Translation in a large Volume, Can. 83.
and two Books of Common Prayer established by Act of Parliament Anno 1662.
Can. 8^.
well and substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies set forth
by Authority, a Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and a printed
Table of such Degrees wherein Marriage is prohibited? V. Can. ^^.
Have you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his
public Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly washed at the
charge of the Parish? VI. Can. 72.
Have you a Register Book of Parchment, wherein to Register the Names, and
Sirnames of all such Persons as are Married, Christened or Buried within your
Parish; together with the Names and Sirnames of both the Parents of the
Children that are Christened, expressing the Day, Month, and Year of all such
Christnings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the Transcript thereof yearly
within one month next after the 23 of March brought into the Bishops Registry?
VII. Can. 52. Can. 85.
Have you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the Names and
Licenses of all such Strangers as are at any time admitted to Preach in your
Church or Chapel? As also a third Book, wherein to write down the
Churchwardens Accounts; together with a strong Chest with Locks and Keys, Can.
89.
wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned
Furniture in safe custody? And lastly, have you a Bier with a black Hearse cloth
for the Burial of the dead?
TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebe and Tithes belonging to
the Church.
I. Can. 83.
IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Rails, or Pales, and
decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattle, or any
other abuse whatsoever? Has any person encroached upon the same, or made any
door into it out of his own ground or habitation without allowance from the
Ordinary? Have any Trees there growing been cut down, how long since, by whom,
to whose use and benefit? II. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate,
with all the Outhouses thereunto belonging, kept in good and sufficient
repair, or have any of the said Houses or Outhouses been defaced or pulled
down without License from the Ordinary, and by whom? Has any Person incroached
upon any Garden, Yard or Close, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage-house,
or cut up any Trees growing thereon, or changed or removed the ancient Marks
and Bounds of the same? Declare what you know, or have credibly heard thereof.
III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebelands, Gardens,
Orchards, Can. 87.
Tenements or Cottages belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage; as also a note
of such Pensions, Rate-tithes, or portions of tithes, or other yearly profits
either within or without your Parishes, as belong thereunto? Has any of the
same been withheld from your Minister, and by whom, as you know, or have
heard? IV. Have any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage been taken away, or exchanged for other, without the free consent of
the Incumbent, and Patron, and License from the Ordinary?
TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister a Priest, Act Unifor. Injunct.
Episcopally ordained according to the Laws of England? II. Is he defamed or
suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders by any Simoniacal
compact? Eliz. 26.
III. Has he been legally Instituted and Inducted into his Benefice? 13 Eliz.
cap. 12.
and did he within two Months after his Induction publicly in the Church, upon
some Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39 Articles of
the Church of England, established by Authority, Act Unifor.
and there publicly declare his assent thereunto? And has he likewise read
the Declaration enjoined by the Act of Uniformity? IV. Has he any other
Ecclesiastical Benefice, 14 Caroli 2.
Prebend or Dignity? Is he constantly resident upon his Benefice amongst you?
How many weeks in one year has he been absent from you without urgent
necessity? V. Has your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate in
Holy Orders, an able and discreet Person, and conformable to the Laws and
Orders of the Church of England? Is he allowed by the Bishop to serve in your
Church or Chapel? and does he serve in any other Church besides? And what
yearly Stipend does your Minister allow him? VI. Can. 14.21.68. Rub. Matr.
Visitat. Burial. Comminat.
Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the Morning and Evening
Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, Celebration of Marriage,
Churching of Women after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick, Barial of the
Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against Impenitent Sinners, use the form
and words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any addition,
omission, or alteration of the same? And does he use all such Rites and
Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said Book,
so far as you have observed? VII. Can. 58. Rub.
Does your Minister at the reading or celebrating any Divine Office wear the
Surplice, together with such other Scholastical Habit as is suitable to his
Degree? VIII. Can. 64. Rub. Com. Pr. Injuct. Eliz. 19.
Does he observe the Holy Days, and Fasting-days, as also the Ember Weeks, and
the yearly Perambulation in Rogation Week, as in the Common Prayer Book, or by
the Ecclesiastical Canons is appointed, giving notice to the Parishioners of
every of the same, in the Church in the time of Divine Service, upon the Sunday
next before? IX. Can. 48, 49. Rub. Com. Can. 45, 46.
Has your Ministor been Licenced to Preach by the Bishop, or either of the two
Universities? If so, does he then constantly (unless in case of Sickness,
necessary absence, or other reasonable impediment) himself Preach in your
Church or Chapel one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a licenced Preacher,
or being so licenced, be hindered by Sickness, or otherwise as aforesaid, does
he procure a Sermon to be Preached by some other Minister, a licensed Preacher?
Or is one of the Homilies set forth by Authority, there read by a Priest on
Deacon lawfully ordained? X. Can, 59.61. Can. 66. Injuct. Eliz. 44.
Does your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church-Catechism, and does he prepare and present them being so instructed, to
be confirmed by the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish
Recusants, and Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the
true Religion established in the Church of England, and to their bounden Duty
in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof? XI. Does he
neglect to visit the Sick, Can. 67, 68, 69. Rub. Com. Pra. Can. 29.
or delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of death? Is there any
Child in your parish past Infancy, or other Person of more years through your
Ministers default yet remaining unbaptized? Does he baptize any without
Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or
Godmother to their own Children? XII. Does he in his Sermons at any time (as
you know or have heard) Preach any False, Heretical, 13. Eliz. 12. Injunct.
Eliz. 31.
Seditious or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the People into parties
and factions, to the disturbance of the public Peace, and Unity of the Church
or State? XIII. Has he presumed to Marry any Persons in Private Houses, or
such as being under age, Can. 16. Rub. Mat.
have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banes first published on
three Sundays or Holy Days in the Church, unless he had License or Dispensation
so to do, or at any other hours then between Eight and Twelve in the Morning,
who are the Persons so Married, and when were they so Married? XIV. Does any
person Preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Act. Uniform.
Has he allowance from the Bishop for so doing? Does he before his Lecture
read Divine Service, according to the Book of Common Prayer, and is he in all
respects conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? XV. Can.
72, 75
Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophecyings or Exercises, not appointed by Authority, or does he or any other,
either Minister or Lay person, hold any Conventicles or meetings in private
Houses within your Parish for people of several Families to resort unto, under
the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving or Humiliation, contrary to
the Laws and Canons in that case provided? XVI. Is your Parson Vicar, Can. 75.
Curate or Lecturer a man of sober, unblamable, and exemplary life? Does he
familiarly converse with ungodly, vicious, excommunicate persons, otherwise
then to instruct or reform them? Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses, a
common Gamester, a profane or obscene Jester, Swearer, a Railer, Scoffer, or
Quarreller? Does he set neighbors at variance one with another? or encourage
them to suits and contention? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker, or
vehemently suspected of Incontinence with any person, either within your Parish
or without? Is his Apparel grave and decent both for fashion and color, as the
Canons of the Church require? Or is his carriage and conversation in any kind
whatsoever disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus
Christ? XVII. Has any person presumed to execute the Office of a Priest or a
Deacon in your Parish Church, and to say, read or celebrate Divine Service
there, Act Unifor.
or to serve the Cure of your Parish, not being a Deacon, or to do any other
Ministerial Office in your Church belonging to a Priest or Deacon? If so, you
are to present what his name is, where he dwells, and how often he has
offended therein. XVIII. Does your Minister use before his Sermon to Pray for
the King's Majesty, King Charles, His Royal Consort Queen Catharine, Can. 55.
James Duke of York, and the Royal Progeny, giving unto His Majesty such Style
and Title of Supreme Governor in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, as are due unto His Majesty? Act. Uniform.
Has your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer a Certificate under the Hand and
Seal of the Archbishop, Bishop; or Ordinary, of his Subscription to the
Declaration appointed by the Act of Uniformity, and has he publicly and
openly read the same, together with the Declaration upon some Lords day within
three months after the date of the said Certificate, in your Parish Church, in
the presence of the Congregation in time of Divine Service?
TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. Can. 110.
IS there in your Parish any person, reputed Heretic or Schismatic, any
Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary, that refuse to come
into the public Assemblies, Prayers, Services of the Church, or that make
profession of any other Religion than that is established in the Church of
England: And if there be any such what are their Names? II. Is there any person
in your Parish, on whom there is a common Fame, or vehement suspicion of
Adultery, Can. 109.
Fornication or Incest committed by him or her? Are there any common Drunkards
within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods name, or any
that are noted to be unclean, lewd or obscene Talkers, or such who are sowers
of Sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their neighbors? III. Injunct. Eliz.
34.
Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holy days follow their bodily and
ordinary labor, or permit their Servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or
Wares sold? Or do any Vintners, Inn, keepers, or other Victuallers and sellers
of Beer, Ale, or Sider, suffer any person to tipple or game in their houses on
those days? IV. Injunct. Eliz. 33. 1 Eliz. 12. Injunct. Eliz. 46. Injunct.
Eliz, 52.
Does every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish, duly resort
unto your Church or Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holiday to Divine Service?
Do they then and there abide quietly, with reverence, order, and decency,
during all the whole time of Common Prayer or Preaching? And are there any
among you that come only to the Sermon, and not to the Common Prayers of the
Church? V. Rub. Ba.
Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-Children to be
baptized publicly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger, in which
case the Child may be baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the form and
rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them to be baptized in any
other Parishes, or after other form than is appointed? Or do they keep them
unbaptized any longer time than the Church allows? And are there any Infants,
or more aged persons in your Parish, yet unbaptized, or any that have been
privately baptized, that are not afterward brought to the Church as is
appointed? VI. Do all Householders in your Parish, Can. 50.
cause their children and servants to learn their Catechism, and to give an
account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in
Church upon Sundays and Holidays, as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed,
that when they are well instructed in the same, they may be confirmed by the
Bishop? VII. Is there any person in your Parish who being sixteen years of age,
Can. 1.21. Rub. Can. Rub. Fra.
and well instructed in Religion, does not receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper at least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one?
Does any in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling, or from the hands
of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad?
Or are there any strangers not of your parish, that forsake their own Churches,
and usually repair to yours for it? VIII. Have you any among you that be
denounced and declared excommunicated for any crime committed? Can. 65.
How long have they been so excommunicated? And do any of your parish keep
society with them before they be reconciled to the Church and absolved? IX. Are
there any living in your parish as Man and Wife, Can. 99.
who are within the degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced
have married again? Or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or
divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together. X. Are there any married
Women in your Parish, Rub.
who after their Delivery from the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their
public Thanksgiving to God in the Church, in such manner, as by the Law and
Book of Common Prayer is required? XI. Are there any belonging to your Parish,
Rub. Com. Act Unifor.
who refuse to pay their Duty for Easter Offerings to your Minister, or any
that refuse to pay the Rate Assessed upon them for the repair of your Church or
Chapel, and for the providing of Bread and Wine for the Communion, and such
Books, Furniture and Ornaments as be requisite for the performance of all
Divine Offices there? Can. 81.82.
And what is each persons particular Rate who refuses so to pay? XII. Do any
refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of England? Rub.
Com.
And are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons dead in your Parish that yet
be unproved; or any Goods Administered without a due Grant from the Ordinary?
Can. 92.
Did any dying in your parish, or elsewhere, leave any legacy to your Church
or Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other Pious and Charitable
purposes; what were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? XIII. Is
there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or
Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in the
Body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary? XIV. Is the
Fifth Day of November observed and kept in your Parish? and also the Thirtieth
of January, and the Nine and Twentieth day of May, every of them yearly
according to the several Acts of Parliament, and in such form, as by public
Authority is appointed for the same? XV. Are there any in your Parish who have
depraved, Can. 4.6.
vilisied, or spoken against the Book of Common Prayer now established in the
Church of England, or any part thereof, or against the Government of the Church
under His Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Officers,
or have spoken disgracefully of the Courts Ecclesiastical? XVI. Do you know of
any that have abused the Churchwardens of your Parish, or given them evil
words for executing their Office, or to dishearten and deterr them from
executing it as by Oath and Duty they are bound?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clarks and Sextons.
I. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish Clark, Can. 91.
aged one and twenty years at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation,
and sufficient and able to perform his duty in Reading, Writing, and Singing?
Is he chosen by your Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine
Offices? Are his due Wages justly paid unto him? Or who withholdeth the same
from him? II. Does he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your
Parish) diligently look to the Doors of your Church that they be locked and
opened at due time? Can. 97.
And does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from Dust, Cobwebs, and other
annoyance? Does he Toll or Ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours before
the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the People may be
warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of this
life, does he (upon notice given him thereof) Toll a Bell as has been
accustomed, that the Neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the dying
person to the grace and favor of Almighty God?
TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Chyrurgions and Midwifes.
I. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School, not of
the Kings Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron
thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the Governors
or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as it
ought to be? And are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the
intention of the Founder, and of such Grants and Ordinances as have been made
concerning the same? II. Does any man keep a public or private School in your
Parish, or is there any Tutor or Schoolmaster in any private Family, who is
not allowed thereunto by the Ordinary? Does he teach his Scholars the Catechism
of Religion, set forth by Authority? Does he himself repair, and also cause his
Scholars upon Sundays and Holy Days orderly to repair to your Church or
Chapel, and see that they behave themselves quietly and reverently during the
time of Divine Service and Sermon? III. Does any in your Parish practice
Physic or Chyrurgery? or any Woman take upon her the Office of a Midwife,
without License from the Ordinary?
Queries to be put to the Ministers.
TIT. VII. Concerning the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen? Can. 69.
II. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, Can. 89.
and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining in
their hand, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chapel?
III. Does the Churchwardens and Sidemen take diligent care, 1 Eliz. 2.
and see who of your Parishioners are absent from the Divine Service and Sermon
in your Church or Chapel, upon Sundays and Holy Days? And if they find any to
have absented themselves without a sufficient cause, do they, by Warrant from
some of the Justices of the Peace, Levy of them by way of Distress upon their
Goods the Sum of Twelve Pence for every such day of their absence, according to
the Act of Parliament in that case provided? And do they distribute the several
Sums so levied among the Poor of your Parish according to the Law? IV. Do they
note them that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun, Can. 90.19^.
or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer none to stand idle, or talk
together in the Churchporch, or to walk in the Church or Churchyard, during
the time of Prayers, Preaching, and Sacred Offices? V. Do they suffer any
misbehaviour, Can. 18.
or disorder to be done by Men, Women, or Children, in your Church or Chapel?
Are they careful that none of them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the
Communion Table? Do they permit any Dogs, or Hawks, to be brought or come into
your Church to the disturbance of the Congregation? VI. Do they against every
Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel, Rub. Can. 20.
provide a sufficient quantity of sine White Bread, and good Wine, according to
the Number of Communicants? VII. Do they cause all Strangers that Preach in
your Church, Can. 5^.
or Chapel, to subscribe their Names the same day in a Book provided for that
purpose, together with the Name of the Bishop that Licenced them to Preach in
this Diocese? And do they permit no other to Preach? VIII. Have they (the
Churchwardens and Sidemen) now Sworn to give in a true answer unto all these
Articles of Inquiry in all their several Titles, Can. 219.
taken sufficient time to draw up their Presentiments, and therein consulted
with you their Minister for your faithful assistance?
You the Churchwardens are duly to consider these Articles, and well and
faithfully to perform your duty in all the Premises, and to consult with your
Minister (as the case requires) for his assistance to you in making your
Presentiments thereupon. For know you assuredly, that as the true discharging of
your Office, is the chief means whereby public Disorders, Sins and Offenses in
your Parish may be reformed and punished: so if you wilful refuse to present
such crimes and faults, as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise
have heard of by public fame; that in such cases, the Ordinary and his
Officers are to proceed against you in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in case
of wilful omission and perjury.

The Ministers of every parish are desired to give in the Names of such of
their younger sort in their several Parishes, as they judge fit to receive
Confirmation from the Bishop, and to present them to be Confirmed; especially
such as, having competently learned their Catechism, have not yet received the
Holy Communion.

FINIS.

