ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry, Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical:
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within
the DIOCESE of EXETER.

In the PRIMARY VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God THOMAS By Divine
Permission Lord Bishop of EXETER.

London, Printed for James Collins, in the Temple-Passage without Temple Bar,
1677.

The Form of a Churchwardens Oath.
YOU shall swear, truly and faithfully to execute the Office of a Churchwarden
within your Parish: And according to the best of your skill and knowledge,
present such Things and Persons, as to your knowledge are presentable by the
Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm.

So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry, Within the DIOCESE of EXETER.
TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments, and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and sufficient repair? Are
the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile, or Slate; the Windows well
glazed, the Floors well paved, the Seats well-fastned, and conveniently placed;
and all things so decently ordered, as becomes the house of God?

II. Has the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chapel, or any part thereof
been pulled down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto been
imbezelled, sold or made away? In whose hands or custody does the same, or any
part thereof remain? Declare what you know, or have heard therein.

III. Is there a Font of Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a
convenient place toward the lower part of your Church, for the Administration
of Baptism? Does your Minister Baptize publicly only in the Font? And is there
in your Chancel a decent Communion Table, for the Administration of the Lords
Supper; with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff or fine Woollen Cloth, and another
Covering of white and pure Linen to spread thereupon? And have you a fair
Communion Cup or Chalice, with a Cover of Silver and one or more Flagons of
Silver or Pewter thereunto belonging? Are they profaned by common uses?

IV. Have you in your said Church, or Chapel, a convenient Seat, or Pew, for
your Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or
Cushion for the same? A Bible of the last Translation, in a large Volume, and
the Book of Common Prayer, lately published, Anno 1662. both well and
substantially bound? Have you likewise the Book of Homilies set forth by
Authority? A Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclessastical? and a printed
Table of the Degrees wherein Marriage is prohibited?

V. Have you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of
his public Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly washed at the
charge of your Parish?

VI. Have you a Register-Book of Parchment, wherein to Register the Names and
Surnames of all such persons as are Married, Christened, or Buried, within your
Parish, together with the Names and Surnames of both the Parents of the
Children so Christened, expressing the Day, Month, and Year of all such
Christenings, Marriages and Burials? and is the transcript thereof yearly,
within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishops Registry?

VII. Have you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the Names and
Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your
Church or Chapel? As also a third Book wherein to write down the Church
wardens Accounts: together with a strong Chest, with Locks and Keys, wherein to
keep the aforesaid Books, and all the aforementioned Furniture, in safe
Custody? and lastly, have you a Bier, with a black Hearse-cloth, for the Burial
of the ^ead?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Rails, or Pales, and
decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattle? Has any
person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it, out of his own
ground or habitation, without allowance from the Ordinary? have any Trees there
growing been cut down, how long since, by whom, and to whose use and benefit?

II. Is the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate (with all the Outhouses
thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient repair? Or have any of the
said Houses or Outhouses been defaced or pulled down without license from the
Ordinary? and by whom? Has any person encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or
Close, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage House? or cut up any Trees
growing thereon? or changed or removed the ancient Marks and Bounds of the same?

III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As
also a note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been with held from your Minister? and by whom, as you know; or
have heard?

IV. Have any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your. Parsonage or
Vicarage been taken away, or exchanged for other, without the free consent of
the Incumbent, and license from the Ordinary? by whom has the same been made,
and how many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnified
thereby in the yearly value thereof; as you know, believe, or have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister defamed, or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice
or Orders by any Simoniacal compact:

II. Has he been legally inducted into his Benefice?

III. Did he within two months after his Induction, publicly in the Church,
upon some Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39
Articles of the Church of England established by Authority, and there publicly
declare his assent thereunto?

IV. Has he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? Is he constantly resident upon
his Benefice among you? How many weeks in any one year has he been absent from
it?

V. Has your Minister a Curate to assist him? Who is that Curate? Is he
conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? and does he serve
in any other Church beside; and what yearly stipend does your Minister allow
him?

VI. Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and
Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, Celebration of
Marriage, Churching of Women after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial
of the Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use
the form and words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any
addition, omission, or alteration of the same; And does he use all such Rites
and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said
Book, to far as you have observed?

VII. Does your Minister at the Reading or Celebrating the Divine Offices in
your Church or Chapel, wear the Surplice?

VIII. Does he observe the Holy days, and Fasting-days, as also the
Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as in the
Common Prayer Book is appointed? giving notice to the Parishioners of every of
the same in the Church, in the time of Divine Service, upon the Sunday next
before?

IX. Has your Minister been licensed to preach by the Bishop? If so, does he
then constantly (unless in case of Sickness, necessary absence, or other
reasonable impediment) himself Preach in your Church or Chapel, one Sermon
every Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed Preacher, or being so Licensed, be
hindered by Sickness, or otherwise, as aforesaid; does he procure a Sermon to
be so preached by some other Minister, a Licensed Preacher? or one of the
Homilies set forth by Authority to be there read by a Priest or Deacon?

X. Does your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church-Catechism? and does he prepare and present them, being so instructed, to
be Confirmed by the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish
Recusants, and other Sectaries (if any such be inhaviting within your Parish)
to the true Religion established in the Church of England, and to their bounden
duty, in oveying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof?

XI. Does he neglect or refuse to visit the Sick or delay the Baptism of any
Infant that is in danger of death? Is there any Child past Infancy, or other
person of more years, through your Ministers default yet remaining unbaptized
in your Parish? Does he use to Baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers or
admit either of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children?

XII. Has be at any time (as you know or have heard) preached any False,
Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the people
into parties and factions, to the disturbance of the public peace and unity of
either Church or State?

XIII Has he presumed to Marry any persons in private houses? or such as,
being under age, have not the consent of their Parents? or without the Banes
first published on three Sundays or Holydays in the Church? or at any other
hours than between eight and twelve in the morning, unless he had a License or
Dispensation so to do?

XIV. Does any person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Has he allowance
from the Bishop for so doing? Does he before his Lecture, read Divine Service,
according to the Book of Common Prayer? and is he in all respects conformable
to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England?

XV. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophecyings, or Exercises, not appointed by Authority? or does he, or any
other, either Minister or Lay person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in
private houses within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort
unto, under the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving, or Humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

XVI. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man of a sober, unblameable,
and exemplary life? Does he familiarly converse with ungodly, vicious, and
excommunicate persons? Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses? a common
Gamester, a Swearer, Railer, or Quarreller? Does he set Neighbors at variance
one with another? or encourage them to Suits and Contention? Is he noted to be
an intemperate Drinker: or vehemently suspected of Incontinency with any
person, either within your Parish or without? Is his apparel grave and decent,
as the Canons of the Church require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation in any
kind whatsoever disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus
Christ?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. IS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretic or
Schismatic? any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist Quaker, or other Sectary, that
refuse to come unto the Public Assemblies, Prayers, or Services of the Church?
or that makes profession of any other Religion than what is established in the
Church of England, and if there be any such, what are their names?

II. Is there any person in your Parish that lies under a common same, or
vehement suspicion of Adultery. Fornication or Incest? Are there any common
Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers or Blasphemers of Gods Name,
or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean or filthy talkers, or sowers of
sedition, faction, and discord amongst their Neighbors.

III. Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holidays, follow their bodily or
ordinary labor, or permit their Servants so to do? Are any shops kept open, or
Wares sold? or do any Vintners, Innkeepers, or other Victuallers and Sellers of
Beer or Ale suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses upon those
days?

IV. Does every person inhabiting, and sojourning within your Parish, duly
resort unto your Church or Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holiday appointed for
Divine Service? Do they then and there abide quietly, with reverence, order,
and decency, during all the whole time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or other
Service of God there used? and are there any among you that come only to the
Preaching, and not to Common Prayers of the Church?

V. Does every person reverently uncover his head, and so continue all the time
of Divine Service in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel at the Prayers,
and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read making due Reverence when the
Name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned?

VI. Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to
be Baptized publicly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger; in which
case the Child may be Baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the Form and
Rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them from their own Minister to
be baptized in any other Parishes, or after other form than is appointed? Or do
they keep them unbaptized any longer time than the Church allows? And are
there any Infants, or more aged persons in your Parish, as yet unbaptized?

VII. Does every Householder in your Parish cause their children and servants to
come to Church to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto
your Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundays
and Holidays, as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed; that when they are
well instructed in the same they may be confirmed by the Bishop?

VIII. Is there any person in your Parish, who being sixteen years of age* does
not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times in the
year, of which Easter is always to be one? Does any in your Parish refuse to
receive the same, kneeling, or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing
for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there any strangers, not
of your Parish, that forsake their own Churches, and usually repair to yours
for it?

IX. Have you any among you that be denounced and declared excommunicate for
any crime committed? how long have they been so excommunicated? and do any of
your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and
absolved?

X. Are there any living in your Parish as Man and Wife who are within the
degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced have married again? Or
any that being lawfully married, and not separated, or divorced by course of
Law, do not cohabit together?

XI. Are there any married Women in your Parish, who, after their delivery from
the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their public thanksgiving to God in
the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and
make their offerings according to custom?

XII. Are there any belonging to your Parish who refuse to pay their duty for
Easter-Offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute and pay the
Rate assessed upon them for the repair of your Church or Chapel, and for the
providing of such Books, Furniture, and Ornaments, as be requisite for the
performance of all Divine Offices there? Have you a Rate confirmed by your
Ordinary?

XIII. Do any refuse to bury their Dead, according to the Rites of the Church
of England? and are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your
Parish that be yet unproved? Or any Goods administered, without a due grant from
the Ordinary? Did any, dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to
your Church or Chapel? what were those Legacies, and how have they been
bestowed?

XIV. Is there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their
Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel,
or in the Body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a Parish-Clerk, aged 21
years at the least? Is he of honest life and conversation? and sufficient or
able to perform his duty in reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are
his wages duly paid unto him? or who withholdeth the same from him?

II. Does he, or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to your doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at
due time? And does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from Dust, Cobwebs, and
other annoyance? Does he Toll or Ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours,
before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening that the people may
be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of this
life, does he, upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell, as has been
accustomed, that the Neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the dying
person to the Grace and Favor of God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Surgeons, and Midwives.
I. IS there in your Parish, any Hospital, Almshouse, or Free School, not of
the Kings Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron
thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue or Stipend belonging to the Governors
or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every respect as in
ought to be? And are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the
intention of the Founder, and of such grants and ordinances as have been made
concerning the same?

II. Does any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Ordinary? Does your Schoolmaster teach his Scholars
the Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Does he cause them upon
Sundays and Holydays orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel? and see that
they behave themselves there quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine
Service and Sermon?

III. Does any man in your Parish practice Physic, or Surgery, or any Woman
take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without approbation and
license from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Queries to be put to the Minister, concerning the Churchwardens and
Sidemen.
I. ARe the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of the Minister and Parishioners, or one of them by the Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

II. Have the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the moneys remaining
in their hands together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel.

III. Do the Churchwardens and Sidemen take diligent care, and see who of the
Parishioners be absent from the Divine Service and Sermon in your Church or
Chapel upon Sundays and Holidays? and if they find any of them to have
absented themselves without a sufficient cause, do they by warrant from some of
the Justices of Peace levy of them, by way of distress upon their goods, the
sum of 12 pence for every such day of their absence according to the Act of
Parliament in that case provided? And do they distribute the several sums so
levied among the Poor of your Parish, according to the Law?

IV. Do they present them that come late to Church after Divine Service is
begun, or depart before it be ended? Do they suffer none to stand idle, or talk
together in the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church or Churchyard, during
the time of Prayers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices?

V. Do they suffer no mis-behaviour or disorder to be done by men, women, or
servants, or children in your Church or Chapel? Are they careful that none of
them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do they permit no
Minstrels, no Morris-dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, to be brought or come
into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation.

VI. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel,
provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according
to the number of Communicants?

VII. Do they cause all Strangers that Preach in your Church or Chapel to
subscribe their Names the same day in a Book provided for that purpose,
together with the name of the Bishop that licensed them to Preach in this
Diocese? and do they permit no other to preach?

VIII. Have they (the Churchwardens and Sidemen) now sworn to give in a true
answer, unto all these Articles of Enquiry in all their several Titles, taken
sufficient time to draw up their Presentiments, and therein consulted with you
their Minister for your faithful assistance.

FOR know you assuredly, that as the true discharge of your Office is the chief
means whereby public Disorders, Sins and Offenses in your Parish may be
reformed and punished: So if you wilfully refuse to present such crimes and
faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of by
public fame; That, in such cases, the Ordinary and his Officers are to proceed
against you in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in cases of wilful Omission and
Perjury.

THOMAS EXON.


THE Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of the
younger sort in their several Parishes, as the judge fit to receive Confirmation
from the Bishop, and to present them to be Confirmed; especially such as having
competently learned their Catechism, have not yet received the Holy Communion;
and to present them to the Bishop to be Confirmed, as there shall be
opportunity.

FINIS.

