ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY TO BE Exhibited to, and Answered by the MINISTERS and
CHURCHWARDENS of every Parish within the JURISDICTION of the Right Reverend
Father in God WILLIAM by Divine Providence, Lord BISHOP of BRISTOL: in his
Second Episcopal Visitation, and the Fourth Year of his Consecration.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook. 168^

The Churchwardens Oath.
YOur Oath is, that you the Churchwardens for your parts, and you the
Sides-men for your parts shall well and faithfully execute your several Offices
for your Parish (as long as you shall continue in your Offices) according to
the Use and Custom there, and the Law in that behalf; and also duly and truly
present such Crimes and Offenses punishable by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this
Land, which shall come to your knowledge or notice; all Favor and Affection,
Hatred and Malice, or sinister Respect set apart; So help you God, in Jesus
Christ.

Articles TO BE Exhibited, Enquired of, and Answered IN THE Diocese of Bristoll:
TIT. I. Of the Church of England.
1. ARe there any in Your Parish, that affirm, that the King is not supreme
Governor over all Persons, and in all Causes both Ecclesiastical and Temporal
within his Majesty's Dominions? 2. Have you any that oppose or deny any part of
his Majesty's Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical? 2. Have you any that affirm,
that the Civil Magistrate ought not to prescribe any thing to Ecclesiastical
Persons, in or about the Public Worship of God: But that his Duty is only to
protect their persons? 4. Have you any that affirm, That the Church of England
is not a True Church and Apostolical? or that the Form of Gods Worship therein,
as now established by Law, contains any thing in it that is contrary to the
Word of God? Or that the Rites and Ceremonies thereof as now established by
Law, are wicked, or superstitious, or Antichristian: And therefore Godly People
ought not to approve of or subscribe, or use the same? 5. Have you any that
affirm that the Government of the Church of England under his Majesty, by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons; and the rest that bear Office, is
Antichristian or repugnant to Gods Word? 6. Have you any that affirm, that the
form or manner of making or consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
contains any thing contrary to Gods Word? or that they who are so made and
consecrated are not lawful Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, till they have some
other call to these Divine Offices? 7. Have you any that separate themselves
from the Church of England and the public Worship thereof, and combine
themselves in a new Brotherhood, making rules and orders amongst themselves,
to be ruled and governed by, in Church matters without the Kings authority? or
who hold private Conventicles with, or are present at them? 8. Are there any
that have, publish, sell, dispose, or convey to others, any seditious,
heretical or schismatical Books, Libels, or Writings?
TIT. II. Of Divine Service.
1. ARe the Lords Days, commonly called Sundays, and other Holydays, celebrated
and kept according to the orders of the Church of England and Gods Holy Will
and Pleasure? Are the Fifth of November, the Thirtieth of January, and the Nine
and Twentieth of May, observed by frequenting the public Worship, according to
Orders prescribed in that behalf? Does your Minister did all Holy Days, and
Fasting-Days, the Sunday before, as it is appointed in the Book of
Common Prayer? 2. Are Morning and Evening prayer, the Letany, and the rest of
the Prayers, the Administration of the Sacrament, and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, duly performed and observed, and in such
Time, Place and Manner, as is by Authority prescribed, without adding,
diminishing, or altering? Has any other Form been used in your Church or
Chapel? Has any one interrupted Your Minister in reading Divine Service,
administering the Sacraments, or Preaching? 3. Do all your Parishioners, having
no lawful impediment resort to ye Parish Church or Chapel upon Sundays, and
holy days, and then and there abide orderly and decently in the time of
Common Prayer, Preaching and other Service of God there used? Do any cover
their Heads in time of Divine Service, or not use such reverent gestures and
behavior, as become Christians in the House and Service of God, and as are by
the Laws and Canons required? 3. Did your former Churchwardens diligently
observe, what Irregular Persons and Non-Conformists absent themselves from
their own Parish Church? And did they repair to the Justices of Peace for their
warrants to levy twelve pence upon the goods of such Person according as by
law is required of them? 4. Are any Idle Persons suffered to loyter in the
Churchyard or Church Porch, in time of Divine Service or Sermon? Is there any
unlawful gaming, drinking, or other disorder practiced upon Sundays, Especially
in time of Divine service?
TIT. III. Of the Sacraments.
1. IS the Sacrament of Baptism duly administered in Your Church or Chapel,
according to the Form thereof prescribed by the Church of England? Are there
such Godfathers and Godmothers used therein as are of age? or have received the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper? 2. Have you any in your Parish that refuse to
bring their Children to be baptized by the Minister, according to the Book of
Common Prayer? who are they? how long have they done so? 3. Do any of your
Parishioners refuse to have their Children baptized by the Minister of your own
Parish, and either carry them out of the Parish or bring in a stranger to
Baptize them? 4. Are there any in your Parish yet unbaptized? and of what age
are they? Have any died unbaptized, And at what age? By whose default? Has
Your Minister refused to Baptize any Child brought to the Church? or in case of
necessity, Oath being made thereof, to Baptize any privately? 5. Is the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper duly Administered in your Church, at the least
thrice a year, Master being one? and does every parishioner being of the age of
sixteen years communicate accordingly, and receive it kneeling? 6. Is there
convenient warning of every Communion given in the Church, the Sunday before at
Morning Prayer? And did your former Churchwardens provide a sufficient quantity
of Bread and Wine for the Communicants? And is your Wine brought to the Table
in a clean and sweet Pot of Pewter, or some other purer Metal? 7. Is the Wine
and Bread (as well that which is first set on the Table, as that which is
brought afterward) duly consecrated according to the Book of Common Prayer
before it be used? 8. Does your Minister admit any to the Communion that are
excommunicate persons? or live in open contention with their neighbors? or are
known to live in any grievous sin? Or have any Churchwardens or Sidemen
heretofore neglected to present such public Offenses as they know to be
committed in their Parishes, and so incur ye borrible crime of Perjury? 9. Has
any of your Parish been debarred of the Holy Communion without just cause, or
without an account thereof given to the Ordinary within fourteen days after?
Are any Schismatics or depravers of the Religion or Government of this Realm
received to the Communion without unfeigned Repentance?
TIT. IV. Of Catechism, Marriage, Burial, with other Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church.
1. Does your Minister upon Sundays and Holydays after the second Lesson in
Evening prayer, openly in the Church examine the Youth and other ignorant
Persons in your Parish in the Catechism set forth in the Book of Common Prayer?
And do all Fathers and Mothers, Masters and Mistresses cause their Children,
Servants and Apprentices, which have not learned the said Catechisms, to come
to the Church at the time appointed, obediently to hear, and to be ordered by
the Minister, until they have learned the same? 2. Does your Minister against
such times as are assigned for a Confirmation by the Bishop, do his best
endeavor to prepare, and procure all such to be brought to the Bishop to be
confirmed? And does he admit any to the Communion who refuse or neglect to be
confirmed? 3. Is the Form of the Solemnization of Matrimony duly observed as is
prescribed in the Common Prayer, and with the Ceremony of the Ring? Or have any
in your Parish been married after any other Form, or without the Ring? 4. Have
any been married without the Banes of Matrimony three times published in the
Parish Church, where the Parties dwell, or without License granted by Lawful
Authority, for dispensing with the same? Or within the times prohibited for
Marriage, without such License? Or have any been married in any other place
than in the Parish Church or Chapel where one of them dwells, without Banes
or License? 5. Is there any in your Parish that have married two Sisters one
after another? Or is there any that have been married within the Degrees
prohibited by the Law of God, expressed in a Table set forth by Authority, Anno
1563? And is that Table set up in your Church? 6. Has your Minister married
any in your Parish Church under the Age of 21 years, without the consent of
their Parents? Or has he married any in private Houses? 7. Do any cohabit
together as Man and Wife, being not lawfully married, or it being not known, by
whom, where, or when they were married? Or do any persons, lawfully married,
live asunder, and in whom is the fault? 8. Does your Minister resort to any
Parishioner, dangerouly sick, having knowledge thereof (the Disease not being
suspected to be infectious) to comfort them and exhort them to Repentance? To
make special Confession of their Sins, if their Consciences be troubled, that
they may receive Absolution, and the Holy Sacrament, if they desire it? 9. Have
you any buried in your Church or Churchyard, that have been known Recusants,
or excommunicated persons, or Felones de se? And does your Minister Bury ye
Dead according to the Book of Common prayer? and the form therein contained?
10. Does your Minisier refuse to bury any Corpse brought to the Church, or
Churchyard at convenient times, convenient Warning being given him thereof,
and there being no lawful cause to the contrary? Does he bury any that die
unchristened? 11. Does every Woman at the usual time after Childbirth, come
decently apparrelled to the Church and kneel down in the accustomed place, or
as the Ordinary does direct, to give thanks to God for her safe deliverance?
and does the Minister perform his office therein? 12. Is the Commination,
Exhortation, and prayers annexed in the Common Prayer, used on the first day of
Lent, and at other times as the Ordinary shall appoint?
TIT. V. Of Ministers.
1. Does your Minister when he reads public prayers, or administers the
Sacrament wear a comely Surplice with Sleeves? and if he be a Graduate, such
Hood as by the Orders of the University is agreeable to his degree? 2. Is
nothing proclaimed or published in the Church during divine Service, but by the
Minister only? Nor by him any thing but what is prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer, or enjoined by the Ring or by the Ordinary of the place? 3. Does
any one who is not a Priest (Episcopally ordained) presume to consecrate or
administer the Holy Sacrament either publicly or privately? or preach in
private Houses, where there are no Chapels consecrated and allowed by the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm? Or does any that is not a Deacon at least
Episcopally ordained presume to read the Common Prayer in your Church or
Chapel, or baptize publicly or privately, or assist in administering the Holy
Communion? 4. Is your Church a Parsonage, Vicarage, or a Stipendiary Cure? If a
Parsonage or Vicarage, is it full or vacant? if vacant how long has it been
so? Who serves the Cure? Who receives the Profits? And by what Authority? If
full, who is the Incumbent? By whom presented, nominated, admitted, instituted
and inducted, and how long has he been so? 5. Is your Minister a Priest
Episcopally ordained? Has he publicly read the thirty nine Articles in the
Church in time of Common Prayer, and has he declared his unfeigned assent
thereunto! Has he since the last Act of Uniformity of public Prayers, openly
and solemnly (according to the Book by the said Act established) read the
Morning and Evening Prayer in your Church, and after such reading publicly
before the Congregation there assembled, declared his unfeigned Assent and
Consent to the Use of all things in that Book contained? And has he subscribed
the Declaration in the said Act, and read the Ordinaries Certificate of his
said Subscription, together with the Declaration, upon some Lord's Day in the
presence of the Congregation? 6. Has he any other Parsonage, Vicarage or Cure
besides yours, or any Chapels of Ease belonging to his Church? What Curate or
Curates assist him? Are they Licensed Preachers? What Stipend or Stipends have
they? And by whom paid? 7. Is he Resident upon yours, or any other of his
Cures? Does he (where he is Resident) at least in every Month in the Church or
Chapel himself in person, read the Common Prayers, and if occasion be,
administer each of the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, in such
manner and form as in the Book of Common Prayer prescribed? 8. Is be a Licensed
Preacher? If so, does he preach once every Sunday in the Year, or procure
Sermons to be preached once every Month at least, if he be unable himself? And
upon every Sunday, when there is no Sermon, does he or his Curate read one of
the Homilies set forth by Authority? 9. Does be labor to reclaim all Popish
Recusants, or other Sectaries, if any be within his Parish? 10. If your Church
be a Stipendiary Cure, have you a settled and constant Curate? By whom
nominated? By whom Licensed? How long has be been so? Is he a Priest
Episcopally ordained? Has be subscribed the Declaration in the late Act for
Uniformity? Has he read the Ordinaries Certificate of his Subscription,
together with the said Declaration in time of Divine Service? does be perform
all the Offices of a Minister? what stipend has be? and by whom paid? 12. Have
you a Lecturer? is be in Episcopal Orders? by whom is be licensed? Has he
openly read the thirty nine Articles? Did he before his first Sermon read the
Common Prayer, openly declare his assent and consent to all and every thing
contained in that Book? does he do the same the first Sunday in every Month?
13. Does your Minister, Preach or expound the Scripture, without license in
your Church or Chapel? does any Preacher confute any Doctrine, delivered by
any other Preacher, in the Pulpit, without acquainting the Bishop of the
Diocese therewith, or his Order? Does he in the Rogation days, go in
Perambulation of the Parish? 14. Has your Parson, Vicar, Lecturer or Curate,
or other Minister living in your Parish, either directly or indirectly,
revealed any crime or offense, any man has privately confessed to him, to
unburthen his own Conscience, or to receive spiritual Comfort? 15. Does your
Minister frequent Taverns, Alehouses, or other suspected places? does he use
gaming at Dice or Cards, or Tables? Does he observe decency in his Apparel, as
is enjoined in the seventy fourth Canon? 16. Is your Minister of an Honest,
sober and holy Life or Conversation, such as becomes the Gospel of Christ? Does
any Priest or Deacon Voluntarily relinquish his profession and live in your
Parish as a Layman?
TIT. VI. Of the Church and Churchyard.
1. HAve you a Church or Chapel consecrated to the worship and Service of God?
is it separated from all profane uses, and kept for the former use only? Is it
sufficiently repaired, Windows glazed, and all things therein such as becomes
the house of God? 2. Have you in your Church or Chapel a Bible of the largest
Volum, and of the late Translation? The book of Homelies, set forth by
Authority? A Common Prayer book approved and commanded by the late Act of
Parliament? 3. Is there in your Church or Chapel a convenient Seat or Desk for
your Minister to read divine Service in? And a comely and decent Pulpit, with a
Cloth or Cushion, for the Preaching of Gods word? 4. Is your Churchyard well
and sufficiently senced by those who by Law ought to fence the same? 5. Have
you in your Church or Chapel a Chest for Alms with a hole in the upper part,
with three Reps, one for the Minister, one for the senior Churchwarden, and
one for the Overseer of the Poor? 6. Are the Seats in your Church kept in good
repair? Are the ten Commandments set up in some convenient place in your
Church, with the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and some choice Sentences of
Scripture? 7. Have you a Font of stone set in the Ancient and usual place of
the Church or Chapel, for the Administration of public Baptism? Is your
Communion Table railed in, covered with a Carpet in time of Divine Service, and
with a fair linen Cloth at the time of Administration of the Sacrament? is it
secured from Profanation? 8. Have you a fair Surplice? The two Books of
Homelies fairly bound? The Book of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical? A
decent Basin to receive the Alms of well disposed People in? Have you a
Register-Book of Parchment for Christenings, Weddings and Butials? And a Coffer
to keep these things in?
TIT. VII. Of Glebes, Tithes, Houses, and other Possessions and Revenues of the
Church.
1. HAve you a Parsonage or Vicarage-House? Is it kept in good Repair, with all
the Edifices and Appurtenances thereto belonging? 2. Have you a perfect Terrier
of all the Glebe-lands, Houses, ^^thes, Rents, Pensions, and other Possessions
belonging to your Church? In whose hands is it? Is there a true Copy of it
transmitted to be kept in the Bishop's Registry? 3. Are any of the Glebe-lands,
Tithes, or other Possessions of your Church enjoyed or occupied by the Patron
or his Assigner or Assignees, either with or without the consent of the Parson
or Vicar? What is the yearly Value or Rent? Upon what Covenants are they held?
How long have they been so? 4. Have you any Church-house, Almshouse,
School-house, or other House for pious Uses? Are they applied to those Uses
only? Are they kept in good Repair? If not, in whom is the fault? 5. Have you
any Church Stock? In whose hands is it? To what Uses was it given? Is it
employed to the same Uses, if not, in whom is the fault? 6. Have any of the
Lands, Tenements, Tithes or other Possessions of the Church, movable, or
immovable, been known, reported or suspected to have been alienated from the
Church? By whom, and when? 7. Are any Prescriptions or Compositions for Tithes
pretended or claimed by any of the Parishioners, which are not truly and really
such, nor warrantable by Law? 8. Are there any Gift-Sermons belonging to your
Church? How many? Who are the Donors thereof? Are there any other customary
Emoluments or Profits detained, concealed and embezelled by any person or
persons whatsoever? Of what value are they? And who is in sault?
TIT. VIII. Of Churchwardens.
ARe your Churchwardens and Sidemen chosen according to the Canons 89, and
90? Do they make due Jews for necessary Uses of the Church? Do they give up a
just account of all Moneys received and disbursed at the years end? Do they
together with the Sidemen resort to their Parish Church, and receive the
Sacrament, and see that other Parishioners do the like? Do they admonish
Offenders, and if they amend not, present them to the Ordinary? Do they make
full Presentiments without favor or partiality? According to the true intent and
meaning of the Oath of a Churchwarden?

TIT. IX. Of Schoolmasters.
1. HAve you a Free School, or other School in your Parish? Is the Schoolmaster
Licensed by the Ordinary under Hand and Seal? Is he meet for that Office, as
well for Learning as sober Conversation, and also for his soundness in
Religion? 2. Has he subscribed to the First and Third Articles (...), and to
the two first Clauses of the Second Article, according to the 36 and 37 Canons?
And also the Declaration specified in the late Act of Uniformity? 4. Does he
teach and instruct his Scholars in the Catechism set forth in the Book of
Common Prayer? Does he himself repair to the Church upon Sundays and Holydays,
and also see that his Scholars do the like, behaving themselves quietly and
soberly all the time of Divine Service and Sermon? 4. Does any Schoolmaster
instruct or teach Youth in any private House, being not Licensed, nor having
subscribed, or not repairing to the Church aforesaid?
TIT. X. Of Parish Clarks.
HAve you a Parish Clark chosen by the Minister sufficient for his Reading,
Writing, and competent Skill in Singing?

Does be receive his accustomed Wages? Are they duly paid without Fraud, Delay
or Diminution?

TIT. XI. Of Physicians, Chyrurgeons and Midwives.
Does any man in your Parish take upon him to practice Physic or Chyrurgery?
Or does any Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife without
Approbation and License from the Ordinary?

TIT. XII. Of the Parishioners.
1. HAve you any Popish Recusants, or Sectaries in your Parish? Are any persons
commonly known to be guilty of Adultery, Fornication, Incest, Drunkenness,
Profaneness, Blasphemy, Swearing, Cursing, Extortion, or any other Wickedness?
2. Are any Excommunicate in your Parish, and yet dare presume to come to the
Church? How long have they been so? and who resort to their Company? 3. Are any
deceased in your Parish whose last Wills and Testaments are not proved? Or if
they died intestate, who has administered, and by what Authority? 4. Is there
any person in your Parish above the age of sixteen years, yet does neglect, or
refuse to come to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper?
You are to present all such; knowing that the Discharge of your Duty according
to your Oaths, is a means to reform Parishes, and prevent God's Judgments: And
if you neglect your Duty, the Minister of every Parish may, and ought to
present, as well the Offenses committed, as the Churchwardens for not
presenting the same.

Your full Presentiments are to be given in at the present sitting of this
Court, and no further time to be expected, to prevent future Neglects and
Charges.

W. Bristoll.

FINIS.

