A PRAYER FOR THE KING.

monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
Whitehall July 11. 1690.
THe Queen does Approve of this Prayer, and Commands it to be Published.

Nottingham.

A PRAYER FOR THE KING, To be used instead of that appointed for His Majesty's
present Expedition.
ALmighty and most Gracious God, we bless and magnify thy holy Name for thy
sat Mercies to us of these Kingdoms, in raising up thy Servant King WILLIAM to
be a Deliverer to us in the day of our Distress, and to rescue us from Popish
Tyranny when we were so near sinking under it. We also acknowledge with all due
Praise and Thanksgiving, that thou have graciously heard the Prayers of thy
Church for him whom thou made the happy Instrument of our Preservation; in
preserving him in so wonderful a manner from those great and apparent Dangers
to which he exposed his Royal Person for our Safety, and for the Deliverance of
our suffering Brethren. Blessed be thy Name, that thou have given such visible
Tokens of thy gracious Presence with him in this Expedition: That thou have not
only covered his Head in the day of Battle, but encompast him with Salvation
round about; that the Messenger of Death which came so near, could not hurt
him; that his Enemies who rejoiced over him are clothed with Shame, and that
thou have crowned him with Victory and Success even above our Expectations. We
beseech thee to continue him under the Wings of thy gracious Providence; to
bless his Arms by Sea and Land against the Common Enemy; and in thy good time
to bring him back in Peace and Safety to our Comfort. And give us grace to live
worthy of these Mercies, in all thankful Obedience to thy Divine Majesty, in
dutiful Subjection to them whom thou have set over us, and in entire dependence
on thy Will, which we have found so gracious to us of this Church and Nation.
Grant this for thy Mercies sake, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1690.


