A FORM OF PRAYER AND Thanksgiving To Almighty GOD, To be Used throughout the
Cities of London and Westminster, and elsewhere within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, on Thursday the 27th day of this instant October; And in all other
Places throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, on Thursday the 10th day of November next ensuing. For the
Signal Victory vouchsafed to Their Majesty's Fleet: For the Preservation of His
Majesty's Sacred Person from all the Dangers of War, and from the Secret and
Malicious Designs and Practices of His Enemies: And for His Safe Return to His
People.

By her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. M DC XCII.

October the 22th 1692.
LEt this Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving be Printed and Published.

Jo. Cant.

A FORM of PRAYER and THANKSGIVING to Almighty God, to be Used throughout the
Cities of London and Westminster, and elsewhere within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, on Thursday the 27th day of this instant October; And in all other
Places throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, on Thursday the 10th day of November next ensuing.
The Service for that Day upon which the Thanksgiving shall be Observed, must
be used, except where it is here otherwise ordered.

The Prayers shall begin wilh these Sentences.

I Will bless the Lord at all times, Psalm. 34.1.
his praise shall be continually in my mouth.

O magnify the Lord with me, Verse 3.
and let us exalt his Name together.

Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed, Psalm. 107.2.
and delivered from the hand of the enemy.

I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, Psalm. 116.15.
and will call upon the Name of the Lord.

I will pay my vows unto the Lord in the sight of all his people, Verse 16.
in the courts of the Lords House, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise
the Lord.

Instead of the Venite, this Hymn shall be used.

THe Lord is my strength and my song, Exodus 15. 2.
and he is become my salvation.

Thy right hand, Verse 6.
O Lord, is become glorious in power, thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed in
pieces the enemy.

Now we know that the Lord is greater then all Gods; Ex. 18.11.
for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he is above them.

For thou shall save the people that are in adversity, Ps. 18.27.
and bring down the high looks of the proud.

Break their the arm of the evil and wicked man: judge the fatherless and the
oppressed, Ps. 10.15.18.
that the man of the earth may no more oppress.

For the oppression of the poor, Psalm. 12.5.
for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise faith the Lord, and set him in
safety from him that passes at him.

When the wicked even my enemies, Psalm. 27.2.
came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.

They are brought down and fallen, Verse 8.
but we are risen and stand upright.

We will rejoice in thy salvation, Psalm. 20.5.
and in the nan of the Lord will we set up our banners.

The Lord lives, Ps. ^2.45.
and blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my salvation be exalted.

Lord, Ps. 35.10.
who is like unto thee: who deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for
him; yea, the poor and him that is in misery from him that spoileth him.

All men that foe it shall say, Ps. 64.10.
This has God done, for they shall perceive that it is his work.

The Lord shall give strength unto his people, Ps. 29.10.
the Lord shall give his people the blessing of peace.

So we that are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture shall give thee thanks
for (...) and will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to
generation. Ps 79.14.


Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Proper Psalms. XXI. CXXIV. CXLIV. CXLV.

Proper Lessons. The first, Deuter. 32. V. 26. to V. 44. Te Deum.

Proper Lessons. The second, Luker 8. the 8 first verses. Jubilate Deo.

After the Apostles Creed, and the Lords Prayer, the suffrages shall be as
follows,

Priest. O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.

Answ. And grant us thy salvation.

Priest. O Lord, save the King and Queen.

Answ. Who put their trust in thee.

Priest. Send them help from thy holy place.

Answ. And evermore mightily defend them.

Priest. Let their enemies have no advantage against them.

Answ. Let not the wicked approach to hurt them.

Priest. Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.

Answ. And make thy chosen people joyful.

Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord.

Answ. Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.

Instead of the first Collect, the following Prayers shall be used.

ALmighty God, the Sovereign Commander of all the World, in whose hand is
power and might, which nothing is able to withstand; To thee alone we owe our
Deliverance from those many and great Dangers wherewith we were so Iately
Encompassed. It is thou alone that command the Winds and the Seas, and they
obey thee: Thou take the crafty in their own Counsels, and turnest the wisdom
of the wise into foolishness. And as if this were a small thing with thee, thou
did not only save us from our Enemies, but deliver them into our hands, and
give Their Majesty's Fleet a most Signal and Glorious Victory over them.
Blessed be God who has not turned away our Prayer, nor his Mercy from us,
notwithstanding our many and great Provocations: Therefore not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy Name be the Glory. And let this be the blessed fruit
of all thy wonderful Mercies, that we may turn every one from the evil of his
way, and may live as a People that have been, in so many remarkable Instances,
the peculiar and visible care of thy Providence: That thou may still delight
to do us good, and our Arms by Sea and Land may be successful to the
Establishing of Truth and Pence in these and the Neighboring Nations, to the
Glory of thy great Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

GReat and glorious Lord God, the just and wise Governor of the World, who
love righteousness and hate iniquity: We Adore that merciful and wonderful
Providence which has given so remarkable a Check to the Pride and Power of the
Enemy, by the great Success of Their Majesty's Fleet in this last Summers
Expedition. It is thou, O Lord, that have been our Defense and Refuge in the
Day of our Trouble. Thou have shown us wonderful things in thy righteousness, O
God of our salvation, thou that art the hope of all the ends of the Earth, and
of them that remain in the wide Sea. To thee alone we ascribe the Glory of all
our Deliverances: For it was not our own arm that saved us, but thy right Hand,
and thine Arm, and the light of thy Countenance, because thou had a favor
unto us: Unto thee therefore, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give
thanks, who have wrought this mighty salvation for us: Stablish, O God, that
which thou have wrought for us: And give us, we beseech thee, such a dutiful
and deep sense of thy goodness to us, that we may live as becomes a People
saved by the Lord. Banish, we pray thee, from among us all Infidelity and
Profaneness; purge us from all our abominations; take away all Hatred and
Dissentions: And endue us with a Spirit of true Piety and Holiness, of Love and
Goodness, of Unity and Concord: that the Blessings of Peace, together with the
Purity of Religion may he secured to us, and continued to our Posterity; for
the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Collect for Peace.

O God, who art the author of Peace, and lover of Concord, in knowledge of whom
stands our eternal life, whose Service is perfect freedom; Defend us thy
humble servants in all Assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Collect for Grace.

O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day; defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Here follows the Litany.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us, good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all blindness of heart; from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy; from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin; and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh, and the devil,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From lightning, and tempest; from plague, pestilence, and Famine; from battle,
and murder, and from sudden death,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all sedition, privy conspiracy and rebellion; from all false doctrine,
heresy, and schism; from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and
Commandment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation; by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision;
by thy Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

By thine Agony and bloody Sweat; by thy Cross and Passion; by thy precious
Death and Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the coming
of the holy Ghost,

Good Lord, deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our wealth; in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servants William and Mary, our
most gracious King and Queen;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule their hearts in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that they may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to be their defender and keeper, giving them the
victory over all their enemies;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve Catherine the Queen Dowager, her
Royal Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal Family;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with
true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their preaching
and living, they may set it forth, and show it accordingly;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom and understanding;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute Justice, and to maintain Truth;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations, Unity, Peace, and Concord;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy Commandments;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and are deceived;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger,
necessity, and tribulation;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences, and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.
Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.
O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;
Grant us thy peace.
O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;
Have mercy upon us.
O Christ, hear us.
O Christ, hear us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Our Father, which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.

Answ. Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful; mercifully assist our prayers that we make
before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress us;
and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the
devil or man works against us be brought to naught, and by the providence of
thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants, being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks, unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost; Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.
Graciously look upon our afflictions.
Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.
Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.
Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.
O Son of David, have mercy upon us.
Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.
Graciously hear us, O Christ; graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.
Priest. O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us,
Answ. As we do put our trust in thee.
Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities; and
for the glory of thy Name, turn from us all those evils that we most
righteously have deserved; and grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only Mediator and
Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the end of the Litany, after the Collect [ We humbly beseech thee, O
Father, etc] shall be said this which follows.

ALmighty and most gracious God, who have been our Deliverer in the Day of our
Distress, and have raised up thy Servant King WILLIAM to be the happy
Instrument of our Deliverance: We praise thy holy Name that have so
wonderfully preserved him from the great dangers to which he has been so often
exposed: More especially, we adore thy great goodness to him in the discovery
and disappointment of that bloody and barbarous Attempt designed upon his
Sacred Person by his cruel and implacable Enemies. We humbly beseech thee
still to continue him under the merciful care and protection of thy good
Providence, and to bless him with good Success: And likewise to give us grace,
in a thankful sense of thy great goodness, to live in obedience to thee, and in
subjection to their Majesty's, whom we beseech thee long to preserve and
continue to us, for thy mercies sake in Jesus Christ our blessed Lord and
Savior. Amen.

Immediately before the Prayer of St. Chrysostom, use the Collect of
Thanksgiving, [ for peace and deliverance from our Enemies.]

ALmighty God, who art a strong Tower of Defense unto thy Servants against the
face of their Enemies; We yield thee Praise and Thanksgiving for our
Deliverence from those great and apparent Dangers wherewith we were compassed,
We acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were not delivered over as a Prey unto
them; beseeching thee still to continue such thy Mercies toward us, that all
the World may know that thou art our Savior and mighty Deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer of S. Chrysostom.

ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three
are gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests; Fulfill now,
O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them; granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Cor. 13. 14.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

In the Communion-Service, between the Commandments and the Epistle, shall this
Collect be used, instead of the Collect for the King and Queen, and of the
Collect for the day.

O Most gracious God, who of thy infinite goodness have preserved our Sovereign
Lord King WILLIAM from the treacherous practices of wicked and blood thirsty
men, and from the manifold Dangers to which his Royal Person has been exposed
for the Public Good, during his late Expedition; and have brought him back to
us in safety: We beseech thee to fill our hearts with unfeigned thankfulness
to thee for so great Blessings; and still to continue their Majesty's under the
watchful care of thy Providence; to protect their Sacred Persons from all
secret Attempts and open Violence, that no VVeapon, no Design formed against
them may prosper: And to make them the happy Instruments of establishing that
great Deliverance which thy Providence by them has wrought for us in so
wonderful a manner, that all the world may see that it is thy hand, and that
thou, Lord, have done it: Which we humbly beg for thy mercies sake in Jesus
Christ our Blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Then shall follow the Eplstle. Heb. XI. verse 23. to ver. 34.

BY faith Moses when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because
they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the kings
commandment. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called
the son of Pharaohs daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt: for he had
respect unto the recompense of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not
fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured as seeing him who is invisible.
Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, left he that
destroyed the firstborn, should touch them. By faith they passed through the
Red sea, as by dry land: which the Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned. By
faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven
days. By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when
she had received the spies with peace. And what shall I more say: for the time
would fall me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Iephthae,
of David also and Samuel, and of the prophets: Who through faith subdued
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of
lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of
weakness were made strong, wared valiant in sight, turned to flight the armies
of the aliens.

The Gospel. St. Matthew. V. verse 43. to the end.

YE have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate
thine enemy: But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you,
and persecute you: That ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven, for he makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends
rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what
reward have ye: do not even the publicans the same: And if ye salute your
brethren only, what do you more then others? do not even the publicans so: he
ye therefore person, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

Then the Nicene Creen. After that the Sermon.

After the Prayer [ For the whole State of Christ's Church, etc.] this Collect
shall be used.

MOst Glorious Lord God, whose Throne is in the Heavens, and whose Kingdom
rules over all; Who do whatsoever pleases thee, in Heaven, and in Earth,
and in the Sea: Thou, Lord, have been our Refuge from one Generation to
another: Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them; they called
upon thee, and were not confounded: We bless thy Name that thou have also
heard the voice of our humble petitions, which we did put up to thee in the day
of our Distress; and have not only kept us in peace at home, and graciously
preserved us from the malicious Designs of our Enemies abroad, and from that
Destruction which they bad prepared for us; but have likewise been pleased to
bless their Majesty's Fleet with a most-wonderful Success, and have triumphed
gloriously over the powerful Enemy: What shall we render unto thee, O Lord,
for all these benefits: We will love the Lord who has inclined his ear unto
us, and call upon him as long as we live: Unto thee, O God, will we pay our
vows, unto thee will we give thanks. And grant, we beseech thee, that being
delivered from the hands of our Enemies, we may serve thee without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before thee all the days of our lives: That thou who
have hitherto been our Helper and Deliverer, may be pleased to establish
Truth and Peace in the midst of us; to the glory of thy great Name, the comfort
and support of the Reformed Churches abroad, the propagation of the Gospel, and
the enlargement of the Kingdom of thy dear Sou: Which we beseech thee to
hasten, that all Nations may fall down and worship before thee, saying,
Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Honor, and Power be unto our God for
ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer for all Mankind, especially for the Reformed Churches.

MOst gracious and merciful God, who art the Savior of all Men, especially of
those that believe; and have commanded us to make prayers and intercessions for
all men, desiring that all may be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
Truth; We humbly beseech thee to extend thy Mercy and Compassion to all
Mankind; more particularly to the Reformed Churches abroad; and especially to
those who are still under Persecution for Truth and Righteousness sake. Relieve
them according to their several necessities; be a shelter and defense to them
from the fury of the Oppressor: Let the sighing of the Prisoners come before
thee, and according to the greatness of thy Power preserve them that are
appointed to die: Let not the poor always be forgotten; let not the patient
abiding of the meek perish for ever. Visit in Mercy them that are vanished for
the Testimony of thy Truth: Gather thy dispersed together, and restore the
outcasts of thy People; and in thy good time bring them home to worship thee in
their own Land: And whatsoever they have lost for thy sake, return it to them,
according to thy gracious Promise, in the manifold Blessings of this and a
better Life: Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his Troubl;es. And we beseech
thee to enlighten all those who are in Darkness and Ertour, and to give them
Repentance to the acknowledgement of the Truth: That all the ends of the Earth
may remember themselves and be turned unto the Lord: And we may all become one
Flock under the great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, Jesus Christ, our
Blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.

