A Form of Thanksgiving, to be used the seventh of September thorowout the
Diocese of Lincoln, and in the Jurisdiction of Westminster.
Read after, O Lord open thou our lips, etc. these Psalms; Psalm. 95. Psalm. 96.
Psalm. 122. 126. 133. 136. Being all short Psalms.

Then 1. Lesson, Jerem. 31. 2. Lesson, Matthew. 24.


Add to the Collects this Prayer.

WE humbly acknowledge before thee, O most merciful father, that all the
punishments which are threatened in thy Law, might justly have fallen upon us,
by reason of our great transgressions, and hardness of heart. It was most
just, O Lord, that thou did lately threaten us with a pulling back and
withdrawing of all those Spiritual Graces and Temporal Blessings, wherewith
this Island did flow and abound above all the nations of the earth: It was most
just (and our sins did well deserve it) that thou, by withdrawing the
Cooperation of thy holy Spirit, should suffer our Faith to grow weak and
feeble, our Charity cold, our hope wavering and without foundation, our hearing
of thy holy word, our partaking of thy blessed Sacraments, our Praying and
Invocating of thy sacred Name, to become in both Priest and People, for want of
true Devotion and the inward guidance of thy Spirit, but as it were so many
outward Fashions, Forms, and Complements. And especially most agreeable it was
unto all the Rules of thy Divine Justice, that from those in whom these
Spiritual could not be found, thy Temporal blessings should be withdrawn:
That our Plenty should be turned into Want and Famine, our Health into
Sicknesses, Plagues, and Pestilences, and our long Peace (the Crown of all
these blessings, and the Envy of all the Nations round about us) into the
worst and most miserable of all Wars, a Civil War, a War of Christian against
Christian, Neighbors against Neighbors, Brethren against Brethren, a War of
Ephraim against Manasseh, of Manasseh against Ephraim, and of both these
against thy Judah.

But the more justly, O Lord, thou might have visited us in this thy fury
and anger, the more are we, dust and ashes, worms and no men, most wretched and
miserable sinners, bound to praise and bless thy holy Name for thy unspeakable
goodness and mercies showed unto us at this time: That it has pleased thee,
upon our weak and unworthy humiliation, to begin some small measure and degree
of Reformation in us, to plant in our hearts some more sense and feeling of thy
spiritual Graces, some more steadiness of Faith, fervencie of Love, assurance
of Hope, Zeal in Prayer, Devotion in the Hearing of thy holy Word, and in the
receiving and administering of those heavenly Seals and Pledges of the same. And
by and by after, as delighted with these green and raw fruits, which thine own
hand had planted, to reward and crown them, unripned as they be, with great
abundance of temporal blessings, with Corn, and Wine, and Oil, with good times
and seasons, with a show rather then any shower of Diseases, which serve only
to keep us awake, that we fall not into that former drowsinesse and
forgetfulness of our selves and thee.

But especially, as a strong fence and hedge to compass in and preserve all
these outward Blessings, thou have given us a speedy and a happy Union and
Peace with all our Neighbors and Brethren of this Island, making us a
multitude of one Heart and of one Soul, as thou had before made us a
multitude of one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism. The which thy great work of
Union thou have thus achieved and effected, not (as thou might have done)
by putting a sword into the hand of the stronger to devour the weaker, but by
sending down thy holy Spirit, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the
Spirit of Counsel and Providence, into the Hearts of our Gracious King, and
the Peers and Commons now assembled in Parliament, thus by a wise and timely
disposing of a few drops of our trash and worldly ^elf, to prevent the
unnatural spilling of whole Cha^els and Rivers of Christian blood, to the
great danger and hazard of so many bodies and souls.

For these thy great and unspeakable mercies, O Lord, we p^aise thee, ^e bless
thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks unto thee for thy great
glory, O Lord God heavenly King, God the Father Almighty, the only begotten
Son Jesus Christ; to whom with the Holy Ghost be all praise, honor and glory
this day particularly, and withal for evermore.

Lastly, that we may be the better disposed to take thy praises into our
mouths, plant in our hearts a true desire to be reformed. Convert us, O Lord,
that we may be converted. Perfect this work of sanctification which thou have
begun in us. Increase our Faith, inflame our Charity, strengthen our Hope,
kindle our Devotion in the hearing, and our rare in the practicing of thy holy
Word. Seal up all these graces in our Souls by the reverent and awful
receiving of thy holy Sacraments, make us to run the ways of thy Commandments,
now that thou have set our hearts at liberty. And let these spiritual, O
heavenly Father; be unto thee a further occasion to pour upon us more and more
of thy temporal Blessings; by preserving our King, Queen and the Royal Issue,
in all health and prosperity, by increasing more and more the Spirit of Wisdom
and Understanding upon the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, by a
stronger knitting and uniting of the Hearts of all these Nations one with
another, which thou have thus united under one Crown and Scepter, and by
increasing our thankfulness and acknowledgement unto thee, in some measure and
proportion of this increase of thy favors and mercies toward us: That so we
may (as much as flesh and blood is permitted to do) begin the Church Triumphant
in this Church Militant, and practice those Praises here on earth, which we
shall more perfectly sing out in the kingdom of Heaven, by the Grace and Merits
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, thee Persons, and one Eternal, Everliving God, be all honor, glory,
praise and dominion this day especially, and withal for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

