The Church of ENGLAND's Glory: OR THE Vindication of Episcopacy.
With Allowance,

July 3. 1688.
NOW call to mind, Edom, remember well
Your cursed Cries against God's Israel.
Now who is Disloyal, where is the obstinate
And busy Fops, that tall of Things of State?
A Plot, a Plot! Who is it that now looks blue?
Now where is Sedition? Where Is the Factious Crew?
Now mock no more, go consecrate the Room
Where Essex died, and think on Russel's Doom.
Now who are they that cried, Ram us and Dam us?
Who is it that now comes off with Ignoramus?
Now who is surmising Fears and Jealousies?
Now who is malicious, fomenting of Lies?
Now whose nice Conscience pleads Religion,
Nay, rather they that once swore they had none.
Now let us Huzza, Huzza, Huzza, examine
Now for the Loyalty expressed by Damming,
Roaring and Whoring, -- that -- Rotting and Sinking:
Hey-Boys! New Healths with Bumpers bravely Drinking.
But say these are the Worst, whose Words are Wind;
But mark our Doctrines, and the more refined.
Now where is the Doctrine made the Pulpits ring,
'Twas all Divine to Love and Laud the King?
Where Is Loyal Sermons now? Where are they gone?
Hark, hark a while, and you shall hear anon.
Where Is Non-resistance now? Now where is Compliance?
Why here, in this, to bid the King Defiance.
In what, an Edict? No, His Declaration.
For Conscience Liberty, to free the Nation
From those accursed Penal Laws and Test,
That Tender Conscience ever might have Rest.
But now it is Popery, Popery, that is the Song;
It Is coming like a Flood: But pray how long
Has Fear of Popery been this dreadful Tone?
Just since you let the Protestants alone.
It Is Fear of Papists, -- Good lack! -- Sad's the Case
Since they have excelled Episcopals in Grace.
No sooner Clemency does Peace propose,
But Envy cries, Take heed of Popish Foes.
Was It not for fear of Popery once ago,
You writ and printed, preached and raged so?
Down with Dissenters, thus with Storm and Thunder;
Magistrates, mind your Duty, seize and plunder.
Fine and imprison, ruin, follow't hot:
This was for fear of Popery, was it not?
Thus Persecution echoed from the Pulpit;
But now look simply, say you cannot help it.
Law was not then so much, as it is since,
But the King's Pleasure, as you made Pretense:
Yet though you have lost the Spur, you would hold the Bridle,
With a straight Rein too: O! but that is as idle
As those that blame this Liberty of Conscience,
And have the Impudence to say it is Nonsense.
Were they (which God forbid) but half so long
To feel the Right, that did Dissenters wrong,
They Would wiser be, kinder, and humbler too,
Who Are now so proud, they know not what they do.
Now who are they that cannot be content
With Regal Right, but Acts of Parliament
Of their own choosing? Yet this will not do;
But must have also Convocation too.
Now who like Toads spit Venom, swell, and pant?
Now who are they that have the way to Cant?
Now who is most busic to degrade the King?
And who knows what? With secret Whispering,
And holding Consults, who makes Parties now?
For to rebel the Malecontent knows how.
Fat Benefits, and Tithes, and Bishoprics
Do not content you; O, these little Tricks!
For Mordecai stoops not: Here Is the Dispute;
You want the Power still to Persecute.
Whence comes this Rule, to Lord it over the rest?
From Tory-Gospel, Penal-Laws, and Test:
Touch 'em in that, and they will begin to wince,
And galled Loyalty spurns at their Prince.
But poor Dissenters, now, as heretofore,
Thankful for Peace, rejoice, and seek no more.
But now, it is well, your cursed Power's subdued;
Here Is Peace, which others like: But let us conclude:
Here Is your own Language, and the Work of late
You gloried in, and still would vindicate.
Look in this Glass, and learn to blush for shame;
Be Christians once, and stain no more that Name.
LONDON, Printed for R. W. 1688.


