A FORM OF PRAYER To be Used Next after the Prayer in the time of War and
Tumults, in all Churches and Chapels of London and Westminster, at Morning and
Evening Prayer, as often as there is Divine Service, during the time of Their
Majesty's Fleets being at Sea.

By Her Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1691.

Whitehall, May 27. 1691.
IT is Her Majesty's Pleasure, That this Form of Prayer be forthwith Printed
and Published, and that it be Used next after the Prayer in the time of War and
Tumults, in all the Churches and Chapels of London and Westminster, at Morning
and Evening Prayer, as often as there is Divine Service, during the time of
Their Majesty's Fleets being at Sea.

Nottingham.

A FORM OF PRAYER To be Used Next after the Prayer in the time of War and
Tumults, in all Churches and Chapels of London and Westminster.
ALmighty and most glorious Lord God, the great Creator and Governor of all
things, who, when thou did divide the Nations, and determine the Bounds of
their Habitation, wast pleased of thy especial Goodness to the Inhabitants of
this Land, to encompass it with the Sea, as a Wall of Defense to us on every
side; so that we are not, like the Nations about us, exposed to continual
Invasion, and especially at this time, to the Ravage and Fury of the common
Enemy and Oppressor: We bless thy Name for this happy Advantage which thy
Providence has given us for the Security of these Islands, and likewise for
the timely Preparations which thou have enabled us to make for the Guard of our
Seas. We do not trust in our Naval Force, neither will our Ships save us: Vain
are all these helps without thee, O God our Defense, and the Rock of our
Salvation. Thou therefore who command the Winds and the Seas, and they obey
thee, show thy Power, we beseech thee, in rendering them favorable to us in
this Expedition. Be thou a present help to them that fight for us in all their
Necessities. Gird them with strength unto Battle, subdue those that rise up
against them. Bring them back with Victory and good Success; that we being
delivered from the hand of our Enemies, may serve thee without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before thee all the days of our lives, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

