A FORM OF COMMON PRAYER, To be used on Wednesday the 4th of February, 1673/4,
Within the Cities of London and Westminister, Borough of Southwark, and other
places within Ten miles distance.

And on Wednesday the 11th of Febr. next through the rest of the whole Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed;

Being the days of the GENERAL FAST Appointed by His Majesty's Proclamation,
for Imploring Gods blessing on His Majesty, And the present PARLIAMENT.

Set forth by His Majesty's Authority.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christ-pher Parker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,

The Order for Morning PRAYER.
Let him that ministers read with a loud voice, one or more of these sentences
of Scripture, and then say the Exhortation that follows.
REnt your heart, and not your Joel 2. 13.
garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and merciful,
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

To the Lord our God Dan. 9. 9, 10.
belong mercies, and forgiveness, though we have rebelled against him: neither
have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws, which he set
before us.

O Lord correct me, but with judgment; not Jer. 10. 24.
in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moves us in sundry places, to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should
not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly
Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart,
to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite goodness
and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins
before God, ye^ ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet
together, to render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his
bands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy-word, and to
ask those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the
soul; Wherefore I pray and beseech you as many as are here present, to
accom^any me with a pure heart and humble voice, into the throne of the
heavenly grace, saying after me.

The Confession to be said of the whole Congregation after the Minister, all
kneeling.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, We have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep, We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts, We have offended against thy holy laws, We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done, And we have done those things which we
ought not to have done, And there is no health in us: But thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us miserable offenders; Spare thou them, O God, which confess their
faults; Restore thou them that are penitent, according to thy pr^mises declared
unto mankind in Christ Jesus out Lord; and grant, O most merciful Father, for
his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the
glory ^f thy-holy Name. Amen.

The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone standing; the people still
kneeling.
ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and has
given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his
people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: he
pardons and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his
holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repentance and his
holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and
that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last
we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ out Lord.

The people shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen.
Then shall the Minister kneel, and begin the Lords Prayer; the people also
repeating it with him.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil: For thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Then likewise he shall say,
O Lord open thou our lips.

Answ. And our mouth shall show l'orth thy praise.

Priest. O God make speed to save us.

Answ. O Lord make haste to help us.

Here all standing up, the Priest shall say,
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without
end. Amen.

Priest. Praise ye the Lord.

Answ. The Lords name be praised.

In stead of Venite exultemus, shall be sung or said this Hymn following; one
Verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and People.
O Come let us humble our selves before the Psalm 65. 6.
Lord: and fall down before him with reverence and fear.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people 7.
of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands.

Let us repent and turn from our wickedness: Act. 3. 19.
and our sins shall be forgiven us.

For this shall every one that is godly, make his Psalm 32. 7.
prayer unto thee, O Lord: in a time when thou may be found.

In my trouble I will call upon the Lord, and Psalm. 18. 2.
complain unto my God: so shall I be sale from mine enemies.

So shall he hear my voice out of his holy temple: 6.
and my complaint shall come before him, it shall enter even into his ears.

Hear my prayer, O God: and let my crying Ps. 10^. 1.
come unto thee.

Thou art my King, O God: send help unto Jacob. Psalm. 44. 5,


Through thee will we overthrow our enemies: 6,
and in thy Name will we tread them under, that rise up against us.

For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my 7,
sword that shall help me.

But it is thou that savest us from our enemies: 8.
and put them to confusion, that hate us.

There is no King that can be saved by the multitude Ps. 33. 15.
of an Host: neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength.

Therefore in thee, O Lord, have I put my Ps. 31. 1,
trust: let me never be put to confusion; deliver me in thy righteousness.

Bow down thine ear to me, and save me: make 2.
haste to deliver me.

I will love thee, O Lord my strength^; the Ps. 18. 1.
Lord is my stony rock, and my defense: my Savior, my God, and my might, in
whom I will trust, my buckler, the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge.

Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that Ps. 33. 17.
fear him: and upon them that put their trust in his mercy.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: Ps. 51. 18.
build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Let thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon us: Ps. 33. 21.
like as we do put our trust in thee.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Domine, quid multiplicati? Psalm. 3.
LOrd, how are they increased that trouble me: many are they that rise against
me.

Many one there be that say of my soul: there is no help for him in his God.

But thou, O Lord, art my defender: thou art my worship, and the lifter up of
m^ head.

I did call upon the Lord with my voice: and he heard me out of his holy hill.

I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord sustained me.

I will not be afraid for ten thousands of the people: that have set themselves
against me round about.

Up, Lord, and help me, O my God: for thou smitest all mine enemies upon the
cheekbone; thou have broken the teeth o^ the ungodly.

Salvation belongs unto the Lord: and thy blessing is upon thy people.

Dominus illuminatio. Psalm. 27.
THe Lord is my light, and my salvation; whom then shall I fear: the Lord is
the strength of my life; of whom then shall I be afraid?

When the wicked, even mine enemies, and my foes came upon me to eat up my
flesh: they stumbled, and fell.

Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid:
and though there rose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in him.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require: even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his temple.

For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his tabernacle: yea, in the
secret place of his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock of
stone.

And now shall he lift up mine head: above mine enemies round about me.

Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblation with great gladness: I will
sing, and speak praises unto the Lord.

Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, and
hear m^.

My heart has talked of thee, Seek ye my face: thy face, Lord, will I seek.

O hide not thou thy face from me: nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thou have been my ^^^cour: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation.

When my father, and my mother forsake me: the Lord takes me up.

Teach me thy way, O Lord: and lead me in the right way, because of mine
enemies.

Deliver me not over into the will of mine adversaries* for there are false
witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak wrong.

I should utterly have fainted: but that I believe derily to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living.

O tarry thou the Lords leisure: be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart,
and put thou thy trust in the Lord.

Ad t^ Domin^. Psalm. 28.
UNto thee will I cry, O Lord my strength: think no scorn of me, lest if thou
make as though thou hear not, I become like them that go down into the pit.

Hear the voice of my humble petitions, when I cry unto thee: when I hold up my
hands toward the mercy-sent of thy holy templ^.

O pluck me not away, neither dest^oy me with the ungodly, and wicked doers:
which speak friendly to their neighbors, but imagine mischief in their hearts.

Reward them according to their deeds: and according to the wickedness of their
own inventions.

Recompense them after the work of their hands: pay them that they have
deserved.

For they regard not in their mind the work^ of the Lord, nor the operation of
his hands: therefore shall he break them down, and not build them up.

Praised be the Lord: for he has heatd the voice of my humble petitions.

The Lord is my strength, and my sh^eld, my heart has trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my (...) will I praise him.

The Lord is my strength: and he is the wholesome defense of his Anointed.

O save thy people, and give thy ble^^^^^ unto thine Inheritance: feed them,
and set them up for ever.

Deus noster refugium. Psalm. 4^.
GOd is our hope and strength: a very present help in trouble.

Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved: and though the hills be
carried into the midst of the sea.

Though the waters thereof rage and swell: and though the mountains shake at
the tempest of the same.

The rivers of the ^^^nd thereof shall make glad the city of God: the ^^ly
place of the tabernacle of the most Highest.

God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall help
her, and that right early.

The heathen make much ad^, and the kingdoms are moved: but God has showed his
voice, and the earth shall melt away.

The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord: what destruction he has
brought upon the earth.

He makes wars to cease (...) all the world: he ^eaketh the ^^w, and ^na^peth
the spear in sunder, and burns the cha^i^t^ in the fire.

Be still then, and know that I am God I will be exalted among the heathen, and
I will be exalted in the earth.

The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

The first Lesson appointed to be read is Isaiah 58.
CRty aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people
their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. Yet they seek me daily,
and delight to know any ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook
not the ordinance of the it God: they as (...) of me the ordinances of Justice:
they take delight in approaching to God. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and
thou s^est not? Wherefore have we a^^^^ed our soul, and thou take no
knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and exact all
your labors. Behold, ye fast for strife and devate, and to ^mite with the fast
of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be
heard on high. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict
his soul? is ^t to bow down his head as a bulr^^^h, and to spread sack^oth and
ashes under him? will thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord?
Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to loase the bonds of whckedness, to
undo the heavy burdens, and to let ^he oppressed go f^^e, and that ye ^eak
every yoke? Is it not to deal thy brea^ to the hungry, and that thou bring the
p^or that are cast out, to thy house? when thou see the naked, that thou
cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine (...) flesh? Their shall
thy light break forth as the morning, and thin^ health shall spring forth
speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the Lord
shall be thy rereward. Then shall thou can, and the Lord shall answer: thou
shall (...), and he shall say, Here I am: if thou take away from the mindst of
thee the yoke, the ^^tting forth of the finger, and speaking (...): And if
(...) out thy soul to the (...) affected soul: then shall thy light ri^e in
(...)ty, and thy darkness he as the (...)-day. And the Lord shall (...) thee
(...), (...) satisfy thy (...) in dr^^ght, and make (...) thy houes, and thou
shall he like a watered ^^^den, and like a spring of water, whose ^^ters fa^^
not. And they that shall be of (...), shall (...) the (...) waste places: thou
their (...) up the foundations of many generati^^^; and thou (...), The (...)
of the breath, The (...) of (...) in* If thou turn away thy foot from (...),
from doing (...), on m^ (...) and call the (...), the (...) of the (...),
honorable, and (...), not (...) thi^e (...) ways, nor finding (...) own
pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: Then shall thou delight thy self in the
Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the (...) places of the earth, and
feed thee with the (...) of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord has
(...) it.

After the First Lesson shall follow Te D^^^n (...), in English.
WE praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry aloud: the ^eavens, and all the powers therein.

To thee Therubin, and Seraphin: continually do cry,

Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sa^ ^oth.

Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty: of the glory.

The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophe^s: praise thee.

The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee.

The holy Church throughout all the world: does acknowledge thee.

The Father: of an infinite Majesty.

(...) honorable: true, and only Son.

Also the holy Ghost: the Comforte^.

Thou art the thing of glory: O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou (...) not ab^^^ the Virgins
won^b.

When thou had overcome the sharpeness of death: thou did open the kingdom
if heaven to all believers.

Thou ^^^est at the right hand of God: in the (...) of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come: to be our Judge.

We therefore pray thee hekp thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints: in glory everlasting.

O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heritage.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever.

Day by day: we magnify thee.

And we worship thy Name: ever world without end.

Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.

O Lord, in the have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

For the second Lesson, the One and twentieth Chapter of S. Luke.
ANd he looked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury.
And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither (...) mites. And he
said, Of a truth I saw unto you, that this poor widow has cast in more then
they all. For all these have of their abundance cast in unto the offerings of
God, but she of her pe^^^^y has cast in all the living that she had. And as
some spoke of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones, and gifts, he
said, As for these things which ye behold, the days will come, in the which
there shall not he left one tone upon another, that shall not be thrown do^on.
And they asked him, saying, Master, but when shall these things be? and what
sign will there be when these things shall come to pass? And he said, Take heed
that ye be not deceived: for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ,
and the time draws near: go ye not therefore after them. But when ye shall
hear of Wars, and commotions, be not terrified: for these things must first
come to pass, but the end is not by and by. Then said he unto-them, Nation
shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: And great earthquakes
shall be in diverse places, and famines, and pestilences, and fearful sights,
and great signs shall there be from heaven. But before all these they shall lay
their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to ^he synagogues, and
into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my names sake. And it
shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to
meditate before, what ye shall answer. For I will give you a mouth and wisdom,
which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist. And ye
shall be betrayed, has by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends,
and some of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall ^^ hated of
all man for my names sake. But there shall not an hair of your head perish. In
your patience possessive your souls. And when ye shall see Jerusalem compa^sed
with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh. Then let them which
are in Iude^, flee to the mountains; and let them which are in the midst of it,
depart out; and let not them that are in the countries, enter thereinto. For
these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be
fulfilled. But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in
those days: for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this
people. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away
captive into all nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles,
until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. And there shall be signs in the
sun, and in the moon, and in the stars, and upon the earth distress of nations,
with perplerity, the sea and the waves roaring, men's hearts failing them for
fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth; for the
powers of heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they see the Son of man coming
in a cloud with power and great glory. And when these things begin to come to
pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh.
And he spoke to them a parable, Behold the fig tree, and all the trees; When
they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own selves, that summer is now
nigh at hand. So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye
that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand. Verily, I say unto you, This
generation shall not pass away, till all he fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall
pass away, but my words (...) not pass away. And take heed to your se^^^ lest
at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and
cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares. For as a snare
shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watch ye
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these
things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man. And in the
daytime he was teaching in the temple, and at night he went out, and abode in
the mount that is called the mount of Olives. And all the people came early in
the morning to him in the temple, for to hear him.

BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited and redeemed his people.

And has raised up a mighty salva^ion for us: in the house of his servant
David.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which have been since the world
began.

That we should be saved from ou^ enemies: and from the hands of all that hate
us.

To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers: and to remember his holy
covenant.

To perform the oath which he swear to our forefather Abraham: that he would
give us;

That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies: might serve him
without fear;

In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life.

And thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways.

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people: for the remission of their
sins.

Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the dayspring from on high has
visited us.

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and to
guide our feet into the way of peace.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and the people standing.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord; who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and buried; he
descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended
into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.

And after that, these Prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister
first pronouncing with a loud voice,
The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy spirit.

Minister.

Let us pray.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Then the Minister, Clerks and people, shall say the Lords prayer with a loud
voice.
OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then the priest standing up, shall say,
O Lord show thy mercy upon us.

Answer.

And grant us thy salvation.

Priest.

O Lord save the King.

Answer.

And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.

Priest.

O Lord save thy servants,

Answer.

Who do put their trust in thee.

Priest.

Send us help from thy holy place;

Answer.

And evermore mightily defend us.

Priest.

Let the enemy have no advantage over us:

Answer.

Nor the wicked approach to hurt us.

Priest.

Be unto us, O Lord, a strong tower,

Answer.

From the face of our enemies.

Priest.

O Lord hear our prayer,

Answer.

And let our cry come unto thee.

Priest.

Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.

Answer.

And make thy chosen people joyful.

Priest.

O Lord save thy people.

Answer.

And bless thine inheritance.

Priest.

Give peace in our time, O Lord.

Answer.

Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.

Priest.

O God make clean our hearts within us.

Answer.

And take not thy holy Spirit from us.

In stead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer shall these two be used.
O Most glorious, and powerful Lord God, who alone have spread out the heavens,
and compassed the waters with bounds, until night and day come to an end; We
adore thy divine Majesty, acknowledging thy power, and imploring thy goodness.
Be pleased to receive into thine Almighty and most gracious protection the
persons of thy servants that fight for us, and the Ships and Navies in which
they serve: preserve them all from the dangers of the sea, and from the
violence of the enemy, and from every sad accident: that they may be a
safeguard to our most gracious Sovereign, and his Kingdoms, and a security for
such as pass on the seas upon their lawful occasions. Help, Lord, and save them
for thy mercies; sake; that they may return in safety, with honor and victory,
and good success, to enjoy the blessings of the land, and the fruit of these
labors; and that all the inhabitants of these Islands, being blessed with plenty
and prosperity, peace and quietness, may serve thee our God in righteousness,
and true holiness, and with a thankful remembrance of all thy mercies may ever
praise and glorify thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, King of all kings, and Governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to, resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent; Save and deliver us, we humbly
beseech thee, from the hands of our enemies; abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devices, that we, being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from all perils, to glorify thee, who art the only giver
of all victory, through the merits of thy only Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Collect for Peace.
O God who art the Author of Peace, and lover of Concord, in knowledge of whom
stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom, defend us thy
humble servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

MOst gracious and merciful Lord God, we thy most unworthy servants being
deeply sensible of the calamitous condition of this Kingdom, involved in a War
with Enemies abroad, and by the contrivances of the Adversaries of True
Religion, distracted with intestine differences and divisions at home, do with
all humility and sincerity acknowledge and confess, That by our unthankfulness
for thy wonderful mercies and deliverances, insensibleness and stupidity under
thy manifold judgments, impiety, and other daily provocations of thy vengeance,
we have justly deserved thy wrath and indignation against us. Wherefore we are
here met together this day, desiring with broken and penitent hearts to present
our selves before the Throne of Grace, beseeching thee in mercy to pardon the
great ^ffences of us thy servants, and the crying sins of this Nation, to
remove the evils which we now lie under, to avert those judgments which we
justly deserve, to reconcile our d^fferences, and heal our breaches, to unite
ou^ hearts in the profession of the True Religion, which thine own right hand
has plante^ and established in this Kingdom, and in an holy conversation
answerable thereunto. To which end we humbly beseech thee abundantly to bestow
the choicest of thy blessings temporal and spiritual, upon the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and the High Court of Parliament, that all their
consultations may tend to the glory of thy great Name, the safe^y and honor of
the King, the advancement of Piety, and preservation of the Church, and the
security, peace and prosperity of all e^tates and conditions of men in this
Kingdom. All which we humbly beg in the Name, and through the Mediation of thy
Son and our blessed Savior. Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Collect for Grace.
O Lord our heavenly Father, Aln^ighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day, desend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger, but that all our d^ings may be ordered by thy governance, to ^o
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Am^n.

Here follows the Litany.
O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not Lord out offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: space us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and he not angry with us for ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory, and hyp^crisie, from
envy, hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness,

Good Lord-deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil,

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death,

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition, privy conspiracy, and rebellion, from all false doctrine,
heresy, and schism; from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and
Commandment,

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incar^^ation, by thy holy Nativity and
Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting and Temptation,

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine Agony and bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precio^s
Death and Burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by the coming
of the holy Ghost,

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our we^^th, in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment,

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church ^^^ver^al in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strongthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Charles, ou^ most
gracious King and Governor.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious Queen Catherine,
James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests and Deacons, with
true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their preaching
and living, they may set it forth and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee-to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute, Justice, and to maintain Truth.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations, Unity, Peace and Concord.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy Commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give ^o all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erret, and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weakhearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and ^anderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy Holy
Spirit, to amend our sives according to thy holy Word.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world,

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world,

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in Heaven, ^c.

Priest.

O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.

Answ.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.
O God, merciful Father, that ^espisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful; mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress
us: and graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and subtilty of
the devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants * being
hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us, for thy Names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the
^oble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord, arise, help us, and delive^ us, for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be a world without end.
Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David; have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, and Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ;

Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

Priest.

O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us.

Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.
WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy Name, even from us all those evils that we most
righteou^^^ have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles, we may put our
whole trust an^ confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only Mediator and
Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou hast-made, and do
forgive the sins of all them that are penitent; Create and make in us new and
contrite hearts; that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, we beseech thee, mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those who
confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Most mighty God, and merciful Father, who have compassion upon all men, and
hate nothing y^ thou have made, who would not the death of a sinner, but
that he should rather turn from his sin, and be saved; Mercifully forgive us
our trespasses; receive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the
burden of our sins. Thy property is always to have mercy; to thee only it
appertains to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy people,
whom thou have redeemed enter not into judgment with thy servants, who are
^vile earth, and miserable sinners; but so turn thine anger from us, who meekly
acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent^us of our faults; and so make haste
to help us in thi^ worst, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the people say this that follows, after the Minister.
TVrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned. Be favorable, O Lord,
be favorable to thy people, Who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying.
For thou art a merciful God, Full of compassion, Long-suffering, and of great
pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, And in thy wrath think upon
mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord, spare them, And let not thine heritage be
brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, And after the
multitude of thy mercies, look upon us, Through the merits and mediation of thy
blessed Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, and our most gracious Father, the Sovereign Commander of all
the world, in whose hand is power and might, which none is able to withstand:
Thou art the Lord of hosts, the God of battles, and the strength of all
Nations. If thou keep not the City, and the Kingdom, the Watchman waketh but
in vain: Nor can victory wait upon the justest Designs, upon the wisest
Counsels, upon the strongest Armies, unless thou teach their hands to war,
and their fingers to fight. Thou art the steady Hope of all the ends of the
earth; and of them which remain in the broad Sea. Go forth, we humbly beseech
thee, at this time by thy more especial assistance with His Majesty's Fleet,
and Naval Forces, and bless them all. In all their Counsels let Wisdom lead
them; in all their Enterprises Courage assist them; and thy blessing every
where crown them with victory, and good success: That so they may at last bring
back Honor to our Sovereign; safety and strength to these his Kingdoms, and to
all his Subjects plenty and prosperity, and a fasting peace: And smally that by
these, and all thy mercies we may be still more engaged to a true and real
thankfulness to thee our God, such as may appear in our lives by an humble,
holy, and obedient walking before thee all our days. Erant this, O merciful
Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer of S. Chrysostom.
ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common supplications unto thee; and do promise that when two or three are
gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests; Fulfill now, O
Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be must expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the worth to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Corinthians. 13. 14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

The Communion-Service.
The Priest standing at the North-side of the Lords Table, shall say,
Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.

ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid; Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of
thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
holy Name, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Minister.

GOd spoke these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall have none
other gods but me.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing, that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not how down to them, nor worship them; for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister.

Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbathday. Sir days shall thou
labor and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and
thy daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates. For in sir days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Donour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the
land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Thou shall do no murder.

People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline ou^ hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Thou shall not commit adultery.

People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Thou shall not steal.

People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Thou shall not hear false witness against thy neighbor.

People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his or, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts,
we beseech thee.

Let us pray.
ALmighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite; Have mercy
upon the whole Church, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant CHARLES our
King and Governor, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things
seek thy honor and glory: And that we and all his Subjects (duly considering
whose authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in
thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, who with thee and the holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever one
God, world without end. Amen.

O Most glorious, and powerful Lord God, who alone have spread out the heavens,
and compassed the waters with bounds, until night and day come to an end; We
adore thy divine Majesty, acknowledging thy power, and imploring thy goodness,
Be pleased to receive into thine Almighty and most gracious protection the
persons of thy servants that fight for us, and the Ships and Navies in which
they serve: preserve them all from the dangers of the Sea, and from the
violence of the Enemy, and from every sad accident: that they may be a
safeguard to our most gracious Sovereign, and his Kingdoms, and a security for
such as pass on the seas upon their lawful occasions. Help, Lord, and save them
for thy mercies sake; that they may return in safety, with honor and victory,
and good success, to enjoy the blessings of the land, and the fruit of their
labors; and that all the Inhabitants of these Islands, being blessed with plenty
and prosperity, peace and quietness, may serve thee our God in righteousness,
and true holiness; and with a thankful remembrance of all thy mercies may ever
praise and glorify thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, King of all kings, and Governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent; Save and deliver us, we humbly
beseech thee, from the hands of our enemies; abate their pride, aswa^^e their
malice, and confound their devices, that we, being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from all perils, to glorify thee, who art the only giver
of all victory, through the merits of thy only Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. VI. 10.
FInally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.
Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles
of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritualwickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the
whole armor of God: that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and
having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with
truth, and having on the breast plate of righteousness: And your feet shod with
the preparation of the gospel of peace. Above all, taking the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And
take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of
God. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance.

The Gospel. S. Matthew V. 1.
ANd Jesus seeing the multitudes, went up into a mountain; and when he was set,
his discioles came unto him. And he opened his mouth and taught them, saying,
Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed
are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for
they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they
shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and perse: ute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake: Rejoice,
and be e^ceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted
they the prophets which were before you.

I Believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of
all things visible and invisible:

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten of his
Father before all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God,
begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom all things
were made: who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from heaven, and
was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin. Mary, and was made man, and was
crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, He suffered, and was buried, and
the third day he rose again, according to the Scriptures, and ascended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of the Father. And he shall come again
with glory to judge both the quick and the dead: whose kingdom shall have no
end.

And I believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds
from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And ^ believe one
Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of
sins. And I look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to
come. Amen.

Then follows the Sermon; and after that shall be said.
LEt your light so shine before men, that they s. Matt. 5. 16.
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Lay not up for your selves treasures upon S. Matt. 6. 19, 20.
earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and
steal: but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor
rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.

Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church militant here on earth.

ALmighty and everliving God, who by thy holy Apostle have taught us to make
prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for all men; We humbly beseech
thee most mercifully (to accept our alms and oblations, and) to receive these
our prayers, which we offer unto If there be no alms or oblations, then shall
the words (of accepting our alms and oblatious) be left out unsaid.
thy divine Majesty, beseeching thee to inspire continually the Universal
Church with the spirit of truth, unity and concord: and grant that all they
that do confess thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy Word, and
live in unity and godly love. We beseech thee also to save and defend all
Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors, and especially thy servant CHARLES
our King, that under him we may be godly and quietly governed. And grant unto
his whole Council, and to all that are put in Authority under him, that they
may truly and indifferently minister justice, to the punishment of wickedness
and vice, and to the maintenance of thy true Religion and virtue. Give grace, O
heavenly Father, to all Bishops, and Curates, that they may both by their life
and doctrine set forth thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duly
administer thy holy Sacraments. And to all thy people give thy heavenly grace,
and especially to this Congregation here present, that with meek heart and due
reverence they may hear and receive thy holy Word, truly serving thee in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. And we most humbly
beseech thee of thy goodness, O Lord, to comfort and succor all them who in
this transitory life are in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other
adversity. And we also bless thy holy Name, for all thy servants departed this
life in thy faith and fear; beseeching thee to give us grace so to follow their
good examples, that with them we may be partakers of thy heavenly kingdom.
Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's sake our only Mediator and Advocate.
Amen.

Then shall be added the prayers following.
WE humbly acknowledge before thee, O merciful Father, that all the punishments
threatened in thy Law against sinners, might justly fall upon us, by reason of
our manifold transgressions; and especially our great unthankfulness for thy
unspeakable mercies toward us. But though our crying sins call aloud for thy
wrath and vengeance to be poured down upon us; yet there is mercy with thee, O
Lord, that thou may be feared; and with thee our God there is plenteous
Redemption. Oh enter not into Judgment with thy servants: For if thou
should be extreme to mark what we have done amiss; O Lord, who will be able
to abide it: At the Footstool of the Throne of thy Grace we prastrate our souls
and bodies, with fasting, tears and supplications. Look down graciously upon
us, we humbly beseech thee, from the habitation of thy Holiness, and of thy
Glory; and for the all-satisfying Death, and Passion of thy blessed Son, accept
this our unfeigned Submission, and Humiliation. O deliver us from all our sins;
and then our enemies cannot hurt us: Let us ever remember, what thou have so
strictly enjoined, That when y Deuteronomy. 23.
Host goes forth against-our enemies, we should then especially keep our
selves from every wicked thing. Unite our hearts, that we may fear thy Name;
and then we need not fear what man can do unto us. O let our ways be such, as
may please thee, that Thou may make, even our enemies, to be at peace with
us here; and when we have accomplished our Warfare upon earth, may admit us
to the blessed Vision of everlasting Peace in thine own glorious presence,
through his Merit, and Mediation, who is both the Lord of Hosts, and the Prince
of Peace, Jesus Christ our Lord and blessed Savior. Amen.

O God, the Protector of all that trust in Thee, without whom nothing is
strong, nothing is holy; who know us to be set in the midst of so many, and
so great dangers, and feast, that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves; Mercifully look upon our infirmities; Raise up thy power, and come
among us, and with great might succor us: and in all our dangers and
necessities stretch forth the right hand of thy Majesty to help, and defend us
against all our enemies. Look, we pray thee, upon the hearty desires of thy
humble servants; Increase and multiply upon us thy mercies; that we, who for
our evil dee^s do worthily deserve to be punished, by the comfort of thy grace
may mercifully be relieved: and that Thou being our Savior and Deliverer, our
Ruler, and our Guide, we may so pass the waves of this troublesome World, that
finally we may come to the land of everlasting life, there to reign with Thee
world without end, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, who have promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in thy
Sons Name, we beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us that have
made now our prayers and supplications unto thee, and grant that those things
which we have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be
obtained to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Priest shall let them depart with this blessing.
THe peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

The Order for Evening PRAYER.
Let him that ministers read with a loud voice, one or more of these sentences
of Scripture, and then say the Exhortation that follows.
REnt your heart, and not your Joel 2. 13.
garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and merciful,
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

To the Lord our God Dan. 9. 9 10
belong mercies, and forgiveness, though we have rebelled against him: neither
have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws, which he set
before us.

O Lord, correct me, but with judgment; not Jer. 10 24
in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moves us in sundry places, to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should
not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly
Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart,
to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite goodness
and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins
before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet
together, to render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his
hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy word, and to
ask those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the
soul: Wherefore I pray and beseech you as many as are here present, to
accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the
heavenly grace, saying after me.

The Confession to be said of the whole Congregation after the Minister, all
kneeling.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, We have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep, We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts, We have offended against thy holy laws, We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done, And we have done those things which we
ought not to have done, And there is no health in us: But thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us miserable offenders; Spare thou them, O God, which confess their
faults; Restore thou them that are penitent, According to thy promises declared
unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord; And grant, O most merciful Father, for
his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sover life, to the
glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone standing; the people still
kneeling.
ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and has
given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his
people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: He
pardons and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his
holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repentance and his
holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and
that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last
we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The people shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen.
The shall the Minister kneel, and begin the Lords Prayer; the people also
repeating it with him.

OUr Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil: For thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Then likewise he shall say,
O Lord, open thou our lips.

Answ. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Priest. O God, make speed to save us.

Answ. O Lord, make haste to help us.

Here all standing up, the Priest shall say,
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Priest. Praise ye the Lord.

Answ. The Lords name be praised.

Then shall be sung or said this Hymn following; one Verse by the Priest, and
another by the Clerk and People.
O Come let us humble our selves before the Psalm. 65. 6.
Lord: and fall down before him with reverence and fear.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people 7.
of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands.

Let us repent and turn from our wic^edness: Act. 3. 19.
and our sins shall be forgiven us.

For this shall every one that is godly, make his Psalm. 32. 7.
prayer unto thee, O Lord: in a time when thou may be found.

In my trouble I will call upon the Lord, and Psalm. 18. 2.
complain unto my God: so shall I be safe from mine enemies. 6.


So shall he hear my voice out of his holy temple: and my complaint shall come
before him, it shall enter even into his ears. Hear my prayer, O God: and let
my crying Ps. 102 1.
come unto thee.

Thou art my King, O God: send help unto Jacob. Psalm. 44 5,


Through thee will we overthrow our enemies: 6,
and in thy Name will we tread them under, that rise up against us.

For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my 7.
sword that shall help me.

But it is thou that savest us from our enemies: 8.
and put them to confusion, that hate us.

There is no King that can be saved by the multitude Ps. 33. 15.
of an Host: neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength.

Therefore in thee, O Lord, have I put my Ps. 31. 1.
trust: let me never be put to confusion; deliver me in thy righteousness.

Bow down thine ear to me, and save me: make 2.
haste to deliver me.

I will love thee, O Lord my strength; the Ps. 18. 1.
Lord is my stony rock, and my defense: my Savior, my God, and my might, in
whom I will trust, my buckler, the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge.

Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that Ps. 33. 17.
fear him: and upon them that put their trust in his mercy.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: Ps. 51. 18.
build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Let thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon us: Ps. 33 21.
like as we do put our trust in thee.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Domine, refugium. Psalm. 90.
LOrd, thou have been our refuge: from one generation to another.

Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were
made: thou art God from everlasting, and world without end.

Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou say, Come again, ye children of
men.

For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday: seeing that is past as
a watch in the night.

As Soon as thou scatterest them, they are even as a sleep: and fade away
suddenly like the grass.

In the morning it is green, and grows up: but in the evening it is cut down,
dried up, and withered.

For we consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid at thy wrathful
indignation.

Thou have set our misdeeds before thee: and our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.

For when thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years to an end,
as it were a tale that is told.

The days of our age are threescore years and ten, and though men be so strong,
that they come to fourscore years: yet is their strength then but labor, and
sorrow; so soon passes it away, and we are gone.

But who regards the power of thy wrath: for even thereafter as a man
fears, so is thy displeasure.

So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Turn thee again, O Lord, at the last: and be gracious unto thy servants.

O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice and be glad
all the days of our life.

Comfort us again now after the time that thou have plagued us: and for the
years wherein we have suffered adversity.

Show thy servants thy work: and their children thy glory.

And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the work
of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handywork.

Qui habitat. Psalm. 91.
Whosoever dwells under the defense of the most High: shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty.

I will say unto the Lord, Thou art my hope, and my strong hold: my God, in him
will I trust.

For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunter: and from the noisome
pestilence.

He shall defend thee under his wings, and thou shall be safe under his
feathers: his faithfulness and truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

Thou shall not be afraid for any terror by night: nor for the arrow that
flies by day;

For the pestilence that walks in darkness: nor for the sickness that
destroys in the noonday.

A thousand shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it
shall not come nigh thee.

Yea, with thine eyes shall thou behold: and see the reward of the ungodly.

For thou, Lord, art my hope: thou have set thine house of defense very high.

There shall no evil happen unto thee: neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.

For he shall give his angels charge over thee^ to keep thee in all thy ways.

They shall bear thee in their hands: that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone.

Thou shall go upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shall
thou tread under thy feet.

Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set
him up, because he has known my Name.

He shall call upon me, and I will hear him: yea, I am with him in trouble; I
will deliver him, and bring him to honor.

With long life will I satisfy him: and show him my salvation.

Benedictus Dominus. Psalm. 144.
BLessed be the Lord my strength: who teaches my hands to war, and my fingers
to fight;

My hope and my fortress, my castle and deliverer, my defender in whom I trust:
who subdueth my people that is under me.

Lord, what is man, that thou have such respect unto him: or the son of man,
that thou so regardest him?

Man is like a thing of naught: his time passes away like a shadow.

Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall
smoke.

Cast forth thy lightning and tear them: shoot out thine arrows, and consume
them.

Send down thine hand from above: deliver me, and take me out of the great
waters, from the hand of strange children;

Whose mouth talks of vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of
wickedness.

I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: and sing praises unto thee upon a
ten-stringed Iute.

Thou have given victory unto kings: and have delivered David thy servant from
the peril of the sword.

Save me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children: whose mouth talks
of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity.

That our sons may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may be
as the polished corne^s of the temple.

That our garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store: that our
sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets.

That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no decay: no leading into
captivity, and no complaining in our streets.

Happy are the people that are in such a case: yea, blessed are the people who
have the Lord for their God.

The first Lesson is, Exodus 17. 8.
THen come Am^lck, and fought with Israel in Rephidim. And Moses said unto
Joshua, Ch^^^ (...) our m^n, and go out, fight with Amalek: to morrow I will
stand on the top of the hill, with the rod of God in mine hand. So Joshua did
as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur,
went up to the top of the hill. And it came to pass, When M^ses held up his
hand, that Israel prevailed: And when he let dow^ his hand, Amalek prevailed.
But Moses hands were heavy, and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he
sat thereon: And Aaron and Hut stayed up his hands, the one on the one side,
and the other on the other side; and his ^ands were steady until the going down
of the sun. And Joshua discomfited Amalek, and his people with the edge of the
sword. And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book, and
rehearse it in the ears of Io hua; for I will utterly put out the remembrance
of Amalek from under heaven. And Moses built an altar, and called the name of
it, IEHDUAH-nissi. For he said, Because the Lord has sworn, that the Lord will
have war with Amalek from generation to generation.

Magnificat.
MY soul does magnify the Lord: and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savi^ur.

For he has regarded: the lowliness of his hand-maiden.

For behold, from henceforth: all generations shall call me blessed.

For he that is mighty has magnifie^ me: and holy is his Name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout all generations.

He has showed strength with his arm: he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts.

He has put down the mighty from their seat: and has e^alted the humble and
meek.

He has filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he has sent empty
away.

He remembering his mercy has helped his servant Israel: as he promised to our
forefathers, Abraham and his seed for ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The second Lesson is, Hebr. 11.
NOw faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen. For by it the elders obtained a good report. Through faith we understand
that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen,
were not made of things which do appear. By faith Abel offered unto God a more
excellent sacrifice then Cain, by which he obtained witness, that he was
righteous, God testifying of his gifts: and by it he being dead, yet speaks.
By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not found,
because God had translated him: for before his translation, he had this
testimony, that he pleased God. But without faith it is impossible to please
him; for he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. By faith Noah, being warned of God
of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of
his house, by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the
righteousness, which is by faith. By faith Abraham, when he was called to go
out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and
he went out, not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of
promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and
Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise. For he looked for a city which
has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Through faith also Sara her
self received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child, when she
was past age, because she judged him saithful who had promised. Therefore
sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the
sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the seashore innumerable. These
all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them afa^^
off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they
were strangers, and pilgrims on the earth. For they that say such things,
declare plainly, that they seek a country. And truly, if they had been mi^dful
of that country, from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to
have returned: But now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly:
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he has prepared for
them a city. By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered us Isaac: and he that
had received the promises, offered up his only begotten son, Of whom it was
said, that in Isaac shall thy seed be called: Accounting that God was able to
raise him up, even from the dead: from whence also he received him in a figure.
By faith Isaac blessed Jacob, and Esau, concerning things to come. By faith
Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph, and worshipped
leaving upon the top of his staff. By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention
of the departing of the children of Israel, and gave commandment concerning his
bones. By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents,
because they saw he was a proper child, and they not afraid of the kings
commandment. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called
the son of Pharaohs daughter; Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; Esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt; for he had
respect unto the recompense of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not
fearing the wrath of the king: for he enduted, as seeing him who is invisible.
Through faith he kept the passover and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that
destroyed the firstborn should touch them. By faith they passed through the
Red Sea, as by dry land: which the Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned. By
faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven
dars. By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when
she had received the spies with peace. And what shall I more say? for the time
would fall me to tell of G^deon, and of Ba^ak, and of Samson, and of Iephtha,
of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets: Who through faith subdued
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of
lions, Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fi^ht, turned to flight the armies
of the aliens: Women received their dead, raised to life again: and others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings; yea,
moreover of bonds and imprisonment. They were sroned, they were sawn asunder,
were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins, and
goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented: (Of whom the world was not
worthy) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of
the earth. And these all having obtained a good report through faith, received
not the promise; God having provided some better thing for us: that they
without us should not be made perfect.

Deus misereatur. Psalm. 67.
GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations.

Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee.

O let the nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.

Let the people praise thee, O God: let all she people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God,
shall give us his blessing.

God shall bless us: and all the end; of the world shall fear him.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and the people standing.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord; who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and buried; he
descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended
into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.

And after that, these Prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister
first pronouncing with a loud voice,
The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy spirit.

Minister.

Let us pray.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Then the Minister, Clerks and people, shall say the Lords prayer with a loud
voice.
OUr Father, which art in heaven, hallowed de thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass* against us.
And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then the priest standing up, shall say,
O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.

Answer.

And grant us thy salvation.

Priest.

O Lord, save the King.

Answer.

And mercifully hear us, when we call upon thee.

Priest.

O Lord, save thy servants,

Answer.

Who do put their trust in thee.

Priest.

Send us help from thy holy place;

Answer.

And evermore mightily defend us.

Priest.

Let the enemy have no advantage over us:

Answer.

Nor the wicked approach to hurt us.

Priest.

Be unto us, O Lord; a strong tower,

Answer.

From the face of our enemies.

Priest.

O Lord, hear our prayer,

Answer.

And let our cry come unto thee.

Priest.

Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.

Answer.

And make thy chosen people joyful.

Priest.

O Lord, save thy people.

Answer.

And bless thine inheritance.

Priest.

Give peace in out time, O Lord.

Answer.

Because there is none other, that fights for us, but only thou, O God.

Priest.

O God, make clean our hearts within us.

Answer.

And take no^ thy holy Spirit from us.

In stead of the first Collect shall these two be used^
O Most glorious, and powerful Lord God, who alone have spread out the heavens,
and compassed the waters with bounds, until night and day come to an end; We
adore thy divine Majesty, acknowledging thy power, and imploring thy goodness.
Be pleased to receive into thine Almighty and most gracious protection, the
persons of thy servants that fight for us, and the Ships and Navies in which
they serve: preserve them all from the dangers of the sea, and from the
violence of the enemy, and from every sad accident: that they may be a
safeguard to our most gracious Sovereign, and his Kingdoms, and a security for
such as pass on the seas upon their lawful occasions. Help, Lord, and save them
for thy mercies sake* that they may return in safety, with honor and victory,
and good success, to enjoy the bles^ings of the land, and the fruit of their
labors* and that all the inhabitants of these Islands, being blessed with plenty
and prosperity, peace and quietness, may serve thee our God in righteousness,
and true holiness, and with a thankful remembrance of all thy mercies may ever
praise and glorify thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, King of all kings, and Governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent; Save and deliver us, we humbly
beseech thee, from the hands of our enemies; abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devices, that we, being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from all perils, to glorify thee, who art the only giver
of all victory, through the merits of thy only Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do
proceed; Give unto thy servants that peace which the world cannot give, that
both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that by thee we
being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and
quietness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son,
our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do
forgive the sins of all them that are penitent; Create and make in us new and
contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those who
confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Most mighty God, and merciful Father, who have compassion upon all men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, who would not the death of a sinner, but
that he should rather turn from his sin, and be saved; Mercifully forgive us
our trespasses; receive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the
burden of our sins. Thy property is always to have mercy; to thee only it
appertains to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy people,
whom thou have redeemed; enter not into judgment with thy servants, who are
vile earth, and miserable sinners; but so turn thine anger from us, who meekly
acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; and so make haste
to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the people say this that follows, after the Minister.
TUrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned. Be favorable, O Lord,
be favorable to thy people, Who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying.
For thou art a merciful God, Full of compassion, Long suffering, and of great
pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, And in thy wrath think upon
mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord, spare them, And let not thine heritage be
brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, And after the
multitude of thy mercies look upon us, Through the merits and mediation of thy
blessed Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
O Lord, our heavenly Father, High and Mighty, King of kings, Lord of lords,
the only Ruler of princes, who do from thy Throne behold all the dwellers
upon earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, and so replenish him with the grace of
thy holy Spirit, that he may asway incline to thy will, and walk in thy way;
endue him plenteously with heavenly gifts; grant him in health and wealth long
to live; strengthen him, that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies, and
finally after this life, he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Royal Family.
ALmighty God, the Fountain of all goodness, we humbly beseech thee, to bless
our gracious Queen Catherine, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family;
Endue them with thy holy Spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly grace, prosper
them with all happiness, and bring them to thine everlasting Kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Clergy and people.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels; Send down upon
our Bishops, and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their charge, the
healthful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, pour upon
them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the honor of
our Advocate and Mediator, Jesus Christ. Amen.

O Almighty God, and our most gracious Father, the Sovereign Commander of all
the world, in whose hand is power, and might, which none is able to withstand:
Thou art the Lord of hosts, the God of battles, and the strength of all
Nations. If thou keep not the City, and the Kingdom, the Watchman waketh but
in vain: Nor can victory wait upon the justest Designs, upon the wisest
Counsels, upon the strongest Armies, unless thou teach their hands to war,
and their fingers to fight. Thou art the steady Hope of all the ends of the
earth; and of them which remain in the broad Sea. Go forth, we humbly beseech
thee, at this time by thy more especial assistance, with His Majesty's Fleet,
and Naval Forces, and bless them all. In all their Counsels let Wisdom lead
them; in all their Enterprises Courage assist them; and thy blessing every
where crown them with Victory, and good Success: That so they may at last bring
back Honor to our Sovereign; safety and strength to these his Kingdoms; and to
all his Subjects plenty and prosperity, and a lasting peace: and finally, that
by these and all thy mercies, we may be still more engaged to a true and real
thankfulness to thee our God, such as may appear in our lives by an humble,
holy, and o^^dient walking before thee all our days, Grant this, O merciful
Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O God, the Protector of all that trust in Thee, without whom nothing is
strong, nothing is holy; who know us to be set in the midst of so many, and
so great dangers, and see, that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves; Mercifully look upon our infirmities; Raise up thy power, and come
among us, and with great might succor us: and in all our dangers and
necessities stretch forth the right hand of thy Majesty to help and defend us
against all our enemies. Look, we pray thee, upon the hearty desires of thy
humble servants; Increase and multiply upon us thy mercies; that we, who for
our evil deeds do worthily deserve to be punished, by the comfort of thy Grace
may mercifully be relieved: and that thou being our Savior and Deliverer, our
Ruler and our Guide, we may so pass the waves of this troublesome world, that
finally we may come to the land of everlasting life, there to reign with Thee
world without end, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer of S. Chrysostom.
ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise that when two or three are
gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests: Fulfill now, O
Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the worl^^ to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Corinthians. 13. 14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1673/4.


