THE COPY OF THE LETTER, Sent from the Commissioners of the G. A. to all the
Presbyteries, showing what course is to be taken by them, and every
Kirk-session and Family, for turning away the LORDS wrath from the Land.
Reverend and beloved Brethren.
BEing frequentlie conveined here, by advice and desire of the honorable
Estats of Parliament and being also by them excited to make an accurat search
of the sins of the land, provoking the Lord to just indignation against us, we
did exhibit to them a new and necessary warning, briefly containing the
causes of our judgment, and the conceived remeedies thereof; Which for some
reasons is thought fit not to be printed at this time: only we signify this
unto you, that in the end thereof we exhorted the several Estates among
themselves to make a strait inquisition of the sins most incident to
themselves, that they might provoke one another to repentance, and zeal toward
God, and his Cause; and so make better use of this, then of our former
warnings, who accordingly did set apart a time for that effect, and went about
it: and we who did exhort others, thought it incumbent to our selves,
seriously to search and humbly and sadly to acknowledge the faults of our
persons and callings, such as were known to be too rise amongst us of the
Ministry: which was in a solemn way performed by us in one of our meetings,
one by one, as the LORD, touched every man's heart, and opened his mouth: out of
which speeches the enclosed catalogue of sins, and remedies thereof was
extracted, and the same we thought good to transmit unto you, that you making
use thereof and reflecting your thoughts upon your selves, may Presbeteriallie
follow the same course, and give order that the samine be done in your several
Sessions: Defiring withal, that in each Congregation, in a solemn
humiliation, there may be a confession and bewailing of sin, and a pressing
of each family privatlie to perform the same; That so all Scotland may lament
after the Lord; that his fierce wrath may depart from us. So hoping you will
not be deficient herein in so necessary a time, We commit you and your
labors to the blessing of GOD, and rests,

Your loving Brethren, the Commissioners of the General Assembly. M. WILLIAM
BENNET MODERATOR.
Perth, Aug. 5. 1645. This our letter, together with the enclosed Articles, we
require to be registrate in your Presbytery Books, for our exoneration.



Enormities and corruptions observed to be in the Ministry, with the remedies
thereof, recommended to the several Presbyteries, by the Commissioners of the
General Assembly, met at Perth, in the beginning of August, 1645.
THE first and main sin, reaching both to our personal carriage and callings,
we judge to be, Not studying how to keep Communion and Fellowship with God in
Christ, but walking in a natural way, without employing of Christ, or drawing
virtue from him, to enable us unto sanctification, and preaching in spirit and
power.

In our Lives.
1. MUch fruitles conversing in company, and complying with the sins of all
sorts, not behaving our selves as becomes the men of God.

2. Great worldliness is to be found amongst us, mynding and speaking most
about things of this life, being busied about many things, but forgetting the
main.

3 Slighting of Gods worship in their families, and therefore no cordial
urging of it upon others: yea, altogether a wanting of it in some, if it be
credible.

4. Want of gravitie in carriage and apparel, dissolutnesse in hair, and
shaking about the kne^s lightness in the apparel of their wives and children.

5. Tippling and bearing company in untymous drinking in Tavernes and
Ail-houses, or any where else, whereby the Ministry is made vile and
contemptible.

6. Discountenancing of the godly; speaking ill of them, because of some that
are unanswerable to their profession.

7. The Sabbath not sanctified after Sermons, which makes people think that
the Sabbath is ended with the Sermons.

8. There are also to be found amongst us, who use small and minched oaths.

9. Some so great strangers to Scripture, that except in their publict
Ministry, though they read many things, yet they are little conversant in the
Scripture, and in meditation thereof: A duty incumbent to all the people of
God.

In our Callings.
1. COrrupt entry into the Ministry in former times, and following the
course of defection, though forsaken, yet never seriously repented: as also
present entering into the Ministry, as to a way of living in the world, and
not as to a spiritual calling.

2. Helping in, and holding in of insufficient and suspected men, who savor
the things of this life, and keeping the door straiter on them whom God has
sealed, then upon these who have less evidence of the power of grace and
holiness.

3. Partiality in favoring, and speaking for the scandalous, whether Ministers
or other persons, teaching them how to shift and delay censures.

4. Silence in the publict cause, not laboring to cure the dissaffection of
people, nor urging them to constancy and patience, in bearing of publict
burdens, nor to forwardness in the publict Cause; whereby Malignants are
multiplied: yea some are so gross herein, that even in publict Fasts little or
nothing is to be heard from them, sounding this way.

5. Some account it a point of wisdom to speak ambiguously: some incline to
justify the wicked cause, uttering words which savor of dissaffection: and
all their complaining of the times is in such a way, as may steal the hearts of
people from lyking of good Instruments in this work, and consequently from Gods
Cause: yea, some reading publict Orders, are ready to speak against them in
their private conference.

6 Idleness either in seldom preaching, as once on the Lords day, or in
preparation for publict duties, not being given to reading and meditation:
others have but fits of pains, not like other Tradsmen continually at their
work.

7. Want of zeal, and love to the conversion of souls, not being weighted with
the want of success, in reclaiming of sinners, nor searching in themselves the
cause of not profiting, preaching ex officio not ex conscientia officii.

8 Self-seeking in preaching, and a venting rather of their wit and skill then
a showing forth of the wisdom and power of God.

9 Lifelesnesse in preaching, not studying to be furnished by Christ with
power: and so the ordinance of God reaches not to the conscience; and heereto
belongs the not applying of the doctrine unto the auditorie and times,

10 The indiscreet curing of the indiscretion of pious people and Ministers,
whereby godliness has gotten a deep wound, and profanitie has lifted up the
head, contrare to that wise and gracious order set forth in the General
Assembly holden at Edinburgh, 1641.

11. Little care to furnish our Army, either abroad or at home with Ministers,
one of our grievous sins, and causes of our calamity.

12. Last, it is to be feared that Ministers in secreet are negligent to
wrestle in prayer, for a blessing to be poured out upon their labors,
contenting themselves with their publict performances.

Remedies.
1. FIrst, That Presbyteries make great conscience to have all vacant places
within their several bounds filled with godly and able m^n, wherever they be
to be found: and that under pretense of being a helper, or second to another,
none be taken in, but such as are able for the same charge.

2. Whereas it is known, that private trial in Presbyteries are for the most
part perfunctorious, the Brethren are hereby exhorted to be more serious, and
faithful herein, as they will be answerable to Christ, the chief Sheepherd:
and in a way previous thereto, that Brethren be free, in loving admonition one
of another secreetly, from time to time; and that whosoever keeps not the
Presbytery or Synod, after grave admonitions, may come under further censures.

3. That accuracie be used at visitation of Kirks, and that the Elders one by
one (the rest being removed) be called in, to d^pone about the Minister, and
one of them about another.

4. That course be taken to divide Congregations in parts, and by the help not
only of Elders in their several parts, but of neighbors also, the evils, and
neglects of persons and families, may be found out and remeedied.

5. That every Minister be humbled for his former failings, and make his peace
with God, that the more effectually he may preach repentance, and may stand in
the gape, to turn away the Lords wrath: running between the Porch and the
Altar, sighing and crying for all the abominations of the land.

6. Special care would be had, that all Ministers have their conversation in
heaven, mainlie minding the things of God, and exercising faith, for drawing
life out of Jesus Christ, the fountain of life, arming themselves thereby with
power against the contagion and wickedness of the world.

7. Care would be had of godly conference in Presbyteries, even in time of
their refreshment, and the Moderator is to look to it, that good matter be
furnished thereto.

8. It is also very necessar for every Minister that would be fruitful in the
work of the Lord, to bring home the word of the Lord to his own heart and
conscience, by Prayer and Meditation, both before and after the publict
ordinance.

9. Use would be made of the roll of the Parish, not only for examination,
but also for considering the several conditions and dispositions of the
people, that accordingly they may be admonished, and particularly prayed for
in secreet.

10. It is very expedient that Ministers have more communion among themselves
for their mutual stirring up, and strengthening of their hands in the Lords
work, and rectifying of these who are not incorrigible.

11. That Ministers in all sorts of company labor to be fruitful, as the
Salt of the earth, seasoning them they meet with, not only forbearing to drink
healths (Satan's snare, leading to excess) but reproving it in others.

12. All Ministers would be careful to cherish the smoking flax of weak
beginnings in the ways of God, and ought courageously to oppose all mockers
and revylers of the godly.

13. As at all times, so specially now when the Lord is calling us all to an
account; it becomes the Ministers of Christ, with all diligence and
faithfulness, to improve their Ministry to the outmost, to be instant in
season and out of season; yea, even frugallie to employ their time in private,
in reading of, and meditating on Scripture, that the word of God may dwell
plentifully in them.

14. That the provyding the Armies with Ministers be preferred to any
congregation, and these who are appointed to attend the same, and are
deficient, be without delay severelie censured; according to the Act of the
General Assembly, and that all Ministers not only in publict, pray for our
Armies, specially these that are to encounter with the bloody enemy within
the land, but also continually bear them up before the Lord, that their lives
being reformed, their heart and hands may be strengthened, and their undertaking
at last blessed of GOD with success.

15. That b^side all other scandals, silence or ambiguous speaking in the
publict cause, much more detracting and disaff^cted speeches be seasonablie
censured: and to this effect, all honest hearted Brethren would firmly unite
themselves in the Lord, the younger honoring the elder, and the elder not
despising the younger.

16. And finally, both for the corruption of the Ministry and remeed
thereof, we refer the brethren to the Act of the General Assembly at
Edinburgh, 1596. revived in the late Assembly at Glasgow, 1638. to be found
in the printed Act thereof.

For George Anderson Printer in Glasgovv,
These are to warrant the Printing of the Letter above-vvritten, with the
Articles containing the enormities, and the remedies thereof.

Mr. A. Ker.


