A FORM OF PRAYER AND Thanksgiving To Almighty GOD, To be Used throughout the
Cities of London and Westminster, and else where within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, on Sunday the Second Day of December next ensuing: And in all other
Places throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, on Sunday the Sixteenth Day of the same Month: For the
Preservation of His Majesty from the Dangers to which His Royal Person was
exposed during His late Expedition: And for His safe Return to His People: And
for the Success of His Forces by Sea and Land.

By Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Nawcomb,
deceased; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. M DC XCIV.

November 16th 1694.
LET this Form of PRAYER and THANKSGIVING be Printed and Published.

Jo. Cant.

A FORM of PRAYER and THANKSGIVING to Almighty God, to be Used throughout the
Cities of London and Westminster, and elsewhere within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, on Sunday the Second Day of December next ensuing: And in all other
Places throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, on Sunday the Sixteenth Day of the same Month.
The Service for that Day upon which the Thanksgiving shall be Observed, must
be used, except where it is here otherwise ordered

The Prayers shall begin with these Sentences.

I Will always give thanks unto the Lord, Psalm.34.1.
his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

O Praise the Lord with me, Verse.2.
and let us magnify his Name together.

Instead of the Venite, Psalm.34.1.
this Hymn shall be used

The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, exceeding glad shall he be thy
salvation.

Thou have given him his hearts desire, Verse.2.
and have not denied him the request of his lips.

And why? because the King puts his trust in the Lord, ^sal.21 7.
and in the mercy of the most Highest he shall not miscarry.

All thine Enemies shall feel thy hand, Verse.3.
thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee.

Now for the comfortless sake of the needy, Psalm.12.5.
and for the deep sighing of the poor;

I will up, Verse.6.
faith the Lord, and will help every one from him that swells against him,
and will set him at rest.

I will call upon the Lord, Psalm.13.2.
who is worthy to be praised so shall I be safe from mine Enemies.

For thou shall save the people that are in adversity, Verse 27.
and bring down the high looks of the proud.

Thou have given me the defense of thy salvation, Verse. 30.
thy right hand also shall hold me up, and thy loving correction shall make me
great.

Now know I that the Lord helps his Anointed, Psalm.20.6.
and will hear him from his holy Heaven, with the wholesome strength of his
right hand.

Some put their trust in chariots, Verse.7.
and some in horses, but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God.

Be thou exalted, Psalm.21.13
Lord, in thine own strength, so will we sing and praise thy power.

Glory b^ to the Father. (...).

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Proper Psalms. IX. LXV. XCVII.

Proper Lessons. The first, Deuteronomy. 32. ver. 26. to v. 41. Te Deum.

Proper Lessons. The second, Luke 18. the 8 first verses Jubilate Deo.

After the Apostles Creed, and the Lords Prayer, the suffrages shall be as
follows.

Priest. O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.

Answ. And grant us thy salvation.

Priest. O Lord, save the King and Queen.

Answ. Who put their trust in thee.

Priest. Send them help from thy holy place.

Answ. And evermore mightily defend them.

Priest. Let their enemies have no advantage against them.

Answ. Let not the wicked approach to hurt them.

Priest. Endue thy Ministers with righteousness.

Answ. And make thy chosen people joyful.

Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord.

Answ. Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.

Instead of the first Collect, the following Prayers shall be used.
ALmighty God, the Sovereign Lord of all the World, in whose hand is power and
might, which nothing is able to resist: To thee alone we owe all our
Deliverances from those great and apparent Dangers wherewith we have been of
late years so often encompassed. It is of thy mercies, O Lord, that we are not
consumed, and because thy compassions fail not. It is of thy great goodness,
that we have not been delivered up to the will of our Enemies. Blessed be God,
who has heard our Prayer, and not turned his Mercy from us: But has been
graciously pleased to preserve His Majesty's Person during His late Expedition,
and to bring Him back in Safety; and to grant such Success to His Forces by Sea
and Land, and to the Arms of His Allies, as thereby to put a stop to the Rage
and Fury of the Enemy. Let this, we beseech thee, be the blessed fruit of all
thy wonderful Mercies, that we may turn every one from the evil of his way, and
may live as a People that have been, in so many remarkable Instances, the
peculiar and visible care of thy Providence: That thou may yet delight to do
us good, and that His Majesty's Counsels and Arms may be successful to the
Establishing of Peace and the true Religion in these and the neighboring
Nations; to the Honor and Praise of thy great Name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

GReat and glorious Lord God, the just and wise Governor of the World, who
love righteousness and hate iniquity: We adore that merciful and wonderful
Providence which has been our Defense and Refuge in the Day of our Distress.
Thou have shown us wonderful things in thy righteousness, O God of our
Salvation. To thee alone we ascribe the Glory of all our Deliverances: For it
is thou who have wrought all our works for us. Stablish, O God, that which thou
have wrought: And give us such a dutiful and deep sense of thy goodness to us,
that we may live as becomes a People saved by the Lord. Banish, we pray thee,
from among us all Infidelity and Profaneness; purge us from all our
abominations; take away all Hatred and Dissensions: And endue us with a Spirit
of true Piety and Holiness, of Love and Goodness, of Unity and Concord: That
the Blessings of Peace, together with the Purity of Religion may be secured to
us, and continued to our Posterity; for the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior. Amen.

The Collect for Peace.
O God, who art the author of Peace and lover of Concord, in knowledge of whom
stands our eternal life, whose Service is perfect freedom; Defend us thy
humble servants in all Assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Collect for Grace.
O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day; defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fail into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Here follows the Litany.
O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miser able sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer: of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: Spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us, good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all blindness of heart; from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy; from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin; and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh, and the devil,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From lightning and tempest; from plague, pestilence and famine; from battle,
and murder, and from sudden death,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all sedition, privy conspiracy and rebellion; from all false doctrine,
heresy and schism; from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and
Commandment.

Good Lord, deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation; by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision;
by thy Baptism, Fasting and Temptation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

By thine Agony and bloody Sweat; by thy Cross and Passion; by thy precious
Death and Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the
coming of the holy Ghost,

Good Lord, deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our wealth; in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment,

Good Lord, deliver us,

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servants William and Mary, our
most gracious king and Queen;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule their hearts in thy faith, fear, and love; and
that they may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to be their defender and keeper, giving them the
victory over all their enemies;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve Catherine the Queen Dowager, her
Royal Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal Family,

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests and Deacons, with
true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their preaching
and living, they may set it forth, and show it accordingly;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That It may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom and understanding;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord,

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute Justice, and to maintain Truth;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all nations, unity, peace, and concord;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and are deceived;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger,
necessity, and tribulation;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and standerers,
and to turn their hearts;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God: We beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ, hear us.
O Christ, hear us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
OUr Father, which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.

Answ. Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful; mercifully assist our prayers that we make
before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress us;
and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the
devil or man works against us be brought to naught, and by the providence of
thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants, being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.
Graciously look upon our afflictions.
Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.
Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.
Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.
O Son of David, have mercy upon us.
Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.
Graciously hear us, O Christ; graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.
Priest. O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us.

Answ. As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities; and
for the glory of thy Name, turn from us all those evils that we most
righteously have deserved; and grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only Mediator and
Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the end of the Litany, after the collect [ We humbly beseech thee, O
Father, etc.] shall be said this which follows.
ALmighty and most gracious God, who have been our Deliverer in the Day of our
Distress, and have raised up thy Servant King WILLIAM to be the happy
Instrument of our Deliverance: We praise thy holy Name, that have so
wonderfully preserved him from those great Dangers to which he has been so
often exposed, particularly in this last Summers Expedition: We humbly beseech
thee still to continue him under the merciful care and protection of thy good
Providence, and to bless him with all good success: And likewise to give us
grace, in a thankful sense of thy great goodness, to live in obedience to thee,
and in subjection to Their Majesty's, whom thou have set ever us, and whom we
beseech thee long to preserve and continue to us; for thy mercies sake in Jesus
Chirst, our blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

Immediately before the Prayer for the High Court of Parliament, use the
collect of Thanksgiving, [ for Peace and Deliverance from our Enemies.]
ALmighty God, who act a strong Tower of Defense unto thy Servants against the
face of their Enemies; We yield thee praise and Thanksgiving giving for our
Deliverance from those great and apparent Dangers wherewith we were compassed.
We acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were not delivered over as a Prey unto
them; beseeching thee still to continue such thy Mercies toward us, that all
the World may know that thou art our Savior and mighty Deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the High Court of Parliament, to be read during their Session.
MOst gracious God, we humbly beseech thee, as for this Kingdom in general, so
especially for the High Court of Parliament, under our most religious and
gracious King and Queen at this time assembled: That thou would be pleased
to direct and prosper all their Consultations to the advancement of thy Glory,
the good of thy Church, the safety, honor and welfare of Their Majesty's, and
Their Kingdoms; that all things may be so ordered and settled by their
Endeavors upon the best and surest foundations, that peace and happiness,
truth and justice, religion and piety may be established among us for all
generations. These and all other necessaries for them, for us, and thy whole
Church, we humbly beg in the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ our most
blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer of S. Chrysostom.
ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three
are gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests; Fulfill now,
O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them; granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Cor. 13. 14. THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the fellowship of the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen. In the
Communion-Service, between the Commandments and the Epistle, shall this Collect
be used, instead of the Collect for the King and Queen, and of the Collect for
the day.
O Most gracious God, who of thy infinite goodness have preserved our Sovereign
Lord King WILLIAM from the Dangers to which his Royal Person has been exposed
for the Public Good, during his late Expedition; and have brought him back to
us in safety: We beseech thee to fill our hearts with unfeigned thankfulness to
thee for so great Blessings; and still to continue Their Majesty's under the
watchful care of thy Providence; to protect Their Sacred Persons from all
secret Attempts and open Violence, that no Weapon, no Design formed against
them may prosper: And to make them the happy Instruments of establishing that
great Deliverance which thy Providence by them has wrought for us in so
wonderful a manner, that all the world may see that it is thy hand, and that
thou, Lord, have done it: Which we humbly beg for thy mercies sake in Jesus
Christ our Blessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Then shall follow for the Epistle. Rev. VI. verse 9, 10.
ANd when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the altar the Souls of them
that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held. And
they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do
thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth?

The Gospel. S. Mitth. V. verse 43. to the end.
YE have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate
thine enemy: But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you,
and persecute you: That ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven, for he makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends
rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what
reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same? And if ye salute your
brethren only, what do you more then others? do not even the publicans so? be
ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

Then the Nicene Creed. After that the Sermon.

After the Prayer [ For the whole State of Christ's Church, etc.] this Collect
shall be used.
MOst glorious Lord God, whose Throne is in the Heavens, and whose Kingdom
rules over all; Who do whatever pleases thee in Heaven and in Earth: Thou,
Lord, have been our Refuge from one Generation to another: Our Fathers trusted
in thee, and thou did deliver them; they called upon thee, and were not
confounded: We bless thy Name that thou have also heard the voice of our humble
petitions, which we did put up to thee in the day of our trouble; and have not
only kept us in peace at home, but have also graciously preserved the Person of
His Sacred Majesty abroad, and so blessed His Forces both at Sea and Land as to
defeat the Designs of the Common Enemy. What shall we render unto the Lord for
all His Benefits? We will love the Lord who has inclined his ear unto us, and
call upon him as long as we live: Unto thee, O God, will we pay our vows, unto
thee will we give thanks. And we humbly beseech thee, that thou, who have
hitherto been our Helper and Deliverer, would be pleased, in thy due
appointed Time, to manifest thy righteous Judgment in punishing that Ambition
and Cruelty which has been the Cause of so many and so great Calamities to
this Part of the World; to scatter the People that delight in War, and to
establish Truth and Peace in the Earth: To the glory of thy great Name, the
comfort and support of the Reformed Churches, the propagation of the Gospel,
and the enlargement of the Kingdom of thy dear Son: Which we beseech thee to
hasten, that all Nations may fall down and worship before thee, saying,
Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Honor, and Power be unto our God for ever
and ever. Amen.

A Prayer for all Mankind, especially for the Reformed Churches.
MOst gracious and merciful God, who art the Savior of all men, especially of
those that believe; and have commanded us to make prayers and intercessions for
all men, desiring that all may be saved, and come to the knowledge at the
Truth: We humbly beseech thee to extend thy mercy and compassion to all
Mankind; more particularly to the Reformed Churches, and especially to those
who are still under Persecution for Truth and Righteousness sake. Relieve them
according to their several necessities; be a shelter and defense to them from
the fury of the Oppressor: Let the sighing of the Prisoners come before thee,
and according to the greatness of thy power preserve them that are appointed to
die: Let not the poor always be forgotten; let not the patient abiding of the
meek perish for ever. Visit in mercy them that are banished for the Testimony
of thy Truth: Gather thy dispersed together, and restore the outcasts of thy
People; and in thy good time bring them home to worship thee in their own Land:
And whatsoever they have lost for thy sake, return it to them, according to thy
gracious Promise, in the manifold Blessings of this and a better Life: Deliver
Israel, O God, out of all his Troubles. And we beseech thee to enlighten all
those who are in Darkness and Error, and to give them Repentance to the
acknowledgment of the truth: That all the ends of the Earth may remember
themselves and be turned unto the Lord: And we may all become one Flock under
the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, Jesus Christ, our Blessed Savior
and Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.

