A FORM OF PRAYER WITH THANKSGIVING, TO Almighty GOD; To be used in all
Churches and Chapels within this Realm every Year, upon the Sixth Day of
February, being the Day on which His Majesty began His Happy Reign.

By His Majesty's Special Command.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be Sold by Andrew Crook at the King's Printing House upon
Ormond-Key, and by Samuel Helsham at the Colledge-Arms in Castle-street, 1685.

A Form of Prayer with Thanksgiving To Almighty God;
To be used in all Churches and Chapels within this Realm, every Year upon the
Sixth Day of February; Being the Day on which His Majesty began His Happy Reign.
The Service shall be the same with the usual Office for Holy Days in all
things, Except where it is in this Office otherwise appointed.

If this Day shall happen to be Sunday, the Proper Office for that Sunday shall
be wholly omitted, and this used instead of it. But if it shall happen to be
the first Day of Lent (commonly called Ash Wednesday) this Office of
Thanksgiving shall be performed the Day before: And however it shall happen,
there shall be Notice thereof given publicly in the Church the Sunday before.

Morning Prayer shall begin with these Sentences.
I Exhort, That first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving
of Thanks be made for all Men: for Kings, and All, that are in Authority; That
we may lead a quiet, and peaceable life in all Godliness, and Honesty: for this
is good, and acceptable unto God our Savior. 1 Timothy II. 1, 2, 3.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us: But if we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 S. John 1.8, 9.

In stead of Venite Exultemus, the Hymn following shall be said, or sung; One
Verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and People.
O Lord our Governor, Psalm. viii. 1.
how excellent is thy Name in all the World / thou, that have set thy Glory
above the Heavens.

Lord, cxliv. 3.
what is Man, that thou have such Respect unto him: or the Son of Man, that
thou so regardest him:

Thou have made him little lower, viii. 5.
than the Angels: and thou crownest him with Glory, and Honor.

Thou make him to have Dominion over the Works of thine Hands: 6.
and thou have put all things in subjection under his Feet.

For promotion comes neither from the East, lxxv. 7.
nor from the West: nor yet from the South.

For why? 8.
God is the Judge: he puts down One, and sets up Another.

There is no king; xxxiii. 15.
that can be saved by the Multitude of an Host: neither is any mighty Man
delivered by much Strength.

An Horse is a vain thing, 16.
to save a Man: neither shall he deliver any by his great strength.

Blessed is the people, xxx ii. 12.
whose God is the Lord Jehovah: and blessed are the Folk, whom he has chosen
to him to be his Inheritance.

Happy are the people, Ps. cxliv. 15.
that be in such a Case: yea blessed are the people, which have the Lord for
their God.

It Is He, lxxvii. 20^
that leads his people like sheep: by the Hand of Moses, and Aaron.

It Is He that has made us, C. (...)
and not we our selves: We are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

It Is He, cxliv. 10.
that gives Salvation unto Kings: and delivers David his Servant from the
peril of the Sword.

It Is He, xviii. 43.
that delivers them from the Strivings of the people: and subdueth the
people, that is under them.

Their Device is only to put him out, lxii. 4^
whom God will exalt: xviii. 45.
and the strange children dissemble with him.

Yet have thou, (O God) set thy King: 11.6.
upon thy holy Hill of Sion.

Behold, O God our Defender: lxxxiv. 9.
and look upon the Face of thine Anointed.

O hold thou up his Goings in thy paths: xvi i. 5.
that his Footsteps slip not.

Let thy Hand be upon the Man of thy right Hand: lxxx. 17.
and upon the Son of Man, whom thou have made so strong for thine own self.

O give him the Comfort of thy Help: li. 12.
and stablish him with thy free and princely Spirit.

Give the King thy Judgments, lxxii. 1.
O God: and thy Righteousness unto the King's Son.

Then shall he judge thy people according unto Right: Psalm. lxxii. 2.
and defend the Poor.

Show (him) thy mavelous loving Kindness: xvii. 7.
thou, that art the Savior of them, that put their trust in thee, from such as
resist thy right Hand.

Keep him as the Apple of an Eye: xvii. 8.
hide him under the shadow of thy wings.

Thou shall grant the King a long life: lxi, 6.
that his years may be as many Generations.

He shall dwell before God for ever: 7.
O prepare thy loving Mercy, and Faithfulness, that they may preserve him.

In his time shall the Righteous flourish: lxxii. 7.
and abundance of Peace, so long as the Moon endures.

His Dominion shall be also from the one Sea unto the other: 8.
and from the River unto the Lands end.

As for his Enemies, cxxxii. 19.
God shall clothe them with shame* but upon himself shall the Crown flourish.

Great prosperity gives He unto his King: xviii. 52.
and shows loving Kindness unto his Anointed, and unto his seed for evermore.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and world without end:
cvi. 46.
and let all the People say, Amen.

Even so; lxxi. 19.
Blessed be the Name of His Majesty for ever: and let all the Earth be fi^led
with His Majesty. Amen, and Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Proper Psalms. XX.XXI.LXXXV.CXVIII.

Proper Lessons. The first, Jos. I. Te Deum. The second, Romans XIII. Jubilate
Deo.


The Suffrages next after the Creed shall stand thus.

Priest. O Lord, show thy Mercy upon us.

Answ. And grant us thy Salvation.

Priest. O Lord save the King.

Answ. Who puts his truth in thee.

Priest. Send him help from thy holy place.

Answ. And evermore mightily defend him.

Priest. Let his Enemies have no Advantage against him.

Answ. Let not the Wicked approach to hurt him.

Priest. Endue thy Ministers with Righteousness.

Answ. And make thy chosen people joyful.

Priest. O Lord save thy People.

Answ. And bless thine Inheritance.

Priest. Be unto us, O Lord, a strong Tower.

Ans. From the Face of our Enemies.

Priest. O Lord, hear our Prayer.

Answ. And let our Cry come unto thee.

Instead of the first Collect at Morning-Prayer shall these two, which follow,
be used.
ALmighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and Power infinite; We are taught
by thy holy Word, that the Hearts of Kings are in thy Rule, and Governance, and
that thou do dispose, and turn them, as it seems best to thy Godly Wisdom:
We humbly beseech thee, so to dispose and govern the Heart of James thy
Servant, our King, and Governor, that he knowing whose Minister he is, may in
all his Thoughts, Words, and Works, even seek thy Honor, and Glory, and study
to preserve thy People committed to his Charge in Wealth, Peace, and Godliness:
And, that we and all his Subjects, (duly considering whose Authority he has)
may faithfully serve, honor, and humly obey him in thee, and for thee,
according to thy blessed Word, and Ordinance: through Jesus Christ our Lord,
who with thee, and the Holy Ghost ^^^eth and reigns ever one God, World
without End. Amen.

O Most Gracious, and Powerful Lord God, who by thy Divine Providence did as
this Day, Safely, and Quietly place over us in the Imperial Throne of this
Kingdom, thy Servant, our most gracious Sovereign Lord King James; We thine
Unworthy Servants, here Assembled together to Celebrate the Memory of this thy
great Mercy toward us, most humbly beseech thee to grant us Grace, that we may
always show our selves truly, and unfeignedly thankful unto thee for the same;
And that our gracious King may through thy Mercy long continue his Reign over
us in all Virtue, Godliness and Honor. Preserve his Life, and Establish his
Throne. Let his Reign be prosperous, and his Days many. Let Justice, Truth, and
Holiness, Let Peace, and Love, and all Christian Virtues flourish in his Days.
Be unto him (we beseech thee) an Helmet of Salvation, against his Enemies; and
a strong Tower of Defense in the time of Trouble. Let all his People Serve him
with Honor, and Obedience: And let him so duly, and religiously Serve thee
here upon Earth, that hereafter he may Everlastingly Reign with thee in Heaven,
through Jesus Christ thy Son, our Savior. Amen.

In the End of the Litany (which shall always be used upon this Day) after the
Collect, We humbly beseech thee, O Father, etc. shall the following Prayer For
the King and Royal Family be used.
O Lord, our God, who upholdest, and governest all things in Heaven, and Earth;
Receive our humble Prayers with our Thanksgivings for our Sovereign Lord James,
as this Day set over us by thy Grace, and Providence to be our King: And so
together with him bless his Royal Consort, our Gracious Queen Mary, Katherine
the Queen Dowager, the Princesses, Mary and Anne; and the whole Royal Family,
with the Sew of thy holy Spirit; That they all ever trusting in thy Goodness,
protected by thy Power, and crowned with thy gracious, and endless Favor, may
continue before thee, in Health, Peace, Joy; and Honor, a long, and happy Life
upon Earth; And after Death obtain everlasting Life, and Glory in the Kingdom
of Heaven, by the Merits, and Mediation of Christ Jesus our Savior; Who with
the Father, and the holy Spirit lives, and reigns ever one God world without
end. Amen.

In the Communion-Service immediately before the reading of the Epistle,
instead of the Collect for the King, and that of the Day, shall these two be
used, as before in Morning-Prayer.
Almighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, etc.

O most gracious, and powerful Lord God, etc.

After the Nicene Creed shall be read the Homily, Concerning Obedience to
Rulers and Magistrates, set forth by Authority: Or the Minister who officiates
shall preach a Sermon of his own composing upon the same Argument.
The Epistle. 1 S. Pet. 2.11.
DEarly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts, which war against the Soul: Having your conversation honest among the
Gentiles: that whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your
good Works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be
to the King, as supreme; Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well. For
so is the Will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men: As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. Honor all Men. Love the
Brotherhood. Fear God, Honor the King.

The Gospel. S. Matt. 22.16.
ANd they sent out unto him their Disciples, with the Herodians, saying,
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth,
neither earest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of men. Tell
us therefore, What think thou? Is it lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar, or
not? But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye
Hypocrites? Show me the Tribute money. And they brought unto him a Penny. And he
says unto them, Whose is this Image and Superscription? They say unto him,
Cesars. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which
are Cesars: and unto God, the things that are Gods, When they heard these
words, they marvelled, and lest him, and went their way.

In the Offertory shall this Sentence be read.

Godiness is great Riches, if a man be content with that he has. For we
brought nothing into the World; neither may we carry any thing out. 1 Timothy vi.
6, 7.

After the Prayer, For the whole State of Christ's Church, etc these Collects
following shall be used.
GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, That our Sovereign Lord the King, whom
of thine especial Grace, and Favor thou have (as upon this Day) happily
settled in the Throne of Supreme Government over us; being strengthened and
established with thy free and princely Spirit, the Spirit of Wisdom, and
Government, the Spirit of Counsel, and Ghostly Strength, the Spirit of
Knowledge, and true Godliness, and being filled with the Spirit of thy holy
Fear; may be always a Religious Defender of thy holy Faith, and Church among
us, a gracious Governor unto all his Subjects, a glorious Conqueror over all
his Enemies, a mighty Protector of the People committed to his Charge, and a
happy Father of a numerous Posterity, to Rule these Nations after him by
Succession in all Ages, and Generations. And grant also gracious Lord, that we,
and all his Subjects, both of this Kingdom, and in all other his Dominions,
duly considering, that there is no Power but of God, and that the Powers, that
be are ordained of God, may be subject, and obedient to him, not only for
Wrath, but also for Conscience sake; and so may long enjoy, together with him
the Continuance of these thy great Blessings, which by him thou do vouchsafe
unto us, leading a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness, and Honesty,
through Jesus Christ, our only Lord, and Savior: To whom with thee, O Father,
and God the holy Ghost be Glory in the Church throughout all ages World without
End. Amen.

ANd grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the Course of this World may be so
peaceably ordered by thy Governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee,
in all godly Quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

