monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
WILLIAM R.

OUR Will and Pleasure is, That this Form of Prayer with Thanksgiving, made for
the Fifth Day of November, be forthwith Printed and Published, and for the
future Annexed to the Book of Common Prayer and Liturgy of the Church of
England, to be used Yearly, on the said Day, in all Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches and Chapels, in all Chapels of Colleges and Halls within both Our
Universities, and of Our Colleges of Eaton and Winchester, and in all
Parish-Churches and Chapels within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Berwick upon Tweed.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Eighteenth Day of October 1690, in the
Second Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command* Nottingham.

A FORM OF PRAYER WITH Thanksgiving, To be Used Yearly Upon the Fifth Day of
November; For the happy Deliverance of King JAMES I. and the Three Estates of
the Realm, from the most Traitorous and Bloody intended Massacre by Gunpowder:
And also for the Happy Arrival of His present Majesty on this Day for the
Deliverance of our Church and Nation.

By Their Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. MDCXC.

A Form of Prayer with Thanksgiving, to be used Yearly upon the Fifth Day of
November.
The Service shall be the same with the usual Office for Holy Days in all
things; Except where it is hereafter otherwise appointed.

If this Day shall happen to be Sunday, only the Collect proper for that
Sunday, shall be added to this Office in its place.

Morning Prayer shall begin with these Sentences. THe Lord is full of
compassion and mercy: Ps. ciii. 8:
long suffering, and of great goodness.

He will not always be chiding: 9.
neither keeps he his anger for ever.

He has not dealt with us after our sins: 10.
nor rewarded us according to our wickednesses.

Instead of Venite, exultemus, shall this Hymn following be used, one Verse by
the Priest, and another by the Clerk and People. O Give thanks unto the Lord,
for he is gracious: Psalm. cvii. 1.
and his mercy endures for ever.

Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed: 2.
and delivered from the hand of the enemy.

Many a time have they fought against me from my youth up: cxxix. 1.
may Israel now say.

Yea, many a time have they vexed me, from my youth up: 2843
but they have not prevailed against me.

They have privily laid their net to destroy me without a cause: Ps. xxxv. 7.
yea, even without a cause have they made a pit for my soul.

They have laid a net for my feet, lvii. 7.
and pressed down my soul: they have dug a pit before me, and are fallen
into the midst of it themselves.

Great is our Lord, cxlvii. 5.
and great is his power: yea, and his wisdom is infinite.

The Lord sets up the meek: 6.
and brings the ungodly down to the ground.

Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: lxxx. 17.
and upon the son of man whom thou shadest so strong for thine own self.

And so will not we go back from thee: 18.
O let us live, and we shall call upon thy name.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

Proper Psalms. LXIV, CXXIV, CXXV. Proper Lessons. The first, 2 Samuel XXII. Te
Deum. The second, Acts XXIII. Jubilate.
In the Suffrages after the Creed, these shall be inserted and used for the
King and Queen. Priest. O Lord, save the King and Queen;


People. Who put their trust in thee.


Priest. Send them help from thy holy place.


People. And evermore mightily defend them.


Priest. Let their enemies have no advantage against them.


People. Let not the wicked approach to hurt them.


Instead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer, shall these two be used.
ALmighty God, who have in all Ages showed thy Power and Mercy in the miraculous
and gracious deliverances of thy Church, and in the Protection of righteous and
religious Kings and States, professing thy holy and eternal Truth, from the
wicked Conspiracies, and malicious Practices of all the Enemies thereof; We
yield thee our unfeigned Thanks and Praise, for the wonderful and mighty
Deliverance of our late gracious Sovereign King JAMES the First, the Queen, the
Prince, and all the Royal Branches, with the Nobility, Clergy, and Commons of
this Realm, then Assembled in Parliament, by Popish Treachery appointed as
Sheep to the Slaughter, in a most barbarous and savage manner, beyond the
Examples of former Ages. From this unnatural Conspiracy, not our Merit, but thy
Mercy; not our Foresight, but thy Providence delivered us: And therefore not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us; but unto thy Name be ascribed all Honor and
Glory in all Churches of the Saints, from Generation to Generation, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ACcept also, most gracious God, of our unfeigned Thanks for filling our Hearts
again with Joy and Gladness, after the Time that thou have afflicted us, and
putting a New Song into our Mouths, by bringing His Majesty who now Reigns over
us, upon this Day, for the Deliverance of our Church and Nation, from Popish
Tyranny and Arbitrary Power. We Adore the Wisdom and Justice of thy Providence,
which so timely interposed in our extreme Danger, and disappointed all the
Designs of our Enemies. We beseech thee give us such a lively and lasting Sense
of what thou did then, and have, since that Time, done for us, that we may
not grow secure and careless in our Obedience, by presuming upon thy great and
undeserved Goodness; but that it may lead us to Repentance, and move us to be
the more diligent and zealous in all the Duties of our Religion, which thou
have, in a mavelous manner preserved to us. Let Truth and Justice, Brotherly
kindness and Charity, Devotion and Piety, Concord and Unity, with all other
Virtues, so flourish among us, that they may be the Stability of our Times, and
make this Church a Praise in the Earth. All which we humbly beg for the sake of
our Blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

In the end of the Litany (which shall always this day be used) after the
Collect [ We humbly beseech thee O Father, etc.] shall this be said which
follows. ALmighty God and heavenly Father, who of thy gracious providence,
and tender mercy toward us, did prevent the malice and imaginations of our
Enemies, by discovering and confounding their horrible and wicked Enterprise,
plotted and intended this day to be executed against the King, and the whole
State of this Realm, for the subversion of the Government, and Religion
established among us; And did like, wise upon this day wonderfully conduct
thy Servant our present King, and bring him safely into this Kingdom, to
preserve us from the late Attempts of our Enemies to bereave us of our Religion
and Laws: We most humbly praise and magnify thy most glorious Name, for thy
unspeakable goodness toward us expressed in both these Acts of thy mercy. We
confess it has been of thy mercy alone, that we are not consumed: For our sins
have cried to Heaven against us; and our iniquities justly called for vengeance
upon us. But thou have not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after
our iniquities; nor given us over, as we deserved, to be a prey to our Enemies;
but have in mercy delivered us from their malice, and preserved us from death
and destruction. Let the consideration of this thy repeated goodness, O Lord,
work in us true repentance, that iniquity may not be our ruin. And increase in
us more and more a lively faith and love, fruitful in all holy obedience, that
thou may still continue thy favor with the light of thy Gospel to us and our
posterity for evermore; and that for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ our only
Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

Instead of the Prayer [in time of War and Tumults] shall be used this Prayer
following. O Lord, who did this day discover the Snares of death that were
laid for us, and did wonderfully deliver us from the same; Be thou still our
mighty Protector, and scatter our Enemies that delight in blood. Infatuate and
defeat their Counsels, abate their Pride, assuage their Malice, and confound
their Devices. Strengthen the hands of our gracious Sovereigns King WILLIAM and
Queen MARY, and all that are put in Authority under them, with Judgment and
Justice, to cut off all such workers of iniquity, as turn Religion into
Rebellion, and Faith into Faction; that they may never prevail against us, or
triumph in the ruin of thy Church among us: But that our gracious Sovereigns
and their Realms being preserved in thy true Religion, and by thy merciful
goodness protected in the same, we may all duly serve thee, and give thee
thanks in thy holy Congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Communion-Service.
Instead of the Collect for the day, shall this which follows be used.
ETernal God, and our most mighty Protector, we thy unworthy Servants do humbly
present our selves before thy Majesty, acknowledging thy Power, Wisdom and
Goodness in Preserving the King, and the Three Estates of this Realm assembled
in Parliament, from the Destruction this Day intended against them. Make us, we
beseech thee, truly thankful for this, and for all other thy great Mercies
toward us; particularly for making this Day again Memorable, by a fresh
Instance of thy Loving Kindness toward us. We bless thee for giving his
Majesty, that now is, a safe Arrival here, and for making all Opposition fall
before him, till he became our King and Governor. Continue, we beseech thee,
to Protect and Defend him, the Queen, and all the Royal Family, from all
Treasons and Conspiracies; Preserve them in thy Faith, Fear and Love; Prosper
their Reign with long Happiness here on Earth, and Crown them with everlasting
Glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

The Epistle. Romans xiii. 1.
LEt every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of
God: the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same: For he is the minister of God to thee for
good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he hears not the
sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon
him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake. For, for this cause pay you tribute also: for
they are Gods ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render
therefore to all their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

The Gospel. St. Luke ix. 51.
ANd it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received up, he
steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, And sent messengers before his
face: and they went and entered into a village of the Samaritanes, to make ready
for him. And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would
go to Jerusalem. And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said,
Lord; will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as Elias did? But he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not
what manner of Spirit ye are of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. And they went to another village.

After the Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall be read one of the six Homilies
against Rebellion. This Sentence is to be read at the Offertory. WHatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and
the prophets* 8. Matthew. vii. 12.

After the Prayer for the Church Militant, this following Prayer is to be used.
O God, whose Name is Excellent in all the Earth, and thy Glory above the
Heavens; who on this Day did miraculously preserve our Church and State from
the secret Contrivance, and hellish Malice of Popish Conspirators; and on this
Day also did begin to give us a mighty Deliverance from the open Tyranny and
Oppression of the same Cruel and Blood-thirsty Enemies: We bless and adore thy
glorious Majesty, as for the Former, so for this thy Late mavelous Loving
kindness to our Church and Nation, in the Preservation of our Religion and
Liberties. And we humbly pray, that the devout Sense of this thy repeated
Mercy, may renew and increase in us a Spirit of Love and Thankfulness to thee
its only Author; a Spirit of peaceable Submission and Obedience to our Gracious
Sovereign, whom thou made the blessed Instrument of it; and a Spirit of
fervent Zeal for our holy Religion, which now again thou have so wonderfully
Rescued and Established a Blessing to us and our Posterity. And this we beg for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.

