A Form of Prayer with Thanksgiving to be used yearly upon the Fifth day of
November; For the happy Deliverance of the King, and the Three Estates of the
Realm, from the most Traitorous and bloody intended Massacre by Gunpowder.
The service shall be the same with the usual Office for Holy Days in all
things; Except where it is hereafter otherwise appointed. If this shall happen
to be Sunday, only the Collect proper for that Sunday shall be added to this
Office in its place. Morning Prayer shall begin with one of these Sentences.
TVrn thy face away from our sins, O Lord; and blot out all our offenses.

Psalm. 51.9. Correct us, O Lord, but with judgment, not in thine anger; lest
thou bring us to nothing.

Jer. 10.24. I will go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee; and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son.

S. Luke 15.18, 19. Proper Psalms,
Xxxv. Lxxv. Cxxiv. Cxxix.
Proper Lessons.
The first, 2 Samuel xxii. The second, Acts xxiii.
In the suffrages after the Creed, these shall be inserted and used for the
King. Priest. O Lord, save the King;


People. Who puts his trust in thee.


Priest. Send him help from thy holy place.


People. And evermore mightily defend him.


Priest. Let his enemies have no advantage against him.


People. Let not the wicked approach to hurt him.


Instead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer, shall these two be used.
ALmighty God, who have in all ages showed thy power and mercy in the miraculous
and gracious deliverances of thy Church, and in the protection of righteous and
religious Kings and States, professing thy holy and eternal Truth, from the
wicked conspiracies, and malicious practices of all the enemies thereof; We
yield thee our unfeigned thanks and praise, for the wonderful and mighty
deliverance of out fare gracious Sovereign King James, the Queen, the Prince,
and all the Royal Branches, with the Nobility, Clergy, and Commons of this
Realm, then assembled in Parliament, by Popish treachery appointed as sheep to
the slaughter, in a most barbarous and savage manner, beyond the examples of
former ages. From this unnatural conspiracy, not our merit, but thy mercy; not
our foresight, but thy providence delivered us: And therefore not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us; but unto thy Name be ascribed all honor and glory, in all
Churches of the Saints, from generation to generation, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen. O Lord; who did this day discover the wares of death that were
laid for us, and did wonderfully deliver us from the same; Be thou still our
mighty Protector, and scatter our enemies that delight in blood. Infatuate and
defeat their counsels, abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound
their devices. Strengthen the hands of our gracious. King James, and all that
are put in authority under him, with judgment and justice, to cut off all such
workers of iniquity, as turn Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into Faction;
that they may never prevail against us, or triumph in the ruin of thy Church
among us: But that our gracious Sovereigh and his Realms, being preserved in
thy true Religion; and by thy merciful goodness protected in the same, we may
all duly serve thee, and give thee thanks in thy holy congregation, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. In the end of the Litany (which shall always this
day be used) after the Collect ( We humbly beseech thee, O Father, etc.) shall
this be said which follows. ALmighty God, and heavenly Father, who of thy
gracious providence and tender mercy toward us, did prevent the malice and
imoginations of our enemies, by discovering and confounding their horrible and
wicked enterprise, plotted and intended this day to be executed against the
King, and the whose State of this Realm, for the subverston of the Government,
and Religion established amongst us; We most humbly praise and magnify thy
glorious Name for this thine infinite gracious goodness toward us. We confess,
it was thy mercy, thy mercy alone, that we were not then consumed. For our sins
cried to heaven against us; and our iniquities justly called for vengeance upon
us. But thou have not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our
iniquities; nor given us over, as we deserved, to be a prey to our enemies; but
did in mercy deliver us from their malice, and preserve us from death and
destruction. Let the Consideration of this thy goodness, O Lord, work in us
true repentance, that iniquity may not be our ruin. And increase in us more
and more a lively faith, and fruitful love in all holy obedience, that thou
may continue thy favor, with the light of thy Gospel to us and our
posterity for evermore; and that for thy dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ our only
Mediator and Advocate. Amen. In the Communion-Service, instead of the Collect
for the day; shall this which follows be used. ETernal God, and our most
mighty Prosector, we thy unworthy servants do humbly present our selves before
thy Majesty, acknowleding thy power, wisoom, and goodness in preserving the
King, and the three Estares of this Realm assembled in Parliament, from the
destruction this day intended against them. Make us, we beseech thee, truly
thankful for this thy great mercy toward us. Protect and defend our Sovereign
Lord the King, and all the Royal Family, from all Treasons and Conspiracies:
Preserve them in thy faith, fear, and love; prosper his Reign with long
happiness here on earth; and crown him with everlasting glory hereafter in the
kingdom of heaven; through Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.
The Epistle. Romans 13.1. LEt every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For
there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. For rulers are not a
terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the
power: do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same: For he is
the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be
afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the Minister of God, a
revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. For, for this cause
pay you tribute also: for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon
this very thing. Render therefore to all their dues; tribute to whom tribute is
due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 27.1. WHen the morning was come, all the chief priests
and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death. And
when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate
the governor. Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned, repented himself and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to
the chief priests and eiders, saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed
the innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that. And he
cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged
himself. And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not
lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood. And
they took counsel, and bought with them the potters field, to bury strangers
in. Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood unto this day. Then was
fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying. And they took
the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the
children of Israel did value; and gave them for the potters field, as the Lord
appointed me.

After the Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall be read one of six Homilies
against Rebellion. This sentence is to be read at the Offertory. WHatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and
the prophets. S. Matthew. 7.12.

