THE Church of England As by LAW Established: Being the very DOCTRINE and
express Words of the HOMILIES against POPERY.
The thirty fifth Article of the Church of England. The second Book of Homilies
does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for these Times; as
does the former Book of Homilies, which were set forth in time of Edward VI.
And therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by the Ministers diligently
and distinctly, that they may be understood of the people. And to this the
whole Clergy of England have willingly and ex animo subscribed for above this
hundred and twenty years, unto this very day.

Homily for Witsunday, concerning the Coming down of the Holy Ghost in the
likeness of cloven Tongues, p. 207. So that if any man be a dumb Christian, not
professing his Faith openly, but cloaking and coloring himself for fear of
danger in time to come, he gives men occasion justly and with good Conscience
to doubt, lest he have not the Grace of the Holy Ghost within him, because he
is tongue-ty'd, and cannot speak.

Vol. 1. p. 50. For whosoever forsakes the Truth for love or displeasure of
any man, or for lucre and profit to himself, does forsake Christ, and with
Judas betray him.

I. That Ignorance is the Mother of Popery.
BY Ignorance the Jewish Clergy induced the common people to ask the delivery
of Barabbas the seditious Murderer, and to sue for the cruel Crucifying of our
Savior Christ, for that he rebuked the Ambition, Superstition, and other Vices
of the High Priests and Clergy. p. 313. London Edition. Ao 1623.
For, as our Savior Christ testifies, that those that Crucified him wist not
what they did; so does the holy Apostle St. Paul say, If they had known, if
they had not been ignorant, they would never have Crucified the Lord of Glory:
But they knew not what they did. Our Savior Christ himself also foreshewed
that it should come to pass by Ignorance, that those who should persecute and
murder his true Apostles and Disciples, should think they did God acceptable
Sacrifice, and good Service; as it is also verified even at this day.

And in this Ignorance have the Bishops of Rome kept the people of God,
especially the common sort, by no means so much as by withdrawing of the Word
of God from them, and by keeping it under the Vail of an unknown strange
Tongue. For, as it served the ambitious humor of the Bishops of Rome, to
compel all Nations to use the natural Language of the City of Rome, where they
were Bishops, which showed a certain acknowledging of Subjection unto them; So
yet served it much more their crafty purpose, thereby to keep all people so
blind, that they not knowing what they prayed, what they believed, nor what
they were commanded by God, might take all their Commandments for God's. For as
they would not suffer the Holy Scriptures, or Church Service to be used or had
in any other Tongue than the Latin; so were very few even of the most simple
people, taught the Lord's Prayer, the Articles of the Faith, and the ten
Commandments, otherwise than in Latin, which they understood not: By which
universal Ignorance all men were ready to believe whatsoever they said, and to
do whatsoever they commanded.

II. The pretended Reasons for denying the People the free use of the Holy
Scriptures.
The great Utility and Profit that Christian Men and Women may take, (if they
will) by hearing and reading the Holy Scriptures, no Heart can sufficiently
conceive; p. 143
much less is my Tongue able with words to express: wherefore Satan our enemy
seeing the Scriptures to be the very means, and right way to bring the people
to the true knowledge of God, and that Christian Religion is greatly furthered
by diligent hearing and reading of them; he also percieving what an hindrance
and let they be to him and his Kingdom, does what he can to drive the reading
of them out of God's Church. And for that end he has always stirred up in one
place or other cruel Tyrants, sharp Persecutors, and extreme Enemies unto God,
and his infallible Truth, to pull with violence the Holy Bibles out of the
peoples hands, and have most spightfully destroyed and consumed the same to
ashes in the Fire; pretending most untruly, that the much hearing and reading
of Gods Word is the cause of Heresy, carnal Liberty, and the Subversion of all
good Orders. But the knowledge of God and of our selves is so far from being an
occasion of Evil, that it is the readiest, yea the only means to bridle carnal
Liberty, and to kill all our fleshly affections. And the ordinary way to attain
this knowledge, is, with diligence to hear and read the Holy Scriptures.

III. Concerning the singular Profitableness of Lay-men's Books, which with
them do supply the place of the Holy Scriptures.
For what Lessons of Contempt of Riches, and Vanity of this World can such
books, so besmeared with Gold, set with precious Stones, covered with Silks,
teach? What Lessons of Soberness and Chastity can our p. ^3.
Women learn of those pictured Scriptures, with their nice Apparel and wanton
looks? But away for shame with these colored Cloaks of Idolatry, of the Books
and Scriptures of Images, and Pictures, to teach Idiots, nay, to make Idiots,
and stark fools and Beasts of Christians. Do men, I pray you, when they have
the same Books at home with them, run on Pilgrimage to seek like Books at Rome,
Compostella or Jerusalem, to be taught of them, when they have the same Books
at home? Do men reverence some Books, and despise and set light by others of
the same sort? Do men kneel before their Books, light Candle at Noon-time, burn
Incense, offer up Gold and Silver, and other Gifts to their Books? do men
either feign or believe Miracles to be wrought by their Books? I am sure that
the new Testament of our Savior Jesus Christ, containing the Word of Life, is
a more lively, express and true Image of our Savior, than all carved, graven,
molten and painted Images in the World be; and yet none of all these things be
done to that Book, or Scripture of the Gospel of our Savior, which be done to
Images and pictures, the Books and Scriptures of Laymen and Idiots, as they
call them. Wherefore, call them what they list, it is most evident by their
deeds, that they make of them no other Books, nor Scripture, than such as teach
most filthy and horrible Idolatry; as the users of such Books daily prove by
continual practicing the same. O Books and Scriptures, in the which the
Devilish Schoolmaster Satan has penned the lewd Lessons of wicked Idolatry,
for his dastardly Disciples and Scholars to behold, read and learn; to God's
most high dishonor, and their most horrible Damnation. Have not we been much
bound, think you, to those which should have taught us the Truth out of God's
Book, and his holy Scripture, that they have shut up that Book and Scripture
from us, and none of us so bold as once to open it or read on it? and instead
thereof, to spread us abroad these goodly, carven, and gilten Books, to teach
us such good and godly Lessons?

IV. Concerning the right use of Churches, and the gross abuses of them under
Popery.
And have not the Christians of late days, and even in our days also, in like
manner provoked the Displeasure and Indignation of Almighty God? partly because
they have profaned and defiled their Churches with Heathenish and Jewish
abuses; with Images and Idols, with numbers of Altars, too too superstitiously
and intollerably abused, with gross abusing, and filthy corrupting of the
Lord's Holy Super, the blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood, with an
infinite number p. 131.
of Toys and Trifles of their own devices, to make a goodly outward show, and
to deface the plain, simple and sincere Religion of Christ Jesus: Partly they
resort to the Church, like Hypocrites, full of all Iniquity and sinful Life,
having a vain and dangerous fancy and persuasion, that if they come to the
Church, besprinkle them with Holy Water, hear a Mass, and be blessed with the
Chalice, though they understand not one word of the whole Service, nor feel one
motion of Repentance in their Hearts, all is well, all is sure. Fie upon such
mocking and blaspheming of God's holy Ordinance. Churches were made for another
purpose; that is, to resort thither, and to serve God truly, there to learn his
blessed Will, there to call upon his mighty Name, there to use the holy
Sacraments, there to travel how to be in Charity with thy Neighbor, there to
have thy poor and needy Neighbor in remembrance, from thence to depart better
and more godly than thou cameest thither.

What Dens of Thieves the Churches of England have been made by the blasphemous
buying and selling the p. 80.
most precious Body and Blood of Christ in the Mass, as the World was made to
believe, at Dirigies, at Month's Minds, at Trentals, in Abbeys and Chantries,
besides other horrible abuses (God holy Name be blessed for ever.) which we now
see and understand. All these Abominations they that supply the room of Christ,
have cleansed and purged the Churches of England of, taking away all such
fulsomness and filthiness, as through blind Devotion, and Ignorance has crept
into the Church these many hundred years. Wherefore, O ye good Christian
people, ye dearly beloved in Christ Jesus, ye that glory not in worldly and
vain Religion, in fantastical adorning and decking; but rejoice in heart to
see the Glory of God truly set forth, and the Churches restored to their
ancient and godly use; render your hearty thanks to the goodness of Almighty
God, who has in our days stirred up the hearts, not only of his godly
Preachers and Ministers, but also of his faithful and most Christian
Magistrates and Governors, to bring such godly things to pass.

V. Concerning Prayer in an unknown Tongue.
First, St. Paul to the Corinthians says; Let all be done to edifying; which
cannot be unless common Prayers p. 137.
and Administration of Sacraments be in a tongue known to the people: For,
says St. Paul, He that speaks in a tongue unknown, shall be to the bearers
an Alien, which in a Christian Congregation is a great Absurdity.

As touching the times before the coming of Christ, there was never man yet
that would affirm, that either the people of God, or other had their Prayers,
and Administration of the Sacraments, or Sacrifices, in a tongue that they
themselves understood not. As for p. 138.
the time since Christ, till that usurped Power of Rome began to spread it
self, and to enforce all the Nations of Europe to have the Romish Language in
admiration; it appears by the consent of the most ancient and learned
Writers, that there was no strange or unknown Tongue used in the Congregation
of Christians.

St. Austin writing upon the eighteenth Psalm, says, what this should be, we
ought to understand, that we may sing with reason of man, and not with
chattering p. 139.
of Birds. For Owls, Popinjayes, Ravens, Pyes and other such like Birds are
taught by men to prate they know not what: but to sing with understanding is
given by Gods Holy Will to the nature of man.

Let us therefore conclude with God and all good men's Assent, that no
Common Prayer or Sacraments ought to be Ministered in a Tongue that is not
understood p. ^
of the Hearers.

VI. Against Invocation of Saints or Angels, and that Prayer ought to be made
and directed to God alone.
But that the truth hereof may the better appear, even to them that be most
simple and unlearned, let p. 114.
us consider What Prayer is: St. Austin calls it a lifting up of the the mind
to God. Isidorus says, that it is an affection of the heart, and not a labor
of the Lips.

Now then, is there any Angel, any Virgin, any Patriarch or Prophet among the
Dead, that can understand, or know the meaning of the heart? The Scripture
says, It is God that searches the heart and the reins, and that he only
knows the hearts of the children of men; as for the Saints, they have so
little knowledge of the secrets of the heart, that many of the Ancient Fathers
greatly doubt, whether they know any thing at all that is commonly done on
earth. And albeit some think they do, yet St. Augustine a Doctor of great
authority, and also antiquity, has this opinion of them: that they know no
more what we do on earth, than we know what they do in Heaven. For proof
whereof he alleges the words of Isaiah the Prophet, where it is said, Abraham
is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not. Esa. 63.


Thus you see, That the authority both of the Scripture, and also of Augustine,
does not permit that we should pray unto them. O that all men would studiously
read and search the Scriptures, then should they not be drowned in Ignorance,
but should easily perceive the p. 115.
Truth, as well of this point of Doctrine as of all the rest. For there does
the Holy Ghost plainly teach us, that Christ is our only Mediator and
Intercessor with God, and that we must not seek and run to another.

Let us not therefore any thing mistrust Gods goodness, Let us not fear to come
before the Throne of his Mercy, let us not seek the aid and help of Saints; but
p. 117.
let us come boldly our selves, nothing doubting but God for Christ's sake, in
whom he is well pleased, will hear us without a spokes-man.

VII. Against the Doctrine of Merit.
But this saying, That we be justified by Faith only, freely, and without
works, is spoken for to take away clearly all merit of our works, as being
unable to deserve our Justification at God hands, and thereby most plainly to
express the weakness of man, and the goodness of God; the imperfectness of our
own works, and the most abundant Grace of our Savior Christ; Vol. 1. p. 16.
and therefore wholly to ascribe the Merit and deserving of our Justification
unto Christ only, and his most precious blood shedding. This Faith the Holy
Scripture teaches us, this is the strong Rock and Foundation of Christian
Religion; this Doctrine all old and Ancient Authors of Christ's Church do
approve, this Doctrine advances and sets forth the true Glory of Christ,
and beats down the vain Glory of Man; this whosoever denies is not to be
accounted for a Christian Man, nor for a setter forth of Christ's Glory; but for
an Adversary to Christ and his Gospel, and for a setter forth of men's vain
glory.

VIII. Concerning Religious Orders, as they call themselves, or Pharisaical
Sects by Antichrist invented, as the Homily calls them, and concerning their
Merits and works of Supererogation.
Sects and feigned Religions were never the fortieth part So many among the
Jews, nor more Superstitiously and ungodly abused, than of late days they have
been among us. Which Sects and Religions had so many hypocritical and feigned
works in their State of Religion (as they arrogantly named it) That their Lamps
(as they said) ran always over, able to satisfy not only for their own Sins,
l. 1. p. 36.
but also for all other their benefactors Brothers and Sisters of Religion, as
most ungodlily and craftily they had persuaded the multitude of Ignorant
People; keeping in diverse places as it were Marts or Markets of Merits being
full of their Holy Relics, Images, Shrines, and works of overflowing
abundance ready to be sold. And all things which they had were called Holy,
Holy Cowles, Holy Girdles, Holy Pardons, Beads, Holy Shoes, Holy Rules, and all
full of Holiness. But to pass over the innumerable Superstitiousness that has
been in strange-Apparel, in Silence, in Dormitory, in Cloister, in Chapter, in
choice of Meats and Drinks, and in such like things, let us consider what
Enormities and Abuses have been in the three chief principal Points, which they
called the three Essentials, or three chief Foundations of Religion, That is to
say, Obedience, Chastity and wilful Poverty.

First under pretense or Color of Obedience to their Father in Religion (which
Obedience they made themselves) they were made free by their Rule and Canons
from the Obedience of their natural Father and Mother, and from the Obedience
of Emperor and King and all Temporal Power; whom of very duty by Gods Laws
they were bound to obey. And so the profession of their obedience not due was a
forsaking of their due obedience. And how their profession of Chastity was kept
it is more honesty to pass over in silence, and let the World judge of that
which is well known, than with unchaste words, by expressing of their unchaste
Life, to offend chaste and godly Ears. And as for their wilful poverty, it was
such, that when in Possessions, Jewels, Plate and Riches, they were equal or
above Merchants, Gentlemen, Barons, Earls and Dukes: yet by this subtle
Sophistical term Proprium in Commune, That is to say, Proper in Common, they
mocked the World, persuading that notwithstanding all their Possessions and
Riches yet they kept their Vow and were in wilful Poverty.

IX. That the Mass is a gross, Idolatrous and mummish Abuse of the Lord's
Supper.
But before all other things this we must be sure of p. 198.
especially, that this Supper be in such wise done and ministered, as our Lord
and Savior did and commanded to be done, as his holy Apostles used it, and the
good Fathers in the primitive Church frequented it. We must then take heed,
lest of the memory, it be made a Sacrifice; lest of a Communion, it be made a
private eating; lest of two parts we have but one; lest applying it for the
dead, we lose the fruit that be alive. Let us rather in these matters follow
the Advice of Cyprian in the like cases; that is, cleave fast to the first
beginning, hold fast the Lord's Tradition, do that in the Lord's Commemoration
which he himself did, he himself commanded, and his Apostles confirmed. This
caution or foresight if we use, then may we see those things that be requisite
in the worthy Receiver; whereof this was the first, that we have a right
understanding of the thing it self.

For what has been the cause of the ruin of God's Religion, but the ignorance
hereof? What has been p. 99.
the cause of this gross Idolatry, but the ignorance hereof? What has been the
cause of this mummish Massing, but the ignorance hereof?

X. What kind of Power the Pope's is, and that therefore we ought not to submit
to it.
Therefore let us all fear the most detestable vice of Rebellion, ever knowing
and remembering that he that resists or withstandeth Common Authority
resists or withstandeth God and his Ordinance, Vol. 1. p. 76.
as it may be proved by many other more places of the Holy Scripture. And here
let us take heed, that we understand not these or such other like places (which
so straightly command Obedience to Superiors, and so straightly punished
Rebellion and Disobedience to the same) to be meant in any condition of the
pretended or colored Power of the Bishop of Rome. For truly the Scripture of
God allows no such usurped power, full of Enormities, Abusions, and
Blasphemies.

XI. That the Papists worship a vast number of false Gods.
And for that Idolatry stands chiefly in the mind p. 46.
it shall in this part first be proved, that our Image maintainers have had,
and have the same Opinions and Judgment of Saints, whose Images they have made
and worshipped, as the Gentiles Idolaters had of their Gods. What I pray you be
such Saints with us to whom we Attribute the defense of certain Countries, but
Dij tutelares of the Gentiles Idolaters? What be such Saints to whom the
safeguard of certian Cities are appointed, but Dij Presides with the Gentiles
Idolaters? What be such Saints to whom contrary to the use of the Primitive
Church, Temples and Churches be builded, and Altars erected, but Dij Patroni of
the Gentiles Idolaters? Oenomaus and Hisiodus show, that in their time there
were thirty thousand Gods; I think we had no fewer Saints to whom we gave the
honor due to God.

Every Artificer and Profession has his special Saint as a peculiar God: As
for example, Scholars have Saint Nicholas and St. Gregory, Painters St. Luke,
neither p. 47.
lack Soldiers their Mars, nor Lovers their Venus amongst Christians. All
diseases have their special Saints as Gods the curers of them. The Pox Saint
Roch, the falling Evil, St. Cornelis, The Toothach, St. Appolin, etc. Neither
do Beasts and Cattle lack their Gods with us, for St. Loy is the Horse-leach,
and St. Anthony the Swineheard, etc.

These things are not written to any reproach of the Saints themselves, who
were the true Servants of God, and did give all honor to him, taking none unto
themselves, and are blessed Souls with God: but against our foolishness and
wickedness, making of the true Servants of God, false Gods, by attributing to
them the power which is Gods, and due to him only. And for that we have such
Opinions of the power and ready help of Saints, all our Legends, Hymns,
Sequences, and Masses, did contain Stories, Lauds and Praises of p. 48.
them, and Prayers to them; yea, and Sermons also altogether of them, and to
their praises, Gods word being clean laid aside: And this we do altogether
agreeable to the Saints, as did the Gentile Idolaters to their false Gods. For
these Opinions which men have had of mortal persons, were they never so holy,
the old most godly and learned Christians have written against the feigned Gods
of the Gentiles, and Christian Princes have destroyed their Images, who if they
were now living, would doubtless likewise both write against our false Opinions
of Saints, and also destroy their Images. For it is evident, that our Image
maintainers have the same Opinion of Saints, which the Gentiles had of their
false Gods, and thereby are moved to make them Images, as the Gentiles did.

XII. Concerning Popish Relics.
But in this they pass the folly and wickedness of the Gentiles, that they
honor and worship the Relics and Bones of our Saints, which prove that they
be mortal men and dead, and therefore no Gods to be worshipped, which the
Gentiles would never confess of their Gods for very shame. But the Relics we
must Kiss and Offer to, especially on Relique-Sunday. p. 53.
And while we offer (that we should not be weary, or repent us of our Cost) the
Music and Minstrelsie goes merrily all the Offertory time, with praising and
calling upon those Saints whose Relics be then in presence; yea, and the
water also wherein those Relics have been dipped, must with great reverence
be reserved as very holy and effectual. Is this agreeable to Chrysostom, who
writes thus of Relics? Do not regard the Ashes of Saints Bodies, nor the
Relics of their Flesh and Bones consumed with time: But open the Eyes of thy
faith, and behold them clothed with heavenly virtue, and the Grace of the Holy
Ghost, and shining with the brightness of the heavenly Light. But our Idolaters
found too much advantage of Relics and Relic water to follow St.
Chrysostom's Council. And because Relics were so gainful, few places were
there, but they had Relics provided for them. And for more plenty of
Relics, some one Saint had many Heads, one in one place, and another in
another place; some had six Arms and Twenty six Fingers. And whereas our Lord
bare his Cross alone, if all the pieces of the Relics thereof were gathered
together, the greatest Ship in England would scarcely bear them; and yet the
greatest part of it (they say) does yet remain in the hands of the Infidels,
for the which they pray in their Beads bidding, that they may get it also into
their hands for such godly use and purpose. And not only the Bones of the
Saints, but every thing appertaining to them was an holy Relic. In some place
they offer a Sword, in some the Scabbard, in some a Shoe, in some a Saddle that
had been set upon some holy Horse; in some the Coals wherewith St. Lawrence was
roasted; in some the Tail of the Ass which our Lord Jesus Christ sat on, to be
kissed and offered unto for a Relic: For rather than they would lack a
Relic, they would offer you a Horse bone instead of a Virgins Arm, or the
Tail of the Ass to be kissed and offered unto for Relics. O wicked, Impudent
and most shameless men, the devisers of these things; O silly, foolish and
dastardly Daws, and more beastly than the Ass whose Tail they kissed, that
believe such things. Now God be merciful to such silly Christians, who by the
fraud and falsehood of those which should have taught them the way of truth and
life, have been made not only more wicked than the Gentile Idolaters, but also
no wiser than Asses, Horses and Mules, which have no understanding.

XIII. Concerning Image Worship.
True Religion then, and pleasing of God stands not in Making, Settting up,
Painting, Gilding, Clothing p. 74.
and Decking of dumb and dead Images, (which be but great Puppets and Babies
for old fools in Doatage and wicked Idolatry to dally and play with) nor in
Kissing of them, Caping, Kneeling, Offering to them, incensing of them, seting
up of Candles, hanging up Legs, Arms, or whole Bodies of wax before them, or
Praying and asking of them, or of Saints, things only belonging to God to give.
But all these things be vain and abominable, and most damnable before God: For
ye have heard evidently proved in these Homilies against Idolatry, by Gods
Word, the Doctors of the Church, Ecclesiastical Histories, Reason and
Experience, that Images have been, and be worshipped, and so Idolatry committed
to them by infinite multitudes, to the great Offense of Gods Majesty, and
danger of infinite Souls; and that Idolatry cannot possibly be separated from
Images set up in Churches and Temples, p. 75.
gilded and decked gloriously, and that therefore our Images be indeed very
Idols, and so all the Prohibitions, Laws, Curses, Threatenings of horrible
Plagues, as well temporal as eternal, contained in the holy Scriptures,
concerning Idols, and the Makers, and Maintainers, and Worshippers of them,
appertain also to our Images set up in Churches and Temples, and to the Makers,
Maintainers, and Worshippers of them; and all those Names of Abomination, which
Gods Word in the holy Scriptures gives to the Idols of the Gentiles, appertain
to our Images, being Idols like to them, and having like Idolatry committed
unto them.

XIV. What Use the Church of Rome makes of her gay Imagery.
Now concerning excessive decking of Images and Idols with Painting, Gilding,
Adorning with precious Vestures, Pearl and Stone, what is it else, but for the
further provocation and enticement to spiritual fornication, to deck spiritual
Harlots most costly and wantonly, p. 69.
which the Idolatrous Church understands well enough? For she being indeed
not only a Harlot, (as the Scripture calls her) but also a foul, filthy old
withered Harlot (for she is indeed of ancient years) and understanding her lack
of nature and true Beauty, and great loathsomness which of her self she has,
does after the custom of such Harlots, Paint her self, and Deck and Attire her
self with Gold, Pearl, Stone, and all kind of precious Jewels, that she shining
with the outward Beauty and glory of them, may please the foolish fancy of fond
Lovers, and so entice them to spiritual Fornication with her; who if they saw
her (I will not say naked) but in simple Apparel, would abhor her as the
foulest and filthiest Harlot that ever was seen, according as appears by the
description of the garnishing of the great Strumpet of all Strumpets, the
Mother of Whoredom, set forth by Saint John in his chapter 17.
Revelation, who by her glory provoked the Princes of the earth to commit
Whoredom with her.

XV. Concerning the opening of Shop, and public seting up of Images.
It is the Office of Godly Magistrates likewise to avoid Images and Idols out
of Churches and Temples, as spiritual Harlots out of suspected places, for p.
62, 63
the avoiding of Idolatry, which is spiritual Fornication. And as he were the
Enemy of all Honesty, that should bring Strumpets and Harlots out of their
secret corners into the public Market place, there freely to dwell, and
practice their filthy Merchandise, so is he the Enemy of the true worshipping of
God, that brings Idols and Images into the Temple and Church, the House of
God, there openly to be worshipped, and to rob the Jealous God of his Honor,
who will not give it to any other, nor his glory to carved Images, who is as
much forsaken, and the bond of love between man and him as much broken by
Idolatry, which is spiritual Fornication, as is the knot and bond of Marriage
broken by carnal Fornication. Let all this be taken as a Lie, if the Word of
God enforce it not to be true. Cursed be the man (says God in Deuteronomy)
that makes a carved or molten Image, and places it in a secret corner; and
all the people shall say, Amen. Thus says God, for at that time no man durst
have, or Worship Images openly, but in corners only; and the whole World being
the great Temple of God, he that in any corner thereof robs God of his
glory, and gives it to Stocks and Stones, is pronounced by Gods Word Accursed.
Now he that will bring these spiritual Harlots out of their lurking corners,
into public Churches and Temples, that spiritual Fornication may there openly,
of all men and women, without shame be committed with them, no doubt that
person is Cursed of God, and twice Cursed, and all good and godly Men and Women
will say, Amen, and their Amen will take effect also.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Sam. Thomason. 1685.


