THE ANSWER Of the Commission of the General Assembly, to the Quaeree,
Propounded to them, from the PARLIAMENT. WITH AN ANSWER Of the Commission of
the General Assembly, to a letter, sent to them, from the Ministers of the
Presbytery of Sterline.

ABERDENE, Printed by James Brown, 1651.

PERTH, 14 December, 1650. Ante meridiem.
Answer from the Commission of the General Assembly, to the Quaeree from the
PARLIAMENT.
THe Commission of the General Assembly, Having propounded unto them, from
the Honorable Estates of Parliament, this Quaestion, What persons are to be
admitted to rise in arms, and join with the forces of the kingdom, and in
what capacity, for defense thereof, against the army of Sectaries, who (who
contrary to the Solemn League and Covenant, and Treaties) have most unjustly
invaded, and are destroying the kingdom? Does humbly return to their L.
this Answer:

That, considering it is a necessary duty incumbent to their L. both by the
Law of GOD, and the law of nature, to use all necessary, and lawful means,
for the defense of the Liberty, Lyves, and Estates of the people of the
Kingdom, against the public enemy, who has most unjustly invaded us, and is
destroying all these; And considering that the Forces formerlie raised in this
kingdom, are so ruined, and scattered, that there is not any considerable power
of them remaining; And that the enemy has now in his possession, and
altogether under his power, a great part, and that the best part of the
kingdom; And that there cannot possibly be raised out of the rest of the Land,
any competency of Forces, to oppose the enemy, either for preservation of these
parts that are yet free, or for relief of these that are already subdued (as is
represented by the Estares) unles there be a more general calling forth of
the body of the people, then heretofore has been; Therefore in this case, of
so great, and evident necessity, we cannot be against the raising of all
Fensible persons in the Land, and permitting them to fight against this enemy,
for defense of the kingdom; Excepting such as are excommunicate, fofaulted,
notoriously profane, or flagitious, and such as have been from the beginning,
and continue still, or are at this time, obstinate, and professed enemies, and
opposers of the Covenant, and Cause of GOD: And for the capacity of acting,
That the Estates of Parliamet ought to have, as we hope they will have,
special care, that in this so general concurrence of all the people of the
kingdom, none be put in such trust or power, as may be prejudicial to the
Cause of GOD; And that such Officers as are of known integrity, and affection
to the Cause, and particularly, such as have suffered in our former armies, may
be taken special notice of.

A. Ker.


PERTH, 6 January, 1651.
The Answer of the Commission of the General Assembly, to the The printing of
this letter, we thought might well be spared, because of the slownes of the
Press here, and because it is already printed at Edmburgh, and is now abroad in
the hands of many.
letter of the Ministers of the Presbytery of Sterline to them.
IN our letters, sent from our last meeting, to the several Presbyteries of
this Kirk, signifying to them, the resolutions of King, and Parliament, to call
forth the body of the people, throughout the parts of this kingdom, which
are yet free from the oppression of the enemy, for the defense, and
delyverance of the kingdom; and desyring all Ministers, in their places, and
stations, to contribute their endeavors, for advancing that work, and service:
As we did then conceive, so do we still judge, that we did nothing, but what
our ductie, in the trust committed to us, by the General Assembly, for the
good of the Kirk, and people of GOD, in this kingdom, obliged us to do; And
that we required of Ministers, their concurrence, in such service, as the
present condition of the kingdom, does require, and nor only, the practice
of all Christian Nations, but also, both the law of nature, and the Law of GOD,
does allow, and approve; Expecting, that the Servants of GOD, out of their
tender affection to the suffering, and bleeding condition of this Kirk, and
kingdom, and respect to the lawful commands of authority, should not been
deficient to so necessary, and pious a service: Or, that if any should find
matter of scruple, and doubt in the public resolution, concerning that
service, which might retard, or put them to a demurre therein, that they would
have come, or sent some from them, to communicate their doubts, and scruples,
with us, that by conference thereupon, light might have been sought, for
removing of mistakes, rather then, remaining at distance, without necessity,
sent their mind, positivelie determining, contrary to the public resolution in
writing, which, ordinarily proves a snare, in matters of controversy, which
is not easily win out of again, men seldom coming off from that, which
once they have in matters of that kind, put pen to paper on: But no ways
expecting, that any brethren would have been so disrespective to the public
judicatorie of the Kirk, and so forward to undo peace, and union in the Kirk
of GOD, as to go up to Pulpits, and preach publicly, against the resolutions
of the public Iudicatorie, before they had recourse to themselves, to be
informed of the grounds, and reasons of their resolutions, and to communicate
any doubts, themselves had upon the same, as to our great grief, we hear
some have done. This, as it is most disorderly, and scandalous, so it cannot,
but at this time, be most prejudicial to the safety of the Kirk, and
kingdom, and advantageous to the designs of the public enemy: And we
expect, that Presbyteries, in their respective bounds, will take notice of what
has been done this way, and reprove it, so as the offense may be taken away,
and the prejudice obviated, so far as may be. As for satisfaction to any
doubts, that are brought against the present public resolution, in relation to
acting against the enemy, and reasons clearing it to be a duty, allowed, and
approven of GOD, albeit, as we have intimate before, this might have been more
convenientlie done in mutual conference together, in the spirit of love, and
meekeesse, then in the way, that is by some chosen: yet shall we not refuse,
even in this way, to hold forth to others, these grounds, wherewith we our
selves were satisfied, and we judge, all in this Kirk, and kingdom, ought to
be, and may be satisfied, as also to answer these contrary reasons, which have
been brought, and we were not ignorant of, when we agreed upon that resolution.

And first, we shall desire every one seriously to consider the case and
condition wherein the kingdom is engaged, and stands, at this time, that
now, we are not upon an engagement of invasive war, but upon necessary
defense against a foreign enemy, who has not only injustly invaded us, but
also (through the holy permissive providence of GOD) slain many of our
Brethren with the sword, subdued a great part of the Land, is oppressing the
people of GOD therein, and following his injust designs, and intentions
against the rest of the kingdom, that in this case, in the ordinary way of
providence, according to which men must act, unless they would be guilty of
tempting GOD, there is need, and ought to be employed against the enemy, such a
competency of power, as is requisite, in right and warrantable prudencie, and
may be had, not being of it self sinful: This certainly is man's duty, what
ever GOD, out of His soveraignity, has done, or may do, in the case of want,
or disproportion of means: That in such parts of the kingdom, as are yet free
from the oppression of the enemy, and so out of which any men can be raised,
there is not a possibility, to get such a competencie of power, unless there
be a more general calling forth of the body of the people, then has been
before, this as it is most certain in it self, so it is most apparent, and
evident unto all, that do understand these parts of the kingdom, and whereas
faithful, and honest men in the State, well acquainted with the several
shyres of that part of the kingdom, have publicly declared, that, when all
shall be brought together, that can be called forth of these parts, according
to public resolution, will scarce be a competent power, against the power of
the enemy, we cannot but much wonder, if any not so acquainted therewith, shall
hold the contrary, and not give credit to the declaration of honest, and
faithful men, especially in authority, the matter being such, as in the
immediate knowledge thereof, depends on sense, and as to these that have not
that knowledge, pertains to humane faith, which gives credit to the
testimony testium idoneorum, of competent witnesses, such as these are whom we
have designed: So that the Brethren in their letter, whileas for asserting the
exercising of their judgment anent this point, of the necessity of the
kingdom, in a way of dissenting from the public declaration, and testimony
given thereanent, they do allege the practice of the General Assembly 1648,
desiring the Parliament to satisfy, and clear them in the lawfulness, and
necessity of the war, seem not to argue to the purpose, because there the
question was about a point de jure, here the question is about the existence of
physical means.

The case of the kingdom standing thus, the question is, whether it be a
lawful course or not, to raise all sensible persons, acknowledged subjects of
the kingdom, according as is expressed in the public resolution for defense,
and deliverance of the kingdom, from the unjust violence and oppression of a
foreign enemy? We judge the course not only to be lawful, but necessary
duty in the case, for these reasons: 1. Because it has been through all
generations, and is at this day, the universal, unconverted practice of all
christian kingdoms, and States, in case of just defense, against foreign
invasion, to employ all such as are acknowledged subjects, and citicens, in
such a way, as is not evidently destructive to Religion, which practice, is
also allowed, and approven by the judgment of the soundest Divines in the
Protestant Kirks, as might be particularly, instanced, if need were, in this
paper. We do not lean our faith, in matters of conscience, upon the
practices, or testimonies of men, yet conceive, that so universal a practice,
in a matter of conscience, uncontroverted, ought not to be misregarded, and
seems is so far from being so horrid a sin, as some account it, that it
cannot want good and clear reason for it: And here we shall desire that the
practice of our own first reformers of this Kirk, may be called to mind, who
did receive sundry unto communion of counsels, and acting with them, against
the Queen Regents faction, who had been before upon her part and faction,
opposing the Congregation, when as they came to acknowledgement of their former
errors, and were willing to join with the Congregation, in the good cause. 2.
As the law of nature binds and obliges every one, that is a member of the
political body of a kingdom, or State, to endeavor, to the uttermost of their
power, the preservation of the whole, and of other fellow members, in a just
quarrel, and cause, which if they refuse to do, they are guilty of murder,
and treachery against the Commonwealth: So the same law of nature allows the
body, and lays an obligation upon such, as are governors and rulers of that
body, to call for the help and assistance of every member, as necessity
requires, for defense and deliverance of the body, from injust violence and
destruction, which if they do not, they run into the same guiltiness, and
betray their trust: Or, to make the matter more clear, take this formed
argument: That which any is obliged to do for another preservation, and
cannot omit, without the guiltiness of another destruction, that may the
other lawfully require of him, when he needs it, and when it may be done by
him, without the undoing of a greater good, then is the others preservation:
But so it is, that every subject of the kingdom, is obliged by the law of
nature, their oath of allegiance, their Covenants, the Law of GOD, to endeavor,
to the uttermost of their power, the preservation of the kingdom, against
injust violence: Therefore their help may be lawfully called for by such as
are in authority, for this end, when; the kingdoms preservatio^ stands in need
of it, and their help tends not to the undoing of a greater good, the^ is the
preservation of the safety of the kingdom. But, to assume in way of
prosyllogisme, the preservatio^ of the safety of the kingdom, at this time,
against injust violence, stands in need of the help of many subjects, who have
been formerly debarred from rising in arms, and their power may be employed for
that end, without the undoing of a greater good, as shall be cleared afterward,
in answering the objectio^s: Therefore, etc. 3. When we have, in the sincerity
of our hearts, advised with the Word of GOD, we can find nothing therein
contrary to the course, in the casewe have propounded: And how could we find
otherwise, seeing the law of nature (which is comprehended in the Word of GOD,
as a part of it) is so clear for it? But we do find in the Word, good and
clear warrant for it: We shall not stay upon all which might be brought thence,
but shall only point at one or two particulars, which speaking clearly to the
point, may be sufficient to build faith upon. 1. We find in the book of Judges,
when, because of great defection from the purity of Religion, and the Covenant
of GOD in that ancient Kirk, they were brought under the oppression of foreign
enemies; yet, when as any governor was raised up by GOD, for their defense,
and deliverace from oppression, and the people are raised, and gathered out for
that end, we find them all called out promiscuously, not withstanding a great
part of them, no question, had been in the defectio^, And it cannot be said,
without groundles rashness, that al such had given convincing evidences of true
repentance: Neither do we find that any of their governors are reproved, for
not excluding such as had been in the defection, from rising in arms, for the
necessary defense and deliverance of the Land: But on the contrary, we find sad
reproofs, and terrible curses, pronounced against the^, that came not out ot
the work; Judge. 5. v. 15.16.17.23. And who will say, that there were none
amongst these mentioned there, had been in the defection? 2. The like may be
seen in the history of the Kings and Chronicles, that, when after a defection
from Religion, and the Covenant of GOD, gracious reforming kings arose, and had
to do against foreign invasion, we find not these kings debarring any
subjects, but calling them out promiscuously, for the just and necessary
defense of the kingdom: Neither do we ever find it laid to their charge, that
they called out such, or such subjects, upon that service, though we may
clearly perceive by the story, and sermons of the Prophets of the times, that
in time of best kings, and best reformations, the greater part of the body of
the people were very wicked, and still retaining in their practice, much
superstition: Insta^ces are well known to such as have any acquaintance in
Scripture. 3. We find a very clear practice, stamped with divine approbation,
and followed with the LORDS blessing making it succesfull, speaking abundantly
to our point, 1. Sam. 11. Where, in the case of Jabesh-gilead, besieged by a
foreign enemy, Saul commands all Israel to come forth, for the defense and
delivery of their brethren, under pain of a severe civil censure: Wherein we
desire these things to be considered. 1. That what Saul did in this business,
was by the motion of the Spirit of GOD; to wit, acting him to do the duty of
his Royal calling. 2. That what the people did in obedience to the command,
they were also moved thereunto of GOD, by an impression of his fear, making
the^, to wit, to revere^ce the authority of the king, called by him, and now
acting his calling. 3. That in this acting, Samuel is co^curring, and acting
jointly with Saul, without making any opposition to the course that is taken.
4. As all the body of the people is commanded to rise, so all come forth as one
man, and yet Cap. 10. v. ult. many amongst them (as is apparent a great
faction) were sons of Belial, wicked and turbulent persons, who malignantly
opposed the work, and clear revealed will of GOD, in calling Saul to the
government of his people. We desire that Calvin's sermons on that chapter be
read, wherein, amongst other things that make to our purpose, it will be found,
that that learned, judicious, and pious writer, does co^demn the citizens of
Jabesh-gilead, of much sinfulnes, for that they were so soon ready to yield
unto, and capitulat with the enemy, and did not first pray to GOD, and call for
the help of their brethren, the like whereof, we are sorry, that the courses of
some in this Land, at least in the condition of the work, leads unto, whileas
the necessary help of fellow subjects against an invading and oppressing enemy,
is not only not called for, but rejected, and opposed by them. 4. To reason in
a more particular way to our case, in hypothesi, we desire it may be
considered, that such as are excluded, who are a great part of the remnant of
the Land, If not the greater part, if rules of exclusion, as they are urged in
the letter, be extended, and applied equally, and impartially, having their
lives, liberties, and estates allowed unto them, must either be in these things
ensured (we mean in so far as is competent to man to do) by interposing a
competent power, for their protection against the violence, or, if that cannot
be given them, as certainly it cannot be given, as the condition of this Land
now stands, they must be allowed to act for their defense, nam qui dat vitam,
dat necessaria, and consequentia ad vitam: Now how shall they act, and take up
arms for their own defense, and the defense of the country, if they be not
called thereunto, and allowed by authority? If it shall be said, that they may
be permitted to act for their own defense, we repone, that must either be in a
joint way with others in the Land, and if so, then the thing in question is
granted upon the matter, but in a way disorderly, and more dangerous, then
that which is desired, and resolved upon: Or apart, and by themselves:
Certainly that were a more ready way, as the condition of the Land now
stands, to expose both themselves, and others, and the whole Land, to ruin,
and we have already found too sad experience of acting this way.

We come now to answer the reasons, and objections, brought on the contrary;
And first, we observe, that no testimonies or grounds of Scripture, are
alleged in an head by themselves, against the resolution, to show that it is a
course sinful in it self: Only in the first branch of the second reason, some
are pointed at, which were made use of anno 1648, against the associating with
Malignants, in the engagement against England, and are alleged also to speak
much against the present business: But it is not sufficient to say, and dictat
this, it ought to have been cleared, if it could been: But the cases are very
much different, that was of an invasive war, wherein an association with
Malignants, notourly continuing in their malignant courses, and that without
any necessity, there being sufficiency of honest men to have been employed, had
the cause been good, this is of just and necessary defense, against foreign
prevaling invasion, and oppression, wherein tho, none are to be employed, that
continue in a course of malignancie: The places pointed at, may well speak
against that, but do not reach this. We need say no more, unless there were
some show of proof to the contrary, yet we shall say somewhat particularly to
one place, that which is said in the case of Amaziahs associating with, and
taking to him the Israelits, for help in his just defense, 2. Chron. 25.7. O
King, let not the army of Israel go with thee, for the LORD is not with
Israel, even with all the house of Ephraim, as being mainly urged, and seems
most to stick with some in the present business, to which sundry things may be
answered, which clear the present business from the force thereof. 1. The
Israelits were idolaters, and forrainers, not so in our case, in either
respect: But it is alleged, that the reason why Amaziah is dissuaded from
taking their assistance, is, Because GOD was not with them, and therefore the
same reason, having place in many of these, whom the present resolution
comprehends, the disswasion has the same force against them. Therefore 2.
GOD'S not being with them, may be either conceived and understood, in regard of
the estate of grace, and reconciliation with GOD, but how-so-ever that with
many of them GOD was not, in this regard, yet the reason cannot be alleged in
this sense, because then it would follow by the argument, that we might not
take the help of any man out of the estate of grace, for our just and necessary
defense, which none will admit; or, it may be understood of GOD'S assistance,
and prospering providence simply: But neither can it be taken thus, because it
is certain and clear, that GOD was often with them in this sense, in their own
cause and quarrels, therefore it must needs be conceived, in regard of their
profession, and Religion, which was corrupt, and idolatrous, Now the reason
thus understood, has not place in our business. 3. Yet do we not find, that
Amaziah is commanded to exclude any of the subjects of his own kingdom, from
acting in that defense, or reproved for not doing of it, notwithstanding many
of them, no doubt, were naughty, and corrupt in their way, 2. King. 14.4.

The first reason, is taken from the fourth article of the Covenant, that the
resolution agreed upon, is inconsistent therewith, the scope whereof, is
alleged to be against the employment of such persons, because it byndeth to
discover them, and b^ing them to condign punishment, which is a further degree
of distance: To which we answer, No persons that are such, as are descrived in
that article, are allowed to be employed, or, we hope, shall be employed: Or,
if any such be employed, we think it our duty, to testify against them, yet
do we not think, that were a sufficient ground or warrant, for any godly, and
honest subject, to withdraw their concurrence, from defending their country,
in a just cause, when called thereunto by lawful authority: But, if any, who
have been sometime such, and having been censured, as has been judged
convenient by the supreme judicatories, or have been pardoned, do now
renounce, and engage themselves against such courses, by all the most solemn
ties, that can be imposed upon men, or not found notourly profane, or
flagitious, and are acknowledged members of State, and Kirk, be employed,
according to clear bound duty, for the just and necessary defense of the
kingdom, that article, to our capacity, speaks nothing against this.

To the second, Alleging the way that is taken, to be against former public
resolutions, declarations, our solemn engagement, etc. we shall not need to
insist in following severally every branch thereof, because all of them may be
cleared, by some common considerations. 1. Our first declarations, and public
resolutions, and engagements concerning this matter, were conceived in relation
to acting, in a way of prosecution of the cause, and no ways intended to the
prejudice of just and necessary defense of the kingdom, against foreign
invasions, for which we are allowed and bound by the law of nature (which no
humane laws or resolutions can infringe or prejudge) to make use of all
subjects in the kingdom, if the making use of them be not sinful in it self,
and may be without prejudice of the cause. And here, we desire it may be
remembered, that in the beginning of these troubles, anno 1638, when as there
were then standing laws in this kingdom, which are not yet repealed to this
day, discharging all subjects from rising in arms, without the kings express
warrant and command: Yet the subjects of this kingdom, perceiving themselves in
danger to be destroyed by foreign invasion, did find these laws no ways to
bynd up their hands, from taking arms, for their just defense, and self
preservation, these laws, in the intention of the lawgiver, being made for
the preservation of the kingdom, and not for the destruction of it: And
accordingly, when the pacification was made at BERWICK, they refused to take a
Pardon for what they had done, in taking arms, not only without, but against
the kings command, alleging and that truly, that they had not broken the
law, in regard they had but obeyed the law of nature, in a case of necessity,
in prejudice of which, these laws could not be conceived to be made: And we
conceive the very same is applicable to our former resolutions, declarations,
etc. in relation to our present case. 2. What is said in latter declarations
concerning this matter, in relation even to defense against our invaders, as it
streatcheth further, then the declared intention of former resolutions, so it
was in a ^yme, when the whole kingdom was inte^re, and there might be a choice
made of instruments to act, and we confess, in such a case choice should be
made, of the best instruments, but now the case is altered, And as to the
answer given by the Commission at STERLINE to the Quaeree propounded by the
Kings Majesty, about the end of September, the like may be said, there being
then considerable forces gathered in the WEST, by whom much was expected, by
honest people, and the remnants of the army which were as STERLINE, and on
this side, together with such recruits as were then a levying, being joined
together, might have been a considerable power, to have opposed the enemy
without any urgent necessity to employ others. Yet 3. neither at this time is
it resolved that any be employed, that are either knownly profane, or
continuing in enmity and opposition to (...), and cause of God.

To the third, Taken from the eminent danger, which is alleged will inevitable
follow the way resolved upon, because these men, getting power into their
hands, cannot but employ the same, according to their own principles, and for
establishing their own ends, destructive to the Work of GOD, We answer, 1.
Suppose there be some danger of this kind, yet it is not certain, and
inevitable; And we desire it may be considered, that on the other hand, if
necessary help, in it self not sinful, be not employed, there is certain
ruin, both to kingdom, and cause, without an extraordinary divine work, which
we have no warrant to look for, neglecting ordinary means: Let these two be
weighed in the balance, one against another, and let warrantable Christian
prudence judge, which of them were to be chosen. 2. We cannot see the danger
unto the Cause of GOD, so apparent, and great, by this way of defense of the
kingdom, Considering 1. That many of these now to be employed therein, who
have been debarred, were formerlie known active favorers, and promoters of the
cause, and have solemnlie declared their acknowledgement of the sinfulness of
their fall from their steadfastnesse, and their sorrow for the same, and have
bound themselves, to a more firm and faithful adhering to the cause, and
Covenant, by all the bands, that can be imposed upon men. 2. That none are to
be employed, who are known to be still of a contrary Mind and affection. 3.
That none, of whom there may be the least suspicion this way are to get such
power, or trust put in their hand, for defending the kingdom, as may be
prejudicial to the cause. 4. For preventing any danger of this kind, we
resolve to have a particular oath, to be tendered unto, and taken by all, who
are to be on the service, as full, and bynding, as possibly men can conceive,
to guard the cause of GOD, and work of reformation from all harm or prejudice.
5. The opposition that many of these, who have been formerlie excluded, and
now are to be admitted, did make to the cause of GOD, did arise upon their
sinful preference of the kings interest, to the cause, which were then
separated, and standing in opposition one to another: But now the interest of
the king, and the cause, being joined in one, and the king now having bound
himself by Covenant, and oaths, solemnlie renewed, at his Coronation, to
maintain the Covenant, and cause, there cannot be so evident danger apprehended
that way.

To the fourth, Taken from scandal and offense of the godly, It is answered,
1. The means resolved on, being not sinful in it self, and being necessary
in the present case and condition of the Land, the offense and scandal cannot
be GIVEN, but TAKEN: And therefore. 2. If any godly shall withdraw
themselves, from contributing their necessary concurrence, for the defense of
the kingdom, they cannot but highly sin against GOD, in deserting their
necessary duty, and we do wish, and hope, that there be no active
instruments, to cause honest and godly people in the Land to stumble, and
offend more, then either they of themselves are inclyned to do, or they can
have occasion by the public resolution. 3. Suppose the Magistrate should
employ some persons whom he ought not, yet we do not see, how that any godly
ought, or could, without sin, lie aback from concurring in the just defense
of their country, in the necessity thereof, and being called by lawful
authority.

To the fifth, Wherein it is said, That it seems to make void the strength of
several answers, given to the adversary, alleging, our accession to the
unlawful engagement, and to promoting a malignant party, and interest, and to
contribute to the justifying of their quarrel, and to heighten them in their
hopes, and resolutions against this Land, It is answered, 1. It can no ways
favor any alledgeance of the adversary, of our accession to the unlawful
engagement, or promoting of any malignant party, or interest, seeing none are
to be admitted, who have been accessorie to the engagement, but such, as have
solemnlie, and publicly renounced the same, and all courses tending thereto,
and make declaration of their acknowledgement of the sinfulness, and
unlawfulness thereof, do engage themselves never to come any way in
opposition to the Covenant, and cause of GOD. 2. We see not how it can any way
justify their quarrel, and we wish that none amongst our selves had given, or
do give them injustlie, pretenses of justifying their quarrel. 3. We must not
stand to make use of lawful and necessary means, for our just Defense, upon
their conceiving groundles big hopes, and injust resolutions against us.

To the sixth, What is alleged therein, is as easily denied as it is
affirmed: And here we cannot but observe, that, which is generally throughout
this whole letter, that all, who have been hitherto debarred from acting, what
ever they have been before, and what ever be their testimonies now of
repentance, for any sinful course they have been upon, for a time, for which
they have given satisfaction to the KIRK, are yet counted Malignants, which we
cannot but think a very hard, and uncharitable judgment, and the rather,
remembering that in the Commission at STERLINE, after the Defeat, it was
otherwise publicly acknowledged.

To the seventh, 1. We acknowledge, that we have cause to be affrayed of the
LORDS indignation, and controversy against the Land, both for the sins of
such as are now to be employed, as also for the sins of others, as well as of
them; but we see no cause to be affrayed of GODS indignation, simply upon
this account, that necessary means, allowed by the Law of GOD, and the law of
nature, be made use of, for our just and necessary defense: And as for that
enemy, he is not only the Rod of GODS anger, and the Staff in His Hand the
LORDS indignation, against Malignants; but also against the whole Land, even
the godly themselves, as is at this day visible, in all the three kingdoms,
because of our manyfold sins, hypocrisies, and disobedience to the Gospel of
CHRIST; So, if this alledgeance have any force to the point, for which it is
brought, it should follow, that all and every one of us should lie down, and
do nothing against the enemy at all: Certainly, although Ashur was the Rod of
GODS anger against the hypocritical nation of the JEWS, yet that was no
argument why that people might not stand in their defense against that enemy.

Whereas it is said, That the necessity pleaded for the present resolution,
does not clear them in these things, because they remember in the year 1646.
albeit the necessity was pleaded by the COMMITTEE of ESTATES, for the
capitulation with JAMES GRAHAME, and his adherents, yet that did not hinder the
COMMISSION, to bear testimony against the pardoning of them, which was much
less then employing them, It is answered, 1. That the necessity being clear
(as it has been cleared in the present case) Pleads most strongly for, and
may clear any concerning the making use of means, in themselves lawful, for
just defense. 2. That necessity, pleaded by the COMMITTEE of ESTATES, was
meerelie pretended, they having then sufficiency of power to have suppressed,
and taken order with that enemy. What is alleged from the passages, and
papers already cited, as speaking against the employing of them in our Army,
in the defense of the Kingdom, has been already sufficiently answered. That
which follows, spoken against unbelief, in case of the scarceness of
means, etc. We acknowledge the Divine Truth of that, that it is all one with
GOD to save with many, or with few, and that it is great sin, to be
misbelieving, when GOD in His Providence redacteth us to scarcetie of
secundarie means, but that it is no ground for us, to neglect the use of
lawful, necessary, and competent means, when GOD does afford them, such as
He has yet, Blessed be His Name, left unto us in this Land. But none of
understanding, whom we meet with, do see, how these can be had, without such
a calling forth of the people in these parts of the Land, that are yet free
from the oppression of the enemy, as is held forth in the public resolution,
which being made use of, as they may be made use of, without such snares,
dangers to the cause of GOD, and any given scandal, and just grief to the
godly, as is pretended, what ever be the event thereupon, give us leave to
say, will be more peace and comfort to us, then if any further calamity
should come upon the Land, lawful and necessary means affoorded by
providence, not having been made use of. What follows here-after, has been
answered before, until it come to these words, But we cannot conceave how
the Kingdom and Cause can be well separated, etc. Wherein, give us leave to
say, without offense, great injury is done the COMMISSION of the KIRK, in that
resolution, whileas it is alleged, that therein we do separate the kingdom,
from the Cause, as we were going contrary to the mind and course of this KIRK
and Kingdom, these twelve years past, which never separated them, and were
homologating with such, as being adversaries, and undermyners of the Cause,
have endeavored to put Religion out of the quarrel. Does our mentioning only
the kingdom in that resolution, import a separation of the kingdom, and the
Cause, in the quarrel against our enemy? Or what Logic can draw out such a
consequence out of it? We do think, that the kingdom being in danger by this
enemy, the Cause also is in danger, and the defending of the kingdom, will be
the defending of the Cause also: And we trust no instruments shall be
employed for the defense of the kingdom, to the prejudice of the Cause: So
that we see not that much advantage is by that resolution given to the enemy,
and we wonder how it can be said, to be inductive to others, to comply with
them, to the prejudice of the kingdom, as being of less value and importance,
then the Cause, except these others, be such, as have cast off natural
affection to their native kingdom, or judge these who are present enemies to
the kingdom, not to be enemies to the Cause.

A. Ker.


PERTH MARCH 13. 1651.
THe Letter of the Ministers of the Presbytery of Stirling is not here printed
as was intended, The same being already printed at Edinburgh, under the false
and odious title of A Remonstrance of the Presbytery of Stirling against the
present conjunction with the Malignant party, and spread throughout the
Kingdom by what means and warrant it is not known.

A. Ker.



