A FORM OF PRAYER, WITH THANKSGIVING To Almighty God for having put an end to
THE GREAT REBELLION by the Restitution of the KING and ROYAL FAMILY. And the
Restoration of the GOVERNMENT after many years Interruption: Which unspeakable
Mercies were wonderfully Completed upon the 29th of May, in the year, 1660.

And in Memory thereof, that Day in every Year is by Act of Parliament
Appointed to be for ever kept Holy.

By His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.

JAMES R.

THe Form of Prayer with Thanksgiving heretofore appointed for the Twenty Ninth
of May, relating in several Passages of it to the Birth and Person of Our most
dearly beloved Brother, King Charles the Second, and so upon occasion of his
Death being necessarily to be Altered; And it being now by Our special Command
to the Bishops so Altered and Settled to Our Satisfaction, as a perpetual
Office of Thanksgiving for the Standing Mercies of that Day: Our Express Will
and Pleasure is, That it be forthwith Printed and Published as here it
follows; to be used henceforth upon every Twenty Ninth of May in all
Churches, and Chapels within Our Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales in
such manner, as is therein Directed.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twenty Ninth Day of April, 1685. In the
First Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Sunderland.


THe Act of Parliament Made in the Twelfth and Confirmed in the Thirteenth Year
of King Charles the Second, For the Observation of the Twenty Ninth Day of May
yearly, as a Day of Public Thanksgiving, is to be Read publicly in all
Churches at Morning Prayer, immediately after the Nicene Creed on the Lords Day
next before every such Twenty Ninth of May, and Notice to be given for the due
observation of the said Day.

The Office used hither to upon this Day, ever since it was by Act of
Parliament Established, relating in several Passages to the Birth and Person of
King Charles the Second; It is thought fit, now upon occasion of his Death, to
alter it as follows.

The Service shall be the same with the usual Office for Holy days; except
where it is in this Office otherwise appointed.

If this day shall happen to be Ascension-Day, or Whit-sunday, the Collects of
this Office are to be added to the Offices of those Festivals in their proper
places; And if Monday or Tuesday in Whitsun Week or Trinity Sunday, the proper
Psalms here appointed for this Day, instead of those of ordinary course, shall
be also used, and the Collects added as before; And in all these cases the rest
of this Office shall be omitted: But if it shall happen to be any other Sunday,
this whole Office shall be used, as it follows, entirely. And what Festival
soever shall happen to fall upon this Solemn Day of Thanksgiving, the following
Hymn appointed instead of Venite exultemus shall be constantly used.

The Order for Morning Prayer.
Morning Prayer shall begin with these Sentences.

TO the Lord, our God belong Mercies and Forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him: Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in
his Laws, which he set before us. Dan. ix. 9, 10.

It ^^e of the Lords Mercies that we were not consumed: because his compassions
fail not. Lam. iii. 22.

Instead of Venite exultemus, shall be said or sang this Hymn following; One
verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and People.

MY song shall be always of the loving kindness of the Lord: Psalm. lxxxix. 1.
with my mouth will I ever be showing forth his truth from one generation to
another.

The merciful and gracious Lord has so done his mavelous works: Psalm. cxi. 4.
that they ought to be had in remembrance.

Who can express the noble acts of the Lord; Psalm. cvi. 2.
or show forth all his praise?

The works of the Lord are great: Psalm. xci. 2.
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.

The Lord sets up the meek: Psalm. cxlvii. 6.
and brings the ungodly down to the ground.

The Lord executes righteousness and judgment: Psalm. ciii. 6.
for all them that are oppressed with wrong.

For lie will not always be chiding: 9.
neither keeps he his anger for ever.

He has not dealt with us after our sins: 10.
nor rewarded us according to our wickedness.

For look how high the Heaven is in comparison of the Earth: Psalm. ^iii. 1^.
so great is his Merry toward them that sent him.

Yea like as a father pitieth his own children: 13.
even so is the Lord merciful unto them that fear him.

Thou, O God, ha^^ wo^^d us: Psalm. lxvi. 9.
thou have tried us, even as silver is tried.

Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads, 11.
we went through fire and water: but thou have brought us out into a wealthy
place.

Oh, Psalm. lxxi. 18.
how great troubles and adversities have thou showed us: and yet did thou
turn and refresh us, yea and broughtest us from the deep of the earth again.

Thou did remember us in our low estate, Psalm. cxxxvi. 23, 24.
and redeem us from our enemies: for thy mercy endures for ever.

Lord, Psalm. lxxxy. 1.
thou art become gracious unto thy land: thou have turned again the captivity
of Jacob.

God has showed us his goodness plenteously: Psalm. lix. 10.
and God has let us see our desire upon our enemies.

They are brought down and fallen: Psalm. xx. 8.
but we are risen and stand upright.

There are they fallen, all that work wickedness: Psa. xxxvi. 12.
they are cast down, and shall not be able to stand.

The Lord has been mindful of us, Psalm. cxv. 12.
and he shall bless us: even he shall bless the house of Israel, he shall bless
the house of Aaron.

He shall bless them that fear the Lord* 13.
both small and great.

O that Men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness: Psalm. cvii. 21.
and declare the Wonders that He does for the Children of Men.

That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving: 22.
and tell out his Works with Gladness.

And not hide them from the children of the Generations to come: Ps. lxxvllj. 4.
But show the Honor of the Lord, his mighty and wonderful Works that he has
done.

That our Posterity may also know them, 6.
and the Children that are yet unborn: 7.
and not be as their forefathers, a faithless and stubborn Generation.

Give thanks, Psalm: lxviii. 26.
O Israel, unto God the Lord, in the Congregations: from the ground of the
Heart.

Praised be the Lord daily: 19.
Even the God who helps us, and pours his benefits upon us.

O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end: Psalm. vii. 9.
but establish thou the righteous.

Let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let all such as
love thy salvation, Psalm. xl. 19.
say always, The Lord be praised.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Proper Psalms. CXXIV. CXXVI. CXXIX. CXVIII.

Proper Lessons.

The first, 2 Samuel 19. v. 9. or Number. xvi. Te Deune. The second, the Epistle of
St. Jude. Jubilate Deo.


The Suffrages next after the Creed shall stand thus.

Priest. O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.


Answer. And grant us thy salvation.


Priest. O Lord, save the King.


Answer. Who puts his trust in thee.


Priest. Send him help from thy holy place.


Answer. And evermore mightily defend him.


Priest. Let his enemies have no advantage against him.


Answer. Let not the wicked approach to hurt him.


Priest. Endue thy Ministers with righteousness.


Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful.


Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord.


Answer. Because there is no other, that fights for us but only thou, O God.


Priest. Be unto us, O Lord, a strong Tower.


Answer. From the face of our Enemies.


Priest. O Lord, hear our Prayer.


Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.


Instead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer shall these two which follow be
used.

O Almighty God, who art a strong Tower of Defense unto thy servants against
the Face of their Enemies; We yield thee Praise and Thanks, for the Wonderful
Deliverance of these Three Kingdoms from THE GREAT REBELLION and all the
Miseries and Oppressions consequent thereupon, under which they had so long
groaned. We acknowledge it thy Goodness, that we were not utterly delivered
over as a Prey unto them: Beseeching thee still to continue such thy Mercies
toward us; that all the World may know, That thou art our Savior and Mighty
Deliverer, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord God of our Salvation, who have been exceedingly gracious unto this
Land, and by thy miraculous Providence did deliver us out of our miserable
Confusions, by Restoring to us, and to his own just and undoubted Rights, our
then most gracious Sovereign Lord, thy Servant King Charles the Second,
(notwithstanding all the power and malice of his Enemies) and by placing him in
the Throne of this Kingdom; thereby restoring also unto us the public and free
Profession of thy true Religion and Worship, together with our former Peace,
and Prosperity, to the great Comfort and Joy of our hearts: We are here now
before thee, with all due Thankfulness, to acknowledge thine unspeakable
Goodness herein, as upon this day, showed unto us, and to offer up our
Sacrifice of Praise for the same, unto thy great and glorious Name; humbly
beseeching thee, to accept this our unfeigned though unworthy Oblation of our
selves: Vowing all holy Obedience in Thought, Word and Work unto thy Divine
Majesty; and promising in thee and for thee all loyal and dutiful Allegiance to
thine Anointed Servant now set over us, and to His Heirs after him: Whom We
beseech thee to bless with all Increase of Grace, Honor and Happiness in this
World, and to Crown him with Immortality and Glory in the World to come, for
Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

In the end of the Litany, (which shall always this day be used) after the
Collect, We humbly beseech thee, O Father, etc. shall this be said which next
follows.

ALmighty God, who have in all Ages showed forth thy Power and Mercy in the
miraculous and gracious Deliverances of thy Church, and in the Protection of
righteous and religious Kings and States, professing thy holy and eternal
Truth, from the malicious Conspiracies and wicked Practices of all their
Enemies: We yield unto thee from the very bottom of our hearts unfeigned Thanks
and Praise, as for thy many great and public Mercies, so especially for that
signal and wonderful Deliverance by thy wise and good Providence, as upon this
day, completed and vouchsafed to our then most gracious Sovereign King Charles
the Second, and all the Royal Family: And in Them and with Them to this whole
Church and State, and all Orders and Degrees of Men in both, from the unnatural
Rebellion, Usurpation and Tyranny of ungodly and cruel men, and from the sad
Confusions and Ruin thereupon ensuing. From all these O gracious and merciful
Lord God, not our merit, but thy Mercy; Not our foresight, but thy Providence;
Not our own Arm, but thy Right Hand, and thine Arm, and the Light of thy
Countenance did Rescue and Deliver us; even because thou had a Favor unto
us. And therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be
ascribed all Honor, Glory and Praise, with most humble and hearty Thanks, in
all Churches of the Saints: Even so, Blessed be the Lord our God, who alone
does wondrous things; And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever, though
Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

In the Communion-Service, immediately before the reading of the Epistle shall
these two Collects be used, instead of the Collect for the King and the Collect
of the day.

O Almighty God, who art a strong Tower of Defense unto thy Servants against
the Face of their Enemies; We yield thee Praise and Thanks for the Wonderful
Deliverance of these three Kingdoms from THE GREAT REBELLION, and all the
Miseries and Oppressions consequent thereupon, under which they had so long
groaned. We acknowledge it thy Goodness that we were not utterly delivered over
as a Prey unto them: Beseeching thee still to continue such thy Mercies toward
us; that all the World may know, that thou art our Savior and mighty
Deliverer, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord God of our Salvation, who have been exceedingly gracious unto this
Land, and by thy miraculous Providence did deliver us out of our miserable
Confusions, by Restoring to us, and to his own just and undoubted Rights, our
then most gracious Sovereign Lord, thy Servant King Charles the Second,
(notwithstanding all the power and malice of his Enemies) and by placing him in
the Throne of this Kingdom; thereby restoring also unto us the public and free
Profession of thy true Religion and Worship, together with our former Pence,
and Prosperity, to the great Comfort and Joy of our hearts: We are here now
before thee, with all due Thankfulness to acknowledge thine unspeakable
Goodness herein, as upon this day, showed unto us, and to offer up our
Sacrifice of Praise for the same, unto thy great and glorious Name; humbly
beseeching thee to accept this our unfeigned though unworthy Oblation of our
selves: Vowing all holy Obedience in Thought, Word, and Work unto thy Divine
Majesty; and promising in thee and for thee all lo^^^ and dutiful Allegiance to
thine Anointed Servant now set over us, and to his Heirs after him: Whom we
beseech thee to bless with all increase of Grace, Honor and Happiness in this
World, and to crown him with Immortality and Glory in the World to come, for
Jesus Christ his sake our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. Pet. II. 11. -- 17.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. XXII. 16. -- 22.

In the Offertory shall this Sentence be read.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, S. Matthew.
vii. 21.

After the Prayer For the whole state of Christ's Church, etc. this Collect
following shall be used.

ALmighty God and heavenly Father, who of thine infinite and unspeakable
Goodness toward us, did in a most extraordinary and wonderful manner
disappoint and overthrow the wicked Designs of those traitorous, heady and high
minded men, who under the pretense of Religion, and thy most holy Name, had
contrived and well nigh effected the utter Destruction of this Church and
Kingdom: As we do this day most heartily and devoutly adore and magnify thy
glorious Name for this th^ne Infinite gracious Goodness already vouchsafed to
us; so we most humbly beseech thee to continue thy Grace and Favor toward us,
hiding and covering us under the shadow of thy wings, that no such dismal
Calamity may ever again fall upon us. To this end send forth thy light and thy
truth, for the discovery of these depths of Satan, this Mystery of iniquity.
Infatuate and defeat all the secret Counsels of the ungodly. Abate their Pride,
assuage their Malice, and confound their Devices. Strengthen the hands of our
gracious King James, and all that are put in Authority under him, with Judgment
and Justice, to cut off all such workers of iniquity, as turn Religion into
Rebellion, and Faith into Faction; that they may never again prevail against
us, nor triumph in the ruin of the Monarchy and thy Church among us. Protect
and defend our Sovereign Lord the King, with the whole Royal Family, from all
Treasons and Conspiracies. Be unto him a Helmet of Salvation, and a strong
Tower of Defense against the Face of all his Enemies. As for those that are
implacable, cloth them with Shame and Confusion, but upon himself and his
Posterity let the Crown for ever flourish. So we that are thy People and the
Sheep of thy pasture shall give thee thanks for ever, and will always be
showing forth thy praise from Generation to Generation, through Jesus Christ
our only Savior and Redeemer; to whom with thee O Father, and God the Holy
Ghost, be Glory in the Church throughout all Ages, world without end. Amen.


