THE Loving Enemy OR A famous true HISTORY Written originally in the French
Tongue, by the most incomparable Penman of this Age, J. P. Camus B. of Belley.
MADE ENGLISH By Mayor Wright, As his Recreation, during his Imprisonment.

the Second Edition Revised.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Rooks, in Gresham College, next the stairs,
entering upon the Exchange, near Bishopsgate-street: who makes and sells the
best Ink for Records. 1667.

To the HONOURABL And mos. Virtuous Lady, The Lady Mannock, Wife to the
Honorable Sir Fra: Mannock, Knight and Baronet, of Giffords Hall in Suffolk.
Madam,
PResuming that the fame of the matchless pen of my Renowned Author, will beget
a Curious desire in your Ladyship, to employ some of your spare hours in the
lecture of any of his works, I am the more confident to offer at the Altar of
your high Perfections, (where there is no less Judgment to discern then
goodness to excuse and pardon faults) the Translation of this small History
the Loving Enemy, being the fruits of my broken and discontented hours, during
my Imprisonment in Newgate for the Royal Cause, and the first endeavors of my
unskilful pen. I hope it will more easily find a gracious acceptance with
your Ladyship, because it is a Sien taken out of the most flourishing Orchard
(...) the honor of his Nation and glory of our Times, the famous B. of Belley,
which I having ventured to transplant and graft upon a Crabstock in mine own
ill cultivated Nursery, (though it bring forth many leaves and promises
pleasing fruit) may by malevolent eyes be blasted in the bud, if not protected
and cherish't by the favorable aspect of your Ladyships Patronization, to
whose most eminent virtues and no less ^udicious censure I shall ever make my
appeal, and with all humility beg an acknowledgment, as being

Madam, Your Ladyships most humbly devoted Servant. I: Wright.

Neparva averseris, inest sua gratia parvis.
Disdain not (Courteous Reader) to cast thy serious View upon this (though)
small Epitomie of Virtue, In it thou wilt find patterns incomparable not only of
Valor and Courtesy, but how to moderate thy hate, and where to place thy
Love. We meet not every day with the opportunity of making vast profits, but no
moment passes that affords us not some benefit, and if we manage well these
small oeconomies, in time they will amount to treasures of unspeakable Riches;
Bees seek not to freight themselves upon the lofty Cedar, or the
broad-spreading Oak, but of the meanest and lowest flowers compose their
sweetest and most excellent honey. Wars, Battles, the taking of towns and
Cittadels, the revolution of States and Empires, are always presaged by some
prodigious Comet, great Conjunctions or Eclipses; and there are writers enough
that will employ their wits and pens to describe such high and notable
transactions, like birds, rejoicing to spread their unconfined wings in a large
free air, or fishes that delight to sport and tipple in the deepest Waters;
But few there are that will bestow the pains to pick and gather up the golden
sand that is found upon the banks of, but, some Rivers, every one being
ambitious to dig and spend his labor in full and untouched mines. This was the
humble exercise of my most renowned Author, (the B. of Belley) who made this
worthy observation, [That the more attentively he reflected upon those things
which were brough^ to his knowledge by means either o^ his eyes or ears, the
more he found the World to be an immense Volume, which could never be enough
studied, nor thoroughly read, and that the things of consideration which it
offers to our understandings, infinitely exceed in number those that are read
in the best furnished Libraries.] Thereupon he studied to publish nothing that
might come under the notion of trivial or vulgar, much less to transcribe any
thing that formerly had been written, to the end that the Readers Curiosity
might not be frustrated, but in the lecture of his works might meet with such
narrations as never had been seen, read, or happily ever heard of before. Out
of this richly adorned plot of most delicious flowers, I have made choice of
one to present thee (Reader) which, if it has not lost its fragrancy by
transplanting, cannot but recreate thy senses. Yet though thou do find this
defect in it, be favorable in thy censure, and accept of my will to please
thee, in endeavoring to put forth in thy mother tongue a history of such truth
and quainte composure in the original, that it is applauded, nay admired, by
all the Curious and Judicious of the French Nation, the benefit will be thine,
the contentment mine, if it likes thee, Farewell.

J. W*

To the most Ingenious, a^^ accomplished Gentleman, Major Wrig^^ upon his
version of a choice piece o^ I. P. Camus B. of Belley, out of French into
English.
Sir,
CAmus is much your debtor, that you have
Cladd him in such rich English, gay and bra
A witty Author saye's, When our first Sire
Lost paradise (by a deserved Ire)
He was in Dutch exterminated thence,
Fore tempted in Italian, and in French
He fell a begging pardon, for of tongues
The French is softest, and has weakest lungs;
Now therefore Camus by your virtuous pains
Speaks stronger lines, and in more sinewy strains:
So have I known on Rome's half-speaking walls,
Coppies improve their first Originalls.
Jam. Howell.

To Mr. WRIGHT, upon his Translation of the LOVING ENEMY.
WHy should (...) raise the venturing Merchant more
That brings bright Pearls from the Erythraean shore;
Or Gold from Inde, to enrich his Countrymen,
Then him that Traffiques by a skillful Pen
T'adorne his Native land with Foreign Wit?
What Merchandise can be compared to it?
Such is thy Traffic, such thy precious toil
In this French Story. In a Foreign soil
This tree first grew, and is so well transplanted
By thee to us that it must needs be granted
It loses nothing by the change of Air,
But is as full (...) Elegance, as fair
(The Virtues ^^ill retained) as fresh in show
In this, as in th^^ Land, where first it grew.
THO: MAY.

To Major Wright, on his Excellent translation the LOVING ENEMY.
BEllaie, who whilome with his Trumpe of Fa^^
Echoed on Seine landing at Silver Them,
Now charms our English ears, and though the (...)
Be different, yet the Melodie's all one.
Those noble foes which he (...) sings,
Thou make the subject of thy well-tuned strings
As deadly Feudes and a Domestic War
Most happily by both accorded are.
And though the Partial French may Bellaie cro^^
We Will say the Sword has put the Miter down.
I wish thou could, who do so well translate
The Quarrels, and at last compose the hate
Of Private persons on our Public Stage;
Set Periods to this too uncivil rage,
(Which empties Families, and Prisons fills,
And Friends, and Foes, promiscuously kills)
And teach by Precedent our Infant-State
T'abbreviate, and restrain the excess of Hate,
Not let the future Gentry be undone
For what was by their Grandsires Grandsires done.
Else we shall think this Worm called Man dares boast
Who him offends, offends the holy Ghost.
We read how Music Charmed Beasts, Fish, Foul, Trees;
May thou charm Man, more easily drawn then these,
And we will crown with groves of Laurel Boughs
(Th'Embleme of Peace) the Prize of wit, thy brows,
AUG: RIVERS.

To Major WRIGHT, upon his Excellent Translation of the LOVING ENEMY.
TH'ingenious Fabler Metamorphosies
Gods into Men, Men into Deities;
^et by enchanting Verse his feigning Pen
^hapes out inhumane Gods, and godless Men.
But, the just Metamorphoser, BELLAY,
Such heavenly transformations does display
As every hellish passion they control,
And of a vicious, Frame a virtuous Soul.
Witness this Story, where pure Love and Peace,
Make cruel Hatred, Bloody Discord, cease.
Yet English minds this profit, this delight,
Had wanted, had not thou Judicious WRIGHT
What thy BELLAY in choicest French has sed
Into like English, Metamorphosed.
John Chapperline.

To my Noble Friend, upon his Translation of the LOVING ENEMY.
IF generous actions merit any Praise,
And Heavens Crown their active heads with Bays,
Then may all say, as well as I, there is skill
And Elegance, ^^ the Translators Quill,
Who here presents unto the world well dressed
His like-spent hours, (bien a la mode) and lest
Detraction, Envy, Malice, or despite,
Mis-judge my Friend, 'twas done by Loyal WRIGHT.
John Lilly.

To my Dear Friend, Major WRIGHT, on hi^ Learned Translation, Entitled, THE
LOVING ENEMI
FEw words (I know) were they as neatly dressed
As thy Translation, would become me best:
And, (could I couch, (like some) in every Line
A New-borne-Fancie) stamp thee All-Divine.
But as my Genius's Rude, and Stale, and Dry,
The Best I am's A Loving Enemy.
[An Enemy to BELLET, and his Lines,
Both stained at once with my unhappy-Rythmes:
An Enemy to Language, most to thee
Thus hung with Rags, in stead of Tapistry.]
Nor is it fit indeed that I should be
A Friend to that, which is Thine Enemy,
Were it not Loving, and averse the Times,
Which count best Virtues, but the worst of Crimes;
And tells Ambitious-Man, wherein he fails,
Where to Cast Anchor, when to Hoist his Sails,
With such a Mixture of Refined Wit,
The Question, is, If Man Composed it?
And if a Man, What Angell's Hand did steer
The Lucky-Vessell that Arrived it here,
With so much Skill, and in a Dress so fine
BELLEY will swear it is none of His, but thine?

Strange! that a Goal such Tempting-fruit should bear,
Without the help of Sun, or Rain, to cheer
The Soil; and it not Blasted in the Bud,
Or Burnt (like other things) for being too good!
And yet more Strange, to find so Plump a Style
Amongst such Leane-Canters, in a School so Vile!
But Prisoners Advantage have in this,
[They're Punished before they Act Amiss;
And have their Muses freed from all Extremes
Being seldom fired by Contracted-Beames,
Nor yet Debased to such Slavist-straines,
As speak them more of Guts, than Subtle Braines]
"Thus Captives are the Men abound with Sense;
" Freemen, but Panders to their Eloquence.
Geo: Wharton.

To my very much honored, and judicious Friend, Major WRIGHT, upon his LOVING
ENEMY.
THis Book, Sir, needs no fillet on the brows,
Or silken Muse to grace it; Beauty grows
In every line, and borrowed Grace defies;
Tie Ribbons where you mean to sacrifice.
Oh had this fair composure been my own!
I should have boasted some perfection,
And my exalted Soul reached that degree
(Before I died) to Love my Enemy.
But this Piece to your Art owes all her Glory,
And I but late admitted to your story
Am only now concerned to wonder, how
You should throne Love and Malice in one brow
So sweet, I knew not, as the flames were dressed,
Whether the Fiend, or Angel pleased me best.
For still Clione ravished as she moved,
Her rage as excellent, as when she loved;
Had there been less of either in her blood,
I had repented Laurean was so good.
But with what reason, some bold Crittick says,
Should I, on you translate the Authors praise?
This was Bellay's. Divide me 'twixt you two:
But what I understand, I owe to you.
J. SHERLEY.

THE LOVING ENEMY.
AS when insulting Neptune musters his turbulent waves against the boystrous
winds, and tosseth (sometimes) his billows to the Sky, then hurries them
again into his restless bottom, seeming to threat the Earth with
P^ssundation (yet all his storms produce nothing but Froth, for the All-seeing
Providence has so set forth his bounds to the limits of her prefiction, that a
small sandy bank bridles in his untamed exorbitance.) Such is the vain potency
of men that oppose themselves to the decrees of Heaven. In vain do Monarchs
load the Ocean with Ships, and fill the Earth with Armies, if the great God of
Hosts assist not in their Battles, these multitudes of Men, and all these
Martial preparations are soon of themselves dissolved and dissipated: They
make great noise, but to so small purpose, for God is only he that gives the
Victory, reserving to himself the disposal of the Events of War, without
respect to the disparity of the Combatants. No force can Rout the Party he
maintains, for who can withstand his Chosen, or break those squadrons that
have his Banners for Protection?

I speak this only, as calling to mind that numerous Army which the Emperor,
Charles the Fifth, brought by Sea and Land to sackage France, which he had
already swallowed in his Fancy. It was at that time when he fell into Provence
by the Coast of Genua, with so powerful an Army, that it seemed no force was
able to oppose him. But God (who has taken to his particular charge the
preservation of this flourishing Monarchy, since by his Holy Writ we are
taught, that amongst all the Flowers the Lilly is his choicest favorite) cast
confusion in the face of this mighty Prince, (who seemed to place his
confidence in the multitude of his Soldiers.) And at the first sight of our
King, Henry the Seconds Army, confounded and overthrew all his Designs, to
show him how vain are all attempts against Gods immutable Decrees; and that
the Honor of the Immortal flower de Luce, shall continue as long as the World
has being. The Egyptians, said Israel, relied upon the force of their
Chariots, and their Horsemen, but Gods People put all their confidence in him,
and only trust in that Almighties aid that framed both Heaven and Earth.

The violent incursion of this so formidable Host (composed of so many
several Nations, that the different Idioms made it seem a kind of Babel)
found an unexpected Remora; and in very short time was quite discomfited by a
strange contagious Sickness that swept the men away by thousands, which
blasted the Vain hopes of the Ambitious Emperor. A certain French Gentleman
that was taken Prisoner by the Spaniards, his horse being killed under him,
gave a notable check to his aspiring thoughts by a witty and generous Answer:
This Prisoner being brought before the Emperor, amongst diverse other Questions
he was asked, How many days journey it was from Aix to Paris? The Gentleman
well perceiving the scope of that demand, replied, If by Journeys your Sacred
Majesty does mean Battles, (as in our language we say the Journie of Ravenna,
meaning the battle that was fought that day in that place) you will find them
infinite: Giving the Emperor to understand thereby that France being so
undrainable a Source of People, and so fertile a nursery of men, He could never
be able to accomplish his ends upon that Hydra, nor conquer, so Martial and
Heroic a nation with so much facility as he imagined. The gallantry of this
gentleman's answer in the Condition he then was, so pleased the humor of this
great Prince, that he esteemed him much the more for it, and gave presently
order that he should have all respectfull and honorable usage during his
Imprisonment.

Always before a furious storm breaks out you see the Sky o're-spred with
Vapors, the Clouds condense themselves, and the rain blacken in them:
Lightning precedes the thunder and the noise is heard long ere the thunderbolt
falls down. The Rumor of these great forces which the Emperor brought from
Italy and the Confines of Genua, bred an extreme terror in Provence: And as
Seafaring men who foreseeing tempestuous weather, hasten all they can to make
into the Shore and bring their ships to ride in some safe Bay, so the
affrighted people of Provence strive to secure their goods and persons within
Cities, Castles and strong holds, where they may be sheltred from the Violence
of this over-powerfull Enemy, and give testimony of their Valors by a
courageous resistance; But in regard the most considerable places of that
Country were too weak defenses against the Impetuosity of so fierce a Torrent,
the richest and most noble families pitched upon Avignon, (a City belonging to
the Pope) which standing neuter, and no way interessed in the differences
betwixt these two Monarchs, was chosen as the fittest and securest place of
refuge for the Gentlewomen and Ladies, where (as in a Sanctuary) they might
preserve their honors, (dearer to such then life) from the violence and
Insolency of the Soldiers: As for the men following the dictates of true
magnanimity, they repaired all to their own Princes Army, there in testimony
of their Loyalty and valor to Sacrifice their blood and lives in the defense
of their King and Country.

Amongst these occurrences it happened that there were two of the most
remarkable families of that Province, who by the Contagion of their too near
vicinity had contracted so much of the Italians disposition, that they mutually
inherited the hatred, as well as the possessions of their Ancestors. But as
the helpelesse Larks, spying the greedy Marlin leave off the private
Skermishes, and seek by soaring wing to procure their safety, and free
themselves from the Pounces of their common Enemy; So at the first appearance
of the Imperial Eagle upon the Ligurian shore, these particular quarrels
were presently appeased, these adversaries trampling under feet all private
grudges, to make a valiant and unanimous opposition against the public Enemy
of their King and Country. Whilst they respectively execute their Kings
Commands, in offices and employments suitable to their births and abilities,
their Ladies are in Avignon, where in imitation of their husbands gallantries
in this public affliction, they make a show of so much reciprocal amity and
freedom, that by their carriage every one thought they had been perfectly
reconciled, and had forgotten all former enmities; so crafty is that faithless
Sex, that can so dexterously cover the burning coals of their malicious
practices under the white ashes of so fair a dissimulation; Sex no less
subtle and addicted naturally to paint their hearts then their faces, and hide
an irreconcilable hatred under the most specious veil of seeming friendship.

But this great design of the Emperor's, who aimed at nothing less then
conquering all France, Vanished into smoke, as the history of those times
teaches us, (to which I remit him that is more curious, to be more fully
satisfied) this proud Peacock was enforced to trusse up his glorious tail: And
of so great thunder and storm there remained nothing but dirt and water; In a
word he left Provence with as much shame as he had gotten it with glory, like a
straw fire as soon quenched as kindled. He being retreated to his own Seat
in Germany, the King having given order for reparation of the breaches and
spoils this foreign Army had made in his Country, and disbanded his own,
retired to Paris, his Metropolitan City, the residence of his Court and Center
of his Kingdom: And those of Provence went to repossesse their former
habitations.

But as these public troubles had qualified for a time the Inveterate enmity
of these two families (whence I derive the process of this discourse) the
public Peace revived it. As the suppressing of fire in a close Furnace
augments the heat, and as a stifferunning stream swell's and redouble's it is
rapidity the more it finde's opposition: So this forced retention increased
their animosity; besides in probability, Ambition and Envy, (two spurs of the
Emulation which commonly growe's 'twixt equals) might re-enkindle this hatred
upon occasion of service in the Army, where each Chief by advancing his own
fortune strove to outvie his Competitor. Insomuch that being returned to their
own mansions (which were not far asunder) after this public storm rose a
particular one betwixt them, so Violent that it could not be allayed without
the effusion of much blood. Accursed Duel, Scourge of our Nation, disturber of
our tranquillity, wherefore must thou destroy in the sweetness of a quiet
Peace, those whom the Sword had spared in the fury of a raging War?

Silvin and Poliecte (the two Enemies) desirous by this last encounter to set a
period to all their differences (which would never be composed by the mediation
of all the friends they had) seek to make parties and Confederacies on each
side, and levy a kind of petty civil war in Provence. In the end to avoid
shedding of much blood, they resolved upon a form of battle of six, against
six, and to end all their discords, by the death of the one or the other
party. Silvin chose his brother and four of his Allies for his assistants
against Poliecte and his Associates. Poliecte had a hopeful gentleman to his
Son, about twenty years of age, newly come from the Academie, very expert on
horseback and at his weapon and of a Courage answerable to his dexterity. As
soon as this gallant heard of his Father's engagement against Silvin, he would
needs be of the Party; but the Father having no other Children, was so tender
of him, that he could not be persuaded to let him expose himself to that
danger, thinking that although his own fortune might be to dye in that Combat,
his Son surviving would keep up the name and honor of the family. But
Laurean being youthful and of a fiery Spirit, was enraged at his Fathers
resusall, and vowed he would precipitate himself into a thousand deaths rather
then suffer his Father to engage without him. Poliecte no way distrusted his
agilitie nor his gallantrie, but feared the tenderness of his youth, of the
mature vigor and experience of those whom his Enemy had taken for his seconds.
At last Laurean exclaimed, entreated, conjured, and stormed so much that his
Father was enforced to condescend to his desire, and suffer him to measure his
Sword with Fructule Silvin's brother and second.

Without troubling my self to describe every particular of this Combat, not
to speak according to the Proverb, as a Clerk at arms; I will relate you
only the Event, which was thus. Silvin was killed outright by Poliecte's own
hand, Fructule wounded and disarmed by Laurean, two others of Silvin's side
slain in the field, the other two put to flight: of Poliecte's party, only
kept the dead Adversaries company, another escaped unhurt, but the four others
were so desperately wounded, that Poliecte and his son were carried off as
dead; and although the glory of winning the Field was theirs, it was a
dear-bought Victory. They were carried to Avignon, where their Wives yet
remained. The one received news of her Husbands death, with such incessant
skreeking and complaints, as pass all terms of expression; the other was not
much less aggrieved, seeing her Husband and her Son in so deplorable a
condition, that their deaths seemed nearer by much then their recovery.
Fructule was also brought thither, but through the loss of so much blood he
had such frequent Syncopes, that every moment 'twas thought he would expire.
Fortunate (Silvin's wife) received her Brother-in-law in this doleful
equipage, and with Clione (her Husbands only daughter and heiresse) so
carefully tended him, that within some days there were evident signs of his
recovery. Eulalie, Poliecte's wife, was no less busied about her Son and
husband, whose desperate wounds put her in continual apprehension of their
deaths. Her conjugall and motherly afflictions bred in her most insupportable
affections, for her heart being equally balanced, and bearing a share in both
their sufferings, could no way condescend to the loosing of either of those so
nearly and so dearly beloved persons. But the Heavens not willing to keep
her soul any longer suspended betwixt these two Idols determined to take one
of them: Both were so near death, that 'twas thought, one while the Father,
another while the Son would lead the way; these sad uncertainties gave
strange convulsions to the doleful heart of Eulalie. At last Poliecte, who was
more perplex't for his Son then for himself, obtained at length what often he
had desired, which was, that by the shortning of his days his Son's might be
prolonged. So he deceased after long languishing and many pangs which his
patience and true repentance made very isntrumental to the expiation of his
offenses.

His death was concealed from Laurean as much as might be, lest that sorrow
added to the extreme anguish of his wounds should cut in sunder the weak spun
thread of so frail a life; as soon as there appeared some symptoms of health
in him, and that the Consolidation of his wounds gave hopes of his recovery, I
know not how the loss of his Father came unto his knowledge, but whether
through the motives of his own good disposition, or the great affection he
bare toward him that gave him his being in this world, or the suddenness of
the grief which seized him unprepared, or whether as yet not thoroughly having
gathered strength, but still languishing with pain, his heart was insufficient
to resist so violent an assault, this news so strongly wrought upon his fancy,
that falling into a continual fever with extravagant ravings, he was possessed
with a melancholy Imagination that he was dead himself. These kinds of
diseases which trouble and pervert the sense and Judgment are the Physicians
crosses, and which they hold the least incurable of any; for what remedies can
be applied to one that esteems all medicines useless, or out of a wilful
obstinacy refuses to take any? This or worse was poor Laurean's condition,
none could persuade him to take any kind of nutriment, saying that dead Bodies
did not eat, and that it was ridiculous, and against nature to take any
victuals* no prescriptions of the Physicians, no remonstrances of Religious
men, nor the incessant tears of the bewailing Mother, could prevail any thing
upon his opiniative obstinacy, until one of his own Servants extremely
perplex't at his Masters malady, bethought himself of an ingenious Stratagem,
which proved no less profitable then pleasing. He knew that men tainted with
such Hypochondriake diseases, are sooner cured by condescending to their
humors, then contradicting them; for crossing them does but imprint their
folly deeper in the brain, which nothing but some witty querk of invention can
deracinate: so faining himself dead, he was laid upon a bed in Laurean's
sight, and there taking such meat as was brought to him, at last bred an
appetite in his Master, who resolved, to imitate the dead man, and eat as he
did. By this means, by little and little, his brains began to settle, and
proportionably as he recovered strength of body, those melancholy Vapors
dispersed themselves, which obfuscated his imagination, and his youthfulness
added to the cure, and remedies applied to him, called him back from Deaths
door to the hope of a happy recovery, and in short time his wounds being
thoroughly healed, he re-enjoyed as perfect health as ever. But as all worldly
pleasures seldom are entire, he scarce had left off mourning for his Father,
but he was re-obliged to the like sadness, both of heart and habit, for the
decease of Eulalie, who quite overcome with sorrow for her husbands death, and
the continual fears she was in for her Son, fell into a lingering disease,
which consuming insensibly her spirits, enforced her at last to follow her so
much beloved Poliecte, leaving Laurean the most disconsolate man living.

Now let us see what passes in the Adversary Silvin's family, where merciless
Death sweeping all before him, makes doleful evidences of his uncontrouleable
puissance, yet nevertheless the coldness of his ashes is not of force enough
to extinguish the coals of their implacable anger; their hatred passes the
grave, which in my judgment is too large an extent, and ought to be the utmost
point, the extremity of any malice should reach unto. Fortunate not being able
to admit in the wounds (which the grief for Silvin's loss had caused) the
ingredients of any Consolation, never considering that the Combat where 'twas
his chance to fall, was fairly carried without any treachery; and that Poliecte
himself, though not killed in the field, was since dead of the wounds her
husband gave him, and that Laurean had escaped no better then Fructule:
Incensed with furious appetite of revenge, breathes nothing in the ears and
heart of Clione but a desire to procure the death of Laurean. Most wicked woman
who not satisfied with so much blood as is already spilt; will thou yet bathe
thy self in his, whom the Heavens had preserved from so many dangers? She
would feign persuade her brother-in-law Fructule to fight again with Laurean,
but he not ignorant of the laws of arms, retained himself within the terms
of his profession, expecting some other occasion to satiate the irreconcilable
hatred he bare Poliecte's heir. At last Death sent his Summons to Fortunate by
an implacable messenger, a burning Fever, yet the violence of her disease
could not make her heart relent, nor renounce her unworthy desire of Vengeance;
but she bound her daughter with this execrable Oath, never to marry any man,
but such as should first bring her Laurean's head, as a sacrifice to her
Father's Ghost. Whether she dyed absolutely in this mind or not I cannot say,
but I Will assure you after her death, Clione kept but too severely the promise
she had made her Mother, although it be rather an act of irreligion then of
piety to observe so illgrounded engagements.

Being now her Uncle Fructule's ward her beauty, which was transcendent, and
the noise of her great riches, made her the mark that the ambition of the most
considerable persons of that Province aimed at. But she is a second Atalanta,
her love cannot be purchased without the hazard of the suitors life, she makes
her self the price of Laureans head, so deeply her Father's death, and the
pressing persuasions of her dying Mother, had engraved in her heart the hatred
of this innocent gentleman. But commonly ill intents have bad events, and sad
repentance follows for the most part all unadvised enterprises; Four of the
most eager aspirers to the acquisition of this golden fleece, one after the
other received a due chastisement for their temerity. The first remained a
Cripple all his life, bearing in his deformity a perpetual mark of Laurean's
Valor, the second was killed in the field, the third delivered shamefully his
arms, and the fourth had served as a trophy to Laureans gallantry, if friends
coming in had not separated them, and ravished this palm from our Champion.

In mean time, as the same waters of the deluge which over-flowed the world,
raised the Arc to the very Heavens, so the same means which Clione had
invented to destroy her enemy, were to him as steps and degrees of Glory: For
it is incredible how much the success of these combats increased his
reputation; and although the act in it self was not commendable, yet the cause
(in regard he aimed at nothing but his own defense) seemed so just, that his
praises were trumpeted out by the very mouths of those that were jealous and
envious at his honor. Seeing he was the only object of Clione's inveterate
hatred, and that like Hydra'es heads, the defeating of his Adversaries begat
him fresh Encounters: his friends advised him often to absent himself from
Provence, and go to the Court, where the Kings presence might be a means to
hinder the no less frequent then insolent provocations of Clione's frantic
Lovers. But he was so far from consenting to these persuasions, that he
slighted and rejected them as frivolous, and contrary to his honor and
courage, fancying (like the Lacedemonian King) that no man was stronger, or
better then himself as long as he could hold his Sword. And indeed this
inflexible magnanimity, scorning the dangers he was like to fall into every
moment, made his Valor so cried up through the whole Country, that the most
inconsiderate and stoutest of Clione's Suitors became more moderate, and
learned at the expense of other men's sad fates to seek the enjoyment of her,
without interessing themselves in the Vindication of her unjust passions.

In short time she found no body would love her, nor that would hearken to her
when she offered her self, as the price and recompense of a murder. Wives
purchased with blood are not usually beloved: It being a thing not ordinary to
take a Wife purposely to put ones life in hazard, but rather to preserve it,
for the generation of hopeful Successors. So that having lost all her hopes
on that side, finding no body that to obtain her favor would coap with the
Victorious Laurean, she fell into a profound melancholy, which made her take
the most extravagant and furious resolution that could be imagined. She
determines to execute her design with her own hand, but knowing how
redoubtable Laurean's vigor was, and that natural weakness of her sex was
incapable to resist the Violence of his invincible fury, she studies how to
compass by subtilty that which she despaired by strength of arms to
accomplish. After long raving and musing which way to effect her intention, she
resolves to transvest her self, and getting into Laurean's Service, to watch
her opportunity to murder him; but she suddenly recanring that enterprise,
considering how shrmefull a thing it would be for a young Lady of her quality,
to go alone disguised in that manner, and to how many ill censures she should
expose her honor by so extravagant and unadvised an action; besides she
thought it almostimpossible to procure a Maid of confidence and courage enough
to follow her, in so hazardous an attempt. Yet Heaven which had decreed the
event, far different from her intention, suffered her not to remain long in
this perplexity, by putting into her hands a bold Virago, who like another Sara
offered her self to wait upon this courageous Judith in her perilous design,
and to put in execution what Commands soever she would lay upon her; But then
presently she found another difficulty of no less consequence then the former,
which was, how they should get out of their house, and retire themselves awhile
out of the sight of Fructule her Uncle and guardian, who watched her with no
less Vigilance then the restless Dragon that had in keeping the apples of the
Hesperian garden. But it is in vain to strive to prevent a woman that is
wilfully resolved, the inventions they have to precipitate themselves into
their own destruction, infinitely exceed any thought that can be imagined to
preserve them.

Clione faines her self much troubled with those obstructions which alter the
Complexion of so ful-blown roses in a Virgins cheeks, and throw down the
fresh colors of the maiden blush, placing in their stead the pale ensigns of
the Lilly: And having well greased her Doctors hand to prescribe in her
Uncle's hearing the remedy which she desired, he ordered her to go to the
Baths and drink the water of Baquieres, which are in Bigorre, a Province of
Guyenne, at the foot of the Pyrenean mountains. Fructule condescends to the
undertaking of this journey, which she so much desired, and the Physician
affirmed was necessary for her health. Amongst other lands and houses which she
inherited by her Parents decease, there was one in low Languedoc, just in her
way where she intended to put in practice her Stratagem. She had to attend her
two men and two maid Servants, whereof her faithful Melicerte was one. They
were no sooner come to this house in low Languedoc, but Clione counterfeited
her self so sick, and so stopped with these opilations, that resolving to stay
there till she could procure some remedy for this disease, (which she so
cunningly dissembled, that the most curious observours might have been
deceived) she sent back her Uncle's two men, reserving only her maids about
her, which with the help of her Farmer's family she judged sufficient for her
present Service. Now she is far enough out of Fructule's sight, Melicerte is
only privy to her enterprise: as for the other maid, she easily found seeming
pretexts enough to turn her away, and the good honest Farmer is satisfied with
any thing she is pleased to tell him. By this means she see's her self in a
full liberty of executing her extravagant purposes. She causes to be bought
her two horses with good weapons, two men's clothing for her self and
Melicerte, and having cut their hair (a strange resolution) and fitted
themselves to their minds, they rode toward Laurean's house.

Being lodged in a neighboring Village, Clione, under the name of Florent, and
Melicerte calling her self Nartal, they gave out that they were Languedochian
youths that wanted service: since they have now taken the names and habits of
men, we will speak of them whilst they continue thus, as of men, their
enterprise being bloody and Martial. In short time they insinuate themselves
into the acquaintance of some of Laurean's followers, amongst whom they learned
that their Master was a great lover of music, finding it the only solace and
Charm to divert the melancholy his generous mind was afflicted with, seeing
himself the only object of the malicious practices of such implacable
Enemies. Florent could Sing so exquisitely to the Lute, that his voice seemed
to declare no less than an exact agreement betwixt the vocal and
isntrumental Music, thereby charming the rocks into such a posture, as if
they had danced measures to that Harmony. Nartal had no such pleasing Voice,
but he had so excellent a hand upon the Virginalls, that joined in concert with
the Lute, and Florents admirable Voice made so Harmonious a melody, that it
sweetly stole out at the Ears the Souls of all the hearers. These pleasingly
deceitful allurements, our Syrenes make the prologue of the detestable tragedy
they intended against this innocent Ulisses. At last some of his Servants that
had heard them presented them to Laurean, whose ears being infinitely ravished
with their incomparable Harmony, and his eyes no less taken with their winning
countenances and demeanure: he conjured them to make his house their lodging,
assuring them to treat them like persons of noble Extraction, (as he deemed
them to be) and that they should command all he had as freely as himself. The
cunning Females perceiving with what impernosity their prey cast himself into
the snares they had prepared for him, made many seeming excuses, and refusals
of his Civility, although they desired nothing more than to remain there; but
that was merely to engage Laurean into deeper Conjurations, and to cover their
staying with the color of constraint. At last (like Hellen) they were forced
with their own consents. Laurean gives them honorable entertainment, Feasts
them in the highest manner he can, knowing how fantastical Musicians naturally
are; and how hard it is to hold these Protheuses which change places and
humors as often as they vary their tunes and notes.

Oh the Admirable effect of Civility and courtesy! which wrought so powerfully
upon Florent's disposition, that presently it changed his resolution. His heart
like Lead melts all at once, and love takes full possession of that breast,
where a mortal and implacable hatred had so long kept his residence. Laurean
is so ready in doing Florent all obliging and civil offices, that his heart
must have been composed of Steel or Marble if it had not relented at such
evident testimonies of affection: And Florent being of no rocky substance, nor
composed of any other insensible matter, remarked so much grace and Comeliness
in Laurean's person, such pleasing discourse and so winning behavior, that by
little and little his perfections made a most ardent impression in the heart of
this Virago. Who can but admire this change? she that came purposely to
surprise, is her self surprised, and wounded to the heart; she is become a
friend, nay a passionate Lover, that went out a Capital Enemy, and with the
most felonious and detestable intention, that the malice of the mortalest and
most inveterate hatred ever could suggest. What various thoughts now agitate
her disquiet mind? What pleasure now she takes in the presence and Conversation
with Laurean? Now if she could persuade her self that Laurean would ever bear
as much love to Clione, as he makes show of inclination to Florent, she should
esteem her felicity a degree beyond infinite.

Nartal observing his Companion very pensive and Melancholy, thought that the
apprehension of the danger, and the difficulty of atchieving their enterprise,
had been the occasion of his discontent: But how much was he mistaken in his
conjecture, since Florent now desires as vehemently the preservation of
Laurean's life, as formerly he had thirsted after his death. Nartal
endeavors to encourage him to pursue their design, persuading him that
those testimonies of affection which Laurean showed them, would be a means for
them to accomplish with more facility their intention; too much Confidence
opening the gates to perfidious treachery, as much as mistrust is Mother of
security. But how much did he find Florents Courage and resolution altered,
and what amazement seized him when he heard expressions of affection proceed
from the same mouth that had uttered so many menaces against Laurean, whilst
the heart which gave her tongue it is motion was fraught with so much gall and
rancour.

Having resolved with my self to abandone all that might breed tediousness in
my histories, I cannot without countervening my resolution now relate the
several discourses upon this occasion betwixt these two disguised damsels. In
the upshot Clione that had not been ashamed to discover to Melicerte to what
extremity her rage and malice against Laurean had transported her, thought it
no dishonor to confess the new flame his merits had kindled in her breast.
This Confession much satisfied Melicerte's curiosity, though she dissembled it
as much as might be, and fed Clione with hopes of terminating their design
with Joy and Contentment, notwithstanding so difficult and knotty a beginning.
But a business of this intricacy could not be so easily disembroil'd. The
respects of honor retain Clione from making her self known to Laurean, but
much more forbad her to discover the extreme passion wherewith her heart was
inflamed for him. On the other side, he, whether through a secret instinct of
nature, more forcible then any artificial disguisements, or by the sweetness
of Florents behavior and Musical charms, or by any other private motive, he
knew not what, he could not without great resentment absent himself from the
company of these new guests, and when the night constrained him to retire into
his Chamber, and called them to theirs, It was but to spin out the hours
instead of sleeping in continual ravings, which still began again when he did
think to end them, losing himself in a Labyrinth of restless Imaginations.
Who ever saw a blind Creature in Love with a thing he never saw, and
passionately seeking after that he loves without knowing what it is: Such is
the disquietnesse of Laurean's troubled mind, vehemently desiring he knows
not what, and suffering strange effects, whose cause he was not able to for
penetrate. Weak is the force of art against the instinct of Nature, Florent's
perfections display their attractive power through the Shadows of all these
artificial disguises.

It Is true, 'twas no small Alarm which Love gave to Clione's heart, where
triumphing like a Victorious General, he put all other passions to the route,
and made a strange disorder in her breast. But Laurean's distemper is far
greater, feeling sometimes much pleasure in his passion, then presently
tormented with Dolours unexpressable, being inclined to love an object which he
could not enjoy in the manner he did desire. How often did he accuse Nature of
mistaking, in placing in the body of a man (as he thought Florent to be) beauty
and qualities that seemed much more Suitable to a Lady; for the lineaments of
his face were in his eye so exquisite, his complexion so delicate, his
discourse so quainte, his Voice so feminine, his gestures so comely, and all
his actions so little savouring of any Martial breeding, that he was much
perplex't to find such rare perfections in a person whom the Divine laws, as
well as those of Nature, forbade him to love with that horrible lust which so
much defameth th'Orientall climates, but never so much as enters into the
thoughts of the Septentrionalls. How much did it torment him to withdraw his
eyes from an object which was so pleasing that he could never satisfy himself
with looking upon it, and yet could not contemplate it without a Crime? had he
lived in the age of the Metamorphoses, how would he have importuned the Heavens
to have made one according to his desire? Amongst many other particulars that
passed whilst Florent and Nartal remained in Laurean's house: I will only
relate two or three, which seem no less remarkable than delightful.

One day, as they were discoursing of the Combats, which this Gentleman had
fought against those, that through the instigations of Clione had challenged
him; there was one of the Company that fell into high Exclamations against the
Cruelty and Malice of that Lady, reviling her with the terms of a Viper, a
Fury, and a Fell-savage Beast; wishing her out of the world, that Laurean's
life might be secured from so many dangers, to which her irreconcilable hatred
daily exposed him. For in effect, every moment he expected such kind of
Messages; and every time any one knocked at his Gates he fancyed himself to be
in one of those enchanted Castles of the Ancient Romans, where those that
remained must always be ready armed, and in a posture to answer some new
Challenge: But Laurean not suffering him to proceed in such Violent railings
against a Lady that he esteemed full of Honor. You blame her (says he) for her
hatred to me, and do not consider that it proceeds from the extreme love she
bears to the memory of her Parents. Her Mother dying, made her swear my Ruin,
as Asdrubal, made Hannibal and Amilcar, his Children, swear the destruction of
the Romans, and make a solemn Vow upon the Altars never to be reconciled to
them. And in this she does an act both of Honor and Piety in so severely
keeping her Oath and Promise. Besides, according to the Laws and Maxims of
the world, who knows not that Revenge is held a point of Courage and
Magnanimity? If she be possessed with this Error, she does but follow the
stream of the general opinion, which transports often times the most discreet,
and considerate persons: Moreover, she takes me (if not for her Father's
murderer) at least for the Son of him that killed him; and in this respect how
can she but abhor me? and why should not she endeavor to deprive him of life
whom she looks on as her Fathers Homicide? It is true, I could object many very
lawful excuses, in regard the Battle was fought according to the Laws of
Arms without Treachery; and that my Father is since deceased of the wounds
which he received from hers: that my hands were not otherwise dipped in her
Fathers blood, but in the just defense of my own Fathers cause and quarrel; and
that I my self was brought off the Field with more probability of Death than
Life. But a heart possessed with prejudice, and ulcerated with an incurable
passion can admit of no reason, though never so just; if the light of Truth and
Equity could but once penetrate the breast of this fair Enemy, with it is
resplendent rays, and dissipate the misty clouds of this savage and inhumane
Opinion which she has conceived against me, I am confident it would abate her
fury, and that she would acknowledge me to be more ready to honor, and serve
Ladies of her quality and merits than she imagines. I have had the thought a
hundred times to write her this resentment of my Soul, (that being the only
means I had to accost her) for my sight I know is most odious to her: But a
vain shadow of honor still retained me, fearing lest she should make trophyes
of my Letters; and that some indiscreet readers might believe that the
apprehension of Death had dictated them to me, seeing my self daily attack't
with fresh Combatants; and no sooner cured of my first wounds, but enforced to
hazard the opening them again in a second Duel. Indeed had I but one Enemy to
deal with, in a moment our difference would be ended by the death of one, or
other, but I must Encounter as many as the Beauty of my dear Enemy (which
charms even those that have the least inclination to love) produces every
day. I believe really, that nothing but death can release me from this misery;
It being impossible but that Hercules himself must at last fall under so many
Adversaries. But besides the comfort I have from the goodness of my Cause,
(which is but a just defense) so that I die honorably, without any stain to
my reputation, I am satisfied. Happy beyond my deserts if this fair Enemy
having sacrificed me to her Vengeance by the hand of some new Lover, may one
day acknowldge her Error, and how she had shortened the days of a Gentleman of
Honor, that ambitioned nothing more than to be her Servant.

These last words pronounced so feelingly, and with such a grace, as was enough
to have made the very rocks sensible of a relenting disposition, struck
Florent's heart with such tenderness, that the blood started out of his eyes,
and the tears trickling like Pearls of dew amongst the Roses of his cheeks,
augmented much that beauty, which Laurean contemplated but with too much
attention. Perceiving his tears, What, Florent, (said he) is it the default of
my courage that breeds this effect of pity in you? No* no, do not think,
though I am called every day to Death's door, that I will ever abate the least
punctillio of Honor, which is so hereditary to my Family: Rather bewail the
misfortune of those, that through Clione's means have fallen by my Victorious
hand. So unworthy a diffidence (replied Florent) never entered into my thought,
the proofs that you have given of your Valor in so many occasions are so
public, that he must be a great stranger in this Province that is ignorant of
them; I am only sorry that such eminent virtues should be so unjustly exposed
to the Cruelty of a barbarous Maid, who cannot deserve (for so many unworthy
actions) that you should esteem so highly of her as you have expressed: And I
believe if she knew your true worth, she would change her animosity into
affection, whereby you might gather the roses of friendship in the same plot,
that produced you the thorns of hatred. But that which forces me to shed
these tears, is the Sorrow that oppresses me to see so generous and spotless
a life exposed to so many deaths, and to such a Continued succession of
tragical adventures. Would to God that I were able with the effusion of my
blood to secure you from these troubles, or worthy to receive so much honor
from you as to go a sharer with you in your dangers, for I shall never esteem
my life better employed then when it is exposed to do you service. These
complements issued so gracefully out of that sweet mouth, that Laurean melting
with such enchanting language, had much ado to refrain from tears, and
express himself in terms suitable to his passion.

It chanced at that same time that Laurean was visited in his house by a
kinswoman (whose name was Octaviane) daughter to one of Poliecte's Sisters, and
whose Father had been engaged in the long quarrel betwixt Silvin and
Poliecte, whose cause (for the mothers sake) he strove to maintain and
justify. This Lady hearing of her kinsman's sad condition, being every day in
danger of his life through the provocations of Clione's Champions, full of a
Courage not ordinary in her Sex, and animated with a strange Rodomontado like
disposition, came purposely to break to him the design she had to challenge
Clione to fight with her, and so with each of them a dagger to revenge upon one
another their Father's Deaths. An heroic resolution for a maid, had not
despair been the principal motive to it. Laurean received her with the
greatest testimonies of respect, friendship and Courtesy, that could be showed
to so near a kinswoman, and so gallant a Lady. But when she discovered her
design (although he admired her Amazonian Courage) he could not hold from
laughing to see how vehement the desire of revenge was in a Sex of so much
imbecility, like fire that flames with so much violence when it meets with any
light and combustible material. Thence he took occasion to excuse within
himself Clione's fury, who used all means possible to be revenged of him by her
Lovers; since Octaviane would expose her own life to so extreme, and almost
inevitable danger to seek satisfaction for her Father's death. Oh could he have
penetrated the secret of darkness, and discovered Florents disguise, he would
easily have perceived that Clione's spirit was enraged with no less fury
against Octaviane! He absolutely disapproves of his kinswoman's proposition,
telling her it was not only a furious rash enterprise, and contrary to all
reason, but impossible to be effected; and that coming to the knowledge of the
world, it would make her the Table-talk of all France.

Octaviane much distasted would not bate one Ace however of her resolution; and
what she had communicated to him in private, she spared not to speak openly,
and in Florent's own hearing (whom she did not take to be Clione) which struck
this disguised Damsel so to the heart, that her Face became like a Rainbow
for diversity of Colors; and you may well think her spirit was agitated with
no less diversity of thoughts. Her heart working like the troubled Sea, one
while she resolved to accept Octaviane's defiance, and engage, that Clione
should meet her; then the fear of discovering her self enforced her to bridle
that impetuosity. But that which stretched the pin of Florent's patience to the
uttermost, was, to hear Octaviane in a Raunting manner say, I have no less
Noble blood in me, nor am I inferior in Estate to that inexorable murtheresse;
and if my Lovers flatter me not, nor my own Glass deceive me, I think Nature
has been no less favorable to me than her: I have Suitours as well as she,
who all make me the highest protestations that may be. Were I as cruelly minded
as that barbarous Imp; or had I as little pity upon those that make Love to me,
I could impose the same Law upon them, and enjoyne them to fight with those
that she employes to revenge her Father's death upon a man that is no way guilty
of it. But rather then to be the cause of so much Bloodshed, I will Encounter
her my self with a Poniard, and make a passage with my Blade for that Black
Soul to sally out of her cankered Breast. Here Florent was fain to suppress
his Choler with both hands, and strive to keep himself within the bounds of
modesty; partly out of respect of his own Honor, and partly out of hope to
Chastise, by effects, the insolency of those outrageous words. And indeed,
within a very little time, fortune gave him fit opportunity to accomplish that
desire; for Octaviane having heard him singe and join his voice to the
ravishing accords of his Lute and Nartalls Virginalls, she was so enchanted
with that delicate voice issuing from a face all of flowers, a mouth of pearl
and Coral, and a breath of amber, in an instant she lost the knowledge of her
self, and giving way to this new flame, she became all ice to her old Servants.

Florent not ignorant of the passions that her Sex was subject to, suddenly
perceived by Octaviane's looks, sighs, and carriage, that the glances of his
beautiful eyes had made no ordinary impression in her heart; desirous to make
this love an instrument of the hatred he bare her, for her invective language
against Clione, he adds fuel to this new fire by fained demonstrations of a
reciprocal affection, and augments with high hopes of fruition the desires of
this imprudent Damsel, like Faulconers and Fishermen, that never present their
baits to the unwary birds or fishes, but to take them and deprive them both of
life and liberty. You may imagine whether Octaviane bit greedily at that bait,
Nature enclining us to believe easily what we desire. It is not my intent to
describe the particulars of this affection, no less sincere and ardent on
Octaviane's part, then cunningly dissembled by Florent. In mean time do not
you admire the several parts which Love does act in humane breasts, and are you
not amazed at these strange intricacies? Seeing at once two Enemies infinitely
enamored of each other, and two Lovers mortal Enemies: And each of the three
principal Actours in this scene, ( Clione, Laurean and Octaviane) were in love
with what they hated, and hated what they loved. Who would not say that all
this were enchantment, were it not apparent that Florent's attractive beauty
and disguise were the origin and cause of these charms. Mean time while the
Spirits of these three Lovers are thus encumbered and involved in this Labyrinth
of confusions, arrives a new subject of disorder, which will produce many
different effects of passion.

Montdor a young Gentleman of the County Venaissin, having listed himself
amongst the Suitours of our Penelope (I mean Clione) in her absence makes his
addresses to Fructule her Uncle and guardian, demanding his consent. He (knowing
to what Fortunate dying had engaged his Niece, and the resolution she had taken
to perform her Mother's injunction, which was to admit of no man to be her
husband, but him that should bring her Laurean's head concealed not this
condition from him, assuring him withal that he would deliver Clione into his
hands, if he could but effect it. Love and the desire he had to advance
himself (two powerful goades to an ambitious youth) soon made Montdor accept
the terms, although he knew the injustice of the cause, and the sad success
of diverse that had preceded him. To this effect furnished with very good Arms,
and an excellent Horse, he comes to a Village within three leagues of Laurean's
house, whence he sends a Challenge enclosed in a packet, which he pretended was
sent from Court. Laurean who was acquainted with such kind of messages, read
it without ever changing his Countenance, or giving the least suspicion of the
Contents, resolving with himself to give the same satisfaction to this new
Combatant as he had to the rest, only he was to beware lest under pretense of
a single Duel, there might be some treachery intended, and so he might basely
be deprived of that life, which he had exposed with such unparalled
gallantry. However he could not carry his business so secretly, but his
design was discovered by the preparation of his Horse and Arms: It was
presently noised through the whole Castle, and came to Octaviane's, Florent's
and Nartal's ears. What diversity of thoughts (think you) were Laurean's and
his Ladies minds then possessed with? his only care was to preserve his honor
and his life, and make his Enemy, feeling the sharpness of his Sword, repent
too late the temerity of his resolution. Florent and Nartal Studied nothing so
much, as by what means they might divert or compose this quarrel, Octaviane
employed all her Rhetoric, but in vain, to dissuade her kinsman from
answering the challenge: For (besides that he was of himself too magnanimous
to refuse that party by a Woman's persuasions only) he stopped her mouth with
her own reasons, representing to her the desperate design she was so
inflexibly bent upon to fight her self with Clione, And the offer she made him
of employing one of her Lovers to chastise the rashness of his Challenger, he
rejected as a proposition highly injurious to his Valor and reputation.

Here Florent took her at her word, to whom she had rendered many testimonies of
affection, not only by her actions and demeanure, but also by her own
confession, (although accompanied with a bashfullnesse that becomes modest and
chaste Virgins.) Florent would ^ot let slip this opportunity, but made it serve
as a specious pretense to cover the design he had already framed, either to
fight himself with Montdor in Laurean's stead, or at least to be his second
against him. But Laurean taking these offers as affronts, and as
disadvantageous to his honor, imposing silence to his kinswoman, entreated
Florent to excuse him if he could not commit so base an action as to suffer him
to go in his place, since 'twas a thing contrary to all the Laws of Honor
and of Arms; neither could he accept of him for his Second, since Montdor's
Ticket mentioned that he would fight single, being unwilling to engage any
other in that Duel. At least then (replied Florent) you shall permit me to go
before, and view the place he assigns you, near the Village where he expects
your Answer, that there may be as little Treachery on his part, as there is
much generosity on yours. Laurean suspecting, and conjecturing aright the wile
of this Cavalier, who desired that Commission for no other end, but to quarrel
with Montdor, and prevent their Combat, would by no means be persuaded to
consent to that employment. But not to discontent him altogether, he suffered,
with much entreaties, Nartal to perform that Office, guessing, by his
deportment, that he was not a man fit to contest with Montdor, who had the
repute of the most expert and complete Horseman of that County. Florent was
enforced to be satisfied with that, since no more could be obtained: Whereupon
he dispatched a Letter by Nartal to Montdor; wherein he forbade him expressly
under pain of his perpetual dis-favour to fight with Laurean, for reasons
which he should know at their first meeting: This he wrote with his own hand,
and subcribed Clione.

Nartal with this Letter, and other private instructions from Clione, takes his
way toward Montdor, where being arrived, he delivers the Letter, the Contents
whereof distracted Montdor's mind with a thousand confused imaginations: for
knowing very well the hand, and bearing a respectfull awe to the absolute
Command of that severe Mistress, who had no less authority to make her Lovers
fear her, than Beauty to attract their Loves. Love solicites hard for Obedience
to that Command; representing often to him Clione's threats to deprive him of
that which he sought for in that Duel with peril of his own life, since he
had no other occasion to be Laurean's enemy. But to revoke the Challenge he had
sent, he thought that would make too great a breach in his reputation; and that
exposing himself to the blame of Cowardice, would stain him with perpetual
infamy: At last he concludes in favor of his Honor, and to the prejudice of
his Love; choosing rather to be deprived of Clione, than of that glory which
such magnanimous Spirits aspire by virtue of their Arms. So to be rid of
Nartal's importunity (who pressed him extremely to acquiesse at Clione's
entreaty) he fained to believe that the Letter Nartal had delivered him (though
he knew it to be of Clione's own penning) was counterfeited by some other, but
would by no means tax Laurean with it, lest that might give occasion of
deferring the Enterprise which he then was too deeply engaged in to repeal
with Honor. Hereupon Nartal prayed him to observe well his Physiognomy;
seeming to wonder that a man's Habit, and a Hat covered with plumes, should make
him so much mis-kenne that Melicerte whom he had so often seen attending on
Clione; assuring him by many particulars, that 'twas none but she; and that her
Mistress had put her into that disguise, having no body else about her that
she could entrust with a Message of such consequence.

Montdor at this was seized with such astonishment, that for a good while his
tongue could not perform it is office; at length recovering his speech, he
asked her diverse questions concerning her Mistress, wherein she satisfied him
with as many quaint, and cunningly framed inventions, never confessing that
Clione, under the name of Florent, was in Laurean's house. But neither her
entreaties, conjurations, nor threats, could in the least divert Montdor from
the resolution he had taken to maintain the Challenge he had sent to Laurean,
deeming himself unworthy ever to wear a Sword, if he should be guilty of an act
that resented of such notorious and eminent baseness.

So that Nartal returning gave Laurean an exact account of the place appointed
for the Combat, and that he perceived Montdor to be free from any base
treachery; But Florent was in the greatest perplexity imaginable to hear that
his persuasions, nor Commands, could not avail any thing with Montdor, nor
divert his obstinate resolution to fight with Laurean, so making necessity a
virtue, he swallowed that bitter pill, leaving the event to fortune, since there
was no remedy nor means to hinder nor defer that Duel. Laurean used all
entreaties possible to persuade Florent to stay with Octaviane, (but all in
vain) for he would needs bear him Company, and be at least a spectatour of
the Combat, hoping at last to apply that remedy which he more feared then
desired.

The two Combatants being come into the field, mounted upon goodly Steeds, and
armed each with Sword and Pistol, at the first encounter Montdor did no
execution, Laurean dexterously slipping aid: But he not losing the opportunity
shot Montdor through the right arm, and making his Pistol fall immediately,
he put him out of his fighting posture: Then presently drawing his Sword he
gained the crupper of him, and had run him through the body, if Montdor's horse
by a fortunate stumble had not cast his rider. Laurean however scorning to make
use of this advantage, leap't from his horse, and coming to him (that was
neither able to draw his Sword, nor rise, being much bruised with the fall) bid
him ask his life, and deliver him his Sword. I cannot deliver the Sword which
I cannot draw ( replied Montdor) and which I never would deliver to any man if
I were in a capacity to use it, much less will I beg my life of you, which I
had rather lose a thousand times then make so foul a breach in my Honor.
Fortune may make me miserable, but never base; I am now in your power, you may
deal with me as you please, and make what use of your victory you list. This
high spirit which so imminent danger could notintimidate, and which looked so
undauntedly upon so present and pressing a death, took infinitely with Laurean,
who unwilling to soil the glory of his triumph with insolency, answered, You
are much worthier of life, than if you had demanded it; and I will assure you,
that for your Generosity and Courage, you shall ever hereafter find me your
Servant, not an Enemy; and I Will acknowledge that it was my good Fortune, not my
Valor that has given me this advantage over a man whose courage I find
invincible. Hereupon Montdor replied, Now I acknowledge my self conquered
since your Courtesy does preserve what your Sword might justly have taken
away: But if God permit me to recover of these hurts, I will not die
ungrateful for this favor. Hearing this, Laurean flung away his Sword; and
having lifted him up, with the help of his Servants, he carried him back to the
Village, lodged him in a friends house, and sent presently for a Surgeon to
dress his Wounds, offering him his own Castle at Command as soon as he should
feel himself able to go thither.

Florent and Nartal that stayed a loof off to watch the success of this
Combat, with such anxieties and fears, as you may imagine, perplex a tender
Lovers heart in like occurrences, seeing this incomparable Valor joined with
so rare a Courtesy, quite ravished with such Heroic Virtues, rode presently
back to Laurean's Castle, under pretense to carry Octaviane the news of her
Cosins Victory, who remained Master of the Field without any hurt. Mean time,
whilst they joyfully celebrate this Triumph; and that Octaviane (deceived with
Florent's outside) feeds her eyes with that pleasing object, and her ears
with his accustomary Courtships: Laurean stays with Montdor, showing him as
much respect, and friendly Offices as if hehad been the most intimate and
dearest Friend in the world, which so transported Montdor, that he almost
forgot his pain. The shot being in his Shoulder, was not so dangerous as
troublesome, being likely to be long a Curing; but he was so bruised with the
fall, that there was more fear of him for that, than for the Wound he had
received.

One day Montdor lying in his Bed, and Laurean sitting by him, (whose Civility
and Gallantry he could never satisfy himself with extolling) they fell upon
the discourse of the subject of their quarrel. Montdor confessed that he was
justly punished for his temerity, having obstinately transgressed the express
Commands of Clione in fighting with him. How? said Laurean, I thought she had
enjoined you to it. Not she (replied Montdor) but her Uncle told me that I
could never hope upon any other terms to enjoy his Niece, who at present is
gone to certain waters near the Pyrenean mountains, for the recovery of her
health, which of late has been somewhat impaired: With that he showed Laurean
the Letter she had sent him, and told him the particular message he had
received from her, by a Gentlewoman disguised in man's apparel. Laurean could
not imagine what might be her meaning to forbid Montdor that whereto she had
engaged so many others formerly, unless that bearing him more affection then
the rest, she would not expose him to so great danger.

After some days time Laurean took leave of Montdor, promising to see him
often, and to bring with him two Languedochian youths that had been some time
at his house; and which, amongst other perfections, were rarely Skilled in
music. Being come back to his Castle, he made a full relation to his
kinswoman, and his two guests, of all the passages betwixt him and Montdor, and
what he had told him of Clione's Letter, and of the Gentlewoman Cavalier that
brought it him. At these words Nartal and Florent were almost out of
Countenance, imagining that they were discovered.

If Laurean had taken notice of the coming and going of the Colors in their
faces, he might easily have guest at their inward disturbances, (but how should
the mind imagine what the eyes do not observe?) So these alterations passing
without his reflecting on them, built a confidence in the two disguised
Damsells, that they were not yet known to be what effectually they were. But
when Laurean prayed them to bear him company the first time, he went to Visit
Montdor again (as he had promised they should) they then believed absolutely
that this was only a wile to draw them in, and that without doubt their plot
had been discovered. Therefore Florent could never be at quiet, till he had
found a handsome excuse to be gone away, having no desire to appear before
Montdor in that habit. So faining to have received news from an Uncle of his
that was desperately Sick, (whose estate after his decease he was to inherit)
he acquaints Laurean with it, and desires his permission, who charmed with his
winning carriage and Conversation could not resolve to part with him.

What an Alarm did this news give to poor Octaviane's heart? who placed all
her felicity in the presence and company often her beloved Florent, whom she had
engaged her self to marry. How often did she upbraid him with inconstancy and
slight affection, but with reproaches of so amorous a Choler, that one fire
augmented the other, and made a more full discovery of the excess of passion.
Florent (rejoicing at her pain, and to continue her in this agreeable error)
made a thousand protestations of fidelity and service, as if he had been
capable of accepting the offer she had made him to marry him, he added many
Vows and desperate Oaths, to answer her love with a reciprocal and most
inviolable affection, beseeching her not to be a hindrance to his fortune, but
give him respit only for some few days, that he might go gather the fruit of
the Inheritance that fell to him by his Uncle's death. Octaviane deceived with
his fair language, and holding the mouth she so dearly loved as an oracle of
infallible verity, consented at last to this separation, but with such dolorous
resentments as cast her into a Swound, an evident sign how near it touched
her to be deprived of so beloved a presence.

Being come again to her self, by the application of several remedies, her
doleful and amorous complaints bred some pity in Florents heart,
notwithstanding the occasion he had to hate her. At last, seeing no remedy, she
was enforced to give way to his departure, which would have much more nearly
touched Laurean, had he known that Clione was hidden under Florent's clothes.
However, it troubled him very much to part with him, yet he was somewhat
consolated with the hope he had that Florent would perform his promise, which
was, shortly to return and stay longer with him.

But then grew another contest about Nartal's going, for Laurean was very
urgent to detain him, imagining all pleasure and contentment would presently
fly from his heart if his ears were deprived both of his and Florents
enchanting Harmony: Nartal is as earnest to accompany his cousin, (for so he
styled Florent) and Florent could not be persuaded to leave him as a pledge.
Laurean promised to furnish Florent with as many attendants to convoy him safe
home, as he would desire, and to wait upon him himself. Florent was encumbered
with so many extraordinary Civilities, that he knew not which way to shape an
answer. Indeed it is more difficult to come fairly off in a Combat of
Complements and Courtese (although there be no bloodshed) the^ vulgar spirits
can imagine. But in the end he found this expedient to satisfy all parties,
promising to send back Nartal as soon as he should arrive at Bezieres (which
Florent feigned to be his Native soil) to bring Octaviane and Laurean news of
his proceedings, and stay with them as an hostage till he returned himself.

Thus parting they carry with them

(but in a different manner) the hearts both of Laurean and his kinswoman. In
what a cloud of discontent remained the desolate Octaviane, being deprived of
an object that was the light and delight of her eyes, I give you leave to
imagine. Laurean to divert his melancholy, went again to spend some time with
Montdor, who began to recover of his hurts.

Mean while the time of Nartal's coming back expires, and Octaviane dying
with impatience to hear from Florent, thinks every day an age till she sees
him. This impatience puts her in despair, and being not able to stay any
longer in her kinsmans house, she took a sudden resolution to retire to her
own, purposely to dispose her self for the execution of a folly, which cannot
be excused, but in attributing it to the Violence of a passion which Reason
could not moderate. So faining her self very sick, she repaires homewards,
where being arrived and fittted with man's apparel, a horse and one footman,
she takes her Journey to Bezieres in hopes to find Florent there, but 'twas in
vain, no body there could tell any news of him, for the house where Clione
had retird her self, was in another part of Languedoc not far from Nismes.
What troubles was Octaviane's mind perplexed with, seeing her self deceived?
how did not she exclaim against Florent? whose trace she could no more find
out then that of Fantomes, which vanish as soon as they appear: Yet this
pleasing illusion which had so sweetly carried away her senses, and distilled a
delicious Venime through the eyes into her heart, made her resent a thousand
several distractions. How shall she find out him that she knows not where to
seek, and who is no more the same he seemed to be? for Clione having
re-assum'd her own name and habit, left nothing of Florent but the bare Idea.
Nevertheless she being no less taken with Laurean's perfections, then
Octaviane was with hers, failed not to send back Nartal in the same disguise
with a Letter to Laurean, which contained nothing but Complements, only in the
Close she entreated him to give full credit to what the bearer thereof should
tell him in her behalf.

How did the blood rise in Nartals face when he was fain to take off the mask
of their dissimulation, to make Laurean see the Visage of the truth? Heavens!
how Laurean stood amazed at the recital of this History, which seems more
like a fable or Romance then verity, yet I have it from an Authentic Author,
that averreth it to be very true.

I will not stand to recount the particulars of this discovery, having already
much gone beyond the limits of brevity which I had prescribed my self in this
work: I will only tell you that the Scales fell from Laurean's eyes, when
Nartal showed him what remarkable tumors were in his breast, not ordinary to be
found in men's: So comparing one thing with another, and calling to mind the
many pleasing deceipts which had deluded his senses in Florent's presence, he
made no further question of what Nartal told him. I will omit the diverse
Imaginations that then possessed his brain, without making reflection upon the
wrongs Clione had done him, (whose person he never hated, but the pretensions
wherewith she disturbed his repose) her beauty and good parts represented
themselves to his fancy in a more advantageous form, then if she had been
present, and adding moreover this unexpected change; that had transformed her
from a Tiger to a Dove, and from a mortal Enemy, into a passionate Lover, he
thought one heart too little to reciprocate so entire an affection. In a word
he was more ready to answer Clione's flame, then fire is to catch at any
bituminous matter.

Upon Nartal's word without any diffidence he goes alone with him, taking no
attendant but one Lakey, and in short time he arrives at Clione's house. These
two Souls felt themselves at the same instant kindled with a flame so equal in
it is extremity, that it had been hard to judge which had the better in that
amorous War. It Is nothing to say they were perfectly reconciled to one
another: I must say, they tied themselves so strictly with deep Oaths and
promises of marriage, that nothing but Death could ever dissolve that band.

These words and this faith being given and received in presence of a Priest,
they past to the Consummation of that which Lovers so ardently desire, being
both so fully satisfied, that their life was but a continued ravishment of
delight. But prickles still accompany Loves roses, and fire cannot be without
some smoke. Laurean's being at Clione's house was soon noised all the Country
over, and she, like the Queen of Carthage, cares not to hide their amorous
stealths, since all was covered with the Cloak of Matrimony.

Fame that has no less tongues then wings, soon carries this report to her
Uncle Fructule, which Stunned him as if he had been blasted with lightning, or
rather thunderstriken. It seems to him a Paradox, esteeming that as impossible
a thing as to join fire and water. A second report which commonly is truer
then the first, assured him that what he feared was but too certain. Upon this
he falls into a rage, exclaimes, storms and threatens both his Niece, and
Laurean, with more thunder then The Heavens heretofore darted against the
Rebellious Giants. All the other friends of both the Families bless God for
this happy alliance, which promising an assured peace betwixt them would stop
the effusion of so much blood, and hinder any further quarrels. Only Fructule
animated with a desperate rage, and fury, resolves to put all in disorder.

Whilst he thus fret's and fume's with madness, studying the accomplishment of
some premeditated revenge against them, let us consider th'amazement poor
Octaviane was in, being already returned from her Knight Errantry, when she
heard that her Cousin was married to his fair Adversary, and that this sweet
Enemy was the same Florent whose Idea was so deeply engraven in her heart. How
strange the History of this transfiguration seeme's to her? for better
satisfaction she goes to give Laurean a Visit, (who was so overcome with the
affection of his loving Enemy; that he could not absent himself one moment out
of her sight) and if her own eyes had not been witnesses of all these
passages (that had been related to her, besides the assurance Laurean gave her
of them by Letters) she could nere have believed them.

Cured both of her love and hatred, immediately she embraces, as her chief
friend and kinswoman, her in whose breast not many days before she would have
stuck her poniard. Oh Love! it is thou that tamest the savage beasts, and make
tractable the most fierce Lions and Tigers, what force is able to withstand thy
powerful sweetness! Mean while that Laurean, wholly taken up with the
delights of his new spouse, seeme's to have forgotten both himself and his
Family, Montdor recover's his perfect health, and hearing the good success
twixt Laurean and Clione, he rejoiced exceedingly that he was prevented in the
design, wherein he had intended to employ all his power and interest, for the
reconciliation of those two Families divided by so many streams of blood. He
was so far from being troubled with jealousy, seeing in Laurean's Arms her
who was cause of that Duel: that quite contrary he looked upon him as the
preserver of his life, as the mirror of Courtesy and valor, and as one for
whom he would have resigned a Scepter to have placed him in a throne. He went
to wait upon this new married Couple, to congratulate their felicity, and
assure them that there was nothing in the world to which his Soul so much
aspired as to do them Service.

There he found Octaviane, who disabus'd of her error, was a blanke, free from
all love and Passion: Montdor being thoroughly healed as well of the wounds
which Laurean had made in his body, as also of those which Clione's beauty had
made in his Soul, felt a private inclination to render himself to Octaviane's
sweetly attractive graces: And she considering the comeliness of this
Gentleman, (who was one of the richest and stoutest Cavaliers of the County of
Avignon) had no less disposition to affect him.

This was the first foundation of their reciprocal liking, which continuance
of time increased through Montdor's faithful service and professions of real
affection, until at last it was consummated by that honorable Bond which makes
of two bodies one flesh. Now he bearing a great hand with Fructule, at whose
instance he had engaged himself in that unadvised Duel against Laurean, took
upon him to appease his anger, and procure his approvement of Clione's
Marryage, which he seemed to be so discontented and enraged at. In this
confidence he went to him, but having reck'ned without his host, no wonder if
he found his expectation frustrated. Fructule gives him very ill language, and
had like to have fallen foul on him. This was an ill beginning, yet he desisted
not, but suffering all the injurious treatments the others fury transported him
to, he endeavored to win him with the fairest and most plausible language he
could invent; Yet this wrought nothing upon him, the Ulcers of his mind being
like those of the body, which Honey does more inflame, contrary to the holy text
which says, good words Molifie anger. Thence Montdor went to visit Clione's
other kindred, and by persuasions prevailed so far with them that they all
seemed very joyful of that alliance, as an extraordinary effect of the Divine
Providence which only was able to procure that recconciliation. But all their
consents were of no great importance, the chief was wanting, that was,
Fructule's, (he being Guardian and administratour of Clione his niece and
ward's whole estate,) and to obtain that seemed impossible.

He talked of nothing but challenging Laurean himself, which Laurean might
wave with two very lawful excuses, for one he might allege his late Marryage
which made Fructule his Uncle, the other that having once before worsted him in
the Field, he was not obliged the second time to fight against him. Fructule
fearing the latter objection, which would not have redounded to his honor,
bethought him of some other means how to make Laurean away. To this effect he
corrupts with money a Cook, that formerly had served him, Commanding to try
how he might get into Laurean's service and poison him. This base fellow
pretending that Fructule had misused him, came to proffer his Service to
Laurean, who entertained him at Clione's entreaty, she having known him at her
Unkle's house, assured him of his fidelity, in which she was much mistaken.
Thus she contributed to her own mischief, in receiving within her husbands
Castle (whither he had carried her) this threacherous Trojan horse. Had not
Montdor given him warning to take heed of that Cook, questionless the
Villain had executed his base design. Upon this advertisement Laurean
apprehended him, and partly by entreaties, partly by promises, and partly by
threatenings, he made him confess the truth, and show him the poison he was to
mingle in his meat. Observe the extreme Courtesy of this Gentleman, who sent
him back to Fructule, not suffering the least harm to be done him, to the end
that he might inflict such punishment upon him as he should think fit himself
for so unworthy a fact, desiring him not to use any ways to deprive him of his
life, so ignoble and so misbecomming a Gentleman of his birth and honor.
Fructule sorry that his powder had not taken fire, nor his treachery succeeded
to his mind, and ashamed to own so dishonorable a design, disclaimed his
Cook, swearing that he was ignorant of that disloyalty, and that it was a good
while since he had turned him away. But not imagining how Laurean should be
acquainted with this plot, out of Suspicion he manumitted diverse of his
domestics, who blazed all abroad the truth of the business to his great
infamy, yet this malicious Soul was not so Satisfied, seeing every body cried
shame on him for his treachery and hard-hartednesse, and that he unjustly
withheld his Ward from her estate, because she was married without his consent
to his and her Enemy: He changed his note, and faining to be better pleased,
and to desire a fair reconciliation (just as the cunning Fowlers use their
calls to entrap the innocent birds) Clione and Laurean who desired nothing more
then to accomplish their felicity, greedily hearkened to the propositions that
were made by some persons whom Fructule had deceived, and who used as much
sincerity and Candor in the mediation as he had baseness and dissimulation in
his proposalls.

He pretends that his greatest desire was to see his Niece, that he could not
foregoe his own blood, that he pardoned her with all his heart, and that he
believed if he could but ser her at his House, and learn of her self what
moved her to marry Laurean, perhaps he should be satisfied with her reasons,
restore her to her Estate, and make a handsome agreement with her Husband. She
(like an innocent Dove, or an inconsiderate Partridge) entrap's her self by
casting her silly harmless eye upon the specious luster of this Fowlers
glass; having begged leave of her Husband to go treat their peace with her
Uncle. Although Laurean presaged that Journey would produce no good event, yet
he lets his Wife go against his will, consenting to that separation induced by
his Friends persuasions, who were very earnest with him, not to show himself
irreconcilable, but yield as much as in honor he could to Fructule's humor,
who by his marriage to Clione was then his Uncle. Clione of her good Nature
mistrusting nothing fell into the Snares her Uncle had prepared for her. At
first he treated her with more Civility then she expected, but this was only
as a fair leaf to hide the Serpent in his treacherous design, and a Figg
wherewith (like the Egyptian Queen) he covered his prernicious aspe. How
deceitful is the Spirit of man! It Is a Labyrinth that is full of false cunning
passages and subtle evasions. A tempest is most to be feared when the Sea is
calmest: All the feasting and expressions of joy which Fructule made his Niece,
were but so many treacherous baits to inveagle her; Apes kindnesses, who kill
their young ones with hugging them. Being entered in discourse with her, by
little and little he cunningly fell from contestation to reprehension, from
reprehension to threats, thence to railing and such offensive terms, as drew
very tart replies from Clione's mouth, then irritated with Choler and incited
with a too great sense of Honor; which gave Fructule occasion to color his
premeditated revenge under the notion of correction. Hereupon he makes her be
locked up in a Chamber, and kept as a Prisoner with all the base usage that may
be imagined, purposely to drive her into despair. And according to the
proverb, one misfortune never comes alone: The news of Clione's captivity was
soon brought to Laurean, who then lay sick in bed of a Fever, that
Melancholy for his dear Spouses absence had been the occasion of. Heavens!
how it stroke his heart, he is mad to rise up, being ready to burst with
Choler and fury, he will precipitate himself into a thousand deaths, rather
then suffer such indignities to be done, to a person that was so near and
dear unto him, as one whom he affected with a more love then what he bare unto
himself. But this excess of rage redoubles his paroxisme, and makes his
Fever continual, from that his Violent burning grew to find no intermission,
so that he fell into such extravagant ravings, as bred astonishment and pity
in all that were about him. Clione is always in his mouth, and her Image
perpetually before his eyes, sometimes he fancies her all bloody and deformed
with blows, sometimes crying out to him for succor, sometimes pursued by her
Uncle, he struggles and keeps a Coile, he ask's for his Sword, he leaps out of
his bed, and makes assaies beyond any ordinary man's ability, ten men can hardly
hold him, they are feign to bind him with cords, amongst all these Violences he
neither would nor could take any remedy the Phisicians did prescribe him, so
that there were hardly any hopes either of life or his recovery. This being
reported to Fructule, he believed that the Heavens in that affliction seemed to
assist him, executing his revenge upon Laurean, whom he Styled the seducer and
ravisher of his Niece; and to augment her sorrows he presently carries her the
news of her Husbands indisposition, but with such joyfulnesse, that it even
broake her heart. For that confirmed her opinion that Laurean then was poisoned
or bewitched, for (besides what her Uncle told her) she heard such strange
reports of the excess and Violence of her Husbands sickness, that there was
nothing of ill but she imagined was befallen him: And for accomplishment of her
miseries she felt her self with Child, a condition so choice and tender, that
the least affliction either corporal or spiritual, often casts into the grave
those that seem the best disposed, and of the strongest constitutions.

Fructule who hated both the tree and the Fruit, and wished no less
destruction to the Mother and her Child, then he did to the Father, used her
worse and worse, and strove by several subtilties how he might make Clione
away, and destroy her Child, by a precipitated and untimely birth. But God (who
preserve's the innocent, to whom all hatred and malicious practices are
unpleasing) confounded the wicked designs of this incompassionate Guardian,
who (more like a ravenous wolf then a faithful Shepherd) used all means
possible to procure the destruction of the sheep, which the Laws both divine
and Humane obliged him to preserve and cherish. Indeed those that are under the
protection of the Almighty, cannot be taken out of his hand, they are (says
the Prophet) delivered out of the snares of the hunters, and sheltred from all
outrages and injuries, for the Lord does hide them under the shadow of his
wings, and is as a Buckler to them.

It had been absolutely impossible but that Clione beaten with so many cruel
storms, had fallen into some desperate sickness, which would have made a
double murder in her, if God had not suscitated Montdor to rescue and deliver
her. He was once in the mind to challenge Fructule, and by his death give both
life and Liberty to that unfortunate Prisoner, but upon maturer consideration,
he thought it more convenient to take a Foxes then a Lions skin, and try what
might be done by wit and industry rather then attempt any violent Course. The
fable of Danae teaches us this Verity, that Gold will make it is passage
through the strongest holds. He spared for nothing that might corrupt Clione's
guards, procuring at length her enlargement, by the means of those that were
encharg'd to keep her. Having freed her from this Slaverie he carries her back
to Laurean, who at the very first sight of her began to feel himself better,
he left his raving fits and the ardour of his Fever grew more moderate,
showing that the Cause of his disease being ceased, the effects could no longer
have their being. Within a short time he recovered his health, and the
lightsomenesse of his heart soon replanted fresh roses in his cheeks. As soon
as he felt his strength perfectly come to him again, he resolved to employ it
for the destruction of him who had so barbarously treated his Clione. But she
never ceased weeping and entreating, until to satisfy her he altered his
resolution, to which he more willingly condescended out of fear, that (she
being very big with Child) that apprehension might cast her into despair and
cause her to miscarry. Nevertheless though he was persuaded to omit the use of
his Sword, he resolved to make good his Interest by force of the Pen, entering a
suite in Law against Fructule to make him render account of his Wardship, and
to restore to his Wife the estate he unjustly kep't from her. During this
process which was protracted by those that make it their trade and
livelihood, to foment such contestations, Clione is brought to bed of a
Daughter, and Montdor had so ingratiated himself with Octaviane, that he was
become her Husband, and kinsman to Laurean. Thus were those two houses now
united in the bonds of consanguinity, who before thirsted after nothing but the
blood and destruction of each other.

It is a general Maxim that Elements so contrary as fire, and water, can
never be converted one into the other, but to that Sovereign power which
governes and gives essence to all things, nothing can seem difficult. Thus at
the destruction of Jerusalem that Sacred fire of the Temple which was hidden
in a well, by the industry of some Religious Priests, fearing lest it should be
profaned by the Idolatrous Conquerours, was found at their return from the
Captivity of Babylon changed into thick Water, which exposed to the hot Sun
beams resumed it is former color and property of fire. I must confess
according to th'ordinary course of this corrupt age, it is hard to see such
effects of Love, proceed from such mortal hatred, but nothing is impossible to
God's omnipotent Providence who daily works miracles.

This consideration made the Wise man say, that men must hate as if one day
they were to Love, implying that their hatred should not be irreconcilable.
And another says, that Enmities ought to be mortal, that is, that they should
take end and dye. And doubtless this is the meaning of the Evangelist, who
teaches us, that the Sun should not go down upon our wrath.

By this Montdor through his incessant endeavors had wrought all Clione's
other kindred to be friends with Laurean, and the Sense of the Court began to
let Fructule see with shame the unjustnesse of his cause: But to prevent
Conviction, he meditated another design so damnable, as could not enter into
the thought of any man but one given over to all wickedness; which to effect
he gives out that he would willingly restore Clione her Estate, and approve of
her Marriage, provided that her Husband and she, would give him an acquittance
of his Gardianship upon such accounts as he should produce. Laurean's Friends
and Clione her self (who desired no better then to be at peace upon what
terms soever) advised him to take what he could get from so ill a Paymaster,
and to quit th'Administration for the time past, so that he would give them
quiet possession of his Neece's estate. Friends on both sides at last concluded
the matter, and the Articles were signed according to Fructule's own desire.

That done they met, the Uncle embraced lovingly his Niece, and Laurean as his
Nephew, pressing them extremely to go to his House, where he would feast them
and the whole company, drowning in good cheer and wine all their former
differences, and publish to the world an act of eternal oblivion. Laurean, who
was of a generous free disposition, promised to be there with his Wife, and
some other Friends, whereof Montdor was now become one of the most intimate:
Who knowing Fructule's treacherous humor, endeavored to cast some diffidence
in Laurean's Spirit, but could by no means make him susceptible of it. So he
resolved by virtue of the powder of Gold, to sound some of Fructule's domestic
Servants, who discovered his damnable enterprise; Which was to set fire to
certain barrells of Powder, that he had placed directly under the Hall, where
he intended to make this detestable banquet, having first made his own friends
go out and secure themselves, by retiring into another part of the Castle. A
desperate resolution, and such as could not proceed but from the suggestion of
him that is a Homicide from the beginning.

Montdor presently acquainted Laurean with this plot, who would hardly be
persuaded to believe it. But Clione that had more experience of her Unkle's
baseness and malicious humor, gave credit to it, and besought her Husband to
send him some handsome excuse, that he could not perform his promise at that
time, without taking notice however that he knew any thing of that bloody
design. But Laurean's high Courage suggested him another resolution, the
boldness and gallantry whereof proved of most avail to their entire
reconciliation, by a means which in all probability was absolutely contrary.
But as it happens that the excess of drinking (so much forbidden those that
are in Fevers) sometimes cures them, so Laureans free-hartednesse and Courage
by an action full of heroic nobleness in one instant drew away all the
malignity from Fructule's heart, imitating (in that) the lightning which
falling upon a Serpent, takes away all his Venime without killing him.

He assembles his kinsmen and most trusty Friends (who being all well armed) he
desires them to accompany him to Fructule's house, first informing them of the
treachery Montdor had discovered. They all agreed, resolving to go so strong
that they would master that Traitor, and make him suffer the same punishment
that he had prepared for them. But Laurean prayed them to moderat their
Choler, for he desired the conversion, not the death of his wicked Uncle:
Thinking himself sufficiently revenged if he could cast the burning coals of
shame and confusion in his face, by manifesting before his Friends the secret
of his dark design.

Being arrived there, Fructule entertained them with all kind of
demonstrations of a most sincere friendship, so expert was this man in
dissembling his unworthiness. As they were all come within the Hall that was
prepared for the tragedy, he fell into a long discourse of the quarrels
betwixt their two Families, reckoning up their Duells and Combats, and how much
blood had been shed upon that occasion, protesting withal how joyful he was
after so many bloody conflicts and murders, that all those debates were so
near an end, hoping that thence forwards they should live peaceably together,
having smothered all their former enmities in good cheer and wine; That he was
more rejoiced to see them there then the best Friends he ever had in his life,
and that he was most ready to resign them the place, and give them free
possession both of that house and all the estate that belonged unto them.

Thus he expressed himself, not thinking that his Powder plot was discovered.
But it is in vain, says the holy writ, to lay nets for birds that Soar a
loft. Laurean knowing that all this smooth language tended to nothing else, but
only to prepare them for the Sacrifice, which he had destined to his fury.
That Fructule might not have the leisure to put in execution his design, nor
to mingle in their meats any other powders no less dangerous then that he had
hiden under the Hall, without any further delay, said, Perchance some others
less circumspect then he or his Friends might have been entrap't by his
Syrenicall complements, but the train having been discovered, if they perished
he should perish with them himself, and the Friends he had invited thither
also, (which were but very few that would be accomplices of so damnable a
project:) then in the presence of all his Friends he laid in Fructule's dish
all his former basenesses, and the present treachery he intended to execute, as
things most unworthy of a man sprung of so noble and illustrious a Family as
his, having so many ways besides to satisfy his revengefull mind many degrees
more honorable: Showing him to what danger he had exposed himself, through his
unlawful desire of Vengeance, seeing that he then had the strongest Pa^^^ in
the House, and could, if he plea^^^, inflict upon him the punishment his
perfidiousnesse deserved: Yet he entreated his friends (that came thither with
him) to pardon that offense, protesting for his own particular, that both that
and all the former attempts he had so unworthily made upon his life, should
absolutely be buried in oblivion; to the end that this extraordinary goodness
joined to the shame which Fructule ought to have resented for so ignoble an
action might somewhat induce him to repentance, and to acknowledge the
preservation of his life as an act of grace and favor from them, who had then
the power to deprive him of it, and yet spared him.

However Fructule's obdurate heart relented nothing at this incomparable
Courtesy, the moment of his visitation being not yet come. But rather
emboldned by the danger he saw himself then in, never offered to d^ny ^or
excuse the design they ta^^^^^ him with, quite contrary with a multitude of
words as confusedly pronounced as his Countenance was unsettled, he set himself
to justify the fact, alleging that he had reason to seek revenge for so much
blood, as Laurean and his friends had drawn out of the Veins of those of his
family, and that he could never enjoy any content or quietness of mind,
until he had sacrificed unto his Ancestors Ghosts the Author's of their
Death's; yiedling himself willingly into their hands to inflict upon him the
same torments, which he would have made them suffer, had they been in his
power, as he then acknowledged himself to be in theirs.

This answer no less desperate then presumptuous astonished the whole Company,
who seeing the obstinacy of his inflexible heart, began to consult amongst
themselves what to do to him, (...) how to make him feel a punishment
suiteable to such horrid treachery. But Clione who feared to be a spouse of
blood, and Laurean who desired his marriage should have an end rather comicall
then tragical, (to stop the course of their fury in the first breaking out,
and to hinder the bloody effects such injurious language might produce) she
suddenly cast her self in midst of here is and her Husbands friends, and
embracing her Unkle's knees with an exemplary humbleness, the tears trickling
from her eyes, besought and conjured him by all that she could imagine might
any way conduce to move so obstinate a Courage, that he would please to pardon
her disobedience, and mitigate the malice and envy he bare her Husband. This
she pronounce'd so feelingly with so winning a comeliness and such dolorous
accents as would have moved the savagests of beasts, so that (not to detain
you with any further ^^^^tion) she bred Compassion where cruelty had formerly
her dominion, and Love, where hatred had so long ruled as Empress.

Fructule (like a lump of lead which for a while resist's the Violence of the
fire, but at length melts all at once) became so changed on a sudden, that it
was enough to have made those who knew him best suppose him Metamorphosed.
Clione's tears having made their approach so near as to undermine and blow up
that unmalleable rock which lay invelop'd in his bosom, and no less seated on
his heart, that this stone distilled its water through the Limbick of his eyes;
But being not yet a perfect Convertite, some reluctance of his conversion
reverberated the stream back again to his heart, till the heart surcharged
with goodness and humility together, sent the purest Spirits of a relenting
expression unto his tongue, that like an overflowing Violl, it gave such
evident testimonies of a sudden Change and real ressentment, as therewith he
fell upon his Neeces neck, still lying at his feet, and mingling his sighs and
tears with here is, confessed that her goodness had overcome him, and quite
eradicated all his hatred and obstinacy; and since that by her means his life
had been preserved, he would upon any occasion employ it and all he had to do
her service, conjuring her to forget what formerly had passed, and reconcile
him to her Husband whom he was not willing to embrace as his most dear Nephew,
to whom thence forwards he would be ready to render with most sincere affection
all the devoirs of a good Uncle and faithful friend, and endeavor to give him
as many testimonies of hearty good will, as he had formerly desired and
attempted to do him mischief.

What satisfaction was it to all the friends of both parties to see this
cordial reconcileation so far beyond all their hopes or expectation! But as
we see the most delicate and best composed bodies, are susceptible of the
greatest corruptions, the firmest friendships converted oft-times into the
deadliest hatreds, and the keenest Vinegar made of the strongest wines: So
sometimes it happens that an inviolable friendship is framed amongst such as
have been most inveterate Enemies. This is confirmed by the remarkable example
of Fructule, who changed in an instant (like Polemon in the Metamorphosis) of a
violent Enemy became so great a friend to Laurean that he could not live
without him, loving him not as his Nephew, but as his own Son. This good
affection continued to the end of his life; which expired, he invested his
Niece in the succession of his Estate, induced thereto by his own inclination,
as well as by the obligation of Nature. Thus Clione's and Fructule's violent
and implacable hatred ended in Love and amity; Laurean's incomparable
Courtesy and Valor, crowning his Memory with a neverdying fame.

FINIS.

