A FORM OF PRAYER WITH THANKSGIVING FOR THE Safe Delivery of the QUEEN, And
happy BIRTH of the Young Prince.

TO BE Used on Sunday next, being the Seventeeth Day of this Instant June, in
all Churches and Chapels, within the Cities of London and westminster, and Ten
Miles distance; And upon the First Day of July next, in all other Places
throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed.

By His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1688.

A FORM of PRAYER WITH THANKSGIVING For the safe Delivery of the QUEEN, and
happy Birth of the Young PRINCE. To be Used on Sunday next, being the 17th Day
of this instant June, in all Churches and Chapels within the Cities of London
and Westminster, and Ten Miles distance; and upon the First Day of July next,
in all other Places throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed.
This Service shall be the same with the usual Office for the Days above named,
except where it is hereafter otherwise appointed.

At the beginning of Morning Prayer the Minister shall read these Sentences
following. OFfer unto the Lord Thanksgiving: Psalm. l. 14.
and pay thy Vows unto the most High.

An Offering of a free heart will I give thee: Psalm. live. 6.
and praise thy Name, O Lord.

In the place of [Venite exultemus] shall be used this following Hymn. O Give
thanks unto the Lord, Psalm. cv. ver. 1.
and call upon his Name: tell the people what things he has done.

O let your songs be of him, 2.
and praise him: let your talking be of all his wondrous works.

Give the Lord the honor due unto his Name: xxlx. 2.
worship the Lord with holy worship.

One generation shall praise thy works unto another: cxlv. 4.
and declare thy power.

For thou, xcii. 4.
Lord, have made me glad through thy works: I will rejoice in giving praise,
for the operations of thy hands.

I will sing of the Lord because he has dealt so lovingly with me: xili. 6.
yea, I will praise the Name of the Lord most High.

The Lord is my strength: xxviii. 9.
he is the wholesome defense of his Anointed.

Great prosperity gives he unto his King: xviii. 51.
and shows loving kindness to David his Anointed, and to his seed for
evermore.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: cvii. 21.
and declare the wonders he does for the children of men.

That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving: 22.
and tell out his works with gladness.

That they would eralt him also in the congregation of the People: 32.
and praise him in the seat of the Elders.

For his merciful kindness is ever more and more toward us: cxvii. 2.
and the truth of the Lord endures for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Proper Psalms 72.89. Proper Lessons
Isaiah 12. St. Matthew. 22. from v. 15. to the end.
To be added in the Versicles after the Creed. O Lord, save the King.
And let his seed be mighty upon earth,
Let him evermore rejoice in thy strength.
And be exceeding glad in thy salvation.
O Lord, save the Queen.
And make her as a fruitful Vine.
Endue thy Ministers with righteousness, etc.
The first Collect instead of that for the day. O Almighty and everlasting Lord
God of heaven and earth, who made the World and all that is therein, and
give to all men life and breath and all things; We devoutly offer our most
hearty thanks to thy Divine Majesty, that thou have given our Dread Sovereign
his hearts desire, and have not denied us the request of our lips, in blessing
him and our Gracious Queen with a Son, and all his Subjects with a Prince:
Stablisly the thing; O God, that thou have wrought among us. Grant the Princely
Infant health, strength, and long life, that he may grow up to live in thy
fear, and to thy glory, and to excel in all virtues becoming his high Birth,
and the Royal Dignity to which thou have ordained him. O prepare thy loving
mercy and faithfulness, that they may ever preserve him, for the honor of thy
Name, and the establishment of the pence, security and happiness of these
Nations from generation to generation, and this we beg for Jesus Christ his
sake our only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

At the end of the Litany, immediately after [We humbly beseech thee] this
following Prayer is to be used. O Most powerful and glorious God, who art
wonderful in all the mysterious acts of thy Providence, and adorable in the
various distributions of thy justice and mercy to the children of men; We
meekly humble our selves, and fall low before the footstool of thy grace,
rendering thee all worship and thanks, that, although for our manifold sins most
justly provoking thee, thou in thy wrath have heretofore taken from us so many
of the Royal Progeny, yet in the midst of judgment thou have remembered mercy,
and according to thy continual goodness have revived our hopes, and begun to
repair our former losses, by renewing fruitfulness to the Queen, and giving
birth to a Royal Prince. We beseech thee, O Lord, give the King and all his
People, such a due sense of this thy mercy, that our devout and thankful
acceptance, and right use of it, may divert thy judgments for the future, and
incline thee to bestow more such public blessings upon us. So we who are thy
people will rejoice evermore, in every thing giving thanks unto thee, through
our only Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the Communion-Service next after the Commandments, the first Collect shall
be the same as in the Morning Prayer, [ O Almighty and Everlasting Lord God of
heaven and earth, etc.] Then shall follow one of the two Collects for the King.
The Epistle, Colos. III. from verse. 12. to v. 18. The Gospel, S. Luke I. from
verse. 57. to v. 67.
After the Prayer for the Church Militant, shall follow this Prayer. O Lord our
Governor, whose Name is excellent in all the World, and who art king for ever
and ever: We praise and bless thy Divine Goodness, for all the mavelous
Protections, and signal Favors, thou have vouchsafed thy Servant our Gracious
King JAMES: particularly that after thou had preserved him from the dangers
of War, from the rage of the Sea, and from the madness of the People, thou
did in thy due time bring him to great honor, by settling him on the Throne
of his Ancestors, and have now enlarged thy Blessings toward him, by this
happy increase of the Royal Issue: We most humbly beseech Thee, to continue and
multiply these thy mercies to Him and Us: That thou would give him Sons to
grow up as the young plants, and that his daughters may be as the polished
Corners of the Temple. Bless, O Lord, the whole Royal Family, with the
blessings of the Heavens above, with the blessings of the Deep beneath, with
the blessings of the Breasts and of the Womb: That when the King's days shall
be fulfilled, and he shall sleep with his Fathers in Peace and Glory, his Seed
may be set up after him, and his House and Kingdom may be established for ever
before Thee. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake our only Savior.
Amen.

FINIS.

