NATURES PARADOX: OR, The Innocent Impostor.

A PLEASANT POLONIAN HISTORY: Originally Entitled IPHIGENES.

Compiled in the FRENCH Tongue BY The rare Pen of J. P. CAMVS, B. of BELLEY.

AND NOW. Englished by Major WRIGHT.

Optabilis est in Amore fucus; eo gratior Superis, Quo magis Innocens. Macrob.
in Saturn. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for EDW. DOD, and NATH. EKINS, and are to
be sold at the Gun in Ivie-Lane, 1652.

Errata.
P. 2. 3. l. 39. 1. r. raised to that. p. 3. l. 15. r. Militia. p. 7. l. 33. r.
have. p. 30. l. 38. r. Arctick p. 56. l. 10. r. no less. p. 57. l. 7. r.
knowledge she. p. 59. l. 1. r. prejudicial. p. 62. l. 15. r. Eyes of p. 70 l.
23, 24. r. declared p. 84. l. 5, 6. r. all-conquering fire. p. 95. l. 21. r.
bend and make. p. 100. l. 11. r. troubled p. 107. l. 19, 20. r. indecency p.
142. l. 4. r. handsome cheat. p. 158. l. 32. r. difficultly. p. 171. l. 24. r.
proceed. p. 175. l. 31. r. endeavored p. 189. l. 13. r. having. p. 194. l. 4.
r. indear Celian. p. 198. l. 38. r. Gentlewoman, p. 200. l. 29. r. keep his. p.
231. l. 32. r. her slave. p. 245. l. 34. r. our words. p. 253. l. 33. r.
trouble me; for, p. 256. l, 30. r. overwhelmed. p. 262. l. 4. r. contained but
too many attractions to captive his desire. p. 269. l. 28. r. his valor. p.
272. l. 3, 4. r. received, p. 273. l. 13. r. beloved is to. p. 277. l. 3. r.
falling into. p. 286. l. 18. r. So he. p. 289. l. 27, 28. r. walking. p. 304.
l. 22. r. Specious. p. 309. l. 36 r. another Object. Whereupon, p. 320. l. 9.
r. It is p. 325. l. 15 r. an heart, l. 25. r. stopped up, p. 331. l. 28. r. such
Dexterity, p. 333. l. 12. r. told him; only. p. 363. l. 10. r. so perfectly
resembled a Br. p. 366. l. 5. r. honoring her. l. 16. r. Lady p. 367. l. 30.
r. who had. l. 37. r. by a way.

The ECONOMY of this History.
NAture's grand Historiographer mentions a Tree he had seen at Tivoly, on
whose Trunk were ingraffed several Branches that bare distinct sorts of fruit;
Here Cherries, there Plums, on that side Apricocks, on this Peaches: But this
vegetive wonder could be of no long continuance, by reason its Radical
moisture was distributed to so many Species. What will be the Fate of this
tender Sien, depends on the smiles or frowns of the Judicious Reader, from the
influence of which it must either grow or wither; however in some sort it is
not unlike that Tree, since to the stock of the same subject are inoculated
some coined varieties, which are but adopted to the maine Body of the History;
They are Clouds, yet inoffensive (which Eclypse not absolutely the Daye's
luster, but only veil the Glory of the luminous Planet that forms it) or
rather Ornaments, which, in decking, somewhat disguise, and lay a fresh
Vermillion upon the pale Cheek of Truth: Some, by nature or evil custom, have
contracted such a disposition, that if an History (according to their
apprehensions) carry an uncommon Face, they can afford it no other style than
of a Fable, never considering that our Eyes converse daily with a thousand
things which pose our Reason; and many effects are palpably apparent to us, of
whose Causes we are entirely ignorant. Another Tide of fantastical humors
carries some Brains into a Belief, that Truths are Fables, as the former
esteem Fables, Truths. It is not unlikely, in regard this History has some
resemblance to Ovid's Fable of Iphis and Ianthe (whence indeed the names of the
Principal persons in this Narration are borrowed) some will be apt to say, It
is either a fabulous History, or a Fable Historized: I am as little Master of
their Tongues as of their judgments, let it suffice for an equitable Reader's
satisfaction and mine own, that I have it from an Author so authentic, that
his report is as far beyond Question as Contradiction. It Is true, my renowned
Bishop acknowledges there are diverse Passages of his own invention inserted in
the Principal relation of Iphigenes fortune: But whosoever would take away
those part colored Feathers, which He so ingeniously has mixed to imbellish
this Piece, would find its Body as little, in comparison, as a Nightingale's,
which the Lacedemonian said was naught else but a Voice. Certain Works there
are, whose specious titles promise advantages in the Front, that are not to be
found in the Perusal; Others within a rough and inconsiderable outside,
contain the precious Pearls of good Learning and profitable Documents: And
notwithstanding at first they appear confused, or more beholding to Chance than
any Method for their Contexture, yet (when atrentively considered) do disclose
an agreeable Connection, a well regulated Order, and no ill-observed Proportion.
For which consideration (Courteous Reader) I thought it not improper to present
you this ECONOMY, to the end you may know, that among all the Romantic
Histories, which have fallen from my Author's Pen (and happily may have passed
before your Eyes) there is not any that seems less Methodicall, and yet is
more answerable to the Rules than this. Be not therefore too ready to
precspitate your censure upon what your judicious Eye may encounter of lean
and frivolous in this Story, Impartiality being able to require your Patience
with the view of such Heroic Actions in this volume as may countervaile the
simplicity of the rest; Though neither (in my opinion) be impertinent, unless
you will deny the difference of Notes in Music to be requisite for the
composition of the most melodious Accords, and make Shadows useless for the
composition of the most melodious Accords, and make Shadows useless for the
imbellishment of Pictures, or diversity of Flowers for enamelling delightful
Garden-Plotts. This Narration runs in a continual line, and the subject threads
it self so insensibly, that you will feel your Fancy led (as it were) by a
little chain from one manner of Life to another, very different, without
perceiving the change. Chemists give the name of Depart to a certain water
which they use to separate diverse Metalls in one Lump; for your facility I
shall make trial of some such, to Anatomize the body of this Work.

As the Eternal Gaider of all things has divided the Spacious Roof of Heaven
into five distinct Zones; Or as the Dramatists dispose their Stories into five
Acts, subdividing them into several Scenes, So the Relation contained in this
volume is digested into five Principal Parts. The First may properly be
termed the INFANTINE or INNOCENT; wherein you shall see the Birth and
Education of IPHIGENES, with his pretty harmeless Employments during his
tendrest years. The Second you may call the AULICK or COURTLY Part; In this
IPHIGENES appears in his Glory at the Court, the Splendor, Policy, Emulation,
Mines and Counterminings, with the rest of the Beauties and Blemishes of that
Life my Author represents not impertinently. The Third is the RUSTIC; where
our Grand Favorite is represented in some kind of disgrace (being confined to
his Palatinate) amusing himself in the exercises of Hunting and Rural
divertisements: In this Part are described the discommodities and contentments
of a Country-life, the imperfections of the vulgar People, Their rude, cruel
and incivill dispositions. The Fourth deserves the title of HEROIC; because it
treats of Wars, Combats, Sieges, Stratagems, not without the intermixture of
some Love-Plots, Negotiations of State Affairs and Treaties of Peace, wherein
our HEROES displayes grand testimonies of his Courage, and Conduct. The Fifth and
last is the NUPTIAL; Which, at the Marriage of IPHIGENES with LIANTE,
represents the Banquets, Tiltings and Magnificences usual at such solemnities,
when KINGS will show to those they love the Marks of their Grandeur and
Affection; Which, indeed, are herein but sparingly described, because the
precedent Parts had already extended this Relation beyond the intended Limits;
In any whereof if you find either a Deficiency or Over-acting Consider this
Piece was composed by a Prelate, who (unless for his Divertisement) was not
accustomed to loosen his Genius to such light studies, yet has been so
fortunate as not to be less esteemed for these Levities, by such as are capable
to judge of his Language, than admired for the Graver productions of his Pen;
But if in my Dialect I have too weakly rendered his quaint Conceptions, I hope
you will have Candor sufficient to pardon my Defects, and encourage by your
indulgence the endeavors of Him, whose Ambition was rather to delight you than
content. Himself.

Farewell. J. W.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES, Earl of NORTHAMPTON; etc. And the Signally
Virtuous ISABELLA, His Incomparable LADY.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
DId the endeavors of my Artless Pen suite with the Judicious Ingenuity of my
Author, I might be capable of indulging a Hope, that the Grandeur of your
Persons, tempered with the Candor of your Minds, would find something here
that may help to wing your Hours; Since in this volume are represented in
Green years, Maturity of Judgment; in High Fortunes, Humility; in Authority,
Discretion; in Abundance, Sobriety mixed with Generosity; Neither is wanting
Valor accompanied with Honor (which have been the Marks, and are now the
known Favorites of Your virtuous Inclinations) or Piety joined with Purity,
whereof you are living Copies, or rather perfect Modells. Here the Passions are
painted in their several Convulsion-fits, the Excesses and Transports of which
may raise no unpleasing reflections upon the calm and untroubled freedom of
your Spirits; In sum, you will find the grave BELLEY has stored his
Principal Subject with both your own precious Plenty, as if your several
virtues had sat while he drew his IPHIGENE; and I hope it will not offend you
to see your Faces in such a Mirror. He was so happy in his Addresses of the
Original that by the support and Patronage of that Princely Pair, the Duke of
VANTADOUR and the Princess of TINGRY his Lady, it added no mean luster to his
deserving Pen, and got him such a spreading Applause from all his Readers, that
a Third Impression sufficed not to satisfy their Curiosities. Suffer his
Example then to excuse my Presumption, and give this Adventurous VIRAGO leave
to fight her Battles in both the Camps of LOVE and VALOR under your Banners;
Which granted (though Combated by Calumny and Criticisme) She cannot fail to
come off Victorious. I am not insensible that this English Habit becomes Her
worst of all her Wardrobe, but there is a Power in your Acceptance to make
Plainness, a Fashion; and teach the World to deal gently with the defects of

RIGHT HONORABLE, The humble Votary of his best wishes for a perpetual Spring
of Happiness to your Honors, WRIGHT.

To his highly valued FRIEND, Major WRIGHT; Upon his Excellent Translation of
his ROMANCE, Entitled, NATURE'S PARADOX: Or, The INNOCENT IMPOSTOR.
LInes dipped in Love should not extracted be
Wholly from Sublimated Mercury;
High-buskind Ayrs decline their proper end
In Paeans to a true deserving Friend.
Lines, like good faces, should have choice complexion,
A neat proportion, and an apt Connection.
Where, as the Eye's the Index of the mind,
The Inward Eye should like attraction find.
Nor in my judgment do I hold it fit
To Paraphraze upon a Divine Wit;
Where every Clause displays a Cloze of Worth,
And needs no tinsell Art to set it forth.
Though there be pregnant Fancies, I confess,
Who have with much facetious happiness
Performed this Task: yet have I often been vexed
To see a Paraphase abuse the Text.
Good Works are Tests sufficient, and retain
Such glorious beamlings from Minerva's brain,
That should they want a Frontispiece, the Eye
Might find where to admire and Deifie.
Seven-mounted Quae fuit Historiae priscae vel origo modernae. Quin pcperit
proli Regia Roma Suae? Prud.
Rome from whence Romances came
By thy politer Pen revive's her Fame;
And from her ashy Urne heaves up her Head,
To tell thee, Major WRIGHT, She is not dead,
But so enlivened by thy serious Quill,
That her Seven Mounts seem one Pierian Hill.
Her pure-Provinciall Italian.
Tongue known to adorn
Which thou enamelst so with thy Translation,
We hold us happy that thou knewst our Nation.
Reader, this Testate's just: I should be loath
To lure thee with hyperbolizing froth.
If ever Builder raised a Story better,
I to thy Judgment will become a Debtor;
So it be Pure-refin'd: but if it appear
A thick Plebeian Scull; Friend, come not here.
Cato's walk only on this rich-pav'd Floor
While Ignorance must knock and stand at door.
Here Is a new opened Mine, where wits of Stature,
And higher growth find the PARADOX of NATURE,
Full of Choice Sense and Language; and though the Style
IMPOSTOR be, it is INNOCENT the while;
But such an Innocence as 'twill beget
Rich Influence in Him digesteth it.
R. BRATHVVAIT.

Upon this Exquisit ROMANCE, Written by the Famous B. of Belley, Naturalized,
and made English By Major WRIGHT.
MY Wit lay Fallow, and my teeming Brain
Thought to repose a while from any strain
Of Poetizing, when the Air of France
Roused up my Fancy in this fresh Romance,
This rich Romance, which both for Weight and Sense,
For various Notions, and neat Eloquence;
And now in point of Version may compare
With any of this kind though never so rare.
Original and Copy Co-excell,
The Prelate and the Soldier share the Bell:
In Speech they differ, but for Mind and Frame
They are unanimous, and still the same.
By this I find, which Men do seldom see,
That Mercury, and Mars may well agree.
JAM. HOVVELL.

Impartial CONCEPTIONS CONCERNING The AUTHOR, and TRANSLATOR OF THIS Renowned
ROMANCE.
MUse, do not strive, I know thou art too mean
To celebrate this rich Polonian Scene;
This task's not thine, but their's, who whilst they praise,
Desert in others deserve equal Bays:
And with triumphant Genius can compose
Encomions in either Verse or Prose.
And as this Storie's worth they clear discern,
By teaching Virtues they can Virtues learn;
Show young, and old, the Male, the Female state,
Their Wills, their Actions how to regulate.
Here Wisdom, Valor, Chastity, discreet
Comportment, true Civilities, strong, sweet
Rules for each Fortune; in varieties
Of Friends, and Foes, Noble Fidelities;
Their parts with such persuasive Graces act
That they best Eyes, and Hearts of France attract.
These, He whose Love is my loved Ornament
With equal Grace to England does present,
That so in English minds his generous Skill
Those Virtues, and their Habits might instill;
Though He to us this glorious Theater
Of Pleasure, and of Profit but transfer,
His Work with so Victorious Art is wrought,
The Dignity thereof exceeds thy Thought.
Yet, Muse, although I grant you are too weak
Of all with a due Elogy to speak,
You, with assurance of applause, may say,
WRIGHT writes best English, as, best French, BELLAY.
John Chapperline.

To his Friend the STATIONER, on the publishing the Famous Romance, CALLED THE
INNOCENT IMPOSTOR.
TWill be expected now that I should raise
Some Monument unto the Author's praise,
The Work's, or the Translatour's, else, I fear,
The Reader'll wonder, what I do make here.
It Is grown Apocryphal, And by the Wits
Quite voted down; Who hold it not be fits
A true-borne Fancy to be Smithfield-wise
Put off with Toll and Vouchers; This defyes
Such Crutches, for it is of so clear a Nature
Twill pass without the Chaplins Imprimatur,
Or our Certificates. Besides, I carry
Such a dislike to all things Customary,
I Will cheat all Expectation, and will be
Thankful to them, but chiefly unto Thee.
In these Selfe-ended times, we only do
Or thank or praise those wee're beholding to.
So call our Justice Charity, and say
We do bestow, when we do only pay.
For though the work be rare; yet should it be
Still in its Dress, what had it been to me?
And though Translated by this worthy Pen,
If not exposed to the view of men,
I had never seen't perhaps. But since all three
Have Clubb'd in this Production, I must be
Grateful to all and to give all your right,
Must Praise, and Love and thank Bellay, Dod, Wright.
ALEX. BROM.

Upon BELLEY'S IPHIGENES, bettered into English by the Ingenious Pen of His
Dear Brother, Major WRIGHT.
I Need not injure Truth to Blazon thee
(Were in my power) with Wit's false Heraldrie:
For, but to give thee all thy due, would swell
Too high, and turn the Reader Infidel.
I Will only tell him, he will find nothing here,
But what is Manly, Modest, Rich and Clear.
No Dropsi'd-Monster-words, all sweet, and clean
As the smooth Cheek of bashful Iphigene;
Who, as thy Pen has made her wooed and woo,
Might pass for Venus and Adonis too.
Thy melting Language (big with naught but sense)
Delight, and Wonder equally dispense.
Thy words fall from Thee, like an April Shower,
Whose every fruitful drop awakes a Flower:
Serpent and Dove first gently greet and kiss,
Then lend each other their best qualities;
Contract a conjugall alliance, whence
Springs thy Impostor's cunning Innocence;
Such rooted sweetness grows in every part,
As if wise Nature taught thee all thy Art.
But why all this to thee? may Critics say,
Since what begin's the Page confess Belley.
It Is true, we owe the ground to him, to thee
Are Debtours for the rich Imbroiderie;
And it is but just the World should constru't so,
Rare Titian here copied from Angelo.
To. Loveday.

To my Learned and Judicious Friend, Major WRIGHT, Upon this Select Piece;
Entitled NATURE'S PARADOX, Or, The INNOCENT IMPOSTER.
DEar Friend, I prize Thee high, but now I Will swear
Thou Art Metamorphoz'd to an Usurer,
[A Paradox indeed] I mean of Tongues,
Where Art's the Scribe, the Creditors Our Lungs:
Yet such a one, that though the Increment
Amount (at least) to Three times Eight per Cent.
(Maugre the Act which limits it to Six)
We Will Plead no Forfeit, nor Re-pay with Tricks.
The Reason's this: [Thy Treasure's Beaten Gold,
Nor Washed nor Clipped, but truly weight, and told:
The Inscription Signal, ( Learning, Judgment, Wit)
Not simply GOD WITH US, but GOD WITH It;
Wherein there is no IMPOSTURE, no Offense,
But what concludes in Sovereign INNOCENCE:
Nor do thou Covet or Extort at all,
We gain by the Use, as well, as Principal.]
Why then an Usurer? Because indeed
(Like unto Him) Thou Art always Pleading Need,
[A Need of Languages;] and yet I Am sure
Thou Have Conquered more, than the Grand Signiour:
The Gulf of Venice Bounds that Monarch's Hand:
Thou gett'st where e're Thou go, by Sea or Land.
The Spanish, French, Polonian and Dutch,
Italian, Irish, Welsh, and Hungry-Scotch,
Crow'd all within Thee; many more beside,
I doubt even Babell, save the Bricks and Pride.
Learn but the Language of the Stars; and then
Thou Have both the Languages of Gods, and Men.
G. WHARTON.

NATURE'S PARADOX: OR, THE INNOCENT IMPOSTOR.
The First Book.
ARGUMENT.
The manner of Government in the Kingdom of Polonia. The Death of Rosuald,
Palatine of Podolia, and his Wife. Liante and Modestina their Children, made
Wards to Mieslas, who succeeded Rosuald in the Palatinate. Aretuza Wife to
Mieslas, Her Policy to deceive his Cruelty. The Birth and manner of Education
of Iphigenes. His Marriage to Modestina. Iphigenes endeavors to contract an
Alliance betwixt his Sister Clemencia and Liante. Iphigenes is made to
understand his own condition by his Mother, and Governor Boleslaus. His love
turned from Modestina to Liante. His sorrow for having indeared Liante so much
to Clemencia. His departure from Podolia to the Court.

THe Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Polonia do commonly give their Monark the
style of the KING OF KINGS, and LORD OF LORDS: Not that they are so profane,
as (by too execrable a Blasphemy) to ravish that eminent quality from him that
bears it engraven on the blade of his Almighty Justice, who disposes at his
will of the Souls of Princes, and who is terrible above all the Kings of the
Earth; But by reason of the form of Government in that Country, which is
balanced with so much Aristocraticall temperature, that it seems their King is
Sovereign only by the benefit of Inventarie (as it is termed:) For whereas
other Kings are extremely absolute, and have an uncontrouleable Power over the
bodies, lives, and estates of their Subjects, disposing of them at their wills
and pleasure (which is but according to the institution of Royalty determined
by Gods own Sacred Mouth, and couched in express terms in the holy Scripture.)
It is nothing so amongst the Sarmatians (so were the People of Polonia called)
where the Sea of Monarchy has its bounds, and what storm soever rises in
their King's heart, what impetuous Surges or motions of Passion soever agitate
his breast, he cannot in any proceedings exceed those limits that are
prescribed to his Authority by the Power of his States. The opinion of that
ancient Emperor, who said, That properly to be a Sovereign, was to do
whatsoever he lifted, is of no esteem or value with that Nation; Neither is
less exploded there this saying of an imprudent Empress, That nothing was
unlawful for Kings to act, if it but pleased their humor. For in that
Kingdom, whatsoever concerns the Power, Family and Function of the Monark, it
is all so regulated, that He cannot deviate or outstrip his bounds in the I
east, without drawing upon himself sudden Rebellions, and most formidable
Combinations. The reason thereof proceeds from this respect, that among those
People (who are as free as fierce, and no less generous then haughty) the Kings
are Elective, Succession having no interest in that Crown, unless a Son, by his
virtuous deportments and valorous Actions, render himself worthy (with the
approbation of the Orders) to ascend into the Throne of his Progenitors. From
this liberty which the Polonians have of electing their Monark arises this
Restriction of the Royal Authority, within such confined terms and
limitations, that it is no more possible than lawful to exceed them, without
altering the Harmony of that Direction which has there been established beyond
the reach of humane Memory, and exciting in the State Revolutions, or rather
Convulrions of most dangerous consequence. It is to be observed, that the
Ecclesiastics and the Nobility only have votes at these Elections: the third
Order (which is, the Common People) is excluded, and must receive for their
King, him, that is lawfully chosen, according to the form and custom of the
Country, by the other two Orders; Who after the Election (though they leave to
the King the honor and prebeminence in all things, rendering him the homage and
reverence that is due to a Sovereign, and all those whom the hand of Providence
has raised that high Dignity) reserve to themselves however the power of
governing and administering Justice, by which Kings reign, and by which they
maintein the Regencie of their Kings and Laws. As for the Ecclesiastical
State, That has its Policy apart, which particularly regards Spiritual
Affairs, and the Conduct or Cure of Souls: And the Secular (which concerns
Political matters, as the exercise of Justice, as well Civil as Criminal, and
the administration of Government and Military functions) is chiefly in the
hands of certain great Officers, named Castellains and Palatines, who are
little Sovereign Lords, or Petty Kings, every one in his own Territory. For
instance, The Castellains are those who have Lands, Cities, Buroughs,
Villages and Seignories under their subjection, as for matters concerning
Justice; and their Authority is so great, that their Jurisdiction is without
Appeal. Moreover, in case of troubles, they have power to levy Forces, impose
Taxes, raise Money to pay and bear the charges of their Miltitia, and do other
Actions in this nature, which in other Monarchies are reserved only to the
Sovereigntie. The Palatines are like Governors of Provinces, but they are so
absolute in their Governments, that they command the Castellaines and the
People at their pleasure, exact Tributes, press Soldiers, appoint quarters,
give Commissions: in a word, they are like petrie Kings in their Palatinates,
such sudden and exact obedience is rendered them, so Supreme and uncontrollable
is their Power. Insomuch that the King (to return to the Proverb before
mentioned) commanding as King over the Palatines and Castellains, is in this
consideration called KING OF KINGS, that is, of the Palatines, who are in
effect petty Kings; and LORD OF LORES, that is, of the Castellains, who are
like little Princes. The History which I am about to relate, obliges me to
represent this form of Government, as being the Basis and principal foundation
thereof, by reason of the Power (almost Tyrannical) of one of these Palatines,
who shall appear upon this Scene we are now opening, and who would seem
strange, nay altogether extraordinary to the Reader, that should fancy to
himself a Country ordered according to the Rule and Policy of FRANCE or SPAIN,
where the Monark being more absolute, the Authority of Governors is much
less; not unlike to that of the meaner Lights of the Heaven, which have no
light or luster before the Sun of Sovereigntie: whereas on the contrary in
Polonia the Palatines do execute their Charges, and exercise their Jurisdiction
in the presence of their King, as if their Authority depended rather on
Monarchy then on the Monark, nothing being able to make them be deposed or
dispossessed of their Commands, but State Crimes which make them lose their
Dignities with their Lives.

Under the Reign of him that preceded MONSIEUR of France (then Brother to
CHARLES the IX. and Duke of Anjou, and who was afterward HENRY the III. of
France, having forsaken the Crown of Polonia) A certain Lord Castellain, by
name Rosuald, who (though not descended of very ancient Nobility, nor much in
favor with Fortune for matter of estate) was elevated for his valor to the
Palatinate of Podolia. Governments and great Offices are like Vessels full of
liquor, whereinto if you cast a sponge, though never so dry and hard, it will
presently be filled and pierced through. Rosuald was so able and understanding
a Man, that without oppressing much his Subjects, or exacting any thing in his
Province, that might render him any way odious or blameable, by subtle and
(probably) lawful means he became so rich, that (Peace by virtue of his
mediation and good conduct reigning among all the families where he introduced
Concord) Abundance entered within his Territories; insomuch that it might be
said of him, That Glory and Riches were in his House, That his Garners sunk
under the burden of Corn, his Cellers were overflowed with Wine, That out of
the very stones burst Rivulets of Oil, That his Coffers were not capacious
enough to contein his Treasures. In sum, That he was one of the most opulent
Palatines in Polonia: But the inexorable Parca that pardons no body (and who
being blind cut's the thread of life when she pleases, without distinction of
Age, Condition or Sex) stopped the course of this Noble-man's days in the full
Current of his Prosperity (at such years as but just passing out of Virility
he saluted only the first and freshest time of Old Age,) by an unexpected
accident, which made him bring Death with him home from Hunting. His Lady, who
was then big with Child (though otherwise very chaste and virtuous, yet a woman
(that is to say) as little capable of constancy as a Reed of steadiness)
suffering her self to be transported by the excess of an inconsolable sorrow,
precipitated her deliverie in the seventh Month, and after a Son which she had
brought forth into the World, but one year before, She was made a Mother at
this second and last labor of a Daughter, which had life, but by her death.
For whether her grief and conceding anguish hastened the birth of the Child, or
whether because her Body was no less cruelly afflicted with the Pangs of her
Travel, then her mind for the loss of her Husband, the Daughter remaining with
the living, laid her Mother among the Dead, leaving these poor innocent
Orphans to the merciless pity of Men; but under the tuition of that great
King of Heaven and Earth, who takes little Ones for his Heritage, who takes
care even of young Ravens when abandoned by their Dams, and who gives himself
the style of Guardian and protector of the Fatherless.

In the charge of the Palatinate of Podolia succeeded Rosnald a Nobleman of a
middle Age, named Mieslas, who was born of a very ancient and noble Family: But
that falls out in Generations sometimes, which is always incident to the most
stately structures, that is, Time with his gentle file does insensibly waste
and diminish them; For it is frequently seen that the Nobleness of an
Extraction advancing and enlarging its greatness by the long succession of
years, the Estate is divided into diverse branches, which so weakneth and
lesseneth the stock, that in the end it is a shame to be so Noble and so poor,
to have so great a Heart and such weak Reins, that (not having faculties
sufficient) a man cannot maintein the splendour extracted from his Ancesters.
For this Reason in great Houses the heirs have in a manner all, to the end that
by this industry their wealth may serve as nerves and supporters to uphold
that magnificence, which distinguishes those of Illustrious Descents from the
Vulgar. Mieslas being elevated to this eminent Dignity (which renders men in
Polonia of equal quality with the Peers of France, Grandees of Spain, and
Earls of England, that is to say, the chief and most remarkable Persons of
that Country, for they are as much as Vice-Kings;) And seeing himself as mean
for matter of Estate, as considerable for Honor both by Birth and Quality,
was on a sudden cast into an inconceivable distraction of Mind and pain; not
much unlike unto that of the fabulous Midas, who not being able to feed or
nourish himself, because every thing he touched was presently turned to Gold,
poor in his abundance, He abhorred in a manner what he had aspired to with so
much eagerness, being angry with himself that his Abilities would not reach to
maintein by a competent and suiteable expense the Pomp and magnificence of his
Dignity. The Condition of this ambitious Sarmatian, me thinks, is very lively
represented by the Child in the Emblem, whose wing seems to flutter up on one
side, but the other is depressed to the ground with a heavy stone: being
pricked one while with the spur of Glory (which puffed him up by reason of his
high birth and quality) another while being inflamed with an extreme desire of
having where withal to support the Height of his Dignity and Extraction, He
was like an high mettled Horse, which feeling two sharp spurrs in his Flank,
curvets and fling's as if he disdained a Rider; But as the twisting Ivy
cannot raise it self from the ground, unless it embrace the Trunk of some
neighboring Tree, or be backed by some kind Wall, so Mieslas deeming Wealth
the greatest luster, and (as it were) the main Pillar of Honor, resolved to
use any means (lawful or unlawful) to purchase it. The first that the Power
(shall I say) or the Tyranny of his new charge put into his greedy mind, was
to load his shoulders with the sweet burden of the Gardianship of the two
Pupills already mentioned, although their Kindred strove to subvert his design,
perceiving plainly that he would prove like an Eagle's feather, which eats
away and consumes the others, that is to say, That this old Saturn would
devour those pirtifull young Children: In a word, having by favor, obtained
the Wardship, or tuition of them, and being established by Authority in the
government, or more properly, in the enjoyment of their most plentiful estates
(as he succeeded their Father Rosuald in the Palatinate) without scruple he
made use of his riches to maintein the Port and Magnificence of his great Birth
and Office. But that Eternal Power which resides in Heaven, which presides
over the designs of Men, who sees their thoughts a far off, knows their ways
and counts their steps, and who has in his hands the ends of the Earth; It is
he that dissipates the Counsels of the wicked, and reproves their inventions.
It is He that takes into his safeguard the widow and the Fatherless, and
confounds the ways of the evill-doers: As we shall see in the progress of this
Narration, which will demonstrate how Providence did by her disposing, take the
Counter-point in opposition to the purposes of Mieslas; and whereas he
intended to swallow Rosuald's Estate, and make that Family fall into his,
Heaven brought to pass the contrary. For as the Appetite comes with eating, and
the desire of having being commonly compared to an Hydropicall humor, which
the more it drinks the more it thirsts; Mieslas not contented with the
administration of his Ward's whole Estate, which he found a very plentiful,
and almost undreinable Source of Riches, whereof he disposed at his pleasure
(like one that cuts in the whole Piece) and made use of it to maintein the Pomp
and State, that high degree of honor (whereunto Fortune had raised him) did
require, as well to avoid any Demands or Inquiries, and not to be subject to
render an account to any, as to make this Estate in some manner his own, and
without enchantment to make the Corn leap from another's ground upon his; He
passionately desired to draw unto himself that mighty Mass of Wealth by some
Alliance (the ordinary hook that great ones use to catch the fattest Preys.)
But God who merely by the confusion of Tongues subverted the proud design of
the Children of Nimrod, laughing at the vain pretensions of Mieslas, gave him
no Offspring but Daughters; and every body knows that sex is far more likely
to transport a succession into another family, then to continue a name and
convey it to Posterity. This multiplicity of Daughters put the fierce Sarmatian
not only into impatience, but transported him into a boundless and unheard of
fury: For as if his Wife (a Lady full of Honor and Virtue) had been
voluntarily the cause of his coffeehouse, he used her so barbarously, that
his inhumanity drew upon him the hatred and scorn of the whole World. Isaac at
the importunity of Rebecca (who bad him get her Children, if he would not see
her dye with grief) answered, that he was not God to give her Progeny:
implying, that as it is not from him that plants, or from him that sowes, that
fruits proceed, but from God, who gives life and growth to every thing, and who
opening his hand fills every creature with his blessing and fecundity, so
Husbands cannot give Issue, if God showers not down upon their Marriage the
Benediction of his sweetness; neither can they have Children according to their
own wishes, but according to the good pleasure of him who is Creator of both
Fathers and Children, and from whom proceeds all Paternity in Heaven and on
Earth. It was by an industry inspired from above, that Jacob spotted with white
and black the Lambs of his flock, to enrich himself in Laban's service: But
though he gave them such colored Coats as he pleased by virtue of his wands,
it was not in his power to make them of what Sex he listed. The discreet
Aretuza (so shall Mieslas his Wife be called) might have returned the same
answer to her barbarous and unreasonable Husband, as Isaac did to the
extravagant demand of his Wife; But that Mieslas was not to be answered but by
suffering and silence, otherwise he would hvae raged like one of those
Earthquakes, which overturn every thing that opposes their turbulencie. And
that which agravated the distemper of his mind, was not only that he had none
but Daughters, but what was worse, and less supportable in that Sex (whose
Element is Beauty, or at least a graceful comeliness, which proceed's from a
just and handsome composition) they brought into the World with them such
remarkable imperfections, and such monstrous deformities, that they could not
appear in public without making the Parents blush that had begotten them. The
eldest was crump-shoulder'd and wrie-neck'd; the second was hip-shotten and
halted with both legs; the third as somewhat handsomer in Body was more ugly
in face than either; the fourth (which was born at his first coming to that
Palatinate) was not only hulch-back't and squint-eyed, but had one leg a
great deal shorter then the other, which made her gate no less unseemly then
painful. These spectacles were so odious to the haught-spirited Mieslas, that
had he lived in that cruel Philosopher's days, and followed his maxims, he
would have deprived those wretched creatures of the life which he had given
them, for in his heart he had no kind of fatherly tenderness toward them,
but considered and abhorred them as Monsters that seemed to reproach the most
secret defects within himself, and cast confusion in his Face, theatning him by
their ill favored aspect with some malediction. To repeat the reviling terms
wherewith he abused the innocence of his Wife, and the insolent threats
wherewith he terrified her timidity, if ever she should bear him any more such
Children, is far from my design, neither will my time permit it: Sometimes he
swore he would repudiate her; Sometimes that he would kill her as a Source and
Mother of Monsters; Sometimes he upbraided her with faults whereof he knew in
his own conscience she was not guilty; Sometimes he tormented her with
disdainful slightings; Sometimes he would banish her his presence, and
confine her to the Country; Sometimes keep her close prisoner. To be short,
there was no kind of discontent but he made her feel her share of it; either
Passion had so blinded his Reason, that he could not see his own absurdity, or
else out of pure Malice he had a design to make her, through despair, cast her
self into the Sepulcher. Notwithstanding all this ill usage, she grew with
Child again, which Mieslas perceiving, he protested if she brought him forth
(not only an ill-favored Daughter, but any Daughter) that he would sacrifice
to his indignation both her and her fruit; and this he sealed with such
execrable oaths, and in so passionate a manner, that there was no doubt to be
made but his Tongue spoke out of the abundance of his heart, and the setledness
of his resolution. You may imagine in what a trance fell poor Aretuza, seeing
her self condemned to Death for a thing uncertain, and which she was no way
able to remedy. Piety made her resign her self totally to God's will, and
submit to the inviolable decree of his Providence, knowing that those who put
their trust in him never are confounded; Nevertheless fearing to tempt him, she
omitted not the means of humane Prudence, God making use oft-times of these
second Causes to arrive unto that, whereto he disposes both thoughts and
actions by an incomparable sweetness.

Among the gentlewomen that attended her, she had one (after the manner of
great persons) that was her particular Favorite and Confident: and although her
sweet disposition begat her the affection of them all, and that they
compassionated exceedingly her misery, yet knowing too well the imbecility of
her Sex for matter of keeping Secrets, she thought it the safest way not to
raveale here is to any more than one, lest it being disclosed she should lose
the benefit and contentment she promised her self. You may understand already,
that it was to change her Child, in case she were brought to bed of a girl.
Cleorite (her Trustee) took the business upon her; and having found out
several Women that were to lie down about the time of her Mistresse's account,
she blinded them with that powerful powder of Gold which dazles all the World,
and makes people undertake any thing. What then? The Heavens favorising the
design of this innocent Lady, gave birth to an earnest occasion, which drew
Mieslas to Court, even as the time drew near of her deliverie; Insomuch that
being laid of a Daughter (as beautiful as an Angel, and whose graceful
sweetness might have moved to pity the bowels of her Tyrannical Father) a Boy
newly born was put in her place, so cunningly, that those (to whom Mieslas has
given charge to watch his wive's actions, and give him a faithful testimony of
that particular) were surprised, and happily deceived. To relate Mieslas his
joy when this news was brought him, were no easy matter. If by an express
command the King had not staid him at Court, he would presently have gone to
see his Son, who adding to the quality of Male (which he had so ardently
desired) a beautiful face with a well-shaped body, rendered him no less
satisfied than his former Daughters had given him discontent. To the fortunate
birth of this Daughter (principal Subject of this merveillous History, and
who by her name gives it the Title of Iphigenes, for reasons which shall be
produced in their time) succeeded the happiness and strangeness of her
education, which was thus.

The King relishing the humor and the counsels of Mieslas, and considering
that his wit and high courage were worthy of employment, retained him for the
most part about his own person, giving him besides, some commands in his
Arimes; and he acquitted himself of all his Commissions with so much prudence,
fidelity and valor, that besides the great reputation he had acquired, he had
purchased a vast estate, but that his humor being excessively given to vanity
(which requires an expense beyond all reason) what one hand saved the other
spent, the King's liberality not being sufficient to support his Prodigality,
insomuch (as the Proverb says) it was but casting money into a bottomless bag.
Sometimes he fished wealth at Court, sometimes in his Government, and every
where he was observed to dissipate rather than dispose of what he had. If he
made any stay in his Palatinate, he would so overcharge and exact upon his
Subjects, that the chief Castellains wrought with the King under hand in such
sort, that upon some pretense or other he was still sent for back again to
Court, to avoid the ruin of the Province, and the trouble of further
complaints. During these many journies and long absences of Mieslas, grew up
the hopeful Iphigenes, whom the careful Aretuza had caused to be nursed in a
County remote from Podolia, having given charge of her to an ancient and
faithful servant of her Father's, whom She made Depositary or Guardian of her
Child and secret. Whilst the supposed Iphigenes passed his Infancy with
Aretuza, Boleslaus (foster-father of the true one) did not only make all those
that came to see her believe she was a Boy, but bred the Child likewise in the
same opinion; And although her extraordinary tender Complexion seemed to accuse
her of being a Girl, yet the advantage of imagining her self to be of the
robuster Sex (added to the generosity which she had by Nature) made her not
only incline, but delight in the sports and exercises of Boys, as if she had
been as her habit spoke her.

About two years after the birth of Iphigenes, Aretuza (who seemed to be
ordained to bring forth none but females, and fill the World with that
Commodity which is hard enough to keep, yet harder to put off) was brought to
bed of another Daughter, who had not so rare a Beauty as to make her be much
admired, nor such remarkable defects as might make her be despised. Mieslas
being then at Court, and having appealed his choler by the imagination he had
of being Father to a goodly Son, expressed not much distaste at the coming of
this fifth Daughter, especially when he heard that she was fair enough and
without deformity. Aretuza made her be named Clemencia, as having experimented
in her the Clemency of her Husband, of whose more courteous usage she began
thence-forwards to have some hopes. Among great persons Marriages do not
always accompany Baptism, but oftentimes precede it; for to allie
illustrious families, to purchase a support, to maintain factions, and effect
diverse other such practices frequently used in Courts, Parents do sometimes
promise to marry their Children before they are in Being, as many do procure
benefices and charges for the Children which they shall have: whence an eminent
man of our times took occasion to say, That it was no marvel if great Ladies
had hard labors, since their Children were Mitred and Armed before they came
out of their Wombs. Such were the thoughts of Mieslas, who was so mad for a
Son, only to make him marry Rosuald's Daughter, his Ward, promising himself
to obtain some spiritual Benefices for her Brother, and so make him renounce
the inheritance, which he intended to draw into his own family by means of
her marriage with his Son. Those that are lavish spenders, are glad to meet
with Estates gotten to their hands, without any trouble or pain of theirs, for
they naturally hate frugality. Mieslas who was of this humor, relied
absolutely upon the wealth of Rosuald, his predecessor in the Palatinate, with
the Revenues and Interest of whose Estate he splendidly maintained all his
train, without touching the main stock, whereof he could not dispose without
prejudice to his Wards. But because this Lamprey might in time slip out of his
hand, he determined to take a Fig-leaf, that is, to contract an Alliance
whereby he might gain the full possession of that mighty Estate, and make
himself enter upon the labors and acquisitions of his Predecessor. And in
regard that the want of years in both Parties, might give occasion to the
kindred of his Wards (already much displeased that he had ravished the
Gardianship out of their hands) to endeavor to render invalid this Alliance,
through the default of a mutual consent, which is the principal knot of
Matrimony, he obtained from the King a permission for them to marry in their
Childhood, or at least to contract them so that the means could not be taken
out of his possession.

This was in agitation before Iphigenes was five years old: And Aretuza being
not well pleased to see that a supposed Child should reap, before the season,
that which she, as well as Mieslas, desired to preserve in their own family,
taking the opportunity of a whole year's time her Husband was absent, she sent
the false Iphigenes home to his Mother, and took the real one into her own
tuition, giving Boleslaus (who had brought her up from the Cradle) the conduct
and government of her, to the end that he should help to conceal that which
she would not have Mieslas know, and that he might see her learn all the
recommendable qualities and exercises requisite for a Gentleman of such
Extraction, (Permit that we speak of her hence forwards, as a Male, since her
Mother will have it so, and her Father thinks her so.) Herein Aretuza was
served as faithfully as she could desire in a business sso ticklish and
dangerous, that she ran no less hazard then of losing her own life, if Mieslas
should discover the deceit, who at his return found his Son so beautiful (for
it was a little Angel) that he was quite ravished. But if his Body was
agreeable, believe it, that exterior domicile lodged a Wit that surpassed many
degrees any of that growth: which augmented exceedingly the Father's joy, who
staying very little at home (being for the most part either visiting his
Palatinate, or called to Court, or sent upon some Military expedition for
defense of his Country) enjoyed but seldom and short whiles the sight of his
dear Son, who was the light and delight of his Soul.

Iphigenes had scarce yet seen eight years in the World, when he was married
(God knows how) to Modestina, (Rosuald's Daughter, and Ward to Mieslas) who
deserved that name for her incomparable Modesty; she was so much elder then
Iphigenes, as that the Husband and Wife could make up eighteen years between
them. Mieslas (being of a magnificent humor) invited the greatest part of the
Nobility and Gentry of his Palatinate to the Wedding, which was celebrated with
all the delights and greatest Pomp imaginable; But one Ceremony that he caused
to be done, was very needless, which was to make a Venerable Matron lie betwixt
the married Couple, lest they should approach each other in the Night. This
Prudent caution of his would have made Aretuza laugh heartily, if her
continual apprehension, that the secret would be discovered, had not held her
in the same transe that kept Damocles from eating at the Tyrant of Sicilie's
table. Liante, Modestina's only Brother, was destined by Mieslas to be a
Churchman, to the end that by that Spiritual and Leviticall Circumcision, his
Sister might remain sole Inheritrix of Rosuald's Estate, and the whole
Patrimony come to Iphigenes. This was the Palatine's plot; but Liante being
high-sirited and of a Martial disposition, took more delight in Arms, than at
his Book, and was more ambitious of wearing a Sword than a Priest's Cassack.
Nevertheless as Trees, which are young, may be bended which way the Master
pleases; the same is commonly done with Children, who are like a blank paper
or a piece of wax, whereon a man may make what impression he desires. At
length the Benefice was procured, the Gown ready, the poor Youth made to put it
on by threatenings, or by flatteries, although with a thousand repugnancies, a
thousand heavy groans, and whole streams of tears. Besides his own Tyrannical
authority Mieslas made use of the King's name, after the custom of many great
Persons, who amuse the People with this pretext, and cover all their passions
under the robe of their Sovereign, whose word and power they abuse with
impunity and insolence. Thus the two Wards were bred up with his two youngest
Children, Iphigenes and Clemencia; for the four precedent Daughters, like the
four monstrous Creatures of Ezechiel, he had commanded to be tied to the
Chariot of God's glory, (that is) had thrust them into Monasteries, there to
draw the Ark; where we ill leave them, as it were, condemned to perpetual
imprisonment, to see the successes that arrived, upon the theater of the World,
to the two Wards and Mieslas his two other Children, who make the four
principal parts in the Music of this Narration.

The married Couple (such as I have represented them to you) loved like
Children; Liante suffered (as well as he could) the Yoke which he was forced
yet to bear, but built a resolution within himself to shake it off, and fly our
of his Cage as soon as Age had given him wings: Clemencia was designed by
Mieslas to acquire him a Son in law of some great fortune, or at the worst, to
keep her Sisters company in the Cloister. These four Children being brought up
together in one house, fed at the same Table, playing and spending the time
always together, lived like Brothers and Sisters with a pretty intelligence
correspondent to the innocence of their age and humors. Iphigenes by the
industry of his Governor Boleslaus lived until eleven or twelve years old, in
such simplicity, that he thought really he as a Boy, not conceiving that there
was any other difference betwixt Male and Female than their manner of
clothing. Mieslas fearing that, if he should permit his Son too soon to
consummate his Marriage, that might be prejudicial to his health (seeing him
of a complexion and stature more delicate than robust) appointed a Governess to
overlook Modestina, fitly named Perpetua, for she was perpetually at her back,
casting an Argu's eye over all her actions, lest Iphigenes at any time should
steal those Rights which Husbands have privilege to challenge; But Nature had
already provided other obstacles. They loved each other however very much,
whether out of resemblance of their dispositions, or whether through that
natural inclination which induces us to affect those of the same Sex, as well
as to be passionate for those of the contrary; Yet this affection betwixt
Iphigenes and Modestina was rather friendship than love. But when Nature
playing her part (which is so difficult a thing to hinder) carried Iphigenes
fancy to delight in working and such Womanish amusements, busying himself very
eagerly with Modestina and Clemencia; then his discreet Governor making him
ashamed of such feminine employments, reclaimed his thoughts to the practice of
Manly actions, and conformable to the Sex, of which the Innocent Youth yet
thought himself, whose condition being more free, seemed to him far more
desirable than that subjection wherein Maids and Women live. So that having an
excellent wit, and a Body very active, though not robust, in every exercise
whereunto he applied himself, he became an admirable proficient.

It was nothing so in the vocation which Liante was compelled to embrace; for
it is very difficult to become learned in despite of Minerva, and to garnish
the Soul with the precious furniture of knowledge and Sciences, if one have not
some inclination to study, this young Nobleman being wrapped up (against his
will) in an Ecclesiastick's Gown, meditated nothing but exercises contrary to
that habit, Arms, Horses, Dancing, Hunting, and Warlike exploits were the
only delicious entertainments of his thoughts, all other discourse was irksome
to his ears. This Constraint (under which He groaned, as if his Soul had been
upon the Rack, and his Heart under the torture of a press) made him so
melancholy and pensive, that He seemed to traile the hours of his life with
regret in an unpleasant Apprentiship. During this discontent, he hatched a
secret, but furious hatred against his inhumane Guardian, considering him as
the ravisher of his Estate, the Tyrant of his liberty, and the Oppressor of his
free-Birth, projecting not only to escape (as soon as he could) but studying
notorious revenges for reparation of the injuries he received. As for
Clemencia she was yet so young, that the innocence of her years exempted her
from Care or any passions of the mind; but it is with Youth as with a flower,
It is no sooner budded, in a manner, but it is full blown, especially in Women,
and chiefly in the Daughters of great Persons; for this Sex being naturally
more subtle, they sooner do put off their Childishness than Men; besides those
of high Births are brought up with such care and quaintness that their Wits are
often ripe before the Season of their years requires it; whence it proceeds
that they are sooner susceptible of those Touches and Ties of Affection which
make young hearts seem to have past their Childhood.

In the full ease of this sweet education Modestina modestly longed after the
fruition of her beautiful, but as yet too young Husband; Her flames were so
pure, and her desires so just, that (if Aretuza's deceit had not abused her
exp^ctation) me thinks her wishes might without shame appear upon these leaves,
whose Paper is less white then the Candor of those passions which shall be
represented in this Volume. Iphigenes in like manner beginning to reflect upon
himself, and who had no other property of Marble than the whiteness, grew
into a pretty kind of indignation, that (being married) he should be deprived
of the possession of his Wife; and seeing himself passionately beloved of
Modestina (who gave him all the civil testimonies of affection She could
imagine) He must not only have renounced all Humanity, but have been altogether
insensible, if he had not been moved thereat; no charm being so powerful to
make one be beloved, as vehemently to love. If whiles they were at their
innocent childish sports they interchanged any kind embraces or affectionate
words, their discourse was soon broken by the presence of their two Argusses,
Boleslaus and Perpetua, whose thoughts (though different) arrived both at the
same end, which was to hinder (that which never could be effected) the
Consummation of their Marriage; Perpetua being encharged by Mieslas was very
vigilant to oppose it, lest his Son's health might be prejudiced thereby; and
Boleslaus having received the Command from Aretuza, was no less circumspect for
fear her deceit should be discovered. Oh who could imagine any thing but
purity in the innocent kisses and tender embracements of these two lovely
Creatures, who like the twin kids in the Canticles did feed among the Lillies?
He that would be scandalized to see two hen-doves join their bills, the union
of the blooming Rose with the Morning dew, or the beams of the Sun when he
licks the Crystal of the Waters, might knit his brow at this innocent
conjunction, and exercise the malicious severity of his peevish melancholy,
like a snaile that sullieth with is slimy train the delightful enamell of the
most curious flowers.

If the agreeable Iphigenes bare much Love to his no less loving wife, Nature
by ways as secret as unknown to him, bred in him as much affection toward his
brother in-law Liante, and although his sullen and discontented humor rendered
him very unsociable, and by consequent less amiable, it cannot be said how he
delighted in his conversation, how much he endeavored to divert him. On the
other side Liante (who looked upon Iphigenes, not as his Sister's Husband, but
as his enemie's Son, as the usurper of his Fortunes, and one whose greatness
was established upon him ruins; Notwithstanding all these thoughts, whereby
he excited himself to Choler and Hatred like a Lion that whets his fury by
scourging his sides with his own tail) could not conceive any aversion against
him, whether the sweetness of his disposition charmed him; whether his
kindness, his complements, and his compliance to his humor won his heart;
whether his beauty joined with his graceful deportment ravished him? or
whether (which is most probable) the Sense bent his inclinations naturally
toward this Object, for reasons which I had rather leave to conjecture than
consign to this writing; He could not choose but love Iphigenes, although in
appearance he seemed much remiss, and rather sensible of his injuries than
susceptible of affection. This cold reservedness increased Iphigenes heat
(according to the disposition of that sex, who are commonly most passionate for
those who do care least for them) insomuch that the more Linate seemed to sight
him, the more he redoubled his affection and courtesies, as if he had
undertaken by the vigor of an ardent flame to dissolve the Isicles that
environed his frozen Heart. At first Liante, whom Melancholy had made
mistrustfull, fancied that those marks of friendship were but feined, and
proceeded from some artificial Counsel or Plot to make him consent willingly
to the donation of his Estate in favor of his Sister Modestina's marriage: But
having perceived by the perseverance, that pur Inclination, not Interest or
Pretensions, moved Iphigenes to affect him, He opened his heart more to him,
complaining of the Rigor and Injustice of Mieslas, who forced him to embrace a
vocation whereunto he was no way disposed. This just discontent found in the
soul of Iphigenes an humor so sweetly compassionate, that although in all his
discourse he observed the respect which he owed his Father, yet he freely
condemned his violence, protesting to Linate, what design soever Mieslas had in
marrying him with Modestina, that he would never take of his inheritance any
other Portion than what he would please to give his Sister, judging it very
unreasonable that a younger Sister should not only make (as she listed) a
Portion for her elder, and only Brother, but deprive him absolutely of his
Patrimony, in obedience to a superior Power that would carry all away by main
force: That if the condition of an Ecclesiastic was not conformable to his
humor, there was a possibility to satisfy him, and content likewise the
greedy pretensions of the Palatine, by making a double alliance, and giving to
him in marriage his Sister Clemencia, with so much of the Estate as belonged to
him by his Father's death; being more willing for his own part to live a
private Gentleman, remitting his Fortune to his personal valor and the point
of his Sword, reserving to himself only Hope (which was Alexander's portion)
than to possess unjustly another's means with continual Remorses and internal
Reproaches. These Reasons so conquered Liante's heart, that thence-forwards all
his affections he thought too little for Iphigenes, whom he began to consider
as his Redeemer, as one who breaking his Iron bonds was to release him out of
the hands of Pharaoh, and free him from the house of Bondage.

Covetousness is a disease which reigns but little among young unexperienced
People, who think (as the Proverb goes) that the World will never be at an end
with them; The desire of pleasures, liberty and vanity, torments them
infinitely more; All that opposes this Torrent, seems to turn the course of
their Nature, and reduce them to despair. This made Liante (building an entire
confidence on his Brother-in-law Iphigenes) declare unto him that the Regret
which undermined him, and led him insensibly to the grave, was not so much for
the loss of his Estate (which he esteemed well bestowed, seeing it fell into
so beloved hands) as to see himself bound up in a Cassock, and engaged in a
manner of life which denied him the use of Arms, whereunto his inclination
called him, and whither all his Ambition tended; for War was his Element, where
he would rather choose to meet an honorable death, then lead a sweet,
plentiful and peaceable life in the most rich and eminent Dignities of the
Church, to the honors whereof he never would pretend, not perceiving himself
called thereunto like Aaron, that is, by a good and Royal way. Brother
(replied Iphigenes) take courage, suffer not Melancholy to or'e-master or
distemper you, preserve your self for generous enterprises; If you have a mind
to take wing, and leave this nest of sluggishness, I have no less desire than
you to seek in Military adventures the Laurells that grow in Mars' s field;
therefore let us go together, let us steal away some favorable Night, and
enter into the harvest of glory in those places where Cowards dare not appear.

These words revived the afflicted Liante, who was so overcome by the
inevitable charms of Iphigenes's Countenance and Conversation, that he could
live no more without him, being in his absence like a Marigold when the Sun
has left its Horizon. For as that flower does close its leaves, when it is
deprived of the aspect of that glorious Planet, so Liante, when separated from
Iphigenes, was overwhelmed with sadness, in such sort, that He seemed to be
rather a fensless Statue than a living Creature. Oh how it grieved him to be
divided in his exercises from him, to whom his heart was so united by
inclination! To be called to his study was death to him, but if for
divertisement his Master permitted him to see the riding of the great Horse,
fencing, dancing, vaulting, and other exercises (which Iphigenes learned with
as much care on his Parent's part, as dexterity and aptness on his own) he
applied his Spirits with such attention to them, that for a good while after
he could think on nothing else: if he handled a foil, he did it with such a
grace, if he Jumped, it was with such activeness, that it was easy to judge
he was as much in his Element at those recreations, as he was out of it when
his Spirits were tormented with the thorns of the Grammar. One time it happened
that complaining to his dear Brother-in-law of the oruell Martyrdom which he
was made to suffer at his Book, and how he abhorred that long robe he was
compelled to wear, great drops of tears, like so many Pearls, ran down his face
from the Orient of his Eyes: This sight so mollified the tender heart of
Iphigenes (who was of a Sex that has tears at command) that mingling his with
Liante's, he fell on his face, and casting his arms about his neck, he gave
him many loving, yet innocent embraces, which Liante received with such
motions of joy and sweet delight, as surpass the terms of any expression; then
with an incomparable harmlessness they interchanged some kisses, wherein the
malignitie of Nature put some difference by certain ardours, which are not
found in those that pass betwixt persons of the same sex, both of them feeling
themselves transported with a certain pleasure and ravishment, whereof the
Cause was yet unknown to them, but which proceeded from the treachery of Love,
disguised under the appearance of Brotherly Friendship.

Boleslaus Seeing that this intimacie increased more and more betwixt the two
Brothers, was afraid lest those Caresses and familiarity should pass to such
terms as might discover to Iphigenes that of which (through his industry and
vigilancie) He was yet ignorant concerning himself. Aretuza never saw them
together without unspeakable heartbeatings and trembling, for she thought her
husband would never pardon her, if he should come to the knowledge of the
deceit, whereby she had abused and amused him so long time; Besides she feared
lest Iphigenes honor might be interessed through Ignorance, though not
Immodestie. Insomuch by this perplexity of thoughts her Mind did feel no less
convulsions and pangs, than a Woman in travel endures in her Body. Whilst
she was in this trouble, the Union of the two Brother's hearts grew to such a
perfection, that it seemed as if there had been but one Soul in their two
Bodies; the same No, and the same Yea coming at the same instant out of their
Mouths. You could never see the one without the other, if they were separated;
their parting was never without tears. Modestina was already become in a manner
nothing with Iphigenes in comparison of Liante, and if she had been of a
jealous disposition, she had cause enough to believe that her Brother withdrew
the affection of her sweet Husband from her, but she imputed that rather to
Childishness then any thing else, imagining that as soon as Iphigenes was
advanced somewhat more toward Manhood, she should easily turn the course of
his inclinations.

Iphigenes in mean time having opened Liante's eyes for his Sister Clemencia,
was not contented to have put, or to have begun to put the fire into his breast,
if he conveyed not all the flame into his Sister's heart, to whom he gave such
a Character of the virtues, gracefulness and perfections of his dear Liante,
that in short time that spark grew to so furious a blaze, that it was near
reducing her to ashes; He had so framed the way to her Mind, that she was
taken on a sudden, according to the Nature of certain subtle fire which takes
sooner and more fiercely in green wood than in dry, and whose first burning is
always the most violent. There was no comparison betwixt Clemeneia's passion
and Liante's, for he possessed far more attractive qualities to make him be
beloved of her, than she had to captivate his liberty: Nevertheless Love being
an Appetite which tends to the production of it is like, it is no wonder (as a
Torch that is burning does easily communicate it is light to one that is out) if
Love first begets another Love in the heart beloved, since to wish well does
almost of necessity challenge a reciprocal well-wishing. The Paleness, which
soon took up its seat on Clementia's cheeks; The looks, messengers of her
passions, which sent glances as suppliants to Liante's eyes; The delight she
seemed to receive in his coversation; The regret she felt for his absence; The
fear of discontenting him; The desire of pleasing him, and the exceeding
contentment she expressed in speaking of him; All these pretty Lovesymptomes
spoke her somewhat more than Child, and bringing her near Woman-hood, changed
the liberty of her Innocence into a Bondage, whose chains did seem so golden
and so sweet to her, that she thought she never had tasted any felicity,
but since the time she had rendered her self a prey to the amiable Liante's
charms.

This Passion passing through her ear into her heart, and being engraven by the
tongue of Iphigenes, as with an instrument of flame, in the profoundest of her
thoughts, devoured or consumed her so, that she was ready to die of the
wound, if her kind Brother (who had kindled the fire) had not applied the
remedy, by assuring her of the reciprocal affection of him whom he had
persuaded her to love. Liante being acquainted herewith by Iphigenes (ingenious
to hinder his own advantages) began by the gate of his Interest to receive some
inclinations for Clemencia, conceiving that might be a means for him to
recover his Estate, and procure Honors: Afterward seeing her so full of
affection, that her too-much loving cast her into a languishing for him, he
answered her desires more out of Compassion than Passion, or rather for Pity
than Affection: for indeed she had more sweetness in her dispositions to
mollify, than Beauty in her face to attract the heart of the brave Liante.
But the Conduct of these Amoretta's required more judgment and discretion than
the small experience of such tender years could promise; They were to deceive
so many eyes that pryed incessantly into their actions, that it was too hard a
task, Love (like a fire) being difficult to be kept hid within the Bosom; And
yet if any one perceived the least of this inteligence, all is lost, all these
Designs will vanish into smoke, all these Projects fly away with the wind.
Nevertheless Iphigenes had the dexterity to manage this business with such
circumspection, Liante had learnt to counterfeit with such subtilitie, and
Clemencia (assured of her Lover's mutual flame) could dissemble with so much
constancy (that sex having a great empire over themselves when there is a
necessity of feining) that they practiced for a good while, this commerce of
Love, without discovering but very weak sparkles of their fire. What cannot
this Passion do when it refineth and subtilizeth thus such young Souls! Observe
but how it brings to School again all the Prudence of hoarie heads.

Modestina and Clemencia had but one Governess, but the two Brothers-in-law had
several Conducters, in regard they were applied to different exercises; yet
neither Liante's Master, nor Perpetua perceived any thing of this secret
correspondence betwixt Clemencia and the intended Clergie-Man; so attentive was
she to hinder Iphigenes and Modestina's private communication, and so
handsomely did Liante with his ordinary sadness hide from his Over-seer his
affectionate pretensions. Only Boleslaus, who watching like a Dragon, that
never shuts his eyes, to preserve the secret of Iphigenes, observed that the
great familiarity 'twixt him and Liante, put in evident danger of being
revealed all the Mystery which he had till then concealed with so much care;
and fearing lest Liante rather than Modestina should discover what kind of man
Iphigenes was, had a serious conference thereupon with Aretuza, who jumping
with his opinion, thought it most expedient to single out Iphigenes, and
declare unto her all the passages of her birth and education, to the end that
seeing her self obliged under pain of losing her life (which punishment she
could not escape by discovering her self, no more than Aretuza) to keep this
secret, and so to demean her self, that living with the liberty of Males, She
might no way blemish the honor of her sex: Necessity (which is a very harsh
Mistres) made them embrace his resolution, and it was no sooner concluded than
put in execution.

To tell you the astonishment that seized Iphigenes at the recital of his own
story, would be too difficult an enterprise; He thought that he either
dreamt, or was enchanted, and hardly could give credit to his ears and eyes.
The joy that the Maidens had or might have received, being transformed into Men
(as some Histories make mention) may make us conceive some shadow of that
sadness, which struck Iphigenes heart, when he saw himself fallen from that
degree of glory, whereunto he fancied the condition of being a Man, might
have raised him. He could hardly refrain from falling out with those that had
unseeled his eyes with the Medicine of their advertisement, and who had
dispossessed him (like Trasimenes cured of his folly) of that sweet error
which contented him. He apprehended to be reduced to that, almost servile,
Subjection of the female Sex, having by Custom made Nature of the liberty
which Men enjoy. What? shall this Amazon change her Sword and Lance for a
Needle and a Distaff? shall she leave so many noble Exercises, wherein her
generous Spirit took such pleasure, to sit constantly in a Chamber, tricking up
her self, and consulting with her looking-glasses how to ensnare and inflame
lover' s hearts? What? in stead of having the Empire and command over Men,
shall she be reformed to the submission and obedience, that is the only portion
and property of Women? No, such a resolution is less supportable than death.
Having been bred, the beginning of her days, like a Man, she will end them
like a Soldier, and seek in the bed of Honor an heroic Death, since she has
lost the hope of a happy life. But this resolution is too extreme; there is a
remedy for every thing but dying.

Aretuza flattered, and (as a Mother) conjured her shee-Son not to disclose
himself. Boleslaus, to second her, beseeched him to have pity on his gray
hairs, and not to hasten his journie to the grave, by paying with too unworthy
an ingratitude his faithful services, representing that upon him (who had been
the Manager and Concealer of that Deceit) Mieslas would chiefly discharge the
burden of his fury, if that Mystery should come to his knowledge. Moreover,
that the advertisement they gave him, was not to oblige him to change neither
manner of life nor habit, or to leave the exercises of Chivalrie, wherein his
Courage and Activity gained the admiration of every one: But quite contrary
they desired him to continue them with more eagerness, and to feine himself to
be a Man the more, the less he knew it. That Time might produce some
expedient means to gain his father's heart wihtout hazarding the lives of so
many persons, and in stead of Modestina (who could not be his wife, by reason
of those obstacles which nature had interposed) he might lawfully enjoy Liante
as a Husband, so that some one of their Children bare the Name and Arms of
Mieslas, whereby his intention would not be altogether frustrated in the
Alliance which he projected with the house of Rosuald.

Judge how great the advnatages of Love are above the Sense of Friendship. This
last Clause which engendered some Hope in Iphigenes to see herself united by
marriage to the beloved Liante, effaced almost in an instant that incomparable
sorrow that dejected her at first, seeing her self fallen from a quality so
honorable and advnatagious, as that of Man. Insomuch that immediately changing
the Love she bare Modestina into a pure Friendship, and the entire Friendship
she had contracted with Liante, into a fervent Love, but virtuous, (since that
it justified it self by the design of a chaste Matrimony;) she personated a Man
better then ever, betook her self to her Military execises again with more
eagerness, and looking upon Liante with other eyes than of a Brother-in-law,
She treated him with more reservedness, deducting somewhat from the liberty of
a Man, to add to the moderation of a Virgin, to whom Pudicity ought to be more
precious than Life. O how much did she repent her possessing Clemencia with so
much Love for Liante, whereby she had made her Sister her Rival, and kindled a
fire which she ought rather to have quenched, and which thence-forwards she
promised her self to smother by all the industry her invention could suggest.
As for Modestina (whose friendship obliged her to a reciprocal affection) she
feined to be more passionate for her than ever, and the better to act the
Husband, She made a show of desiring with much ardour the possession of her
wife, being by that time near fifteen years of age.

Perpetua wrote to Mieslas (then at Court) that she should be constreined to
suffer, what she could no longer hinder, and that if Iphigenes would make use
of Modestina as her Husband, Modestina had no less desire to serve him as his
Wife. Mieslas who had desired nothing more than the accomplishment of that
marriage, out of an odd fantastical humor would not consent to the
Consummation, but delayed it from day to day until his return into Podolia.
But being not able to obtein leave from the King (who finding him very fit for
the managing great affairs, had every day some new employment for him) He
bethought himself to send for his Son to the Court, (which is the Theater of
young Nobility,) where he would present him to the King, and make him appear
according to his quality. This Command somewhat troubled Aretuza at the first;
but Boleslaus quickly persuaded her to condescend to that which she could not
oppose, promising her to watch so carefully over the deportments of his
Nursling, that she should receive neither reproach nor coffeehouse.

This news was diversely received among our yuong Lovers, all their four hearts
did feel at the same instant very different assualts. For Modestina pressed
with the just impatiences of a marriageable Virgin, that expects till the
maturity of a too-tender husband makes her both Wife and Mother, could not
endure to thik of losing the sight of her Angel like husband, who was more the
life of her Soul, then her Soul the life of her Body. To register her Sighs,
her Groans, and her Tears, were no more easy than to number the puffs of wind
in Autumn, the parching minutes of Summer, and the drops of rain in Winter. How
Modest soever she was in heart, as well as by name, her exceeding Love turning
to Folly, and that Folly into Rage and Despair, made her commit Immodesties,
which could be excused by nothing but the qualities of Wife and Lover.
Iphigenes seeing her in this condition, so deplorable, that it seemed the
stroke of Death had been more favorable to her, than to see her self deprived
of the light of his eyes, and plunged in the darkness of the Eclipse of that
detested Absence, was touched with such tender resentments of sorrow, that He
had much ado by falling in a Trance to keep himself from discovering that in
his body there was a womanish weakness hidden under the habit of a Man.

But this affection of compassion was nothing in comparison of the torment
which she felt, when she came to think of her Separation from Liante: For
since she had the knowledge of her self, having put (as it were) a bar betwixt
those familiarities and privacies with him that might have hurt, or any way
blemished her honor, by this restriction her smart was become more painful,
and the fire of her breast (like that in a narrow furnace) was rendered the more
ardent, the more it was suppressed. All her fear was, that the ignorance of her
Sex, wherein She must leave Liante, and the continual presence of Clemencia,
in whose affection She had engaged him, with the help of her absence, would
ravish from her that heart, which was the aim of all her pretentions, and the
golden Fleece whereunto aspired her most desired Conquests. Clemencia (who
remained at home with no less passion for Liante, than Iphigenes carried with
her to Court, yet covered the Coals of her desire with the ashes of Discretion
and Silence) was in an extreme pain for the absence of her Brother, in whom
She lost a faithful interpreter of her thoughts: Yet promising her self to
supply that want with the Pen, which should serve to convey her conceptions to
him, and likewise his to her, She was the less afflicted for his departure.

But the grief of the disconsolate Liante, was not so easily pacified; for
feeling himself bound to Iphigenes with bonds which he could not comprehend,
and such strong ones as could not be broken, he did like the Cimmerians, who
cry and groan when the Sun leaves their Country, as if theywere never to see
it any more: He felt his very bowels rend within him at this Separation: And
as Rebecca, who had so much desired to be a Mother, repented her of her wish
when She felt the pains that her two Children struggling together in her womb
did make her suffer: So Liante could almost have wished that he had never
seen, nor loved Iphigenes, since that sweet Friendship produced so cruel a
torment. And as those who are troubled with worms, which engender in the head
or the Entrails, endure strange indispositions, without knowing the cause that
does afflict them; So this young Gentleman feeling that Viper, Love, which
gnawed his heart under the appearance of Friendship, did suffer a far more
penetrating smart for his being parted from that beloved Object, than any one
is accustomed to feel for the absence of a friend. For Friendship does kindle
in the Soul a fire more sober and moderate than Love, whose flames are more
fierce and painful. Was it not enough (said he within himself) that we were
separated in conditions and exercises, without dividing by such a distance
those whose hearts are so united, that they are as the Unity it self? To whom
shall I have recourse hence-forwards in my discontents? Who shall selace me in
my sadnesses? Who shall support and revive my decayed hopes? O my dear Brother,
you are my only stay, my second Soul, the light of mine Eyes; Absent from you,
I shall never see the day more without pain; and the life (if it may be called
life) that I shall lead, will be a continual punishment to me. Yet if I might
be but suffered to follow you, I should esteem my self too happy; but I am
born under too unfortunate a Planet, to be otherwise than persecuted to the
extremity by Disasters. Would to God there were no other obstacle than my
passlng over all the interest I pretend in my Father's Estate, according to the
covetous pretensions of Mieslas, and that I might enjoy the felicity but to
wait on you as your servant; Indeed I prefer the meanest condition about your
person before all the riches of the Earth, that sweet servitude before any
Liberty. O Mieslas! why cannot you read my thoughts? why can you not see my
intentions? I do not think you so void of Humanity, as to keep me any longer
in this tortune, if you knew my heart.

These Complaints recall to my remembrance the fable of the contestation
betwixt the Sun and Boreas, which should first make the Traveller put off his
Cloak; at last the one did by the gentle heat of his rays, what the other
could not accomplish with his impetuous blustering. The Poets have reason to
feine, and their cozen-germans the Painters, to picture Love naked, since his
Power is far more prevalent to make a man strip himself of his Estate than are
Cruelty and Rigor. But if I should stand to relate all the discourses of these
young Lovers, I should never get out of this Farewell. To conclude, they were
torn by Violence out of each other's Arms, and the streams that ran from all
their Eyes, did make a little Ocean of Tears, yet this deluge could not drown
all their Sorrows. I could borrow some pensills of the Poets to give the
Colors to this Departure, were I not unwilling to retard the greedy curiosity
of the Reader, who desires to be speedily informed of the good and evil
adventures of Iphigenes.

The second Book.
ARGUMENT.
The Character of Iphigenes: His Reception at the Court. His Favor with the
King and Queen. The Envy and unworthiness of Augustus the Lithuanian: His
Banishment from the Court. The Princess Respicia's affection to Iphigenes: Her
Policy to obtein her Desires, and dissolve the Marriage betwixt Iphigenes and
Modestina. Modestina's complaints against the Court-Ladie's unjust attempts to
bereave her of her beloved Husband. Mieslas's endeavors to persuade Iphigenes
to repudiate Modestina in favor of the Princess Respicia's propositions.
Iphigenes's answer, and deportment toward Respicia. The Jealousy of Stanislas
Palatine of Uratislau, and his plot against Iphigenes.

IPHIGENES was no sooner arrived at the Court, with an equipage suitable to the
humor and quality of his Father, but the Eyes of all the Courtiers and Ladies
were fixed upon this new Sun, which rising upon the Horizon of that Climat,
filled it with the splendour of his Rays, casting such fiery glances, and so
penetrating a light, that it was hard for any (if not blind) to avoid the
scorching of his presence. The Spring is not adorned with so many flowers, nor
Titan's glorious Orb with so many beams, as he displayed Beauties and
attractive Graces: All his Actions, his looks, his words, his deportments, his
exercises, were as many Charms that enchanted the hearts of all those that did
contemplate him. The attribute of Beautiful was presently given him by the
common consent of both Gentlemen and Ladies, and he was usually called The
beautiful Podolian. To see him and to be in love with him were two things
that followed each other, as the Lightning and Thunder are observed to do: And
those that knew him but by reputation only cherished his Memory, for besides
his dexterity in those Exercifes, which Courtiers hold for virtues, as
Singing, Dancing, Vaulting, Managing a horse with activitie and a grace,
handling well his Arms, and having a good Garb, His Language was so smooth, his
Disposition so sweet, his Compliments so indeering, his Conversation so winning
(especially amongst the Ladies) his Modesty so remarkable, his Chastity, so
extraordinary in a Courtier, his Discretion so exquisite, his Courage so
undaunted, his Tongue so moderate, his Gesture so well composed, his Generosity
so splendid, his Liberality so magnificent, such Decency in his apparel, a
Sternness in his Armor, so sweetly fierce, that it seemed as if Venus having
taken possession of his Face, and Mars of his Heart, and the Ferocity of the
one, being tempered with the Gentleness of the other, had both conspired to
give him the Empire over all hearts either by Force or Love. It cannot be
imagined what ravage his beautiful face made in the Lady's breasts, every one
took him for an Angel descended from Heaven to set on fire all the daughters
of Men; and what was most of all admired, was, to see, that this glorious
Star, like the Sun, engendered a thousand flames, without having in himself,
or (at least) without making show of any degree of heat, giving what he had not
(that is) Love.

There was during the winter (which is extremely rigorous in Polonia) a new
disease so universally catching, that hardly any body did escape its malignity,
it was called there the COKELVCHE: And in regard there were very few Ladies at
Court that had not particular inclinations for Iphigenes, and that spoke not of
him in terms of admiration, a Wit of the Times called him the COKELVCHE of the
Court. To this purpose a certain Lady said, That to be in love with him was a
thing indispensable: Another answered a Gentleman that seemed to wonder at the
so general passions for this young Nobleman, saying, I believe you are either
without Heart or Eyes. He was the Rock where their minds suffered shipwreck,
few going with curiosity toward this Angelical Object, but returned with a
wound, or at least with some distemper. How many young Ladies longed he were
their husband! how many Fathers and Mothers desired him for their Son-in-law!
When it was known that Mieslas had already married him to Modestina, what
sorrow was expressed! how many great and more advantageous matches were offered
him, which made the greedy Father often repent his hastiness, and he grew so
proud to see his Son so well beloved, and so highly esteemed, that he swam in
satisfaction. And indeed he that will fancy a most exquisite feminine beauty,
a delicate white complexion, sweetly mixed with a lovely red, lively and
sparkling Eyes, hair like Silk, and the rest of those attractions that accompany
that perfection which an Ancient called an agreeable Tyranny, and all this at
the age of fifteen or sixteen years under a man's habit (who cannot have so
little beauty but it is much for that Sex) will find nothing strange of all that
has been said.

Oh! how could I extend this History if I should engage my Pen to the recital
of the several evenements that befell him upon this Account! That specious form
(which seemed to have been given him expressly to ruinate the pudicity of the
most determinate and severe preservers of their honor) how many assaults and
strange attempts did it make him suffer from those Ladies that thought him of a
contrary Sex! But I fear in publishing the impudence of those shameless Souls,
to call the bashful blood into more modest Faces, who cannot endure any thing,
I will not say of Dishonesty (for I should disclaim my Pen if it were tainted
with any impure Relation) but only tending to wantonness. The Wits of the
Court, whose invention is very pregnant in such occurrences, know already more
then I am able to imagine: others that are more simple shall remain (by my
consent) in the commendable ignorance of such malicious practices.

Whilst these inconsiderate Lovers try in vain to draw into their Nets him who
has caught their Hearts, and who takes pleasure in seeing them burn, like
Flies, at the Fire of his eyes, He does like those Engineers, who cast their
artificial fires all about, without receiving any damage in their own
persons; or like those Fountaineers, who showing curious Waterworks and
Grotta's, where a thousand little Pipes cast water on every side, set
themselves in some known place where they remain dry, whilst every one else is
wetted to the skin. And as the secure Shepherds standing to feed their flocks
upon some eminent Hills near the Seaside, behold from those firm and solid
heights the tossing and agitation of Ships beaten with stormy weather: So did
He contemplate, in the weakness of those spirits, so passionately enamored of
him, the imbecility of a Sex, which bred in him rather Pity than Envy, and
Compassion rather than Love. It was not on that side that He feared being
surprised, his natural impotency rendering him most potent to resist all those
temptations. On the other side the attractive graces displayed in the
countenances of so many brave Cavaliers (wherewith the Court was as glittering
as the Heaven is with Stars in a clear night) moved him as little; An honorable
desire of glory and the preservation of his chastity being a powerful bridle
against the assaults and surprises of the Sense; besides that his heart was so
prepossest with love for Liante, that there was no room left to place any other
Object: Moreover his humor was so averse to vice and riotous deboshing (which
he saw was the continual practice of dissolute companions) that their
excesses made him rather shun than follow them, rather abhor the lewdness of
their deportments, than fancy the handsomness of their persons; pitying rather
than envying their conditions: whereas on the contrary his virtue and
handsomness were more envyed than pitied by them. Yea, for as the Cantharides,
those stinking and venomous Flies, do not settle but upon the most delicate
Flowers; So those young Courtiers were grown mischievously jealous, because
this new comer with his eminent beauty accompanied with sweet dispositions, and
diverse recommendable parts, came to do them the same affront as the Sun does
every morning to the meaner lights of Heaven, and ravished from them the hearts
of all the Ladies, from whom they could no more receive any countenance, but
slights. And, jealousy being a fire, which happening to kindle in an human soul,
hinders it (by reason of the vapors which it excites) from seeing the Sun of
reason, they conspired all together against Iphigenes, and plotted how to
engage him in several quarrels.

Already diverse wicked Designs were laid to entrap his innocence, but the
Preserver of the virtuous still delivered him: for the Courtiers (more
changeable than the Sea or the Moon, accommodating themselves to the humor of
the Times, more than the Fish, called the Polypus, does to the color of the
Rocks where it fastens) have no other rule for their Hatred, or their Love,
than their interest, and the measure of this Interest is the Humor of their
Prince. Although those who are most in the King's favor, are commonly the
object of the People's hatred; yet the dissembling complacency of the Court
obliges those, who follow its wind and tide, to applaud those whom the
Sovereign affects, notwithstanding they hate them in their hearts, or at least
do not esteem them. Beauty accompanied with a comely carriage is a Letter of
admission, which opens the Cabinet and Heart of Kings; for they are but Men
as well as others, and the more subject to passions because elevated to an
higher degree of Eminence, by the same reason that the tallest Cedars suffer
most by the wind's impetuousity, and the loftiest Towers feel oftnest the
effects of Thunder and Lightning. And as the Elephants may be most easily
wounded in the flank, which is the tenderest part in their unweildy bodies (as
several examples witness:) so great Persons are no where so weak, nor so
easily to be surprised by any thing as by passinate affections, this being
their general defect. And indeed it were a difficult matter for those, who are
beloved (I should rather say) served, adored and admired of so many deserving
persons as are still about them, not to be sweetly enforced to render
themselves to the particular affection of some one; whence it follows that
Favor is the inseparable shadow of Royalty. For if the Sun, that lamp of the
Universe, which from his Heavenly Chariot sees all things upon Earth, looks
with another eye (amongst the flowers of a Garden-plot) upon the Marigold, and
all other yellow flowers, which seem to be decked with the Gold of is splendent
Rays, and by that yellow livery do testify the love they bear that glorious
Luminary. So Kings who are the light of the World, and the Suns of the Earth,
since it is from them that the most noble persons of a State do borrow their
luster, although they do extend their paternall care to all their subjects, as
fathers of their People; yet in this general solicitude they apply their Eyes
and Ears to some particular servants, who by that means get ground in the
territory of their hearts, and do rule the spirits of their Kings by the
sweetness of friendship, as the Kings by the force of authority do reign over
the Provinces under their subjection. And above all, Beauty has the property
to establish her Empire with such polite and quaint indeerments, that whereas
all other subjection is irksom, here Liberty is odious, and Chains amiable,
every one contributing to bring himself into this traldom: And how
vainglorious soever it be, it cannot exact from the humility and submission of
its adorers such homages as those that are rendered to it by voluntary
Sacrifices; thousands fall at its right hand, ten thousands at its left, all at
its feet, as being the most visible Ray of the Divinity upon Earth.

It was this Beauty, seated in Iphigenes countenance as on a Throne of Ivory,
that framed his way, by the eyes, into the King's affection. And if the Iron,
though heavy and insensible, and a Straw, that is light and without reason, do
by a natural inclination turn and make toward the Lodestone and Amber; if
the Lodestone that has touched Iron, does communicate unto it that secret
property of standing always toward the Antartick Pole; if the Vines love the
shadow of Olive Trees, and the other Fishes delight to follow the Dolphin,
without any other knowledge than the force of instinct: Who can deny that Man,
whose senses are inclined to evil from the beginning, may be carried away by
Concupiscence, being allured and sometimes drawn and ravished by the objects?
That monstrous vice, the abortive of Nature and Hell, which diffames the
Oriental and the Southern parts, is hardly known in the Occidentall and
Septentrionall Regions; at least if it be frequent there, it is very rare here;
if there it be a vulgar and popular Malady, here it seems to infect none but
great persons. I am not the only Man that esteems Courts to be the receptacles
of Iniquity, the Theaters of Licenciousness as well as of Vanity, the Schools
of Dissolution and Riot; for since Piety is excluded thence, according to the
saying of an Ancient Writer, if the shades of Impiety reign there, in the place
of that Light, what can one imagine to be practiced there, but the deeds of
Darkness? Therefore I shall not stick to say, that Asmodeus (that unclean
spirit which suggests to animal Creatures the brutall desires of the flesh,
whom the Pagans and Poets made a Deity under the name of the Goddess of Cypru's
Son) cast, like another Sinon into Troy, such Grecian fires into the sulphurous
hearts of the Courtiers, that diverse of them beholding with too much attention
the perfections of Iphigenes, and thinking him of a Sex conformable to his
habit, entertained such base desires as ought not to enter into any thought,
much less be repeated. Thereupon some of them to accomplish their execrable
pretentions, used means to seduce the young Gentleman to the licentious
frequentation of loose Women; thereby (one vice calling on another) to draw him
into more enormous abominations.

Here I might raise the trophy of our young Gallant's chastity with lines that
would deserve to be exempted from Oblivion: But because the multitude of weak
spirits, as well as that of the ill-advised, exceeds the number of the strong
and prudent, not to offend the infirmity of those, we will wean the ability of
these. For as the light of the Sun is injurious to certain Eyes; So the truth
is not always well received by all discreet hearers. But to believe that such
horrible Imaginations could harbor in the Kings Breast, I should hold it a
blasphemy to think it, yet they are Mortals environed with frailties, and
subject to failings: And who knows if any secret Malignity made the King
conjecture, that under Iphigenes clothes was something more than Man? however
his affection never went beyond the limits reserved to Moesty. But who can
hinder Detraction (which carries the venim of Asps upon the lips) from
spreading its poison upon the purest innocence? Persons which are seated in the
highest place upon the World's Theater, are commonly the subjects of obloquies,
as the Butts and Blanks of Calumny.

The King, besides the merits of Mieslas, and the remembrance of his former
services, saw joined with a ravishing presence such remarkable virtues and
perfections in his Son, that as a just, prudent and liberal Prince, he could
do no less than show the esteem he made of so many rare qualities, which
rendered him the spectacle and marvel of his Court. And as this life is a
perpetual Game, full of contrarieties and vicissitudes, the disgrace and
falling of one being the advantage and raising of another; as in Heaven when
some Stars rise upon the Horizon, others at the same time set; when some are
seen, others are hid, it being impossible that all should appear to us at once:
So at the Court several Favorites are incompatible, they strive to thrust each
other out of their Prince's affection. This drew much envy and many quarrels
upon the brave Iphigenes, but in all these contestations He came off with such
good success and signs of courage, that as the files do polish and smooth the
Iron by biting it, and the waters of the Deluge did raise the Ark by falling
upon it; so these malicious oppositions did increase the value and reputation
of Iphigenes. Insomuch that the King, whose solid Judgment was able perfectly
to distinguish the Precious from the Vile, and knew what extreme difference
there was betwixt the Merit of that virtuous Gentleman, and the Demerits of so
many others of his age (who lost themselves in gameing and deboistness) did an
act worthy of so great a Prince to seat his favor in so good a place,
withdrawing it from those who had not purchased his countenance by Desert but
Art, imitating those Women that paint, who make borrowed and supposed Beauties
be beloved in them, rather than Natural.

This transported with a desperate fury a young Nobleman, named Augustus, Son
to the Palatine of Vilne in Lithuania. He having been bred Page to the King,
had found the means so to insinuate himself into His Majesty's favor, that
he had obtained a great Estate, of his gift, and a considerable charge in the
Court, whereby he was become so haughty and insolent, that his humor was
insupportable. Seeing then that Iphigenes entering into Grace was likely to
cause his Ruin, and that the King turning his Eyes from him, and fixing them
on this new Object, he should be supplanted; there was no sort of Bravado's
and Treacheries that he left unattempted to provoke the patience of our
innocent Cavalier: But his Discretion augmenting the Arrogance of the
Lithuanian, whose abuses drew one day some language from Iphigenes mouth, which
gave him to understand that he feared his Biting no more than his Barking. His
frowns and threats, (lightning which presaged a tempest near at hand) were
cause that the King interposing his Authority, cut off this Contestation in the
root, by commanding Augustus to contein himself within the bounds of his
devoir, or quit the Court. This put him into an excessive rage, judging by this
Soverign Oracle, which way the King's Heart inclined. Envy which murthereth low
spirits, cruelly gnawed this Lithuanian's; but because this vice is so
ridiculous, that it dares not show it self, he bit his bridle in silence,
feeling his heart pierced with a thousand pricks, to see that his Competitor,
high in the King's favor, acquired every day new honors, and that, (as when a
precious balsome is spilt) the good odor of his reputation dilated it self
into all parts. Iphigenes was never mentioned but with terms of high
commendation, as not seen without astonishment. If his Face was the glory and
delight of those Eyes that beheld him, his Actions full of virtue and winning
gracefulness purhcased him the quality (so rare in this age) not only of
Irreprehensible, but of the most accomplished of Gentlemen. Hereupon Envy, who
is sick at other men's well being, made Augustus feel such torment in his mind,
as none of all those invented by the barbarous Tyrants mentioned in Histories
could parallel. A just Vice in the unjust hatred it bears to Virtue, since it
serves to torture him that gives it admittance into his soul. But the mischief
is, that as the winds enclosed a long time within the bowels of the Earth, at
length burst out with horrible Eart quakes that dis-joyn the frame of nature:
So the furies of Envy suppressed a good while with silence, most commonly
disclose themselves all at once by most tragical successes.

In all honorable Exercises wherein young Gentlemen use to show their activity
and skill, Iphigenes always had the better. There were no Rings but for his
Courses, so exactly could he command his Horse and Lance; At the tiltings his
graceful garb ravished all the spectators; At dancings there were no Eyes but
for him. And as the King's bountry to him was very great, his Expenses,
Sumptuousness, Liberality and Magnificence increased proportionably; No body
was so handsomely dressed, so richly attired, so well attended, so well mounted,
so well accompanied as he, and all this with so much judgment that it rendered
his pomp doubly admirable. He was no Gamester at all, neither was he guilty
of running into any unnecessary Excesses, by which means he was the abler to
appear with the Nobler train. Mieslas ravished with the Virtues and prudent
Conduct of his Son, became more reserved and moderate in his expenses,
imitating him as much as might be possible; and although his credit was great
with the King, it was nothing in comparison of his Son's; For without entering
into the quality of importunate (being very circumspect in managing his
Master's favor) He always received of the King more than he demanded,
containing himself within the compass of what he might or ought to do, if he
had been a greedy seeker of his own advantage: But as the Shadow follows those
that fly it, so does Prosperity those that look not after it; In less than one
year's time the King gave him a whole County with some Offices of Castellains,
and destined him also for a Palatinate, as soon as Age had furnished him with
Experience and Authority requisite. If Fathers were susceptible of Jealousy
against their Children, Mieslas had reason enough to conceive some against his
Son, seeing the rarity of his beauty and discretion had thrust into his Hands
in an instant a Fortune, which his long services could not attain; (but it is
not with her as with a Goal, where those that run fastest come the soonest at
it:) He was very glad to be surmounted in that by Iphignes, after the custom
of most Parents, who desre nothing more than to see their Children higher and
more advanced in the World than themselves.

The Queen, a virtuous and wise Princess, and who saw but with the King her
Husband's Eyes, could not but esteem him whom she saw His Majesty so highly
prize, and cherish, and who possessed so great a share in his Favor. For it is
not seldom seen in Courts that Favorites have more power in effect, though not
so much state in appearance, than the Queens, and that to accomplish their
desires in some cases, these are glad to have recourse to their mediation. In
such a condition a man had need have a good brain not to be made drunk with the
fuming vapors of Favor and a strong sight, not to be dazzled with the splendour
of so great a Light: for what Soul is there so reserved that would not feel it
self puff't up, at least somewhat more than glad, at such a height of Fortune,
as renders in some sort inferior, a person who acknowledges no Superior but
God? It was in this particular that Iphigenes made chiefly appear the
Excellency of his Wisdom, demeaning himself with such moderation and humility
toward the Queen, that he was in a no less degree of favor with her than
with the King, so far forth as to receive many considerable presents from her
hand, not without some murmuring of the Ladies about her person, who wondered
to see her bestow such liberalities upon a Man, contrary to her custom, and in
their opinion, somewhat beyond Decency. But she conforming her self to her
Husband's humor, did only show by this imitation how much she honored the
King, seeing it was enough that He esteemed any one, to make her show him the
like respect and Countenance. Indeed it is probable, if she had known all the
mystery, or if the unbridled lusts of the Orientalls could fall into the
imagination of the Septentrionalls, that Jealousy might have possessed her with
some ill thoughts of Iphigenes. But the incomparable Chastity and Modesty that
apeared in all his proceedings, begat him so admirable an Opinion, that all the
Men in the Court (and indeed wihout danger) would freely have trusted all their
Wives to his keeping, as if he had been the Prince of the grand Signor's
Eunuchs. There was never seen a Youth so discreet, a Beauty so chaste, a
Favorite so courteous, a Greatness so affable, a Fortune so reserved, an
Elevation so moderate, a great Courage so humble, a Generosity so judicious;
He was the Spectacle of astonishment, the Miracle of Grace, the Ornament of
Nature, the Glory of his Country, the Joy of those that had dependence on him,
the Honor of his Lineage, and we may add the Flower of Polonia, the Eye of the
Court, the Orient of Virtues, and the Occident of Vice.

At all the Justs and Tournaments made for public rejoycings, where Iphigenes
was of the answering Party, (and always Conqueror) Augustus who studied
nothing more than to meet with some occasion to do him an affront or mischief,
made this Opportunity the Baud of his base Design, like those Traitors who in a
Salve of Infantry at a Trayning (where they should use none but Powder) do
charge their Muskets with Bullets, to shoot at some particular Enemies. For
where is all Gentlemen did run with but slight Arms, because their Lances were
only pegg'd purposely that they might break in pieces at the least touch, that
exercise, having no other end than to delight the Spectators; Augustus being to
run against Iphigenes furnished himself with a Lance plated with Iron and
ground very sharp, intending to pierce him through, or at least to make him so
rudely measure the ground with his Body that he should serve for a
laughing stock to all that saw him. But the Powers who love Justice, hate
Iniquity, and above all do abhor Traitors, turned this malicious desire upon
Augustus own head; For, missing his Rest his Lance slided along the smooth
gilded Arms of his Adversary, who not failing of his aim, broke his all to
shivers with a very becoming grace; but one of the splinters falling with the
point downwards pierced Augustus thigh, which put him to an intolerable pain.
The furious Lithuanian seeing his blood, was enraged with Choler that he was
hurt, and no less mad for Spite that he had mist his thrust; Insomuch that
without considering that his wound proceeded from Accident and not from
Iphigenes will, as if he had been highly offended in his honor, he returned
with full career, his Sword drawn, to revenge that affront upon Iphigenes; who
protesting innocence, and declaring that he was sorry for that chance, he
cried out to him to draw or he would kill him, vomiting against him a thousand
injurious reproaches not becoming the mouth of a Cavalier. Iphigenes who was
not used to such caresses, put himself in a posture to receive him and make him
feel the punishment of his Arrogance. Augustus came full speed with his Sword's
point toward Iphigenes to run him through, or bear him to the ground; But
Iphigenes, who had more slight than strength, putting by that thrust, charged
him so home, that of a furious Assailant he had enough to do to prove himself a
good Defendant. The King, who with the Queen was present at this show, seeing
this Quarrel begun by Augustus, who was the Aggressor, commanded them to give
over fighting. But the enraged Lithuanian refused, saying, the King was Master
of his Estate and Life, not of his Honor, which he fancied was then highly
interessed. This proud reply so incensed the King, that he commanded his
Guards to cut him in pieces presently; mean time the Combat continued, and
notwithstanding diverse Cavalier's intervening to hinder them, Augustus being
mounted upon a Horse as full of fire as his Master of fury, made himself
passage in desight of all those that endeavored to separate them: And being
even ready to fall, like a hasty storm, upon his Adversary with a quick
back-blow the dexterous Iphigenes slit the nostrills of his Courser, who
foaming and breathing fire out of his mouth, reared up on end and flung so
desperately with pain, that casting his Rider with his heels upwards, added to
the hurt upon his Thigh, the breaking in pieces of a Leg. Iphigenes nimbly
leaping from his Ginet to give Augustus the contentment to fight on foot also
(though he could have made his Horse passing and repassing trample out his
guts) found him in no condition to contend; So, without taking any other
advantage than that of making him deliver his Sword, he gave him his life
before all that Assembly, notwithstanding the King gave order he should be
killed for having disobeyed his Command. This done, Iphigenes prostrated
himself before his Majesty; ceasing not to supplicate until he had changed his
Indignation into Clemencio, and obtained Life for him who would have procured
his Death. Augustus was carried to his own house, loaded with as much infamy
and shame, as Iphigenes reurned covered with the Laurells of triumph and glory:
By chance one of his friends taking up Augustus Lance, found it made purposely
to do mischief, being very strongly plated with Iron and sharp-pointed,
sufficient evidence of his unworthy intentions; This being told the King, he
banished him the Court for ever, notwithstanding Iphigenes employed all the
credit he had to procure his pardon.

The Sun is never without Shadows, nor Virtue free from Envy: yet among so many
thorns some flowers may be gathered. Iphigenes had so much quaintness and such
sources of polite subtilities in his brain, was so dexterous and happy in
captivating hearts, that he was called the Master of that Art. It is true that
shadows do still accompany the Sun, but they are very short, when he is
Elevated to his Apogee, or the vertical point of the Horizon. So Iphigenes
being arrived at the highest degree of favor, and (which is very rare) as
precious in the King, his Master' s sight, as in the Queen, his Mistresse' s,
in this Zenith of Honor he contemned the vain vapors of Envy, seeing, as it
were from the top of a lofty mountain, the rolling Thunder grumble, and the
stormy clouds burst under his feet. There are few that haunt Favorites but
either very powerful or inconsiderable persons. For if the Royalty be for
them, is it not a Giant-like presumption to offer to approach that Greatness?
If the Gods of the Earth be for them, who can surmount, nay, who dares
contradict them? Yet as we see, although the glory of the World' s Eye be
never so bright, the least Atoms and exhalations (like moats) do rise to
oppose and blemish it, but are as soon deprest as raised, and no sooner
gathered together than dissolved: So do presumptuous spirits revolt and combine
sometimes against the Eldest Sons of Fortune; but their fruitless endeavors
immediately do make appear the weakness, as well as the baseness of their
hearts, swollen and pufft up with Vanity, rather than filled with Courage. Such
was Augustus, such approved himself another Nobleman, named Polignotes, of
whose vapouring and jealous Bravadoes I shall at this present omit to make any
further mention, esteeming it more to purpose, by mingling sweet with sower, to
temper the animosities of these envious Antagonists, with the delicious amity
of the innumerable friends, which Iphigenes had purchased by his most perfect
Courtesy. This admirable knot of Friendship (which is the sweetest bond of
humane Society) in its perfection is an Enemy to Multiplicity: A man may be
Friendly to all, but should be Familiar with few, and in this Virtuous
Familiarity consists that Communication, which gives life and being to true
Friendship. To establish an eminent Fortune and high favor, a man has need,
as of diverse Supporters, of many Friends; But in regard Favor (no more than
Love) can admit of no Corrivalls, it was Iphigenes industry sto to manage the
good wills of those, that expressed any affection toward him, that making them
participant of his Riches, he reserved the King's favor entire to himself.
Thus do those that make presents of Fruit, keeping the Tree and the Ground
still in their own possession: Thus may one distribute Water, and allow their
Neighbors part, and yet retain the Spring in its wonted place.

Among others, of lower degree (I do not say for matter of quality, but
affection) there were two particularly in favor with Iphigenes: One was a
young Prince of Polonia, named Cassin, the other a Noble man of a very ancient
family known by the name of Pomeran; this was the Minion of his heart, and (as
it were) the Favorite of the Favorite, for He loved with much tenderness the
person of Iphigenes: The former (who cherished rather his greatness and
quality, ardently embracing whatsoever had reference to his Interest and Glory)
was as the favorite of the Favor; like Hephestion and Craterus the two friends
of Alexander the Great, whereof one loved him as Alexander, the other as King.
Cassin and Pomeran were the two Arms and Eyes of our young Count, as those that
applied themselves more particularly to what concerned him. Pomeran, being more
disinteressed, considered nothing but the person of Iphigenes, for which He
did feel passions, which would have been much more Violent, if he had been as
Skillful to penetrate the secret of darkness, as Ignorance made him incurious.
The Prince (who grasped at great Charges, and whose ambitious humor aimed at
nothing but those Grandeurs, whereunto by his extraction he justly might
pretend, but could not yet arrive by reason of his too unripe age) accosted
Iphigenes, as a Jacob's ladder, that he might thereby clime to the top of his
pretensions. His Mother (who shall likewise enter upon this stage, under the
name of Respicia) brought him into the World before She could fully reckon the
third luster of her age, her Husband (who had be one of the highest rank in
the Kingdom) having left her a widow in her five and twentieth year; And
although She was owner of Beauty enough to make her be beloved, and enjoyed
an Estate that might invite the greatest in that Country to marry her, yet the
affection She did bear to the memory of her deceased Husband, and the
consideration She had of her two Children, made her remain almost ten years in
a constant Widdowhood, breeding with all the splendor and care imaginable,
those two precious pledges of her former flames. However being one of the most
consderable Ladies in the Court, and living in the height of delights (though
then arrived at her five and thirtieth year) She found at length the death of
her Liberty in the inevitable charms of Iphigenes Beauty. This COKELVCHE or
Court-Vertigo had so turned her brain, that She forgot both the Idea of her
Husband, the Affection to her Children, and the Care of her self, exposing her
self to the hazard of being the table-talk through the whole World, to the
disadvantage of that Honor, of whose preservation She had always thitherto
made so exact a profession.

Those Creatures that are signalized for the greatest Wiles, when they are
taken, do display all their Shifts; so did this subtill-witted Lady, when She
perceived her self tied by the Heart with such delicious bands, that she
preferred this Servitude before her former Liberty. For, the better to
dissemble her wound, the more she felt the smart, of all the Ladies in the
Court she was observed to speak the seldomest and the least advantagiously of
Iphigenes, suppressing all her passion within her breast without suffering it to
evaporate at the passage of her mouth but by very slight sparkles. But if she
said little she thought the more, and fancied no mean projects to accomplish
the design she had to make her self lawfully his Wife. Widows, who have
learned in their Matrimonial observances the secrets of pleasing Men, and how
to entrap them, send glances from their Eyes so much the more attractive, the
less they are innocent; And as the most sparkling fire and hottest embers, are
those which are covered with ashes; as the most shining flashes of Lightning
are those which proceed from the blackest Clouds: So the kidnesses that come
from under those great Veils, are generally the most attractive; those are the
Fires that blaze in the midst of Water, when from Eyes destined to Tears are
cast such speaking looks. Yet all these artificial affectations were Vainly
employed by this Princess to conquer or inveagle Iphigenes, whose Heart was no
less susceptible of these flames, than his Body was capable of those
legititimate Embraces to which she did aspire. However Iphigenes did very much
esteem her person, but it was in that manner as he could and ought, not as
she desired. This cautelous Student in Love's Politics had learned
particularly by Mieslas (the depth of whose thoughts she had sounded by her
sugared speeches) that the marriage of Iphigenes with Modestina was not
consummated: Whereupon she contrived a Plot, that will make appear the
subtilty of a Wit refined by that Passion, which puts Invention into the
simplest and most blockish brains.

She, who had a conceit that Marriage consisted only in the use of the Bodies,
never considering that the Union of the Hearts and the consentment of the
Wills, are the materials whereof if formed the Essence of Matrimony, flattered
her self that she should easily disannull or untie that knot betwixt Iphigenes
and Modestina, and put her self in Modestina's place; But fearing lest a
repulse should make her the fable of the Court, and expose her to the people's
scorn, she thought best to bring her Daughter into play, and propose her to
Mieslas for Iphigenes with such advantages as were neither in the Fortune nor
person of Modestina. This Daughter of here is, named Simphoroza, was yet very
young, but did promise in the Aurora of her age great perfections of Beauty at
her Noon. The Palatine of Podolia who devoured in his greedy thoughts all those
high proffers of the Princess Respicia, (believing that Rosuald's Estate would
however be entirely his own, by making Liante embrace an Ecclesiastic life,
and giving some slight Dowry to Modestina;) was easily induced to hearken to
her propositions, considering (besides the great fortune she promised to make
her Daughter) the splendour of so Noble an Allaince; But this cunning Mother' s
design was only to substitute her self in her Daughter' s place (who was yet
nothing near Marriageable) and to supply with the luster of her Gold and
immense Estate, what she wanted in Beauty, or was superabundant in Years; Thus
the Father was gained, which seemed no small advancement to our Pretendant' s
intentions, every one being apt to believe easily what they do desire. But the
difficulty ws in obteining the Son's consent, (who being advertised of this
Design by Mieslas, and knowing in his Soul that he was no less unfit to be
Simphoreza's Husband than Modestina's, not to multiply his deceipts,) rejected
the propositions, feining scruples of Conscience, much passion for his wife,
and giving Mieslas to understand that he had proceeded further in the terms of
Marriage with Modestina then he imagined. The rigorous Podolian (who had in a
manner engaged his word to the Princess, thinking to find more obedience in
his Son's spirit) was ready to burst into a furious fit of Choler at this
resistance, but considering that Iphigenes by his favor had all the power with
the King, he retained the impetuosity of his passion, giving testimony enough
however of his displeasure by the alterations of his Countenance.
Notwithstanding this refusal Respicia gave not over her pursuit, feining,
like a good Mother, to be passionate for the advancement of her Children, for
whom she could procure nothing more advantageus than the Alliance with Favor
(mean time it was her own interest made her act with so much solicitude:)
According to the nature of her Sex, which never cease asking until they
atchieve their end, she prayed, pursued, pressed in time, out of time, leaving
no means unattempted; and it was partly her persuasion that made the Prince
Cassin, her Son, render such devoirs to Iphigenes, which made him worthy of his
friendship, wherein he succeeded as is already mentioned. Thus did this crafty
Spider spread her Web to ensnare the beautiful Adolescent, and make her self
wife to him, of whom she might have been the Mother.

She had such a hand over Cassin, that this young Prince at her instance used
all the arguments his Invention could suggest, to induce Iphigenes to marry his
Sister, to whom, for quality, Modestina was not comparable. But Iphigenes had
the skill to divert his discourse with such modesty and dexterity, that without
giving him any occasion of distaste, he amused his expectation, and by little
and little made him relinquish that thought, which he esteemed unjust. It is
an opinion that Batteries made Crosse-wise are the most destructive; Respicia
raised here is in this manner, and as if she had been desirous to sink all her
house (which was one of the most opulent of Polonia) into the family of
Mieslas, she offered him to give her Dauther to his Son, and her Son to his
Daugher Clemencia, and so make but one of both their Families. which the
Palatine, dazzled at the splendor of so much honor, embraced with both hands,
not perceiving the hook that was hidden under this bait. Mean time Respicia
covered so dexterously her Love under the mask of Ambition, that whilst she
was called a careful and loving Mother, she aimed at another Mark. Her
importunities, together with the oppressing instances of Mieslas, did shrewdly
tempt the patience of Iphigenes, who against all these assaults had no other
defense than the rampire of the Fidelity which he owed, and which he had
sworn to his wife Modestina to whom, being pressed with these agonies, He
wrote such passionate letters, that the most affectionate of Lovers could not
express his imaginations in a style more Patheticall: Which kindled such a fire
in the bowels of this Maiden Spouse, that the too much sense of Love deprived
her of all sense. You may add to that Love, the Fear which is insepirable from
those who fervently do affect, and the Apprehension of losing, by Change, that
which is more precious than Life. For she knew by the mouth of Fame, which
has a thousand tongues and by letters from Iphigenes own hand, that he was
the common object of the Eyes and Hearts of all the Court Ladies, which bred a
torment in her Miad, inconceivable by any Soul, that has not experimented the
just and incomparable affections that possessed her heart. A thousand times
she was in the mind to go to Court to her Husband, and say to all her Rivalls,
What do you? he is entirely mine, as I am solely his; Your pretensions are too
unjust to find any access into his breast, who is nothing but Fidelity, who
feeds amongst the Lillies of Purity, and the Roses of Honor: Your attractions
are too slight to move so constant a Spirit; Your Passions, be they fein'd or
real, are but weak Vapors before the Sun of his Reason. Why then with too
licentious a desire do you endeavor to purloin a treasure, that belongs
peculiarly to me? withdraw your fond affections, banish those no less Vain
than unanswerable pretensions from your thoughts, for Iphigenes has engaged
his faith to me by the indissolvable ties of a most sacred Hymen.

Thus did this loving Spouse entertain her troubled mind, but Shame opposing
her Design (if there can be any shame in the legitimate desires of a chaste
wife) or rather the impossibiity of disengaging her self from under Aretuza's
wing, and the strict guard of the too severe Perpetua, made her seek in
Patience the common Remedy of all her discontents. How often did she please
her fancy with the imagination of transvesting her self, and by the help of a
Man' s disguise deceiving the eyes of those that watched her deportments, to
convey her self into the Court to her beloved Iphigenes? But that Honor,
whereof she was so Jealous, did choke this Resolution at its birth,
considering that such an Equipage would not only make her the discourse of
inconsiderate Censurers, but in stead of rendering her Husband a testimony of
her Love, might perhaps attract upon her Innocence his Dislike. At length, not
to do any thing unbeseeming her quality, she resolved to hearken to Modesty,
and let Discretion prevail over all those Surges of Passion: She comforted her
self with her letters from Iphigenes; the words in every line whereof were as
many protestations of Constancy, and new oaths of Fidelity. The several
virtues she had remarked in her dear Husband were as many Proofs, and those
Proofs as many Assurances of his invariable Purity, whereupon she reposed all
her thoughts; And these thoughts, which often made her sequester her self into
sad unfrequented places, were her most delicious recreations. The shade of
woods, the coolness of Gardens, and the agreeable murmuring of Fountains
fomented in her breast that humor which nourished it self with the dear
remembrance of her adored Husband's perfections.

And if such were the resentments of this Turtle, being separated from the
presence of her mate; Think not that Iphigenes felt any less discomfort amongst
all his greatnesses, which he would willingly have shared to his dear Friend
and Wife, or, to have rendered the contentment perfect, have enjoyed in their
presence. His affection to Modestina, and the Love he bare Liante, never
suffered him to take any rest, notwithstanding the multitude of Felicities,
wherewith the King's favor had (in a manner) overwhelmed him. Thus in this
world we can have nothing perfect: Those whom we do many times imagine
(seeing them born up by the wings of the Wind of a Prince's favor) to Swim in
an Ocean of Delights, do find amongst the agreeable flowers of Pleasure, some
secret prickle of Sorrow, which marreth the harmony of their Prosperity. Of so
many Objects whereunto the Court did invite Iphigenes to affix his affections,
he saw as few that he deemed worthy of the application of his thoughts, as
He who looked for a Man with a candle, at midday, amongst a great Assembly in
a public place. Whether the want of Freedom and Virtue (which is great
amongst Courtiers) made him meet with a scarcity of friends in that multitude
which environed him; or whether (which is very probable) the first impressions
of affection had so seasoned the new Vessel of his Heart, that here was no
possibility of making it take any other tincture, or taste, than that which he
had relished in the conversation of Modestina and Liante, the sweet Objects of
his education and most tender years: His Disposition being of an excellent
temperature, and his Heart no coveter of Wealth, Avarice and Vanity (which are
the two Bonds, the two Charms, and, as I may say, the two poisoned Tets of the
Courtfavour) had very little interest in his Soul; And Voluptuousness (which
according to the saying of an ancient Orator, has no place of abode in the
Kingdom of Virtue) could find no access in his Body, too Honest not to be
Continent: No wonder then if the fetters of the Court, though made of Gold and
precious Stones, were irksome unto him; and the sincere, chaste and true
affection which he bore those two absent Objects of his Love, made him in the
midst of so many pleasures languish with the desire of their presence.

The passionate resentments of his Soul for this detested Separation, He
feelingly expressed in several letters to Modestina and Liante, which they
interchangeably communicated to each other according to the permission of their
Overseers, and in order to Iphigenes particular injunction, who at his
departure from them did earnestly entreat Liante to take, as intended to him,
the affectionate letters he should write to his Sister, protesting that the
Friendship he did bear him, was no less tender nor less ardent, than his Love
to Modestina (as may easily be believed by one that knows the reason, whereof
Liante as yet was ignorant.) One day ( Modestina and her Brother having been
allarmed, by letters from the faithful Iphigenes, with the Princess Respicia's
design of breaking their Marriage, and giving him her Daughter to wife;
whereunto he had been Solicited by Mieslas, whom she had gained; But that
he had rejected their propositions, choosing rather to lose his life than his
Loyalty) He received letters from them full of complaints and stinging
resentments of Jealousy; Modestina feining to fear, or fearing in effect that
the rare Beauties and great Honors, whereof the Court is the Element, would in
time ravish from her the Mind as well as the Body of her Iphigenes; And Liante
writing that the acquaintance of great Ones would perchance make him not value
the friendship of meaner Persons, in which rank he placed himself. Whereunto a
Reply was speedily dispatched, which containing large expressions of a holy and
real affection, comforted a little those two tender hearts which languished
one for her Husband, the other for his sincere Friend: But why do I say
comforted? I should rather say, that it caused the same effect in the sorrow of
their Privation, as water in a Smith' s forge being cast upon burning coals,
whose heat it does increase; Or as those hot drops of rain extorted by the Sun
during the ardors of Summer, which rather Scald than Wet. Indeed if we
measured their discontents for his absence, with the satisfaction they would
have received by the presence and possession of Iphigenes, we might judge of
its extremity. However not to give Iphigenes any occasion to be afflicted at
their suspicions, they made him understand by Letters how great a confidence
they had in his promise and constancy, acknowedging that those honors which
are accustomed to change the dispositions of weak and vulgar Souls, are below
the thoughts of them that place their honor in their Faith, and who are not
Reeds of the Desert in unconstancy, but Pillars of the Temple of Stability.

By this reciprocal intelligence of Letters these three loving Hearts
maintained the harmony of their concord, that served for Oil to nourish the
Lamp of their mutual affection. Mean time Iphigenes, blessed with the dew of
Heaven and Earth, was the true Child of Increase, and the Nursling of Fortune,
Fortune in him seeming to have lost those two qualities of Blind, and being an
Enemy to Virtue, since she knew so worthily and so abundantly to acknowledge
his Merit. The greatest secret to gain Fortune is to be Just, to abstein from
Evil and do Good, for it is with Justice as with Wisdom, all sorts of felicity
do attend her. The same success does not accompany those, who by oblique and
undirect ways do seek to accomplish their pretensions, in imitation of Ships,
who having but a bare quarter wind, do laveer and turn several ways before
they can arrive at their intended Port. The Princess Respicia, being stung with
that Wasp that rob's Minds of repose, solicited Mieslas without intermission,
to press Iphigenes to the rupture of his non consummated Marriage, and become
Spouse to her Daughter, Simphoroza; Which proposition jumped with the Father's
disposition, being equally greedy after her Wealth and Honor, especially the
Prince Cassin likewise promising to marry Clemencia. As for this last Marriage,
Iphigenes's consent was easily obtained thereunto, nay more, he desired it
might be accomplished, to draw that thorn out of his foot, I mean, that point
of Jealousy, which sticking at his Heart did cause him to fear, lest Liante
should be so deeply engaged in Clemencia's Love, that He should not be able
to conquer his inclinations when the time for his Revelation and Metamorphosis
should be expired: But for the other he labored all he could to hinder it,
alleging his Faith given, the Honor of his Word, his Affection to Modestina,
and the Obligations he had to the fervency of her Love, whom he would have
them esteem as his Wife. All this Mieslas (after the manner of great Persons,
who use to make and unmake Marriages according to their Interests) called
Superstitious and frivolous Scruples, telling his Son, by way of reproach, that
he was too Religious for a Courtier, and too strict an observer of his word
for a Favortie. At least, said he, Do not oppose the advancement of your
Sister's Fortune by your too fond inclinations for Modestina; whereupon
Iphigenes suddenly replying, promised, That he would contribute the utmost of
his endeavors to further the Match between the Prince Cassin and his Sister
Clementia; and to that effect he became a frequent Visiter of Respicia, who
did express such extraordinary kindness in her receptions, that Iphigenes might
easily have perceived the full scope of her thoughts, and whereunto did tend
those Nets which she prepared for him. For producing her Daughter before him,
rather laden than decked with Jewels, besides her Youth, being yet Infantine
in a manner (an Age that has neither Beauty nor Ugliness) her design was to
induce him to make a Change, and catch him in her own Trap by attracting his
looks upon her self. But Iphigenes being what he was, ran no danger of being
entangled in such Snares, this Bait and Line were not proper for that Fish.

Love, how blind soever he is esteemed, has Linxe's Eyes, which penetrate to
the very thoughts. Stanislas Palatine of Vratislau, being a Widower in the
strength of his Age, and having no other issue than an only Daughter, had cast
his Eyes upon the Princess Respicia, as the Party of all the Court most
suitable to his quality. She through a vanity common to all Women, who take a
pride in seeing themselves Observed, Courted, and Adored, admitted of his
Visits, and by a tacit consentment approved of his Suite in not rejecting it.
For, young Widows, that suffer Men to accost them, that give ear to their
offers of Service, and their protestations of Fidelity, do seem (as Mistresses
of their Motions) to give these Suitors some hold upon their liberty, or at
least to foment a hope in them that their Vows shall not be displeasing. This
Nobleman holding Respicia for his Mistress, was not well satisfied to see her
visited by our Favorite, whose glory dazzled all the World, and effaced the
luster of the most Eminent persons. But his displeasure was redoubled, when he
perceived by Respicia's actions and countenance, that she participated of the
Court-vertigo for this fair Podolian. At last he grew beyond all temper,
having intelligence of the Marriage which was projected betwixt the Prince
Cassin and Clementia; (for he Marrying the Mother intended to match his
Daughter to her Son, and by their double Alliance to draw the Princesse's vast
estate into his own hands.) But when he heard of the advantages that were
offered to Iphigenes, if he would take to Wife the Princesse's Daughter
Simphoroza, this raised so furious a disorder in his Mind, that he believed
the Favor would ruin all his pretentions, if he did not speedily rid his
Hands of the Favorite. Already Respicia had no more any Eyes to see him, no
Mouth to speak to him, no reception for his Visits; he perceived nothing in
her Actions but a cold Reservedness, in her Countenance Disdain, at his
arrival Sadness, at his departure Joy; apparent signs of his being in
disgrace, if he prevent it not, all his hoes are vanished. Ambition kindled
his Love, Love suscitated Jealousy, Jealousy hatched Despair, and Despair
precipitated him into such a rage as made him espouse the wickedest of
resolutions, to Sacrifice to his Revenge the Innocent blood of him who thought
nothing less than to supplant him in the Princess Respicia's Favor.

The Third Book.
ARGUMENT.
The Combat betwixt Stanislas and Iphigenes. Stanislas killed by Iphigenes.
The manner of his Death. The Palatinate of Uratislau given by the King to
Iphignes. The Envy of the Courtiers, and their plots against Iphigenes. The
King made jealous of the Queen, She no lesS umbragious of him, and both for
Iphigenes. Iphigenes by the King's command is difmiss'd the Court. His generous
deportment in this Disgrace. Perpetua having discovered the intelligence
betwixt Liante and Clemencia, advertiseth Aretuza and Mieslas. Liante made
close Prisoner by express command from Mieslas. Iphigenes obtein's leave of the
King to pass through Podolia into his Palatinate, under pretense of seeing his
Mother, and taking his Wife Modestina with him. Mieslas having indeavored in
vain to dissuade him, command's Modestina to be imprisoned and strictly guarded
in one of his strongest Castles. The King's and Queen's deportments when
Iphigenes came to take leave of them. His speches to them at his departure. The
manner of his retiring from the Court. The Princess Respicia having followed
him into Podolia presses Mieslas to make him repudiate Modestina in favor of
her Daughter Simphoroza. His Evasions.

ONe Day Stanislas, attended by diverse Gentlemen besides his ordinary Train on
Horseback (after the Polonian manner) met Iphigenes accompanied like a
Favorite; And it being in a public place where the Noblemen used to take
their pleasures, He accosted him, desiring that He might speak two or three
words to him in private: Iphigenes (who for Courtesy had not his equal
through the whole Universe) presently left his company, and being retired some
little distance, Stanislas said to him in a fierce arrogant manner, That he
porceived he had a design to establish a fortune to his prejudice, which was a
thing repugnant to the Laws of Chivalry and Honor, and that he might find
ways enough to advance himself about the King, without going to trouble or
thwart his pretensions to the Princess Respicia, to whom He was Servant and
ambitioned to be Husband, intending likewise, by Marrying her, to make Cassin
his Son in Law; therefore he wished him to desist from pretending to that
Alliance, which (he heard) was projected betwixt him and Simphoroza, and that
betwixt Clemencia and the Prince Cassin: Otheriwse He being obliged to resent
so injurious an Affront, was resolved to revenge it with his Sword. Iphigenes
answered very mildly (but with a resolution full of generosity) That He should
be very sorry to make any advantage of another Man's detriment; That thitherto
He had so managed his Fortune, that no body could frame any complaint against
him for that respect; That He knew too well the honor which was due to His
quality, and what He owed to his own Modesty to begin with Him to disoblige,
by any prejudice, persons of such Eminence. That for his alliance with
Simphoroza, it was not only unlikely but impossible, and whereof he never had
nor should embrace any thought (although it might be done without tentering his
Conscience) his affections being already so engaged to Modestina, that, if
she were not his Wife, he never would have any other, And therefore he might
rest satisfied for that point: As for the Marriage of the Prince Cassin with
his Sister Clementia, it proceeded rather from Respicia's own seeking, than any
motion of his, and for that he did appeal to the Testimony of the Princess her
self, to whose Alliance he did neither hinder him to pretend, neither would
he bar Cassin of the free liberty to choose his Daughter, or Clemencia. Who
could have ansered with greater moderation, respect and sincerity? Yet the
Savage Sarmation drawing vanity from the sweetness of this reply, like Spiders
which make venim of Roses, rudely thus retorted, that is was not enough that
he pretended nothing to Simphoroza; but that Clemencia must not be Married to
Cassin: Adding (with a proud Bravado) That there was not that Man living, that
should dare to look upon her Mother, but should receive Death from his Hand. At
which words Iphigenes with an accent no less civil then resolute said; My Lord
Palatine, I have already told you that the Mother is left to Your self; That I
pretend nothing to the Daughter, and as for my Sister she has never yet seen
Cassin, neither has she any will but that of her Parents, who are discreet
enough; the management of such matters belong's particularly to them, and they
know best what they have to do; Marriages are free, and Violence ought to have
no place in such Sacred ties. And I told you (replied Stanislas) that that does
prejudice me, that I am the first pretendant to that Alliance, and no Man
shall come to tread in my steps, but I will make him repent it, let him be never
so much in Favor, and his quality never so eminent.

Hereupon Iphigenes presently made this answer, It seeme's Stanislas, by the
word Favor, that you address your speech to me, as if I were the Subject of
your discontent: I wear by my side where withal to give satisfaction to
persons of Honor, and you must know that I am no Man to suffer such
out-braving Language. What I have said already ought to satisfy you, if you
are reasonable; but if you are beyond that, I know the way to make you return
to Reason. The Proud Palatine who aimed at nothing but to pick a quarrel,
persuading himself by the weakly proportion of body, and the unsouldier-like
countenance of Iphigenes, that a stout Heart could not be harbored under so
fair a Face; besides seeing himself at that time not only better Horsed, but
advantaged with a great Sable or Cimeterr which hung by his side, replied;
There Is too much said, Men of my Birth and Quality are not accustomed to bear
such words, I must take thy Life, and so deliver Polonia from the Tyranny which
thou do exercise over their Sovereign. Whereunto Iphigenes immediately thus:
I owe nothing to thy Birth, nor to thy Quality, they are both equalized, nay
surpassed by mine, and since my Mouth could not satisfy thee with Reason, my
Hand shall punish thy unreasonableness with Justice. This said, they parted to
give their Horses a turn. Stanislas being mounted upon a stately Courser, came
with his Sable in his Hand as if he would have cleft Iphigenes to the twist,
who riding upon a little Hungarian Nag, very swift and well managed, the
nimbleness of the Horse, together with the dexterity of the Rider, rendered the
direction of that Thunder blot of no effect: And the Nag being very ready,
answered the least motion of Iphigenes Hand, so that making a quick turn, he
presently gained the crupper of Stanislas, and sheathed his Sword in his Reins,
of which wound (being mortal) he fell immediately from his Horse. The two
Troops that attended on them a loof off, were no sooner come up to them, but
Stanislas, being at the last gasp, seemed to remain alive only to acknowledge
his fault, which declaring in all their hearings, he demanded pardon of
Iphigenes, and of the Heavens, after which he expired, protesting that nothing
was more just than Heaven, nothing more unjust than his Jealousy and Choler.
This encounter, as that with Augustus, highly augmented the glory of Iphigenes,
even the same persons that accompanied Stanislas condemning the unjustness and
blindness of his Passion.

The King hearing this, and fearing lest this Temerity of Stanislas might
imbolden other envious persons to attempt some malicious design against
Iphigenes, commanded that the Process should be made against the memory of the
dead Offender, and that his carcass should publicly suffer the shame of an
ignominious punishment. But Iphigenes begging upon his knees before His
Majesty, mitigated the severity of his resolution, deriving the fault upon Love
which does frequently over master Reason, and blind the cleerest Judgments.
This increased the praises of Iphigenes, and made all his deceased Enemie's
friends profess themselves his servants. The King, though overcome by
persuasions to pardon his Honor, would however make his Estate suffer, the
confiscation whereof he gave to Iphigenes, but he refused it, having not the
heart to triumph in such mournful Spoils: yet afterward seeing the King would
bestow it amongst his Courtiers (who, like Ravens or Kites, do fly greedily at
such preys) to preserve it for the Orphaline, he accepted it, and took a
singular care of advancing the posterity of him, who so barbarously sought his
Life, rendering, like a Flint, for unkind Blows, the sparkles of Favor and
Courtesy. The Shoulders of the Princess Respicia were eased of no small
burden by this Palatine's Death; for (besides that it lay heavy upon her, his
pursuit being become not only importunate, but odious to her, since she had
cast her Eyes and affections upon the beautiful Podolian) she fancied that,
being watched now no more by that Dragon, she should have better opportunity
to disclose her intentions, and conduct them to the desired end. The same Death
raised Iphigenes to the degree of Palatine (which is the highest step of honor
amongst the Grandees of Polonia) for the King requited his innocence, with the
inheritance of his unjust Adversaire's Authority. Thus the Weights which seem
to depresse the Palms, do make them grow up higher; Thus the Knife that cut's
the Vines, makes them flourish, and is cause of their producing new Leaves,
whose Breadth and Beauty do efface the luster of the ancient stock.

As great Tempests are preceded by little Winds, which curl the smooth-faced
Waters, and make the Tree's Leaves tremble; As many little stones do tumble
from an Housetop before the whole building falls; And as extreme Sicknesses
are fore-run bymany slight indispositions: So in great Prince's Favorites the
declining of their Fortune has it is presages; and although oftentimes they
feel the Thunderbolt before they see the Lightning, yet, to those that have
but indifferent judgments, it is easy to prejudicate that some sinister
accident does threaten them. When Pamphlets, Songs, Advertisements, Satyrs,
Poems, and Diffamatory Libells are dispersed abroad, it is, as when those white
Birds are seen flying upon the Sea coast, which are infalilible forerunners of
foulweather. The beautiful Face of Iphigenes (which betrayed and almost
accused his Heart) was the Rock whereon equally those that loved, and those
that hated him were Shipwrackt. It Is strange, that Hatred and Love should
deduce their Origin from the same Principle. That which ravished his Lovers,
made the Jealous burst with Spite; and when some praised exceedingly those
perfections which charmed so many Eyes, the Envious would take occasion thence
to blame him as being Effeminate: But as Iniquity commonly stop's its own
Mouth, and give's it self the Lie, the two incounters of Augustus and Stanislas
showed evidently enough the nullity os that reproach, and compelled those that
called Iphigenes a cowardly Paris, to acknowledge that He was rather to be
honored as a brave Hippolytus, who could join Valor with Beauty. Some others
(who knew that he had been Married very young, and that he had not proceeded
to Consummation, and besides, (although the Ladies generally were inamored of
him) seeing that he repayed their flames with such indifferency) accused him
of Impotency; For Courtiers have that base quality, not only to make little
esteem of Continency themselves, but blame it in others. Besides, Envy is a
False Glass, which changes the Face of Objects, which makes the handsomest
things seem ugly, and charge Virtue with the same defects that render Vices
blameable. It is true, Iphigenes the better to conceal what really he was;
would sometimes play the Courtier amongst the Ladies, taking pleasure to foster
in their Breasts a Disease, whereunto he was incapable of applying a remedy;
and perceiving that diverse amongst them, laid Snares to entrap his Liberty,
he delighted in cutting them out Work, and paying them in the same Coin. What
Jealousies, Quips and petty Quarrels did he raise amongst that Sex, who are
naturally inclined to Self-conceit and Envy? Their hearts were all as Brimstone
to the fire of his Eyes, all as Heliotropes or Turn-sols to the Luster of his
Presence. For, besides the advantage of being the King's Favorite (which is the
North-Star of those, whose hearts are touched with the Loadstone of the Court)
he was possessor of so many amiable qualities, that as soon as he fixed his
Eyes upon any Lady, she presently imagined she had caught him, when he had
taken her; and this Opinion raising her Fancy to the skies, she thought to
triumph over all her Competitors, and be Queen of the Bean, although she had
no part of the Cake. For Iphigenes changed his discourse so often, and knew how
to amuse them all with such dexterity, that although he loved none, he seemed
to consume at every fire he approached. This gave Occasion to some malicious
Spirits, Jealous of his Glory, to blast with their Satyricall invectives the
blossom of his Reputation.

Whilst these snarling Curs, who cannot bite Iphigenes, do bark after him,
casting stones at him without discovering their Arms, and making Libells fly
about, which the Authors durst not own but to their surest friends: Others more
dangerous, like to the worm that eat's into the Root of the green Ivy, did set
their wedges to the Root of his Fortune, to make the Tree fall down, and sturck
their Pick axes into the Foundation, to undermine the Edifice. He that has
been an Homicide from the beginning, has in all times been busy in forging
Calumnies, and endeavored to establish Lies in the place of Truth: He has
always sowed Darnell amongst the good grain, and mingled in the pure Gold of
the most generous Actions, the Rust and Skum of false Reports and Detraction.
The wheel of Fortune (like the Potter's) is in perpetual Motion, always
framing new Vessels, sometimes of Ignominy, sometimes of Honor, and seems to
raise those, on whom She confer's Dignities, merely to dash them in pieces by
their fall, as Eagles deal with Tortoises. This fickle Step-dame (constant in
nothing but Inconstancy, and who has nothing certain but her Incertainty)
favoring the designs of the malicious Enemies of the innocent Iphigenes, whom
she had till then been elevating to the highest point of her Circle, suggested
to their Envy the Invention, if not to work his utter Ruin, at least to make
him be discarded from the Court, and so, by a Disgrace, to precipitate him
down the hill of his declining Greatness. Thus was their Plot, which they so
cunningly contrived, that those who were surprised in the same snare never did
perceive it. Some Divellish Spirits, by means of certain Women (good workers of
such wicked Stratagems) buzzed into the Queen's ears Imaginations, that ought
not to enter into the thoughts of so discreet and so virtuous a Princess,
persuading her that the King, in his friendship to Iphigenes, by an Oriental
Licentiousness did pass the terms of Honor and his Devoir. This was to touch
the Queen on the Apple of the Eye, and wound her in the most sensible place
about her: Insomuch that as those Meats which most delight our appetites in
health, are the most loathsome to us being Sick; so the very name of Iphigenes,
on whom she looked so favorably beofre this false report, hereupon became
odious unto her, and his presence insupportable. The matchless Civilitie,
Modesty, and chaste Demeanure, which formerly she had with leisure remarked in
this beautiful Youth, vanished all in one moment out of her Mind, and the
place of Truth was presently usurped by false Reports and vain surmises. How
easy it is in a Woman's heart to supplant the Innocent!

They had a fairer game to play with the King: For the familiarity and free
access which Iphigenes had to the Queen and the other Ladies, more than ever
was permitted to any other Favorite, presently cast dust in the Eyes of his
Reason; And as for the most part we are the last that know what is said of us,
they made his Majesty believe that every one's mouth was filled with the ill
deportments of Iphigenes, to whom moreover they attributed the insolence of
boasting of Favors, which (though he had received) he ought to have kept
secret; But this (they said) they could not be induced to believe of a
Princess so Virtuous, and who had always led so exemplary a life as the Queen;
Nevertheless that Greatness was not Goodness, neither could her Dignity hinder
her from being a Woman, that is, like Crystal, the more brittle, the more it
is resplendent. This is the usual procedure of all envious Back-biters, they
draw their Arms backwards, like Archers, to make their shafts enter deeper,
feigning not to believe themselves, what they endeavor to persuade others:
their soothing words are as the Oil, wherein Surgeons use to dip the end of
their Lancets to render the point more piercing. The Bed and the Throne admit
of no Competitors; in these, Suspicions are Oracles, and Shadows seem Lights of
Truth. Nevertheless the King (who had by long experience known his Companion,
and who did not only believe her, but knew her to be all white with purity and
innocence, besides, not finding that the most venomous nails of Envy could make
the least impression in the polished Ivory of Iphigenes actions, as far as he
ever could discern) like a prudent and equitable Prince, would not decide a
cause of such importance upon that bare report, lest he should thereby fall
into Accidents as scandalous as full of injustice; Much less did he think it
suitable to his Majesty, to inform himself more particularly in such ticklish
matters, it being an Act of little discretion to seek too curiously after that,
which one would be aggrieved to find. But judging (and rightly) that a
business of this Nature ought rather to be hushed up than published, not to
offend his own honor, nor give occasion to any other to be scandalized, He
thought it more convenient to unsow gently, than rend in pieces Violently:
Knowing that if that relation were but a fiction, Time (the Father of Verity)
would discover it is Vanity; that if those affections were then but beginning,
Absence would deracinate them (like young plants) before they took too deep
root; at the worst, that it was but casting Earth upon that Fire, that is,
interposing a good distance of ground betwixt them, Love's power remaining
effectless in the privation of the Object. The expedient which Prudence
suggested to him, was to send Iphigenes from his Court, under pretense of
taking possession of his new Palatinate, where being, He would command him to
stay to acquire credit amongst his Subjects, and take account of the
Castellians, without returning to the Court until further order, which in good
terms is called an Honorable Banishment.

The Storm fell all at once upon the faultless Iphigenes, by the Eclips of the
Gemini, the favorable looks of their two Majesty's; and, which was very
strange, the treachery was designed and effected so artificially, that he
could not devise who should be the Artificers, nor, which afflicted him the
more, knew the Cause of his disgrace: In that respect more miserable than those
Criminalls, who by hearing their Indictment read, are at least informed of the
reason of their punishment. But what was most of all to be admired, was, that
neither the King nor the Queen, who both agreed in this relegation, did
communicate to each other their Thoughts, which by different projects arrived
at the same End. Those that have purchased Favor by Merit, not by Subtilities,
have a certain generosity not common to all Favorites, by virtue whereof they
descend with as much Glory as they were rais^d, like a Lion as bold in his
retreat as in his Sallie, and as Caesar, who feeling himself Stabbed in open
Senate, took care to adjust the folds of his Robe, that he might fall
honorably, as is remarked by his own Historian. Iphigenes without inquiring
further into the Occasion of his being thus on a sudden discountenanced, not to
irritate their Majesty's, and without preventing their Commands by a
predemanded leave or any feined distaste, was willing without reply to subscribe
to the King's Will, which his obedience held to be a sufficient Reason. As he
was just upon the point of fitting his train for his journey into his
Palatinate, not complaining as commonly those do, who know themselves not
guilty, or those that leave their Fortunes with Regret; nor seeking to justify
himself, which had been to accuse his Master of Injustice, in regard that
before Kings (in that, like God) no justification can subsist, their Disgrace
only being capable to render the most Innocent Culpable. It was not without
some remorse on the King's part, some coffeehouse on the Queen's, and the
universal sorrow of the Court, that this fair Star was Eclipsed from that
Climate, which seemed to borrow more less luster from his presence, than it
received from the splendour of the Royalty. But Mischiefs, which seldom or
never come single, attended Iphigenes by the way, to make him alter his Course,
and try his patience in more than one manner. Being ready to depart, a
Messenger brought him news of a disaster befallen Him, who was the light of his
eyes, and for the possession of whom he would not only have left his Favor at
the Court, but willingly have resigned Scepters and Crowns, which are but
Vanities, as Onerous as Honourble. Liante, the Object of his thoughts, was made
prisoner in one of his Father's Castles, and so stirctly guarded, that he was
hardly permitted the liberty to take the Air; which imprisonment was imposed
upon him for the reason which you shall hear.

Whilst Iphigenes was swimming in the full stream of Favor at Court, being the
Torment and the Delight of all Eyes and Hearts, and the Minion of Fortune;
Liante plunged in the depth of an inconceivable Melancholy, as well for the
absence of his dear friend, as to see himself constrained (like Sisyphus) to
roll an unpleasing Stone without any relaxation, I mean to wed himself to a
vocation, which (though honorable in it self) was however odious to him, had no
other means to divert his discontented thoughts, nor any other possibility of
releasing himself out of that thraldom, than by flattering his fancy with the
the alliance of Clemencia; who burning in a mutual flame for him, did daily
(with all the civil respects and discretion, that could be desired of a
modest and well educated Virgin) render him most fervent testimonies of her
chaste affection. Although Love loves secrecy as the Violets do the shade;
yet it is easy to follow it by the track, and, if it be honorable, to smell
it a far off by the odor of its parfumes; if it be otherwise, the blackness,
the stinking smoke, and the shameful Events that always do succeed illicite
desires, will at length make it known. Perpetua sleeping in security as for
Modestina's part by reason of Iphigenes's absence, applied all her care to
observe the deportments of Clemencia, in whom (like a subtle Matron) having
perceived either by her Complexion, in her Eyes, or her Actions the Tokens of
an Heart distempered and taken with some Object, like a cunning Hound she
followed the sent so close, that in short time she found where the Hare had
made her Form, and discovered on which side Clemencia's Pulse did beat. The
more knowledges he gained of this secret intelligence 'twixt her and Liante,
the more she feined ignorance, like Fishers who let their Angles loose, the
better to draw the Fishes to them, or drive them genlty into the Leaps, there
to make prey of them; Or like Fowlers who seem to go away, when they would have
the Birds come into their Nets. Indeed how witty and inventive soever young
heads are, it is hard for them to deceive old People; for if their Bodies be
decayed with Age, their Spirits being refined by Experience, do lead the
others to the School of Prudence. In a word, this old Governess was too
quick-sighted for our young Lovers; She, like an Owl, could see by Night,
that is, in the most obscure corners of their retreats; She understood the
Language of their Looks; She could Divine the meaning of their Hearts; She
clearly saw the complacency of their conversations, whether in the House,
sitting alone in the Gardens, walking in the Fields, or in company; She
perceived that Modestina was likewise of their intelligence, and that She
contributed what she could to the unity of these two Hearts, for the
contentment of her Brother, whom Iphigenes had recommended to her above all
things (Alas! with a quite other intention.) But that which made this Lynx
penetrate into the depth of this Mystery, was the discovery which the restless
old Ferret made of a private place, where our young Lovers were accustmed to
put their Letters, and so interchange their correspondence without being
perceived by any. This crafty Female finding them, perused them, and then put
them into their place again, for they had no other seal than a little band of
Silk; in regard they were to pass through no third hand, the secrecy of the
place suffised to keep them close. Although Perpetua found by a long file of
circumstances, that there was nothing but what was chaste and honest in their
pretensions, since all their designs did aim at that great Sacrament, whose
sacred end does in some manner justify all the ways that do conduct to the
accomplishment of it: yet knowing the design of Mieslas, which was to make
Liante espouse an Ecclesiastic like, thereby to draw all the Estate to
Iphigenes by the right of his Wife Modestina, and besides, being advertised of
the Match, which was in agittion at Court, betwixt the Prince Cassin and
Clemencia, She thought it no less than her duty to acquaint Aretuza with the
secret affections of her Daughter and Liante, to the end they might be cropped in
the Bud, and that such remedies might be applied as should be thought most
convenient. Aretuza (who had other thoughts in her mind, knowing that
Iphigenes, according to the hopes she her self had given him, pretended to
Liante with a more than ordinary passion) was glad of this advice, and being
desirous to break this intelligence, to preserve Liante for Iphigenes, She
forthwith gave Mieslas notice, as also did Perpetua.

Mieslas (who was Rigor and Barbarism it self) commanded immediately to
separate those two Lovers, (as if Hearts could as easily be dis-joyned as
Bodies) that Liante should be kept so close Prisoner in one of his Castles
(with only his Tutor and such Servants as were requisite) that he might have
no possibility of continuing his correspondence with Clemencia, whom he had
promised to the Prince Cassin and the Princess Respicia, and would have the
Marriage concluded with all expedition. This command was no sooner received but
executed, and to the end the Process might be made by Evidences that could not
be denied, Perpetua, like an hungry Kite wheeling too and fro, having pryed out
the Cabinet where Clemencia kept the Papers she received from Liante, one day
she fell upon it, and finding the Nest full of young ones she seized on them
with her greedy claws. Liante was the Father, and Clemencia the Mother of them,
since (as Hens do their Chickens) she kept them under the shelter of her
Wings. The loss of those dear Pledges of Affection was resented by Clemencia
with such sorrow, as you may imagine a virtuous Virgin would conceive being
surprised in that manner. Liante's Tutour having received instructions from
Perpetua did the like to his Pupil, which cast him into such a perplexity, as
no words an express; And to heap up the measure of his sorrow, he saw himself
debarred of the presence of Her (whose sweet Disposition and Fidelity He had
more reason to love, than Her beauty, whereof Nature had been but sparing to
her) and not only that, but confined to a Prison, which was no less odious to
him, than the cause of his imprisonment was unjust. Iphigenes received
intelligence of all these passages from Aretuza, who knew that if this rigorous
treatment did dislike him in one respect, it would be pleasing to him on the
other, since it did put an obstacle to that Alliance, which might have been
prejudicall to his design. But Iphigenes (who was grown so Rich and so Great,
that the advantage of Rosuald's Inheritance was nothing considerable to him,
and who loved Liante with a Love of perfect Friendship, that is, with an
affection so free from Interests, that it aimed at no other end, than the good
of the person beloved) though glad on the one side to see that Mieslas so
played his Game, as to stop the current of Liante's and Clemencia's
corresondence, was much grieved on the other for the captivity of his dear
Brother-in-law, whose liberty he resolved to procure some way or other, though
to the hazard of his own contentment. This was the occasion, that before he
went into his own Palatinate of Vratislau, he demanded leave of His Majesty to
go first into Podolia, under pretense of taking his Wife along with him into
his Government; which request was so reasonable that there was no Probability
of its being subject to a Denial.

Mieslas knowing of his Son's Design to go into Podolia, and fearing, amongst
diverse other things, the Consummation of his Marriage with Modestina (which he
had least reason of all to apprehend) and lest by the importunities of his
Wife, He should be constrained to give Liante his liberty, and not only that,
but also to confirm the Match betwixt him and Clemencia, as he had formerly
seemed to desire; All which was extremely contrary to the Resolutions, which
he had made with the Princess Respicia, concerning the double alliance of
their Children. Fearing, I say, all these events severally, and much more,
being put together, He employed all his Power and Rhetoric to dissuade his
Son from going into Podolia, counselling him punctually to obey the King's
command, which was, to retire into his own Palatinate of Vratislau: But his
hopes were, that he being far distant from Modestina, Time, the great Worker
of Oblivion, might purge his Heart of that Passion, and dispose him to the
Nuptials of Simphoroza: But all his Entreaties, all his Persuasions could not
induce Iphigenes to change his Determination; And although diverse times,
according to his haughty humor, he would thuder out some imperious Language,
and express himself in terms that witnessed his Displeasure, yet he durst not
attribute too much to his Fatherly Authority, his Son being (according to the
World) as Great, and in some respects Greater and Richer than himself. But what
did he? whether according to the dictates of his own Disposition (as Cruel as
Covetous) or whether instigated by the suggestions of the crafty Princess
Respicia, to prevent the mischief which He apprehended, He sent with all
expedition a command to commit Modestina close Prisoner in another of his
Castles, (but far stronger than where the afflicted Liante was) to hinder his
Son, even to the extremity, from enjoying that Wife, which he was resolved to
take from him, and place Simphoroza in her room, under whose Infantine
Countenance Respicia did hide her own full-grown desires.

It is a general Maxim at Court as well as in War, that a Man fails but once,
as He can fall but once that tumbles from an high precipice (for at the first
falling one's sure to break his neck;) the Favor of Princes holding somewhat
of the Nature of the bone in an Horse's Leg, which being once broken can never
be well set again. For Monarks do imagine that they never do any body wrong,
and that the most innocent are culpable, if they conceive but the least
suspicion against them. That if by evident proofs they are brought to
acknowledge their unjust precipitation, instead of repenting (as if they were
impeccable) they persuade themselves, (although by a re-establishment they
salve the sore of the offended party) that the Cicatrice will yet remain, which
leaves a sense of the injury, like that of the Goddess Juno, irritated by the
judgment of Paris, who could never be reconciled. But all these Axioms were
contradicted in this dismission of Iphigenes; for never was any Disgrae more
Gracious, Disfavour more Favorable, Misfortune more Fortunate, nor Exilement
more Gentle. Oh! how highly would he have obliged the King (if Kings can be
obliged) whosoever could have devised some honorable expedient to retein
Iphigenes! But the Plot was contrived against him with such subtility, that
neither the King nor Queen (though they had desired it) knew which way to
motion it. For although they both perceived the innocence of Iphigenes as
clearly as the Sun is to be seen at Noonday (if there had been no other proof
than his leaving the Court with so little show of disgust;) yet their Honors
were equally engaged to suffer his departure, to remove the reciprocal
umbrages of suspicion, wherein the malice of his Enemies had so cunningly
involved them, that the King knew not that the Queen had any Jealousy of him,
neither did She imagine that He had any diffidence of Her; for neither of
them made the least show of any discontent; their Tongues being, as it were,
Enchanted with the charm of Calumny, could not communicate the conceptions of
their Hearts. But when they considered that the Crown was in a manner falling
from their heads, Iphigenes, the Soul or (as I may say) the Court of their
Court, being to take his leave, they could not but resent the compunctions of
sorrow for that separation: however they swallowed that draught not so much to
please their tastes, as for their health, since that Absence was to be the
Medicine to cure their diseased Minds, and serve as a Touchstone to the Truth,
to discern Impostures.

Never wasy any departure so glorious as that of Iphigenes, you would have said
that he went to put the Court into a Sepulcher, and that it was the Funeral
of the public Joy; if the Mourning appeared not in the apparel, it was in
the People's Hearts, which is far more essential. The King himself, (when he
came to kiss his Hands) discovered in his Countenance most evident signs of
Sorrow, not as repenting that he had raised his Fortune, but that he had so
discarded him: And taking him aside, he spent some time in Discourse, guilding
that Pill, and Sugring that Ruburb, to make him swallow it with the less
difficulty, Telling him That he must give way to the Torrent of Envy, for fear
it should ruin all that opposed its fury; That it was a part of Wisdom to
yield rather than to withstand it; That indeed he had many Detractours, but
all their reports did make no more impression in his thoughts, than a Stone in
a running water. He promised to recall him er'e long, protesting That it
grieved him to suffer him any time out of his presence, however he would have
him think that it was not to disparage him, but to authorize him the more,
giving him the means to purchase Credit and Esteem in his Government, which
might one day be useful for the service of his Crown; That he used him like
a Father, that send's his Son to Academies in strange Countries, to learn the
Art of living in the School of the World, and return with more knowledge Home.
Moreover, in token of his real Affection, he gave him as great Presents, as
ever he had done formerly, commanding his Treasurers to defray all the charges
of his Journey, and giving his Courtiers to understand, that those who would
accompany Iphigenes in Complement out of the City, would do him a Pleasure, and
those that would attend him all the way, would do a Service as acceptable as if
rendered to his own Person.

To all this Iphigenes, confounded with so many signal Favors, could make no
distinct answer; yet the confusion of his Speech, and the throbbing of his
Heart, with the colors of Virtue, which rendered his Face more beautiful than
that of Aurora, when she rises under a serene Sky, furnished him with a
Discourse that surpassed the Eloquence of any Tongue; whereunto if you add that
moving and fluent Language, which issues out of the Eyes, when bathed with
Tears, there is no charm in all the Art of Rhetoric can parallel this manner
of Expression: for it is the Heart that speaks in bleeding through the Eyes.
What Iphigenes? do you play the Woman? Ha! Are you not afraid to be
discovered? certainly Ulysses knew that Achilles, under a Woman's habit, was a
Man, by Tokens less evident. At length Sighs and Sobs having made way for
Words, he thus replied; Your Majesty looking on me as a Creature of your own
making, would be sorry to undo that work of your Hands, therefore you are
pleased to surcharge me with so many Favors, and heap such multitudes of
benefits upon me, that in despite of my Gratitude I must die Ungrateful to
your exceeding Munisicence; but that spot can be no blemish to me, seeing that
it is the will which acknowledges Obligations, and pays in some kind by
Desire, what it cannot in Effect. Sir, you know how often I have beseeched you
to moderate the Favors and Grace (wherewith your Liberality over-loaded me)
not to offend the malevolent Eye of Envy, who not measuring Presents by the
Greatness of the Giver, but by the Meanness of the Receiver, cannot endure that
Kings should exalt those who have the happiness to gain their Favor, to the
prejudice of their Capricious Humors, which make them find nothing to their
minds. As Envy is displeasing to all the World, so all the World displeases
it, all hands are against it, and it is hand is against the most innocent. I
should take glory in its Malice, for thence I might derive an occasion to
presume of having some virtue, since that is the common Object of its malign
practices; But I must confess that in separating me from the presence of Your
Majesty, it has found the means to wound me in the most tender part, and
discovered the secret to put my Patience to the harshest trial that I could
imagine. For there is no Grandeur, no Riches that I would not trample under my
feet as Dung. So that I might but remain near Your Majesty, and all is but Dirt
and Ashes to me in your absence. The Colors which they have chosen to banish
me from your Court, are very specious; This is to pursue me with Roses and
Flowers, to persecute me in casting Oranges and Vialls of sweet Waters at me;
It is to cut off my Head with a Blade of Gold, or strangle me with a Silken
Halter. I do not question, Sir, the reason of my Exile, it suffiseth, that it
is your Pleasure, to persuade me that it is Just; if you would command me to
go meet Death, you should see me run headlong to obey you, although I were
most certain that I had not deserved it. Were it in my choice, I should freely
say to your Greatness, Be pleased to take from me what your immense
Liberality has hitherto powered upon my head. But since your Ordinance is
otherwise, and that, burdened with Benefits, I must leave the Source for the
Rivulets, and be removed hence for the advancement of your affairs and service
(without considering the disadvantage to my Honor, or the joy, I will not say,
of my enemies, (for I have endeavored as much as in me lay not to purchase
any) but of those that are jealous of the Graces I have received from your
Goodness) I am willing to deprive my self, as long as your Majesty shall
please, of the glory of your presence, in testimony of my extreme Obedience and
Fidelity, protesting that I had rather Die at your feet, than Live far from you
in all the honors and delights Imaginable. This discourse interrupted
sometimes with Sobs, and accompanied with Tears, as pitiful as the Grief,
which produced them, was real, so moved the King's generous Spirit, that he
was almost in the mind to repeal Iphigenes Banishment. But humane Prudence, for
the reasons already declared, prevailed above his Affection; showing therein
his great virtue by subduing himself.

Iphigenes after this, (with the King's permission) went to take leave of the
Queen, who (like a woman,) knew better how to dissemble her regret, but not
retein her tears, whose flowing betrayed her Countenance, which she had framed
to Gravity and Disdain; So that at length she was enforced to leave off that
borrowed Visard, and show openly enough to Iphigenes, that she lost in him
(not without resentment) the richest Ornament of her Court, but that the King
making her hope that his absence should not be long, she comforted her self
with the expectation of his return, wishing him all happiness in his Journey,
and recommending him to continue in the fidelity, which he had always expressed
in his Majesty's service, who had obliged him thereunto by so many gracious
favors. Whereunto Iphigenes with a cheerful and confident look, replied,
MADAM, Since after so many glorious days spent under the heaven of your Court,
in the presence of your Favor, I must plunge, or rather bury my self alive in
the obscurity of a tedious absence: my Reason more powerful than my Senses,
forbid's me to complain, and denying utterance to my Sorrow, renders it so
much the more miserable, the less it dare's disclose it is Agony. Since afer so
many graces received, and so many others that I hoped to receive from your
Royal Beneficence, there is a necessity of my experimenting the Rain after the
fair weather, and Thorns after the Roses, I can do no less than extol the high
Providence of Heaven, which destinying me to Misfortune after so many humane
Felicities, has ordained that my Chastisement proceed's from the same hands
that have made me what I am, and from whom I have received greater benefits
than I was ever able to deserve, If my Affection to serve your Majesty's supply
not the place of Merit. Indeed the Excellency of the Cause, make's me rather
applaud than condemn the Rigor of the Effect. If the extremity of Sorrow may be
allowed to utter words rather free than desperate, permit me, MADAM, to say
with all due respect to your Majesty, that if I have any way failed in the
Honor or Fidelity that can be required from the most humble subjection and
servitude; If I have deviated in the least from my Devoir, after the reception
of so many Gratifications, there is no torment cruel enough to inflict upon
such a Monster of Ingratitude. Banishment is too Mild, and such a one as is
procured me, too Honorable for a Punishment which ought to be more
Exemplary. But why do I speak, having protested to suffer in Silence? I belie
my own proposition, and fly into complaints, which cannot appear just without
doing injury to your Prudence and Equity. Excuse, MADAM, the vehemency of my
sorrow, since, seeing my self torn from the King, my Master, whose presence and
favor I esteem more than my life, I feel my Heart rend in pieces, and my Soul
separate from my Body. What Trophies will my Enviers raise to their Malignity,
seeing their designs which aim at nothing but my ruin, take effect? What
Vanity will puff up their poisonous Minds, that they have had the power to
infect such clear Judgments as your Majesty's, making their Calumnies prevail
against my Innocence? But if suffiseth that it is your Will, I most humbly
submit to the absolute Power you have over my Life, my Death, my Honor and my
Fortune; for, being your Creature you may dispose of me, as the Potter of his
Clay, forming me, according to your own pleasure, into a Vessel of
Magnificence or Ignominy. I am ready to condemn my Innocence, whenever you
shall pronounce it guilty, and to subscribe my accusation without replying: And
if you please to dictate the Sentence of my Death, I will write and sign it
with my Blood, and willingly fulfill your decree with the loss of my Life: For,
preserving it for no other end, than to employ it in your Majesty's service, I
cannot lose it more honorably, nor more advantagiously than to content you. But
since your Majesty's have otherwise determined, and that I am reserved to live,
that my Life may be as a lingering Death to me, I will yield shamefully to
those who procure my Disgrace, choosing rather to fail by a faint hearted
Obedience, than defend my self with a rebellious Generosity. Perhaps one day
the Light may shine through the Darkness, and that Time, which makes evident
the most hidden things, drawing Truth out of the bottom of the Well, may render
me worthy to appear again before your Majesty with so much Advantage, that my
present Damage will seem as the seed of my future Prosperity.

Imagine you if the Queen, being a virtuous and merciful Princess, and a
Woman, of a tender Disposition and susceptible of Compassion, could hear this
long discourse without being somewhat moved. So, for his farther satisfaction
she gave him to understand, That she had been informed by the King, that this
sending him into his Government was not intended through any dislike of theirs,
but for reasons which regarded the State and the service of their Crown:
Assuring him that for her part she had no prejudicial oinion of him, not
suffering her self easily to be carried away by slight suppositions and false
reports, (which like importunate wasps are always buzzing at the ears of
Princes;) that he might remain assured, wherein she could procure him any
advantage, or do him any good office to her Husband and Sovereign, that she
would endeavor it with a sincere affection. To these words, which were worth
mountains of Gold, she added no presents, because those pass away, but these
remain, and being more material give more occasion of Suspicion, from which
she desired to keep her self as fre as she was from Crime. Thus Iphigenes in
an unheard of manner, was dismissed from Court, with extraordinary Caresses
from both their Majesty's, and (which was admirable) not dissembled. To demand
permission to pass through Podolia, to take his wife thence with him into his
Palatinate, and to obtein it, was all one. The Courtiers, those Protheusses,
who change according to the inclination of their Prince, made (in imitation of
the King) a thousand compliments to Iphigenes, and large expressions of sorrow,
when some of their hearts leaped with joy at his departure.

The false accusers of Socrates, Anitus and Melitus, seeing the universal
mourning of the Athenians for the death of that great Philosopher, being
haunted with Furies, and tortured with the remorse of their own Consciences,
became their own Executioners. The Calumniators of our Favorite, were upon the
point of giving themselves over to the like rage; but they did more wisely to
reserve themselves to a better end by repentance. Those who thought to have
pleased their Majesty's in not accompanying Iphigenes, found themselves
deceived in their opinions, receiving as little Countenance from the King, as
they showed little Courtesy to him: And those who did that civility to him,
were favorably looked upon at their return: But how were they esteemed and
applauded that rendering themselves his constant followers, became partakers of
his adverse, as well as of his favorable Fortune? They inverted the sense of
this common saying, The Fortunate are oppressed with Multitudes, and
Solitariness environeth the Miserable. Some Flies and now and then a Swallow is
seen in winter, and their rarity makes them the more remarkable. Those who
abandon not their friends when Fortune knits her brows, show they are not led
on by interest, but that affection to the persons beloved does attract them.
This apparent disgrace of Iphigenes did nothing diminish the ardent flames of
the passionate Princess Respicia, all that troubled her was his ominous Journey
into Podolia, which seemed to threaten the shipwreck of her pretensions. What
will not a heart resolve being touched with that fire, which breeds the greater
torment the more it is concealed? To hinder the Consummation of his Marriage
with Modestina (which Mieslas had already prevented) she determined to follow
Iphigenes and Mieslas into Podolia, under pretense of affiancing the Prince
Cassin with Clemencia, and to endeavor to persuade Iphigenes to marry her
Daughter Simphoroza, though there was nothing more far from her intention than
the latter. If Modesty had permitted, she would have put her self amongst that
troop of Courtiers that accompanied Iphigenes, amongst whom the Prince Cassin
was the first in quality and in rank, taking this occasion to assist his future
Brother-in-law, and see his Mistress. The brave Pomeran, inviolably wedded to
the fortune of Iphigenes, was likewise of the number: As also Argal and Pisides
(who being a Lord Castellain in the Palatinate of Vratislau, and of an ancient
family, resolved to employ all his own means, and use the utmost of his
friend's power to serve Iphigenes after his arrival in his Government;)
Besides a great train of other Noblemen and Gentlemen of Podolia, that returned
from Court with Mieslas. Iphigenes in this pompous retirement was like a
certain sort of Tapers, which composed of Aromaticall ingredients, exhale not
so much sweet odor burning, as when extinguished, or Incense which smoaketh not
until put on the coals, and spices that render no sent until they are beaten.
This I say, because the reputation of Iphigenes was greater in his absence than
in his presence, Privation making the enjoyment of him more valuable. And as a
Beard grows thicker after shaving, so his Renown increased under the Razor of
Detraction.

Mieslas being entered into his Palatinate, made his Son be received with the
greatest delights and honors that he could devise, but it was to make him
taste Gall after this Honey, and give him an after course not conformable to
this first* Service; for, being arrived at the place of his residence, he
neither found his wife Modestina, nor his Brother-in-law Liante with Aretuza,
whereat he expressed no slight discontent. And although by an especial
providence of Heaven, Mieslas had enclosed Modestina in a place inaccessible by
any force (which might serve for a specious pretext to Iphigenes to keep hid
the defect which hindered him from acting the husband really) yet he feined to
be very sensible of the injury they did him in debarring him of the possession
of Her, whom he could not enjoy in that quality he pretended, by reason of
the obstacles which Nature had imposed at his Creation. His Mother to whom he
communicated all his designs, could not enough admire with what grace and
industry he concealed his condition, and dazzled the Eyes of such quick-sighted
overseers. Whilst he fumed and raged to have his Wife released (toward whom,
if they had granted his request, he knew not how to behave himself as a
Husband) Mieslas opposed the rigor of his Fatherly Authority, alleging, That
his Marriage was made before the time, that the consentment of the parties at
such tender years could be but imperfect, and therefore he held it as
nothing; that the face of things being changed, he did revoke the consent
which he had given to that Contract, having since engaged his word to the
Princess Respicia. Then, being further importuned to set Modestina at liberty,
he threatened his Son with fearful maledictions, if ever he took her as his
Wife. Hereupon Iphigenes, handsomely feining Scruples of Conscience, seemed to
apprehend lest his Father' s curses should light upon his Posterity, and
absolutely ruin his Fortune, which already was shrewdly shaken; Insomuch that
Mieslas perceiving that this battery made breach in Iphigenes Soul mounted no
other Artillery, and employed no other Thunderbolts to reduce all his
endeavors unto ashes.

In the heat of these contestations arrived the Princess Respicia, bringing her
Daughter Simphoroza, whose age being yet too near Infancy, was incapable, for
certain years, of bearing Hymen's yoke. At her coming (as at the appearance of
Porposes a Tempest is observed to follow) Mieslas began again to storm and
torment Iphigenes to marry Simphoroza. He alleged for excuse his Faith given
to Modestina, that whom God has joined, men could not separate, that nothing
but death should break the Bands that united his heart to here is; besides, he
would have persuaded them that he had in a manner passed to a perfect
Consummation, and that she was not only his wife by words but in effect: But
this was contradicted by Perpetua and Modestina her self, whose innocent
deposition declared that she never knew what Man was. Respicia knowing, that
as in Natural things the Corruption of the one, is the Generation of another;
So in affairs, the Rupture of one, is the Accomplishment of another, urged
nothing so eagerly as the Dissolution of this first Marriage.

The Fourth Book.
ARGUMENT.
The Result of the Divine's Consultation concerning the dissolution of the
Marriage betwixt Iphigenes and Modestina. The Court-Maxime. Iphigenes object's
the same Reason for not marrying Simphoroza, as was alleged by the Casuists
against Modestina. Simphoroza being excepted against for her too tender years,
Mieslas (by Respicia's instigation) propounds the Mother in the Daughter's
place. Iphigenes's answer to his Father. Clemencia refuses to marry Cassin. The
fury of Mieslas for her Obstinacy. Cassin having left Podolia discontented
indeavour's all he can at Court to hinder his Mother's marriage with
Iphigenes. Liante being escaped out of his Prison by means of his dear
Brother-in-law Iphigenes is secretly conveyed into his Palatinate. Iphigenes
retiring to his own Government leaves Aretuza as full of satisfaction, as
Mieslas of Perplexity for the Crosseness of his Children. Respicia, accompanied
by Mieslas, returns with small contentment to the Court. Liante being arrived
in the Palatinate of Plocens disguises himself in a Sheepheardesse's habit
under the name of Almeria. Iphigenes loses his company in Hunting to meet with
his Almeria. Their Discourse. The Reason why Liante made use of that Disguise.
Merinda Daughter to Celian, in whose House Liante concealed himself, falls in
Love with the feined Sheepheardess. She discover's her affection to him. The
Character of Courtiers and Countrey-People.

THere are in the World certain Divines a la mode, who can adapt the Scripture
and the Fathers of the Church so dexterously to their own Fantasies, and to the
palates of those that consult them, and whose passions they desire to flatter;
that they fashion that Water of saving Wisdom to the form of the Vessel which
receive' s it, planting the Canons of the Church against such opinions as they
list, and Levelling them in such sort as they Demolish, Edify, root up and set
as they think fitting; Like Pilots who direct their Rudders in a strait and
Oblique line according to the Motion of the Waves that agitate their Ships.
Iphigenes to whom all women were indifferent, for the reasons already declared
(making no other Intrenchment than within the Fort of his Conscience) had that
scruple cleared by a Consultation of Churchmen appointed by Respicia and
Mieslas; The result whereof was, That in regard the Infantine age of the
parties Contracted, being added to some kind of force used by the Contracter,
Mieslas, rendered their consentment invalide, since the use of Bodies had not
intervened they esteemed that Obligation void, and that without offense they
might proceed to another Marriage; not considering, that as Contracts made by
persons in Minority, do become valid when they do ratify them in their
Majority, whereby an imperfect Consentment is made perfect and of full force,
when at an age more mature and capable of approving it, It is confirmed and
renewed by mutual promises: which had held undeniably in this case, if
Iphigenes had been of a condition to take a wife, for as much as by diverse
letters written to Modestina and received from her, they had made a thousand
and a thousand Oaths to each other of an inviolable Fidelity. But this Maxim
is so strongly established at Court -- -- (the Powers above
Laugh at the Oaths pronounced in heat of Love)
that when Iphigenes alleged Protestations beyond number, both verbal and
under his hand, which he had made to Modestina, never to have any other wife
but her, they scoffed at his words and letters as if they had been engraven on
the Wind, and written on the Water. But they were to seek what to reply, when
to their confusion their decision rebounded in their own faces; For, Iphigenes
readily presented to them that Simphoroza was of years, not only incapable to
consummate the marriage, but to give a full and perfect consent, without which
(according to their own argument) that knot could not be rendered indissoluble.
Hereupon the Princess Respicia made appear the subtility of her wit, feigning,
what she desired with impatience, to Subrogate her self in the place of her
Daugher. This she intimated to Mieslas with so much Artifice, and such
Prodigious advantages for Iphigenes (for the most part of the Estate came by
her) that the Palatine of Podolia, naturally desirous of wealth to maintein his
excessive expenses, was presently induced to hearken to her persuasions. On
that side the business was as soon concluded as propounded; but they foresaw
much difficulty to make the young Gentleman bite at this Golden Bait; for his
own Estate was so plentiful, and his Honors so great, that how vast soever
the Fortune of Respicia could be, and how illustrious her Alliance; if the
Appast (which youthly Palates do relish with most greediness) composed of
Beauty and Pleasure were wanting, it must needs be imagined that he would not
easily be drawn into that Marriage, as unequal for years on the one side as on
the other: For, as Simphoroza was too young, and her tender Beauty, being not
yet full blown, did promise no great matter in the Bud; So her Mother was too
old, though not so aged as to be rejected for ugly, nor so young as to be
ranked amongst the Beautiful: She was in that Point as Women begin to leave
the Attribute of Fair, to enter into the Predicament of Good. But being very
Artificial, she had the Industry (without discovering that she Painted)
advantageously to repair the damages which Age had done to her Presence, and
doting upon her own Perfections, She gave such credit to the false Reports of
her Looking. Glass, that she fancied her self to be the most lovely Creature
breathing.

IPHIGENES making a Buckler, against his Father's Importunities, of the
Childhood of Simphoroza, Mieslas said unto him, And if I find you another
Match Richer than she, and of mature Age, will you accept of her? Hereupon
Iphigenes (to whom all Women were alike, for anything he had to do with them)
to counterfeit the obedient Son, declaring out of Compliment, That he had no
other Will then his, so that he would please to give him time to know before
he Loved, there being nothing in the World so hard to do by Force, or in
respect of Duty, as to Love. Mieslas, ravished with this Act of Obedience,
after acknowledgement of the Immortal Obligations He would do him, if he
would leave Modestina to marry one of the noblest and most opulent Ladies of
Polonia (being lessoned before hand by the subtle Respicia) proposed by a
thousand crafty circumlocutions the Mother in stead of the Daughter; and
setting out her Beauty (like flattering Painters) with the Pensill of his
Tongue, and magnifying her Riches with the Eloquence of a mouth of Gold, he
endeavored to provoke Iphigenes appetite to relish that stale Fruit, and make
him take a commodity that was not for his utterance. A modest blush covering
his delicate Cheeks at the recital of this Proposition; What? said Mieslas,
you do like those foolishly nice Virgins that are dashed out of Countenance,
when one speake's to them of a Husband. Indeed your Enviers at Court were
mistaken in the term, when they called you Effeminate, since you make so
little account of Women, as to blush with shame when they are but mentioned.
Truly Sir, replied IPHIGENES (the Blood rising faster in his Face, because his
Father had taken notice of that Girlish Action) me think's (as that Ancient who
would not be persuaded to marry, answered those that urged him thereunto in his
youth, that it was yet too son, and in his old Age, that it was then too late)
I may freely say, that as it is not yet time for the Daughter to dream of
Marrying, so it is more than time that the Mother should leave such thoughts;
the one is too young, the other too far advanced in years (for the word Old is
injurious to that Sex,) and both of them (if I have any Judgment) are very
unfit for me: I have Riches and Honors more than I need, and being by favor
of Fate begotten by you, the alliance of a Wife can add nothing to the
nobleness of my Extraction, nor of my Posterity. In Marriage is required not
only an augmentation of Fortune, but the equality of Age and Humors.

This Discourse so displeased the arrogant Mieslas, who invoking Heaven and
Earth against his Son, loaded his Rebellion with Imprecations, and fulminated a
thousand execrable curses against his Disobedience; Iphigenes feigning to be
afraid of those Threats and terrible Thunderclaps of his Father's wrath,
beseeched him to pardon him, if he had declared his sense so plainly, knowing
that the first Ideas are generally but little Judicious, and how the first
Motions are not in our Powers. That Reason did oblige him to acknowledge the
Beauty, Nobleness, and Eminent advantages of the Princess Respicia; but that
the Sense surprising for the most part the Judgment, it arrives oft-times that
upon second thoughts we desire with ardour, what at the first we too
inconsideratly rejected: That He knew Matrimony to be so sage a Bargain, that
therein was not to be given so much access to Appetite as to Prudence; That
great Personages ought to hearken thereunto more out of Maxim of State, than
for the consideration of Flesh and Blood, and that he did desire only some
time to reflect seriously thereupon, and give his resolution. This satisfaction
being speedily applied to the wound in Mieslas his choleric breast, took away
all the pain and inflammation in a moment.

When Iphigenes had the full liberty of his thoughts, I give you leave to Judge
what his Imaginations were of Respicia's Designs, all whose deportments
repassing through his Memory, he easily gathered by her former Discourses to
him at the Court, that being inamored of the Beauty which appeared in his
Face, she had disguised her own Pretenses under the Marriages of her Son and
Daughter; and then making reflection further upon the weakness of a Sex
accompanied with such cunning Plots, he regretted that Nature having endued
his Mind with such a Masculine Courage, had ranked his Body in so miserable a
Condition: At last, resolving never to deceive any other Woman than Modestina,
and in regard if he married Respicia, his Secret would soon be divulged, he
thought it most conducing to his purpose, to thrust back Time by the Shoulders,
and amuse her with delays. This Design he imparted to Aretuza, who much
approved his ingenuity; and you may guess, if knowing (as they did) the truth
of Iphigenes Disguisement, they had not occasion enough to make their Pastime
of the Princesse's Pain: Who being full of Vanity, seeing her self Courted by
Iphigenes with some little show of Passion, conceited presently that, Basilisk
like, she had wounded him in the Eyes; which Opinion transported her into
follies more extravagant than can been imagined; But I will leave them at the
end of my Pen, not to verify this saying of a certain Author, That there is
nothing more ridiculous than a decrepite Soldier and an aged Lover. Mean time
Iphigenes protracted the determination of his resolution, having his brains
more troubled about procuring the liberty of his dear Liante. To demand that
grace of his Father upon the nick of Clemencia's Marriage to the Prince Cassin,
were to put him quite off the hooks; besides, to break that affection between
his Sister and that beloved Brother-in-Law, he thought it material, first to
let that Alliance betwixt the Prince and her be fully concluded, wherein
Mieslas did labor all he could.

We have already said that Clemencia enjoyed not so much outward Beauty, as
inward Virtue; and that if Liante had any Inclination for Her, it was, because
Obliged by her Affection and Cordiality to him. But Cassin, who had seen so
many objects at Court more worthy to stay his thoughts, did look upon her
merely to please his Mother, and to satisfy the ambitious Desire He had of
raising himself to high Commands by the support and favor of Iphigenes, who
being then retired from the Court, which is the Country of Occasions, and the
Field where Dignities are reaped, this made the Prince more cold in his
pursuit. Nevertheless having embarked himself in that Voyage, and being
advanced to offers of Service to Her, and Terms of Agreement with Mieslas,
there was no possibility of his receding, without offending the Palatine, who
had given Him his Word, and to whom He had reciprocally passed His. Besides
that, His Mother, who was entered into some hope of possessing Iphigenes (which
She kept close enough from His knowledge) egged Him daily on to finish that
Treaty. Iphigenes on the other side (being importuned by Mieslas to the
re-search, or more properly, the Acquisition of Respicia) found an expedient,
(for his own respect) to procrastinate that business; which was thus.

His Marriage with Modestina had been celebrated publicly and with Solemnity;
therefore for his own Justification, and the good of his Posterity, it was
requisite that it should be declared void by public Authority; for the
effecting whereof they must have recourse to Rome, He being of Opinion that
in mean time they should proceed to the accomplishment of his Sister's Marriage
to Cassin. That shall be no hinderance, replied Mieslas, if that be all: And
Respicia, more glad than if she had gained an Empire, could not hold her Heart
from Dancing for joy as soon as She heard this news flattering her self that to
Demand and Obtain that Dissolution was but one and the same thing. Whilst the
Messenger was posting to Rome, the Parents labored to effect the Marriage of
the Prince and Clemencia: But the mutual consent of the Parties, being that
which fasten' s the Knot, it was traversed by the resistance of Clemencia, who
refused to subscribe that Contract, declaring freely to her Father, that her
Heart was Liante's, and that she would be wedded to a Cloister with her Elder
Sisters, or have him for her Husband. Judge you what an impetuous storm of
indignation rose in the Palatine's tempestuous Spirit, seeing himself
contradicted by a simple Girl in two things which were extremely sensible to
him: The one, that Liante should leave his Ecclesiastical Vocation (which he
had forced him to embrace) to Marry his Daughter without making him acquainted;
The other, that she should deny a Prince, who in his Opinion did her too much
Honor, and to whom he had engaged his Promise. His Fury grew to such Excess,
that He spoke of nothing but dipping his Hands in her Blood, to punish her for
a Rebellion which he deemed worthy of no less than Death. And in effect if
she had not been withdrawn out of his Presence, probably he would have
committed some notorious scandal. He cursed and fumed against those that
hindered him from tearing her in pieces, and turning himself with Eyes casting
Flames of Rage toward Aretuza, Thus (said he) you bring up your Daughters:
Go, and if you make her not change her Note, and crave pardon for her obstinate
refusal, hope for nothing from me but most-rigorous usage, and to end your
Days by some memorable punishment. I Will teach you to obey me, or I Will make you
measure the Ground with your extended Corpse. Thus did the irritated Podolian
vent his Choler, whilst the Prince Cassin without uttering one Syllable did
lose himself in the confusion of his thoughts. What? said he within himself,
Am I come so far to receive an Affront, to gather the Relics of a dying
Favor, and suffer a repulse from a Creature that has neither Beauty nor
Riches capable to attract my Love, that surpasses me neither in Birth nor
Breeding; and must I return to serve for a Fable and Laughing Stock to the
whole Court? Oh Mother! In what a business have have you embarked me? Oh
Ambition! upon what Rocks of ignominy do thou precipitate me?

Respicia on the other side was no less perplexed, this presaged no good to her
Pretenses; for, as She believe That one of these Alliances being
accomplished, might be a means to further the other, So, she feared that the
dissolution of This, would be the destruction of That which she most desired.
At length Clemencia proved like a Leaf, that is moved with every breath of
Wind. For, Aretuza knowing the secret of Iphigenes, and seeing into what
Extremities Passion was likely to transport Mieslas, if She persevered in that
Disobedience, Prayed her, Preached to her, and tormented her so much, that in
the end she tore a kind of Consent from her, like to the second Myrrh, which
drops not from the Tree but by violent Scratching and Raking with Teeth of
Iron. Cassin who would not possess the Body, when another enjoyed the Heart,
not to join (as it were) the Living with the Dead, carried himself with extreme
coldness in this Treaty, which he signed only out of compliance to his
Mather's Will, who never ceased conjuring him; And Clemencia (with a thousand
Tears, witnesses of her unwillingness) did the like, by the absolute command of
her imperious Father. These were very discordant Accords, and which (if no
other Tune were added) will never make any good Music. But that which ruined
all was, when Cassin came to the knowledge of his Mother's Affections to
Iphigenes, and how she managed the Accomplishment of her own desires under the
Name of Simphoroza; For, judging how ruinous her second Marriage might prove to
him, according to that Maxim, which says, That She who re-marrieth,
declares War against the Children of her first Bed; He resolved to return to
the Court, and use all possible means by his Interest and Credit with His
Majesty to hinder that Marriage of Iphigenes and His Mother. So, leaving
Mother, Mistress, Mieslas and all Podolia, he posted away to the Court without
acquainting any of them with his Departure. In what confusion Respicia
remained, you may better Imagine than I Describe, when she saw her Practices
Discovered, which she had, till then, carried on with such circumspection.
Iphigenes hereupon had a fair pretense to personate the Malcontent, and defer
those Matrimonial Ceremonies until better opportunity, alleging that during
his Exile (so he termed his Retirement from Court) he esteemed it not fit to
Talk or Think of Marrying, no more than to wear Green for mourning; besides,
that his Enemies might take occasion from thence to possess the King, that he
made little account of his Disgrace, since, he passed the time in Feasting,
Magnificence and Jollity.

That which made Iphigenes fullest of Care and Pensiveness, was Liante's
Imprisonment, the enlargement of whom He Resolved to procure by some Invention
or other, or to perish in the attempt. What need is there of Strength, or
Stratagems? Gold does all. There Is no Place impregnable to him that shoot's
Golden Bullets; no Castle so strongly fortified, but is Accessible and
Penetrable by a Mule laden with that metal, as said a certain King of the
Mecedonians. With these Suns of Darkness, he dazzled the Eyes of Liante's
Keepers, and made him Escape away so handsomely, that it seemed to have been
rather by his own Industry, than through any Negligence of their's: And by the
intercourse of Boleslaus, his faithful Foster-Father, underhand he conveyed
to him all things necessary for a Journey into his Palatinate, where he gave
him a secret Rendez-vous, and followed him some few days after, leaving
Aretuza full of Consolation to see him so well educated, and yet in mervellous
perplexity of Mind, knowing that shortly all the Mystery, which had so long
been concealed, would be discovered: But she was somewhat eased by the
assurance which Iphigenes gave her, of being careful above all things to
preserve his Honor, which was no less Recommendable to him than his Life.

Mieslas, who formerly did so rail at Aretuza, now (like a Cuppingglass) had
drawn all the trouble upon himself: For, the Prince Cassin's going away
Discontented; Clemencia's Passion for Liante, which (as she witnessed by her
Sighs and Tears) was unremoveable; Liante's escape out of Prison; Iphigenes's
Displeasure for Modestina's severe confinement, who could no more be thrust
out, than Respicia or Simphoroza be received into his Heart; the Princesse's
affliction for all these confused Imbroilments: And lastly, the apparent
Disgrace of his Son, having lost the King's Favor and Presence; All these
happening upon the Neck of one another, put his Wisdom to seek a Determination.
After long Raving, and not finding any Thread to draw him out of this Labyrinth,
He resolved to return with the Princess Respicia to Court, to see how his
Son's business stood there, and to hinder Calumny from prevailing so much
against his Innocence, as to cause the time of his Relegation to be lengthened,
knowing well that those Regions which are most remote from the Sun are both
Cold and Barren, and that by the long continuance of Frost, the Ice turn's into
Crystal, which the Rays of the Prince of the Stars are not able to dissolve.
Kings are commonly like Nurses, who care for their Foster-Children no longer
than they are hanging at their Breasts; For they cherish their Favorites, but
while they are in their Sight: Absence with its insensible Sponge effaceth them
by little and little out of their Memories.

It is so ordinary a thing for Children to complain, when their Mothers fly to
a second Hymen, that it is no wonder if Respicia at her return found all the
Court possessed with the news of her new Flames, which by her usual
subtilities she endeavored to smother: And to stop the Current of that
Opinion, she said, That the putting of her self in her Daughter's place, was
only to amuse Iphigenes, and to gain the time which was necessary for the
annulling of his Marriage with Modestina, and that having him sure by an
Agreement, it would be easy for her, Simphoroza being grown to a competent
Age, to remit her in her place to accomplish the Contract with Iphigenes,
blaming her Son for taking with the Left Hand her Right intentions. This Excuse
she covered with so much Art (as she plastered her Face with Painting) that
as this made her seem Beautiful though she was not, so that gave her Speech
an apparent show of Truth, though in effect it was clean contrary. That in
private she rebuked with vehemence the Prince, her Son, threatening to deprive
him of the Succession of her Estate, for having endeavored to cast dirt in his
Mother's Face, I make no difficulty to believe: for, such vain and haughty
Spirits, as here is, suffer not without resentment the least Affronts or
Obloquies. And He, who desired no better than the public Declaration which
she made, of not pretending to break her Widdow-hood, made her all the
Satisfactions his filial obsequiousness could suggest, which she included all
in this one Condition, That he should not disclaim the Agreement made with
Clemencia; For, holding him fast tied with the Band of that Alliance, it would
be more easy for her (she conceived) to recover the Track of her former
Chase. As for Mieslas he was received into the same Rank he had before in the
King's Council, and his Majestice communicated his designs more particularly to
him, to the end he might understand thereby, that the dismissing of his Son
Iphigenes was not any Disgrace, but a Remedy rather to dissipate the clouds
which Detraction had suscitated betwixt Him and the Queen.

A Courtier Inured to the tricks and Policies practiced in King's Palaces, has
incomparable Industries and ways to pick open the Secrets of the Mind's
Cabinet. Mieslas did so much by his Inquests and close following, that he
discovered the Match, and by the Train found out the whole Mine. It being an
ordinary thing amongst Traitors to appeach one another, some of the malicious
Cabal of Calumniators, thinking to insinuate with Iphigenes, (whose credit in
Court they saw was nothing diminished by his absence) revealed to Mieslas, to
the prejudice of their Companions, the whole Imposture concerning his Son, and
what Stratagem they had used to work him out of the King's favor. Mieslas
having heard all the passages from point to point, evidently perceived, by the
several discoureses which he had observed to fall now and then by piecemeal
as well from the Queen's mouth as the King's, that his Informers did not amuse
him with fopperies, but touched the matter home.

Iphigenes in mean time arrived in his Palatinate of Vratislau, with a Train
and Equipage little Inferior to the King's, not unlike to those vast Rivers
which overflowing their banks carry away all they meet in their Course through
the Valleys, or those Massy pieces of Rock which falling from the ridge of a
Steep Mountain, tumble before and draw after them a multitude of other small
Stones. A great number of the Gentry of Podolia, conducted him to the Confines
of Vratislau, where he was received by the Lords-Castellains and Gentlemen of
his own Government, with such applause and joy, that it was plainly to been
seen his Favor was not Extinguished neither in the opinion of the Nobles nor
Comon-People. The King had by express letters commanded all the Towns in his
Palatinate to render him the same Honors as to his Royal person, promising to
acknowledge and gratify those that respected him, whom He esteemed.

Among all the Noblemen and persons of note about Iphigenes, Pomeran, Argal
and Pisides appeared like great Planets among the smaller Stars, which in a
Serene Night are seen twinkling in the Firmament. Nevertheless Courtesy and
Civility, (which polish the Spirits of Courtiers, and make a Visible
distinction betwixt them and the Country Gentry) were held in such
recommendation by those Gallants, that in stead of Slighting or Scoffing at
those who were so much their Inferiors, they treated them with such endearing
Affability, that they made a Conquest of Hearts for the Palatine, so
considerable, that within very short time he had a most absolute power in his
Province. In a select place whereof Liante having made his retreat, expecting
an opportunity to confer with Iphigenes, judged it his securest way to avoid
all sort of suspicion, to disguise himself in the habit of a Country Wench: of
which design he advertised the Palatine by Letters, who applauded much the
Invention.

LIANTE having left all those of his attendance in a neighboring Town, retired
himself to a Country Farmer' s House in a little Village within the Forest,
(having first dazzled the Clown's eyes with that Metal, whose Power dimmeth the
clearest sights, and makes tongues Silent, or speak what the giver lists)
where he took the charge of his Cattle in quality of a Shepherdess. And
Iphigenes (after he had received the first Honors of his Charge, and that by
several Magnificent Banquets, Balls, Tournaments, and other public
rejoycings, those of that Province had expressed the contentment which they
received in seeing themselves subjected to so sweet a Government as his) for
his ordinary divertisement made choice of the pleasure of Hunting, which is
generally affected by great persons, because in Peace it make's them see some
shadow of their profession of War, and entertain's their high Spirits with
more Generosity than any other recreation: The Towns seemed Prisons to him, the
Fields and Woods a Paradise. For, being deprived at one time of both those
Luminaries, which enlightened his thoughts, Love and the Court; I mean, the two
Objects of his Ambition and Affection, the King and Liante, He became like a
Flower without the Dew, and the Earth without Water; Insomuch that it might
easily be gathered by the alteration of his Complexion, that there was no
small disturbance in his Mind. And to confess the truth, if either of those
Passions alone be sufficient to trouble the firmest brain, what disquietness
will they cause being joined together? The pain which proceed's from the desire
of Glory, and of possessing the most eminent Dignities, is a great Torment to a
generous Soul; And if you add the Interest of Riches, which are as the Bones
and Sinews to sustein that Greatness, you will render the sorrow for the
privation of these two things very vehement: But amongst people of no mean
Judgments, the grief which the absence of a beloved Object does engender in the
mind, is esteemed the least supportable. You may imagine then in what a
Tempest was Iphigenes Spirit agitated, having before his eyes neither of those
favorable Stars, which only could procure his Calm, the Royalty of his Prince,
nor the Loyalty of Liante, Liante the King of his Affection, nor the King the
Object of his Ambition. But where Love presides, all other Passions must give
place: The loss of Iphigenes's hopes in Court was less sensible to him in the
obscurity of this Exile, enjoying Liante's presence, than the want of his
beloved sight was in the midst of all his Honors and Delights at the height of
his Favor.

BOLESLAUS, the faithful Depositary of all his Secrets, who was not Ignorant
of the just pretensions he had for Liante, (wherein as in all other
occurrences, aiming at nothing but his contentment, he disposed himself to
serve him) by his frequent coming and going to the Hamlet, where Liante (under
the name of ALMERIA) kept himself concealed, prepared an Interview for these
two dear friends. By whose directions Iphigenes went so many times a hunting
that way, that at length in despite of all his followers (who never lost sight
of him) he happily lost himself to find out the Canton, where his Shepherdess
fed her gentle Flock. Let all those, who are not Ignorant of the Effects of a
sincere Friendship, be Judges of the resentments of those two Souls at this
meeting, so Long expected, so Ardently desired, and effected no less
Succesfully than contrived with Dexterity. For, to relate you here all their
indearing speeches in entertaining each other, would be perhaps to say much to
little purpose, and fill these Pages, which are not destined (as not desired)
for any other end, than to represent the Event of their Adventures. Only in two
words I may say, that their Minds discharged themselves in each other's Bosom
of that weighty Burden of Thoughts, which they had been breeding ever since
their Separation. Iphigenes first giving Liante an account of the diverse
Traverses, that Fortune, sometimes Kind, sometimes Cruel, had made him
Undergo at Court, which is the Theater, whereon, to the View of the whole
World, she does expose her most Extravagant actions. There he displayed the
several successes of the King's Favor; the Queen's Courtesy; the Envy of
the Grandees; the Calumny of Malign Spirits; the Passions of the Ladies; the
Jealousy of Augustus and his being Banished; his Encounter with Scanislas,
whose Palatinate he enjoyed, having taken his life; the subtle deportments of
the Princess Respicia; his being dismis't from Court, by a Plot which had been
discovered to him by Mieslas since his arrival at Vratislau; In sum, he gave
him an abridgment of every passage mentioned in this Narration, with diverse
other particulars which were too tedious to rehearse.

LIANTE reciprocally acquainted him with the misery and discontents which he
had received by his absence, the bitterness whereof he was in hopes somewhat to
mitigate by the sweetness of the affections, which he had cast into his Soul
for the amiable Clemencia, whose Goodness, Constancy, and fervent Love he felt
himself obliged to cherish, besides the passionate Ambition he had of having a
double relation to him, by the alliance of his Sister Modestina (for whose sake
he highly applauded his withstanding so may assaults) and by that which he
desired to Contract with Clemencia; wherereunto, if he were not incited by
that Glory, He should however esteem himself engaged (unless he would incur
the Repute of the most Ungrateful amongst Men) for the firm Resistance which
she had made, notwithstanding all the Rigours of her severe Father, showing
the Excellency of her Courage, in that (to maintein the Faith which she had so
many times sworn to him) she did refuse a Prince, who in Birth, Quality, and
Estate, was far more considerable than he, to whom the violent usurpation of
Mieslas had left nothing but Alexander's Portion, Hope. From this Passion which
he expressed for Iphigenes's Sister, and which served as a Charm in his
Melancholic restraints, He fell to the Treason of Perpetua and his Governor,
(so he termed the discovery of his Letters, under whose Ashes they disclosed
his Fire;) thence to the Castle, where the Cruelty of Mieslas had kept him so
close Prisoner, and from which he owed his releasement to Iphigenes, whom he
styled his Deliverer, his Brother, his Master, the Star of his Hope, with as
many other sweet Appellations as an Entire Friendship could suggest, which made
his Friend clearly see the Profound Resentments of his Soul for this last
Obligation, which was the greater, in regard Liberty is sweeter than Life.

Whereunto Iphigenes replied, That that was but the door of the building of
that great Fortune, whereunto He intended to raise him, if letting lie dormant
for a while his Pretensions to Clemencia (wherein he saw so many oppositions)
he would give ear to his Counsels, by which he would render him the
greatest man in Polonia. Iphigenes said this, because, as ordinarily we are
aptest to put our hands upon the place that paine's us most, the strong
Inclination which Liante revealed for Clemencia, bred a jealous Apprehension in
his Breast, lest his Heart being prepossessed, could not admit of his Affection
in that just manner he desired, and you may easily Conjecture. As a great
Light does dimm a less, and (according to the Proverb) one Nail drives out
another: So it is seldom seen that two Violent Passions do reign together in
one Heart, the Bed is two narrow to receive them both. Where Love has the
Empire, Vanity must yield: For that Quality which causes Love, has little
Ambition. But where that aspiring desire of Honors has the Ascendant, Love
must deliver his Arms. And whatsoever the Fable tells us of the Association
of Mars and Venus, it is hard to find them together, as Vulcan did, without
rendering them ridiculous; These Planets in their Aspects have never any
favorable Conjunction; for, how can one join two things so directly contrary,
as the Exercises of War and Peace? The Judgment of Paris does sufficiently
demonstrate, that the Apple could not be divided, but that either Glory (which
is denoted by Pallas and Juno) must give place to Pleasure; or that Delights
must yield to the Desire of Honors: For, as there is no entrance into the
Temple of Honor, but by the door of Virtue, so there is no admittance into the
Temple of Virtue, but through the Porch of Labor. This I say, because Liante,
who was more Ambitious than Amorous (quite contrary to Iphigenes) catched with
both hands at his Brother's propositions, promising him not to think of
Clemencia any father than his Commandments or Permission should allow,
remitting his Fortune solely to his Conduct, and esteeming it a great happiness
to attend on him in quality of a Servant, and depend absolutely upon his Will.
O Iphigenes how sweetly did these last words flatter thy Imagination, since
this Shaft hit so directly the Blank of all thy thoughts?

As Iphigenes had even upon the Brink of his Lips the discovery of his Project
to advance Liante in the World, (which was the point that tickled most his
generous Heart, therein not unlike Virgins, whose Sensual Temptations are the
more pressing, because they fancy the Nuptial pleasures to be far greater than
they are:) Fortune, like the Sea which never keep's its face long Calm,
thwarted the impatient desire of our disguised Shepherdess, to make her know
that in this transitory dwelling we have nothing perfect, that the fairest
days are followed by Nights, the sweetest flowers environed with Thorns, and
no Honey to be gotten without some Stinging. For, as he had assembled all the
faculties of his Soul in his Ears, to hear what his Brother had designed for
his Promotion, the winding of the Hunter's Horns, making the Forest resound
with a thousand Echoes, gave them notice that the Game was not far off. So
that, not to be surprised together, they were enforced to part not without
promising to meet again with the first conveniencie. The Hunts-men, who were
more in pain for the straying of their Master, than their missing of the Stag,
whose Strain they could not find, all their Hounds being at a loss, seemed to
ask news with their Horns and Hollowes of the Palatine, who rushing through the
thickets to the place of the noise, found his Men, but no Game; With whom he
returned as much contented that he had seen Liante, as little satisfied for
having discovered that he retained yet so much Passion for his Sister
Clemencia.

The Reader perchance will think strange why these Brothers should use such
Circumspection in their Interviews, in regard Iphigenes, as well as other
Palatines, being very powerful, and in a manner Sovereign in his Palatinate,
might have made Liante of his Train, and protected him in his own Palace. But
what safeguard or Protection can shelter a man from Traitors, and secure him
from the hands of those who Persecute him by ways the more dangerous, because
least known? you are then to take notice, that as soon as Liante had made his
escape out of Prison by means of his dear Brother-in-law, Miestas (whose Rigor
and Cruelty passed the quality of a Sarmatian, and who from the beginning did
express an unheard of malice against this Innocent Youth) gave Commission to
several murtherous Villains, who bound themselves by Execrable Oaths to bring
him back to Prison, or if they could not take him alive, to bring him his head,
and in case they could not accomplish this by force, that they would make use
of Policy and Poison. In this Barbarism the Salvage Podolian had two ends;
One, to hinder Liante from pretending to his Daughter, and that being out of
the World his consideration should be no hinderance to her Alliance with
Cassin, which he exceedingly desired: The other, to gain his whole Inheritance
to himself, by muing up in a Monastery with his other Daughters the unfortunate
Modestina. Iphigenes having got an inkling of this accursed Conspiracy, gave
notice thereof to Liante, which obliged him to conceal and Disguise himself,
as is said. For if he had been known, how could he have secured himself from
the Ambushes of Murderers, who founding their Fortunes upon his Death, would
always have been Levelling at him, and held him in continual fear? Was not
this apprehension, together with the difficulty he had to accost Iphigenes
(who was his only Solace and Refuge) enough to afflict this young Spirit, but
the Fates must persecute him with further Disasters, and assail him with
unsavory Rustic importunities in his Disguisement?

The Countryman, in whose House he had retired himself, being a Widdower,
committed the managing of all his Husbandry and Household to the charge of a
Son, yet unmarried, and two Daughters ready to be Married; the Elder whereof
(named Merinda) he was constreined to acquaint with the secret of Liante,
telling her that he was a young Man, who having committed a Murder, was fled
for shelter in his Cottage, and that to avoid the hands of Justice, he was
advised to disguise himself: therefore he willed her to help him to a Country
Wenche's habit, and he would entertain him to keep his Cattle in nature of a
Shepherdess; Injoyning her to be silent under pain of his Displeasure, and
making her understand besides, the great profit they should gain thereby, he
being a Rich Man's Son, and who might be very beneficial to them. Merinda put
this Coal into her bosom, I should say, this secret; but it is all one for a
Maid to hold the one or the other: yet I spoke in some kind more properly than
I was aware. For, Judge you, if it was not to put a Coal (and of the hottest
too) in the bosom of a lusty Lass, the giving her a handsome young Man for a
constant Companion. In sum, the Face of the feined Almeria, insensibly made
impression in Merinda's Heart, which put her in the like Condition as those
that are stung with a certain venomous Creature, known in Italy by the Name of
TARANTOLA, whose pricking, because not to be perceived upon the skin, the
affected place is never discovered by any swelling, until the venim has
possess't the Heart and become remediless; Sight and Conversation are the two
Wings of Love, which beating the Wind make the flame kindle. Merinda was all on
fire, and reduce almost to Ashes, before her little wit perceived the Burning.

Fire is hard to take in great pieces of Wood; but if it be once lighted, it
is not easily quenched. This Element is so active, that in Penetrate's and
melt's the hardest Mettalls, it calcine's Stones, no substance is able to
resist its vivacity: But that which causes Love, is yet far more subtle. For
it is so generally spread through the whole Universe, that the Ancient
Philosophers esteemed it the Soul of the World. Therefore the Poets did Marry
Olympus with Rhea, intimating that it was the Ligature of Heaven and Earth. It
burn's the Fishes in the midst of the Waters, the Birds cannot avoid it in the
Air, and much less the Creatures that are more Terrestiall. Flints have secret
sparkles in their hard Bodies, and if Mankind were repaired by them, according
to the fabulous Invention of Deucalion and Pyrrha, yet should they be sensible
of the Motions and Heat of Love. What wonder then if Merinda, who was not
composed of Marble, did feel the Effects of this all-conquered Fire, being
taken with the Graces of the amiable Liante? I will not stand to describe the
Symptoms, whereby his quick-sightedness read her Disease; but if She was
forbidden to communicate to any other the Disguisement of Almeria, without
Disguisement She manifested her own Passion to him with as few Words as much
Sincerity, telling him that she loved him. I might give the Reader some
Recreation here, if I would extend my self in her Homely and Natural
Expressions; For, as her Face (being no less exposed to the inclemency of the
Air than the Shephard's Tabernacles, or the Skins of Solomon) was without
Painting; So her Discourse was without any Artificial Contexture.

What pleasure, do you imagine, was this to Almeria (thus we must call Liante
as long as he shall continue in his Sheperdesse's Weeds) to see her self
Courted in this manner by her whom she called Cousin? (for Celian, Merinda's
Father, commanded his Daughters to use that term to her, saying he was her
Uncle, as Liante had desired him.) This pleasant humor contributed not a
little to the diverting of the Melancholy, which otherwise would have
overwhelmed his Heart in that solitary Residence, especially being in a
Condition, which was as strange as difficult to him, to personate a Sex whereof
he never had studied the Deportments. However the Cassack, which he had been
forced to wear, made him the sooner acquainted with the long Coats, and the
Modesty which had been taught him afforded some Decency to his Transformation.
Almeria thinking only to make a pastime of Merinda's absurd Passion, pestred
her self in the greatest intricacy imaginable; for, as there is no great
difference betwixt Folly and Fury, nor far from Fury to Despair, that little
Spark was enough to cause a furious Flame. For, suffering the innocent Wench to
entangle her self in her Nets, and feining to hearken to her Reasons, embarked
her so deep in the pursuit, that she could not live without the conversation
of this new Cousin. And as the Fire does refine Iron until it becomes Steel,
so Love sharpning the Wits of those whom it possesses, gives them more
Penetrating Reasons, then are observed to proceed commonly from cold and raw
Judgments. Which if you will have confirmed by Example, hear what Merinda
said one day to Almeria, as they were sitting alone under the shade of a great
Elm-tree, whilst their Sheep were feeding.

Although I am a Woman, do not you think good Sir, that I can keep a secret no
more then a Sive hold Water, for I would rather endure my Soul to be torn out
of my Body, than suffer that to come out of my Mouth, which my Father has
committed to my Silence. You may assure your self, that never any disaster
shall befall you through fault of my fidelity, I would rather embrace death a
thousand times, than harbor so unworthy a thought. And to let you see, for all
I am but a Country-Girl, that my Soul is seated in a good place (and indeed it
is well-seated, since it is wholly fixed to your Perfections) I pray hear what
project is come into my Fancy, and which I will freely put in Execution, if you
are so contented. You can pretend nothing more in the World, since, having
killed a Man of greater quality than your self (as my Father has informed me)
it is to be supposed that all your Estate is confiscate, all your Hopes lost,
and that the Justice, which is so rigorous in this Country, has not pardoned
your Memory, but has done some public ignominy to your Effigies, not being
able to light upon your Body to punish it according to the Laws. Therefore as
you have covered your self with my Cleaths to secure your Person, give leave to
the Passion which I suffer for you, that I may make use of yours (which I have
carefully locked up) to venture my Life by going to take down that shameful
Picture, which without doubt serving as a spectale to all Passingers,
tarnisheth the luster of your Reputation and dishonoreth your Glory. I believe
you did not commit that Homicide treacherously, but that it was in your own
Defense, or in running half the Danger; the Deportments which I have remarked
since I frequent your Company, give me a strong confidence that you have too
much Gallantry in your mind, to do an Act unbeseeming a Man of Honor. If I
should be surprised in this Exploit, which will offend the Justice ( the
torments, that I shall endure being a Testimony of my Affection to you) I
shall expire contented: for, not being worthy enough to live to, and with you
I shall be glad to die for you, and make you see by my constancy that in a
rustic Body there is some spark of Generosity.

Almeria hearing such Language fall from that Silly Countrywenche's Tongue, was
no less astonished than Esop's Cock, that scraped a Pearl out of a Dunghill; or
to speak more Religiously, than the high- Priest, when he found the Sacred
Fire in the Mud. But why so amazed Almeria? Do not you know that Love is the
true source of Hippocrene, the true top of Parnassus, that the Ecstasies of this
Passion are as many Enthusiasmes which raise the Soul above it self; and that
as a Squib flies from the Earth into the Sky, as soon as the Fire is applied to
its Train, So the clownishest Bodies do become gentile, and the dullest Spirits
subtilized, when once they are touched with this fire? Can you imagine a more
Natural and a more generous manner of discovering an ardent Affection, or of
demonstrating at the same time that one loves not verbally, but in effect, and
the most signalized of Effects (which is to expose one's Life for the party
Beloved) than that which Merinda used to manifest to Almeria, the Fire, which
she had some time kept hidden under the Ashes of Discretion? Indeed there are
some Productions of Nature so admirable, which all the Art in the World can
never reach with imitation. At Court they talk of nothing but Despair, pour
our such deep Protestations, as make the Hearers tremble, and Death, whom one
of the Ancients called the Diety of Lovers, is invoked every Moment; There it
is ordinary to threaten to cast themselves away; to thrust their Souls out of
their Bodies at a Sword's Point; they exclaim against Rigours; call Honor
Cruelty, and the Impatience of Desires an insupportable Torment; their Tears
are feined, their Terms Specious; But all that is but vain babbling, a motion
of the Lips, not of the Heart, an idle Resignment, no real Resentment; They
say enough, but see who perform's: Fidelity is only in their words, Infidelity
in their Actions; Loyalty in their professions, Treason in the Execution;
Purity in their Tongues, and base Designs in their thoughts; In sum, Fraud
and Duplicity are the Pastimes of Courtiers, but their end is the ruin of
Hearts, and the Poison of Souls. Amongst Country People it is clean otherwise,
their Clothes, Diet, Lodgings, Industries, all are plain and simple, So are
their sayings and their meanings; what they have upon their Lips come's from
the profoundest of their thoughts, not belying by their proceedings the Union
which Nature has made of the Root of the Tongue with the Heart. So that
Almeria easily perceiving the reality of Merinda's Passion, and being moved
with Compassion to see that She fruitlesly aimed at an Object beyond her Port,
and that her Desires were supported more by the Wings of Love, than of
Ambition, thought herself obliged to esteem her Courage, and repay her
Affection with this Answer.

Dear Merinda, I fear I shall never be able to do any thing for you, that can
countervail the Obligations I have to you already, without adding this
incomparable Testimony of your Affection, offering to expose your Life for the
defense of the Shadow of my Honor. It would be too sensible a displeasure to
me, that you should employ your Body for a Fantome, for so I call the
Execution of an Image, or rather imaginary Revenge, which the Rigor of Justice
may exercise against me in my absence: as for my true Honor, it is out of all
danger, in regard it was rather to defend than offend, that I did kill my
Enemy: But his Kindred are so powerful, that they will weigh down the Scale of
Justice, and reduce me to the greatest extremity, that disasters can compel
an unfortunate Man to undergo. Therefore I pretend to nothing now in my
Country, nor to my Estate, but shall think my self happy enough if with
preservation of my Life, I can secure my Person from those ignominious
Torments, which my Adversaries would make me suffer, if I fell into their
Hands, who seek to glut their revengefull Spirits with my Blood. This is the
Reason which made me have recourse to the Fidelity of your Father and you, not
contenting my self to embrace a Condition so much below that, unto which by the
Favor of Heaven I have hitherto been educated, but by changing my Habit to
render my self under this Disguise less Subject to the strokes of Fortune. As
for the service you proposed to do me in tearing down my Effigies from an
infamous place, I believe that endeavor will be needless, for my own Kindred
interessed by that dishonor to their Family, have doubtless e're this used
means to take away that disgraceful Remembrance. But wherefore do I call it
disgraceful, since the Infamy is in the Fact, not in the Punishment? So that
not feeling any remorse in my Soul for that, I ought not to esteem this any
Disparagement; quite contrary when I recall to my memory with what valor I
prevented the Assassinate which was intended to my Person, and how I behaved my
self in the Combat, the Gibet whereon they have hung me in Effigies, Seems
to me as an Obelisk or Pyramide erected to the Glory of my Virtue.
Nevertheless I cannot but acknowledge a singular Obligation to you, for that
worthy Office which your Friendship persuaded you to render me, and I will
endeavor by all possible devoirs to ascertain you, that Ingratitude has no
harbor within my Breast.

Merinda, who was not so well acquainted with the Art of placing her words, but
who had very real Resentments of Affection for Almeria, replied after her
manner, That what she had proposed, was to let him see by the little esteem
she made of her Life, that thence forwards she never would employ it, but to
Honor and Love him, to the end, that, if her mean Birth did render her
unworthy of possessing his Favors, her Humility and perfect Submission might
supply the place of Desert. But why do I stand to disguise the Language of a
simple Shepherdess, in whose Mouth polite words would suit as ill as Painting
upon her Cheeks? I might have only said, That She freely disclosed the Design
she had to Marry him, if he pleased, and follow him to the World's end,
imagining, as the Helmet of a Valiant Warrier is sometimes changed into a
Bee-Hive, and Chambers that have been hung with the costliest Tapistries,
become Workhouses for Spiders, the beautiful Adolescent, disgusted with the
trouble in Cities and glutted with the Grandeurs of the World, (like that
Ancient Emperor, who resigned his Scepter for a Gardner's Spade) would
perchance be glad to reduce himself to a Pastoral Life, and endure some
hardship after his sweet Delights. But Almeria was far from any such thought,
her Ambition which aimed at nothing but Governing Provinces, and commanding
Armies, could not descend to follow silly Sheep. Her dear Iphigenes (who had
put a Flea in her Ear, and by his large Promises had left a thousand strange
imaginations in her Brain) gave her other Ideas than this poor Shepherdess did
conceive She harbored.

The Fifth Book.
ARGUMENT.
The Rustick's Labyrinth, and their general mistake of Almeria. Manile
Celian's second son, thinking Liante in a Shepherdesse's habit to be really a
Woman, falls in Love with Him. Lupicin Eldest Son to Celian, and Husband to
Belida, seeme's to be taken likewise with the Beauty of Almeria. Fleurial
Brother to Belida, and Antalcas Suitor to Merinda become Rivalls to Manile.
Remonda younger sister to Merinda is enraged with Jealosie against Almeria,
because her Lover, Polemas, left her to make his Addresses to the graceful
stranger. Belida no less incensed because her Husband made show of Affection to
Almeria. Iphigenes returns to his Shepherdess, who inform's him of all the
Passages of her Country Lovers. Their Plot to increase the Country-People's
Errors. Merinda is brought into some suspicion of Almeria's condition by
Iphigenes ambiguous speeches. Almeria, at Merinda's importunity to discover her
Sex, make's her believe, that she was really a Woman. Merinda's distemper at
this Relation. Her spite in accusing Almeria to her Father and Brothers to be
a lewd Woman; to Belida and Remonda she affirmed she was a Wicked Man that
had attempted to ravish her. The Men's several Resentments of this
Information. Belida and Remonda take Merinda's turn, having changed their
Hatred to Almeria (as a Woman) into Love, thinking her a Man. Iphigenes his
speech to Pomeran. His Reply.

BUt as there is a certain imperious Inclination predominant generally in our
Souls, which makes us immeasurably affect to render our selves amiable, and
be admired as well as beloved, without regarding by whom; this sauce being so
delightful, that it make's all Meats go down: Insomuch that we feel a
complacency and contentment to see our selves followed and fawned on by brute
Beasts, as Sheep, Dogs, Cats, Birds, Fishes (witness the Murena of Crassus) and
although they have neither beauty nor handsomness, their applying of themselves
to us does gain insensibly our Affections, and makes us cherish them: Almeria
to divert the melancholy of that uncouth Life, and to recreate her fancy with
the pleasure of Merinda's pain, took an humor to engage her further in that
Passion, by opening her the Gate of Hope with such quaint and cunningly framed
Terms, as (like Arrows dipped in Oil) they presently pierced through her
Simple Heart. Merinda, like the generality of Country People, took Almeria's
Words of Compliment and Civility for real Obligations, and those Sparks grew
to such a Blaze in her Breast, that it seemed as if nothing but the Ashes of the
Grave could quench it, whilst the feined Shepherdess hugged her self with
delight to see her so intrapped in her Snares; a pleasure, I must confess, very
malicious, but marvellously delicious.

But She was not the only prey that fell into the Nets of the graceful
Almeria, rather she served as a Decoy to draw other silly Birds unto the
Tunnell. For, as the Sun at his rising upon our Horizon, does fill all places
(where he shewe's his Head) with the glory of his light and heat; So Almeria
had no sooner illustrated that solitude with her Presence, but all Eyes
(capable of considering her Worth) were fixed on her Face, as if it had been a
Lodestone, or a piece of Amber for those Hearts, which may be said to be of
Iron for their rude unpolishedness, and of Straw for their simplicity. Merinda
had a Brother, named Manile, who lived in the same House, and had the
overseeing of his Father's Husbandry; This Brother having diverse times
seriously contemplated the not ordinary complexion of Almeria, was ravished as
with the aspect of an Angel: and from this overcurious Sight proceeded the
loss of his Liberty. He was certain that this lovely Stranger was no Niece of
his Father's, and besides he perceived by her garb that she was born to some
better employment than following of Sheep; in a word, this imaginary Servant
became the real Mistress of his Inclinations. One day, He inquired very
earnestly, who that Maid was, of his Father Celian, who being unwilling to
discover the Mystery of Almeria's Transfiguration, paid his curiosity with a
Tale which he invented on the sudden, making him believe that she was a
Gentlewoman of a City not far thence, who being fallen into some fault of
Frailty, was fled thither to avoid her Friend's Fury, and that (the better to
keep her self concealed) she had transvested her self like a Shepherdess,
notwithstanding she was descended of an Honorable extraction. This cast Oil
in abundance into the Fire that was kindled in Manile's breast; for, this
Imagination presently mounted to his brain; If Almeria were a light Huswife,
he should easily Induce her to satisfy his desires; if otherwise, however
she might be persuaded to be his Wife, not caring though he wedded a
Disgrace, so he might cure his Love. Thereupon he forged these Reasons,
apparently charitable; that taking her to Wife he should withdraw her from
Lewdness, Save her from the Shipwreck of her evident ruin, Protect her from
the Fury of her Irritated Parents, Repair her Honor by that Sacrament,
fancying to himself that Honor consisting in nothing but Opinion, she would
rather condescend to take Sanctuary in his Arms, and live with the Repute of an
honest Woman in a Country Village, where her mischance was not known, than in
the City where she would be scorned and upbraided by every body, and where
(what penance soever a poor Maid does after such a escape) the World, that
Inexorable Judge, will never restore her to the sweet savor of her reputation.

Full of this confidence he accosted this feined Kinswoman, and after a little
time he bluntly made her understand, that not contented with that Alliance
(which was but imaginary) he pretended to a straiter band, namely, that which
of two Bodies makes but one Flesh by the sacred Laws of Hymen. Almeria,
laughing within her self to see that with such falsifying blows she made such
real wounds, contributed all she could to strengthen Manile's error, and
having learned of Celian with what opinion he had possessed his Son concerning
her, she was prepared sufficiently to jeer at that Dolt's simplicity; which
having commmunicated to Merinda, you need not ask how they (being in the Fields
together) did solace themselves with the conceit of his being so handsomely
deceived.

If Love be not the Mother, it is the Daughter of Idleness; and an ancient
Author calls it, the Exercise and Occupation of lazy persons. Manile, being
Love-stricken, found many excuses to leave his Plough, to seek out his mistress
Almeria, who with Merinda followed the Sheep to Pasture, and there he
discovered the depth of his Pretensions. Almeria accommodating her Speech to
the Lie which Celian had made of her, cunningly feined to be very Penitent for
her past Folly, and to resolve to become wiser for the Future; which kindled
more flames in that Swain's rude breast, than the Treacherous Sinon did cast
into Troy to consume that stately City. It would be too tedious a thing to
relate particularly the subtle Inventions of the witty Almeria to augment her
Lover's distemper: One while she attracted him with her Refusall's, another
while she charmed him with her fair Language; now she would heighten his
desires to the highest pin, then kill all his hopes, representing sometimes to
him by way of demand, if he would be contented to marry a cracked maid, or if
he did not fear that might be a dishonor to him; sometimes again faining to
be fearful her self, that after their Marriage he would be apt to cast that
in her dish upon the first dislike: By these several motions (which might be
compared to the Ebbing and Flowing of the Tide) she put his Mind so out of
frame, that he knew not whereunto he should apply his resolution. But Love
always gained the Ascendant over his other Considerations; Insomuch that
despairing to gain any thing of Almeria but by Marriage, he resolved to
Conquer her that way; to which the feined Shepherdess opposing new
difficulties, did like Smiths in their Forges, who with light aspersions of
Water increase the Ardour of their Fornaces. He, seeing his own Courtship
prevailed nothing, took his Sister Merinda apart (who he perceived had some
Credit with Almeria) conjuring her to be favorable to him, and persuade her
Companion to accept of him for her Husband. Merinda being ready to burst with
laughing, had all the pain in the World to keep her Tongue from blabbing, and
dissemble what she knew; but the fidelity which she had sworn to Almeria,
forbad her to undeceive Manile by declaring the truth of the Story, only she
advised him to withdraw his thoughts from that Object, representing to him how
vain and indiscreet a thing it was for him to seek his Pleasure to the
prejudice of his Honor, that marrying one who formerly had lived loosely, it
would be a perpetual Reproach and Confusion to him, if ever it came to be
divulged; Besides, that He could not but be in a continual Jealousy, and
Apprehension lest such a wife should return to her former lightness, and that
the humors of Maids bred up in Cities were very hard to be discerned, in
regard they concealed as many crafty devices in their heads, as a Leopard
discovers spots in his skin. Yet all these Remonstrances made no Impression
in Manile's mind, being determined to have Almeria, or perish: All this was
but the beginning of the Labyrinth in which those Country-Spirits did find
themselves involved.

It happened one day, as Merinda was looking for something in her Trunk, that
Remonda, her younger Sister, came unexpectedly into the Chamber, where seeing a
Man's apparel, which seemed to her very costly, Curiosity (an accident
inseparable to the Nature of that Sex) egged her to inquire to whom those
Clothes belonged. Merinda surprised a little at her demand, remained some time
without replying; at length being urged to an answer, her affection (which had
sharpened her wit) suggested her to pay the other's Importunity with this ready
Evasion; These are the Clothes, said she, which Almeria wore when she came
for refuge hither. How Almeria? said Remonda, These are Men's Clothes; That Is
granted, replied Merinda, for she disguised her self in this habit to avoid
the fury of her Parents, who would have Persecuted her to Death. Why so?
answered the inquisitive Remonda, what had she done? me think's there is
nothing more Sweet, nor fair conditioned than She. Then Merinda related to
her the same Fiction wherewith Celian had fed the curiosity of Manile, with
charge not to speak of it for her life; which afterward occasioned a strange
confusion. For, People of that Nature have never a greater itch to be Tatling,
than when they are commanded to be Silent, and the greater the danger is, the
more are they tempted to reveal it. This was not all. Celian had another Son
married to the Daughter of a rich Husbandman not far off, who since his
Marriage lived in his Father-in-law's House. Lupicin (so was this Elder Son
called) coming sometimes to visit his Father, had no sooner Invisaged Almeria,
but asking who she was, Remonda told him all she knew, and added of her own
what her Imagination did dictate. Whereupon he, being not very fond of his
Wife, (whose disposition was none of the meekest) entertained presently a
conceit that he should render her more careful to please him, if in her
presence he should make show of some inclination to Almeria; but the Event was
otherwise, for she grew horn-mad with Jealousy.

Fl^urial (brother to Belida, Lupicin's wife) had no sooner observed this new
Star on that Horizon, but he was touched with her Influences, and became
Manile's Rival. Merinda and Remonda, before Almeria's coming, had both of them
Servants, that is, Young Men of their condition that made Love to them; But as
in the presence of a Diamond the Loadstone loses the Natural Virtue it has
of attracting Iron: So since Almeria's Arrival, they lost all their
attractions, and were as little minded as Stars at Midday, there were no eyes
but to gaze upon the handsome stranger, she was the Rock whereon they all
suffered Shipwreck, or rather the Altar where they Sacrificed their Vows.
Merinda, who saw all this Maze, and laughed at the several passages with
Almeria, was little troubled for the Inconstancy of Antalcas (who was her
pretendant) having higher thoughts than he, according to the hopes wherewith
Almeria fed her Fancy. But Jealousy transported Remonda into strange fits of
Fury, seeing her self robbed of the Eyes, Heart and Conversation of her
Polemas, who (before he had seen Almeria's face) expressed so much affection,
and sealed his Protestations to her with so many Oaths. Whereupon this
spightfull Female fell into such terms of Precipitation against Almeria, that
she did render her the most Infamous Creature under the Heavens, adding to the
Story Celian had framed, so many other horrid Circumstances, that it seemed
Heaven had not Thunderbolts enough, nor the Earth Punishments sufficient to
expiate the Imaginary crimes of Almeria, which she published every where for
truths. If her Father chid or threatened her, that did but irritate her
spleenfulll appetite of scandalizing the Innocent stranger. Yet for all this
her Sweetheart looked no more after her, his Passion for Almeria either
stopping his ears against the injurious Reproaches which she vomited against
him, and this new Object of his thoughts, or else making him believe that it
was merely Calumny proceeding from the Envy which possessed her, for being
frustrated of his Services. Merinda who gave her the Lie at every turn, and who
said as much in defense of her Companion, effaced by her commendations the
malicious detraction of her Sister: and in respect we are apt to believe what
we desire, that troop of Rivalls suffered themselves to be persuaded by her
that spoke advantageously of the Common Object of their affections, rather than
by her, whose invectives discovered so visible a Passion, that had she spoken
truths, they would have sounded in their Ears but as fictions.

But as when blustering Boreas and the South wind are in contention, the Air
and Sea are filled with Storms and Tempests, in such sort, that it seems as if
those two Elements would exchange their Centers: So when Belida's Jealousy
together with Remonda's railing, came to join, or rather to oppose and give the
shock to Merinda's justifications of Almeria, it made as foul an House as can
be imagined to be amongst vulgar Women that quarrel, where all Speak and none
Hear, Reason being banished from their Prattling. Who ever saw a Company of
Birds gathered together about an Owl, some pecking it, some admiring (as it
were) it is form, and all crying after that Night. thief, has seen a shadow of
this Medlie of Passions for one poor Subject, some of Love, some of Envy,
others of Jealousy, and all as foolish as disorderly. And indeed what else can
be expected from Rusticks? Amongst whom Fleurial was one of the most eager, who
not knowing that his Brother-in-Law Lupicin made show of love to Almeria for
any other end than to reduce his Wife to Reason by some prick of Jealousy,
casting Oil upon the Fire of his Sister's Fury, set her a Vomiting against her
Husband such outrageous speeches, as no discreet Woman would have been heard to
utter. But her quality excused her somewhat, besides a slight Imposition of
Hands which Lupicin made upon her Face, trying to strike Dumb that Evil Spirit
which made her scold with so much Insolence. But when she perceived that
Fleurial was infected with the same Disease, and that he began to talk of
Marrying Almeria, she expressed no less Impatience and Extremity of Choler
against him, seeing he would bring into their Family one, whom she wished
under ground, or at least at the World's end. What she did and what she said
to hinder that design, which she foresaw, would be the Banishing of her from
her Father's house, and the continual Object of her Fear, or rather of her
Fury, is needless here to mention.

Mean time Almeria managed her Deportments and Favors with such Industry and
Modesty, that She was the Idol of all those Peasant's hearts, who Adored her
as if she had been a Mortal Goddess. But as it is impossible to force Nature,
so it is hard to bend it and make it so pliable that it discover not some
tokens of its real Being. Achilles disguised in woman's habit could not
forbear handling of Weapons, besides, his gate and discourse did oftentimes
betray him: only Iphigenes was able to appear directly other than what she
was, for, having been always bred as a Man, and been possessed for a long time
her self that she was so, Education had taken the place of Nature, and
retained almost all her qualities. It was not so with Almeria, for sometimes
unawares and not heeding the personage she was to represent, she did let fall
some generous words, and performed actions more Vigorous than ordinary Females
are guilty of undertaking; which after some observation made Fleurial and
Belida likewise harbor a suspicion, that she was a Youth in Woman's
clothing. Yet considering the sweet attractiveness of her countenance, and the
delicacy of her complexion, they returned to their former opinion, thinking
that she was really some Gentlewoman, and that perchance those that had their
breeding in Cities (for what may not people imagine of a manner of life whereof
they have no knowledge?) were as dexterous and Valiant as Amazons, and no less
capable of conquering with their Hands than with their Eyes. At length Belida,
whether by the inevitable instinct of Nature, (whose secret virtues we are not
able to comprehend) or whether through the suspicion of that suit of Clothes
which Remonda had discovered, did feel certain motions, sometimes of Hatred
against Almeria, as believing her a Woman, and sometimes of Affection, as
fancying the contrary. Thus this Feverish Passion which agitated her thoughts,
made her fall from Heat to Cold, and from a chill Shivering, into a scalding
Sweat. To relate what thoughts ran through the Brains of the four Pretendants,
Manile, Fleurial, Antalcas, and Polemas, were to no purpose: As for Lupicin,
his design, as you have heard, was rather to punish his Cross-grained Wive's
perverseness, than for any other pretension. Only Merinda and Celian, who knew
the secret, did participate with their new Kinswoman of the Divertisement she
had in this pleasant Cozenage. Which Almeria longed to communicate to her dear
Iphigenes, as the most agreeable Pastime that could be imagined: And to the end
the Comedy might be exactly perfect, Celian and Merinda must likewise be
brought into the Labyrinth, which was thus, but not without an extreme
Intricacy.

Iphigenes having once more lost himself to find out his Almeria, met Merinda
with her (who stirred no more from that beloved Companion, than the Shadow is
separated from the Body;) He was so advantagiously Apparelled, that the silly
Shepherdesse's eyes were dazzled at such extraordinary Gallantry; but, if she
was amazed to see him, he was no less surprised to meet her, for he knew not
how to be rid of her, that he might discourse more freely with Almeria. At
last he told them that he was one of the Palatine's followers, who had lost
his way and Company in Hunting, but he had reason to rejoice at his being
strayed, since he had found such honest Virgins as might give him some
directions. It must be my Sister then, replied Almeria, that must render you
that good office, for I am Ignorant of the ways in this Forest, being a
stranger, and arrived but very lately in these parts. Iphigenes, who asked no
better than to fall into talk, without taking notice that he knew Almeria,
said, So me think's Virtuous Shepherdess, for your Language is far different
from that of this Province, and by your Face one may judge, that you are as
unused to that habit, as unacquainted with the ways of the Country; if all
Shepherdesses were like you, the Cities would become Deserts, and the Deserts
be quickly filled with People, many Young Gentlemen would leave the Court,
where nothing but Mischief and Envy is practiced, to apply themselves to such
agreeable Objects and so worthy to be beloved. Here Merinda imagining that
Almeria's eyes had wounded the Gentleman's heart, as well as the Country
Swain's, partly out of Jealousy, partly out of Simplicity, briskly thus
answered, addressing her Speech to Almeria; In good earnest, Cousin, I think the
Gentlemen will fall in Love with you as well as the Plough-men, and that in the
end you will set Fire in every place, if you take not heed. But you are too
wise to hearken to such Gallant's words, who so much contemn us Country-maids,
and never commend us but when they think the contrary, of what they say, or if
they do speak as they mean, it is but to abuse us. And you, Sir, continued
she, turning her self toward Iphigenes, should do better to pass on your way,
without suffering your Mind to stray amongst us, as your Body has done in
these woods, that you may not lose both together, and like an ill Hunts-man in
stead of taking, be taken your self. The brave Palatine was not a little
Astonished at her Language: For, besides that he expected not such clear
Reasons from so gross a Soul, he feared lest by replying he might catch
himself, and discover that he had a better part than she in the acquaintance
of Almeria, who made him Signs with her Fingers and Eyes not to take notice of
her. Nevertheless not to remain absolutely without answering, he thus said;
Sweetheart, You answer according to your own fashion, that is, uncivilly, to
one that treat's you with Courtesy; your Companion is better taught, and
whether she be a Citizen, or has had her Education in some City, as her
Countenance, her Speech, and her Carriage do testify, she would have had more
Civility than to have returned such an answer. The sweetness which does polish
those that are well bred, is esteemed amongst you Rusticks Treachery; for, you
are Naturally so Distrustful, that when a man speaks kindly to you, you
think he will betray you. You must not deal so ruggedly with a poor Gentleman
that is Strayed, and who desire's to be put again into his way, the rather,
that he may be rid of such rude Conversation as yours. In sooth that shall
not hinder you (replied Merinda) from leaving us in Peace, follow me and I
will set you in the way that shall lead you to the next Village, where you may
be farther informed of those whom you seek This said, she advanced to direct
him; But Almeria (who was unwilling to let slip this occasion, the visits of
her Iphigenes being very rare) drew her back, and whispered softly to her;
Sister, what is your meaning? I know this Gentleman, he is one of my best
Friends, and who may be very useful to me as my business now stands,
doubtless he does not know me in this habit; but if you please to retire your
self into yonder Copse whilst I Discourse a little with him, you will oblige
me infinitely. Merinda, who desired nothing more than to please Almeria,
thought her self able to make no better excuse on the sudden than to satisfy
her demand.

She being thus separated to give the two Friends liberty to talk freely
together, it cannot be expressed what pleasure Iphigenes took in hearing from
the Mouth of the Feined Almeria the Relation of those Flames which she had
kindled in those Rustic Souls, and the uncertainty wherein they were of her
Sex, by reason of the different Tales already mentioned. Whereof being willing
not only to take share himself, but to make some of his Favorites participant
likewise, that they might recreate themselves with the simplicity of those
Swains, they conspired so to lay their Plot, that the Gentlemen might be
abused as well as the Clowns. Great Persons would not esteem their pleasures,
if they were not singular; for, as their Condition raises them above the
Vulgar, their Entertainments, their Occupations and their Divertisements ought
not to be Common. Greatness, like Bodies o'recharg'd with Fat, draws so many
Inconveniences after it, that those that are in important Charges, and elevated
to high degrees of Honor, are glad sometimes to pack up all that Baggage of
Vanity which environ's them, to lead by stealth a low, popular and obscure
Life, mingling themselves amongst the Lees of the People, and abasing their
Dignities to the condition of the lowest Subjects, of whom the Plough drivers
march in the last Rank, being (as it were) the Earthen Feet of that Statue
which the King of Assyria saw in his Dream.

Almeria, whose spirit Ambition much more disquieted, than these Recreations
delighted, desired Iphigenes in mean time to tell her how he would dispose of
her after those Rural Merriments were past; Whereupon Iphigenes (who aimed at
nothing but to divert the affection she bare to Clemencia) proposed the Desire
he had to raise her to a great Fortune (this was to feel how her Pulse beat,
by the pretention of Glory) by Marrying her to Simphoroza, or the Princess
Respicia, her Mother, to the end he might divert her Passion, and hinder her
from breaking off his own Marriage with Modestina, in the Continuation whereof
Liante's honor did seem to be engaged. But if all that failed, He promised to
give her his Ward, Leonora Daughter to Stanislas, whose Estate he might have
enjoyed as well as his command of Palatine, if he had listed, the King having
given him the confiscation. All these Propositions were as many specious Ports
to let Liante (hidden under the name of Almeria, and with the veil of a
Shepherdess) forth of that odious condition, wherein Mieslas had enthralled
him, and gave him at the same time entrance into that of Wealth and Honors,
after which he so ardently did thirst. But all this disguised Nymph could do
during the short space of their Interlocution, was to remit the conduct of all
her Fortune into the hands of the beloved Iphigenes, to whom she needed not to
have made so strict a Recommendation, since therein He labored for his own
Interest.

In mean time they resolved to play the Countrymen the pleasantest Trick that
could be imagined: for ground whereof they agreed that within few days
Iphigenes, accompanied by some of his Friends, disguised like Peasants, should
come to a certain Neighboring Village (where a Wake or some such Solemnity was
to assemble a multitude of Country People) and that they should make show of
being in love with Almeria, to see what mettle Jealousy would put into the
four Rivalls already mentioned. And to leave the seeds of some suspicion in
Merinda's Soul, they thought it would not be improper, that Iphigenes taking
leave of Almeria, should now and then mistake himself, speaking sometimes as if
she were a Man, and sometimes as if she were a Maid, in ambiguous terms
promising to assist her; sometimes to cover her shame, as if she had been a
defloured Virgin; sometimes to obtain her Grace, as if she had been guilty of
Homicide, which the ingenious Iphigenes carried with such dexterity, that
Merinda knew not where she was, but thought she had been enchanted. And
indeed what with the Doubts and Suspicions, 'twixt which her spirits swam,
besides the discourse which she heard, there was enough to disturb a much
stronger Brain than here is.

Iphigenes having left them to their own liberties, By the Faith of a Maid
(said Merinda to Almeria) I know not what to think, whether you are Fish or
Flesh; to my sense you are like the Otters of our Marshes, which are both
Terrestrial and Aquatick Creatures, or like our Geese which live in both
Elements; for, if I consider the Lineaments of your Face, they are so
attractive, and your Complexion so delicate, that I do not wonder, if in the
Opinon of all our young Men you pass for a Maid; On the other side, when I look
upon your stoutnesse of Heart, and vigorous activity of Body, I cannot but
persuade my self that you are of the Sex of that Habit which I have in keeping
for you: But, when I recall to my thoughts the reservedness of your carriage to
me, who yet have never seen you do the least Action, nor speak the least word
that showed you to be a Man, that make's me conceit that you are like me, and
whilst I laugh to see others deceived in their pursuits, I am frustrated my
self of my Expectation. Therefore without holding me any longer in suspense,
you will oblige me very much to deliver my mind of this Perplexity. Almeria
(like Hunts-men and Fowlers, who glad to see the innocent Creatures fall into
their Gins, in stead of untangling them do engage them further in their
Snares, letting them struggle and torment themselves until their own weariness
make's them consent to their taking) in stead of casing Merinda of her pain,
led her about with so many ambiguous Circumlocutions, that after a tedious
Discourse she left her no less unsatisfied than before, casting her by those
intricate Explanations into a greater Obscurity, than that of her former
uncertainties. Whereupon said the trouled Merinda, Thus the City-Wits, more
slippery than Lampreys, riggle from us when we think to grasp them: but in
short, I have only one question to ask you, Are you Man or Woman? Then
Almeria, who took pleasure in this confusion, told her, That she was extremely
sorry that she had so long deceived her, in saying she was a Man, for in
effect she was an unfortunate Maid; that thinking to tell her Sister a lie,
she had told her Truth, like a blind Man that shooting at a Mark does
sometimes hit it by chance, Hazard supplying the defect of Address. However
she entreated her, if she was thereby deprived of her Affection, that she
might not lose her Friendship, which she saw was very necessary for her
Preservation, not resolving after her fault to cast her self into the precipice
of her total ruin, hoping that Heaven taking pity of her repentance, would
create in the Heart of him that had abused her, the desire of repairing her
honor by Marriage, by which means she might be re-established in her Estate,
and regain her Parent's Favor. To describe the astonishment, together with the
regret which seized on Merinda at this confession, is beyond my ability: for
this Truth was not a little odious to her, and had not Compassion taken the
place of the Ashes of Love, whose coals were deaded on a sudden, she had made
foul Work.

This Counter-point hurried her into the participation of Remonda's, and her
Sister-in-law's Jealousies, and her Scoffing and Laughing at those young Men,
who expressed such Passion for this stranger, returning to her memory, put her
into strange distempers. I need not repeat the Reproaches she made against
Almeria, in regard her Anger was like to a storm, which after much Thunder and
Rain, leave's nothing but Dirt and Vapors: for, Almeria had such an Art to
pacify her, that she pardoned her that Deceit, considering that broken Maids
would do what they could to hide their Faults, there being nothing so natural
as to shun shame. For the better effecting whereof, she prayed her to spread a
rumor underhand amongst the People of the Village, that she was a Man, to the
end she might remain unsollicited, and likewise Remonda and Belida be cured
of their Jealousies. Whereof Merinda would not have failed, though she had not
been entreated, there being but one point which obliges a Maid to keep a
business secret, that is, when she her self is interessed; take away that
Flood-gate and she will disgorge like a full Mill-Dam. Besides, Merinda had
reason to foment this supposition, to repeal Antalcas to his former observance
of her, and cure her self of the real jealousy which she might conceive, if
he continued his Courting of Almeria: whom she had no sooner left, but, like
a person who suddenly shake's off a Coal that flie's upon his clothes, she
ran to acquaint her Father with the Discovery, telling him that Almeria was
indeed a Maid, who under Man's clothing had escaped from the fury of her
Parents, who would have washed in her Blood the Honor, which she had stained
and ravished from them. This startled the old Man at first, believing his
Daughter might have had some proofs, which those of her Sex might gather with
more Certainty and Modesty than Men. But (when he perceived that her drift was
to persuade him to turn her speedily out of doors, otherwise he would nourish
a Viper that would be his Destruction, and keep a fatal firebrand which would
reduce his whole Family into Ashes, besides the Dishonor which he would reap
by harboring an idle light Huswife in his House) he stopped her Mouth with a
Multitude of Arguments in Almeria's Defense, feeling the profit sweet which he
got by her, his Heart being of the Composition of those mercenary Spirits, who
for an Ounce of Gold would give an hundred weight of Honor. Merinda seeing
that her Speeches availed nothing with her Father, to excite him to dismiss
her, whom she feared as much, believing her to be a Maid, as she loved,
whilst she thought her to be a Man; besides, considering that in stead of
apprehending that Manile would Marry her, he seemed to hold the imaginary
Ignominy of that Alliance too great an Honor, not believing that (although
she was a Fugitive) she would condescend to any such Bargain; at length, she
let him alone, and turning her course, she resolved to disperse the
uncertainty of her Condition among her Brothers and Sisters, not so much to
oblige Almeria, (as she had promised) as to satisfy her own spightfull Humor.

To her Sister Remonda (as if she had escaped some great danger) she related,
how she had thought to have undon her self by frequenting Almeria's company,
believing that she had been really a Maid ( as she had possessed Celian and
her) but that she now had found that He was a wicked Man, who having
committed some Villainous Action, to avoid the hands of the Justice, was fled to
hide himself in those Woods, and not thinking himself yet sufficiently
concealed, unless he denied his Sex, he had covered his Knavery under the
Habit of a simple Shepherdess. If I should tell my Father or my Brother, what
violence that Traitor offered to me (continued She) I believe they would
tear him in a thousand pieces, unless my Father be too much blinded with the
Gold which he has cast into his Eyes; for old Folk generally are of that
Disposition, that Lucre make's them neglect all Honor. How do you think was
Remonda affected with this Discourse? In stead of continuing in her former
frenzy, which Merinda's intention was to resuscitate, she felt on a sudden all
her choler vanish, and gently slipping into it is place an agreeable sweetness,
like unto that delightful poison which is called Love. The winning Graces of
Almeria (as a Man) represented themselves to her Eyes in a more lovely form
than ever, and turning her Passion in an instant, of a Mortal Enemy, she
became a voluntary slave to her, whom Jealousy had made her hate. Oh how she
than repented that she had spoken so unworthily of the worthiest Subject in
the World! How much she apprehended lest her brawling and invective Speeches
might be an Obstacle to the Conquest, which she projected of that Golden
Fleece! She transplanted all her Rage and Malice into her Sister's Breast, and
having in exchange embraced her Affection, in stead of blaming Almeria for the
violence, which she thought she had offered to the pudicity of Merinda,
perchance she would rather have excused than accused the like attempt upon her
self.

Merinda made the like Relation to Belida, who presently felt her self eased of
that Headache which troubled her, by reason of her Husband's show of affection
to Almeria, and in stead of seconding Merinda in that choler (wherewith she
feined to be transported against that disguised Ravisher) she told her, that
to make any further Complaints would be but a needless trouble, and that it
was better to turn into laughter the Passions of those Men, who were so
inamored of that supposed Maid, and cast in their Faces the confusion of having
neglected the Legitimate Objects of their real Loves, to run after a Shadow.
So Merinda finding no more Disposition in her Sister-in-Law, than in Remonda,
to back the Design she had of chasing away her, whom she could not love as a
Maid, (perchance because she had disclosed something, which she then wished
she had concealed, and which she feared would be discovered by the Frailty
of her Sex, whom she knew to be in the impossibility of silence) she
resolved to continue her Plot, and beget a belief in her Brother Manile, and by
his means in the rest, that Almeria was a Man, whom some heinous crime had
obliged to take that disguise, thinking thereby to make them hunt her away,
lest being discovered by the Justice, they might be brought in question and
imprisoned as harborers and accomplices of his crime.

If Belida was glad to hear this Maid was a Man, changing her Gall into Honey,
and the sharp prickles of her Hatred into the sweet flowers of Friendship,
Manile was no less afflicted at this news; for, it was the burying of that
amiable Passion which inlivened him, and which fed his imagination with the
most agreeable Fancies, that ever he had experimented. As if a Thunderbolt had
swept the ground under his Feet, and a flash of Lightning sealed up his Eyes;
or, as if he had received a great Knock with a Club upon the Head, so he
stood amazed for a good while without any motion of Body or Tongue. At length,
as, although the Fire be out, the Ashes yet remain warm; So Pity assuming in
the Heart of this Rustic the place of Love, which was quite extinguished by
this Relation, He answered, That however, they ought to have compassion of
those that were in affliction, and not to commit so base a Treachery as to
betray a poor criminal, who did what he could to shelter himself from the
rigor of Justice, that it would be a very unworthy part for Protectors to
become Sergeants, that the Sanctuary should prove the Ruin, and serve as a
Prison to those that fled thither for refuge, thinking to find their Liberty
and safeguard; those Harbors being very unfortunate where vessels were cast
away.

The spightfull Female seeing he made no more account of her complaints than
the rest, repaired to Lupicin, who was very glad of that advertisement; for,
having no other end in following Almeria, than to torment his Wife, he thought
it might be a means to make her see her folly, when that verity should come to
be divulged. Fleurial, Lupicin's Wive's Brother, was no less astonished than
Manile, when it came to his ears, Oh! how he wished it had been false,
although he believed it was too true, Merinda had the skill to relate it with
such resentments of a Virgin, the treasure of whose integrity (she pretended)
Almeria would have ravished. Only Antalcas, quondam servant to Merinda, had a
conceit, that what she alleged was a mere supposition, invented to confound
him, for forsaking her to Court the strange Shepherdess: for, he carried the
perfections of Almeria so deeply engraven in his breast, that he needed a more
Authentic proof than a bare report to disabuse him, so, he sent her away very
ruggedly, telling her that he was not so Credulous, and that she spoke out of
Envy.

In sum, whilst all those eyes, like so many Argusses, were watching and
observing every particular gesture of Almeria, she had the wit so Dexterously
to hold the Balance in this Ambiguity, that she led those Rusticks (as they
say) by the Nose, like Bears that are Blind and Muzled. For, the Men by her
Womanish behavior, which she acted to the life, were confident she was of
that Sex; And that to avoid their Importunities, she had made Merinda publish
that Lie: But Belida and Remonda applying their Observations more particularly
to those Actions that spoke her, as they desired her, had a conceit that
Merinda had invented that Stratagem to preserve that prize to her self, in
imitation of Nurses who lay Mustard upon their Nipples, when they have a mind
to wean their Children, to make them shun the bitterness in the same place,
whence they Sucked the sweet nourishment of their lives. Thus Remonda taking
Merinda's turn, declared without much Ceremony her Passion to Almeria, telling
him that she had seen his Clothes, and that she knew his Condition; And
Belida, who would pay her Husband in his own Coin, and make his Brains crow
another while, began to make extraordinary caresses to Almeria, which were much
less supportable than her Envy and Detraction. And Merinda, (though she
studied to shun the sight of Almeria with no less care, than she had formerly
desired it with eagerness whilst her sense made her hope for some
satisfaction) could not forbear looking backwards (like the woman that was
Metamorphosed into a pillar of Salt) and to call some Scruples into her mind,
that perchance Almeria to be rid of her importunities, made her believe that
she was a Maid, when she was otherwise. The importance of all this was, that
every one champed on his Bit in Silence, and out of the Mass of diverse
thoughts, could not draw one Dram of resolution.

These Rustick's heads being thus Intoxicated, a Solemnity in a neighboring
Village invited the Country People to assemble there; Almeria seeming to be
unwilling to go thither, out of fear of being known, augmented by her
backwardness the desire of her Suitors to see her appear amongst the other
Lasses, like the Moon near her full amongst the smaller Lights, which the Night
displayeth in the Firmament. At length by much wooing and entreaty, she
suffered her self to be persuaded to bear Belida and Remonda company, who left
her the least they could; Merinda likewise, being desirous to see the pastime,
was forced to join with them, and re-accost Almeria, who cast such glances upon
her as penetrated her very Soul, and without speaking a word, reproached openly
enough her unworthiness. Whilst they are upon the way, let us take the time to
relate the plot which Iphigenes laid to render invisible to the eyes of his
friends the Passion which he intended to make visible to Almeria, but in such
a manner as I want words to express it.

Pomeran being his bosom friend, He took him into his Closet, where he thus
disclosed his mind unto him: Dear friend, can I conceal any thing from thee
that come's near my Heart, since thou take so much part in my joys or
Displeasures? No certainly, unless I would offend thy Friendship, which
obliges me to an Entire confidence. Alas! At our last Hunting, whilst you
having the Heart at a Bay, were making a Prey of him, I doubly lost my self in
the Forest, and have Inthralled my Heart, but in such a Bondage as I esteem
above any Freedom; Love has made beoty of my Liberty, by the Encounter of a
Shepherdess, who does so much resemble the only Object which delight's my Soul
(that is, my Wife, my dear Modestina) that at first blush I thought she had
been escaped out of the Prison, where the Cruelty of my Father reteineth her,
and had concealed her self in these Woods, disguised thus, purposely to accost
me, and learn the resentments of my Soul. But by her Conversation I perceived
it was not she, though this has a good wit for a Country- girl, accompanied
with an Incomparable Modesty: I have showed thee sometimes her Picture, which I
always wear next my Heart, where her Idea is so lively Engraven; by that thou will discern their likeness when thou see this sweet Object of my
Divertisement: For, really I must confess, since I have met with this living
Copy, that Picture has seemed dead to me, and if I have Strayed sometimes in
the Forest, I may tell thee, it has been to seek out this Image of my only
Joy, the Original whereof is detained from my sight, by the Imperious command,
I dare not say Cruelty of my Father. And although I confess there is an extreme
difference betwixt the Merits of my Lady and this Shepherdess, yet this deceit
is as sweet to me, as that of an agreeable dream, which when we awake makes
us sorry it lasted no longer. I wish the Heavens may never pardon me, nay
contrary, I desire that my head may serve for a Butt to all their Thunderbolts,
if in this pleasing imagination I have any design that is not conformable to
Virtue. I know what I owe to God and my own Soul, what I owe to the Glory of my
Birth and Quality; I know what the inviolable Fidelity is, which I have sworn
to my Wife, and I should be the ungratefullest Creature breathing, if I did
not correspond to the sincerity of her Affections to me: thou may believe
me, were I to dye a thousand times, and by a thousand sorts of new torments, I
would rather undergo them all, than commit an act of Disloyalty against Her,
or with This of whom I speak. For I hold, that to Love without Honor, (besides
that it is an Infamy) is rather Pain than Pleasure, and those Sinister
intentions are for the most part shameful, and abhor the light; Which is quite
contrary to mine, for I do not only declare unto you my Passion, but I desire,
if you please, to make you participant of my Pleasure. Those that aim at
nothing but such delights, as are common to us and Brutes, cannot endure any
companions in their enjoyments, being covetous to possess alone what they
desire with as much Impurity as Impatience: But chaste Love is not subject to
any of those Frenzies, it is Jealousy look's no farther than the desire of
rendering it self more perfect, more amiable, more accomplished; to be beloved,
not alone, but better than others. Reason is the Conductor of this pure
Affection, whereas she is banished from all illicite Passions. All that I
pretend in this Divertisement, which I am about to tell you, is only to amuse
that concupiscible Faculty which is Natural to us, (and which cannot be void,
that is, useless in us) in giving it an Object, whose Simplicity can no ways
lessen or cause any alteration of the Sincere affection which I bear Modestina:
Let the Heavens so prosper me, as I Honor and am Faithful to her, and may I
enjoy no longer Life than I preserve my Loyalty to her; But, as in stead of
being offended, I am sure she would be well pleased to know that in her
absence I should love and make a thousand caresses to her Picture; So, I
believe that rendering but Honorable and chaste Devoirs to her living Image, I
shall not prejudice the Faith which I owe her, seeing I do not cherish this
Figure, but in consideration of her whom it represents, amusing my self
therewith as an Innocent Child would do about a Babie, to divert the
Melancholy and disgusts which accompany my disgrace.

You may say what you please, replied POMERAN, for believe me, Sir, it is
impossible to speak so feelingly, and cry up the merits of any Subject with
such Vehemence, without being touched with that Frenzy which turne's the
strongest Brains. I dare not question your Fidelity to Modestina, but as a
Fever is known by the Alteration, and by the Tongue is observed the
indisposition of the Stomach; so by the discourse is discovered the Intention
of the Heart, since out of the abundance thereof the Mouth speaks. The Image
you so much adore, is too real and too lively, to make me believe that you
cherish the Present only by Imagination, and the Absent in Effect; if you are
not very cunning, and well-sented, you are now in danger of taking a change;
these Savage Creatures have oftentimes such Wiles, as the expertest Hunts-men
are never able to find out. Any other Passion else may be so handsomely
dissembled, that a Man may cheat the Eyes of the most Circumspect, but in this,
which carries away the Heart entirely, it is not the Mouth but the bottom of
the Soul which speaks. Some do persuade themselves they Love very much, when
they are not touched with the least Affection, and others sometimes do think
they have but a spark of that Fire, when all their Bowels are on a Flame. Make
no jest of this, Iphigenes, for whilst you think to catch, you may be caught,
and believing to deceive others, you may be abused your self. For the most part
this dangerous Passion, (the Murtheress of our Honor and the Enemy of our
Repose,) insinuate's it self and slip's into our Souls under such specious
pretexts, and by such plausible means, that with the Sugar we swallow the
Poison, and contribute all we can to our perdition. You say it is only for
sport, and to recreate your discontented Mind, and that there is nothing of
evil, or indedecencie in it; Can there I pray, be any thing more misbecoming,
than to see a Man great by Extraction, great by Quality, great in Esteem, and
great in Courage, abase his thoughts so low as to Court a Shepherdess? You, who
have the Honor to deserve (what disgrace of Fortune soever may be imagined by
this retirement from Court) the Affection of both their Majesty's, what will
they they say of this Fantasy, but that Lucifer is fallen from Heaven, and
that you have precipitated your self from the Vertical point of Honor into
the Center of Dejection by some sort of Despair? Indeed you prepare matter for
your Calumniators, who not content to triumph over your Innocence, will add to
their Trophies the Laughter at your Folly. Pardon me Sir, if I speak so
boldly to you, the excess of my Affection to your Person passes the Reverence
which I owe to your Quality, and I should esteem my self a Traitor, if I should
conceal so remarkable a Verity.

After a multitude of other disswasive Arguments, which Iphigenes refuted with
no less subtility and eagerness, than Pomeran alleged them with Cordial
tenderness, We shall never have done contesting, said Iphigenes, unless I
quite unbutton my breast to you, which I will do, Pomeran, with as much Freedom
as I have Confidence in your Fidelity. This Fire which you think so great, or
which you fear will grow to se great a Blaze, is but a little spark which I
desire to Choke, not to Cherish; For, beside the solemn Protestations which I
make to Heaven, never to admit within my Soul any thought of Unfaithfulness or
Impurity, I must absolutely have renounced all Honor and Reason, if I should
suffer my desires to stoop so low as the Condition of Almeria: But this is a
plot which I have invented (wherein I have need of your assistance to cover my
dissimulation) that Respicia losing all hopes of conquering me, and my Father,
fearing lest this fantasy may ruin my Fortune, may consent to render me
possessor of my Modestina, without whom mee-think's the light of the Sun is
irksome to my sight. Judge you then, Dear Friend, if my Intention be unjust,
or my wounds inflamed by the remedy which I apply to them. This would not be
the first time, answered Pomeran, that the Antidote were changed into poison.
Violent cures are always dangerous, we never make use of Irons and Fire but
in extremities, and when it is feared that the Gangrene will hasten Death. We
cannot judge of Counsels and Enterprises by the beginning, but by the Event. It
happens oftentimes that a Mutinous People seeking to shake off the Yoke of
their Natural and Legitimate Prince, do fall by their revolting under the
Domination of a strange Tyrant, not acquiring the Liberty which they pretended,
but having only changed a bad Master for a worse. Physic is not always in
season, and that which is good for one, is hurtful to another; That which you
are about to take, is as if in stead of casting your self from a precipice, you
should fall into the Fire. Some potions are harder to be taken, than our
Diseases to be supported; and mee-think's there is an Hook under this Bait:
Therefore I conjure you by all the glory which accompanies you, to manage well
and be charie of your Renown; be not carried away inconsiderately by these
Passions, which will render you no less ridiculous, than you have hitherto been
remarkable for so many Heroic and Generous Actions.

The Sixth Book.
ARGUMENT.
Iphigenes, under the Name of Iphis, attended by Pomeran, Argal, Pisides and
Boleslaus (all disguised like Countrey-Fellowes) goes to Celian's Village and
make's Love to Almeria. The Jealousy of the Swains, and their Malicious
Combination against these Strangers. Almeria's Loving Speech to Iphigenes. His
no less Passionate than Ambiguous Answer. Iphigenes the better to enjoy his
Almeria's Company, and blind his own Friend's Eyes as well as the Clown's,
procure's himself to be received likewise into Celian's Service. Almeria by
another feined story of Herself, staggers the belief of the other Shepherdesses
more than ever. Their Plot against her, Iphis, and the other disguised
strangers. The several Censures of Iphigenes's Friends for his Disguisement.
Iphis overcomes by Presents the Malice of his Clownish Enviers. Iphigenes and
Almeria, accompanied by Boleslaus only, steal privately away into the Woods.
The sense of the Feined as well as the real Swains concerning their
departures. Almeria and Iphis having changed Clothes in the Woods, she take's
the Name of Calliante, and he calls himself Scrife. Their parting from each
other, the better to effect their Stratagem. Pomeran with his Companions and
the Country Men going to seek Iphigenes, meet with his Hunts-men. The manner
of their encounter, and the fall of the Stag they hunted. Iphigenes or Serife's
Dream. Her own interpretation of it: Her Meditation.

IPHIGENES being out of hope of winning Pomeran to favor his Desires; I see,
said he, you are too serious to accompany me in this merriment, but I know
when you see the issue of it, you will be sorry that you deprived your self of
a pleasure which might have afforded you much contentment: For my own
particular I am sure to come safe enough out of these imaginary dangers, and
that I shall take no more Passion than my Reason will be able to overruled.
Whereupon Pomeran thus made answer, I am your Friend in all seasons, Summer,
Winter, in Favor and in Disgrace, I have forsaken the Court to follow you, and
I will leave the City to attend you in your Rural Recreations, with you
Imprisonment is Liberty to me, Solitude a Paradise, and without you the Court
is a forlorn Desert. I have served you in Combats, and in Duells, being
resolved to be yours as well in Death as in Life; I am upon the least summons
ready to go with you upon any Exploit, though never so dangerous; And having
given you my advice with all Sincerity and Affection, it is now my turn to
embrace yours without seeking any further Reason than your Will. If you run
your self into destruction, I will be destroyed with you; but give me leave
to lament your ruin more than mine own, which is much less considerable than
yours; wheresoever you go, I will die at your feet, and in the Obedience which
I have vowed to your command. To this Iphigenes presently replied; I love
voluntary Sacrifices, Friendship admit's of none but free persons on board of
her Galley, she will have no forced service. I should be sorry that you
should do out of constraint, what ought to proceed from an hearty cheerfulness.
I am sorry for the contradiction that I have caused to your Humor, which I
perceive at present is not disposed to Mirth, for my own part I had rather Die
with hunger, than Live upon Alms; I cherish my friends according to their
Fancies; if they are joviall I rejoice, and I am sad at that which afflicts
them. However, I love you n'ere the less, Pomeran, for I know it is the Excess
of your good Will to me which make's you fear where there is no occasion.
Therefore you may use what Exercise you please, whilst with Argal, Pisides and
some others of my friends (who will not stand upon such niceties) I will take a
Recreation which I hold to be innocent, and wherein I will do my endeavor to
hinder Malice from introducing any of her stratagems. My proposing of those
Reasons (said Pomeran) was not to oppose them against your Will, but to let you
see with what measure I march in your service, for (you may believe me)
although I do not suspect your pleasures in the least, but believe your
intentions are upright and sincere, yet I must tell you that what has
reference to your Advantage and Glory, touches me more nearly than what
concern's your pastimes, In which I shall not be wanting, nevertheless to
attend you, so that my presence be not offensive or suspected. For, in such
case I will rather retire my self, to remove an Object from your Eyes, that may
be an occasion of your perpetual trouble, and bar you of the Liberty of
Speech or Actions.

Iphigenes being desirous to preserve so real a Friend, and knowing that
first or last the success would disabuse him, not to give him any cause of
Discontent, consented that he should accompany him in his Facetious Enterprise
of going in a Peasant's Habit to make love to Almeria. Pisides and Argal (being
not so considerate) were no sooner acquainted with the Design, but they
approved it, and with a complacency, familiar to Courtiers, they presently made
Proffers of their Services, fancying already a thousand inventions to abuse the
simplicity of those clownish Souls. There was none but Boleslaus (Foster-Father
and Confident to Iphigenes) who participated of the truth of this Story, or
knew whereunto tended the Moral of this Fable. He had already (disguised like
a Traveller) been to confer with Almeria, of whom he learnt the Dispositions
of those Rustic Spirits, wherewith she was environed; and the Politic Old
Man (by whose counsel Iphigenes chiefly directed his course) cast now and then
into the Soul of this supposed Shepherdess certain hopes which gently flattered
Her Ambition.

All things being thus ordered, Iphigenes with his three Friends, Pomeran,
Argal and Pisides, not forgetting Boleslaus, whom he called Father, marched
like Country-fellowes to the Village where the solemnity was; thither likewise
came Almeria, accompanied with Belida, Remonda and Merinda, ushered by Lupicin
and the four Competitours. Manile, Fleurial, Antalcas and Polemas. To make a
comparison betwixt those Real Rusticks and these disguised ones, I had need
have the Pencill of that Painter, who (with only turning the Picture) of an
Horse that was tumbling in the dust, made one running full speed, and beating
the dust in his Carreer. I will not here amuse my self in the Description of an
Antic, nor abuse the time and the Reader's Patience with the Representation of
a County-solemnity; I shall only say that our Strangers appeared amongst those
rough-hewen Boors, like that golden Sand which shines amongst the gravel of
the River Tagus. There were no Eyes but for them, nor any but upon them. They
carried away with such advantage the Glory in all the Exercises, as Dancing,
Wrestling, Jumping, Slinging of Stones, flinging the Bar, Shooting, or
whatsoever, that they seemed as if they were come thither purposely to dazzle
the sight of all that did behold them: But their Carriage being too gentile
for such mean Habits, their clear Complexions and their studied Slights
betrayed them. Every one ask't, Who are they? whence are they? but no body
could give an account. This bred a suspicion that there was some Plot in their
coming, and that they were some cunning Shavers that intended to surprise them.
To repeat you the Discourse of these Stage-Peasants, would be too long and
Frivolous; or to tell you that amongst the throng of Females Almeria was
presently noted for her which deserved the Golden Apple, would be as needless.

If Amity is formed betwixt equals, or equalizeth those whom it unite's, there
was no Body, how envious soever, that seeing Iphigenes Discoursing with
Almeria, would not judge them the best Maach't Couple in the World, only He
appeared too white for a Man, and she too brown for a Woman, but her brownness
was Alablaster in comparison of the rest. Pisides and Argal commended Iphigenes
(who had given himself the Name of Iphis) for his choice: But Pomeran, who
always suspected this (seemingly feined) Love, conceiving that it had some
reality which he could not discern, had his mind balanced in the Flood and Ebb
of different Imaginations; Sometimes reflecting upon the Resemblance of the
Picture Iphigenes had shown him, he thought she might indeed be Modestina,
but that conjecture was soon effaced by some homely Actions, which Almeria
counterfeited with so much Art, that the most cleer-sighted would have taken
them for Dame Nature's own production. Iphigenes ravished with delight to see
his Design succeed, opened his Heart in private to Boleslaus, who participated
of his contentment to see how they were all deceived in Almeria, and she her
self in him. And in regard the pleasure would have been too short, if confined
to one daye's time, our Disguised Gentlemen continued their Visits to Almeria,
and the rest in Celian's House for the space of half a Moon: during which time
the Palatine made a Report be spread in Plocens (which was the chief City of
his Government) that he was retired to a Castellain's House in the Country for
some Affairs of great Importance.

In the fifteen Days time which Iphigenes with his Companions spent in a Rich
Farmer's House not far from Celian's, their Expenses and great Cheer quickly
made appear that they had nothing of Countrymen but the Habit. They went not
to Plough, nor followed any such exercises as the others did, but making
Fishing or Hunting their daily Occupations, they missed no opportunity of
accosting Almeria, either in the Groves, in the Meddowes, under the shade by
the Rivers side, or near some cool Spring. These frequent Meetings confirming
Merinda in the Opinion she had that Almeria was a Maid, turned Belida and
Remonda to their first belief. Lupicin with the four Concurrents lost the
suspicion they had that she was a Man, to embrace this, That these Strangers
were perchince The Men which had shipwracked her Honor in the City. These
surmises kindled their Fires, and their Fires redoubled their Jealousies,
seeing themselves supplanted by persons unknown. Envy, says the Wise Man, is
the vice of base abject Spirits. This Monster whose Pain is another's Ease, and
who feed's upon his own Heart, seated himself in the Souls of these Churles,
who could not endure the luster of so many gentile Qualities as rendered those
Newcomers recommendable. And as Wolves, (Creatures that are singular,
insociable, and which tear one another to pieces) do agree and go together, if
there be question of falling upon a Flock of Sheep, or breaking down a Fold; So
those Swains (who hated each other as Rivals) complotted with a secret
intelligence how to chase away these strangers from Almeria, and conspired
Machinations against her, which were the Effects of Hatred, though they
proceeded from a contrary Cause.

I omit their Reproaches and Detraction against her Innocence: For, their
Jealousy being visible, our Gentlemen gave no credit to their Speeches,
knowing that they troubled the pure Waters of that clear Fountain, only to
hinder them from admiring and staying near it. It was a pleasure to see the
Schism that was amongst them, and how their deceitful Lips uttered words quite
opposite to their Hearts; Some reported that Almeria was a Man, pursued by the
Justice for a Murder, and had transvested himself to avoid the punishment of
his Crime; Others gave out that she was really a Maid, but of a deboshed and
lewd Life, who to shun the fury of her Parents (that would have chastised her
for her Fault) or to Live with more Liberty, had clothed Herself in a
Shepardesse's Weeds. One said she was a Citizen's Daughter, another that she
was born in the Country; some said she was of one Province, others of another;
Some affirmed she was Celian's Niece, others denied it. If Remonda called her
Cousin, Merinda declared she knew her not; Belida gave her the style of
Kinswoman, Lupicin used another term; In sum, never a one could agree with
his Companion, their Relations and Opinions being as differing as their Faces.
You would have said Almeria had been the Moon, for whom her Mother could not
shape a Garment, because she was never long in the same condition. These
various rumors marvellously divided the Spirits of Argal, and Pisides; for,
amongst so many uncertainties they knew not what to apply their beliefs unto.
Sometimes the Masculine courage of Almeria, and her vigorous exercises made
them incline to the thought of her being a Male Feminiz'd; and when she acted
the Maid, the sweetness of her Carriage persuaded them the contrary. The brown
tincture of her Complexion seemed to plead in favor of their former
conjecture, but the Loveliness and attractive Motion of her Eyes confirmed them
in the later. However that her Education or Birth were of an Air which resented
nothing of Rusticity, was evident: Insomuch that they were really of the mind,
that whilst they thought to cheat her with their disguises, she laughed at
their Artifices, and by a coun-termine would render all their Endeavors
fruitless. These imaginations they communicated to Iphigenes, who was ready to
die with delight to see them so handsomely seduced. But Pomeran took no pleasure
in these passages; for, out of all these contrary Relations, He drew these
Consequences: If Almeria be a Man, and what is worse, a Murderer, What honor
is it for us to amuse our Times about an Object, that one day upon a Gibet must
make Faces at those that pass? Indeed we are fallen into a rare conversation
of Clowns and Gallows-clappers; If she be a Woman, and of a loose Life, what
credit will it be for Iphigenes to singe the Wings of his desires at the Flame
of so stinking a Torch? No, I cannot endure to see him cast himself away in the
Embraces of a dissolute slut: But he must first be diverted by the sweetness
of the Rays of solid Reasons, and afterward by the violent Buffets of strong
Remonstrances; and before the light of his Judgment be quite extinguished,
he must be made to understand, that he is upon the Brink of a Precipice,
whose fall is so steep, that if he do but trip, he will never be able to
recover himself until he comes to the bottom.

Iphigenes rejoicing to see him so perfectly mistaken, it cannot be imagined
what delight he took in imparting these particulars to Almeria: And whilst
he employed all his thoughts and time in entertaining his Penelope, those that
accompanied him, seeing they could not make him hear of returning, fell a
courting her Attendants; for, what else should I call the two Sisters and
Belida, who were continually in Almeria's company? I should be too long if I
should relate in what manner those subtle Wits inveagled the simplicity of
those silly Maulkins: for, to doubt of the advantages which the quaintness of
Courtiers has above the rude ignorance of Countrie-People, were to make a
question, when it is most light, at Noon or at Midnight. They made such fair
Stories to those dull Souls, that presently they forgot the uncertain Passion
they had for Almeria, to frame new affections for these strangers, who told
them wonders of their Flocks, of their possessions, and of the commodities of
their Village which they described to be a Paradise on Earth; insomuch that
all three Sisters were almost persuaded to follow them, out of a certain
inclination, (natural to every Body) to seek that which is most advantageous.
This bred strange thoughts in Celian, Lupicin, Fleurial, and the rest, seeing
these unknown Persons, and who had nothing of Peasants but their outside,
should breed alterations in the minds of those, where they had lodged their
Affections. Nevertheless (as all base and dull-spirited Souls are always
guilty of cowardice, what Anger soever their Malice is hatching, they have not
courage enough to produce any bold, or resolute Effects) they quietly suffered
themselves to be dispossessed of their ordinary Conversations. And this
supplantation was easy enough, for the Clowns being pressed with Necessity,
were more attentive at their Work and Profit, than their Pleasure; whereas
these Strangers, having nothing else to do, than to spin out their Time, and
besides, spending high, and making such cheer as the others were not accustomed
to see, might with much facility have advanced their Designs, if they had had
any other than to give their minds some recreation.

In mean time Iphigenes who desired absolutely to blot out of Almeria's
Thoughts the Affection of Clemencia, and place himself in her room, in making
himself be cherisht by his feined Mistress, otherwise than a Friend, perished,
like Tantalus, in presence of his Remedy. Hundreds of times He was upon the
nick of Declaring all the secret to this beloved Object; But Boleslaus (without
whose advice he did nothing of importance) served as a Bridle to moderate the
violence of his desires, telling him, that the time of his Manifestation was
not yet expired, and that he must be contented until he was Repealed from
banishment, to the end his Marriage might be in the establishment of a Fortune
more favorable for Liante. Who will now furnish me with terms to express
Resentments, which for their singularity, mee-think's, ought to be remitted to
Thought alone? When these two Friends could steal any time to themselves, (for
which they sought all possible opportunities) It was a pleasure to see the
Admirations of Almeria, who sometimes thus entertained Iphigenes: My dear
Brother, indeed it is not amiss that our so passionate conversation is not in
my Sister's sight, for, although it is but her Image, and the lines of some
resemblance of her which you love in me, doubtless she would find some cause
to be jealous of her Picture: I never saw you so fond of her, nor render such
endeering devoirs to the Original. It is true, that therein you were to be
Excused by reason of the tenderness of your Age, which did not make you
Susceptible of so great fire as you express to me, on purpose to deceive more
neatly those who do attend you. To deal really, were not the advantages of our
Sex incomparable, I could almost wish my self as my Habit speak's me, out of a
conceit I have that you would love me as well as my Sister, and could I change
my Nature, it should be merely to be your Wife, not to share in those Honors
and Wealth which environ you, but for the Merits of your own Person, which are
abundantly more Estimable than all the Benefits which blind Fortune
distributeth ordinarily to those that have no real Desert. Oh! why am not I
Almeria indeed? and these feined Affections which you so dexterously do
represent to me, why are not they essential? Believe me, after that, my
Ambition would be at an end. Who can but think that this Discourse deliciously
flattered the imagination of Iphigenes? who to prolong that agreeable
amusement, and still touch that String whose sound was so Harmonious in his
Ears, thus replied:

You may see, Brother, how far does transport me not the Love of an Image, as
you imagine, but the power of my Friendship to you, I say to you, to your
Person, to Liante as Liante, not as the Portraicture of Modestina: Indeed I
love her, as my duty obliges me, but do not you know that nothing is so ill
performed out of that Respect, as Loving, since that Passion, being the
Daughter of our Will, retains something of the Mother's Disposition, whose
Element, or rather Substance, is Freedom? But besides the constreint of a
Matrimonall Bond, (which how golden soever it be, is always a Bond) in my mind
that Sex, in regard of it is frailty, is so little capable to sustein that
straight and durable Knot of a true Friendship, that the greatest inclination a
Man can have for Women, is nothing in comparison to that pure and cordial
Affection which he bear's to a Friend, who is his second self. For, it is
betwixt two equal Hearts that is formed that reciprocal correspondence,
wherein consists the Essence of Friendship. In that you apprehend to wish
your self of another Sex to attract from me a more ardent Affection, you have
reason, considering, that were to wish a mighty inconvenience for a mean
advantage: For, perchance if you were as your Sister is, my Affection would be
much less fervent to you, for then I should look upon you with more Compassion
than Passion, as a brittle Vessel more worthy of Pity than Envy. Yet if your
Heart invite's you to desire a condition so miserable as that of Women ( whom
God and Nature have Created to be subject unto Men) to augment in me an
Affection which is already infinite; Give me leave to answer your wish, who
without Dissimulation or Consultation would, to the greatest contentment of my
Soul, relinquish not only the favor of the Court, the dignity of my
Palatinate, and the benefits I receive by the bounty of the best and most
liberal Prince in the World, (the King my Master) but all that I am, to
purchase me the power of being your Wife. It is I who am really jealous of
Clemencia, and who would gladly have but so much privilege of your thoughts as
my Sister, whose inconstant Soul was so shaken with the wind of my Father's
fury, that she would have been persuaded to marry Cassin, had not the disdain
of seeing his Mother desirous of my Bed, made him retire out of Podolia sooner
than Mieslas expected. Oh fickle Girl! said I, when I saw her so poor-spirited
in an encounter, where she needed but to have spoken boldy, and carved out a
Negative. Oh wavering Girl, said I, and unworthy of so perfect a Lover as
Liante! had the Heavens put me in thy place, I would surely have showed more
Fidelity and Resolution: But what can be expected from that Sex, but
infirmities, since it is the pure substance of Debility, and therefore always
shivering and moving like a Leaf? Yet what defects soever I do condemn in that
Sex, I would not greatly care if I my self were of it, if I thought thereby to
be more yours, or that you would love me as well as my Sister.

Here Almeria taking the word out of Iphigenes mouth, said; Believe me,
Brother, That if you love me as much or more than my Sister ( whereunto I can
hardly be persuaded, knowing the little reason you have) it is the like with
me; and as if our Stars had Embraced at our Births (to Express my Resentments
naturally, and nakedly to you) I never had by many degrees so much inclination
for Clemencia as for you; and thereby I find that Friendship has a more
powerful ascendent over my Heart than Love, which, to say the Truth, is a
Passion too Effeminate to have any regency in a Masculine spirit. And to give
you assurance that the Resentments are real, which make me declare my self in
these Terms, Hold for most certain that Clemencia shall never be any thing
more to me than what you please, and if you conceive that it may be for her
advantage to Marry the Prince Cassin, and mine to have another Wife, I will
most freely renounce all those Pretentions, which your Persuasions induced me
to have for her, my desire subscribing willingly to your command. Iphigenes
seeing Almeria arrived at that Point, whereunto he most passionately desired
to reduce her Resolution, was strongly tempted to disclose the secret of his
Birth; But, not having the convenience to consult his two Oracles, his Mother
and his Governor, he contained himself, but with such pain as may better be
imagined than discribed. So, contenting himself to have absolutely withdrawn
Almeria's thoughts from Clemencia, which was the clog that most oppressed his
Mind, and to have obtained her consent to his Sister's alliance with Cassin,
promising to find another Match that should raise her Fortunes infinitely
beyond what she could have hoped by Clemencia; It is requisite, said he, to
conceal your self from those whom my Father has incharged to apprehend and
carry you to him Alive or Dead, that you continue this Life, until we can
find the means to convey you into the City, or until my Relegation being
repealed, I may send for you to the Court, where by the King's Authority I
doubt not but to secure you from the Tyranny of Mieslas, and shall take order
for the advancement of your Fortune. Mean time for our Recreations, let us
persist in dazzling the Eyes of those that are about us, as well your Rusticks
as my Attendants: Therefore the more ardour I shall express to you, the more
disdainfully do you treat me, the better to wipe out of their thoughts the
sinister Opinion, which they have conceived, that you are a Maid of an unchaste
Life. And to the end our Conversation may be more frequent, I have an
intention to put my self likewise as a Servant to Celian, whom, I presume, we
shall draw to any thing by the powder of Injection, wherewith we will fill
both his Hands and his Eyes; making him believe, that to avoid the rigor of
our Parents, who would not consent to the terminating of our Legitimate
Affections by the sacred tie of Matrimony, we have been constreined to leave
our Native City, and make use of this stratagem to meet and enjoy more freely
each other's company, but with all the Civilitie, that can be expected from
persons which make profession of Chastity.

Almeria who was in the Hand of Iphigenes, as clay in the Potter's,
condescended to whatsoever he propounded; And in effect a Purse full of
Chekeens, or Crowns of Gold, had no sooner made the Preface of Iphigenes Speech
to Celian, but he believed the rest as an Oracle, and with both hands pressed
it to a conclusion; And taking this occasion as an occurrence of Treasure, he
prayed Iphigenes to dispose of all that was within his small power, as his own,
and under the notion of Servant to command as Master. This did not displease
the old Man's Daughters, who were not so blockish as not to like the company of
this new Guest; Only Manile was ready to run beyond his Reason, protesting
with many Oaths to his Father to leave his House if he entertained that
stranger. Celian to pacify him, showed him how he was an enemy to his own
good Fortune; telling him that those Angels were not only the Gardians, but
the enrichers of his Family. Whereunto He, being deafned by Jealousy, could
give no ear, but continued murmuring incessantly against his Father's
covetousness. Mean time Almeria to disabuse her two lately created Kins-women,
tell's them another new forgery.

It is true, said she, I came hither in Man's Habit, having made use thereof
to withdraw my self from under my Parent's Wings, not that I had made any
breach in my Honor, but fallen off from my Obedience to them. And I thought
that their severitie did furnish me with a Sufficient dispensation: For, being
desired in Marriage by one Iphis, a Young Gentleman richer and of a better
Extraction than I am, although contrary to the will of his friends, in whose
Opinion I seemed too mean a Fortune for him, my Father not daring to promise
me to him without the consent of his Father, whose power was redoubtable, we
deliberated, (to be free from that servitude) to betake our selves to the wide
World; and therefore having put on Disguises, to facilitate our Escapes, we
fled into these Woods, expecting until Time, which bring's all things to
perfection, should dispose our Parent's wills to condescend to our chaste
desires. Thus in few words you have the History of our Lives, wherein I see no
other Crime than this ardent Affection which has made us fall, not into any
Dishonesty (for we detest Vice with horror) but into some sort of Lightness and
immodesty, which may easily be pardoned by them, who know to what Extrmities
are transported those that are touched, with the same Passion that animate's
our Souls. This Discourse she made to Merinda, Remonda and Belida which being
ended, the two later looked as disdainfully as their Passion could make them
upon the other, reproaching her of the false Accusations she had raised
against Almeria's Honesty; Whereupon Merinda very confusedly, Answered, that
Almeria had with so many different Stories overturned her belief, that indeed
she knew not how to trust her, her former Lies prejudicing what Truths she
might afterward deliver.

To represent the diverse Motions this last Invention cast into the spirits of
these three Parcae, would require too much time: for, seeing their hopes nipped
in the Bud, as well on Almeria's part (whom one while they thought to be a
Man) as on the other Stranger's, whom they imagined did keep them company only
to wait on Iphis, they concurred, like the Parcae indeed, in the same
conclusion, which was to cut the Thread of these strange Practices, by hunting
away those unknown Persons that disturbed their repose. The same Design had
Lupicin and his companions; But before they came to any violence, and to make
use of the Lion's skin, they were not so little politic as not to know that
the Foxe's ought to be employed first, having gained so much power over
themselves as to dissemble what they thought. However they broke their minds to
Celian, laying before his Eyes the many hazards, whereunto he exposed himself
by concealing in his House persons that were liable to the Law, and who durst
not show their Heads for fear of the Justice: But, the virtue of that yellow
metal (which is the measure of all things) had so strongly operated in his
brain, that he was incapable of any other reason, than that of his profit.

In mean while the Time passed away so deliciously with Iphigenes, who serving
with a condition to do no Work, (which was likewise Almeria's Agreement) saw
not only every day, but every hour of the day, the beloved Object, which only
could comfort him, and yet which was the sweet cause of all his disquietness.
Great was the astonishment of his Friends to see, that Passion had reduced him
to so vile a Function; Especially Pomeran was in an unspeakable anguish for his
Transfiguration, yet durst not speak much to him for fear of exasperating his
humor, knowing that fair persuasions would prevail much more upon his generous
spirit, than the sharpness of Reproaches. Argal and Pisides were more moderate
and complacent, making a favorable construction of all his Actions, yet they
could not sometimes but resent a little indignation to see him so Wedded to
that Almeria, in whom observing no such exquisite Beauty, they could not
imagine whence should proceed those Charms that so strongly bewitched, and
besotted his Reason; then, condemning themselves again of too much harshness,
they sought Excuses in the tenderness of their Affections to him, saying, This
fantasy will not last long, it is too violent, the necessity of the affairs
of his charge will shortly call him back to his Government; All these passages
will quickly be carried to the Court, and Shame will make him forsake this
enterprise. The actions of great Persons, how secret soever they be, are at
last divulged, such public Ministers can act nothing in private. Those that
are exposed to the light of the Day, and to the view of the whole World, cannot
remain long in obscurity. Mean time we must endure this storm, and take our
share of this unpleasant pastime; we would willingly follow the Palatine in
some other occasions, as more glorious, so more perilous; the worst that can
befall in this, is but laughter; and besides, the Passion which produces these
actions, carries it is excuse in its blindness. Thus did the friends of
Iphigenes discourse amongst themselves, But He was like unto those who having
Ulcers in their Bodies, do not apprehend any thing more than the hand of the
Surgeon.

Presents, says an Ancient Writer, pacify both the Gods and Men; the Heavens
and the Earth have a delight in receiving; He that invented Gifts, has forged
Chains to inthrall Hearts. The poor Peasants have a custom to bring petty
Presents to their Landlords, either to preserve or purchase their Favors; And
our Rusticks received Gifts from those strangers to let them live peaceably
amongst them. Celian was ravished, and thought it was Jupiter that was come to
visit his House in a shower of Gold, his Daughters were all repaired with the
Favors Iphigenes and his Companions bestowed on them; Not so much as Lupicin,
Fleurial, Manile, Antalcas and Polemas, but every one of them resented the
benefits of their Benevolence, besides the good Cheer which they made every day
at their charge, Wine being as plentiful with them as Water, and no spare
made of delicate Dishes. These Exercises of the Teeth hindered for a while their
Tongues from murmuring, and did make as it were a Dam to stop the torrent of
their envy. Nothing was to be thought upon but Feasts and Banquets after the
Country fashion, wherein Iphigenes made a great show with a little Expense. He
was presently taken for a Grand Monsieur, and Almeria for some Lady of quality;
And since he was so willing to pay all, those Trencher-Friends cared not
greatly for working, every Day was Holy Day with them upon that account, and to
keep Holyday after the Boor's fashion, is, not to labor at all, unless it be
with the Teeth and Gullet, Eating much and Drinking not a little; That done,
Hunting, Fishing, walking amongst the Groves, or reposing upon the fragrant
Banks of the Cristall River, repeating Verses, or making Eclogues upon the
pleasures of the Rural Life, to the no less admiration of the silly Swains,
than the satisfaction of the rest, was their recreation for certain Days,
which though then being at the longest of the Year, they thought the Sun did
Gallop away too fast.

Iphis during these Divertisements having taken all occasions to manifest the
fervency of his Passion to Almeria, and she as cunningly (according to their
former Agreement) carrying her self with much indifference toward him, so
puzzled the imaginations of the Assistants, that it was hard to say which were
most surprised, the Countrymen or the Courtiers: For, having remarked nothing
in either of them of Rustic but their Habits, if those did guess Iphis to be
some great Man, these judged Almeria of an extraction far above that Vile (if I
may not say) servile condition which she had then embraced. Yet not remembering
that ever Iphis had been engaged in any Amoretta's at Court, nor at Plocens,
nor in Podolia, they could not devise where he should have contracted so
particular an acquaintance with Almeria, whose condition it was impossible they
should e're devine, having never seen Liante. And that which troubled them most
of all, was to see that Iphis, who was far more beautiful than Almeria, had
such an extraordinary Passion for an Object that seemed not to answer his
Flames, but with a kind of disdain. But these Enigma's requiring a more ample
Explanation, Night came on, which Eclipsing the Light of the Day, cast them
into a double Darkness, both of Mind and Body, the ignorance of a truth being
no less an obscurity to the understanding, than the shade of Night is to the
Corporal sight, which depriveth it of its Function.

The Night was differently spent by this disguised Company: For, whilst some
troubled their Heads with projecting how to expound the Artificial Demeanures
of Iphis and Almeria (which gave many strange Alarms to their thoughts) These
did meditate new and handsomly-contrived Frauds, to render them blind at high
Noon. Having then conferred in private (which convenience they had by lodging
in the same House, though always in the presence of Boleslaus, whom Iphis
might well call the Guardian of his Integrity) they determined to change their
parts, and make the Rusticks believe that Iphis was a Maid (which was but too
true) and Almeria a Man (which was not false:) to which effect, that the next
Morning stealing very early into the Woods, they should change Habits, and put
in Execution this Stratagem, as follows. Boleslaus conducter of the Bark
having approved of the Design (partly out of a desire to see if his dear
Nursling could act the Woman's part so well, as she had till then naturally
represented the personage of a Man) the performance was extremely easy.

Scarce had the clear Aurora opened the grand Gates of the Orient, to give
passage to Titan's Chariot, but our Diana and her Endymion lost themselves in
the Forest. Boleslaus only (who upon the Sea of such perilous occasions never
lost the sight of Iphis, no more than Mariners do the Pole) was Witness
Complice of their Conspiragy. When the Brigade of the Feined as well as Real
Swains were assembled betimes, thinking to advise with the two Lovers wherewith
to deceive the hours of the following Day, the Gemini (the Stars whereby they
steered their course) appeared not; This was a foul storm for them, and which
struck them with the fear of a Shipwreck. Every one thought diversely, and spoke
according to his Fancy. One said Almeria was not so rigorous as she seemed,
and that the backwardness she showed, was but a feined Copy of her
Countenance. Another's Verdict was, that she that would steal away from her
Friends in that manner, would do worse. A third Man alleged, that it was not
likely that she should continue long without discovering what she was, and
that she that could make a Pannier could make a Basket. Some made this
construction of their going away, some that. Proteus never assumed so many
several shapes, as this absenting themselves had Explications. Celian was very
sorry for the loss of two such profitable Guests, who were as the two Teats,
from which his griping hunger of gain found Suck in abundance. He stood
amazed like a rich Miser that has lost his Treasure, he grumbled and railed
against his Children, for not keeping amity with those goodly Angels, who
would have put Wealth and Felicity in his House. And alas! They were rather
more perplexed than He; For if Almeria had carried away with her the Hearts of
all the Men, Iphis had gained no less ground in the Affections of his Daughters
by his admirable Beauty and extraordinary Bounty. But the most astonished of
all were Pomeran, Argal and Pisides, (for the rest were at home;) To remain
any longer in that Rustic equipage, was quite against the hair with them, for,
it was merely the desire of complying with the Palatine's humor, that brought
them thither, and by his absence that complacency fell to the Ground. They
resolved however to expect the return of Iphis for a while, considering they
were not far from the City of Plocens, whither they could at all times make
their retreat, if the too long want of his presence should drive them into
impatience.

The most amiable occupation of those who have nothing to do, being Hunting:
They commanded the Countrymen to follow them, having already given them to
understand that they were Gentlemen of that Noble-man's retinue, whom they
called Iphis. Gain and good Cheer (after which your Plough-Joggers will run and
throng as thick as Flies in a Kitchen) were main Spurrs to prick on their
Observance, for these they were their humble Servants, ready at the first call,
(that sort of People, although they were never so Lubberly and Heavyheaded,
Gold will make them like quick Silver, and as nimble as Mercury, this Metal
puts Wings to their Heels, and make's them skip like Squirrells.

Whilst they are going to their Stands, let us see what is become of our two
Lovers, accompanied by the Moderator of their Passions. How joyful were they
to see themselves rid of the pesterment of their Companions, whose too
observant Eyes followed the motion of their least actions? That moment of
Liberty after such painful restrictions, was no less agreeable to them than
the pleasure which a poor Prisoner feels, when his Irons are taken off.
Being fallen upon the Discourse of their feined Passions, they protested to
each other, that those Artificial Expressions proceeded from a real
Resentment; And that as the whole Universe could not produce an Example of
Friendship comparable to their's; So, if there were a distinction of Sex, it
would be the most perfect Love, and the happiest Marriage in the World. Thence
proceeding to the recital of the handsome contrivance, and conduct of their
Mummery (as one may call it) they were ready to split with laughing to see that
neither Iphis's Friends, nor the Peasants knew what to think or say. Judge you
what contentment the subtle Boleslaus had in beholding those two Hearts, so
united by the Bond of Friendship, that it seemed as if one Soul had animated
both their Bodies; especially when Almeria embracing Iphis with as much
Simplicity as Tenderness, thus began; My dear Brother, Mee-think's those Clowns
were no Fools, when they said that thou had the Beauty of an Angel; for, I
believe, if thou were a Woman, all Men would fall in love with thee; As for my
own particular all the Men, and all the Women in the World are nothing to my
Eyes, in comparison of thee; the Affection I bear to thee, (although limited
within the bounds of Honor and Decency) has I know not what tender
Resentment, which I do not feel for all the rest of my Friends. Pomeran, Argal
and Pisides ( to give them their due) are very gallant Men; but, to my sense,
they are no better than Statues to you; And yet it is not the greatness of your
quality that dazleth my sight, but the only merit of your Person.

To this endeering Language Iphis presently replied, not without smiling upon
Boleslaus; And I believe, Brother, that I have been wounded with the same Dart
for thee; for, all Women are so indifferent to me when I am in thy Presence,
that me-think's there are none in the World; and this Name and this
Disguisement of Almeria, strike's so deep into my Imagination, that what thou
think I speak but in Jest, is unfeinedly the production of my Soul's most
tender thoughts: And if thou were in Effect what thou art but in show, I swear
there is no Queen upon the Earth, whom I would have more willingly for my Wife
than thy self. I pre-thee, Brother, ( answered Liante, do not talk to me of
being a Woman any further than in Habit; For, were it to make me the Wife of
the greatest of Monarchs, I would not be of any other Sex than I am. But I Will
assure thee, said Iphis, that were it only to be Married to Liante, I should
be glad to be a Woman: And, that thou may know with what sincerity I speak,
if it be impossible for me to be so, I promise thee, that I will lose all the
remainder of my Credit in the Court, or I will make thee Marry the most Eminent
Lady in Polonia; And I am very certain, that it shall be merely thy own fault,
if thou failest of that fortune; For, the King cannot deny Me that Grace,
when I shall demand it in thy favor.

Almeria, as if with the Woman's Habit she had likewise put on the curiosity,
was very importunate with Iphis to name that so advantageous Party; that she
might dispose her Courage to do some generous action, that might make her
deserve so high an Alliance. It is not yet time, answered Iphis, that I should
satisfy you therein; Wine, Love, and a Secret, if once vented, are worth
nothing; you shall know it in it is season. Content your self now to learn only
that to merit the Possessions of so rare a Subject, you shall not need to run
any further dangers, than what you have already undergone, and that it
depend's entirely on my will: For, of the Person whom I mention I have the
absolute disposal; Almeria Smiling upon Boleslaus whispered in his Eire, I
know whom he means, and what she is; It is his Ward Eleonora, Daughter to
Stanislas, his Predecessor in the Palatine of Uratislau, but the fruit is not
yet ripe, a great deal of Straw and much Time will be required to bring that
Medlar to perfection. Boleslaus glad to see her in that pretty Error, told
Iphis alowd what she had said, who was extremely well pleased that she
understood it so, and to stick her deeper in her mistake, The expectation (said
he) will not be so long as you may imagine, I was not above two or three Years
elder when I was Married to your Sister: However, the party whom I intended for
you is in Estate and all things else so far beyond Clemencia, who possessed
your thoughts for a time, that when you see her you will not stand to consult
which choice you should make.

At these words Almeria casting her self amiably upon Iphis Neck, as the
amorous Vine imbraceth it is Supporter, the Elm I pre-thee dear Brother, said
she, speak not to me of any other Party than thy service; for, as long as
thou will own me, I will never inslave my self to any Wife; or, rather, if you
please, as long as you will permit me to be your Servant. I will have no other
Master; or else if you think fit to Honor me still with the style of your
Mistress, I will never have any other Servant. Iphis ravished to see her so
perfectly deceived, would willingly have returned some answer, but that Almeria
held his Mouth so straightly besieged and blocked up with Kisses, that he had
not passage for one single word, Only their Tongues advancing to the
Superficies of their Lips, made a mutual communication of their Thoughts, and
those Thoughts engendered such Resentments as transported them almost into that
Ecstasy which all Philosophy holds for the most powerful Effects of Love.

Boleslaus, who feared lest that Fire which quickneth when it is in mediocrity,
and consumes when in Excess, should be kindled so fat in his Nursling's
veins, that afterward it could hardly be extinguished, to separate these
Metalls, made use of the Water of Depart, that they might better practice those
Caresses in their second Transvestment, wherein Serife should be more
favorable to Calliante, than Almeria had been to Iphis, which intimated that it
was time for them to undress and change their Garments. Heavens: what do I say?
Be not disturbed chaste Souls, I will speak nothing but what the most rigorous
Vestal may hear without blushing, and without the least interest of her
Modesty. Here it was that the natural pudicity of Iphis acted its part, and
that Almeria by her bold, not to say impudent, Actions did plainly show what
She was, by reason of her Sex, which renders Men less bashful: For, as if
She had had great haste to become Man again, She presently cast off that
shameful habit, which belying Her spirit had violented Her Nature. Whereas
Iphis could not put off His without much regret; for which purpose he begged
the protection of a thick copse to hide the tumor of Her Breasts, which began
to broach Treason against him. Whereupon Almeria in a jesting manner said,
What? Servant do you hide your self from me, in a condition, wherein by your
past sighs you seemed to have lodged the chief of your felicity? See, how he
counterfeit's the Woman already. Truly he has reason, said Boleslaus, to give
Iphis time to go away; for, it is more shamfull for a Man to take upon him a
Woman's attire, than for you, who are a Man, to resume your own natural Habit.

It was in the time of the most excessive Heats, when the delightful coldness
of the Water is most desired; So, there being not far off a River, which
gently rolling its Crystal, or rather liquid Silver upon the Golden Sands,
Almeria cast her self into it, carrying her Body as gracefully, and with as
much ease along the stream, as a Swan does seem to glide upon the face of a
smooth Pond. Agreeable Water (said she washing her self) purify me, I pray,
from the Ordures I have contracted under a Habit, which has sullied the
generosity of my Sex: And since it was from your Element that the Goddess which
causes Love did receive her Being, make my excuse to those that shall
reproach my Effeminacy, and tell them that this Passion is of such a Nature,
that as it infuseth courage into the basest spirits, So it make's guilty of
unworthy actions those that before had never sacrificed but to Glory, as the
only aim of of all generous Hearts. Let your Current, gentle River, carry all
my follies into the bosom of the Sea, and drown in the depth of Oblivion the
Name of Almeria, which I leave with her Garments. Whilst she was thus bathing
her self, and the water, which greedily environed her on all sides, served as a
transparant vestment, Boleslaus conveyed her clothes to Iphis, who could not
be so soon uncased for peeping at this swimmer through the boughs of the
envious Trees, which seemed to be jealous of the attention of his Eyes upon
that curious Spectacle.

As he was revesting himself in Almeria's Robes, See Father (said he to
Boleslaus) to what the vehemence of my Passion reduces me: For, without
feining, whilst he that is the Legitimate Object of my desires is refreshing
himself in that Water, I consume my self in this Wood, which would likewise be
burned if it were susceptible of my flames. Being by the help of Boleslaus
quite dressed, Oh how handsome you are, my dear Foster-Daughter; (said the old
Man) The Goddess of Cyprus came not so beautiful out of Thetys Bosom, as you
appear in this Equipage. If in the habit of a Man you did cast so many fires
amongst the Ladies at Court, with this you will set all Men, that look upon
you, on fire: But be wary, and keep your self upon your guard, for, at this
Game, oftentimes he that intend's to take, is taken. After this advertisement
he went to carry Almeria the clothes which Iphis had put off, which being of
the Country-make, that is, not only not fit, but a great deal bigger than
needed, it was no hard business for our Masculine Nymph to get them on.

As the weary Pilgrim after a tedious travel rejoices at the review of his
Native Soil; Such was the gladness of Liante to see himself again in his
Natural Garb. After his dipping in that pleasant Bath, our Reformed or
Metamorphosed Shepardess from the mouth of Boleslaus received a new Name, which
yet somewhat disguised his own, before he borrowed that of Almeria; it was
Calliante; the fair Iphis called himself Serife, and under this name, as under
his Shepherdesse's weeds, she appeared before the Astonished Calliante; I say
Astonished: For, to see Serife, and to be touched, possessed and ravished, was
one and the same motion in his Soul. What? said he to Boleslaus, is this
Iphis? No, answered the grave Senior, it is Serife, a handsome Shepherdess of
this Country, which has taken his place, und covered her self with the
Clothes which you put off; For, the name of Iphis is buried in this wood: And
as that Water has transformed you from a Shepherdess into a Man ( as the Fable
reports of the Fountain of Salmacis) what know you, but that Iphis may have
Eaten of some Fruit in this Wood, the virtue whereof may have Metamorphosed him
likewise from a comely Youth into a lovely Nymph? This he said Smiling. But
Calliante replied seriously, Father, I know not where I am, nor what I am:
neither can I persuade my self that I am awake, and see what I have before my
Eyes. Is it not a Dream? am not I asleep? This he said rubbing his Eyes. Is
not this an Enchanted Forest? Is this some vain Apparition, or a real Body,
which under the lines of my Iphis Countenance, presents to my View a Serife?
Boleslaus, I am not so easily deceived, Either I am no Man, or that is a
perfect Woman; I will pawn my life that you have played me some trick. Speak,
Beautiful Angel, that I may know you, and be assured whether you are indeed
Serife, to me you shall be a Serafine, for, I will honor you as a Celestial
Creature, you shall be my good Angel, my Tutelary Saint, my Ursa or my Pole,
toward whom shall ever turn the Needle of my most sincere affections. In this
Passion casting himself upon his knees, and taking her by the hand, he thus
continued; Beautiful Serife, hold me no longer in suspense, but tell me who
you are, that I may know whose I am: For, howsoever Fortune shall dispose of
me, I can be no other then yours, from you henceforwards will proceed all my
Felicities or Disasters. This said, he offered to lay his Lips to her Hands,
but Serife hastily snatching them away would permit no such Familiarity, nor
gratify him with so great a Favor. By this, cried out Calliante, I find that
Boleslaus has supposed a Serife in the place of my Iphis, or I am bewitched:
For, if it were Iphis, to what purpose should he deny me so small a Favor,
who whilst I was Almeria, made no Scruple of casting his Arms about my neck,
and joining Lips to Lips? Speak therefore; Sweet Serife, that I may hear from
your own mouth my Doom, unless this Sorcery has enchanted my Ears as well as
my Sight.

The newly transformed Serife perceiving by these transported expressions, that
her beauty had wrought strange effects in the surprised Calliante, with a tone
of Voice that would have extracted the Essence of an affectionate resentment
from the most barbarous Soul, answered; Really, Brother, You counterfeit the
Lover so feelingly, that if you continue to act your part so handsomely, no
creature will be able to judge but that indeed you are in Love, and this will
be the best means we can have to usher our Enterprise to the intended
perfection. How, counterfeit? replied Calliante, do you take me for an Orlando
upon a Stage, who make's a show of being Furious or Passionate, when he is
only so in his gesture, and Extravagant actions? I pray, esteem me not of
that rank, but believe that I am what I seem, and that what I say proceed's
from the most Entire and tender resentment of my Heart; For, although that Face
and that Speech represent to my Eyes and Ears my dear Iphis, yet I am so taken
with Serife, that if you change not that habit, I shall never change my
Passion, and hence-forwards farewell the thoughts of any Woman: For, though I
would rather that the Earth should open under my Feet to swallow me, than give
that Crime admittance into my Breast, which cannot be imagined, much less named
without horror; Yet I may say with much truth that my Soul is so glued (as it
were) to yours, and your affection has so penetrated my Heart, that I love you
above the love of Women. This is to be understood in the chastest manner
conceivable; For, without Honor and Virtue, no Union of Hearts can bear the
sacred name of Friendship: Otherwise, the Societies of Thieves and Infamous
persons would assume that glorious title; which would be too great a
Profanation. Therefore dear Serife, do me the courtesy to persuade your self
that I use no Dissembling in my Protestation of Service to you, or in the
Declaration which I make, that your Idea banisheth out of my Fancy all other
Images; Insomuch that my Spirits are so taken up with your perfection, that
there is hardly any room within my self for my self.

They had continued longer in this discourse, ( Calliante being no less
ravished with Serife's agreeable presence, than Serife with a secret glory to
see that she had reduced under her obedience a Captive, the possession of whom
was the greatest happiness her Ambition did pretend:) But that Boleslaus (who
playing the Mirth-marrer at this Triumph, put Water into this fuming Wine, lest
drunk with delight they should be surprised, and their own Felicity render
them unfortunate) interrupted them, showing the danger they ran of discovering
their Stratagem, if they were found together by those whom they had left in the
Village, who Infallibly would leave no place in the Forest unvisited to seek
them out. Heavens! what sweet words did he stop in their Mouths, separating
them in that moment wherein they were producing expressions, whose rehearsal
would have much imbellished these Pages! But since Action does better satisfy
the Reader's curiosity than Discoursing, let us see what succeeded this new
changing of habits, which for an Iphis and Almeria, has brought us forth a
Serife and a Calliante.

Calliante took a way by himself, and Boleslaus accompanied Serife a contrary,
unto a Village not far from that where Celian lived; where leaving her, he
returned to seek Pomeran, Argal and Pisides, where he had left them; But he
found none but the three Sisters, Merinda, Belida and Remonda, who looked like
Pictures that had lost their Color and Luster with the light: For, being
deprived of Almeria, (who was their Ornament and Splendor, though the Object
of their Envy) they were like Fishes upon the dry ground. When they saw
Beleslaus (who, they thought, had been gone away with Iphis and Almeria) they
were in hopes of hearing some news of them from him: But, he feigning to have
run several ways to inquire after them, without meeting any one that could
inform him, seemed to be much amazed at their so sudden departure; and to
underfeel their censures, he made very Sinister judgments of their stealing
thus away; Then, asking what was become of his Companions, he learnt that they
were gone with the Swains a hunting, partly to follow the track of the
run-awaies, partly to divert by that exercise the coffeehouse which they
suffered by their absence. Whereupon the old Man, who by the privilege of his
age was more inclined to his repose, than so much Coursing which debilitateth
Hunts-men, and makes them buy a little pleasure with much pain, resolved to
expect their return, passing the time in discourse with Celian and his
Daughters, and observing carefully the motions of those Souls diversely
passionate upon the subject of those Fugitives.

Celian lamented their absence out of sense of his own Interest, having lost
the profits which he hoped to have gained by their presence: the rest, either
moved with Affection, or prioked with Jealousy, and all floating in
uncertainties, manifested their Passions the more naturally, the less capable
their Clownishness did render them of those arts, which the more polite Spirits
do use to cover their weaknesses. Already Titan's panting Sleeds hasting to
refresh themselves in the Western Waves, extended the shadow of the Mountains,
when on a sudden a great noise and winding of Horns from the thickest part of
the Forest peirced their Ears, intimating that a great Troop of Hunts-men with
a no small pack of Hounds were making that way. These were our disguised
Courtiers, and the perfect Clowns, which had met in the Forest with Iphigenes's
chief Ranger, who to keep his Horses and his Hounds in breath had taken all the
Palatines hunting Equipage to harbor a lusty Stag, which he had imprimed
there. But in regard this meeting was not unpleasant, it will not be
impertinent to spend a little time in relating the manner.

This Stag which bore all his rights, and whom Age had taught many wiles, made
so many doublings or turnings, that he put the subtlest and best-sented Hounds
to a loss; whilst the nimble footed beast taking advantage of their delays,
hastened his Course toward a Pond, whose desired Waters he had no sooner
perceived, but he plunged himself into the midst, bathing his overheated
tongue in that refreshing Liquor, which he seemed to suck all into his thirsty
Throat, to quench the Fire that burned in his Stomach; engaging his whole Body
(covered with Sweat and Foam) so far in the Water, that nothing appeared but
his Head, couching his Horns upon his Back in the same manner as when he used
to swim. Our Clowns having discovered him, made him quickly leave that
agreeable refreshment, galling him with their Arrows; but the Wounds were so
slight that they hindered not his Flight, which they were not able to follow,
being not so light-timbred as that swift Animal; and hearing on the other side
by the retorting of the Eccho's the confused noyle of the Hunts-men, and the
Cry of the Hounds, they resolved to direct their steps that way, to inform the
Hunts-men of the fearful Fugitive's retreat. And in effect they found them so
puzzled to find out the cunning turnings, wherewith that subtle Beast had
imbroyled his Strain, that without their directions the Chase had been at an
end. But the pleasure was to see the Hunts-men take the Change as well as their
Hounds: For, Pomeran, Pisides, and Argal being disguised, and mingled without
distinction with the Swains, they were not known by Arcade nor any of his
Companions. So that passing all for Country-fellows (the custom of Prince's
and Noble men's Hunts-men, especially in that Conntry, being to domineer over
the Peasants, and force them by menaces, rather than entreat them to be
assistant to them) Pisides and Argal, seeming to be the nimblest and most
dextrous of the Gang were commanded by the chief Hunts-man to go with them to
the Pond, whence they had Chased the Stag, that by the Blood which their Arrows
had drawn out of his sides, the Dogs might recover the Sent. This made Pomeran
say to his Comrades, laughing, what an Ancient Philosopher said of himself That
they paid the Interest of their ill looks: Thou art mistaken, answered Arcade,
it is because they are likelier men than thou, that I take them. Sir, said
Argal to the Hunt-sman, if you ride very fast we shall not be able to follow
you, for we are very unfit men to be Lacquaies. Sirrah, said Philaster, I Will
make thee find thy feet, and if thou come'st not away quickly, I shall put
mettle into thee. He had his Arm already up to measure Pisides over the
Shoulders, who not being accustomed to such caresses, slipped aside to avoid the
blow, saying, You Master Hunts-man, me think's it would become you better to
go on Foot, and me to Ride, if you would please to alight, we should end the
Chase more conveniently. This he said thinking Philaster would know him by his
Voice; But whether the heat of his Game, or the strangeness of Piside's habit
rendered him so little civil, he replied; How now Rascal, do thou jeer me?
As I am a Gentleman, thou shall pay for thy Insolence. With that he was going
to join the Effect to his Promise, when Pomeran, calling him by his name, said,
Hold, art thou blind? do thou not know Pisides under this Peasant's Coat?
He that meets a Ghost when he thinks least of it, is less Astonished than
Philaster was, hearing those words, and understanding the Error which he was
going to commit. So, leaping from his Horse, and falling on his Knees, he
demanded pardon of him whom he would have beaten, making many excuses,
accompanied with Protestations, that were needless, since the disguisemement
rendered the offense nothing. Pisides and Argal turning all to laughter, took
Philaster's Horse and Armelin's; Arcade would have given Pomeran his, but being
unwilling to dismount the chief Conductor of the Game, he took another. So,
some running on Foot, some on Horseback, they continued their Chase. The
Hounds having recovered the Sent, followed the Stag full-cry, until being
brought to the Bay, he rendered his life with Tears, and lamentable Groans, to
the violence of the pitiless Hounds, and the force of our Gentlemen's Spears,
who took pleasure to pierce him in diverse places. The Chase being thus ended,
they satisfied the Hunts-men's admiration, by telling them that the Palatine
was in that Forest, disguised in the same manner for his divertisement,
incharging them not to say who they were, but only that they were Gentlemen of
their acquaintance. Having thus given them their lesson, they returned to
Celian's Village, there to break up their prey, and make good cheer for their
Countrymen. Their arrival comforted the old Man, who intended to kill the fat
Calf if his Iphis had been returned: But his joy was very short, when he
perceived not in all that company his desired Iphis and Almeria, and
notwithstanding all their jonkets, he could not be merry, because those two
persons whom he loved more than his own Children did not appear. But Boleslaus
having given him some hopes of not being much longer deprived of their sights,
he made of Necessity a Virtue.

But it would be hard to say whose astonishment was greatest, that of
Boleslaus, Seeing Iphigenes Servants and all his Hunting-Equipage; or their's
to see Boleslaus, whom they knew to be the inseparable shadow of their
Master's Body. However the discreet Old Man, knowing the Palatin's Intentions
and most secret Thoughts, told them that Iphigenes would not be well pleased
to find them there, where he concealed himself for some very important
Affairs; therefore he willed them to return next Morning betimes to Plocens.
Which command they readily obeyed; For, hardly the Breaking Day had summoned
the watchful Stars to prepare themselves for a retreat, but the Hunts-men (as
early as the Precursor of the Morn's approach) cast themselves again into the
Forest, with design to coast over the Country, Hunting, to theirs Master's
House. But the adventure of their return deserve's the time to consider it.

The Passionate Serife, whose senses felt no small commotions in Calliante's
Presence, had during the Night, and in his absence lost the benefit of repose;
For, this Idea was so lively imprinted in her mind, that she was continually
in Alarm until her sight restored to her Eyes that malignly-sweet
consolation, which is taken in the aspect of the Object beloved (the source of
perplexing Agonies no less dear than troublesome.) Scarce had Aurora Gilded
over the Girdle of the Horizon, but leaping out of her Bed (which seemed to her
as if it had been strewed with Thorns) she went into the Wood to entertain her
Thoughts; sweet Thoughts, which hovering within the circumference of Love's
Dominion still lighted upon Calliante as their Center, her Designs aiming at
nothing but to captivate that high Spirit, whose ambition could not be limited
by any less subject than her self. After the spending of some time in seeking
out a place suitable to the humor wherewith she was possessed, she chose in
the thickest of the Forest, the brink of a Silver Brook, whose murmuring waters
seemed both to speak and answer at once, and tune their pleasant Purling to the
agreeable noise, which the Leaves of the Neighboring Trees did make, when
frizled by the Zephyr's welcome Wings. There, under the protection of the shady
Boughs (which were so interlaced, that the Sun could not peep through, but
rather Night in Daytime seemed there to keep her Residence) being laid along
upon the soft Flowers, which lost their luster at the presence of those that
appeared in her Face, an humid coolness having sent a sweet vapor into her
Eyes, ushered in gentle SLEEP, who could not all Night upon the Feather-bed
find admittance. Scarce had that drowsy Deity benumbed all her senses, but
MORPHEUS (who take's delight in representing to the imagination the most
extravagant Chimera's that can be fancied) made her conceit, that the Princess
Respicia displeased at his backwardness to satisfy her desires, had made
recourse to the power of enchantments, which of an Iphigenes made a Stag, and
that the same Stag thredding the brushy Woods, and having mued his Antlers,
became a Hind, which being pursued by the Palatin's Hounds and Men, was
reduced to such extremity, that if she had not retaken her former shape, she
had been killed by these, and devoured by the others. These troublesome
thoughts put her into strange perplexities, and passing her Hand twice or
thrice over her Face, as it were, to strike off the Flies, she felt a stinging
more sharp than those Creature's ordinary touch, which made her awake; and she
had no sooner opened her Eyes, but the first species that formed it self to her
sight, was an horrible Serpent of an immense growth, which made toward her,
sliding himself in diverse folds upon the Grass, infecting it with the poison
which distilled from his swollen Throat. This spectacle made the valorous
Serife find her Feet; but in regard she had long since forgot the Trade of
running away, gracefully brandishing her Shepheardesse's hook, she marched
courageously toward that furious Snake, which casting fire out of his Eyes,
and darting mortal poison from his pointed tongue, disposed himself to give
her a strange exercise. But she, who feared neither Wolf nor Bear, and who not
long before had laid a wild Sow grovelling upon the Earth, (not inferior in
bigness or strength to the Erimanthian Bore) with three blows, addressed with
an incredible dexterity, put this dangerous Serpent in a condition of defending
rather than assaulting, and with two more of flying rather than defending
himself, being bruised in several places of the Body; But, knowing that if
those Creatures are not hurt in the Head, all other blows are but of small
effect, seeing that he trailed but lazily his weakened Train, and that he
hardly could find out his retreat, she hit him so full upon the Pate, that
presently he remained without Motion. Then, she bethought her self that this
might be the Event of her Dream, although the species were as different, as
Ridles are from the sense which is commonly applied to them: But not being
able to imagine, who had so opportunely wakened her, she believed it might
happily have been her good Angel (to whose guard (as we read) we are
committed) they having charge to preserve us in all our ways, to uphold us
lest we should stumble, and to give us the courage to trample upon Serpents,
and the most fell Animals of the Earth. With this thought lifting up her Eyes
to the azury roof of Heaven, she addressed this

ELEVATION OF SPIRIT To the All-seeing DEITY.
SPIRIT Divine, whose only Influence
Fill's th Earth with Flowers, and the Sky with Light;
Eternal Sun, who by thy Indulgence
Make blessed Souls taste fullness of delight:
Shower down on me thy Clemency, thy Grace
Infuse into my Spirit, and assure
With Hope my Senses, that in this low Place
My Confidence in thee may rest secure.
Grant that I may withstand the Temptor's strength;
Afflictions with Constancy support;
Give Fervency unto my Heart, at length
That I may find safe Harbor in thy Port.
Banish from me all evil thoughts, from Wrong
Preserve my Honor, and from Envie's stings;
And as the Birds shelter their tender young,
Hide me within the shadow of thy Wings.
The Seventh Book.
ARGUMENT.
Iphigenes in Almeria's Habit meeting with his own Servants at their return to
Plocens, by reason of that Disguise runs the hazard of being ravished by them.
His Speech to them. Their astonishment and shame when they knew him to be
their Master. Liante or Calliante having put himself in a Gentleman's Habit,
come's to inquire after Almirea, who, he said, was his sister. The feined
Relations of his sister's going away with Iphis. Calliante endeer's the
Country- swains to help him to find out his imaginary Sister and her Lover.
Iphigenes or Serife having changed her Shepherdesse's weeds into a Lady's
attire, fein's her self to be Modestina, to deceive Pomeran and her other
Companions. Boleslaus's cunning dissimulation to strengthen the other's error.
The feined Modestina's Complaints against the inconstancy of Iphigenes.
Pomeran's and his Companion's zealous Speeches, and their endeavors to comfort
her. They discover the fallacy through Arcade's indiscretion.

Whilst she was in these Divine Meditations, a little Golden Feathered Bird
seemed to warble and chant in her shrill Notes, Actions of grace to the Author
of all Good, for giving that Virgin the power to kill the Serpent, according to
the threat pronounced against that cursed Creature at the first Creation. This
pretty Harmony made Serife cast her Eyes to the place, whence her Ears received
the sound, and having a while observed that this little Bird fluttering from
Branch to Branch did follow her, as if it sang the IO POEAN of her Victory,
She was amazed at last to see it cast it self with fury upon the Body of the
Serpent, pecking him as if it would have killed him again after Death. Which
recalled to her memory a Relation she formerly had heard of a small Bird
called Saura, which is held to be as great a Lover of Mankind as a Hater of
Serpents, and whose natural custom is to peck the Faces of persons who sleep
in Meadows or Marshy places, as well to kiss them as to make them waken to
avoid the Ambushes and biting of Serpents, that lie sculking under the Grass.
Hence she conjectured that those prickings which she had felt upon her Cheeks,
sleeping, proceeded from the Philanthropie of that little Creature, which had
the care to preserve her from the deadly sting of that reptile Enemy, who would
have conveyed Death with his Poison into her Heart. But all this had little
congruity with the species which her Dream (though short and suddenly
interrupted) had so lively engraven in her fancy. O Serife, justly you begin to
act the Woman, wherein Women most play the Women, that is, by the observation
of Dreams.

As the light of the Sun dimmeth that of a Torch or Candle, so a great noise
drowneth one which is less loud; That of a Chase with a full Cry and vehement
impetuosity, banished from the Ears of our contemplative Shepheardess, that
Bird's chirping, the murmr of the gliding Water, and the whistling of the
Wind amongst the Trees. These were her own Hunts-men, who returning to Plocens
by the address of their Blood-hound had rowsed an Hind, and loosed the whole
Kennell after her. The Forest returned Echoes from every part, and this being
an exercise wherein Serife took a singular delight, her former thoughts
ravished with this present Object, were immediately turned toward that part,
whence she heard that confused noise (which is more agreeable to those that
love that sport, than the most melodious harmony, that Music can produce in
its best regulated Concerts;) and taking a cross path, in short time she
arrived at the Game. Heavens! how was she surprised with astonishment, when
she saw her own Hounds (whom she knew severally by Name) and her own
Servants, who were far enough from thinking her to be their Master. She
remained some while in suspense whether she had best appear, or retire into
the thickest of the Wood to avoid their sight, lest they coming to know her,
might found some Opinions which might be prejudicial to her afterward. But
whether the excessive Pleasure she took in this Cynthian Recreation, hindered
her from retreating; or whether she thought, at the worst, if she were
discovered, that she should easily turn into a laughter, the changing of her
Habit, she resolved to show her self, and the first Man she met she asked
him what was their Game; That accent, that manner of speaking, that grave and
Majestic port, that Angelical Face, and that delicate complexion, touched the
Hounts-man so, that he stood stockstill as if he had been at a loss; and
considering with Attention this Shepherdess, he thought he had met Diana, or
one of her Nymphs.

In this confusion, hardly knowing what to answer, he said, Excellent Nymph,
we are in chase of an Hind, which we have singled out from the Herd; but if
this Company has made us take the Change, your presence is more capable of
staying us: For, there is not one of my Companions, but would become your
servant as well as I, if he had been so happy as to meet you. Sir, replied
Serife, I am not so lately come into these Woods, but that I know the custom
you Hunters have to abuse all the Shepherdesses you find, and then at your
return make your City-Dames ( whose slaves you are) merry at their simplicity;
But we are not yet so dull, but that we can discern your craft, and know that
under the Honey which is upon your Lips, you hide the Gall which you carry in
your Hearts.

This answer retorted no less gracefully than wittily, seized Armelin (so was
the Hunts-man called) with a new astonishment; Insomuch that falling further
into discourse with this agreeable Nymph, he endeavored by a multitude of
deep protestations to assure her, that she had conquered him in a moment, and
that he never had felt himself taken with so violent a Passion, nor farther
remote from dissimulation for any Creature in the World. But as he made show
of alighting from his Horse to talk with her more at ease, and by his
persuasions to render her more susceptible of his torment: Know, said Serife,
that although we come short of your City-Dames in Beauty, we do exceed them
in Honesty, and that our Rustic Simplicity rendereth us less capable of being
surprised by your deceitful and affected flatteries; Go, Sir, keep on your
way, I Will follow your Game with my Eyes, and although your little courtesy
refuses to inform me what it is, I am not so ignorant in this exercise, but
that I may teach you; and if I can come time enough to the fall of your Deer, (
so that you vouchsafe to lend me your Sword) you shall find that I know how
to use it as well as my Hook or Distaffe. This said, she presently retired into
the thickest of the Wood, leaving poor Armelin perplexed with strange
imaginations; One while, he thought it was an Angel that vanished as soon as
it appeared; For, that Voice, that Garb, those Eyes, and that manner of Speech,
seemed to have he knew not what of Celestial. At last, believing it was an
illusion which had charmed his Senses, shaking off his amazement, he set Spurs
and hasted after his Companions. Having overtook them, he prayed them to give
him audience a little while, and having told them in few words, how he had
happened upon the most beautiful, not only Shepherdess, but Creature that his
Eyes ever had beheld, who wandering all alone might perchance be brought to
yield, not to their Discretion, but to the Indiscretion of the unreasonable
Passion, which by his Description he kind led in their Souls; They like
Hare-brain'd Hunters and dissolute Courtiers, who at the first motion do burn
with a base desire of evill-doing, pressed him immediately to conduct them
toward that clear spring, there to quench the thirst of their abominable
Lusts. Their Request was no sooner made, but granted: So true it is that vice
is always leading to a Precipice, and that illicite Passions may not
improperly be compared to Bitches, which bring forth their young ones blind,
all first motions being without consideration.

They rushing through the Wood thitherwards, where Armelin met Serife, had not
gone far before they espied her advancing a great pace in a path, which she
thought would lead her to the Game. They presently rode up to her, and Arcade
and Philaster seeing that Armelin's words were very much inferior to the merit
and Graces of that Shepherdess, they thought this Prize, better worth than the
Hind which they were pursuing. Mean time the Hounds, which were no more
encouraged nor cried after, left their chase to follow their Masters, insomuch
that they were environed with the whole Pack when they accosted Serife, who
seeing her self bayed and barked at by those Creatures, began to fear that her
dream might indeed then turn to truth; For, all the three Gallants being
equally inamored of her Beauty, quitted their Horses with a resolution to have,
by fair means or by foul, that which could not enter into the thought of any
but persons whose brutall Pleasure is the only Butt of their Passions. They
began with Compliments, from thence they passed to insolent Language, and from
insolent words to impudent Actions. Serife at first took much pleasure to see
her own Domestics in that pleasant error, and by witty and ambiguous answers
did seem to whet their Desires and quicken their Inventions. But at last when
Impatience made them speak openly, and gave them the impudence to come to
threats of Force, this extremity made her take off her Mask, and casting her
hand upon the guard of Arcade's Sword, she drew it hastily, saying to them,
with a tone and Countenance full of displeasure; How, Philaster, Arcade and
Armelin, are you so doubly blinded, that you know not Iphigenes your Master?
and admit it were not he that speak's to you under the Habit of a Shepherdess,
ought not you to dread his Anger and his Justice, if it should come to his
knowledge that you should have committed in the meanest subject of his
Palatinate, an act so dishonorable as a Rape?

When they heard their own Names from the Mouth of a Person, to whom, they
thought, they had not been known, and that the word of Master piercing their
Ears, made the Scales fall from their Eyes, to know the Palatine under an habit
so unsuitable to his quality; if the Earth had opened under their Feet, or some
mighty Tree falling had squeezed their Bodies under it, I believe they would
have thought it an happiness to have perished at that instant, rather than have
swallowed the Shame and Confusion that overwhelmed their Hearts and covered
their Faces with the Livery of Guilt. They remained for some time so
immovable, that they resembled Statues, rather than living persons. And when
this amazement had given them leisure to breath, they did like People that are
drowning, who catch not at that which may best help them out of danger, but
that which come's first to their hands. A free accusation is always better
than an impertinent defense. Therefore they did like the Crocadile, which
weepeth and yet has no tongue; tears were the discourse of their Repentance,
and sighs and sobs the witnesses of their real Resentments, which begat in the
Heart of that generous Amazon a greater desire to pardon than to punish them,
though they would have endured the chastisement with as much constancy, as they
had little confidence to demand forgiveness.

This persecution was no sooner ended, but there began another, no less
perilous. For, the Hounds being enraged for losing the sent and footing of
their Prey, falling foul upon one another began a furious skirmish, wherein
Serife, who loved them passionately (as the custom is of great persons who
take delight in Hunting) engaging her self to separate them, being pressed
with fury and accustomed to Blood, they turned their rage against her, and had
it not been for the Sword which she had naked in her hand, they would have
preyed upon her. She called them by their several names, that they might the
better know her, but their Barking and Yelping quite drowned the sound of the
Shepherdesse's voice; the more the Huntsmen beat them, the more eager they were
to fasten on her. Thus Serife, for having seen with too much curiosity her
Diana (Almeria or Calliante) bathing in that Silver stream, had like to have
undergone the miserable Acteon's fate: And her Dream was accomplished in such
manner, that whereas other Dreams are but the representations of precedent
Events, in this, there seemed to be denoted some principal Traces of
succeeding accidents. Wherefore Serife taking by the fore-top this Occasion,
which presented it self, of making use of her own Servants to effect her
present design, commanded Philaster and Armelin to repair without delay to
Plocens with their Hounds, and not to hunt any more in that Forest without her
order, palliating the disguisement of her person, and her change of habit with
the pretense of affairs, highly concerning the service of her King and Country:
But the secrets of State which she then attended, were only those of her
Passion; Her King was Calliante, in respect the Will is Queen of the Faculties
of our Souls, and Love the King of the Will She kept Arcade to wait on her,
having sent the others away one on Horseback, the other on Foot making use of
Armelin's Horse for the purpose which you shall hear.

Whilst they return to the City with the Seal of Silence upon their lips,
(applied by Serife's command) being resolved to be more discreet and reserved
for the future; let us see what was the issue of our newly-transvested Lover's
design. Boleslaus like a crafty Sinon, had already (according to Iphigenes
intention) prepared the Spirits of Pomeran, Argal and Pisides to a belief, that
the Palatine had enjoyed Almeria long before he left the Court, though with
such circumspection, that the watchfullest observer could never discover his
inclinations; so that living secretly like a Paris with that Hellen, he seemed
in the Eyes of the World to be another Hyppolitus; And that retiring from the
Court unto his Palatinate, He had persuaded her to wear a Shepherdesse's
weeds, that he might visit her as a Nymph of those Woods: Unto which Motion
she (who was a piece of Wax in his Hands) easily consented, burning with
reciprocal ardors for the incomparable Iphis, though in appearance she seemed
to be all Ice. This artificial Fiction (whereof they had already some
conjectures, especially since their stealing away in that manner) so balanced
those Gentlemen's imaginations, that it presently passed with them for a
certainty, and thereupon by a complacency (so ordinary amongst Courtiers) they
determined to favor those amorous stealths, like him who is reported to have
slept at a Festival meeting purposely to give another the opportunity to Court
a Lady.

Upon this surmise Boleslaus made them resolve to expect the lost Couple's
return, which was with a very handsome heat. For, Almeria, who was become
Calliante, having changed in some town thereabouts his Contrie-slops for a
Gentleman's apparel, and furnished himself with a Horse, came upon the Spur to
Celian's house, and making a show of much earnestness and indignation, inquired
of the good Man for a Sister of his, called Almirea, who, he said, had been
seduced by a Young man, named Iphites, threatening to make both of them feel the
Bloody effects of his just displeasure, and revenge by their deaths the
dishonor which through his Sister's Folly redounded to their Family. Celian
surprised with this discourse, and judging by the perfect resemblance of this
Gentleman's face to Almeria's, that indeed he might be her Brother, durst not
at first declare what he knew of her; but making use of her absence, I know
not (answered he) where she is whom you demand, neither can I give you any
account of her. Hereupon came forth the disguised Courtiers, the real Rusticks
and Celian's Daughters, who all together environed the Stranger, and
considering him with attention, they concluded presently that he was Almeria's
Brother. Calliante vapouring and chafing thundered out a thousand
Rodomontadoes, saying, That he must and would have them restore her, whom he
charged them with concealing in that House; alleging that in the neighboring
Hamlets he had learned such certain Intelligence thereof, that he could not
be otherwise persuaded. Then, falling to the relation of some particulars, and
telling them that his Sister called her self Almeria in stead of Almirea, and
that Iphites had given himself the name of Iphis, he put all the company into
a strange plunge, and their answers were as different as their censures.

The three Sisters, being as envious as incapable of keeping a Secret, declared
without much entreaty what they knew of her; which was in part confirmed by the
Swains: But Iphis's friends thinking to oblige the Palatine, denied all that
the others affirmed, being induced thereunto by Boleslaus, who was ready to dye
with delight to see this pleasant contradiction. Calliante feigning not to know
Boleslaus, applied himself to those who told him news of the Fugitives, and, as
if he had had a Commssion to be a self-murtherer, he drew his Rapier, after
several Exclamations, seeming to desire nothing more vehemently in the world,
than to sheath that blade in the bowels of the lost Almeria. This confirmed
the Rusticks in their suspicions of Almeria's honesty, and made them pass for a
Cause adjudged the passions and privacies which they had observed betwixt her
and Iphis. In sum, having said all they knew and thought of her, the
conclusion was, that Calliante found nothing but the nest, the Birds had taken
their Flight, and perchance upon inkling of his arrival. But Pomeran being
curious to dive somewhat deeper into the knowledge of this affection, prayed the
Gentleman to inform him how it came to pass, that his Sister left her friends
in that manner, where the place of her Birth was, and what the name of their
Family. Calliante, who desired nothing so much as this demand, to have a
Subject whereon to establish his Deceit in the minds of those Gentlemen also,
desired to be excused, saying, That the recital of that Story would but tear
up his wound again, and aggravate his despair by the manifestation of his
dishonor. This refusal sharpened the desires of the hearers, who joined all
together in a supplication to him, to satisfy their curiosity therein,
promising to assist him in the search of that abused Damsel; and they pressed
him so far, that, as yielding to their entreaty, not without much
unwillingness, He thus began.

Gentlemen, In the Plain of Cracovia, not far from a place where the River
Nidas loses its name in the Vistula, stands a very agreeable City named
Corcin, wherein was the Mansion House of my deceased Father; there exchanging
Earth for Heaven, he left my Mother a Widow, with a charge of two Male
Children, and as many Females. I was born a Twin with a Sister, who has
oftentimes been taken for me, and I for her; when the tenderness of our Age
rendered us incapable of discerning our Sexes, without which our Nurses (as I
have been told) were oftentimes like to have exchanged us, being unable to
distinguish us by our Faces. If you have seen the unfortunate Almirea here, I
believe you will judge by my Gate, my Pitch, my Voice, and my Countenance, that
I say nothing that can be contradicted by your experiences; and if the habit
which I wear did not make appear what I am, you would take me for a disguised
Damsel, or a Man transvested. And I remember, whilst the innocence of our Age
permitted us those sports which are agreeable to Children, that we did
oftentimes take pleasure in changing our Clothes, to make us be taken one for
the other, and so deceive in merriment all those that conversed with us.
Insomuch that in our neighborhood, it was commonly said, that either Calliante
was Almirea, or Almirea Calliante.

Here the rude Manile (according to the custom of Country-lobs, which is to
interrupt them that speak, without any respect or consideration) said, In good
sooth, Gentleman, You did well to avise us of that, for if you had not, there is
none of all this Company but would have taken you for the same Almeria, that
has put so many Doubts, Jealousies, Passions and Proclamations in our Heads.
It may be she bewitched him that fallows her, and who, you think, has
ravished her; for in the few days she was here, she bred (I can tell you)
strange ravages, or rages (what you will call 'em) in our Spirits. I marvel
why you will take such pains to seek after a Creature, whose loss is as
advantageous, as the possession dammageable. The rest of his Gang nodding their
Heads approved Manile's reason, and not one of them but said in his Heart, that
it was a fair riddance of her, and that the Gentleman was like those that are
jealous, who are very eager to find out what were far better let alone.

After this interruption, Calliante continued his relation in this manner. Now,
Gentlemen, that you may know me for other then that idle Runaway (the
reproach of our Blood and the shame of our Extraction) you must understand,
that being in the Country with my Mother in a Castle of here is not far from the
place of the King's residence in Summer time, and near a Forest where their
Majesty's use sometimes to recreate themselves with the pleasure of Hunting, It
happened one day (for our sorrow) that one of the greatest men of this Kingdom,
being strayed in the Forest and overtaken by Night, which robbed him of the
knowledge of the way to return to the City, where the Court was, retired
himself to our House; where holding his arrival for a great Honor, we
received him with the greatest respect and Courtesy we could imagine, little
thinking that he should have been like that Machine of Wood which set on Fire
that famous City, whose Story has employed so many Pens. But this false
Courtier having cast the Eyes of Concupiscence upon the unfortunate Almirea,
and finding perchance some reciprocal answers in that language of looks, which
cannot be understood but by those that love; That encouraged him to speak in
general terms; thence to fall into Courtship and expressions of Affection,
and so by little and little into private Familiarities, which seduced the
simple Girl into her perdition, being overcome with the glory of his Greatness,
and egged on with that vanity, which is so natural to that Sex, to see
themselves Sued to, and Adored like Goddesses, which opens the doors of their
Hearts to that Passion, whereof if but one sparkle takes in such weak
Subjects, it presently flames like Fire in dry straw or Flax, and cannot be
quenched neither by Tears nor Blood. His visits following (and somewhat too
frequently iterated) were the Match by whose Smoke we easily discovered the
Fire; But to oppose great persons and Favorites, or, like the Giants in the
Fable, if by heaping Hills on Hills you offer to wage War against those Gods of
the Earth, so firmly seated on the top of Fortune's wheel, they will but laugh
at your contradictions, as Hercules did at the ridiculous endeavors of the
Pigmies. Although we visibly saw that the design of this Polyphemus was to
devour the Honor of our Family in abusing my Sister, yet it seemed that our
low spiritedness stretched out the neck to this blow, and to accept this Yoke;
thus Servile is the condition of those who suffer their Honor to perish to
preserve or advance their Fortunes, as if a Fortune were estimable without
being Honorable. It is no ordinary displeasure to me to reveal this shame,
which I should rather study to conceal, every one naturally abhorring Infamy;
but what? this is a thing so publicly known already, that if you should not
learn it from my Mouth, the very stones. would declare it to you, the whole
World being full of it, by reason of the abuse of my Sister, and the greatness
of him that has made the unworthy conquest of her. But if I had watched so
carefully, as I might have done, the deportments of my Sister, or that my
Mother had had her Eyes open upon the golden Apple of her Integrity, we never
had felt those sad effects of sorrow which now afflict us: For, the pudicity of
Virgins is like a Glass, which may be preserved a long time if well looked
unto, but with the least knock is broken all in pieces. Yet since faults are
personal, why should I derive the vices of the Guilty upon the Innocent?
Especially in regard the Honor of that Sex cannot be guarded by any but
themselves; for, the too strict observation of others in this case does rather
irritate than appease their Passions, and sharpen rather, or Set, than take off
the edge of their desires. No Demonstrations, no Admonitions were wanting on
our parts, to dissuade that inconsiderate Girl from the conversation of that,
no less dangerous than desirable, Visitant; intimating to her that although his
frequent coming were without any evil effect, yet she could not admit of his
company without Suspicion and Scandal, in regard the Actions of great Men,
especially Favorites, were Subject to a thousand interpretations, whereof the
most Sinister were generally the most Certain. Sometimes, when my Mother asked
her what fruit she could pretend of that, but too evident, Affection, unless
it were the loss of time, and perchance of her Honor, (which is commonly
attended by a public shame and an universal table-talk, which hurrieth into
the precipice of despair those that expose themselves to such miseries:) She,
belying her own Heart, would answer, that she believed Iph' (excuse me,
Gentlemen, if his name who ought to be odious to me, being at my Tongue's
end, had like to have broke through my Lips, since out of the abundance of the
Heart the Mouth speaks with precipitation) she answered, I say, that she
thought that Nobleman had no more design upon her, than she had inclination
for him; That she took all his discourse and compliments but as essays of his
abundant wit, or tricks of Affectation which the Court-Gallants hold for
commendable qualities; and that all his expressions proceeding only from the
outside of his Lips, penetrated no farther than the Superficies of her Ears,
preserving her heart clear from the contagion of that venomous Passion, which
most persons do condemn, but few eschew. But not to weary you with too tedious
a relation, notwithstanding his Scorpion-like subtilty to hide the Poison of
his Intentions, and her simplicity, too ingenious for her destruction, the End,
which uses to Crown good Actions with Glory, discovered to us the ignominy of
their evil practices, as you shall hear. When this great Favorite, being
fallen into some disgrace at Court, was in a manner exiled to his own
Palatinate; at this departure, their two Hearts, whose Bodies had perchance
contracted another alliance than that of words, could not support their
disunion: Insomuch that by the King's command he being enforced to leave the
agreeable Climate of the Court, it was no difficult matter to persuade the
imprudent Almeria to transvest her self and follow him, judging that in that
habit every one would take her for me. She presently condescended to this
proposition, which, as it was the Life of her desire, proved the Death of her
reputation. So, taking a Suit of mine of Seagreen, laid with Silver-lace, and
having handsomely put up her Hair, under a Gray Hat, covered with a White
Plume, she Mounted one of my best Horses; and in the Dusk of the Evening
repaired to the place where her Paramour had assigned her: since which time I
could never learn any certainty what was become of her, until Fame (the
inseparable shadow of great Persons Bodies,) informed us that this Nobleman
being come into his Government, was no where less than in the City of his
Residence, but consumed all his time in Hunting amongst these Woods, where he
was become a Prey to a Shepherdess of such beauty, that bred Envy in all those
Ladies of the Court, whose Affections he had ravished formerly. Hereupon a
thousand imaginations arose in my troubled Mind, sometimes, that he had left
my Sister enclosed in some Castle as a Trophy to his Vanity, contemning her
with as much Cruelty after abusing her, as he had seduced her with Malignity;
Sometimes, my Fancy seemed to persuade me, that she, who denying her Sex, had
had the Courage to Disguise her self in Man's Clothes to follow him, might
well renounce that condition, and take upon her the habit of a Shepherdess,
thereby to enjoy his conversation with less Suspicion and more Liberty. At
length, to satisfy my own Curiosity, and my Mother's desires, resolving to
search out my Criminalls, Fortune conducted me into these parts, where I am
encouraged with some hope of finding what I seek: And now Gentlemen, I must
conjure your Courtesy, by all that I read of Humane in your Faces, and do
believe to be in your Hearts, to Favor me in this so just a Cause, which I
have so ingenuously revealed unto you, to the end this Freeness of mine, joined
to the Generosity which is so natural to all Persons of Honor, may oblige you
to afford me your assistance. For, not to conceal the least point of Truth from
you, I am resolved in this business, which concerns not only mine, but the
Honor of my Family, to play Double or Quit, or to stake all I have, and (like
the Be which puts her life in her revenge, leaving her Sting in the Wound she
makes,) cease to live after the loss of my Honor; for, to enjoy Life without
Honor, I'esteem a condition farworse than a thousand Deaths. Therefore if I
find assuredly that my Sister has passed beyond the bounds of her Duty, and
preferred her Pleasure before her Reputation, my resolution is by plunging this
Poniard into her Bosom to tear that polluted Soul out of her unchaste Body; if
otherwise, I will press the conclusion of her Marriage as much as I can, and
decency will permit. For, if Love equalizeth Lovers, Honor does render the
Condition of Gentlemen equal to the greatest Nobles; and my Extraction is not
so obscure, but that I can reckon diverse Palatines of my Ancestors, in whose
Dignities, though I have not had the fortune to succeed, I cease not however to
inherit a part of their Courage; Besides, I want neither Friends nor Kindred,
who espousing my Interests, will join their Arms with mine in this just
quarrel: And; since he is Master of another's Life, who despises his own,
there is no sort of hazard, whereinto I shall stick to precipitate my self to
get satisfaction from that Ravisher of Almirea, how great soever he be,
being persuaded by this Maxim, That he dies gloriously, who perishes with
his adversary in the resentment of an injury. Nevertheless not to run
headlong, or like one that is blind, I will first be satisfied of the truth,
and then I shall see how to settle my Resolution.

Calliante filed these and diverse other particulars on the thread of his
Narration with such Art, pronounced them with an Air and Accent so full of
grace, and animated his Speech with Actions (though feined) which seemed so
real, that Boleslaus, who knew all the mystery, could not sufficiently admire
his industry, that could so dexterously put a Mask upon his Tongue, which at
the same instant deceived the Eyes, Ears, and Thoughts of all that were
present, who though appearing (as you know) to be all of one condition by
their Habits, were of two sorts extremely different, yet equally deluded by the
subtilty of Calliante.

The Answers which he received from these Auditors were very different, or
rather contrary; For, the Peasants (through a vice which is ordinary to them)
being extremely jealous of Iphis, thought they had met with a fair opportunity
to satisfy their malicious humor and destroy him, by declaring to the stranger
that Almirea (who was in a Shepherdesse's habit, and called her self Almeria)
was not only in love with Iphis, but had lost her self in his embraces, which
(they said) was manifest enough by their running away together. This Deposition
was strengthened by the testimony of the Shepherdesses, who hating Almeria no
less than they loved Iphis, endeavored all they could, not to wound, but rend
in pieces the Reputation of her, who ravished them, whilst they thought her of
a Sex contrary to her habit. But the disguised Gentlemen's Answer was quite
otherwise; For, Pomeran speaking for them all, and showing himself full of zeal
for the preservation of Iphis, having boldly denied all that the malice of
those base Souls had calumniously alleged, assured Calliante, That his Sister
was so curious of preserving her integrity, that her Suitor had nothing so
ordinary in his Mouth as the Complaints of her Severity (which Lovers are
accustomed to qualify with the titles of Cruelty and Rigor) which the
Rusticks could not gainsay without doing an irreparable injury to the truth;
therefore he exhorted him not to give credit to their Envy, but rather to
believe the Report of Gentlemen, as they were, (though covered with habits
disproportioned to their Conditions) than to the viperous Tongues of those
Clowns, who carried the venim of Asps upon their Lips, and who spoke only by
conjecture; But if He would not conform his Passion to the Rule of their
Reasons, they had Reason, and knew how to rule his Passion, opposing with Force
the Violence which he threatened in his Discourse; He, whom he was to
encounter, (besides his quality and personal valor, which had rendered him
victorious over so many redoubtable Enemies) not being so unprovided of
Servants, nor fallen so in disgrace with Fortune, but that he could yet
command a great number of gallant Men, who would take glory in hazarding their
Lives in his Defense.

Pomeran had continued to urge this Point, and doubtless had engaged Calliante
in a single combat (wherein he would have wanted no seconds;) But that the
cunning Boleslaus traversing this Discourse interrupted him, telling him in his
Ear, that Iphis would be very much displeased, if he should pick a quarrel
with Calliante, whom he indeavored by all means possible to oblige, thereby to
render his Sister more tractable; That all things being fairly carried, and
the honor of Almeria no ways interessed, there was nothing so easy as to
terminate that difference in an amiable manner, without fighting upon such
punctilio's of words, Menaces being but vain flashes, or like blasts of Wind
which leave no trace behind them: that it would be much better to follow this
way of gentleness, than to repulse just Resentments with impertinent Bravadoes:
that from this clashing, as from the collision of flints, nothing could proceed
but sparks, which would produce veryd angerous flames: Besides; to his
knowledge, Iphis would not be well contented, that the Peasants should
penetrate so far into his secrets, as to know his Affection and Quality, or the
Condition of Almeria: that Calliante had already spoken but too much, unless
he should have quite discovered the Mine, which would spoil all the sport,
wherein they saw the Palatine did take an innocent recreation, which diverted
him from melancholy for his disgrace and absence from the Court. Pomeran
relished these reasons, which being communicated to Pisides and Argal, they
became like Men without the faculty of Hearing and Speaking; Boleslaus assuring
them that in so doing they would oblige and render most agreeable Service to
Iphis, of whose pleasure, he told them, he had certain knowledge, as also of
the place of his retreat, which was not very far from thence.

Mean time, Calliante having thus contrived his Design, the better to bring it
to effect, addressed his Complaints to the Contrymen, who promised him
Miracles, induced as well by their own base Dispositions, as with the hope of
profit, which the Gentleman made glitter in large promises to them. Already
they engaged themselves to put into his Hands those whom he was seeking,
wherein they discovered no less temerity than baseness, obliging themselves to
effectuate that which was neither within their Knowledge, nor Power. Calliante
being transported with joy to see them so perfectly deceived, redoubled his
Promises, and encouraged them to assist him with Propositions of considerable
recompenses. Hereupon they went to offer Sacrifices to Ceres and Bacchus, I
mean, to make good cheer, at Calliante's charge; For, it is the custom of those
Rusticks to seal all their Bargains with Dishes and Bottles, otherwise they
hold no Agreement can be firm or prosperous. On the other side, Boleslaus, who
had the watchword, promised his Companions to bring them the next Day to the
place where the Lovers were, which was so strong, that being therein they might
laugh at the folly of those Clowns, and at the vanity of Calliante, who after
the Fashion of great persons had made choice of the worst side, that is, of
Flatterers.

Scarce had the cool Aurora powered out those drops of dew, which look like
liquid Pearls, or little Eyes, upon the Grasse's tops, when both the Crues went
forth to seek what they should never find in the manner they did imagine,
although they should have compassed the whole Earth and sea; Whilst the
Contrymen conducted Calliante in his Knight-errantry, entertaining him with
smoaky promises, as he fed them with the Vapors of Hope, Boleslaus knowing the
Blank, was sure not to miss his aim: For, Serife having assigned him the
Rendezvous in a certain by place in the Forest, after a long wandering, this
politic Guide feining to have mistaken his way (although he had on purpose
brought them insensibly out of all beaten Paths) when they were all at a stand,
not knowing whither to direct their course, the found of a plaintive voice
saluted their Ears; Which struck them into a sudden amazement, and made them
the more astonished, the less they imagined to find any reasonable Creatures
in so wild a Place; the Desire of being put again into some way, added to the
curiosity, which is so natural to humane Spirits, of knowing other's miseries,
made them advance toward the place, whence the Air conveyed those sad Accents
to their hearing: For, whether Boleslaus had made any sign, or whether they had
been descried a far off by any one that was set Sentinel to that purpose, just
as they arrived, a deep-fetch'd sigh broke the way to these Expressions.

And shall I ever hence-forwards esteem the fidelity of any Man? Oh! let the
Heavens invent some pains more bitter than those which they make me suffer (if
it be possible to imagine any more rigorous) if ever I give credit to their
Oaths, or open my Ears to their deceitful Courtship! Oh Iphigenes, the most
treacherous and ingreatefull amongst those that tread upon the Earth, is it
thus that thou did feed with vain Protestations, my too facile, credulity?
But who would not have been surprised with thy Language, thy looks disguising
thy words under so seeming a goodness, that I should have thought my self
guilty of an irremissible crime, if I had conceived the least doubt of their
Reality? Is it thus, perfidious Man, that thou did hide thy Heart full of
Gall under Expressions of Honey, and that to catch me, like an innocent Bird,
with thy false Call, did thou ensnare me with thy cheating Promises? A great
glory indeed thou will acquire by abusing thus a miserable Maid, who reposed
her belief upon the Reed or broken Staff of thy Fidelity. Heavens alter the
motion of your Spears, and thou Sun hence-forwards go take thy Resting Place
in the Oriental plage, Rivers run back to your Sources, and Day cease to be
light, since the Constancy of Iphigenes is become moveable, notwithstanding he
pronounced a thousand solemn Oaths, that the Effects of Nature should be
enemies to their Causes, before his Soul should be rendered capable of change.
He has changed however, disloyal as he is, and without remembering the
sacred plighting of his Faith, or considering the miseries which I have endured
for his sake, has abandoned me as a prey to Melancholy and Despair. Heavens
where are your Thunderbolts, where your Plagues?

A heavy groan having terminated these words, there was not one of the Hearers
(excepting Boleslaus, who was acquainted with the Plot) but thought it had been
Almeria that charged Iphis with perfidiousness, seeing her self forsaken, like
another Ariadne by Theseus, after the loss of her Honor. As they were upon the
point of rushing in to show themselves, and consolate the Affliction of that
Desolate Plaintiff, For Heaven's sake Gentlemen, said Boleslaus, do not appear
before this Creature, until I have discovered what she is: For, mee-think's I
have heard this voice heretofore, and I am certain it is not Almeria's, being
too much assured of Iphis Love to her, and that his Deportments being full of
honor, He is no Man to commit so unworthy an Action. So, having persuaded
them to stand still in a place where they could not be perceived, the old Fox
slipped gently into the Thicket, as if he went to discover who that doleful
Female was, who (as if she had been advertised of the approach of those that
heard her) thus continued her Complaints.

Deplorable Modesta, what Fruits have thou of thy Fidelity and Patience, since
thou have sowed on a barren Sand, and since thy ardent Affections have not been
able to oblige the most inconstant of all Humans, to keep what he had so often
sworn to thee? Indeed thou had reason to believe that he would play thee
such a trick, considering without caring to deliver thee out of the Prison,
where the rigot of thy Father-in-Law had enclosed thy innocence, he slighted
thy Disasters, and laughed at thy Tears and Captivity. Yet if he had forsaken
me for that Princess, or those great Court-Ladies which were so passionately
taken with him, it would be some consolation in my incomparable Misfortunes,
to see my self supplanted by those that exceed me in Deserts, as far as I have
surpassed in Affection to him all those of my Sex; But, to violate his Faith
promised to me, for a Country-Hoiden, for a Herd-Wench, who is as inferior to
me in Birth, Estate, Breeding and Beauty, as I am to those Stars which render
so illustrious the Court of our Monarch, that is a thing which I cannot endure
without an Heartbreaking anguish, more sensible and dolorous than a thousand
Deaths. Therefore since I cannot survive an affront of such indignity, I am
resolved to die; but it must be in the presence of him whose inconstancy does
murder me, that in expiring I may fasten to the collar of that ungrateful
Wretch a thousand Furies, which may represent incessantly to his thoughts my
Bloody Ghost, to the end that possessed with Despair for having reduced me to
that extremity, he may exercise a vengeance upon himself more horrid than can
enter into my imagination.

Here sobs breaking off her Speech, our hearers conjectured, and said amongst
themselves, that it was not Almeria; And in regard none of the other three had
ever seen Modestina, they could hardly think that it was she, because they
heard her call herself Modesta (which Name pleased her the more, because
Iphigenes did commonly use it in his most Familiar caresses to her.) Whilst
they were in this perplexity, returned the old Oedipus, who in stead of
explaining this Enigma, rendered it more obscure. For, counterfeiting much
trouble in his Mind, with a low and trembling voice he said to them;
Gentlemen, let us be gone from hence, or we are all undone; for my part I
think that this is an enchanted Forest, and that all the Adventures we meet
with proceed from Magic Art, And that the Enviers of the Palatine's fortune
keep him here by witchcraft, and us with him. For, how can any Man imagine
without a manifest illusion, that Modestina, my Master's Wife, should be
transported into this Forest ( without the help of some that deal with the
Devil) to come to utter her Complaints in this Desert corner, which has no
Inhabitants but ill-boding Schreech-Owls, and seems only fit for a Sabat or
Assembly of Sorcerers? And what know I but that Despair (wherewith her
complaints do speak her over whelmed) has driven her to make recourse unto
this horrible remedy, to release her Body out of Prison, and free her Mind from
the rage of her Jealousy? Thereupon he told them, that it was, indeed,
Modestina lying at the foot of a great Tree upon a Carpet of Moss, who made the
Woods so resound with the Eccho's of her lamentable sighs; that if she
perceived him, he was a lost Man, because she would believe that he had
seduced her Husband to those Levities, or at least fomented them by his
Assistance, conjuring them to retire themselves speedily from that place; or
(if their curiosity invited them to hear any further) to permit him to fly,
that he might not appear before the face of his Mistress, transported with
Anger and Grief.

This amazement was so dexterously feined, and this advise colored with such
probability, that it served as a Fascination to the three Gentlemen's Eyes, and
a Charm to their Ears, So really they believed this false Report. And whilst
they were consulting whether they should succor that distressed Lady, or not
discover themselves to her, Boleslaus still urged them to retreat, but in such
a manner, as rather increased their desire of assisting her. At length,
Pomeran, who had always pleaded Modestina's cause without knowing her (when he
indeavored to divert Iphis from the pursuit of Almeria) judging besides the
happiness he should have to be known to her, he should begin his
acquaintance by the most signal service he could render her, remitting her
into her Husband's Arms, made his Companions resolve to succor the Lady,
(which Boleslaus desired most, yet seemed to fear) assuring them (the passion
which possessed Iphis for Almeria proceeding but from a light youthly humor,
and rather from Fancy than Reason, or a Disease in the Mind than any sound
judgment) that he would thank them in the end for that which perchance at
first would seem displeasant to him, like those who revile the Surgeon which
hurts them in dressing their wounds, and afterward return him thanks, with a
good recompense, when the Cure is done.

Upon this Resolution they all concluded to make Boleslaus stay to be witness
of their proceedings, and that by his means they might the better be made
known to the Lady. But he feined to strive to get from them, the more earnest
they were to hold him. This Contestation could not be without some bustling,
neither was the bustling without some Voice and Murmr. At which a Man came
rusling out of the Thicket, as it were to inform himself of the way, which he
seemed to have lost. This was Arcade, whom Serife had retained having sent away
Armelin and Philaster; he having his Lesson, took no notice of them, but as
Peasants; and thus spoke to them: Friend's, what evil Spirit brought you
hither to disturb the Silence, and re-double the Horror of this place with your
quarrel some debates? Yet I am not sorry I have met with you, since your
arrival may do an afflicted Lady, and me some service in setting us again
into the way, which we have been long seeking without happening upon any body to
direct us. He had no sooner uttered these words, but Pisides, knowing him by
his Voice, and Clothes, answered; Arcade, what do you persist in the
enchantment, which makes you not know, (when your Eyes are open) those to whom
you speak? Do not you remember, that you saw us not many Days since in these
Clothes, when the Chase made you put a Stag into our Hands? At these words,
Arcade, as if he had been much surprised, Replied, Oh my Lord Pisides. what
good Angel directed you so opportunely into this solitude to the succor of our
Palatine's Lady, whom a violent, though not unjust Jealousy does enforce to
traverse both City and Country! Upon further inquiry he told them (as he had
been instructed by Serife, that Modestina, being arrived at Plocens, had
commanded him to conduct her into that Forest, where she had learnt, that the
Palatine, her Husband, being taken with the Love of a Shepherdess, had
relinquished the care of his Charge, and contemned the Grandeur of his Dignity
and Birth.

These Gentlemen being prepossessed with so many Charms, accosted the
sorrowful Lady, who seeing them approach seemed to be much affrighted, yet
settled her Countenance again, as soon as Arcade, stepping in before the rest,
informed her, that those, whom she saw in Peasant's Habits, were Gentlemen of
Quality of the Palatine's Retinue, whom they sought as well as she; He having
eclypsed himself from their sights some Days since. They having never seen
Modestina, doubted not but Serife was she; For (besides the Dress and
Accoutrements of a Lady of note, wherewith she was sumptuously attired) she
had so mortified, or rather dyed her Face with a certain yellowish Liquor, that
it seemed Mellancholly had given her the Jaundies; Besides, by the means of
some device which she held in her Mouth, she feined another voice so
naturally, that they were deceived on all sides. After they had made their
obeisance, and tendered all the services due to her Grandeur: The only service,
said she, that I desire of you, is, that you would bring me into my Husband's
presence, or do me the last of all Duties, put me into my Sepulcher; For, to
be separated from him, and to die, is the same thing to me. Hereupon they
swore to use their best endeavors (but to make good their Oaths they needed
not go out of the place) conjuring her to rise, and permit them to set her upon
her Horse, which was feeding close by with Arcade's. As she moved her self,
she espied Boleslaus amongst them, on whom casting a stern look, And dare
thou yet (said she) appear before me, thou disloyal servant to a faithless
Master? After thou have so misguided him, who was committed to thy Government,
thou come perchance with thy Companions disguised, like thy self, to plunge
me into new Miseries, and cast me into another Prison. Ah! No, I will rather
open my bosom with this blade (drawing a Dagger from under her Robe) than
commit my self to the Mercy of unknown Persons, who may first attempt my
Honor, and afterward take my Life. Here Boleslaus putting one Knee to Ground,
answered, Madam, Let Heaven never pardon me, if I am culpable of any
misdemeanour toward you, and when you know the condition of these Gentlemen (
whereof there is not one that would not lose a thousand lives for the
preservation of your Honor) you will be sorry for conceiving such a suspicion
of them. I take the Sun, or rather him that give's it Light to witness, that it
is no fault of mine, if Iphigenes has not continued his Affections entire (as
he ought) to you. But alas! I am no more his Governor, but by Name, he is my
Master in effect, the truth (as to all great Persons) is become odious to him,
he spurn's at Remonstrances; instead of taking my advises in good part, he
paye's them with injuries; his answers are harsh and froward, I cannot read his
humor, he is grown so extravagant (these Gentlemen know it as well as I) that
I am not able to hold him; yet for my part, if I have not Power sufficient to
stay him, I have Patience to let him run, but not Constancy enough not to
bewail his condition. His Disgrace at Court is one step to his fall, and if he
continue in his obstinacy, that Gossip which has bewitched him (I think) will
ruin him absolutely both in Body, Mind and Reputation.

Ah! Boleslaus, replied the feined Modestina, if by the contagion of that
deceitful Spirit thou art not become impudent as well as he; if thy words are
sincere, tell me, if I must lose all hope of regaining his Affections, to the
end I may presently by Death set a period to all my Miscries. Madam, said
Pomeran, that remedy were worse than the Disease; For, it is easier to
resuscitate affection in an Heart, than recall a Soul into a Body when once it
is departed; For Heaven's sake banish such desperate Thoughts, and cast away
that murtherous Weapon which so ill become's your hand; And I swear to you by
the Faith of a Man of Honor, that if I were not seconded by any of these
Gentlemen (although their Friendship and Courtesy promises me otherwise of
their Generosity) I will employ my Sword with those of my Friends, my Industry,
my Diligence, and my own Life, to procure your repose and reduce Iphigenes to
reason. These Gentlemen can tell what Disputes I have had with him upon this
Account, and how often he has gone displeasod out of my Company, because he
could no more brook the Liberty which I took in speaking to him, than I the
Libertinage of his Life; But that was nothing to what I now desire to say and
do, being no less animated by the sight of your Afflictions, than the Romans
were moved at the view of Cesar's bloody Shirt.

There was not one of the Company, but engaged with Pomeran to lay their Lives
down upon so just a quarrel, especially Boleslaus, as if by that employment
he desired to efface the suspicion, which she had conceived of him. Here
Arcade, (who could not persuade himself that those Gentlemen, whom he had seen
so frequently and so familiar with Iphigenes, could be so deceived) began to
laugh upon Boleslaus, saying to him in his Ear, That he could not sufficiently
admire the dexterity of the Palatine and him, in representing their Personages.
That whispering cast some jealousy into Pomeran's thoughts, which was
increased by Arcade's often smiling afterward and winking upon Boleslaus,
whereby a person of mean understanding might have evidently perceived a secret
intelligence.

Another time Boleslaus (fearing a Discovery) drawing Arcade aside to tell him
in secret that under pain of incurring the Palatine's indignation, he should
be more serious in his carriage, lest his lightness betrayed all; Argal, who
was fallen into Pomeran's suspicion, said alowd; Senior Boleslaus, amongst
friends nothing ought to be concealed, speak out, that we may know what you
are plotting there with Arcade; For, if it be any thing that may countervene
not only the Service, but the will of this Lady, we protest to oppose your
designs with all our power according to our promise without exception; For,
though we are her Husband's friends, we are friends no further than to the
Altar; that is, as far as Virtue and Conscience do extend, beyond those bounds
we know not what it is to love. If he renounce not his no less unjust than
injurious Passion for that idle Almeria which has metamorphosed him into a
Shepherd, and quench in the legimate embraces of his Spouse the illicite flames
where with the other has possessed his Heart, and robbed him of the use of
Reason, what complacency soever we expressed heretofore to flatter his humor,
we are determined now to leave his service. This he spoke with such
seriousness (animating his Speech with a sharp and colerick tone) as there
remained no doubt in Arcade's thoughts, but that they were really deceived, or
that they dissembled purposely to deceive him; and making him the Fool of
their Play, produce him for their laughing stock and the subject of their
merriment.

At length, notwithstanding all the signs Boleslaus made him to contein
himself, and the austere look which Modestina glanced to keep him in awe, he
could not refrain from laughter, when he heard Boleslaus return this excuse to
Argal. That which I would have said to Arcade in private, was only to inquire
of the particulars of this Lady's escape out of Prison; For, Mieslas kept her
so close in one of his Castles, out of which it seemed so impossible for her to
get, that I think Jupiter himself could hardly have found an invention to
penetrate it, although he should have resumed the same form, which facilitated
his conquest of Acrisius his Daughter; or had she been a Flora, I know not how
Zephyrus could have accosted her. The feined Modestina to give color to this
invention, and to hinder those Gentlemen from discovering the whole Mystery by
Arcade's impertinent laughing, replied.

You cannot conceive how subtle a Woman's Wit is, especially when sharpened by
Love, and refined by Jealousy; you only look upon the guards that did environ
me, and do not consider that a Woman, who has a mind to deceive, or free her
person out of Captivity, makes those, who are incharged to watch her, the
Instruments of effecting her own Designs: you might rather wonder how the news
of my Husband's licentiousness-should penetrate my Ears in that recluse
Mansion; But without having recourse to the Devil or Magic Art, know, that
suspicions are Lover's Messengers, and their inquiries are so frequent and so
urgent, that hardly any thing that regards the Object beloved can escape
their knowledge: and I must tell you, that my diligence has been such, that
Iphigenes has not done any one thing since his first going out of Podolia,
either at the Court, or in his Palatinate, but I know it as well as he; and
were he now present, I would reproach him all his unworthinesses one after the
other, and reveal his shame to his own Face; neither should he be able to
contradict or oppose any excuse to the Verities which I should allege.

If the Answer Boleslaus returned Argal, put Arcade out of Countenance, this
transported him beyond himself; and bursting into an excessive laughter, his
Imprudence served in stead of the Oculist's Collyriu^ to make the films fall
from the Eyes of those Gentlemen, who doubting already some pretty prank of
Joviality, perceived at length their Error; insomuch that the sad and Tragical
beginning of this Cheat ended with a Catastrophe so Comicall, that the
Deceived, as well as the Deceivers were marvelously delighted with that
recreation.

After this the feined Modestina, to take entirely off that Mask (which rendered
her not absolutely unknown, but much harder to be known) having dipped her
Handkerchief in the Brook, and rubbed her Face therewith, wiped away that
yellowish color, which altered her Complexion. Which done, she seemed so
beautiful, that had not the natural tone of her voice (which she used again,
having taken out of her mouth that which she had put in to falsify it)
assured them that it was Iphigenes in a Woman's habit, they would have been
more difficulty drawn out of this second error than the former. Then, they fell
to discourse freely, and the Palatine declared to them, wherefore he had taken
a Woman's habit to deceive them, as Calliante had done in Man's, who was no
other than Almeria disguised.

This new Discovery bred a new altonishment, and every one of the Company
thought himself over head and Ears in enchantments. And the deceived party
regretted, that they had not continued longer in their agreeable error, that in
the sincerity of their actions the Palatine might have read the fidelity of
their friendship, and judged by its uprightness, that their Souls permitted
them not to be Favorers of Vice: So Arcade was taunted on both sides, for
having betrayed by his indiscretion, what had been contrived with so much
subtility. But as in Springtime, the Heavens being grown inamored of the
Earth, do heat her bosom with the rays of the Sun, you may hear the Birds
chanting their Love-layes in several Notes; So, Serife perceived by their
language, that the powerful glances of her Eyes had warmed the Hearts of those
disguised Peasants: For, from extolling her Beauty beyond any thing Nature had
yet produced, they fell to particularize her perfections, with such curiosity,
that it was easy to judge that their Passion was the main Spring of their
Eloquence. And as those who are over-mastered by Wine, disclose their
infirmities by a flux of incongruous words, whereby one may gather that their
Brains are troubled with Fumes, which cloud and disturb the faculties of the
Intellect; So, by the discourse of these three admirers, it evidently appeared,
that that sweet Poison which is drunk by the Eyes, had distilled its malignity
into their Breasts, and that their mouths pronounced but what proceeded from the
abundance of their desires. Argal complained that Nature had not made Iphigenes
a Woman; Pisides flattering his agreeable Error, said, That as the Hyena is
reported to change her Sex with her hair, so perchance Iphis having
metamorphosed himself into Serife, and leaving the habit of Male, was become a
Female. Pensive Pomeran, who though he spoke not all he thought, could not
choose but let slip some Expressions, which like sparks gave testimony of his
inward fire; For, sometimes he confessed himself filled with vain illusions,
and to avoid a prejudicial censure, in satisfying his Passion, he protested
that he would remain to the last Breath a friend to Iphis, and Servant to the
incomparable Serife.

The Eighth Book.
ARGUMENT.
Arcade is sent back to Plocens by Serife. Pomeran and his Companions attend on
Serife, whilst Boleslaus advances to prepare Celian and his Daughters to
receive Her. Serife's feined Relation of Herself to deceive the Shepherdesses.
Their endeavors to appease Her Counterfeited Grief. Calliante with his
Assistants returns from seeking Almirea. Their amazement at Serife's admirable
Beauty. Calliante's and Serife's moanfull Contention to outvie each other in
Misfortunes. Her swounding at his feined Bravadoes against Iphis. Calliante's
seeming Anger against Almeria and Iphis, is appeased by Serife's conjuring
Speeches. The Amorous and ambiguous discourse betwixt Calliante and Serife to
puzzle the hearer's Thoughts. Serife seeming at length to be overcome by his
Courtship, make's show of requiting the inconstancy of Iphis, by Answering
Calliante's feined Flames.

THe perplexity of Boleslaus was no less than Serife's apprehension, lest what
she had so long, and so seriously concealed should now be unadvisedly revealed,
to the ruin of her Fortune, and perchance of her Honor. At length it was
concluded that the Design should still continue to deceive the Country People,
to make themselves some Pastime with their Simplicity. To this effect lest
Arcade by his indiscretion should give occasion of any suspicion likewise to
the Rusticks, Serife sent him back to Plocens, incharging him not to mention
any thing of those Divertisements, which she would have buried in the silence
and solitude of the Woods. That done, they repaired toward Celian's House,
whither Boleslaus advanced a little before the rest, to see if Calliante with
his attendants were returned from their Inquest: But he found only the old Man
accompanied with his Daughters, deploring the loss of his profit more than the
absence of the two Lovers, who he imagined had lost themselves on purpose to
find a more free possession of each other. Some questions being past,
Boleslaus told him, that he had other news for him, which was, That the Wife
of Iphis, being transported with Jealousy, was come into those Woods to seek
him, where she had been informed he spent his time in the Embraces of
Almeria, and that his Companions, who had by chance met with her, had sent him
before to know if he would be willing to receive her in his house, she being
a Lady of quality, that had fufficiently where withal to recompense his
services and Courtesy to her.

That hope of Gain was the only Shaft he could have shot to hit the
pretensions of that greedy Churl; His Ears and his Doors were presently opened
at the sound of that Silver Bell. And whilst they were upon these terms,
arrived the other three, leading the beautiful Serife as it were in Triumph,
upon a handsome Nag, whose Furniture was correspondent to the Richness of her
Apparel. That rare Beauty wherewith Nature had Favored her, being increased
by the Luster of those precious Garments, so dazzled the weak sights of Belida,
Merinda and Remonda, that they did not only forget the Graces of Almeria, but
lost the remembrance of the countenance of Iphis. So certain it is, that
Clothes do set off people in such sort, that they seem in a manner
Metamorphosed. Celian looked no further than her Hands and Neck, whither his
Eyes were invited by the sparkling of some rich Rings, and a Carcanet of
precious Stones, which he already swallowed in his Fancy. Every one's
attentions were divertised according to their different inclinations; the
Courtiers admired the Beauty of Serife, the Shepherdesses the Magnificence, and
their old Father the Richness.

This feined Syrene being received (if not according to her merit, however in
the best manner that Cottage could afford) renewed the deceit which she had
so artificially begun in the Forest, and possessed those simple People (who
devoured her words by Mouth-fulls) with what belief she listed, telling them,
That she was Legitimate Spouse to Iphis ( and indeed they were but one and the
same Flesh, their Conjunction being not only Union but Unity;) That she had
sought that Perfidious and Ungrateful Man both by Land and Sea; That He had
Traitorously abandoned her to Despair, forsaking her to follow an Idle
Creature, who being little beholding to Nature for Beauty, had doubtless
bewitched her Husband by some Magical Charms; And yet (said she) I love him
(notwithstanding his Disloyalty) as dearly as my self, and if you please to
measure his Malice by my Innocence, I am in some kind culpable of my own
misfortune, for, I am the Cause that my Rival does entirely possess Iphis. All
this discourse, which had a double meaning, was thoroughly understood by none
but Boleslaus, who could not sufficiently admire the dexterity of his dear
Foster-child, who the better to cover her Deceit, drawing a Chain of Sighs
from the bottom of her Heart, and drowning her Cheeks with Tears, moved not
only the Daughters, but Celian himself to Compassion, and bred Astonishment in
the Courtiers to see her subtility in representing so to the life, a Sorrow,
which they thought was feined. But those Sighs and Tears proceeded from, but
too real, a Source of Passion, so that the Deceit held good on all sides.
And, it being a curiosity as Blameless as Natural, to inquire into the
Disasters of Afflicted persons, to remedy them if it be in our power, or at
least to pity the sufferers if we cannot help them, the Shepherdesses who
desired no less to learn some particulars concerning Iphis and Almeria, than to
hear the Lady's Story, beseeched her to give them the relation of her
Afflictions, assuring her of their Fidelity; and promising, in exchange, to
tell her what they knew concerning those two Persons, whom Passion had rendered
extravagant. Then, Serife, after the manner of Musicians, having made her self
be somewhat entreated, disposing them by that appetite, the more easily to
believe her Inventions, thus began.

Iphis and I were Married so young, that we could hardly know what 'twas to
Love. I was Ward to his Father, who to draw my Estate into his Family, and of a
Guardian become Master of all, made me Marry his Son. If there was any force on
Iphis part, I know not, but in me (I am sure) there was no Constraint, for I
do not remember that ever I saw him without having some inclination for him.
From the Cradle almost we were brought up together: during our Childhood we
loved like Children, and our Affections increasing with our years, I loved him
afterward as my brother, but I must confess after I was permitted to hope to
enjoy him as a Husband, I began to cherish him with a Love more ardent and
delicate. At length we were united by the bonds of Hymen, but alas! that was
only in words, for the use of our bodies was forbidden by his Father, who in
respect of his tenderness of Age and Complexion, deferred our contentments
until riper years had given both of us more Vigor and Ability to consummate
our Marriage. Yet to observe the form of like Ceremonies, we were both laid
in one Bed, but with an old Governess, (that I had) betwixt us, who like a
Salamander did extinguish all our ardour, imprinting in our Spirits so much
respect and awe, that during the whole Night, the motions of Love had no access
in our Bodies. After that, to take away all occasions of our accosting, and to
deprive us of our ordinary conversation, He was sent to the Court, where his
good parts rendering him the common desire of the most accomplished Ladies, He
still made me believe by his Letters (which were my only consolation in his
absence) that among so many Stars which glittered before his Eyes, none could
attract his sight from his Diana, whose Eclypse overwhelmed him with as much
Darkness, as he hoped to enjoy Light, when I should again appear in his
presence. With a thousand such like fopperies did that deceiver amuse my
Simplicity, whilst in the midst of his Triumph over so many hearts, inthralled
by his merits, he became, I know not how, a Slave to a Fugitive, which leads
him up and down Captive where she pleases. Upon certain advice whereof I have
done what I could by Letters to reduce him into the trace of his Duty and
Reason; But He sometimes denied flatly that report, sometimes he accused me
of Jealousy, sometimes disguised his baseness in so many fashions, protesting
incessantly against my Suspicion, and making such show of Innocence, that
(easy fool as I was) I belied my own belief to conform my self to his
persuasions; and to purge him of crime, I accused my self of too much
credulity. Oh how easy a thing it is to circumvent a Soul whose affection
disposes it to take in good part all that proceed's from the Object beloved!
But at last perceiving by his flight with this new Hellen, whom he has
ravished with her own consent; that (like a silly Fish) I had swallowed the
hook under the bait, and what I held but for a Fiction was too manifest a
Passion, alsolutely destructive to my contentment: Love armed with Jealousy
suggested such reproaches to my Tongue against his barbarous Perfidiousness, as
you may better conjecture than I repeat; I exclaimed against Heaven and Earth,
I accused the Innocence of the Stars, as if their influence had contributed
somewhat to his inconstancy, and strewing my Chamber with whole handfulls of my
hair, I bruised my breast with my own Fists, punishing my self for the faults
which he had committed against me. His Father as cruel as he is faithless,
kept me close Prisoner in a Castle, where this news, which afflicted me even
to Death, could enter, but I had little hopes of getting out, to prevent by my
Liberty this ruin of my Affections and Marriage. My condition was like a Man's
who sees his House burning before his face, and is not able to carry any Water
to quench the Fire; Yet, besides that Necessity is ingenious, the Providence of
Heaven (which watches over the afflicted) gave me the invention and means to
free my self from that Captivity to seek my Husband, and endeavor to draw him
out of that Mire of Deboistness, whereinto he is plunged: And being informed in
a City not far from hence, that my Husband (who is but too well known amongst
the chief of this Province) had retired himself into this Forest, where under
pretense of Hunting he made Love to a Shepherdess (which is no other than that
Almeria, disguised in a Country habit) without taking any other counsel than
that of my Affection, I came at a venture hither, not knowing which way to
direct my Course, to meet with him who has stolen my Heart, and robbed me of
his Faith. Thus Courteous Shepherdesses, you have the sum of my sad
adventures, and the Subject of my coming amongst you. Perchance you will judge
this escape an act of rashness, and unbeseeming a person of my Sex and Quality;
But when you consider that those actions (which in themselves do appear not
only not discreet but very reprehensible,) are justified by the Cause that
produces them, (which is a conjugall Love,) and by the End whereunto they
tend, (which is to reform an Husband from his dissolute courses, and reclaim
him from the precipice of ruin to the terms of Reason, Obligation and
Honesty) I believe that the water which comes from so clear a Spring, cannot
be troubled with the Mud of any Calumny; and that so Legitimate a Cause cannot
produce Illegitimate Effects. Can any one be so void of Humane Reason, as to
censure a chaste Woman for endeavoring to make her Husband relinquish his
extravagancies, and return to the enjoyment of her lawful embraces, since that
is to seek her self, not another; and to reunite what God has joined, and
which no Mortal power can separate? But, alas! why do I say re-joyn that which
never was joined, unless in Spirit and the Will? Yet the Will of my inconstant
Husband may not be said to have been united with mine; otherwise he would
never have forsaken me for another, if it be true that that Friendship can
never cease, which has been once perfectly contracted. Whose condition was
ever like to mine? I am a Virgin, and yet I may say I am a Wife, without having
suffered any detriment in my integrity; and being Wife to a Man which shuns
me, I remain a miserable Prey to sorrow. I am Married, and yet am a Widow,
that is, I dye all my lifetime being deprived of my Husband by a ravishment
more sensible than the stroke of Death. Not many days since I wandered
disguised in Man's clothes, despising for him, that despises me, the Glory
of my Condition: and now I run my self out of breath after a wanderer, whom I
am no more able to catch, than he that follows his Shadow, overtake it. Be
favorable Judges of my misery, and if there is any Humanity remaining in your
hearts, I am confident you will be so far from interpreting amiss my actions,
that quite contrary you will not deny me your assistance in the necessity, you
see, I am at this present.

Here Serife cut off her Discourse with Sighs and Tears, which came so
opportunely from her, that one would have said she reserved that Wind and
Water in particular places of store, to let them out when she listed. The
Gentlemen (who knew the Fallacy, admired the readiness of her wit, which could
so dexterously mingle Fables with Truths, and speak things of such double
sense, that nothing she said favored of any improbability) were less moved
than the Shepherdesses; who believing nothing more certain, than that which
she had told them, felt powerful resentments of Compassion at her so
handsomely feined Sorrow. And as the blood in Humane bodies runs to the part
that is wounded, as it were to strengthen and cheer it up; so it being Natural
to comfort them whose affliction touches us, either by lessening their grief
with the lenitive of comfortable words, Recalling their senses from Despair to
Reason, Making them hope for a change of their evil Fortune, Promising
assistance to withdraw or abate the miseries which oppress them, or by some
other ingredients whereof are composed the Cataplasms, that are applied to the
wounds of the Heart: Those Geatlemen, who saw all these passages with a
singular satisfaction, having (to bring on the rest) first made offer of their
Services to the disconsolate Serife, for the conquering of her inconstant
Husband, expected to see how the Shepherdesses would undo that knot which the
Lady had knit and tangled with as much Art, as that which could not be loosed
without the Edge of a Sword.

Their pity presently engaged them in the like tender of assistance to her,
and ( Women being as capable of keeping a secret as the reeds that betrayed
Midas Asses Ears) they declared to her all they knew of Almeria's deportments;
how she came thither in Man's clothes, which she left in Merinda's hands as a
pledge for those which she procured her; How Iphis came after her in a
Countrey-man's habit with those Gentlemen there present; How she had fed them
with lies, sometimes saying she was a Maid, sometimes a Man, with so
well-carried a dissimulation, that they knew not what to think of her; such
Sweetness and Modesty she showed amongst Women, such courage and dexterity
being in the company of Men; That sometimes she acknowledged she had
committed a fault, and therefore had stolen from her Parents, fearing their
displeasure, Sometimes again she would justify her self to be full of
Honor, and as immaculate as a new born Babe: However (as Detraction easily
slippeth into Reports) for their parts, they said, if she was honest, they
believed it was in words only, not in effect; then, they construed in the
worst sense the Passions which Iphis expressed for her, and the feined rigours
wherewith she rejected his pursuit: In sum, they all concluded that her
running away with that Man convinced her sufficiently of the crime, which she
had before disguised with such cunning.

Hereupon Serife (to make her self sport by sounding the malice of those
Rustic Souls) pressing them, as if she had been animated with a jealous
curiosity, to discover freely to her, what suspicious, or unbeseeming actions
they had observed betwixt those two Lovers; such tricks, replied Merinda seek
Darkness more than the Light; witnesses are not required at such bargains;
those that have a mind to do amiss, endeavor at least that Solitude and
Silence may shelter their faults from Judgments and Murmures. I perceive, said
Serife, that you deal with me as Surgeons do with those who apprehend
letting Blood, amusing their Eyes another way, whilst they open the Vein; or,
as the Executioners sometimes with criminalls, covering their Faces, that they
may not see the instruments of their punishments; you veil my mischief, and
thereby redouble my torment: For, it is some consolation to see on which side
one falls.

Hence Belida took occasion to speak thus, Madam, the Jelousie which possesses
you, and which for a time did likewise disquiet my Brain, is a Disease that
makes us seek what we would be grieved to find; it forgeth oft-times Idea's
of that which is not, makes small trespasses seem great offenses, and like a
malign Ulcer, impoysoneth it self by the same remedies which are applied to
cure it; any Wood will foment that Fire, but no Water can quench it. If you
will be ruled by me, you shall content your self with that little which we
have told you of the much which we know; for your imagination, (ingenious to
torment your self) will extend but too far, (to your sorrow) the particulars
we have already represented. I speak by experience of that Malady, which is
worse than a quartane Ague, for, it proceed's from an odd conceited humor,
which every thing does aggravate, and nothing eases; Heavens be praised I am
now rid of it, and I hope I never shall be afflicted with the like pain. I am
confident, Madam, as the Stars lose their Light in the presence of the Sun,
that your Husband, having but compared your Beauty with that which he now so
esteems in Almeria, will account all her Graces ugliness, and the more
deformed, because accompained with the vilest and most infamous of vices, which
is Adultery; and that balancing your Fidelity with the Lightness of her
indiscretion, he will the sooner acknowledge his fault, the greater Obligation
he has to your merit. For, as we find by experience that the Sheep which
have been drawn out of the Wolv's Throat, are the tenderest and daintiest meat;
So his Love doubtless will be the sweeter and more firm toward you, the
greater his Repentance is for having offended such a Goodness, and tempted such
a Patience as yours. Live in this hope, Madam, and assure your self, that if
Iphis has two Eyes, and sees you, Almeria's gone; she will be the Object of
his Disdain, and you of his Affection; Perchance the difficulty of possessing
you, has transported him to this no less unjust than inconsiderate Passion.

Remonda (after the manner of Women, who would be sorry to hold their peace
when others speak) interrupting Belida, would also pay her shot with the mite
of her verdict, adding to her Opinion an expedient remedy to ease the Lady
Serife's plain, to whom addressing her Speech; Madam, said she, It seeme's
that Heaven conspiring your good, has sent hither on purpose a Man that will
release you of that trouble, by tearing Almeria out of your Husband's Arms,
and putting him into yours; it is one Calliante, who saye's he is her Brother:
he came hither yesterday to inquire after her, and is gone this Morning with
my Brothers to see if they can find them out. I marry Sister, replied Merinda,
there is a salve indeed for this Lady's sore, to tell her of a Gentleman that
is come with an intention to kill Iphis, or make him marry her whom he has
abused, which will be an absolute dissolving of his former Marriage, which is
not consummated, by another whose consummation has preceded the Wedding.

At these words Serife seeming extremely disturbed, feined to fall into a
swound; and as there is no body so deaf as he that will not hear, so there is
none so sick as those that counterfeit themselves to be so: Serife dissembled
her indisposition with such Art, that every one judged it to be real; some
ran to fetch Vinegar and Water, whilst some pinched her, and others rubbed her
Face; the Shepherdesses handled her after their fashion (that is) rudely, yet
for all their doing she stirred not, so that they thought her past recovery.
The Courtiers knew not whether they had best laugh or cry; and in effect she
had continued longer in that pleasant ecstasy, if, when they came to unbrace
her, she had not feared (by leaving to the view of those Argusses and Lynxes
the precious treasures of her bosom) that without divination they would have
passed from Conjecture to the certainty of the Truth. So she awaked out of
that sweet Sleep, as full of Joy in her Heart to see her Deceit take so
handsomely, as of Sorrow in her Countenance; For, all her Blood being retired
inwards, she looked as pale as Death, and watering at the same time her Cheeks
with Pearls, which she had prepared in her Eyes, with a trembling, and, as it
were, a dying voice, she formed these words. Who was that which by an endeavor
pitifully cruel has restored the Light to my Eyes, to make me contemplate in
my self a Spectacle of nothing but Miseries? Oh Death! the only Consolation of
those who are remedilesly afflicted, why do thou seize on so many persons
that shun thee in the midst of their Delights, and leavest me in this World,
who invoke thee without cease, unless thy meaning be to make my Head a Butt
for all Misfortunes? Then, the Design is to rob Iphis of his Life, or ravish
him alive from me; from me who Live not but for him and in him, and who to
save his Life would lose mine own, or rather many Lives, if I had them, to
rescue him from Death. Oh Destiny! if thy Rigor be yet susceptible of any
spark of Pity, close my Eyes with that Sleep, out of which one never wake's,
before they see so tragical an Event. My dear Friends, pray give me leave to
die, for it is time that by this last action I testify to my Faithless
Husband, how much I cherish his Liberty, and that if I have not strength enough
to follow and overtake him, I have constancy enough to let him please himself.

This said, she would have drawn out of her sleeve, hanging after the
Sarmatick fashion, the same Dagger wherewith she feined to kill herself in the
Forest, had not the disguised Gentlemen held her Arm; but there needed no great
striving to hinder her from hurting herself, who had no such intent, and who
would have wounded Iphis as soon as herself. Mean time this strengthened the
Deceit: For, as there is no tincture so lively as that of blood, so there is
no impression so powerful as that which is mingled with some tragical effect.
The Shepherdesses were no less moved with the generosity of her courage, than
mollified with compassion to see to what a point of Despair the unfaithfulness
of Iphis had reduced the deplorable Serife: Their Eloquence being not able to
form Consolations powerful enough to appease such vehement Sorrow, all they
did was to chide Remonda for her indiscreet babbling.

By this time the Lamp of the Day being drawn near his Occident, and beginning
to give place unto the smaller Lights, which his absence kindles in the
Firmament, arrived Lupicin, Antalcas, Fleurial and Manile, accompaning
Calliante, who came from the fruitless search of those whom they had before
their Eyes without knowing them. At this arrival the Gentlemen renewed their
attention to consider this new Comicall Act, the best whereof was, that
Calliante, who came with intention to deceive them, was himself deceived.

By the complot betwixt him and Serife, at their parting in the Forest, he
knew the fallacy wherewith she had prepossessed the spirits of all the Company;
But his return being unexpected, Boleslaus had not the leisure to inform him
speedily enough of Arcade's folly, who by his laughing had betrayed all the
grace of that subtle supposition. It was a double delight to see Calliante's
Mine countermined; But there remained a great mistake in the Gentlemen's
Spirits, who took him for a Woman in Man's clothing, and that he only
counterfeited a Man-like Countenance; on the contrary they believed Serife to
be a Man, who was really of the Sex they thought she counterfeited.

What worthy Pensill shall I borrow to delineate to the Life the new
astonishment of Calliante at his approaching near Serife? For, having left her
in his Country-weeds, and finding her in that glorious attire, which she had
put on purposely to complete the conquest of his thoughts, he could hardly
persuade his fancy to believe it was the same Iphis, whom he had left in the
Forest. In a word, those rich Ornaments gave so much advantage to Serife's
Beauty, that they did the Office of Wood in augmenting Calliante's Fire; which
was such, that losing the knowledge of himself, and the remembrance of the
Personage he was to represent, he remained a good while, his Eyes fixed on
her Face without motion, as if he had been ravished in a profound Ecstasy; and
resigning the Function of his Tongue to his Eyes, he was angry with Nature,
that she had given him but two to contemplate so many Marvells. On the other
side the Countrymen, his attendants, who were not accustomed to see such
eminent Beauties every Day, much less to be visited by them in their Cottages,
were not without admiration. Whilst they were in this maze, not knowing where
to begin their Compliments, the Women who were as hasty to cast the secret out
of their Mouths, as a Spider off their Bosoms, put them out of pain: For,
Belida to her Husband, and Merinda and Remonda to the rest, had quickly related
all that had passed since their going abroad, and what the doleful Serife had
imparted to them of Her Disasters.

This bred some compassion in their Hearts, and made them imagine that it was
not without some particular Providence of Heaven, that so many strange
Accidents in so short time should be presented to their sight. In mean time
Boleslaus accosting Calliante, after some common Discourse, intelligible
enough, told him softly Arcade's fault, that he might understand that the
Gentlemen knew him. How? said he, starting, for Liante? No, replied Boleslaus,
but for Almeria, their discovery has gone no further. If they know no more,
answered Calliante, bid my Brother keep his Countenance, and the scene not
ending yet, the Countryfellowes shall not be the only deceived.

To describe the greeting of these two Lovers transvested in Opinion, but in
Effect, clothed according to their Sexes, were a difficult task. For, Serife
being deeply in Love with Calliante, never had so fair an opportunity of
representing her Passions to him with as much reality, as he thought them full
of dissimulation: And Calliante feeling his Heart so straightly bound by the
Charms of Serife's graces, knew not what to think, nor with what expressions to
discover his Resentments. At length making use of the privilege of the Deceit
which occasion then offered him. He broke silence, saying: That, if it were a
Consolation to those in misery to find their equals in infelicity, he might
in some wise deem himself happy among his Disasters to have met with her: yet
if persons that have been bitten by mad Dogs, do feel their rage re-doubled by
the approach of such as are affected with the same Disease, he feared to
exasperate his by Communication, or (Maladies being contagious) to multiply
his Afflictions by making known to her the just complaints which he had to
make against Iphis.

Sir, replied Serife, I believe our disasters are arrived to such an height,
that there can be nothing added to their extremity; and if every thing which
has attained to its just plenitude is accustomed to diminish according to the
course of Nature, me-think's in our Despair this glimpse of Hope is yet
remaining, that henceforwards we ought to look for the Decreasing of our
Miseries, since they cannot increase without augmenting to infinity. Your
seeking and mine tend both to the same end, though by different ways; we aim
at the same Blank from several Stations. You lament the loss of your Honor,
wounded by the lightness of your Sister, and I bemoan the Levitie of my
Husband, who by a cruel Change does unworthily abuse my Loyalty. I am
confident if without Passion you could compare one affliction with the other,
you would be constrained to judge in my favor (ah wretched favor!) and
acknowledge that I am the most miserable: But, it is hard, especially in
matters of Misfortune, for a Man to be an equitable Judge in his own cause, in
regard a Straw in our own Eyes, or a scratch upon our Bodies, is more painful
to us than a Beam in the sight, or a great wound in the Body of another.

Madam, answered Calliante, if all did run in the Race of Infelicity, every one
would think he were first at the End; For, there is no one living but esteem's
his own Misfortunes the greatest in the World, and thence proceeds so many
lamentable Complaints, wherewith the distressed fill the Air. But this is a
miserable contestation, wherein it is more advantageous to be the Conquered
than Conqueror; Nevertheless since in all things we strive to overcome by an
innate desire which we cannot leave, but with our Lives; give me leave to
tell you, that if those who lose their means ( as it passes in some places for
a Proverb) do lose their Senses, with what fury ought they to be transported,
who are robbed of their Honor, which all well-tempered Minds will always
prefer not only before the favors of Fortune, but their own Lives? This
make's me run in this enraged manner through the World, seeking my Sister,
either to dip this Weapon in her Blood, if she has forgotten herself so far,
as to dishonor our Family by an irreparable fault, or to venture my own life
with her Ravisher, who (I am informed) is your Husband.

At these words, pronounced with an angry Tone and an haughty Countenance,
Serife began to Stagger; and (as if one had plunged a Dagger in her Heart) She
let her self sink down betwixt the beloved Arms of Calliante, who never
received so acceptable a burden; as she never swounded with so much delight.
This Fainting was beyond Jest, proceeding not from Sorrow, but the excess of
Contentment, which transported her at the Presence of an Object dearer to her
than the whole Universe besides: yet the aspersion of a little cool Water upon
her Face recalled her Spirits from that amorous trance. As an Infant sleeping
betwixt it is Nurse's Arms, does open leisurely it is little Eyes, when she
spurts out of her Breasts some drops of Milk upon its Face; so gracefully did
Serife unclose here is, feeling her Cheeks bedewed with some Tears, which
Apprehension and Tenderness had squeezed out of Calliante's Eyes, being
troubled at this unexpected Accident.

This tempest being past, Calliante fell into another, being assaulted on all
sides with the Reproaches and Accusations of the Assistants, for having raised
that Storm, which blasted all the Flowers that appeared so Lively, and so
Lovely in that Lady's Countenance. Alas! said he, carrying Compassion in his
Looks, persecute me no more for a fault, which has brought it is Repentance
with it, and for which I crave this virtuous Lady's and the whole Companie's
Pardon. I confess that my indiscreet Expressions did hurry her even to the
threshold of Death, but I am so sorry for having reduced her to that extremity,
that I protest by the Beauty of her Eyes, ( whose light I shall ever hereafter
most inviolably honor) to belie those audacious Words by contrary Effects,
turning the fury of my Passion against my Sister and my own Blood, and re-gain
Her the possession of that Husband, whose disloyalty rendereth him unworthy of
her Merits, and whom, notwithstanding, she seems so passionately to affect.

Courteous Sir, replied Serife, as your first speeches precipitated me into
the pit of Death, this second give's me a desire to Live. But have a care to
verify your words if you will have me esteem you a Gentleman of Honor.
Madam, said Calliante, if Death prevent me not in the attempt, I will exactly
perform my Promise; For, I had rather lose my Life, than stain my Honor with
the breach of my Word. A more sensible affront cannot be done to any Man, than
that which our Family receives from your Husband; but I remit the Vengeance to
Heaven, and lay my interest at your Feet, resolving to exercise my Indignation
only against that unadvised Girl, who has suffered herself to be abused by
him. and who by her indiscretion has blemished the honor of our House.

If you forgive my Husband, for Heaven's sake and my consideration, with all my
Heart I pardon Almeria the offense which she has committed against me. But
if Courtesy ( the Queen of gentile Spirits, like yours) has any ascendant
over your Heart, I conjure you to let it plead for Me, and obtain the Favor
which I shall demand of you. Demand not, Madam, answered, Calliante, but
Command; For, I esteem it as great a glory to obey you, as I should be
sensible of shame to refuse you any thing, were it to the hazard not only of
my Fortunes, but of my Life and Honor. I do not use to make any such
Reservations, when I tender my services to Ladies of your Quality, especially
when they are accompained with such Virtue and Graces as you possess.

Sir, replied Serife, I am so far from desiring any thing prejudicial to your
Fortunes, Honor or Life, that clean-contrary I Study the preservation of them
all together, beseeching you to pardon your Sister, and not to execute any
Vengeance upon Her Person; She is your own Flesh and Blood, and (as it were)
another self. Why do I say another Self? These Shepherdesses (who have seen you
both) tell me, that one drop of Water is less like another than you two, so
that you seem not only to be Twins, but the same Person; there being none
living able to distinguish the one from the other, and that would not take Her
for Calliante if she were in your Clothes, and you for Almeria if you were in
Here Is. For (which Heavens forbid) if in the heat of your Passion you should dip
your Hands in the Blood of that miserable Creature, who could exempt you from
expiating that Parricide by the loss of your Honor, Life and Fortunes, I say,
by the prosecution of humane Justice? which though you should find means to
escape, would not the Divine, ( think you) persecute you through all the
corners of the Earth, whither your guilt would make you wander (like a
desperate Orestes) without finding any repose for your Conscience, which would
be agitated with a thousand Furies, the Voice of Blood crying out incessantly
for Vengeance of your Crime?

Calliante feining to be overcome by her conjuring Speech, made appear that
the Poet's fictions were not without reason, when they made Love disarm the God
of War, and snatch the Thunder out of Jupiter's Hand; For, casting all his
Poison under the beautiful Serife's feet, he protested that he would do no
violence to the person of Iphis, nor vent his Passion against Almeria, but
would continue loving Her as Himself, and honor Him in the person of that
Lady, under whose obedience he resolved to Live and Die. Thus the Peace was
concluded, to the great contentment both of the Gentlemen and Rusticks, who
were as much amazed to see in so little time so great a change, as when a
furious Tempest, which fill's the Air with Thunder, and storms the Earth with
Rain and horrid Hail, is suddenly dissipated, leaving the agreeable Rays of
the Sun in full liberty to inlighten those that do behold them. It was as easy
for Calliante to keep his Oath, as hard for him to break it; For, how could he
offend Iphis without injuring Serife, or take revenge of Almeria without
turning his fury upon himself? So, they all agreed to terminate amiably this
memorable adventure, and rather to employ the Oil of Friendship, than the
Vinegar of Enmity for the healing of their imaginary wounds.

Their Conversation being ended with the Day, Serife remained with Celian's
Daughters, whilst Calliante and the other Gentlemen retired themselves with
their Rustic Attendants to their Lodging. Money being not spared, there was
great cheer on all sides; For, besides the Presents which Serife bestowed on
Celian, and his Daughters, Calliante was no less liberal to his Assistants,
who promised him a thousand services for his generosity to them. As it is the
custom of Peasants in all places to drink freely, especially in the
Septentrionall Countries, these spent the best part of the Night at that
exercise; in so much that the Sun was already well advanced in his Diurnall
course, before their Eyes were capable of discovering his Light. Whilst they
were buried in that Liquor, the abundance whereof ingendreth Sleep, no less
than the juice of Poppies, our Gentlemen had full leisure to entertain
Calliante, who acting the modest Virgin before them, made show of a certain
bashfulness, which argued nothing of a loose Life; For, persons given over to
Impudicity, do commonly acquire the quality of Impudence; So that they knew not
how to judge lightly of her, whom they saw so extremely reserved; And this was
the only part Calliante had now to play, to make them still take him for
Almeria.

Then falling upon the Discourse of the passionate Affection he expressed to
Serife, the Gentlemen told her that they could not but admire to see the chance
so turned, that being now in Man's apparel she seemed to be excessively
taken with Iphis, who some Days before received nothing but Marks of her
Disdain. Whereunto Calliante thus replied, I know not if those Clothes be
enchanted, but I must confess that since his change of Habit, my Heart is
become so Linked to his perfections, that out of his Presence I am like a
Marrigold, which closes when the Sun is set. The Contrymen being risen (to
be rid of their not much pleasing Company) he dispersed them several ways,
to make further search after the Fugitives, that they might not (as he
pretended) travel up and down in vain as they had done the day before. They
being gone upon this trivial errand, the conversation of the remaining Day
was in the Forest, under the delightful shades, in the company of the
Gentlemen and Sheperdesses; who thought they had made no little gain by the
change of Iphis and Almeria, for Calliante and Serife, measuring the quality
and merit of the Persons by the profit which accrued to them. In this agreeable
place, where the Shepherds used to lay their Nets for the innocent Beasts, did
our Gallants contrive inventions to deceive their simplicity. Here it was where
those who thought to surprise, were themselves surprised, and where was acted
the most pleasant Piece of cousenage, that could be imagined.

For, first, if you consider the Shepherdesses, there was not one of them, but
took Calliante and Serife for quite other persons, than those which had
appeared before, under the Names of Almeria and Iphis. Next, if you look upon
Calliante, though he did the office of a Deceiver, he was deceived no less
than they, taking Serife to be a Man, whom Nature had created otherwise; than
the Gentlemen, who had disguised themselves to abuse the Peasant's Eyes, had
their error also; For, they thought Calliante to be a Woman, when he was
really what his habit spoke him. Neither was Serife without a share of mistake,
in that she conceived that the Passion which Calliante expressed to her was
feined, when his Tongue was a faithful Interpreter of his Heart's sincerest
thoughts. As for Calliante's Scouts, Lupicin and the rest, their fruitless
peregrination was a sufficient testimony of their being perfectly abused.
Only Celian was not deceived in his end, who aiming at nothing but to get what
he could on all sides, found his account well enough; it was indifferent to
him whether Iphis and Almeria, or Calliante and Serife filled his House, so
that his Purse was filled he cared no further.

Whilst the compassionate Shepherdesses endeavor to comfort the desolate
Lady, with the hope they gave her of shortly seeing again her Husband, in
regard there were so many Messengers well acquainted with all the passages of
that Forest, sent several ways to seek him, she sighed for an Object present
in Body, but whom she thought absent in Heart, not deeming herself to be the
absolute Mistress of his desires. And as by instinct of Nature every one is apt
to lay his Hand on the Sore, or to the place where he feels pain, they were
no sooner seated under the favorable covert of a fair Sicomore Tree, whose
root was watered with the Crystal of a clear Fountain, but Serife began to
rip up the remembrance of her disgrace. What Lenitives soever the assistants
indeavored to apply, it seemed as if the anguish of her wound was augmented by
their remedies.

Calliante and the other Gentlemen alleged many exquisite reasons, and acute
Arguments, to convince her obstinate grieving, which would much imbellish this
History, if I did not fear to spin it out too far beyond my measure. I shall
therefore content my self to remark only this pretty accident which interrupted
their discourse: It was the plaintive chanting of a Turtle-Dove, who having
chosen her seat upon a withered stump among those Leaves, began to salute their
Ears with a tone so doleful, that it would have moved Compassion in Souls
least susceptible of pity; which gave occasion to Serife to return it these
words: Pitiful Bird, the living Emblem of my condition, thou come very
opportunely to present thy self to my view, and teach me to bemoan, in an
accent, like thine, the Miseries that afflict me. Thou make us sufficiently
understand, that thou have lost thy Mate, either by the cruel stroke of Death,
or some sinister straying; and thy Groans reverberating the Eccho's of these
Woods, seem either to recall him to Life, or to carry him news of thee; to the
end by his return thou may give over complaining. Sweet Dove, thou have no
Gall, neither have thou any need of it; For, thou art assured that his
unfaithfullness will never give thee cause to express any anger. Alas! I am not
so perfect, nor so happy, for the jealousy which devour's me, take's away all
sense of sweetness, and make's me hate to live, by reason of the inconstancy
of him, who has made me so many deep Protestations never to be capable of
disloyalty. Go pretty Pigeon, and since I have Married my Accents with thine,
direct thy speedy Wings toward the place where my perfidious Iphis now is, and
if thou can not make him consider the torment which his ingratitude causes
me to suffer, make him ashamed by thy presence, and let him see that Men (
more unreasonable in their irregular dispositions than Animals which have no
understanding) may learn of them Lessons of Fidelity and Temperance.

She had continued longer in this mournful strain, if Calliante seeming to
fear lest the excess of sorrow should transport her into some unseemly
extravagance, had not broke off her Speech, telling her, that to talk to Birds,
and to sow upon the Sands, were things equally absurd; That she ought to hope
for better Fortune, and take the consolation which is commonly given to young
Widows, which is, that by the loss of one Husband they may have the choice of
diverse others. And being of a Joviall Disposition, especially in these
delightful Recreations, having a greater desire to pass his time in Laughing
than Lamenting, he fancied an Air to some Lines, in answer (as he said) of the
Turtle's mournful Tune. So with a very agreeable Voice, he animated these

STANCES.
THese Pains assail not you alone,
For among Mortals there is not one,
But feel's his Reason overswai'd
Sometimes; there are no Souls, whom Love
Has to such Discontents betrayed,
But like Effects of Pity move.
Why by an Humor then so Blind,
Which disturb's your Riper Mind,
Feed you your Thoughts with bitter Pain;
Since it is the Poison of the Heart,
Rather by Custom to complain,
Than by Reason ease the Smart?
Some transports of Grief's excess
May be excused, I confess,
But how can you e're justify
These Afflictions indiscreet,
Whereby you seem an Enemy
To that Face and Eyes so sweet?
What Trespass has that Golden Tress
(Of Lover's Vows the dear Address)
Done, to deserve the Penalty
Of so Severe a Punishment,
And receive the Salarie
Of Crimes whereof it is Innocent?
The Ungrateful whom you thus bemoan,
What rare Perfections can He own
To merit, that away should fade
The beauteous Roses of your Face,
And let pale Sorrow thus invade,
And play the Tyrant in their place?
Appease the Tumults of your Breast,
Change these Distractions into Rest,
And by the End of this sad Rage
(To oblige some better Spirits)
Rob not your Beauties from this Age,
Which has its Glory from your Merits.
If the Power you call to Mind,
Wherewith your Graces use to blind
Beholders, when your Eyes are calm;
Of Dying quit that strange Desire,
And don't reject that glorious Palm,
Which by their Luster you acquire.
As long Hair imbellisheth handsome Faces, and rendereth more ugly those that
are ill-favored; So Music has that property to inlighten Hearts inclined to
Mirth, and augment the Sadness of those that are Melancholy. The Gentlemen and
Shepherdesses, whose Spirits began to droop at Serife's heaviness, were much
rejoiced with this Singing; but the afflicted Lady's heart seemed to be
deeper sunk in Sorrow. These sweet words were to those dull Rustic Souls, like
Pearls cast before Creatures incapable to judge of their value; but they were
otherwise understood by the Courtiers, who judging of the Lion by the Claw, by
this Essay of Calliante's wit (whom they still took to be Almeria) presently
gathered this conjecture, that the Palatine was more in Love with the Beauty of
her Mind, than of her Body, which was comely enough for a Man, but hardly
handsome for a Woman. After a little time Serife having weighed in her Thoughts
the sense of Calliante's Verses, as soon as she demanded it, obtained leave to
evaporate these

SIGHS.
WHen (Soul) will thou enjoy some Rest,
Leaving the Prison of this Breast?
When shall thy Days and Pains have End,
Since thy Griefs beyond compare
Have only the last Hope to friend
Of those that perish with Despair?
Yet when this Body, pale as Lead,
Augment's the number of the Dead,
How shall thou assurance have
To see the End of thy Torment,
If separated by the Grave
To Thee remain's yet Sentiment?
Heavens, Directors of our Fate,
Planets, who, like a Reprobate,
Condemn me to be miserable,
If all things else their Limits know,
Why will you render Memorable
By it is Eternity my Woe?
Fortune has made my troubled Heart
The Mark of each malicious Dart:
The Source is dreined of my Tears,
And now are always in my Sight
Of the dire Furie's Torch the Fears,
In stead of Titan's pleasing Light.
Alas! what Light can me rejoice,
Since separated from my Choice
The Morning Star of my Delight?
This is the worst of Tyrannies,
To rob It of Its glorious Light
Or to bereave Me of my Eyes.
By hiding Him from outward view,
Vnkindest Spirits, what? think you
My inward Faculties to blind,
And by the Essay of your dread Ire,
Stealing the Pleasure of my Mind,
To bar me also of Desire?
No, treacherous Ingratitude,
Who of my Sense's servitude
The Patience do exercise,
By Calms and Tempests, as you please,
With no less Fury than do rise
The Winds to agitate the Seas:
Know, that by a generous wound,
Rage in my dearest Blood had drowned
My wretched Life with this Disgrace,
If through a fond Timidity,
My Fury had not given place
To the Fear of displeasing thee.
The Courtiers (who were only able to discern the Vivacity of this Reply, and
not to savor simply the Air, as the Shepherdesses did, but taste the Sweetness
which was comprised in these Lines) were hereby invited to display afresh all
their Rhetoric to conjure that Sorrow, which Serife feined with such
dexterity, that they could hardly believe it was a Fiction; but that she had
taken that Cloak to cover the real Resentments of her Passion for Almeria. And
with joint supplications they never ceased importuning her, until they had
drawn a solemn promise from her Mouth to requite Calliante's courtesy, by
changing the Resolution, she seemed to have taken, of Dying; as at her
entreaty he had renounced his of killing Iphis or Almeria. And hereupon
Calliante beating the Iron while it was hot, and making use of this overture,
was not satisfied with her yiedling to this request; but acting openly the
passionate Lover, he offered to be her Servant, in case her Husband did
repudiate her to marry Almeria, swearing to her by all that was most sacred,
That he would be as zealous to render her the most assured Testimonies of an
inviolable Loyalty, as Iphis had been forward to afflict her with his unworthy
Ingratitude.

If it be true that the Thunder proceed's from the Antiperistasis of Heat and
Cold, and that there are passages from one Extremity to another, which leave no
perceptible Medium; whereof the experience may be seen in great Friendships,
which are changed into mortal Hatreds: It was in this Point, that Serife
manifested either her Dexterity, or the Levity of her Sex; The first, in doing
like those Coach-men or exact Horsemen, who show their skill by their quick
turning; the other, in changing Face much more suddenly than the Night ruling
Planet, which is thought to have so much communication with the weaker Sex.
For, as if Despite had restored her Reason, which an excess of Love had
ravished from her, she presently appeared as if she had been cured of her
doleful Humor, and putting on a serener look, her Eyes gave an evident
testimony that her Ears were not displeased with that new Proposition.

But lest any should condemn her of too much easiness to be won, they are to
consider that this was only a Fallacy to abuse the Country People, (the
Gentlemen knowing it already) and besides, that it was not without diverse
persuasions, as well on Calliante's part as of his associates, that she
delivered the Arms of her obstinacy by bending her Resolution to this
Condescendence. Which she did with such gracefulness, that she effaced all
suspicion out of the Shepherdesse's Souls, as she left no small admiration of
her wit in the Gentlemen's, and to crown this action, she demanded Permission
to sigh out this

COMPLAINT.
MUst I then, Oh! cruel Fate,
Out of my Soul's Image blot,
And must Despair now separate
Whom Death's severity could not?
Must my sincere Affection's fire,
Extinguish't by Disloyalty,
Resign its Flames to the Desire
Of a revengefull Tyranny?
Sol may as well sequestered be
Of Light, as I of my Desire,
Though his ungrateful Levity
Indeavour's to befrost my Fire.
His Oaths and execrable vows,
(From which Despair now set's me free)
Dear Sighs and Torments, pleasing Woes,
Can I forget and living be?
Can I with settled Front behold
Of his bewitching Face the Charms,
As motionless as Mountains bold
Reject the inclement Air's allarms?
Alas! my treacherous Will, I fear,
Will render my Fault pardonless,
As it is seen in Treason, where
They Are punished that in Will transgress.
But if by his Inconstancy,
I am compelled to this Divorce,
Reserving of that sacred tie,
Only the ungrateful Mark of Force:
To Free my self from his sweet Bonds,
I contradict my proper Sense,
And this no Reason else Commands
But too much injured Innocence.
In fine, the Lot's now cast, I Will try
(And let not any think it strange)
To pay his Mutabilitie,
With a just Vengeance by my Change.
Calliante finding this conclusion favorable to his Design, interrupted her
Singing with these words: Madam, Nature has endued our Souls with a certain
instinct which inclines us to the preservation of our selves, as appears by
Persons that are drowning, who lay hold on any thing they can reach to save
their Lives. Some few days since you and I, without Reason or Consideration,
did run to find out Rocks, where (according to the violence of the Passions
which blinded us) we could expect no less than a deplorable Shipwreck: But the
just Heavens ( which favor good intentions) have not permitted us to fall into
those Precipices, quite contrary, in having made us known to each other, it
seems that they have imitated the Earth, which produces no venomous Plant,
but has ordered i'ts Antidote to grow near it, if we have the skill to
distinguish them. For, if we manage aright the occasion that is now presented
to us, we may reap great Advantage by our Loss, and draw an extreme
Satisfaction from the Center of our Afflictions, as the purest Pearls, which
are so clear and smooth, are taken out of black and rugged Shells.

Then, to create a belief that she should find a more solid and firm
supporter of him than she fancied, he made her a summary Relation of his
Condition and Quality (as he had done before in Celian's House, when he so
handsomely cheated all that heard him) adding some circumstances, and so
quaintly contrived Expressions, that the most scrupulous of the assistants
could hardly believe their Eyes, their Ears were so surprised. It is true,
being touched to the quick, he animated his Discourse with so passionate an
Action, that it was easy to discern he had much interest in those passages;
Which was taken diversely by the Shepherdesses, Courtiers, Serife and Himself.
In sum, upon this last Resolution, the Sun beginning to make Night by the far
extending of his Shades, they retired to the Village; the two Lovers more
inamored than satisfied of each other, because, for diverse respects, they durst
not manifest their Resentments; The Shepherdesses not very well pleased with
the Lady's sudden change, who therein showed herself more Woman than they
could have wished for the Honor of their Sex, and the Courtiers full of
admiration at the dexterous conduct of this Plot, whereinto they penetrated no
farther than half way.

The Ninth Book.
ARGUMENT.
Serife's passionate Complaint to Boleslaus. His discreet Answer. Serife's
moanfull Soliloquie being retired into her Chamber. Calliante's feined Plot to
steal away Serife in the Night. His Speech to the Swains, persuading them to
assist him. He discover's his Design to the disguised Gentlemen. Their's and
the Rustick's several resentments. Merinda acquaints Serife with Calliante's
intention. Her counterfeited Astonishment. The zealous Pomeran's serious Speech
to Almeria, thinking her really a Woman. Her wittily-fram'd Answer to increase
his Mistake. The Countrymen by the Gentlemen's wrangling with Almeria (in
Calliante's habit) are brought into suspicion of Serife's, and his
transvestment. Pomeran demands the Justice's Assistance to prevent the feined
Rape of Serife. The Character of Lawyers and Judges. Calliante and the Rusticks
are imprisoned. The Rusticks are presently released upon Bail. Upon their
Petition all the disguised Gentlemen and Serife are likewise committed into
several Prisons. Their contradictory Answers to the Judge's Interrogatories.
The noise of Iphigenes his Country-Mistress is carried to the Court. Modestina,
being animated by Love and Jealousy, makes her escape out of Prison, and
come's disguised to Plocens to seek her Husband Iphigenes. Her resemblance to
her Brother Liante makes her be apprehended, by Mieslas's command, for him.
Arcade coming to advertise Iphigenes of Mieslas cruelty to the supposed Liante,
is imprisoned likewise by the Clowns. His Deposition before the Country-Judges,
and his ambiguous Conference with Boleslaus, and his fellow- Prisoners.
Calliante's and Serife's distemper at Arcade's news. Their several Speeches to
the Judges. They are more straightly imprisoned for their high Words. Boleslaus's
subtle Plot to procure the enlargement of Serife and the rest. The extorting
Judge, to screw money out of his disguised Prisoners, condemns Serife and
Calliante to a privy Search. Celian's Daughters are appointed to do the Office.
Serife overcomes her Shee-visiters with Presents, and large Promises Calliante
pays them with Kicks and Blows. He is Beaten by the Peasants (that rescue
the Shepherdesses) bound Hand and Foot, and threatened to be put to a shameful
Death. Humbertus Captain of Iphigenes Guards, coming with his Troop upon
notice from Boleslaus, apprehends the Judge with all his Accomplices, and
releases Iphigenes and the rest. Humbertus his suspicion concerning Calliante's
suffering. The Conference betwixt Humbertus, Calliante and Iphigenes. A
Consultation among the released Prisoners what punishment to inflict upon those
Clowns and Judge. Boleslaus his discreet Opinion. The Justice and Clemency of
Iphigenes in punishing those Offenders.

THey had not been long returned to their Village, before the weary Swains came
dropping in from several parts, as wise as when they went out; yet every one,
not to appear an unprofitable Servant, made his report, which came as near to
the truth as white to black, and had as little reference to each other. For,
some promised him the next day to bring him certain tidings where the Fugitives
were; others despaired of ever finding them; like the Scouts of the Israelites,
whereof some discouraged the People from entering into the Land of Promise,
others made them believe wonders to animate them to that glorious Conquest.
There was nothing to be talked of, but to provide good cheer for those hungry
Seekers. who had lost their labor in following a Shadow and embracing the
Wind.

Thus the Evening passed, not without many Protestations of an inviolable
affection betwixt Calliante and Serife, each striving in cozening his companion
to deceive himself. Their discourse for some time was in private, where (after
some laughter at the simplicity of those whom they had abused) said Calliante,
Amongst all this jeasting we may be caught our selves in earnest. For, I
protest, Brother (said he in her Ear) thou do act Serife so admirably, that
I cannot take thee for Iphis, and I consume within myself by an unknown
Passion, which give's me a cruel torment, but such a torment, that I had
rather be cured by the hand of Death, than use the means which the Tempter
proposes to me. My Soul abhor's so execrable an impiety, so detestable an
abomination, and I protest that I love nothing in thee but what seems to be
Feminine, and if there were a Fountain in the World, where Males might be
Metamorphosed into Females, my Passion would make me so uncivil as to do my
best to plunge you in it perforce, having first employed all my Retorick to
persuade you. But this is better to be wished for than expected, and fitter to
amuse my Passion than ease my Pain. Alas! I suffer really what Ixion endure's
in the Fable, and this for desiring (like him) to embrace a Cloud: For, what is
that but the shadow of a Feminine Beauty which I admire in you? Ah! Dear Iphis,
do you not pity my perplexity?

So much, answered Serife, that against the advantages which Nature gives to
the condition of Men, you make me almost desire to be a Woman, that I might
possess you entirely, and under the Laws of Hymen be perfectly yours. But,
Brother, Is it possible that you can jeer so handsomely at my simplicity, and
that you are so Artificial as still to continue your dissimulation before me,
who plainly perceive your policy? Those Heats of the Liver which your Speech
discover's, resemble the Surges that appear in the Sea some time after the
Winds are down, and the Tempest of the Air ceased, as marks of it is anger, and
precedent agitation. You think (I believe) that those Gentlemen and
Shepherdesses understand what you say, not considering that you speak
particularly to me, and that you are heard by no other Ears than mine.

I do not use to be so ravished from my self, replied Calliante, that I cannot
see to whom and before whom I speak, and by calling you, Brother, you may well
judge that I presuppose no body hear's me but your self, and therefore I now
unmask myself to you, assuring you that if under the simple habit of a
Shepherdess you appeared to my Eyes no less beautiful than an Angel, under
the Ornaments wherewith you are now attired, your presence does so transport my
senses that I may well forget that you are a Man, since mistaking my self I
know not what I am, nor by consequent what I either say or do I feel a
dizziness of Brain which so disturbeth my Reason, that if you alter not
speedily the Scene, I shall be overcome with these Illusions, and fall into
the strangest Frenzy that ever possessed a Spirit diversely agitated.

They had not so soon ended this amorous Conference, but the hour of the Night
separated them, Serife remaining in the company of the Shepherdesses (or rather
of her own thoughts) and Calliante retiring with the Men to take some rest, if
the perplexity of his Mind would permit. Boleslaus by the privilege of his
grizled Beard, and the Quality of Governor to Iphis, had the favor to stay
some while after the rest with the Lady, as having some business of importance
to impart to her. Being alone, after some merriment at the success of their
stratagem, Serife who was all on fire, or rather all fire for Calliante, (yet
who through a dissimulation, natural to her Sex, could discreetly retein her
impatiences) embracing the old Man, said, Father, Now is the only time of
setting a period to my miseries, by discovering to Liante who I am, being
fully assured of his Affection to me. Then having related to him from point to
point their sweet secret Discourse, He will doubtless, continued she, hold it
a perfect Miracle to find me as he desire's me. If I defer it any longer,
Occasion ( which is bald) will presently pass, and perchance I shall never
find one so favorable as this, which now presents it self; Fortune envious of
Virtue, and who has been my Enemy from my Cradle, will probably suscitate some
cruel blast that may nip my Design in the Blossom, and reducing my hopes into
Ashes make them be blown away with the Wind. My tongue's end itched to tell
him what I was, but Shame stopped the passage of my Voice, and besides Prudence
suggested to my Thoughts, that (not to disobey my dear Mother Aretuza) I ought
to do nothing without your advise, (my dear Father) I pray conform it to my
Desire, if you Desire to preserve my Life.

Madam, replied the discreet Senior, I so much desire the preservation of your
Life, that I will always be ready to redeem it with the loss of mine own; but
I beseech you to consider that all Passions are Precipitated; all Precipitation
is Blind and Blindness is incompatible with Reason. What we do through the
violence of that Motion, is not judicious; and that which is without Judgment
is subject to great Failings, and those Failings to remarkable Repentance: You
may do what you please, it is my Duty to Obey you, and move in the Sphere of
your Authority. You are past Childhood now, the yoke of Paternall power does
no longer press your neck, take heed of imitating the Birds whom Love drives
into the Fowlers Nets, and thence to Death, or, at least, into Captivity. The
Servitude whereunto Marriage obliges Ladies is not small, those Devoirs will
seem very strange to you, and for a Pleasure which you esteem the more, the
less you know it, you will purchase to your self much Pain. Besides, what will
People say, nay, what will they not say, if you discover your self, and be
Married in this manner? You will lose all your Estate and Honors, and you
shall be sure to make your Father your Enemy, who will pursue you with Fire and
Sword; your Mother will run the hazard of her Life, and not being advertised
of your proceedings, she will be so perplexed, that the fear of Death will
perchance make her anticipate the Vengeance of the rigorous Mieslas.
Clandestine Marriages ( whatsoever can be objected) are always suspicious, and
bear the Mark of Dishonesty in their Faces. What will these Gentlemen think
that are in your company? At first, it may be, they will conceit, that all this
was done by Witchcraft, but when Time shall have made appear, that there is no
other Magic than Natural, if they do not blame your Conduct, it will be
either for want of judgment, or through excess of Friendship. Consider
moreover, that if the secret which we have so long concealed, should be
disclosed in this manner, you will render yourself the Fable of the whole
World, and the most infamous and dishonored Creature under the Sun; Whereas,
if moderating your Desires a little, you will but follow my former Counsels,
(which you were than pleased to relish, and your Mother approved, and which are
conformable to your Affection and Design for Liante) Fame will speak you not
only in Polonia, but through the whole Universe, the most admirable, the most
Honorable and the most triumphant Virgin, that ever Nature framed: the Mouths
of Mortals will not have Tongues sufficient, nor their Tongues words, nor
their Words terms elegant enough to express the Greatness of your Name, and
represent the Splendour of that unspeakable Glory wherewith you shall be
crowned, and which will one day, by the Pen of some eminent Historian, convey
your Esteem into the Memory of succeeding Ages. Marriage, Madam, is a sacred
and indissoluble bond which ought to be treated of with Grave and Serious
deliberation, not amongst these Facetious Recreations; Those that contract
Matrimony ought to proceed with great Circumspection, and think upon the
establishment of their Fortunes, and the good of their Progeny, rather than the
satisfying of their Lusts. If you do otherwise, the Shadow is not so
inseparable from the Body, as Repentance will be from your Action; And it is
far more easy to prevent a Mischief, than remedy it when it is happened. I am
not against your being Married to Liante; since from your Infancy it seems
that Heaven ( where Marriages are made) has destined you for him, but I would
advise you to deferr your Wedding, and of blameable render it glorious, of
private public; hide not with shameful obscurity that which ought to be
illuminated with the clearest Light that ever produced Day. What is but
prolonged is not lost, and my judgment can foresee no Cause (what Venim soever
envious Fortune spit's in Virtue's face) capable of hindering so just and so
Legitimate an Effect, which may Crown your Father's Heart with Satisfaction,
your Mother's with Gladness, the King with Contentment, and the whole World
with Wonder.

These words pronounced with a zealous sincerity, conformable to the
disposition of him that uttered them, were as Water cast upon the Fire of that
Passion and as a Bridle to that Temptation which began to transport the Reason
of the virtuous Serife. And immediately a Vermillion color (the livery of
Modesty) overspread her Cheeks, not without some trickling tears, which the
vehemence of her distemper extorted from her Eyes. He that has ever observed
the Pearls that Aurora sprinkle's upon red Roses, may fancy something near the
countenance of that Lady, scorched with Shame and watered with Tears. Thence
the prudent Boleslaus gathered, that her Heart was in no ill temper, and that
Honor gaving gained the victory of Love, did render Reason triumphant over
Passion. At length with no less Sweetness and Modesty, than he had Compassion
to see her in that Perplexity she answered: Be assured, Father, that this
assault, nor any other (Heavens permitting) shall ever make me forget my duty,
neither have I hitherto admitted any thing into my thoughts, contrary to what a
Virgin of Honor owes to her Reputation and Virtue: The End which I pretend is
so Glorious, that it is sufficient to justify all the means I use to atchieve
it. But since your Prudence, ripened by the advantage of Years and much
experience, make's you judge that the fruit of my desire is not yet come to
maturity, I will deferr the gathering it, until you shall think it time for
me to cast off my veil. This said, not to press any farther her Heart, big
with Sighs, Boleslaus having made his obeisance and wished her good rest, left
her, to retire to his other Companions.

Then, Serife seeing herself alone and thinking she was unheard, having opened
the Flood gates of her Eyes, and given Air to her sighs, she eased the burden
of her overswollen Heart by the utterance of these doleful words. Wretched
Serife, how long must thou (like a miserable Sisyphus) roll this stone, which
is no sooner brought to the top of thy pretensions, but by a fatal weight, in
spite of all thy Force and Industry, it take's the advantage of the steep
descent to precipitate thee into the bottom of Despair? Shall thou never see an
end of this Labor, no less Unprofitable than Painful? Shall a clear Day,
dissipating the foggy Vapors which environ thee, never shine upon thy Repose?
Is it then Registered in the Book of Fate, that thou must consume in these
comfortless Woods the most flourishing season of thy Years, in the Presence,
but not to the knowledge of him, who is the innocent and amiable Cause of thy
sufferings? must thou then spend, and perchance end thy Days in these
obscurities without informing him, who thou art, and of the true manner of thy
Love? Oh Liante, Oh Calliante! if you could read within my Heart the Torments
which you make me feel, as you find in my Face the subject of your own
Disturbances, I am confident you would be moved with the same Compassion for
my Woes, as you desire me to have of yours. Alas! you have this Comfort at
least in your Disease, that you tell me freely what you think, but I
nourishing your Perplexities by my own Pains, dare not speak half my thoughts,
lest you should discover what I am, and know too soon for my Contentment, what
you will never know but too late for my Desire. Rigorous Law of Honor, why
have thou chosen the infirmity of our Sex, unless it be to render more
sensible the effects of thy Violence? But no, dear Honor, Pearl beyond esteem;
no sacred Chastity, (who to every well-bred soul art a kind of inviolable
Deity) I am determined to consecrate my pleasure to thee, and sacrifice upon
the Altar of thy severity my innocent Desires; I have ever hitherto been too
Religious an observer of thy dictates, to forget now so lightly what I have
been, what I am, and what I ought to be, if I will close the Period of my Life
in that Reputation, which in this World I have acquired. Yet I find by
Experience (which I did not heretofore believe) that there is no punishment so
great as the sight of that which we are forbidden; For, the Object irritating
Desire, and Respect striving to suppress it is Motions; in this contention is
formed the most exquisite torment that ever tortured any Soul. But when I
consider that it is partly for Honor's sake, partly for a subject which I
esteem beyond Expression, the Beauty of these Causes abateth the Rigor of the
Effect, and makes me find I know not what Pleasure in my Pains. Only the
silence, which I so exactly keep, aggravate's their smart, and render's my
Flames more ardent, the more they are suppressed. He that dare's vent his Misery
by Complaints, suffer's but half the Anguish; they are Happy in their
Unhappiness who suffer for an Object that is informed of their Martyrdom, and
is capable of corresponding with their Desires: But it is a double torment to
be consumed with Care, and with the Fear of revealing it. This is to dye like
a silly Sheep, which without crying receive's the Knife in her throat.

Oh Heaven! the witness of my Moans,
Who the ruin of my Joy conspires,
Grant that the Author of my Groans
Like you, may read my Heart's Desires:
Or consolate my troubled Sense,
By lessening my Misery;
Or, else give me the Confidence
To say in Dying, that I Die.
As if these verses had had the power to call SLEEP out of his dark Cave, where
the Poets feine, that he frames the fantastical extravagancies of Dreams,
he gently powered into her languishing Eyes some juice of Poppies, which caused
so pleasant a drowsiness, that letting her body fall upon the bed, all her
sorrows were drowned in that repose, which Nature has ordained so necessary
for the preservation of Life.

The Country-People's Houses are commonly so ill built, that they let in the
Light by as many holes as Argus had Eyes, so that out of one Chamber one may
not only hear, but see what passes in the next. This gave Celian's Daughters
the curiosity, not only to hearken to the Discourse betwixt Boleslaus and
Serife, and to her complaints after he had left her, but also to observe her
deportments; whereby they gathered that she was really much afflicted. But
neither by their Discourse, nor her behavior, could they ground any conjecture
contrary to the Opinion they conceived, that she was indeed Iphis Wife,
induced to affect Calliante as much out of spite to see herself rejected by
the one, as by inclination to the merits of the other. Thus passed away the
Night, whose sable veil equalizeth High to Low, Rich to Poor, and, by the
benefit of Sleep, the unhappiest to the most Fortunate.

Next Morning some of the Swains, allured with the luster of gain, offered
themselves betimes to Calliante to make another Search; but he thinking to
have better sport by their presence than in sending them away, having warmed
their Heads with Wine, made them this pleasant Proposition, saying: Honest
friends, you know the injury Iphis has done me by abusing my Sister; you know
the Assistance you have promised me in taking my Revenge of him, I cannot
desire a more sweet, a more fit, nor a more ready one, than by stealing away
his Wife and making her Mine, to oblige him by this irreparable Offense to
Marry my Sister (as he has promised) and leave Serife to me, whom he would
be loath to acknowledge for his Wife, after she has been in my possession. In
saying this he dazzled their Eyes with an handful of Crowns, which made them
promise to further his Design without any farther consideration; Then continued
he; But you must beware lest these Gentlemen, (who are his friends, and as
many Spies to watch our actions) discover this Match: For, if they should
perceive any thing, our Plot would be prevented and my hopes absolutely
ruined, which would transport me into the desperatest Rage, that can possess
a Soul doubly inflamed with Love and Revenge. You know that this Lady has some
inclination for me, and that the vexation of seeing herself forsaken by her
Husband, does animate her to resent that affront in the same manner as I
propose to you. It is true that as that Sex is subject to Apprehensions, it is
incapable of sudden and violent Enterprises; besides, Ladies are generally of
that disposition, not to yield without some show of compulsion, even in things
where they are lest of all forced. I can assure you, how displeased soever she
seems, and whatsoever she says to the contrary, that the Rape which I intend
will be attended by her own Consent, which will be a sufficient justification
for my action and your assistance. But, in regard Resolutions of this Nature,
have all their Effect and vigor in their sudden Expedition, this must be put
in execution this Night, by favor of the intelligence we will have with
Celian's Daughters, your Sisters and Allies.

This was no sooner moved, but resolved. Calliante having disposed them to this
attempt, discovered presently the design to the Gentlemen, to the end they
should oppose the carrying away of Serife, and that their opposition might make
another Scene of Merriment, which will have an Exit contrary to what he
imagined. The Swains of necessity must communicate this Plot to the
Shepherdesses, in regard they were to be isntrumental to the effecting of it.
But he that tell's a Secret to three Women must not look to have it long kept
Secret. They presently revealed it to their Father, that he might not be
surprised with that action. But He, who loved the present better than the
future, and Effects better than Promises, did not approve of that enterprise,
which besides it is injustice, and being subject to many disasters, robbed him
of his dear Guests, who yielded him more profit in a week, than he could get
by his tillage in a Year; So that, partly out of Prudence, partly for his
private interest, he absolutely refused his consent, commanding Merinda to
advertise Serife, that she might stand upon her Guard; this Office Merinda
would have performed without his injunction; For, her Heart was so oppressed
with that Secret, that she had resolved to disburden it by her Tongue,
whatsoever befell.

At this news Serife counterfeited such amazement, that she seemed, for a
while, as if Fear had been carrying her Soul out of her Body; at length having
somewhat recollected her Spirits, with a trembling voice she said; To what a
degree of Misery does Fortune reduce me, since she persecute's me so
cruelly, that in the same Port where Hope promised me Security, She make's me
suffer Shipwreck? What? must I then follow those I ought to shun, and fly from
those who promised me all assistance? Those disguised Gentlemen, my Husband's
Friends, will they be my Protectors against him that made me such solemn
protestations to preserve me from all injuries? Ah Calliante, you will sell at
a dear rate the promise you gave me of your succor, since without having the
patience to stay till the Fruit be Ripe, you will gather it by breaking the
branches, or rather transplanting the Body of the Tree out of the Ground of
it is Duty. Have you forgot, Soul blinded with Passion, that I consented to the
admittance of your Service and Affection, only in case Iphis ( whose yet I am)
repudiated me to marry your Sister, and so to cure at once the Honor of that
abused Virgin, the Disloyalty of my inconstant Husband, your Love and my own
Jealousy? Believe it Calliante, if I find any Asistance, this Precipitation
shall cost you dear; and if all humane succors fail me, I will borrow from
the courage of my own Heart, and the vigor of my Arm the last remedy of all
miseries, which is Death; and sheathing a Dagger in my Bosom, I will reduce
all your Designs into Smoke.

Madam, answered Merinda, by Heaven's favor, you shall not be put to any such
extremity: For, if my Father expressly forbid's my Brothers and their Companions
to act any thing against your Person, the contriver of this Plot will reap
nothing but the Shame of having attempted it, and you shall be free from the
Displeasure his unadvisedness would have caused to your Thoughts. Serife
knowing that it was the powder of injection, which made the Rusticks favor
that Project, to try their Dispositions, and tempt them by feeling their
Pulses on both sides, having put some small Chains of Gold into the
Shepherdesses Hands, to make them Bracelets; and showing them several rich
jewels, she promised them, that those should be the meanest Recompenses of
their fidelity, if by their means that storm blew over her Head; giving them
besides, some pieces of Gold to hinder Celian to keep his Sons in order, and
some to be distributed among them; Hereupon they became like that corrupt
Judge, who caused a Coach (which a Client had given him to pronounce sentence
in his favor) to be drawn by Horses of a greater value, which the adverse
Party had presented him.

Whilst this was in agitation on one side, Pomeran (who was, as we have said,
jealous of the Palatin's Honor, and who did not greatly relish his Passion for
Almeria) entertained in his thoughts the pleasantest imagination that could be
devised: He fancied that Serife had an intent to marry Calliante under that
disguise, and it being done and past all remedy, that (he resuming the habit
of Palatine) would laugh at their simplicity, as well as the Country-People's.
Therefore out of a desire to oblige Mieslas and Modestina, and (as he thought)
I phigenes himself (as those do a courtesy to poor Creatures that are
frantic, who take the pains to bind them, although they rail and exclaim all
the while they are tying) He thought it very requisite, that He with his two
companions and Boleslaus, should oppose in good Earnest that Imaginary Rape;
and to the end they might the more securely effect their intention, it was not
held improper to require the Justice of the Place's succor.

The Evening being come, every one stood upon his Guard; Serife not only
stirred not abroad, but refused the entrance of her Chamber to Calliante;
Celian watched like the Hesperian Dragon over his Treasure; His Daughters were
set Sentinells, to call for help upon the least allarm; the Swains being
overcome by the Commands of Celian, and presents which Serife sent them,
pretended difficulties, and stood still with their Arms across; and the
Gentlemen were resolved to preserve Serife; Hereupon Calliante feining to be
in an excessive Rage, fell to vaporing with the Countrymen, thundered out
diverse threats against their baseness, called them treacherous Villains for
failing him in the only time he had need of their help, and vomited all the
bitterest terms that Despair does use to suggest in like occurrences.

But the hour of Rest summoning them to retire, they all continued for a while
in a sad silence, every one allowing the more liberty to his Thoughts, the less
he gave his Tongue; until Pomeran, esteeming it necessary, to speak in that
extremity, thus began; Almeria, it is now time to quit that Mask, we are not
Men to be cheated as you imagine, content your self with having ravished the
Heart of Iphis by the Charms, which his Passion make's him find in that little
Beauty, which appears in your Face, and seek not to rob his legitimate Spouse
of his Body; He cannot be yours until his first bonds be dissolved, which he
has so publicly and solemnly sworn never to violate; greater Ladies, than you
can ever hope to be, pretend to his alliance, if that first Marriage could be
declared void. Do not think to inchant us, or surprise the Palatine by your
artificial Stratagems; For, we are resolved with the peril of incurring his
dis-favour, and losing our own Lives, courageously to hinder your Design of
making your self his Wife; be satisfied with the part you have in his
Affections, without aspiring farther, unless you have a mind to see a strange
disorder, and humane Justice as well as the Divine opposed against your
Practices.

Calliante concluded by this Discourse, pronounced with a grave and settled
Countenance, that Pomeran was seriously and really deceived. Therefore to
entangle him the faster in his Net, he replied: My Honor is so deeply engaged
in this business, that I must die or bring it to perfection, nothing but
Marriage can make me Repararation; Iphis has plighted me his Faith, being
in full capacity of Understanding and Self-disposall, whereas that which you
pretend was forced, and in an Age so tender, that he knew not what he
promised; therefore I maintain that he is more Mine than Modestina's, and
Iphis is able to justify his engagement to Me in despite of all your
endeavors and contradictions.

These expressions were like Oil cast upon the Fire of that Indignation, which
was kindled in the Genlemen's Hearts. So they grew to high Words, then to
Threats, afterward to Exclamations; Iphis was named aloud, Almeria likewise.
Hereupon the Countrymen that were in the next room, sending their looks
through the crannies, and leaning their Ears to the Wall, suspected there was
some deceit in the disguisement of those unknown persons; and Antalcas
reflecting upon Serife's resemblance of Iphis, and besides hearing Calliante
called by the Name of Almeria, he presently concluded that Calliante was
ALMERIA and Serife IPHIS, which filled those Rustick's Heads with such strange
imaginations, that no sleep could seize upon them for that Night.

Scarce had the bashful Harbinger of the Day saluted the edge of the Horizon,
when Pomeran (who had not closed his Eyes) leaving his Companions as Guards
upon Calliante, went to the Justice of the place to require succor for the
preventing of a violence intended against a Lady of quality. The Officers of
Justice in villages are a pretty sort of People; For, Ignorance having
predominance there, the Dominicall Letter is less known than the Golden Number,
so that their Rule is Money, and the Level of their Justice is this Maxim of
Lawmakers, I give thee 'cause thou give me, and Do thou for me, and I Will
do for thee. The Springs which make this Engine move are of quick- Silver, The
first thing they ask is, who is Plaintiff? the next, who must pay us? and before
hand, like true Executioners of Justice. Those petty Tribunalls are the ruin
of the People; and whereas true Justice is to give every Man his own, These
have the trick to rob every one of what he has: For, those thirsty Leaches
suck indifferently the good blood and the bad.

Pomeran having spared nothing that might induce these to assist him in that
Action (which he thought very important) they went, as the Grecian Orator
said, to a Golden harvest. First they seized upon Calliante and the Rusticks,
charging Celian with Serife, seeming in this execution as inflexible as
Rhadamanthus: But it is sufficiently known that in the Country, one hand rubb's
the other as well as in Cities, that partly by interest, partly by Favor, and
for respects of Parentage, the Eyes of Justice are usually blinded, as the
brightness of the Sun is dimmed by the interposition of Mists and Clouds. In
what part soever it be, a Stranger is always more to blame than an inhabitant
of the place. The Country men only saluted the inside of the Prison, and were
presently released upon Bail, but Calliante found that place according to the
description of the pious Trojan's descent into Avernus, where the entrance was
easy, but the coming out very difficult. Such are the Scales of humane
judgments, while one is up the other is down, never even.

The Rusticks incensed with this affront, and sufficiently instructed by what
they had heard the Night before, of the Cheat which had been put upon them,
resolved to be revenged, and to that end presented a Petition to their
Justice, desiring that those Gentlemen and the Lady also might be imprisoned,
urging that they were persons disguised, and who under habits different from
those of their condition, were come thither to plot and engage them in some
dangerous Design; Moreover, that they had assumed habits contrary to their
Sexes against the Laws of the Land and Modesty, and that upon farther search
it would appear, that Calliante was a Woman and Serife a Man; which, they said,
they would maintain with the hazard of losing their Lives and Goods. This put
their wise Judges to a Nor-plus, yet they were not much troubled at it; For,
seeing these contradictions they promised themselves good Fishing in that
troubled Water, and as the Raven in the Fable, seeing a Dog and a Wolf
fighting, said, that whosoever had the Victory, he should be sure of a prey;
So, by this Debate they hoped to fill their Purses, being resolved to take
with both Hands.

Herupon Order was given for the securing of their persons; The Commons of the
Village assembled in such multitudes, that what could three or four Gentlemen
do in such an hubbub, unless by resisting, make themselves be Butchered by
ignoble Hands? Besides, Serife (who willingly submitted herself) making them
signs to do the like; flattering herself that only by pronouncing the name of
IPHIGENES, she should dissipate all that rabble, as a great Eagle Scatter's a
flight of Pigeons when she stoops among them.

To be short, they were all Apprehended and Committed, but to several rooms,
which troubled Serife not a little (who thought she should have been put with
Calliante) and cast the rest of the Gentlemen into strange perplexities; And
Boleslaus, (though he spoke not all he thought) could not refrain from saying
as he passed by Serife: Madam, you see into what troubles your Passion has
brought us, now it concern't you to take your measure so as to draw us out of
this Dungeon by your power, whereinto we are cast for your Pleasure. Serife
knew not well construe these words of Boleslaus; For, respecting his wisdom as
she ought, having always found her success as evil when she rejected his
Counsels, as advantageous when she followed them, and gathering by his looks
and tone of voice, that he spoke seriously, her thoughts were in no small
perplexity by this allarm, which seemed a presage of the extremity she should
suffer by that imprisonment. But the short time she had to reflect upon his
advertisement, and the violence of her desire to be with Calliante, caused the
balance of her judgment to incline to the worst side, suffering herself to be
immured in that labyrinth, whence those Monsters (the corrupt formalities which
so disfigure the fair Face of Justice) opposed her enlargement more than she
imagined.

Their examinations were taken severally, which had as little conformity to
each other, as the sable Mantle of Night to the azure robe of Heaven in a clear
Day. Calliante said he was a Man, and being asked if it was not he, who not
long before, being in a Woman's habit, went under the Name of Almeria, he
answered, Yes: This raised a general laughter, as if he had been an
Hermaphrodite.

Serife denied that She was Iphis, protesting that she was a Woman; and her
deposition was the less believed, because true.

Pisides fearing to displease Iphis, said, that he knew not what that Lady
was, but he was Iphis humble servant, and that Iphis was a Man of such
quality, that they should find he had power to Judge his Judges, and punish
that Country with Fire and Sword, if they did Him the least injury; Being
demanded what the Quality of that Iphis was, he answered, that he had Age and
Wisdom enough to satisfy them himself: Being urged to declare his own
Condition, he told them, he was a Gentleman of the retinue of that same
Iphis: Being asked why he had so disguised himself, to pass my time (answered
he) and please him that commanded me.

Argal, in stead of answering to their interrogatories, laughed at his
Examiners; to their threatenings he returned Bravadoes (which had suited better
with a Man in Liberty, than a Prisoner) and without consideration of his
Captivity, speaking like a Resolute Captain, at the head of a gallant Party of
Horse, that had command to cut those Rogues in pieces, he had nothing but
Fire, Sword, Slaughter and Revenge in his Discourse.

Pomeran, more serious and temperate, answered with much more Modesty and
Reservedness, and judging that a brave Spirit ought to say nothing but the
truth, he told them really his Opinion, and what he esteemed ought to be
said for the Honor of Serife, in these words; Gentlemen, it is not good
handling a burning Coal, nor an Iron red hot without Tongs, you have Him in
your Hands, in whose you are, and who has the power to Exercise an horrible
Revenge upon you, if you do him the least Displeasure. I advertise you that
this Lady whom you have imprisoned, and who has given herself the Name of
Serife, is your Palatine IPHIGENES, whom the love of Almeria has thus
transformed; and Almeria is no other than Calliante, who has made those People
(that have caused us to be put here) believe he was her Brother, but I can
assure you he is the same Almeria, who is likewise a Gentleman of quality. I
confess this Changing of clothes is against the Laws; but these Laws are but
like Spider's Webs, which catch only the smaller Flies, Great persons ( whose
recreations are Extraordinary) are exempted from their Rigor: For mine own
particular I am a Gentleman of the Palatine's train, who being come with Him
into these Woods to take my pleasure in Hunting, to comply with his humor, did
fit my self with this Peasant's habit, not thinking fit to leave him whilst
he amused himself in the conversation of this Creature whom he Love's. It
concern's you to make your benefit of my Deposition, which will serve you as an
Advertisement, if you make the right use of it; if not, it will prove the
presage of a grand Destruction, that will befall this Place, in case you should
be so unadvised as to attempt any thing that may incense him, who is able to
ruin You utterly.

Those that have gotten the repute of Liars, are so unhappy as not to be
believed when they speak Truth; Pomeran seeming to speak more wisely than the
rest, was held to be the greatest Fool, and his Predictions were as little
regarded, as those of Cassandra by the Inhabitants of Troy.

Boleslaus being last of all to Answer, desired to speak in private with him
that was to examine him, and (knowing that nothing was impossible nor
impenetrable by the Power of God) dazzled his Eyes with some pieces in hand, and
the promise of a greater sum in case he qualified that business, and
restored to liberty so many Persons of Honor, who were not accused for any
crime, and at the worst could be convinced only of a piece of Youthful folly.

The Judge, who went in as fierce as a Lion, came out again after this
Conference as gentle as a Lamb, having promised Boleslaus to let them all out
by the golden Gate; but for the more clear Escape it would be requisite that
they should make themselves a Bridge of Silver.

This done, for Form's sake he examined Him again and the rest in the Presence
of their Accusers and Adversaries, whose Hearts were ready to fly out of their
Mouths for joy, to see themselves triumphant over those that would have
affronted them. All their answers were so ambiguous, and their ambiguity so
different, that it was no less difficulty to expound them than those ancient
Oracles, which had several Faces and diverse Senses. In sum, there was
nothing said, whereon they could build any conjecture.

At length, these Gentlemen asked leave to write to Serife, that by her
authority she might deliver them out of trouble: This was granted, upon
condition that the Judge first saw their Letters, who found sport enough in the
diversity of their styles. For one called her Madam, another Sir, the third My
Lord, which made the doubt greater; and so puzzled those thick-scull'd fellows,
that they could not devise what to censure. Those Officers of Justice, like
Surgeons and Physicians (whose profit is by tedious sicknesses and wounds that
are a long time healing) thought by protracting this business to make
themselves all rich. But whilst our Prisoners are learning Patience in it is
true school, let us see what is acted more seriously upon the Theater of the
World; and how these passages were but a shadow, and a weak representation of
that which passed, contrary to Iphigenes knowledge, in places, where he had
interest, and reason to preserve more tenderly his Reputation.

It is a frequent observation of Historiographers, that before Wars (which are
God's Scourges) begin in any Country, there are seen certain signs which serve
for presages of Civil Dissentions, as terrible Meteors, Apparitions, and
Armies seeming to join Battle in the Air. These Rural recreations which we
have here represented, were in like manner the forerunners of the troubles,
and diverse For tunes which attended Iphigenes, as will appear in the sequel of
this Narration. The Actions of great Persons, and of those who are placed like
Luminaries in the Orbs of eminent Charges, can be no more kept hidden than
the Light; which (in how close a place soever it be) discover's it self by
sending it is Rays, and Splendour through some little hole or cranny. The
Palatine's disguisement could not be long disguised at Plocens; What he
thought to do in private, was said openly; what he practiced in the secret
retreats of the Forest, was the common tabletalk in the City, either by the
indiscretion of his own Hunts-men, or the Relation of some of Celian's
Neighbors. In sum, he could not keek his Fire so close but that it was
discovered by it is smoke. An ignominious report is like a spot of Oil, which
increases as incessantly as insensibly. The Court was already filled with
these Rural Affections of Iphigenes, and (as the least failings of Favorites
are sifted and aggravated by their enviers) Heaven know's with what Glosses
they adorned this simple Text. Every one censured him according to their
humors; Some pitied, others fed their Envy with his folly: Only the King
could not believe so extreme an oversight of him, whom he had always found
so extraordinary discreet beyond what could be expected from his years. His
Calumniators without considering that this Report might be false, published it
for an evident truth with all the amplifications their Malice could suggest.
But among so many Objects that were taken with the presence of Iphigenes, none
being inamored comparably to the Princess Respicia, you may imgaine with what
pleasure her Ears received this news, what a multitude of confused thoughts
immediately assembled in her brain. She grew exceedingly impatient concerning
her expeditions from Rome, (which, according to the Form and Matter of their
Seal, go but with Leaden Feet;) this occurrence redoubled her longing, and set
a spur in her Heart, which pricked her to know a truth no less than she feared
to find it. She labored all she could at Court to smother this report; but
what could her Tongue do alone against so many Mouths opened to Detraction? As
for Mieslas, the interest he had in his Son's reputation cast him into a rage
not easily to be expressed, hearing in what manner it was wounded; And he
resolved to apply such remedies as his Prudence should inform him to be most
convenient. For, to undertake as many quarrels as there were scandalls, would
have been a labor more difficult than that of Hercules against the Hydra. But
as Mischiefs seldom come alone, another trouble fell upon the neck of this,
which put him into no less distemper than the former.

If the news of this Pastoral Love of Iphigenes disturbed the Mind of the
Princess Respicia, as soon as nimble Fame had dispersed it in Podolia, and
conveyed it to Modestina's Ears, she was possessed with so enraged a
Jealousy, that without the Hope she had of escaping by some industry out of
Prison, to go seek her Husband, and tear him out of those Arms unworthy to
embrace him, She had doubtless by some desperate wound forthwith set a period
to both Life and Pain. She had no sooner framed the Design of going to him, at
what rate and in what manner soever it was, but she began to think of
effecting it by corrupting some of her Keepers. It was in vain, she knew, to
offer to tempt her Governess Perpetua (she being too rigorous an observer of
Mieslas his Tyrannical commands:) Therefore she cast her Eyes upon a young
Youth (Son to some Officer of the Castle) who being about her growth, and
having yet not the least sign of any Beard in his Face, might be taken for a
Woman, if his habit had been suitable.

After she had gained this young Keeper, by her Presents and Promises that the
Palatine, her Husband should advance his Fortunes, She being covered with a
Suite of His, he found the means by favor of the dusky Evening to convey her
safely out of the Castle, and having provided, a quarter of a League off, a
good Horse for her, and another for himself, he brought her at length to
Plocens, by the crossest and least-beaten ways he could pick out. If the
excess of her Affection, had not been accompained with an extreme Justice, I
should be loath to excuse her Action, or make her appear in such manner as
might give Birth to any scandalous censure. But who can with reason blame a
Wife that followe's her Husband, to take him out of the Arms of an Adulteress?
unless he will likewise accuse Marriage it self, whose Law is such, that the
Husband has not the power of his Body, but the Wife; as reciprocally the
Person of the Wife is not here is, but her Husband's, on whom she absolutely
depend's.

Being arrived at Plocens, she fitted herself with handsomer and richer
Clothes, than those which she brought out of her House of bondage: And, lest
Menochius (so was her Conductor named) should be known by any of Iphigenes's
followers, that might have seen him in Podolia, she bought him a Woman's
habit, and charged him to stay in the Inn, whilst she went like the Man about
the City, to inquire what news was there of her Iphigenes; which she found but
too conformable to the report she had heard in her Prison. But she, having
much resemblance of her Brother Liante's favor, was presently taken for him by
some of Iphigenes followers, who took particular notice of her Lodging,
thinking to oblige their Master at his return, by telling him that his
Brother-in-law was there. The poor Lady was much in pain to know in what Forest
her Husband was with his Shepherdess, yet she durst not be too inquisitive,
for fear of discovering herself; Besides, that business was so closely carried,
that although this Endymion was known to be in the Forest with his Diana, yet
very few could give instructions where to find him; So that to engage herself
in the Labyrinth of those intricate Woods, (wherewith that Province was
abundantly covered) had been the way to lose herself rather than find what
she sought.

Whilst she was in this perplexity, Mieslas (having received Informations out
of Podolia of her escape) arrived at Plocens, imagining that she would have
posted thither to her Husband, as a Straw flie's to Amber. This tidings
troubled Respicia no less than Mieslas; For, she apprehended, like Death, the
consummation of that Marriage, which was the Death of all her Hopes. The
Amoretta's of Iphigenes with that Shepherdess gave no small allarm to her
Heart, yet esteeming them only a liberty of Youth, and rather to divert his
Melancholy than out of any desire to cast himself away upon a creature so much
below his Quality, the tumults of her Mind were the sooner pacified; But upon
notice of Modestina's flight, Passion pleading her interest, she departed from
the Court, within short time after Mieslas; and notwithstanding all the speed
he could make, she arrived in a manner as soon as he at Plocens.

Mieslas was no sooner alighted at his Son's Palace, but inquiring for him he
learned that he had been near a Month lost in the Forest; but no body could
tell him any other particulars, than that having found a Shepherdess which
pleased his Fancy, he had dismissed all his train, reserving only two or
three of his familiarest Friends to bear him company in his Courtship. To find
out where he was thus fettered with the Chains of his own Will, was a
difficult matter; For, he had shifted shape and places so often, that it had
been as hard to follow his steps, as the strain of a Stag that doubles and uses
all his wiles to deceive the pursuing Hounds. But in stead of seeking him, whom
he had no hope to find, he was informed of one, whom he did not seek.

For, one of Iphigenes domestics (thinking nothing) said to him, My Lord,
though the Palatine be not here, his Brother-in-law is in this City, expecting
(I believe) my Lord's return. What? Liante? ( replied Mieslas amazed) where is
he? The simple fellow told him his Lodging, and offered to go call him to
him, if he pleased to command him: But lest he should not obey, take two or
three of my servants with you, (said Mieslas) that if he be unwilling you may
bring him perforce. You may imagine with what astonishment was poor Modestina
seized, seeing come into her Chamber (when she least suspected them) four men
armed with Sword and Pistol, which commanded her to go before the Lord Mieslas
Palatine of Podolia. Who, I? (said she) what is his will with me? My Lord
Liante, replied the chief of them, understanding at his arrival, that you
expected here his Son's return, he judged it more fit for you to stay in his
House ( which, you know, is at your command) than to lodge in an Inn, and I am
confident that Iphigenes at his coming will acknowledge it. Gentlemen, answered
the imaginary Liante, if that be all, I had rather enjoy my Liberty in an Inn,
than be a Prisoner in his House, as he has kept me already too long; I pray
thank him for his courteous proffer, and tell him, that I left not his House
with an intent to return any more with my good will; He has put us so in his
House, that he has drawn our House into his, and not content to deprive us of
our Estates, he will yet triumph over our Liberty, which is the greatest
happiness on Earth. Sir (said he, to whom Mieslas had given the command) do
not take it so, we have order to carry you to him alive or dead, be you
willing or unwilling, and you had better go quietly with us than oblige us to
bind you, and drag you along the streets, for we are resolved to execute
faithfully what he has enjoined us. Is it thus, answered the disguised
Liante, that you treat persons of my Quality? Lett's go then, since I must
follow the Destinies, and submit to the Law of Necessity; I hope his Majesty
being informed of this Violence will do me Justice, and deliver me speedily
out of the Hands of his Tyranny. So they went to the Palace, where Mieslas had
given order to imprison Liante in a close Chamber, with a strong Guard, until
he should be further resolved what to do with him. He would not suffer him
to come into his presence, lest his tender Age, and supplications should kindle
any spark of pity in his inhumane breast.

Next Morning, lest the entreaties or authority of Iphigenes in his own
Palatinate, should restore him to Liberty, his Cruelty suggested to his Fancy
the most barbarous resolution that e're was harbored in the heart of Man, to
be quit of that innocent Creature (whose Guardian he was, and whom he ought
to have cherished as the apple of his Eye.) But to what will that execrable
hunger of Riches, and the stings of Ambition not transport men's thoughts? In
Histories we find some examples of Fathers and Mothers, who renouncing all
interest of Nature, have either murdered or made blind their own children for
the Jealousy of ruling. What does this savage Sarmatian to extinguish
absolutely in the race of his Predecessor in the Palatinate of Podoha, the hope
of Progeny, and by that means make all the inheritance sure to his own Family?
He gave order to deliver the Prisoner into the hands of certain bloody
Villains (fully disposed to the execution of his Barbarisms) commanding them to
carry him back to his Prison in Podolia, and make him an Eunuch by the way, or
kill him in case he would not suffer that affront, which is the most sensible
that any mortal could receive.

These rugged Executioners led away the supposed Liante, threatening him with
Death, to make him condescend to suffer that indignity by the desire of Life:
But before his departure they bade him examine his Conscience, and prepare
himself for a journey, longer than he imagined, not only from Plocens into
Podolia, but out of this World into the next.

Some of Iphigenes followers having intelligence of this Tyranny, and abhorring
it, were enraged they could not prevent it, and he that had been the imprudent
Instrument of the poor Gentleman's being apprehended, was ready to be his own
Executioner, fearing the just indignation of his Master, when he should come
to the knowledge of so unjust and horrid a Fact. Among the rest, Arcade having
notice thereof (thinking to oblige his Master by advertising him, and desiring
to save the miserable Liante's Life) presently took Horse, and rode with all
possible speed unto that part of the Forest, where few Days before he had met
Iphigenes, and served him under the name of Serife, where not finding him,
after much inquiry he learned the way to Celian's Village.

The report of those Stranger's imprisonment being dispersed all over that
part of the Country, at his arrival in the Village, he asked to speak with
the Lord Palatine, about some business of great importance. At the first the
People laughed at him, thinking that his coming had been some new Imposture,
and illusion to dazzle the Eyes of their Judges, and hinder them from doing
Justice. At length he spoke so much Reason, that they took his Folly for
Discretion; and to act with more assurance, they apprehended him and put him
into another room of the Prison, to hear more at leisure his depositions.
Wherein he declared, that he demanded a Nobleman, habited like a Gentlewoman,
who made herself be called Serife for private reasons which he knew not; That
this Nobleman was his Master, and that this Master was Palatine of Plocens,
named Iphigenes: That there was happened since his absence an occurrence which
required his presence, So necessarily, that it concerned no less than the Life
of one of those persons, whom he esteemed the dearest in the World.

This relation wakened the Judge's attention; For, Arcade spoke so seriously,
that they could not think he came to deceive them. Yet before they told him
that Serife was in Prison, they led him to Boleslaus Chamber, who asked him at
the first sight, What? Arcade is my Lord out of Prison? does he take pleasure
to make us lie languishing here? For my part I comprehend not his meaning, but
I find no Felicity in such Pastimes, I prithee bid him leave off these
Fopperies speedily, at least if he will oblige me.

How (answered Arcade) should I tell him that? I know not where he is; these
People have made me a Prisoner, I know not whether it be by his Order or by
Enchantment, but I am sure there is a business in hand at Plocens ( for which I
am come hither) that require's none of these delays, unless he will suffer
his Brother-in Law to lose his Life. What? replied Boleslaus much troubled,
have they sent Calliante to Plocens? what talk you of Calliante? ( said Arcade)
I know no such Man, but I say Liante my Master's Wive's Brother. That is the
same I mean, answered Boleslaus, and whom they have put in Prison here with us.
I know not, said Arcade, wherefore you are Prisoners, unless it be to please
the Palatine's Fancy, but I cannot conceive what pleasure there is in keeping
you penned up thus: Is it not that he may have more liberty to dally in the
Woods with his Diana? Malediction light upon her, she is cause that my Master
is dishonored, and his reputation lost at Court, and all over Polonia. There Is
no other discourse at Plocens, but of his Loves; and no body knowing the
certainty, Every one speak's according to his own Fancy.

He is so far (said Boleslaus) from giving any such command, that I tell thee,
both He and Liante, with Pomeran, Pisides, Argal and my self are all Prisoners
here in several Chambers; whether the Palatine take pleasure in it, or
commanded it so, I cannot say, But we have been now five or six Days in this
trouble, neither can we yet tell what these People intend to do with us. And I
know less, Answered Arcade, how they mean to deal with me, whom they have
likewise apprehended for no other crime, that I know, than for demanding to
speak with my Master. But in earnest, Boleslaus, are you a Prisoner, or is this
still to continue the stratagem you know of, and for which I was sent away,
because I could not dissemble and act my part so gravely as I should?

I protest seriously, said Boleslaus, there is no jest in what I tell thee,
and I have almost lost my Reason and Temper in these fopperies. The Palatine
has brought us into these broils, but I do not see how he will be able to
enlarge us again suddenly, he being in restraint as well as we. How? a
Prisoner, said Arcade, did the King command him to be committed? No, not the
King said Boleslaus, but these Peasants, under the name of Serife, and with him
(I tell thee) they have imprisoned all us that attended Him.

What? answered Arcade, is he then yet in the Lady's habit he had when I
left him, and his Lady ( by consequence) in Man's, and each in a several
Prison? But would he be committed to Prison, without disclosing his Quality?
Nay more, said Boleslaus, now that he is in Prison he denies himself to be
what he is, and saye's he is what he is not.

This is the strangest fancy, answered Arcade, that ever I heard of, and which
will produce new Discourses, that will not redound to his Honor. However I
must speak with him, to tell him that he must speedily take some order to
succor his Brother-in-law, whom Mieslas ( who is now at Plocens) has
delivered into the hands of certain fellows, that will take away his Life or
(at least) his Honor, if they be not prevented by some sudden remedy.
Hitherto, said Boleslaus, thou have spoken like a discreet Man, but now I
perceive thou ravest; For, I know where Liante is and am sure that he cannot
be in Mieslas hands.

Their reasoning might have continued long enough, e're they could have
penetrated each other's meaning, Boleslaus not daring to speak all he knew,
for fear of displeasing Iphigenes, and never being able to imagine the
adventures of Modestina.

The Judges and Commons of the Village, who heard all this Dialogue, knew not
what else to think, than that of all the Fools that they had seen in their
Lives, they never saw any so sens-less. After this they led him to Pomeran,
Pisides and Argal, whose discourse was yet more extravagant; For, they knowing
not Liante, spoke altogether of an Almeria and a Calliante, names which Arcade
never had heard: Insomuch that the Judges could pick nothing out of their
various Speeches, than cause of laughter.

But when he was brought into Calliante's Presence, he began to bless
himself, his Heart panting as if he had seen a Ghost. For, he could not
persuade himself that without Negromancy he could appear before him there,
having seen him (as he thought) at Plocens. At length, My Lord Liante, said
he, is it you whom I see, or has some Spirit borrowed your shape? certainly
you cannot be in two places at once, and I am as sure that I saw you at
Plocens within these two days, as that your likeness now appears before my
Eyes; Either that which I saw at Plocens must be an illusion, or this which
here troubles my sight. Yet me-think's it is your voice, which I hear, said
he ( Liante having answered him) But in regard Magicians by their Diabolical
Art, can counterfeit that as well as Faces, give me leave to touch you, that I
may know it is your Body. Which Liante having permitted; This is Flesh and
Bones, said he, this is no Spirit certainly; I will rather believe that the
other which I did only see, and that at some distance too, was but a Vision,
whereby the more than barbarous cruelty of Mieslas will be deceived, and I am
glad for your sake, that you are out of his power; for, if you were in the
place of that Ghost of yours, which he has put into the hands of some no
less inhumane than himself, I should esteem you the most unfortunate Gentleman
upon Earth.

These words having bred in Liante's Spirit a curiosity to know what cruelty
Mieslas intended to his Person: Arcade told him what had passed at Plocens, and
that it was the main cause of his coming into that Desert, to acquaint
Iphigenes with that design of Mieslas. You may imagine what an alarm this
made in Liante's Heart; with what impatience he was presently seized to see
himself at Liberty, that he might fly before that storm, and avoid the
clutches of that rigorous Sarmatian. Fear, which made him tremble at every
shadow, bred a suspicion in his thoughts, that all this Pastoral Comedy had
been invented by Iphigenes, only to impe the wings of Time, and amuse him
until Mieslas had apprehended him, and sent him back to his prison; there to
force him to suffer the affront whereof Arcade had given him notice. These
imaginations put him beyond all temper; and, ready to run into despair, he
fulminated terrible threats against those Clowns, if they released him not
speedily.

These apprehensions so violent, and sovisible, gave birth to diverse sinister
Opinions in the Judges and Countrymen there present, making them suspect him
for some notorious Criminal, or some dangerous Person; in regard Arcade talked
of murdering or reducing him to an incapacity of aspiring to Marriage: yet the
strong impression they had Calliante was Almeria, and really a Woman, made them
revoke all this story into doubt, as a fiction invented to delude their Senses.
Insomuch that in stead of giving Liante any hope of a sudden enlargement, they
made him closer Prisoner, having received no other consolation by Arcade's
visit, than the assurance of Mieslas being at Plocens, and of the horrible
desire he had to commit in his person the Murder of his Posterity.

Thence Arcade was conducted to Serife's Lodging, who after a long Paradoxicall
Conference (being certainly informed of her Father's arrival in that
Palatinate, by whom she had no will to be seen in that equipage, and a
Prisoner to those base People, whom (according to the authority of Palatines in
Polonia) with the least word she could have sent to the Gallows) raising the
tone of her voice in a more grave and Majestic manner, than became the quality
of a Prisoner, she thus spoke to her Judges; Gentlemen, dispatch quickly your
formalities, and do me Justice, I begin to be weary of this Prison: Whether I
am Man or Woman, is nothing material to any of you. Besides, I believe you can
lay no Crime to my Charge, nor Calliante's, who for pastime only, not with any
ill intent, conspired with those Swains ( whom you have set at liberty) to
carry me away, whereof I was advertised and contented, what displeasure soever
I expressed. Do not make me entreat you twice to discharge me; For, if you
compel me to discover who I am, there is not he among you, but will tremble
at my very name, being able to render you of Judges Criminals, of Apprehenders
Prisoners, and send you presently, if I please, from the Jail to Execution.

These words she pronounced with so courageous and Masculine an accent, that
notwithstanding her delicate Complexion and Feminine dress, they began to
persuade their fancies that she was more than a Woman. But if Hercules could
not resist two, what should she have done against so many? It is the natural
disposition of Clowns, and such Mechanic Souls, as compose the Lees of the
People, to be insulting, and as inflexible as Lions or Tigres, when they have
the power in their own hands; as they are like mere Cowes and Sheep, when they
are in subjection. They scoffed at Serife's words, and, according to the
custom of such Brutes, they imparted their scorn to the Eccho's of that
solitude by their loud shouting.

After which, one more impudent than the rest, replied, Master or Mistress,
(What shall I call you?) What or whosoever you be, we shall teach you to
speak otherwise, and not to affront People in this manner. You must not think
to rule us, but to be ordered by us, who have power to keep you here until
your Process be ended, or discharge you at our pleasure; we will teach you to
obey, not command, and if need be, we want neither Bolts nor Manacles for
your Feet and Hands, nor yet Gags for your Mouth, to the end you may know
another time how to respect Officers of Justice. If there be any Magical
operations in all this, the illusions will cease by the authority of the
Judges, and we shall so conjure those Spirits, that in spite of their
resistance we shall bring the truth to light, and make it appear to your
confusion.

These words having transported Serife into a more violent fury than ever Anger
had kindled in her Breast, she was ready to declare her true Name and Quality;
and Arcade likewise was much tempted to tell that saucy Clown, that he should
deerly repent that Language; (yet he forbore, for fear of disobliging him,
whom he desired to serve, and whose indignation he dreaded no less than
Thunder;) But without further delay they made him quit the room, and having
never the more cleared their doubts by this confronting of the parties, they
left Serife to entertain her choleric thoughts, and re-inclosed Arcade betwixt
four walls, threatening to torture him if he told them not the naked Truth.

The like Message was sent to the other Prisoners, and by the Shepherdesse's
means came to Serife's Ears, which increased her Rage to a resolution of
consuming all that Country with Fire and Sword. But there was no remedy, she
must endure the bitterness of that Pill, not having then the Power to declare
her Grievances to any but the Walls of her Prison, as deaf, as her brutall
Judges were inexorable.

Whilst the rest of the Prisoners, allarmed with the barbarous intentions of
the Rusticks, consume their Spirits in impatient sumings, threatening, and
meditating most remarkable revenges: The subtle Bolestaus (who knew that
Needles are not thredded by violent strokes, and that Birds being fallen into
the Fowler's gins entangle themselves the worse, the more they struggle) having
preferred a Petition to those Country-Judges, full of Modest and Submissive
Terms, besides Promises of revealing great matters to them, they went to his
Chamber, where speaking in private to the same Officer, (whose hand he had
already oyled) and having disposed his Ears to give a favorable audience by
replenishing the hollow of his hooked hand with Crowns; Sir (said he) much
mischief may arise by this business, if it be discussed by rigor of Justice,
in regard it concerns the Honor and Life of Persons of eminent Quality, who
may resent it in an high nature; and nothing can fall to your share by the way
of Process, but perchance some Forfeitures and Fees, to make you be indulgent
to those that prosecute; Were it not better for you to oblige so many Persons
of Honor, who are now in your Power, and gain four times as much?

The Judge (who hungered and thirsted after Justice, and who (like another
Leviathan) could have swallowed all the Golden Sand of Tagus without
difficulty, and let a whole Jordan of Silver run down his throat without
slacking his thirst) opened. with his Ears, his Heart to this Proposition, and
Judas-like, answered, What will you give me, and I will set you free?
Whereupon they agreed upon a sum, which (though immense,) Boleslaus promised
to make him good, knowing that ere long he should make him vomit that Dose
hotter than he swallowed it, and that the Gallows should be the salary of
his extorting Avarice: But that is not all (said the Judge) to promise, For, we
never condemn or quit any but according to what is evidently proved and
delivered. I have sworn never to play upon ticket with Gentlemen, I will not
open any door unless I see the golden Key, and the Money told out upon a Table.

Sir, answered Boleslaus, I mean it so, and I Will assure that the sum you shall
receive shall be all in good pieces and down weight: But you know I cannot
coin them here, either give me leave to go fetch them, or procure me a trusty
Messenger, who shall receive them upon a Letter, which I hope you will permit
me to write. As for going out (replied the Judge) that is a thing I cannot
condescend unto; For, Prisoners are like Birds which Sing no more when out of
the Cage; and Nightingales which are observed never to warble, but in the Nest,
where they hatch their Eggs. But for writing I am well contented to permit; So
that I see your Letter: For, I am no Man to endure any treacherous dealing. I
desire no better than that you should read what I write ( said Boleslaus) For,
my intentions are no other than just and honest.

Then, Paper being brought, he traced some lines to a friend of his at
Plocens, desiring him to send upon sight thereof the sum, which he had
indented to deliver that Justice-seller: And at the same time he wrote another
note to the Captain of Iphigenes Guards, thus; It is of no less concernment
than the Life and Honor of our Master ( who being fallen into the hands of
Thieves, is here imprisoned by them) that you should come speedily with your
troop, whither this bearer shall direct you, make him give you right
Instructions, by setting a Pistol to his Throat: But let not Mieslas know any
thing of your coming, nor of this Accident.

The first note he showed the Judge, which was according to his own desire,
but hid the other in his sleeve. The Judge having perused it, would have sent
it away presently; But, said Boleslaus, without my own Seal it will be of no
effect, therefore give me leave to seal it in regard the sum, as you see, is
of no small importance. The Judge, thinking he spoke as really as reasonably,
gave it him again to close: But in seeming to seal it, he slipped this into the
place of the other in his sleeve, (being both of one bigness and made up
alike) and having written the superscription, and sealed the later, he
delivered it to the Judge with some pieces of Gold to give the Messenger,
desiring him to let him go on Hors-back, because the business required haste.

After this golden conference the Judge grew more temperate, he talked no more
of torturing upon the Rack, but of releasing the Prisoners, telling the
Rusticks that all those passages were only tricks of Youth, and that there was
nothing to be done in this case, but to plume them like Pigeons, and then let
them fly again; and that it was enough to let their Purses blood, and make
good cheer at their charge; by which means they would be sufficiently revenged
of those, that intended no other evil than to laugh at their simplicity. But
he found more repugnance in those savage Souls, than he imagined; For, with
one Voice they all cried out, Justice, Justice.

This troubled the Judge not a little, knowing the brutality of the vulgar
People of that Nation. But as he that betraye's Justice, may as well betray
the Criminals, It is no rare thing for Judges (whose Eyes have been dazzled with
the luster of Gold) to condemn those that corrupted them, not to seem
corruptible; and to hide their extortion under a double wickedness. This moved
that abominable Minister of Injustice to make use of a most malicious
Stratagem, to content that enraged Rabble by satisfying his own avarice. He
resolved to condemn to a privy search those persons whose doubtful faces did
not by their Chins give evident testimony of being Men. Boleslaus, whom the
Winter of Age had already covered with it is Snowy Livery, was exempted from
that harsh and shameful sentence; neither were Pomeran, Pisides or Argal
concerned in that Decree, the downy shadow on their youthful Checks declaring
sufficiently of what Sex they were. Serife and Calliante were the only
stumbling blocks, whose changing of Habits multiplied the Rusticks
imaginations, and disturbed their Reason; which (what er'e befell) he thought
should serve to color his unworthy ACT, adjudging them to very considerable
amercements, in case of disobedience.

This Design he communicated to the Prosecutors, who received it with a
general applause and acclamation, conceiving that they could no way have a
more sweet and full revenge of their cozening them, then by doing them this
affront under the Cloak of Justice. The Order was no sooner drawn, but it was
notified to Serife and Calliante.

Calliante, who esteemed such an indignity much less supportable than Death,
threatened to tear in more pieces than the Bacchides did Pentheus, whosoever
should approach him for that purpose: But they taking him to be really a
Woman, laughed at his weakness, telling him, that they had knocked down Bulls
far stronger, and more fierce than he. And the Pharisaicall Judge, to seem a
modest and courteous Man, let him understand, that he would do him the favor
to give him the choice of being searched by Men, if he was a Man, or by Women,
if a Woman; whereunto Calliante enraged, said, I will have neither one nor
other, let me alone as I am, for if any Women come to me I shall make them
ashamed, and if you send any Men, I shall make them feel the strength of my
Arms.

As for Serife, shame and indignation so transported her, that to say which was
greatest, were no easy matter. All her Entreaties, Threatenings, Protestations
that she was a Man and their Palatine, Son to Mieslas, Palatine of Podolia,
were to their rude Ears but as chaff before the Wind; and notwithstanding her
appealing, the Judge commanded them to execute his Order, without which they
could not be satisfied of the Truth; at length, he offered her the same
civility as he had to Calliante; to which she returned a like answer,
desiring the Judge to cause Her to be strangled rather than condemn Her to an
abuse which She must resent as long as She had breath, and whereby Her fury
would be incited to a Vengeance, that could not terminate him by the sacking,
and absolute ruin of that whole County.

These high menaces that Clownish multitude answered with loud laughing,
pressing her still to choose, otherwise they would proceed to the Execution of
the Judge's Ordinance: At length, a Ray of Prudence inlightning her in this
extremity, made her Name Celian's two Daughters with their Sister-in-law
Belida, hoping to gain them by Gifts, or compel them by force to depose what
she listed. These were before appointed to search Calliante; whereunto Merinda
was nothing unwilling, Curiosity increasing her desire to know whether that
Almeria (whose face was the same as Galliante's, and had raised such tumults in
her mind) was Male or Female.

Boleslaus and the other Gentlemen knew nothing of these proceedings; For, the
Judge promised himself, that his Messenger would be returned e're night with
the sum, for which he had indented with Boleslaus, and his Sentence being
executed upon Serife and Calliante, he should by that means please the
Peasants as well as his own covetous humor, and seem just, though his
proceedings were contrary.

Serife's Prison being the nearest to Celian's House, the She- Inquisitors
came first thither to do their Office. It would be needless to repeat the
worthy excuses they made at their entrance, and with what Rustic eloquence
they imputed their curiosity to the Justice's constraint, whereby they were
forced to an action, which they undertook with no less unwillingness than shame.

This kindled so much choler in the Heart of the generous Amazon, that Reason
could hardly dissuade her Passion from inflicting upon their Bodies a
punishment suiteable to the baseness of their Souls: But considering that had
her Poniard executed her just revenge, the fury of those Peasants would not
have been satisfied with less than murdering her, and that the loss of her
Life would be seconded with the stain of her Honor (whereof she was chiefly
careful) she hearkened to the moderate dictates of Policy, which suggested to
her thoughts this stratagem, which took better than she expected.

It was to rob her Neck, Ears, Hair and Fingers of all the Rings, Chains, and
Jewels (wherewith they were splendidly adorned) to fill the Hands, and stop
the Mouths of those three Harpyes, promising them besides a thousand Crowns a
piece, before she went out of Prison, if they would favor her in that
connivence.

The resolution of these Women, whom Weakness and Poverty made inclinable to
corruption, staggered at those extraordinary Presents, and large Promises; But
(seeming somewhat scrupulous for fear of being punished, if they gave in a
false evidence) Serife drawing the Dagger which she wore under her robe, and
beginning to brandish it with threats, pronounced in a manlike and courageous
manner, so intimidated their low Spirits, that being enticed on the one side
with the hope of gain, and seized on the other with fear, they engaged
themselves to do and say whatsoever she should command, beseeching her, if
they should be discovered, to free them from the severity of the Justice.

Whereunto Serife thus replied, Let not that trouble you, for the Judge himself
(you may tell him) shall have his share of the Cake, I intend more for him than
all that I have given and promised you. If you will have a testimony of my
being a Man, and the same Iphis whom you have so often seen in the company of
Almeria, look not upon the Effeminacy of my Face, but consider the strength of
my Arm; with that she shook them so forcibly, that Merinda fell to the ground,
and the rest had much ado to keep upon their Feet. By this (continued the
stout Virago) you may see what I am, and accordingly you may assure the Judge
of my Sex. As for Calliante, what bravadoes soever he make's, believe me, he
is a Woman, and the same Almeria whom you have all known already; Therefore if
you have any Order to search her content your selves with my Relation,
otherwise in regard she is so robust, and so used to all manly Exercises (for
which I love her more than for her Beauty) I fear you will find but a sorry
welcome; Wherefore make your Report according to my Declaration, and fear not
that I shall make you avouch any thing contrary to the Truth; For witness
whereof see the advantages that will redound to you, besides the immortal
Obligations that you will acquire upon Iphis and Almeria.

The Goddess Persuasion with her golden Tongue having inthroned herself by
these words in Serife's Mouth, there was not one of the three Searches, but
judged this good Office as feasible as reasonable. In this Resolution they went
forth, and having met the Judge, with the Swains, who expected their return,
they remained some while speechless, counterfeiting as much bashfulness as if
they had been seeing some strange business. Which gave some of the Rusticks
occasion to cry out, Oh! oh! Did not we guess right to say that Lady was a
Man? Indeed Master Judge (answered Merinda) it was not so well done of you to
scoff in this manner at our simplicity, and send such, as we are, to see Men
that laugh at our folly. Then Belida, who being a Married Wife had somewhat
more confidence, laughing full mouth, said, By my Soul if that be a Lady, my
Husband may be a Lady too; For, I am sure they are both made alike; and
turning toward Lupicin, See friend, (said she) upon what employments you send
your Wife.

This made an hooting suiteable to the condition of the persons before whom
this Comedy was acted. That done, the Judge gave them Order forthwith to go to
Calliante. Which they refused with much seeming unwillingness, and far-fetched
excuses, until the Judge, holding his gravity of President, iterated his
Command, telling them that they must obey the Ordinances of Justice, if not,
he knew how to compel them.

Whereupon replied the crafty Belida, that she was contented to obey, so that
she and her Sisters might first confer with him in private. That request
being thought too reasonable to be denied, she told him punctually what had
passed betwixt them and Serife, and that there was nothing more sure than her
being a Man, and Calliante a Woman.

Then, they showed him the presents they had received of her, besides the
promise of three thousand Crowns for themselves, and twice as much for him, if
he would be iudulgent in the Execution of that Order.

This made him as gentle as an Ermine's skin, and open both his Ears to their
Proposition; But to enhaunce his Justice to the highest rate, he resolved to
gather with both Hands, as if he had been in a Treasury, in a Mine, or at an
Harvest of Gold: Therefore after a little pause, This is not enough (said he
to them) We have now before our Eyes the fairest opportunity of enriching our
selves that can be presented, we must take it by the fore-lock, and beat this
Iron whilst it is hot, only, (if you can) be prudent and secret, otherwise
in stead of gaining we shall undo our selves. You are now going to search one
that is really a Woman; if the other, who is a Man, being frighted with his
Crime and Imprisonment, has given and promised you so much, what may you not
get of her, who will at what rate soever preserve her honor, and free herself
from the Infamy and Laughter of all these People? Go then, and manage your
business so, that you may get a good fleece off her, and forget not me; For,
you know I sit at the Helm, and that all must be done by my Order, their
Lives, Honors, Imprisoment, and Liberty being wholly in my Hands: Be sure
you take not Promises for Payment, But put Eyes into your Hands to believe what
they shall see and receive: For, if you do her the favor not to search her
according to the Order, it is but Reason that she should recompense your
Courtesy with some remarkable Gratification; Do not quit Her for less than
what Iphis has given and promised you, For, the Favor is greater to Her than
Him.

Being thus instructed, and determined to follow precisely these Instructions,
they went, like Commissaries deputed by the Justice, to know of what Category
Calliante was. And as a Ship saile's swifter when she is in open Sea, and has
the Wind more full; So the greater hope these Women conceived, and the more
their desire of having was increased by the advice of that good Judge, the more
eagerly and cheer-fully did they run to execute this second Commission; whereby
they hoped to get more than they had done by the former; Neither was their
expectation frustrated; For, they were no sooner entered and had made their
goodly Speech, but Calliante falling into a Lyon-like fury, in stead of
speaking, began to answer them with his Hands, making them feel the weight of
a Man's Arms. The door, which was locked again, that they might the more
secretly, and without scandal perform their Office, gave him better
opportunity of pummelling them; For, not being able to run away, they were
enforced to endure that storm of blows without shelter. One had her Eyes
beaten into her Head with his buffeting, another her Teeth struck out, the
third he trampled under his Feet, which was not without their crying out
Murder, help, help: But the Peasants, who stayed within hearing, thought it
had been Almeria, whom they three were forcing to a Manifestation, which she
could not suffer without striving and shame, and in stead of succouring them,
they drowned their cries with laughing, till their Lungs were ready to split,
and calling out to them, You are three against one, you will overcome her at
last; continue, do what the Justice has commanded you.

Judge you what leisure this gave Calliante to kick, and beat his Visiters, as
if they had been three bars upon an Anvill, and his Fists the Hammers. At
length having laid them all under his feet, so tired and sore with blows, that
they could hardly breathe, one of them swounded, another feined her self dead;
but Belida, who seeing Calliante draw a Knife which hung at Merinda's Girdle,
thought (as it was probable enough) that he meant to cut their Throats; as a
Torch that is going out casts the greater flame, so she in that extremity,
summoning all that little Spirit she had left, cried aloud, Lupicin, I am
dead, He kill's me, help, help.

These words made them consider, that indeed they might have need of help,
Despair having perchance transported Almeria to some action in her own defense
beyond the ordinary strength of a Woman; thereupon they rushed into the room,
where they saw two lying like dead bodies on the ground, covered over with
their own blood, and Calliante dragging Belida about, with one hand up ready to
sheath the Knife in her bosom.

It was then no time to consult but to act; They presently made toward
Calliante, who flinging that scurvy Woman from him, flew, like a Tigre that
enter's into an Herd of Deer, among those Rusticks. Who ever saw a furious wild
Bore foaming with rage, being enclosed in the Toils between the Hunts men's
Spears and the Hound's mouths, make an horrible slaughter, tearing out the
bowels of this Dog here, tossing another yonder, fastening his Tusks in an
Horse's belly on another side, and trample upon the over-turned Rider; but at
length being overpowered with the multitude of Assailers, is enforced to
submit to the greater strength; He may imagine the behavior of Calliante in
the midst of that rude company; the first whereof that came near him, received
a great stab in his Arm, another a cut over the face, others felt the smart of
the same Weapon in other places: He flung himself here and there, and
sometimes by agility, sometimes by main force, he wrested himself out of their
hands, watching still to get to the door; But the throng of those that pressed
to come in, rendered the passage impenetrable, which put him into such an
agony, as you may imagine, seeing himself ready to be murdered by the hands
of those irritated Swains.

At last having done all that a gallant courage owed to a just defense, so many
People fell upon him at once, that they forced him to quit the Knife, and
seeing him disarmed and under their Feet, they began, by binding him Hand and
Foot, the outrages which they were relolved to make him suffer, devising
ignominies and revenges inimaginable against him. But the care they had of the
wounded Women, and to recall their affrighted Spirits into their martyred
Bodies, made them deferr for a while the punishing of Calliante, whom they
threatened with no less than a shameful Death.

The Judge, who came in when all the blows were past, and the Prisoner fast
bound, inveighed highly against Calliante's Rebellion, as contemning and
resisting the Order of Justice; and precipitating his Sentence, he said, that
nothing could make a sufficient reparation but Death, and if that lewd Hussif
were not found to be with Child, that she should be executed the next
morning.

These were the Consolations of the poor Calliante, who being all bruised with
blows, besides the pain he received by the Bonds and Chains wherewith he was
laden, saw himself upon the point of being Sacrifised to the vengeance of
those Salvages, whom it is not enough to call Sarmatians to expess their
cruelty.

But as that barbarous Rabble was going to make a shameful Anatomy of the Body
of Calliante, in the Opinion they had that he was a Woman, intending the next
day to make him endure a torment conformable to their inhumane Dispositions,
the whole Village was allarmed on a sudden with the arrival of a great Troop
of Horse, that came with great diligence: Before them rode a Man with his Arms
pinioned, and his Feet bound under the Horse's Belly, as if he had been some
Notorious Thief whom the Provost Martial had lately taken.

The Judge upon notice hereof, (thinking they had been some Officers of
Justice) went forth to meet them, to desire their assistance for the Execution
of a Prisoner that would have broke the Jail, and who had wounded diverse
persons that withstood him. Doubtless, said the Captain, this must be the
place: then, turning toward the fellow that was bound, he continued, is not
that Prison here, whither we commanded thee to conduct us? Yes Sir, answered
he, and there is the Judge, who committed them, and sent me to you from one
of the Prisoners to bring the sum of money contained in the Letter.

At these words the Judge knew his Messenger, and his Conscience accusing him,
he was ready to sink with fear, when two or three of them setting their
Pistolls to his throat, said, Deliver us My Lord quickly, or you are a Dead
Man. What Lord? answered he trembling: the Lord Palatine of Plocens whom you
have imprisoned here, perchance not knowing him. Hereat a cold sweat
overflowing the Judge's Face, seeing that he had brought himself into a
Praemunire, and that no less than his Life was concerned; See Gentlemen, said
he, if that be he which has done such havoc in the Prison; Then ten or
twelve alighting went in with their Arms in their hands, where Humbertus
Captain of the Guards knowing Liante (having seen him often in Podolia) stood
amazed, thinking that Mieslas his Executioners had reduced him to that
extremity, to force him to suffer the affront, which they were commanded to do
him: But seeing none of them, and only the Country People, We shall find
(said he to his Companions) that they have given that barbarous Commission to
these villainous Boors, holding it too base an Office for them to execute.

Thereupon He said to the Peasants; Friends, what dee you intend to do with
this Gentleman? why do you use him thus cruelly? It is no Man, replied one of
the Clowns, but a mad Woman, who had almost spoiled us all with a Knife, there
never was any such Fury in the World. Humbertus thought that was an illusion,
hearing him style a Woman, one whom he saw in Man's Clothes, and whom he held
to be a Man; Signor Liante, said he to the Prisoner lying on the ground, is
it you, and do you not know me?

How should I know you, replied he, that do not know myself? For, all these
People will make me believe per force that I am a Woman, although I am most
certain of the contrary. Infallibly, said Humbertus to the others with him,
this poor Gentleman is become distracted, not being able to preserve his
Judgment entire, after that horrible affront which they have made him suffer;
For, being no longer a Man, he denie's that he is a Woman, which indeed he
is not however.

Then speaking again to Liante, Sir, said he, who brought you into this place?
my own foolish Will, said Liante. Who put you in Prison and committed you into
the power of these People? Iphigenes, answered Liante, I know not whether his
intention be to rid Himself of Me thus.

This made Humbertus presently conjecture, that Iphigenes had an hand in the
Plot with Mieslas, to purchase to himself Liante's whole Estate by virtue of
his Marriage with Modestina. Therefore not to dive any further into the
business before so many hearers, he left Liante under the Guard of two of his
company, telling them, that he must first see the Palatine, or speak with
Boleslaus.

So going forth he seized upon the Judge, and told him, that he must show him
where the PALATINE was. What Palatine? said he. Ha? replied Humbertus roughly,
there is no jesting nor trifling with me, I ask for IPHIGENES Governor of this
Palatinate, who is Prisoner here. Sir, answered the Judge, if I were to die
immediately, I am not able to tell you where he is, nor what he is; For, he
is one whom I never saw. At least, said Humbertus, you shall let me see Him
that wrote me this Letter, he is an old Man. The Judge having demanded to see
the Letter, and having read it, Ah! treacherous old Man, cried he, are these
the Mountains of Gold which thou were to bring forth? Then without farther
entreaty ( his Messenger desiring him to release him out of his pain) he
conducted Humbertus with his attendants to Boleslaus Chamber, who in few words
gave him the full Relation of their Comicall Chase, their several disguises,
and their imprisonment, which had like to have had a Tragical conclusion.

Then resigning his place to the Judge, Sir, said Boleslaus to Humbertus, Let
us now go directly to the Palatine; For, although for his pastime he has been
Author of all this, I fear his own trouble is not the least, and when he is
free we shall easily release the rest. This said, the Judge, being Manacled,
was forced to go before to show them where he had put Madam Serife; For,
Boleslaus who knew the secret, told him, that she was the Palatine whom they
sought, and that now he should make him believe by good tokens those verities,
which he before so much slighted and laughed at.

When Serife saw Boleslaus entering into her room; Ah! Father, said she, what
good Angel has brought you hither to release me out of this Captivity, where
I was in the greatest perplexity imaginable? Whereupon Boleslaus told her his
Stratagem in sending for that Troop, which was commanded by Humbertus, who
attended her pleasure at the door. O Father, said Iphigenes, suffer him not to
come in, For, I should be yet more afflicted if he should see me in Woman's
Clothes; bid him command one of the Guards to give me his and let him take one
of the Peasant's habits, that I may quickly get out of this Dungeon, where I
have endured so much unworthiness.

This command was presently performed, and Iphigenes appeared in the form of
Iphis, not of Serife, before her Guards. She was no sooner out, but Passion
made her ask for Liante. Alas Sir, said Humbertus, I left him in the Prison
with two Soldiers to guard him, but he is in a pitiful condition, I cannot
but grieve at his disaster, yet it concerne's not us to contradict our Master's
will. How, in a pitiful condition? Sir, said Humbertus, your Grandeur knowe's
better than I the whole story. Tell me, Humbertus ( replied Iphigenes) what
story? Then the Captain related to him, what he had heard of Mieslas order in
Plocens, which he believed his Father would not have commanded without
communicating it to him.

This so troubled Iphigenes, that he could not be satisfied without going to
see him, notwithstanding Humbertus diswaded him all he could; being come to
Liante's Prison, where he found a multitude of Clowns crouding in, he
commanded his Soldiers to seize upon them all, and advancing near Liante, who
lay upon the ground all covered with blood and dust, and laden with Irons;
What is the matter, Brother, said he, in what equipage do I see you? These are
your sports, replied Liante angerly, you may end them when you please, but I am
sure they have almost ended me. How ended? said Iphigenes. It was this
infamous Generation of Clownish Rascals, answered Liante, that has put me in
the pickle you see me, and if my pains are a pleasure to you, you may let me
alone in my misery, Death it self will be welcome to me if it proceed from
your Hand or Order: But you would oblige me very much to send me into the
Wars, where I might lose my Life with Honor, and not be butchered by these
Ox-drivers.

All this was a Riddle to Iphigenes and Boleslaus; for, having been kept every
one in a several room, they knew nothing of each other's sufferings. And it
being then no time to stand long in Discourse, Iphigenes contented himself to
protest to Liante, that he was innocently the cause of that imprisonment,
whereof he was not then to repent; but, that he was in no wise consenting to
the treacherous design of Mieslas, which he would most evidently make appear.

What do you talk to me of Mieslas, Replied Liante, whilst they were loosing
his bands, I think that Sorcerer Arcade has enchanted you as well as me, and
has made you believe I know not what story of your Father concerning me,
which is the most ridiculous Tale that e're I heard. Is it not so then? said
Iphigenes, What, Brother? have you not been in the hands of Mieslas his
servants? I have neither seen Mieslas, nor any that have relation to him, only
Arcade ( whom they brought hither to me the other day) told me that he was at
Plocens, and that he had caused me to be apprehended there, with several
other idle circumstances, which cannot proceed but from a distracted Brain.

You have then no other harm than what these Peasants have done you, said
Iphigenes: Or than you have made them do me, continued Liante, but if I get
once free of these bonds, I Will make them feel the weight of my Fingers. Have
you no other wounds than what we see? said Iphigenes, No other, answered he,
but if I had not been succored in time, and if Humbertus had not appeared when
he did (but you gave him his just time that your Game might be complete) they
threatened to do me the greatest affront that ever was offered to any Man, and
expose my Body naked to the view of every Passenger, and not satisfied with
that shame, which I hold worse than Death, they purposed to make me die
publicly by the authority of the Justice, against which they taxed me for
having committed a Rebellion ( in defending my self against their insolences)
which they said could be no otherwise washed away than in my own Blood; but all
this I believe was but to fright me.

Hereupon Humbertus said softly to Iphigenes, Sir there is nothing more certain
than that Mieslas servants have delivered him into these Peasant's hands, to
execute that shameful Commandment which he had imposed on them. If it be
so, replied Iphigenes aloud, I will make them be hanged immediately in my own
presence. If you do not, answered Calliante, I shall say that you had a hand in
it, and though I were to be hewed in a thousand pieces, there is not one of
them but I will sheath my Sword in his Bowels, the injurious words and
unworthy treatment wherewith they have violated my Patience, cannot be
satisfied with any less Vengeance; For, what command soever you gave them to
torment me, I am confident they have exceeded their Commission, and used me
worse than they were enjoined.

In sum, not to dwell any longer in these lawless proceedings of that corrupt
Justice, the rest of the Prisoners being released, when they least expected
it, after some mutual Conferences and Communicating their respective
Sufferings in Prison; the matter was decided to the confusion of the Judge, and
all the Inhabitants of that Village, who were as Blanke at this alteration as
Bell-founders when their Mettalls answer not their Expectation. IPHIGENES was
acknowledged to be Palatine of that Country; Almeria known to be Liante (but
only to Humbertus and some few others, who were enjoined to silence under pain
of the Palatine's high displeasure) and Arcade found a true and faithful
servant, being confronted with Humbertus. Nothing was wanting but Halters to
hang those Clowns, and the Judge higher than the rest: Which Iphigenes, being
pressed by the conjurations of Calliante and the other Gentlemen, would have
had executed forthwith.

The chief Actors were presently apprehended, as the Judge and his inseparable
shadows, the Clarks, and other blood-sucking Officers, with Celian's Sons and
the three Harpies, besides some others which were found Accomplices of their
insolences; of whom the Soldiers, to revenge the Palatine, chose each of them
one, to tie him to the branches of the next Tree.

Those Rusticks who were a little before such insulting Tyrants, became now
humble Petitioners, and begged pardon upon their Knees, making many excuses,
pleading ignorance and condemning their rashness. Calliante, seconded by
Pomeran, Pisides and Argal, cried out for nothing but Vengeance and sudden
Execution, every one relating the particular affronts they had received: Only
Boleslaus more discreet then those young fiery Spirits, harkened attentively to
what they said without uttering a syllable, until Iphigenes said, What?
Father, do you say nothing?

To this he replied, It is not that I have not had my share of the bitterness
of this Cup as well as the rest, but me-think's the Sun has now given place to
the Night, as it were, on purpose to give us Counsel, and somewhat settle the
motions which agitate our several thoughts; that which is done in cold Blood
is always riper and more considerate than what is acted in heat of Passion.
Choler is a short Madness, the productions of that Passion are seldom
judicious; you may do what you please, but as the King of the ^^es is without a
sting, So you will find by experience that Clemency is more convenient for
those that govern, than a rigorous Justice. I do not say this to excuse the
Malice of these Swains; but you are to consider that for your own Pastime you
have cast your self into this Tempest; if you give a Tragical end to a Comedy,
you will not observe the Rules of the Play: You laid the block before their
feet, whereat they have so indiscreetly stumbled. It become's not the Palatine
of Plocens to revenge the injuries offered to Serife unknown, nor Liante to
resent those which were done to Calliante and Almeria. When this shall come to
be divulged by so solemn an Execution, what will People say, but that you have
imitated Cats, who first play with the Mice, and then kill them? and there will
not be wanting some that will compare this Action to the cruelty of the Roman
Emperors, who at their Feasts made the Gladiators, in their presence, feed
their Eyes with humane Blood, whilst they were filling their Bellies with the
Flesh of Beasts. Calumny, which forgeth what is not, how will not she
aggravate this which has some image of rigor, although in effect it is but an
Act of Justice? Sir. I tell you again, you may do as you think fit, but the
Zeal which I have of your glory, make's me desire rather to hear the praises
of your humanity, resounding on the Tongues of Men, than complaints against
your severity and rashness.

What? said Iphigenes, shall such crimes then pass unpunished? by no means,
answered Boleslaus, I would not have you be insensible of their misdemeanors,
but I advise you only so to manage your Chastisements, that your Enviers may
find no occasion to defame your manner of Government, and cast you farther
into the King's disfavour than you are. For, as it is easy to impose any thing
upon one that is absent, by consequent it will not be hard to render him
odious.

What? shall this wicked Judge then escape for such abominable extortions? said
Liante; I will rather strangle him with my own Hands, then that the World shall
be infested any longer with such an Harpy; And we, said the other Gentlemen,
will do as much to those other Monsters, who have nothing of humane but their
shapes.

Gentlemen, answered Boleslaus, to stop the boiling of your irritated bloods,
there is a way to content you, to punish them sufficiently, and preserve the
Honor and Reputation of the Palatine. This proposition having procured all
their attentions, he coninued thus: Do not you think the fear of Death, will
be a punishment answerable to the pains which they have made us suffer, and
into which indeed we cast our selves for our own pleasures? whereunto if you
add the Lash or the Strapado with a perpetual Banishment, I do not see but
that you may be thoroughly satisfied, they rigorously enough punished, and that
those who shall hear of this penalty and their offense, will not have occasion
rather to applaud the Palatine's Mercy and Prudence, than condemn his rigor.
And for the Judge, I confess he deserve's Death by all humane Laws; but if
you consider how his case is linked with the Peasant's, and that by your
disguisements you puzzled their understandings you will find that if they are
not worthy of Grace for their own sakes, you ought to pardon them for the Love
of your selves, since by your secret connivance you did in a manner make them
tumble into the ditch of Error, which led them into these exorbitances.

At last Boleslaus by his mild and discreet Arguments stopped the impetuosity of
their wrath, as heaps of soft Earth use to stifle Cannon-bullets, and persuaded
those high Spirits to condescend to his remonstrances. So Night being far
spent, they settled themselves to rest, resolving to put his advice in
Execution next morning.

In mean time, the Trances and Agonies, which the apprehension of Death made
the Country People feel, were beyond expression. The Day which rejoiceth all
the World was odious to them, as that, which was to veil their Eyes with an
everlasting Night: But Heavens provided for them otherwise then they expected.
For, to give them a full measure of fear, Iphigenes commanded they should be
all hanged forthwith upon trees near their own dwellings, which the Soldiers
were very ready to execute; but, as they were about to give them the swing,
Boleslaus and the other Gentlemen cast themselves at the Palatine's feet, to
beg their Lives, of which, Apprehension had almost bereaved them already. Then
came the deplorable Celian watering his hoary-Beard with tears, and prostrating
himself before Iphigenes, beseeched him by all that was most sacred in Heaven
and on Earth, not to deprive him of all his children at once, and quite
extinguish those sparks, by whom he hoped to revive in his Posterity.

This supplication was seconded with the lamentable cries of the three
Searchers, who were tied to their several Gibets like the rest; the image of
Death (painted on their Faces, and which danced before their Eyes) touched with
some compassion those who were the day before so eager for revenge, deriving
all the fault upon the Judge, who escaped very narrowly being sacrificed to
Example, and having been (as the Hebrew's Emissary Goat) laden with the Faults
and Maledictions of all the People. But in stead of perishing for the rest, he
had his grace as well as they, a disgraceful grace, yet just and full of
equity.

For, if their lives were given them, it was to prolong it by a condition,
which those that are happy in a Country, and who love their native soil, would
esteem worse than Death: It was Banishment, which was so dreadful to the
Romans, that they thought it was to die, to live out of Rome. It Is true, that
with poor People it is as with those that are extremely generous, to whom every
Land is their Country, as the Air and Water are the Elements of Birds and
Fishes.

But before the pronouncing of this sentence, (which could not but be sweet to
those that were recalled from the Sepulcher) It was decreed, to spare the pains
of fetching Surgeons, presently to let blood those People, whom the fear of
Death had cast into a violent Fever, to recommend them to the discretion or
rather indiscretion of the Soldiers, who to save rods, laced their shoulders
so well with their stirropleathers, that they made them swim in their own
blood, which was inflamed with the Wine they drank some days before in so
great abundance. And the three Shepherdesses, deputed for that search, had
their share of this whipping- cheer.

After this blooding, six Soldiers were appointed to conduct them forthwith to
Danzic, to be embarked and transported thence into Moscovia (a Country more
rude and barbarous than Sarmatia) there to continue to perpetuity, under pain
of being Hanged if ever they returned. Where they remained until Iphigenes's
re-establishment at Court, who then considering that they were sufficiently
punished, sent them his Grace, and permitted them to repossess their former
Habitations.

The Tenth Book.
ARGUMENT.
Iphigenes to prevent the malicious Practices of Mieslas against Liante, causes
him to be secured in a strong Castle in his Palatinate. He returns to Plocens
to meet his Father Mieslas. Their Salutations, and Speeches concerning Liante,
and Almeria. Mieslas persuades Iphigenes to give the Princess Respicia a visit.
Her imaginary contentment at his seeming Professions of Affection. Iphigenes
being with his Father, and the Princess, is sent for by Menochius in a Lady's
habit, who gives him an account of Modestina's escape out of Prison, and her
being taken in Man's Clothes for Liante by Mieslas servants. Iphigenes
perplexed at this Relation, consults with Boleslaus how to demean himself. His
sage advice: to satisfy Iphigenes, He undertakes in person to inform Liante
of what had passed at Plocens. The affront offered to Modestina by the
barbarous instruments of Mieslas cruelty against Liante, is related to Mieslas
in his Son's presence. The just resentments of Iphigenes for that indignity
done to his Wife, and his resolute Speeches to his Father concerning Her and
Liante. The furious Mieslas severe Replies. Iphigenes's reserved carriage
toward the Princess Respicia, after this passionate Conference with Mieslas.
Her Amorous Complaints. Liante relates his Dream to Boleslaus. He applies the
circumstances of that Dream to the transfiguration and Disaster of Modestina.
Liante upon this assurance of Maieslas's barbarismo, without acquainting him,
or any else with his Design, steals privately out of the Castle. Mieslas having
learnt where Iphigenes had concealed his feined Shepherdess, marches with a
strong Party of Horse thither in the Night; being entered, under the Name of
Iphigenes, he commands his Men to leave no corner unsearcht for Almeria. Next
Morning early Iphigenes with a more considerable strength hasts after his
Father; Meets him coming forth of the Castle; Passion persuades Iphigenes to
charge him: Boleslaus disswades it. The blustering words betwixt the Father and
Son at this Encounter. After some Dispute they return to Plocens. Mieslas much
displeased at his Son, retires himself to his own Palatinate: the Princess
Respicia to the Court. She causes a complaining Letter to be left upon the
Table in Iphigenes Chamber. He slights her Torments, but is much perplexed for
the loss of Liante. Liante's Letter to Iphigenes. The Grand Duke of Lithuania
commonly Elected to the Crown of Polonia. The Reason of the Lithuanians
Rebellion against their Prince. Liante is received and honorably treated by
the Palatines of Troc, and Minsce, chief Commanders of the revolted Party.
Iphigenes's resentment for Liante's siding with the Rebels. The King prepares
a great Army, to suppress them. Mieslas returns to Court, is made Lieutenant
General. The Princess Respicia procures Iphigenes to be repealed from
Banishment, lest he should engage in the Wars. His answer to the King's Letter
inviting him to the Court. Tho Substance of Modestina's Letter to Iphigenes,
and of his Answer. Iphigenes raises a considerable Party of Horse for the
present Service, meets his Father at the Rendez vous. The Royal Army besiges
Minsce the Rebels chief City. A description of the Palatine of Minsce's two
Daughters Oloria and Amiclea. Liante falls in Love with Amiclea; Oloria with
Him. Liante sends a Challenge to any of the Royal Party: Is incountred by
Iphigenes, both unknown. After some dispute Liante is worsted. The Gallantry
and Courtesy of Iphigenes to his Enemy, before he knew him to be Liante.
Their Deportments and Speeches after this Discovery. Mieslas's rage against his
Son for sparing Liante's Life. Mieslas beggs of the King the confiscation of
Liante's Estate, pretending he was in actual Rebellion. Liante sends Mieslas a
Challenge. Iphigenes is second to his Father, and Polemander to Liante.
Iphigenes unhorses Polemander, and Liante had killed Mieslas, had not Iphigenes
rescued him. The Lithuanian's Reception of Liante after this Victory. Olavius
designs his Daughter Oloria for Liante. She discovers her Passion to Him. He
rejects her, and becomes more inflamed for Amiclea.

THe Peasants having thus paid for their insolence, the Palatine, accompanied
by those Gentlemen and his Guards, repaired toward Plocens, to meet his
Father. And in regard he could not conceive who should be that miserable
Creature, whom Mieslas had taken for Liante, and had commanded to be so
ill-treated, not to expose that innocent Nobleman to the hazard of receiving
any affront from that rigorous Sarmatian, he sent him with a Convoy of twelve
Soldiers to a Castle in his Dominion, entreating him to stay there until
further intelligence from him, with an exact account of Mieslas intentions; and
whence that news was derived, which Arcade brought in such have, and was
afterward confirmed by Humbertus.

Liante being thus secured from Mieslas fury, Iphigenes gave order that his
other Domestics, and Hunts-men should meet him a league from Plocens, where
he dismissed his Soldiers, and entered into the City with a more peaceable
train. His Father received him with great demonstrations of joy, and he
returned the Honors and Respect which Nature obliged him to render to the
Author of his life. The complements and embraces being past, they presently
fell into the Discourse of what was said and done at Court.

There has been no Action of late (said Mieslas) whereof, I believe, you have
not been informed; But perchance your intelligence has not been so punctual
in letting you understand what is said there; For, generally what is reported
of us come's last of all to our knowledge: the Eye which sees all other
Objects, see's not it self, and knowing how every thing else is made, is
ignorant of it is own composition. Thereupon Iphigenes, not without coloring
his cheeks with a graceful vermillion, having inquired how People censured
him, said; It is no wonder if my Name be traduced, the ordinary Discourse of
Courtiers being principally of Favorites, or of those who are in disgrace, to
whose Actions they give what colors they please.

I will tell you really (said Mieslas) it is not of your perfidiousness or any
treason that you have committed: For, every one know's the education I have
bestowed on you, and how I never recommended any thing so much to you as
Loyalty, and Obedience toward your Sovereign. Neither is there any mention of
your absence from Court, which cannot be called a disgrace, in regard the King
and Queen never speak of you but in very honorable and advantageous terms:
But, all mouths are filled, especially the Lady's, with your new affection for
a certain Shepherdess in these Forests, who is esteemed an invisible Diana, and
you her Endimion. There are some, who bear her as much Envy as they are full
of Pity and Passion for you, admiring that you who have sailed through the Sea
of the Court without striking upon any Rock or Sand, should now be shipwrack'd
in a sorry Brook; and who having despised the splendour of so many Suns in the
Sphere of the Grandeurs of Polonia, should abase your self to do homage to a
Moon in the obscurity of these Woods. And diverse speaking with me concerning
you, have said that they believed this servile yoke, so disproportionable to
your quality, was fallen upon your neck as a punishment for the scorns
wherewith you paid the merit of those Ladies of honor that affected you.

Iphigenes desiring to turn all this into a Gallantry of Youth, and prepossess
Mieslas in case he should chance to learn any farther particulars, gave him a
brief relation of his Rural Recreations, of the Country-People's insolence,
and what punishment he had inflicted upon their unworthiness, vernishing his
Narration as he pleased, to the end this first impression might take place of
after-reports, which flew about in several forms, but all so far from the
truth, that it might properly be said of Fame, she is like a Camelion, which
take's all sorts of Liveries, except the whiteness of Verity. In conclusion,
he said, that he was more passionate in show for his Shepherdess by much than
in effect, in regard she was nothing recommendable for Beauty, but only for
her extreme Nimbleness, and Dexterity in the Exercise of Hunting.

So much I have always promised my self of your judgment ( answered Mieslas)
what ever others would make me believe of your Affection to this
Country-wench, whom they stuck not to give out that you were resolved to Marry.
I am not yet arrived to that degree of folly (replied the subtle Iphigenes)
neither have I so little sense of my condition, that I should make a
Shepherdess my Wife, considering that the conquest of such People is not so
difficult, but that a Man may accomplish his desires better cheap, than by a
public shame, and the loss of both Fortune and Honor: Besides, I should
esteem myself unworthy of the Blood I have from you, of the rank which I
possess by the King's Favor, and of the Estate which I enjoy and expect to
have by him and you, if the only thought of so ridiculous an alliance should
harbor in my breast.

I can believe no other (said Mieslas) but the Women are not so satisfied: For,
being the pure substance of infirmity, they presently take the alarm, and
seizing on the Firebrand by the burning end, they construe every action in the
worst sense. This is averred by the Princess Respicia, who at the first
broaching of this news (out of excess of Passion for you) fell into such
strange distempers, imagining that you would give her the slip, that she never
ceased persecuting me, until I came to bring water to quench this new Fire,
and dissipate or at least hinder by my presence your imaginary Marriage: And to
make you sensible of her impatience, ( which cannot be blamed but for an
extremity of Affection) she has followed me so close, that I arrived here
but one day before her. How, said Iphigenes, (counterfeiting an astonishment,
though he had been informed of her coming) is she in this Country? I must
acknowledge as much Obligation to her Love, as her jealousy has done me
injury: But does she esteem me so little judicious, or guilty of so much
inconstancy, as to change the glory of appertaining to her, for the embraces of
a silly Shepherdess, who cannot be compared to her, unless it were to make
appear how beautiful the Day is by the horrors and darkness of the Night?

I am glad, said Mieslas, that this opposition make's you consider the value of
that Lady, and especially to hear you speak in such terms of her Merit, which
is yet greater than you imagine, and her affection to you beyond comparison. If
you had expressed yourself thus before, things would not have been in the
condition they now are; but your first Marriage not being consummated, you
might have freely contracted this second, without staying for any needless
Dispensations, whose tedious delays are incompatible with her Desires. You may
be confident, Sir (replied Iphigenes) that I suffer no less then she the
rigor of that Law; but me-think's my Conscience would never be at ease, if
that be not declared void by a public authority, which was so solemnly
contracted. It is true, what ceremony soever was used, I never had any
intention to marry Modestina, which may easily be judged by the tenderness of
my Age in which your absolute Will m^^^ me take her to Wife, rather than my own
Inclination, which neither at that time nor since, has been much bent toward
any Woman in particular. I must confess as Love is paid but by it self, this
affection wherewith the Princess is pleased to honor me, obliges my Soul to
a reciprocal resentment, unloss I would purchase to myself the title and blame
of the most ungrateful among Mortals; And, I will assure her, that as soon as
I shall be legally freed from the yoke of Modestina, I will render myself her
Seave, and make her my Wife, if she continue in the same desire of having me
to Husband.

Mieslas, being much satisfied with this Speech so conformable to the Passion
he had to see this Marriage accomplished, and the former dissolved, said; if
the Princess heard you speak thus much in her favor, I think Joy would so play
the sweet Tyrant in her Breast, that it would in a manner rob her Heart of Life.
It is a singular happiness for me (answered Iphigenes) that I am able to give
you and her satisfaction, and ( in obeying you by Duty and Obligation) find
besides what correspond's to my own desire. For, I am not so void of
understanding, as not to see how much this alliance, both for Estate and
Parentage, is more advantageous to me than Modestina's, whose Fortune will be
much diminished by Liante, who having now taken his flight into the World, will
first or last find the means, either by the favor of some Eminent Person,
that may perchance make him his Son-in-Law, or by the support of the Justice of
this Kingdom, regain the possession of his Inheritance, whereof indeed we
cannot frustrate him without exposing our selves to the detraction and Envy of
those, who carp at my actions.

Let not that trouble you (said Mieslas) For, I have taken such a course, that
we will enjoy both, being most undoubtedly sure of that I have already in my
Hands. For, Modestina has protested very solemnly, if her Marriage to you be
declared void, that she will never have any other Husband than a Cloister. As
for Liante, I have unexpectedly met with him, and committed him into the hands
of such trusty Executioners, as will clear all these doubts, if he will not
endure to be reduced into a condition of never having issue.

Iphigenes having brought him to the point, whereof he desired with much
impatience to be satisfied, deferred not to ask him, how Liante happened into
his Hands? Mieslas thereupon told him, that coming to Plocens he found him
there, expecting his return from Hunting. Sir, answered Iphigenes, did he tell
you that he came to see me? No, said Mieslas, for I saw him not, but thus he
said to those whom I sent to apprehend him. Did not you see him then, answered
Iphigenes? No, I would not, said Mieslas, lest the compassion which the
tenderness of his Youth might have suscitated in my Breast, should have made me
lament his Fortune, and recant the Design which I had resolved to execute upon
him. That Design, said Iphigenes, is very severe, and it is to be feared, that
being divulged (as it is no easy matter to conceal such actions long) it will
produce one of these two mischiefs; either that it will cast you into the
King's disfavour, (who doubtless will abhor so strange a proceeding) or else
that the despair of so inhumane a violence, may make that poor Gentleman
resolve to preserve his own Life to take away yours, and revenge himself at
what rate soever of that affront, which is the most sensible any Man can endure.

I have other ways, answered Mieslas, to bridle his fury: the Prison whither I
have sent him, shall keep him safe enough, until he has purged away all his
Choler. As for the King's displeasure I fear it not, considering that I have
rendered him services capable to counterpoise this action, which will rather
excite laughter than any thought of punishment. You are too conscientious for a
Palatine, if you quit not these vain Scruples, you will never raise your
fortune to the height. In this World a Man must be daring, and allow somewhat
to adventure; he that has so much circumspection, will never acquire great
Riches; be sure to get what you can into your Possession, and then you may
dispose afterward at leisure. I have always (replied Iphigenes) held Scruples
to be vain doubts, which make us esteem evil that which is not so; But it is
neither Superstition nor Scruple to call evil that which visibly is so; and
for my part I had rather Live and Die poor, than enrich my self by unlawful
ways: if you call this Humor, I call it Reason, and I am so wedded to this
Reason, that nothing shall make me renounce it, no, not all the Wealth, nor
all the Scepters in the World.

Leave this Discourse (said Mieslas) and go give as much satisfaction to the
fair Princess, ( who is come to see you) as you have given me, by the promise
you have made to answer her affection by your services, and make my Prayers
follow by your Obedience. So, they went immediately to wait upon the Princess,
whose agitations of spirit I will not stand to represent, nor repeat her words,
contenting my self to say, that Iphigenes, who was Wit and Eloquence it self,
omitted no sort of Honors, Complements, respectfull Behavior and quaint
Terms to foment her Fire, and fill the sails of her Hope with a thousand
Protestations as frivolous as the Wind: Insomuch that being ravished with joy
to see her self, as it were, at the top of her pretentions, her Fancy floted
upon the Sea of her desires, and fed it self with imaginary contentments.

The whole Fable of Almeria (the Diana of those woods) was represented in new
colors, wherewith Iphigenes shadowed his Narration so artificially, that the
Enamell has not so much grace when most curiously laid on Gold, as those
flowers of Rhetoric in his Mouth gave ornament to that story.

Night summoning every one to a Retreat, a Page came to acquaint Iphigenes,
that there was a Lady in the Hall, who desired to speak with him about some
business of great importance. He, who was all Courtesy, especially toward
Ladies, made her not long expect him: But she having entreated him to hear in
private what she had to impart to him, he led her into his Chamber, where
she said, My Lord, the person that speak's to you under this Woman's habit is
a Man Iphigenes not a little surprised at these words, and the room being
somewhat obscure, thought it had been Liante; which made him presently say, Ah!
Brother, wherefore are you come hither? do you long to be butchered, and
precipitate your self into Death? you do not (it seems) know the affront
Mileslas intend's to your Person.

My Lord, answered the disguised Man, You take me for another, I am Menochius,
one of your Mother Aretuza's servants, appointed to wait upon your Lady,
Modestina, in the Castle where your Father commanded her to be kept close
Prisoner: There she first gained my heart by Pity, then by presents, and
lastly by promises and assurances, that the service she desired of me would
be acceptable to you; It was to convey her out of Prison: which I effected
very fortunately, having covered her with one of my Suits; and having provided
Horses in a convenient place not far thence, I conducted her hither, where she
commanded me to take the habit wherein you see me, whilst she went abroad
to inquire after you: And here was confirmed to her the news, which made her
resolve to find you out, being pricked with Jealousy and the apprehension of
losing you by a Passion, which she was informed, possessed you for a
Shepherdess in these Neighboring Forests, whom you were reported to have been
resolved to marry. But her ill fortune was, at the arrival of Mieslas, to be
observed by some of his followers or yours, and to be taken by them for
Liante, by reason of her likeness to him in Face, and her being in Man's
clothes. Upon this mistake she was apprehended by order from Mieslas, and I
hear that he has sent her back into Podolia, to the same Castle where Liante
was Prisoner: But when she is known, I believe she will be sent where she
was before, with her Governess Perpetua. And I, My Lord, remain here destitute
of all relief, having no hope but in your Pity, no confidence but in your
Mercy. If I have transgressed in serving her in her desires (which proceeded
only from the extreme and incomparable affection she bears you) I am ready to
receive such punishment as you shall please to ordain. If your more favorable
censure judge me not culpable, I fly for refuge under your Protection against
the fury of Mieslas, who will make me be torn in pieces, if he come to know
that I have contributed any thing to her escape: For, he dreaded nothing so
much as to see her with you.

Iphigenes seeing that Menochius ended there his Speech, asked him if he knew
no farther news of Modestina? No, answered he, For, fearing to discover my
self, I durst not inquire after any other particulars. By this Discourse
Iphigenes presently perceived what gave the rise to that Report, which Arcade
brought him into the Prison, and the veil fell from those Enigma's, which held
his imagination in suspense. But this was to him a falling out of the
Drying Pan into the Fire: for as his Passion for Liante was great, so his
Affection to Modestina was not ordinary; and if he would have desired to
change his Sex, it should have been merely for her sake, and to be really her
Husband; none among all the Ladies he had ever seen deserving more than
Modestina to possess his Body as well as his Heart. And indeed Iphigenes had
lost much of the glory of his sweet Disposition, if he had done less than love
Her, who besides their long education together, the conformity of their
humors, and the bond of their Souls, came to give him so remarkable an
evidence of her Love, exposing her person to so many perils to seek him, and
enjoy the felicity of his Presence. So Liante being already secured from his
Father's rage, all his care was bent toward Modestina, as the Object which had
most need of his succor; and having dismissed Menochius, after advising him to
continue in that Woman's habit, and stir little abroad until Mieslas were
returned to Court, promising him his Protection and Assistance against
whomsoever: and in acknowledgement of the service which he had rendered to
Modestina, he filled his hand with a good sum of Gold, as an earnest of the
favors he would do him, assuring him in mean time to exempt him from Danger
and Necessity.

Which done, he cast himself upon his Bed, overwhelmed with such a multitude
of thoughts, that his Eyelids were hardly closed all night; For, his Heart
being divided betwixt Modestina and Liante, and suspended like a piece of Iron
between two Load-stones, he knew not which way to incline his resolution. This
restlesness of Mind denying repose to his Body, he sent very early in the
Morning for Boleslaus, to take advice of that faithful Counselor, how he
should shape his course in that tempestuous occurrence. He repeated in brief
what Menochius had told him; and the fear lest ( Modestina being discovered by
his Father's bloody instruments) they, to comply with his severity, should
murder her, put his Heart into an unspeakeable perplexity. To post presently
to her relief, had been to contradict what he had made the Princess and his
Father believe of his slender esteem of that Wife, from whom he seemed to them
to desire nothing more than a separation: Not to go, and not to assist her in
so urgent a necessity, he deemed an ingratitude not to be digested by any
generous Spirit. On the other side being too well acquainted with the cruelty
of Mieslas, and the design he had against Liante, he began to think that he
had not provided sufficiently for his safety, keeping him so near that
inexorable Sarmatian. And although Palatines (who are incontrouleable in their
own Governments) have no authority in another's Dominion; yet the quality of
Father gave Mieslas I know not what privilege in that of Plocens, which
Iphigenes would not have permitted to another.

Having communicated all these painful imaginations to Boleslaus, he
answered; My Lord, it happen's oft-times that recreative sports are the
presages, and as I may say, the Prologues of more serious occurrences: It was
your pleasure to make yours lately in the Forest, and perchance it is the
Heaven's Will now to act their part. You made Liante be covered with Woman's
clothes, whilst his Sister made her escape in Man's; and whilst you courted
Him in that feined appearance, She followed you in her disguise. He love's
you with perplexity, because he think's you are a Man; and She is jealous of
you, not imagining that you are a Woman. You personated Modestina in the Woods,
while she represented Liante at Plocens; your Friends were deceived in you,
and your Father in her. Observe how all these passages are linked to each
other. It was not without the particular providence of Heaven, that we escaped
the affronts which those irritated Clowns would have made us suffer; and I
beseech the Powers above to continue us the same grace, and draw us out of the
Labyrinths, wherein, I foresee, that we are likely to be involved. Indeed it
would require the thread of a greater Prudence than mine to conduct us safely
forth; But since you do me the honor to believe me, my fidelity having been
approved by you. I can do no less than persevere in assisting you till Death
with my Head, Hands, Advice, and Life. All the remedies you can now apply to
Modestina, will be too late; For, since her being apprehended, she is
infallibly either Dead or re-inclosed in her Prison; besides, by going in
Person, or sending to rescue her, you would discover a Meaning contrary to what
you have professed in Words to your Father and the Princess; which would be
very prejudicial to a person of your condition, who never ought to be
surprised in doubledealing. The best way therefore in my opinion is to expect
the certainty of this Event, and take it as from the hand of Providence, what
e're it be. If she be Dead, consider that your Sorrow will not recall her to
Life; and besides, she is a Creature, the privation of whom ought to be the
less grievous to you, in regard Nature has forbidden you the enjoyment of her
Person. But for the preservation of Liante, whom you cherish above all the rest
of Mortals, you ought in time to apply your Care, Diligence and Authority. Yet
as the deepest Waters make the least noise in their course, so the solidest
Judgments conduct their affairs with more temper, and less rumor, more
Effects and less show. The surest guards you can give Liante, are Secrecy and
Silence. Make as if you knew not where he is, and let Pisides, Argal and
Pomeran remain in the error, which possesses them that he is Almeria; Close
with the Seal of Authority Arcade's lips by a severe prohibition to reveal
this Mystery; and command Humbertus and his Soldiers under pain of Death not
to declare what they know concerning him. If, notwithstanding all these veiles,
Mieslas should chance to discover the place of his retreat, we shall easily
make him escape out of this Country, or by Night convey him into some private
Corner, which shall be known but to very few.

However we must advertise him of what particulars we have learned since our
arrival (said Iphigenes) and who shall we appoint to carry him this message?
Do you think Arcade fit for this purpose? I would not advise you (answered
Boleslaus) to commit this secret ( which touches you in the Apple of the Eye)
neither to Arcade, nor to paper; For the one may miscarry, the other be
corrupted: If you conceive me worthy to serve you therein you may freely
command me; For you are the only Master whom I do, or will ever serve.

Father, said Iphigenes, embracing the old man's neck, and washing his Face
with tears, you continue obliging me in things that are more sensible, and
which I esteem more precious than my Life; do me then the courtesy to go in
my Name to him, for whom I preserve my self, and tell him that to preserve him
there is no force, but I will employ it, no respect of Father that I shall
stick to violate; since choosing him for my Spouse, I ought to prefer him
before Father and Mother. You shall be a living Letter, and I am sure you will
represent to him the passages here much better then I can write; only in one
thing I should surpass you, that is, in representing him my affections: For,
there is none but that Tongue whose Heart is pierced with Love, which is able
to express to the Life the resentments of a passionate Soul.

Boleslaus, to satisfy the impatience of Iphigenes, departed presently with
this Commission, and had hardly delivered his message to Liante, when news was
brought to Mieslas (his Son being then with him) of the Discovery of the
imaginary Liante, the Story whereof was thus.

THE DISCOVERY OF MODESTINA.
THose who had taken upon them the charge of conducting Modestina, disguised in
Man's habit, being arrived in a place where, they thought, they might securely
execute their damnable design on the person of that innocent Creature, having
to that effect procured a Surgeon for a great sum of Money, and masked him,
lest being afterward known by him to whom they intended to do that horrible
affront, he might be liable to the Law or his Revenge; The pitiful Prisoner
suffered herself to be bound, like an harmeless sheep whom the rugged Butchers
carry to the Slaughterhouse, without the least Replication; And whether
Modesty tied her Tongue, or the horror of the affront by a sudden apprehension
deprived her of the use of Speech, she remained some time without so much as
asking what they intended: At length as if her Spirits had returned out of a
deep trance, and fearing more the loss of her Honor than of her Life, she
screaked out like a Virgin calling for aid against the violence of some
dissolute Ravisher: For, she conceived that they having perceived what she
was, would have sated their brutall appetites on her. But she learned other
news by him that brought the Commission from Mieslas, who speaking as if she
had been Liante, told her, that she must resolve to imitate the Beaver when
he is chased, or lose her Life; that if she were wise, of those two evils
she should choose the least, and save the whole by losing a part. In a word,
he Made her understand the Will and Command of Mieslas, which was to make her
an Eunuch against her Will, since she had refused to make herself such by a
voluntary embracing of an Ecclesiastic Life.

Then Modestina seeing herself reduced to this extremity, judged it time to
declare her condition, and disabuse them of their error: But it was after
attempting this last means, protesting that she was ready to obey the Will of
Mieslas in resigning herself wholly to the service of the Church, beseeching to
defer their Execution until they had received his definitive answer. For that
the lot is already cast (replied the chief of the Band) there is no other
determination to be expected than your choice. It concerns not us to interpret
the commands of our Master, we have now no leisure to discourse, time
require's a speedy Expedition, choose the hand of the Surgeon, or that which
shall plunge a Poniard in your Breast.

Hereby Modestina perceiving that her last remedy was in vain, and that she
must use other terms; Thou Barbarous Wretch, said she, could thou have the
Heart to sheath that murtherous blade in an innocent Woman's bosom, who is
capable of receiving Death, but not the affront which thou proposest? There is
as much difference betwixt him, to whom thou think to speak, and me, as
between Brother and Sister; I am not Liante, but Modestina, the Daughter-in-Law
to thy cruel and impious Master, Wife to Iphigenes, who will be able to
revenge my Death, if thou killest me, or my honor, if thou do me the least
affront.

See, said the inhumane villane, what an invention this Gallant has found upon
a sudden to save himself in this storm, how the oxtremity of danger does
subtilize men's Wits? But we are not come thus far to stop in so fair way, we
must put him in a condition of never pretending to the possession of the Lady
Clemencia, she is reserved for a person of more eminent quality than he. This
said, he prepared himself to make a search much different from that which the
Shepherdesses would have made of Liante in the Prison.

What resistance should this poor sheep have made in the midst of so many
Wolves? that chaste Andromeda had recourse to her tears, whose tender drops
were able to penetrate Marble, and mollify Hearts more rigide then the
senseless Rocks. She conjured them by all that she thought might have most
ascendance over their brutall Souls, to be pleased only to take notice by her
Hair if what she said of her Sex and Condition were not true. Then having
unbound her Head, a wave of delicate Curling Hair overflowed her shoulders; and
covered all her Body to the waste, which made them spend some time in
Admiration; yet they thought this but an illusion.

That not satisfying, she entreated them to unbutton her doublet, and they
should find in her Bosom a disposition correspondent to her Hair. Which done,
as by the sweetness of the Mountains, one may judge of the Soil in the
Valleys; So the Surgeon, who was present, and had some knowledge in the
constitution of humane Bodies, seeing the gentle rising of those Snowy Hills
upon her Breast, assured them of the Natural condition of the Dale. Insomuch
that this Conjecture (which in all reason was sufficient) might have served as
a bridle to their curiosity, if Misfortune (which had not yet rendered the
state of that miserable Lady desperate enough to be released by Miracle) had
not suggested to those Tiger's thoughts the desire of being farther satisfied
by the visitation of certain grave Matrons, who affirmed upon their
Consciences (having used the Lady with all sort of civility, and made no
farther search than of her Head and Bosom) that she was a Lady full of as
much Honor as Virtue and Integrity.

How cruel and fiery soever those barbarous Executioners were, yet they could
not hinder cold Fear from freezing up their Hearts; which distilling it is Icy
liquor through every vein, benumbed their spirits so, that they stood in a no
less maze, then one who (unawares) chances to tread upon an angry Snake, lying
in ambush under the green Tapistry of the Earth, whose horrid hissing invite's
the Passenger's Eyes to behold him raising his poisonous Head, and darting
Death from his forked Tongue against the Foot that pressed him: They began to
think themselves lost Men, for offering such an affront to a Person of her
Quality, believing that neither in here is nor her Husband's Heart there could be
any place for pardon of so unspeakable an injury.

In this despair they consulted together to render their last error worse than
the first. The blood of the innocent Modestina was put into the balance; The
principal Man of that accursed crew made a proposition to take away her Life,
alleging that they might justify themselves to Mieslas for that action, by
the resistance which they would feign she made; and besides that thereby
Iphigenes would be in full liberty to marry the Princess Respicia, without
expecting the issue of so many formalities. This Proposition was put in
deliberation, and discussed both ways. At length merciful Heaven (whose Eyes
continually behold the just, and watch over their preservation) contrary to the
ordinary course of the World (where evil Counsels commonly oversway the good)
made the best and discreetest advice prevail in favor of that innocent
captive. So that at length they concluded to suspend that cruel Execution,
until they had advertised Mieslas of that mistake, and received directions
from him, how to demean themselves in that occurrence. And this news was
brought to the Palatine of Podolia, whilst he was with Iphigenes, the
Messenger adding of his own conceit, That of a Hen they could not make a Capon.

Iphigenes having been already informed by Menochius of Modestina's being
taken, was the less astonished at this relation; But Mieslas was no less
surprised than angry; surprised with the strangeness of the error, besides the
uncertainty wherewith his thoughts were perplexed of the impression which this
event might make in his Son's mind, who he believed would be very sensible of
that affront done to a person of so near relation to him: And angry to see
that, in stead of Liante (whom he intended to raze out of the number of Men)
he had but a shadow; and which was worse, that the design he had against his
person being divulged, and coming to his Ears, he would be more careful to
avoid falling into his hands; or else, that perchance Despair would transport
him to some memorable revenge. Nevertheless dissembling the distemper of his
Mind, and hiding his Choler under a smiling Countenance, he feined to turn
this evenement into Laughter; yet could not forbear protesting if ever Eiante
did fall into his hands, that he would deal him hard measure.

His manner of speaking, drew from Iphigenes mouth this reply; The affront
which you had plotted against him was the cruellest and most barbarous that
could enter into the thoughts of Man, and I should be very sorry if it had
been executed in my Palatinate: For, I do so abhor the injustice of that
proceeding, that I should have employed all the power and force I could command
to hinder it before it was attempted; and there is no sort of vengeance and
punishment but I should make them suffer that had put it in execution. What? if
I had commanded it? said the fierce Mieslas.

Sir, answered the resolute Iphigenes, I know my duty to you as my Father, but
you must give me leave likewise to consider what I owe to my King, to my
Province, to the People who under my Government are committed to Justice and my
Conscience. Alexander the Great denied a request his Mother demanded of him,
because in his Opinion it was not just. As being your Son I owe my Life to
you, but for the Honors and Estate which I possess, I must acknowledge my self
indebted to the King's beneficence; and for my Government I must thank my
Sword. You know that the jealousy of ruling makes Children not regard their
Parents; That of commanding likewise make's Parents dis-own their Children. I
have read in the History that a certain Consul of Rome having made his own
Father alight from his Horse to render him the Honor which was due to his
Magistracy, was applauded for that Action not only by all the Senate and
People of that City, but by his Father also, as making the Laws of Nature,
which were but particular give place to those of his Charge, which was public.
And this I say to you, Sir, to the end that not any of your Attendants may dare
to attempt any thing against Liante, if they should meet him within the
territory of my Palatinate; otherwise I should torture them with so cruel a
Death, that their punishment should serve for an example of horror to
Posterity. And let not those brutall Villains, who have done that unworthy
affront to Her who is yet my Wife, be so audacious as ever to appear in my
presence; For, as the Creator live's, before whom I stand, I will pass and
repass my Rapier through their Bodies for punishment of their insolence.

The furious Mieslas, who was not accustomed to suffer such caresses, without
retorting an answer with his hands as well as his Tongue, seeing himself
out-braved by him, whom he esteemed to be his subject, had no small pain to
contein his Passion. He did however for that time, being bound by a certain
respect, which Virtue and Verity do usually imprint in the most brutall and
least tractable Spirits. So, having calmed his countenance, he replied,
Iphigenes, I see that contrary to your custom you grow choleric and that your
Passion transports you beyond the limits of that reverence which is due to me;
I thought I had had more power with you, and a greater credit in your
Dominions, than I find I have; But you are to remember that how eminent
Dignities soever the King has conferred upon you, no humane Law can exempt you
from the obedience which by the Precepts of Heaven you owe to me as your
Father. In contradicting me you plead against your self: For, do you not see
that what I do is for you? that I scrape together only to make you rich? Will
you undo what I design for your good? will you preserve those whom I seek to
destroy, to establish you? Are not you like the Peacock, which uncover's the
House where he roost's, or Ivy which pull's down the wall that hold's it up?

Sir, answered Iphigenes, Every one act's according to his understanding; and
is the Artificer of his own good or bad Fortune; I will not ground mine upon
the maxims which you hold, nor therein imitate your ways. If I am an honest
Man, I have Wealth and Honors enough already by the mere liberality of the
King my Master: If I am wicked, I have but too much. And I hold as an especial
favor of Heaven this image of disgrace which has absented me from Court, and
thereby hinder's me from atteining to that utmost degree of Fortune, that is
envied by all the World, and which cast's those who are elevated to that height
into the public Hatred, and terms of continual apprehension, when Hope can
promise them no more. And to declare freely my sense, I had rather be reduced
to the extremest Period of Misery, than live splendidly by the unjust
acquisition of another's Estate, being resolved, if I do Marry the Princess
Respicia, to renounce all that I can pretend of Modestina's, without compelling
her to intomb herself alive within the walls of a Monastery, much less to force
Liante's Genius, which he has so often professed to me to be averse to
Learning and an Ecclesiastic Life, and wholly inclined to Arms and Martial
Exercises: and it may happen, if of a good Soldier he become's a good
Captain, that he may make you restore by force of Arms in his Majority, what
you have usurped of his during the weakness of his Minority. For my part I will
not mingle the Good with the Evil; that is, what I have justly acquired by the
King's Bounty, with that which you shall rake together by such unjust practices.

This discourse, said Mieslas, is the Child of your Scruples, and proceed's
from the little experience you have yet in Worldly affairs. You think it is but
to open the Sails and receive the Wind of Favor, as you have done hitherto;
But if once Fortune knit her brow, you will catch at what you can, and to
uphold yourself you will grasp with both hands as well as others. But I
perceive through the ashes of the counterfeited coldness, which appears in
your Speeches, certain coals that are yet burning in your Breast for that
Modestina, whom you call your Wife, although she was no more joined to you in
Heart then in Body, according to your own confession, since you acknowledge
never to have consented but with your Lips to her Marriage; And you are so
simple as to consider Liante as your Brother-in-Law, although he has not the
least relation to you.

I say still, answered Iphigenes, that I never was greatly in love with
Modestina but my Friendship can admit of no out-vier: For, if our Faces tan
insensibly by being in the Sun, and clothes are perfumed by lying near sweet
odours, it is impossible but that the long education you have given us
together, should have planted in my Soul the roots of affection, which make's
me desire her happiness, and detest that which does her mischief; I may say
with much truth, I love her as my Sister, and by the same reason Liante as my
Brother, and in this quality we have so often joined hands of association,
that I should esteem myself a Traitor and an execrable Monster both to God and
Men, If I should embrace the thought of doing them any injury. Therefore, Sir,
I conjure you by all that has any power to move your Heart, to give order
speedily that no harm be done to Modestina, otherwise I will go my self to
rescue her. If it be your pleasure to re-imprison her in the same Castle where
she was, until the arrival of the Dispensation for my leaving her my Consent
shall attend your Will, but upon this condition, that finding another Match you
shall give her a Dowry according to her quality; otherwise I will settle upon
her of my own Estate as much as you detein of here is, protesting to do the like
for Liante, and what is more, to become their Protector in such manner against
all their enemies, that I will prosecute with Fire and Sword whosoever shall do
them any injury.

I foresee then, replied Mieslas, ( sparkling Fire out of his Eves) that you
and I must have ae quarrel. Sir, said Iphigenes, I shall kiss your weapons and
lay my Standard under your Feet, whenever you appear; but (excepting your
Person) I shall esteem my mortal Enemies those that shall attempt any thing
against Creatures who are so much my Friends. If I suffer for so good a cause,
I shall bless my Persecutions, and hug Death if she seizes on me in so just
an action; humbly beseeching you to excuse me, if for the lawful defense of
my Friends I use these words of Precipitation, and exceed the terms of a
respectfull Modesty.

I see, said Mieslas, that you speak like a Palatine in your own Palatinate;
that is like a Sovereign and not a Son; But Fortune may so turn her wheel, that
you will be glad to creep under the shadow of my wings, and shelter your self
under my Authority. Sir, you see that I do what You will, and I judge to be
reasonable; I marry without enjoying my Wife, I unmarry, I marry again, and all
this more to satisfy your desire, than follow my own inclinations; you are the
Rock, I am the Polypus, I receive my colors but from you, I am as Wax to your
impressions; and yet if I speak in favor of a friend, you presently cry out
against my disobedience. Pardon me, Sir, if I tell you that you requite very
ill the sincerity of my intentions, and that you give me cause to make use of
that liberty which the Heavens gave me at my Creation; the liberty that is in
my Soul, which Soul I received by their infusion, having nothing from you but
this wretched Body, which I can no less than abhor, when I contemplate it is
misery; yet in the greenness of it is youth you will bind it to a withered old
Woman, whom it is fitter for me to reverence as a Mother than embrace as a
Wife; as if Love, which proceed's from our own choice, were the child of Duty.

At length, (said Mieslas (who felt Choler gaining the ascendant over his
Reason) you will say so much, that my Patience being too far tempted will turn
to Fury and constrain me to let you see by some violent effect, how much this
Language displease's me. Sir, replied Iphigenes, my sorrow is so just, and my
resentments so legitimate, that if I were not moved for this outrage done to my
Wife, I should be unworthy of the Name of Husband; And of friend, if I did not
with all my power oppose the mischief intended to Liante. The worst that can
befall me, is to lose by your hands the Life which you have given me, but to
take away my honor and fidelity is beyond the power of Man.

Hereupon Mieslas being ready to burst with rage, and thundering out no small
Oaths, said; We shall see (Gallant) if Liante ever fall into my clutches, how
you will hinder me from executing my will upon him. As for Modestina her
innocence move's me to some pity; besides that, her Sex protects her from my
choler, with the design she has of espousing a Monastic life when you are
married to this other (who is more worth then she or you) which resolution
will make me treat her with less rigor, and for the present I am contented to
send her back to the same Castle, whence she made her escape (but her Guards
must be more careful than they were before) or else I will commit her to
Aretuza's charge, who will be watchful enough of her deportments, and execute
upon her as I shall command. I see that hence forwards you will follow your own
fancies, and do but what you list; But in believing your self take heed you be
not counseled by a fool; For, such have only a dear repentance for their
Wages. The Court has taught you loosnesse, which it seems you reserved to put
in practice until you came into your Palatinate, and being puff't up with his
Majesty's favor you take upon you Liberties against my will, by withdrawing
yourself from my subjection. However, I will have patience, and making Virtue
of Necessity, I will forbear, expecting the time to express my Resentments; But
if you resolve not to marry the Princess, who does you too much honor in
desiring your alliance, let Heaven never pardon me if ever I pardon you.

Sir, replied Iphigenes, We are Men only by Reason, and Reason is manifested
by your Words; I am a Man of both, and I will never recede from what I
promised, So that the conditions annexed to my promise be performed; the one is
my dispensation, the other if she will have me in the condition I am. I would
to Heaven (answered Mieslas) that the first were as ready as the second. For,
in the Passion wherewith she is inflamed for you, I know there is no exile so
disgraceful no condition so miserable, wherein she would not esteem herself
happy to enjoy you; And for my part I think her very unhappy in having placed
her affection on a subject so full of ingratitude, and who acknowledges so
little her Love and Merit.

After much other discourse to the same effect, they parted very little
satisfied of each other. Mieslas went to see the Princess, to whom, though he
dissembled, he could render no pleasing account, which put her into such
distemper, as may be imagined in a Woman of her Spirit, haughty by reason of
the nobleness of her extraction, eminence of her dignity, and the vastness of
her Estate; besides all which being inflamed with Love, and yet who perceived
through all these advantages, her affections repayed with some kind of slight.

Not long after Iphigenes went to visit her; But to repeat what passed in this
interview, were to fill these pages with Passions, which are better concealed
than published, and more easily conjectured than rehearsed. All that I can say,
in short, was, that the affection of Respicia made her act the part of an
earnest Suitor, who indeavour's by all sorts of persuasion to charm the
inclination of his Mistress; And the reservedness of Iphigenes made him seem
like a Virgin, whom Modesty obliges to express a pure indifference to those
that court her, and an absolute refignation of her will to her Parents
pleasure. All that she could obtain of him, was a solemn protestation (which
he often iterated) to take her to Wife, when he was released from Modestina,
with this Proviso, That She would accept of him for her Husband, when he
should be in full liberty of disposing of himself. Which clause was offensive
to her Ears, as revoking into doubt her constancy, and the resolution which
she had taken to bequeath herself irrevocably to the beautiful Palatine. Mean
time she languished almost to Death, though near her remedy; and in the midst
of so many occasions of delight, as his splendid entertainment afforded her,
she could not hinder her sighs from discovering by stealth her grief. So,
having imprisoned herself within her Closet, where she had full Liberty of
expressing her thoughts, she brake her perplexed Silence with this Complaint
against

THE INCONSTANCY OF MEN.
I Can no longer hide this torturing pain;
Soul wast thy self in Sighs, disclose my smart;
And since my Passion's answered with Disdain,
Let Iphigenes know, Love broke my Heart.
Unfaithful Iphigenes, who did force
Thee to make show of so much fervent Love
To me, when by I know not what remorse,
The effects a perfect contradiction prove?
But of such faithless Souls it is the use
To make a purchase of our firm Desires,
And by false Oaths our credulous Hearts abuse,
And quench with Icie difrespects our Fires.
Yet why should I be troubled at his Change,
Since it is the humor of all Men to vary?
Their Words are Wind, their Fancies love to range,
And all their Faith is but Imaginary.
The Constancy which they so deeply vow,
Is but the paint of their inconstant Hearts;
And by their Levities too late we know,
They glory in augmenting of our Smarts.
That there a Phoenix is most People say,
But who her spicy Nest did ever see?
And if by the Effects we censure may,
Such is my Idol's vowed Fidelity.
While she is spending her Breath in Sighs, and thirsting like Tantalus in
the midst of pleasant Waters; Let us go see how Boleslaus has discharged the
Commission of his Embassy. Being arrived where Liante, by Order of the
Palatine, was concealed; Father, said the young Gentleman, your appearance
rejoiceth me no less than Phoebus does the World, when he chaseth away the
shades wherewith the Night had covered the Face of the Earth. This last Night I
had the most extravagant Dream, and which put me in the greatest pain of any
I can remember; For, me thought that being escaped out of the claws of those
Harpies, which I belabored so handsomely in our Country-prison, I was fallen
into the Hands of those barbarous Rusticks, who searching me, bound as I was,
found me to be a Woman, which bred a strange Agony in my Thoughts; For I speak
really, I had rather embrace Death, than be subject to their sad Condition: And
that which troubled me most, was that brutall news which Arcade brought us of
the Design Mieslas had against me, which my Fancy made me believe those
rascals had executed on my person. But, wakening put me out of all pain, and
your arrival, unveiling all these Enigma's, will set my Thoughts at rest.

I never was with Artemidorus of Morpheus Council, said Boleslaus, but it is
probable that by some kind of transpiration, or by the means of Spirits things
acted at a distance are conveyed to persons absent, and represented to them in
their sleep with strange disguisements. Your Dream is but too true; for, that
Liante ( of whose disaster Arcade brought us notice) is no other than your
Sister, who came in Man's apparel to seek her Husband, being pricked with
Jealousy for Almeria; the poor Lady had made her escape out of Prison, but at
Mieslas arrival at Plocens, she was apprehended for you, and delivered into
the Hands of some Villains who undertook to execute what Arcade told us: But, I
believe, if their barbarism transport them to the impudence of a search,
finding themselves mistaken, the apprehension of being severely punished by
Ighigenes will make them seek their security by flight.

If this news doubly distempered Liante, I give him leave to judge who know's
how sensible to a Bother that is full of honor, is an affront offered to his
Sister: Besides, considering how much more precious the Skin is then the Shirt,
the danger whereunto he saw himself exposed by the rigor and proximity of
Mieslas, agitated his mind with no small perplexities. He would have inquired
diverse particulars concerning Modestina, but Boleslaus could inform him no
farther than what he had learned by the relations of Menochius and Arcade:
Only he assured him that Iphigenes intended an exemplary revenge against
those inhumane instruments of his Father's cruelty, if they attempted any
outrageous act upon the person of her who was so dear to him. And as for him,
that he came purposely to let him understand, that the Palatine would expose
his own Life in his defense against the rigours of Mieslas; by whom he need
not fear to be surpised, as well in regard Iphigenes was more powerful than
he in his own government, as that Mieslas could not learn where he was, those
same Gentlemen whom he had seen in the Forest, being still in the opinion
that he was Almeria.

Notwithstanding all these reasons, fear made so hot an allarm in the poor
Gentleman's Heart, that confidence could find no admittance. He was too well
acquainted with the imperious and brutall humor of his Tyrannical Guardian to
trust him, the experience of his long imprisonment and unworthy treatment
formerly, represented themselves feelingly to his Memory. Insomuch that
thinking his only safety was in his heels he determined by withdrawing
himself secretly out of that Province, (where he had passed so many perils) to
secure his person from the violence of that Tempest. Nevertheless he prudently
dissembled his resolution to Boleslaus, lest he should divert his design by
persuasions, or oppose it by the authority of Iphigenes. Insomuch that after
some other discourse, Boleslaus (thinking that he had sufficiently pacified
his thoughts by the assurance of Iphigenes protection) took leave of him to
return to Plocens, whence he promised to give him frequent intelligence of
what passed.

But Liante, who studied nothing more than to be out of Mieslas reach, easily
accomplished the design of his security: For, not being Prisoner in that
Castle, it was no difficult matter to steal away from those, who were commanded
to defend, not to detein his person. And doubtless it was not without the
suggestion of some good Angel, that he so suddenly took the resolution of
leaving that fatal coast, which was no less dangerous to him, then Scylla and
Charybdis are to those Mariners that sail through the Sicilian Sea.

For, whether Mieslas would revenge himself upon that imaginary Shepherdess for
the liberty which Iphigenes took in speaking to him, or whether he conceived
that she was the main obstacle that hindered him from answering Respicia's
desires, being moved thereunto by her instigations, he set so many Engines to
work, that in short time he learned where that Castle was in which Iphigenes
concealed that supposed Mistress. And it being an hard matter to keep long
undiscovered a thing done in the presence of many; whether Pomeran out of zeal
for the Palatine's honor desired by that means to divert his friend from that
Passion, which he esteemed ridiculous; or whether some of the Soldiers,
corrupted by money, revealed the secret to Mieslas; he stole away from Plocens
in the Night, and being well accompanied he marched to that Castle, he
introduced himself cunningly under the Name of Iphigenes. Being entered he
asked for Almeria; but the inhabitants answering him that Liante was no longer
there, he thought they mocked him: The Master of the house on the other side
thought Mieslas mocked him and began to grow angry to see himself braved in his
own House by persons whom he knew not, only they had made use of the
Palatine's Name to facilitate their admittance. Mieslas fearing lest, during
those debates, the party whom he came to seek might by some subtility be
evaded, commanded his followers to search diligently every corner of the
Castle. But neither Liante nor Almeria could be found, for they were both
retired to a place unknown as well to the Governor of Plocens, as the cruel
Palatine of Podolia.

Day had no sooner opened the watchful Iphigenes Eyes, but being informed of
his Father's nocturnall chase, and fearing lest he should take his Turtle in
the Nest you may imagine what perplexities disturbed his thoughts. But at
length Love gaining the ascendant over all other respects, made him presently
take Horse, and having assembled as many Gentlemen, besides his Guards, as
could not but overpower the Party which attended Mieslas, he marched with all
speed toward that Castle, resolving to defend his Friend against the violence
of his Father. Undoubtedly their encounter had been very bloody, if he had
found Liante taken: For, what would not our Amazon have done for the price of
such a victory?

He arrived at the Castle just as Mieslas, after an exact Search, was coming
forth. In his heat Iphigenes would have charged his Father's Troop without
further Examination, being determined to rescue Liante, or lose his Life: But
Boleslaus tempered that impetuosity, telling him that before he came to so
desperate an effect, he should first consider the certainty of the Cause. Then
asking some of his Father's Attendants if Liante was taken, he was answered,
that Almeria was not to be found. Passion having too much overbalanced his
senses, I care not for Almeria (said Iphigenes) so that Liante be free, You may
well think (said Boleslaus in his Ear) if Almeria be not taken, that Liante is
safe enough; For, they go both one way, and under the same Clothes.

But when he advanced toward Mieslas, that meeting of the Father and the Son
was like to the opposition of the Planets of Mars and Saturn, whose Aspects
dart none but malign influences. Mieslas taking occasion to speak first, said
to his Son; I think this is an enchanted Castle, for the People answer all by
contraries; I asked for your Diana, and they toldmee that Liante was no longer
there; has your Bother-in-law been in this place then? Sir, replied Iphigenes
angerly, are you come hither to search? show what Commission you have from the
King to that purpose, otherwise give me leave to tell you, as Palatine of this
Country, that you have nothing to do to seek either of them here.

But if I had found either of them (said Mieslas) I should have made them knew
what my Power is, and all your strength would have been too weak to have taken
them out of my hands. As being my Father (answered Iphigenes) you have
privilege to use these terms, But there is none else breathing upon Earth whom
I should not make thoroughly sensible of the Power I have in the Countries which
depend on my authority. Therefore, Sir, you must tell me if you have taken
either of those persons; For, I will die in the place, or I will make him that
has them in keeping release them; and whatsoever you are able to do or say,
nothing shall hinder me from cutting in pieces all those that accompany you,
if they are not delivered to my hands: For, to suffer this breach in my Charge,
and that before my Face any one should seize upon Persons that are under my
Protection, is an affront which I can less endure than Death.

This inflamed the fiery Sarmatian with such Fury, that fetching a Career he
had fallen upon Iphigenes like an hasty storm, if he (who was no less
dexterous than the other fierce) had not handsomely slipped aside, and let pass
the impetuosity of that Torrent. Then those that attended him interposing
themselves to hinder them from joining, you might have seen Mieslas foaming
with rage, and brandishing his naked Sword, with threats to dip it in his own
blood, (that was) in the body of Iphigenes; who having not so much as laid his
hand upon the Guard of his, was resolved rather to die by his Father's hand,
than draw his Sword against him.

But as how graceless soever Children are, yet there remain's some raye of
Paternall reverence in their Souls; So in the Heart of a Father, what Choler
soever animate's him against his Children, there is a secret Advocate which
plead's their Cause, and make's the Weapons fall out of their hands. This was
verified by that occurrence; for, what Passion soever transported Mieslas at
the present, he was afterward glad of those Gentlemen's opposing his fury,
and that they had given his Indignation leisure to appease the impetuosity of
it is violent Surges, being better satisfied to have killed his Son with his
Tongue then his hands, and run him through with threats then with his Rapier.

At length Iphigenes being assured by the Gentleman of the Castle, and the
Soldiers, that Liante had given them the slip the day before, his mind was
indifferently well pacified, but yet much troubled, that he knew not whither
he was gone. So, the storm being quite blown over, the Father and Son
accosted each other; and Mieslas abating not a little of his rigid haughtiness,
By-. (said he swearing desperately) I think you will force me to deliver
those whom I have not in my power, but if I had, you should as soon wrest the
Club out of Hercules hands, as tear them out of my clutches. I bless the
Heavens, Sir, said Iphigenes, that things be in the condition they are: I must
confess I should be much troubled to see persons ill treated in any
territories, whose preservation is precious to me.

But, said Mieslas, may not I know if that was Liante? Sir, answered Iphigenes,
that equivocall appellation deceive's you; it is Almeria, who having put on
Man's clothes to go a Hunting, and do violent exercises with more Freedom and
Activity, call's herself Calliante, which name I imposed upon her in an humor,
it signifie's Fair-Flower. What, Fair-Flower? said Mieslas, indeed she did
well to vanish before I came; For, never any Hail did so much spoil in the
Vineyards, as my Blows should have done on Her Shoulders, if I could have laid
hold on Her.

With some other such like passages which wanted not Quips and Jarring words,
they re-entred the City of Plocens, Iphigenes having always his hand upon his
wound, that is, his thoughts continually returning to his Loss of Liante.

The Pilot that in the midst of dangerous Rocks is agitated by a raging
Tempest, and from whose Eyes the horrid shades of Night do hide the twinkling
flames of his directing Star, is not in greater perplexity then our Iphigenes,
not knowing which way to steer his course in pursuit of his dear Liante. With
what an Eye did he behold the Princess at his return, esteeming her the
principal cause of all these troubles? He carried himself with such
indifference toward her, abating so much of those Courtesies, and Compliments,
whereof he was esteemed the only Master, that it was much the despite of
seeing her affection so ill recompensed, had not cured her of that wound which
the Beauty of Iphigenes had made in the Center of her Heart: But alas! it was
incurable, since neither Time, Absence, Cruelty, nor Disdain, the sovereign
remedies of that Desease, were able to assuage the torment of her languishing
Pain.

Mieslas very unsatisfied with his Son's deportments, resolved to depart next
Morning for Podolia, as well to give orders concerning the affairs of his
Charge and Family, as to cause Modestina to be more strictly guarded, and take
his Daughter Clemencia with him to Court, there to attend the Queen until the
Prince Cassin should marry her. And the Princess Respicia settled her
resolution to return to the Court more in love than ever with the perfections
of Iphigenes, but less satisfied with his Courtesy. Only Hope (which never
leaves us in the midst of the greatest disasters) somewhat appeased the
tempest of that Lady's thoughts, by the assurance which Iphigenes confirmed to
her of making himself here is, as soon as his dispensation had restored him to
himself.

The same Night she went from Plocens, Iphigenes found under the Carpet in his
Chamber a note, the Characters and sense whereof accused the hand and invention
of Respicia; all the contents were amorous complaints and exclamations against
inconstancy, but no subscription, nor any particular address to him; yet he
needed no Oedipus for the expounding of that Riddle; he plainly saw that she
complained of him, but he feared less that despite would cure her Love, than
to see her flames increase by the Ice of his neglect. Let her be pleased or
displeased, said he within himself that concerne's me little; For, sooner or
later her error must be manifested: and coming at length to understand how
unable I am to answer her desires, that knowledge will make her lose all
farther hopes. Oh! that my misery consisted only by being in her Prison, then
my disease would never trouble; me, for any mean medicine would be able to
heal my wound. But the rigor of my Fate, never ceasing to persecute me,
make's me love in so strange a manner, that groaning under the pangs of Death
in my Martyrdom, I dare not express my sufferings. Oh! if in the presence of
the Object which ravished me, and which is now ravished from me with so much
cruelty, I had not the confidence to declare my condition and my smart, how
should I do it in his absence, and such an absence as is to me an absolute
loss; since in my disaster I am yet so unhappy as not to know where he is? Ah!
Liante, could you have the Heart to steal your self away from the person in the
World which love's you most, without leaving me the consolation of being
advertised where you were retired? For your flying and my following should have
been in the same path; and if you had flown before as the Lightning, I should
have come as close after as the Thunderclaps.

Judge by this discourse how forcible is the attraction of inclination.
Iphigenes was no more where he was, but where he loved; and as he knew not
where that was which he loved, he knew not well where he was himself; like
an Archer that shoot's without seeing the mark, or one that run's a race
without knowing where to end his Career. So great riches and such high honors
as environed him, were but as many burdens to the wings of his desires, he
would have esteemed himself more happy, if his condition had been more
miserable.

To repeat his Exclamations against the severity of his Father, (who not
satisfied to have persecuted him from his birth, seemed to aim at nothing but
the ruin of his contentments) would be superfluous. What recreations soever
Pomeran, and his other friends invented to mitigate the sense of his
Affliction, nothing had the power to divert him from his Melancholy musings.
Being deprived of the Aspect of the Star of his desites, nothing but obscurity
and confusion possessed his thoughts.

At length after the revolution of some days, consumed in a comfortless
coffeehouse, having received no answer from the several places whither he
had sent to inquire after Liante, at a time when he least expected news, he
received from the hands of an unkown Messenger a Paper wherein he read these
words.

LIANTE'S Letter to IPHIGENES.
Since the Fortuen of your Family, and the Misfortune of mine, have conspired
to make me perish, be not displeased (dear Brother) that I go to seek in the
Wars an honorable Grave: the edge of Mars's Weapons cannot cut so deep, but
that it will yet be more favorable to me, than that which the rigor of your
Father, ( insatiable of my calamities) has designed for me. You conceive (I
presume) my meaning, therefore I shall not express myself in any other terms,
lest this Paper should blush at that, which cannot be related with any Face,
under which remain's the least drop of generous Blood; nor projected but by a
Soul that is absolutely Brutall, it were too little to say Barbarous. This
Reason is sufficient to justify my flight, which I never would have undertaken
without your privity, could I have given my Soul as much confidence in your
Power, as I had of your Will to protect me; and could I have banished from my
apprehension the just distrust I conceived of the fury of that inhumane
Tartare. The greatest displeasure I have, is, that before the Death, whereinto
I am going to precipitate my self, I could not give you the last ADIEU, and
assure you that my Affection to you shall survive my Ashes, and that the
coldness of Death shall never have the power to lessen it is agreeable ardours.
If I have not deserved to Live near you, and in your service, at least it shall
be for your service that I die thus destant from you; too too happy in this
last endeavor, if I could make you see the oblatition which I shall Sacrifise
to you of my one Life. I know that this is the intention of Mieslas; and that I
can do nothing through the whole course of my Life, that will be more
agreeable to him than to end it; and thereby sat his extreme covetousness of
having that little fortune which my Father left me. Oh Heavens! if the
resigning of my whole Estate to him, would purchase me the happiness of
enjoying freely your presence, how well satisfied should I be? Let all Riches,
the causes of so many troubles, perish: He did well that cast all his into the
Sea, saying, that he had rather lose them, than stay till they lost him. And
for my part I should think nothing lost if I possessed you; but not seeing you
any more, I have now nothing to lose but my Life, if it be living to spin out
tedious Days, languishing in the privation of that, which we esteem the
dearest of any thing the World produce's. All my Despair is, that going to the
War ( wherewith this Kingdom is threatened by this last commotion) I shall be
constrained by the severe Law of Necessity, to embrace an interest which my own
Conscience, and the general Opinion holds the least justifiable. But what
safety could I promise my self in the King's Army, where Mieslas cannot fail
of having eminent Command's? were not that to deliver my self to my Enemies in
doing service to my Prince? He that has a will to die, present's himself to
the blow; such is my resolution, not to disserve his Majesty, to whom my Family
owes all its Fortune. I conjure you, if you are recalled to the Court, to make
him understand the sincerity of my intentions, and assure him, that my casting
my self on the Rebell's side is not to maintain their interest, or foment that
unnatural Fire, but to ruin and subvert their designs; at least, if my birth
procure's me any power and credit among them. In mean time I bid you a long
ADIEU by these Lines, less black with their Ink than my sorrow. ADIEU, Brother,
no less beloved than you are lovely, and the only Idol of my Heart. ADIEU,
since the unkind influence of our Stars separates us; and since I could not
Live to Die at your Feet, if I Die ( as I am determined) let me Live in your
memory. Preserve me some place in your Thoughts, and believe that your Name,
and the Idea of your Perfections shall be to Eternity the most precious
Treasures of mine.


Was not this Discourse sufficient to make our Amorous Palatine die with Love,
had he not already been overwelmed with Grief? Oh sighs of Iphigenes, the
Winds must be your supporters; for, no other Tongue, but that of silence is
capable of expressing you. The words of this Letter were as Oil upon his Fire,
and Wood in the flames of his disquiet Mind. Well, Iphigenes, you complained,
that you had no news from your dear Liante, nor what Region he had chosen for
his Retreat; and now this knowledge is more afflicting, than the torment of
your ignorance. Poor Mortals, let us cease to wish, since our proper desires
are contrary to us, and that the inflammation of our wounds increases by the
application of those remedies, whereby we think to refresh and lessen their
anguish.

But for the perfect understanding of Liante's Letter, and to give light to the
sequel of this Narration, I am enforced to make a little Digression in the
History of those times, to describe the condition wherein Polonia then was.

The Monarch of that Kingdom is accustomed to add to his Title of King of
Polonia, the style of great Duke of Lithuania, Prusia and Russia, although the
Knights of the Teutonick Order possess a great part of Prusia, and the Emperor
or grand Knez of the Muscovites a great part of Russia; but as for Lithuania
he injoyeth it entirely, and has reason to style himself Grand Duke thereof,
in regard it is a Duchy of a very large extent. In the Sea the great Fishes
devour the smaller, In the Heavens the appearance of the Sun Eclipseth the
Stars, and in the World the strongest States swallow the weaker. Diverse Dukes
of Lithuania were chosen by the Polonians to be their King, by which means the
Lithuanians having reigned in Polonia, made Polonia reign in Lithuania. For,
from the time of Iagellon (as yet an Idolater) who, being turned Christian,
received in Baptism the Name of Vladislaus, and married the Daughter of Lewis
King of Hungaria and Polonia, that Crown continued for many successions in the
Family of the Jagellons, until the reign of Sigismond Augustus, in whose time
happened the event which I now relate. All which by their birth rights, being
Dukes of Lithuania, were elevated by Election to the Royal Throne of Polonia:
And although they jointly held those two Sovereignties, yet they were distinct,
and might be separated; Not that the Polonians omitted any endeavors to unite
that Country to their State, and add that precious Pearl to their Diadem; but
the Lithuanians powerfully opposed them. And this was their Reason. There is no
Nation nor Province so petty, but the People would be glad to have a Prince of
their own Land, though in this they know not what they ask. For, being
received for a Maxim by the sagest Politicians, that little Principalities are
great Tyrannies, and that a Sovereignty is the more just the greater it is, Who
see's not that the pettiest Princes, striving to imitate great Monarchs in
their Pompous Trains and Magnificence, to maintain that state are enforced to
oppress their Subjects with extraordinary impositions? Nevertheless the
Lithuanians, sick of this popular error, desiring always a particular Duke,
would never consent to an union with the Polonians. Insomuch that during all
the forementioned successions, very few years passed without some insurrection
and revolting in Lithuania, to keep in breath the valor of the Polonian
Gentry. And at the same time Liante took this resolution to perish in the Wars,
the Palatines of Troc and Minsca, being returned mal-content from the Court,
made a League offensive and defensive against the Polonians, and hooked into
their Confederacy, besides those of Kiovia and Polocia, diverse Castellains of
other Palatinates; in a word, the rising was in a manner universal through all
Lithuania.

Liante had no sooner made his addresses to the Palatines of Troc and Minsoe,
chief instruments of this Commotion, but he was received by them with respects
answerable to his Birth; the Palatine of Minsce protesting that he had always
made profession of a singular friendship to his Father. They were presently
Cozens, and Liante entrusted with places of great command, before he had
passed through the Military Discipline and Obedience: Like Themistocles
banished, he blessed his misfortune, seeing himself raised on a sudden to
those honors which he so vehemently ambitioned. He troubled not his thoughts
to penetrate into the depth of the Cause; it suffised him, that he had met
with an employment wherein, by the effects of his valor, he might make appear
the Greatness of his Courage.

Iphigenes being certified of Liante's being among the Rebels, (although his
Love pleaded an excuse for the other's Despair) could not comprehend how that
generous Soul should fix upon that resolution of taking Arms against his
Sovereign, which he held the unworthiest action any Gentleman well-born could
be guilty of; For, in effect the Sunbeams are not more inseparably
concomitant of Titan's luster, than the Nobility ought to be of Royalty.

Mieslas had no sooner settled the private affairs of his Family, with those
which concerned his Public Charge, and remitted Modestina to the guard of his
Wife Aretuza, but upon a Summons from the King he repaired speedily to the
Court, giving order that his Daughter Glemencia should be brought shortly
after him, whom he placed at her arrival among the Queen's Maids of Honor.
The Lord Castellain of Cracovia (who is above all the Palatines of that
Kingdom, and one of the principal persons of State) was made General of the
King's Army, and Mieslas Lieut. General.

The Princess Rospicia (lest her Iphigenes should be diverted by the Functions
of War, from answering her pretensions, after she had obtained his
Dispensation) dealt so with the Queen by the intercession of some Ladies near
her person, and her own persuasions, that she resolved to entreat the King to
repeal the beautiful Palatine from his exile; whereunto, after some
consideration, he condescended; being informed besides, that he being much
afflicted at his so long absence from Count, was determined to seek a glorious
Death in the Bed of Honor, rather than train so obscure and discontented a
Life. And being overcome by the Lady's importunities, he dispatched a
Messenger to him with Letters so favorable, and full of such charms, as had
been capable not only of drawing Diana out of the Woods, but the Moon out of
her Sphere. But this kind invitation, which would have ravished Iphigenes with
joy, could he have enjoyed Liante's company; without him, seemed
inconsiderable and irksome. Therefore he forthwith returned an answer full of
respect and humility to the King, with no less expressions of the Greatness and
Gallantry of his Courage in these Words.

IPHIGENES Letter to the KING.
Most Gracious SOVEREIGN,
I Should esteem my self unworthy, not only of so many Favors which render
me your Creature, but also of beholding the Sun, ( who is the image of your
Bounty, as you are that of God) if Fortune now presenting an occasion, to make
appear the devotion of my Heart to your Service, and the zeal of my fidelity, I
should plunge my self in the Delights of your Court, whilst others are mounted
in the field for the defense of your Royal Authority, against the Insolence of
the Rebels. What would those envious persons say, whose Calumnies have for so
long time deprived me of the Honor of your presence ( the only felicity of
my Life) or rather what would they not say, if in this public occurrence, I
should not give some testimony, that I am not so desirous of receiving your
Liberalities, as to deserve them by my endeavors, and the effusion of my
Blood? which are but slender proofs of the boundless affection I have to serve
you. Permit therefore, gracious Sir, by whose Munificence I enjoy both my
Honor and Estate, that I may expend this, and employ that for your Majesty, to
whom I am so far engaged, that although I should sacrifice my Life in your
Wars, I should not requite the least of those Obligations, which render me
Eternally your Debtor.


Scarce had he by this answer waved the inticements of the Court, but a
Surcharge (shall I say of Affliction, or importunate Affection?) opposed his
determination; it was a tedious, but loving Letter from Modestina, adorned with
the Flowers of so plaintive a Rhethorick that Iphigenes heart was much more
moved at those sad Contents, than allured with the King's invitations; yet
having paid her with a like excuse, he continued his preparations for the War.

The Palatine's power is so absolute in Polonia, that when they command the
Drums to beat for any Expedition, all those in their territories, who are
obliged to the exercise of Arms, must presently be in a readiness to march.
Besides this Authority; Iphigenes being of a very obliging and liberal
disposition, in short time he raised a considerable party of as gallant Horse,
as any were in the whole Army. Mieslas used the like diligence in his
Palatinate; but being of a greedy tenacious humor, and more ready to take
from others than impart any thing of his own, his Levies were not comparable to
his Son's, who met him at the Rendez-vous: And although they were ill satisfied
enough of each other, yet at that time they trampled under feet all private
considerations, to apply their united forces to the present service of the
Public, and their Prince.

The revolted Lithuanians not daring to encounter the Royal Army in the Field,
sheltred themselves under the bulwarks of the strongest Holds then in their
possession. So that after some slight skirmishes, the Loyal Party besieged the
Mutiniers in their chief City named Minsce, situate upon the River Nepor,
which the Ancients called Boristhenes. Liante amongst others had cast himself
into this place with Olavius Palatine of that Province, and Bogdales Palatine
of Troc his Confederate, besides diverse Castellains and Gentlemen of note. This
City was strongly fortified, and well stored with Provisions, and all
necessaries requisite to maintain a Siege. And as Despair redouble's the
courage of those who know the unjustness of their cause, there was not any of
those Factious Spirits, but resolved to suffer the utmost of extremities rather
than surrender.

Olavius had retired within those Walls his whole Family, Wealth, and as I may
say, all his Fortune. Whilst the Royal Army were drawing their Lines of
Circumvallation, the Rebels made Sallies daily, and allarmed them with hot
skermishes; and sometimes sent Challenges for single Combats.

I should swell this Volume too much, if I stood to relate the particulars;
therefore, not to tire the Reader, I shall only mention some persons
principally concerned in my History. But first I must crave leave to say, that
the Planets of Mars and Venus, who do so frequently interchange their glances
in the Heavens, have such powerful influences upon Earth, that it seems the
one has no sooner cast his Aspect upon any Morrall, but the other by some
agreeable Sympathy, take's possession of the same Object. And in effect among
those who make profession of handling a Sword, it seems that the wearing
thereof would not be fortunate to them, if it were not employed for the
consideration of some Lady; as it is commonly seen, that Gentlemen expose their
Persons to most eminent dangers, to give testimony of their Valor in favor of
Her whom they serve.

Liante, who till then had lived in exceeding restraint, seeing himself in full
liberty of his desires, was easily induced to the natural inclination he had
to Love. Olavius, among diverse other Children, had two Daughters, whose Beauty
deserved observation: But the younger had a great advantage of Nature above her
Elder Sister, who was inferior to her in all things but her age, wherein she
surpassed her by many years. The one was full-ripe, and in a condition that
seemed visibly to demand an Husband. The other was a Bud not quite blown, yet
discovered something that promised in her season all the excellences of a
perfect Rose, but as yet so green, that her years might have dispensed the
hastiest of her Sex to render her self under Hymen's pleasing yoke; her humor
was childishly vain, and more apt to give then receive Passion, her Judgment
being yet insusceptible of any.

It was Liante's Fortune to be caught with this bait; betwixt seeing her and
being taken, there was no great intervall. His Birth and Estate, which he
hoped to recover by Olavius means gave him confidence enough to aspire to that
alliance, and the merit of the Object contained captive but too many
attractions to his desire. Nevertheless he hid his Fire under the Ashes of
discretion, expecting a fit time and opportunity to disclose his intentions.

Clemencia Sister to Iphigenes possessed no such charms, as could oblige him to
much Constancy; her fidelity only having moved his Heart to a reciprocal
amity: but in regard the Despair of possessing her, by reason of Mieslas
cruelty, and the Prince Cassin's research, forced him to relinquish that
desire; he thought more of being revenged of that savage Palatine of Podolia,
than of seeking her alliance, being the rather incited thereunto by Despite,
seeing his Sister Modestina upon the point of being repudiated by Iphigenes.
Upon these considerations he suffered the inclinations of his Mind to bend
under the yoke of this new Captivity, suppressing however his flames within his
breast, allowing nothing to outward appearances, but what Modesty and Decency
might permit.

Whilst he was contriving projects for the conquest of this Rachel, Olavius
studied how to engage him in his alliance, by giving him the Leah: It being
the custom in these days, as well as in Laban's time, to marry the Elder
Daughters before the younger, Age, Reason and Decency requiring no less. Olavius
having formerly been familiarly acquainted with Liante's Father, and knowing to
how great an estate he was heir (though Mieslas unjustly detained it from him)
thought it no small advantage to have him for a Son-in law (notwithstanding his
disgrace) which he could not have hoped for, if Fortune had been more kind to
him. Therefore to make him fall into his Nets, he received him, as yet all wet
with his Shipwreck, into his house, cherished him as his Son, and rendered him
all the indeering Offices, that could be expected from a tender Father. His
Table, Horses, Attendants, and his Purse, he might command with as much
freedom as himself: So that Liante feeling his generous heart o're-charged with
so many Obligations, meditated nothing more then Olavius service, and how best
to comply with his disposition, that he might see he had not sowed his
favors on an ungrateful Soil.

This Palatine of Minsce had a Son, whose tender youth might have excused him
from the use of Arms, had not his high Courage invited him to Martial
exercises for the defense of his Father's Fortune, then engaged in the Party of
the Revolters. Him Olavius commanded to render so many, and such respectfull
devoirs to Liante, that at length those Courtesies (which would have won the
most untractable of Spirits) absolutely charmed our gallant stranger's noble
Heart, and laid the foundation of an inviolable friendship betwixt them.

Already the desire of dying was half quenched in Liante's Mind, and the
Ambition of living to establish his Fortune, and serve Amiclea (so was Olavius
younger Daughter named) wholly possessed his thoughts. And through the door of
this Love entered another ray of Glory, tickling his aspiring Heart, which
inflamed him with a desire of conquering that Michol by the death of many of
her enemies.

Whilst he consumed in this ambitious impatience to signalize his valor by
some honorable Combat, Oloria, Olavius eldest Daughter, suffered a no less
torment, but of a contrary quality: For her Eyes having fed too greedily their
sight with the delicacies of Liante's Countenance, that sweet Idea slipped into
her Soul, and there ingraved it self with so deep an incision, that it was
beyond her power to efface it. Besides this inclination (which she dissembled
as much as possibly she could by the privilege and innate Modesty of her Sex)
when she had an inkling from her Mother, to whom Olavius had communicated his
design, that they intended to marry her to Liante, you may imagine with what
joy her Heart was dilated.

Upon this assurance she let her thoughts take Wing, and restreined her
desires with the less caution, because the end of her pretensions was
honorable and lawful; and passing somewhat beyond those Limits of Discretion
and Modesty, which a fervent Love is easily persuaded to exceed, she prevented
his Courting of Her with extraordinary caresses, which made his Heart recoile
as fast as she advanced; According to the general custom among Men, who
never eagerly pursue any, but such as fly them, and contemn those that meet or
follow them: And it is likewise the Order of Nature and Civility, that Ladies
should make themselves be served and observed, until of Sovereigns Marriage
tendereth them Subjects: Those that do otherwise have found the direct means to
make themselves the Fable and laughing stock of all that see and know them. But
to what extremities does not that Passion, which blind's the discreetest Eyes,
reduce the firmest and most resolute Souls?

Liante, who acknowledged himself highly obliged to her Father, for his
favorable treatment, and her Brother for his Courteous respects, could hardly
constrein his humor from letting her understand, that those affected
attractions, and too fond indearments were not pleasing to him. She used all
the Plots her Passion could invent, to accost him, but he shunned her
encounter by such studied evasions, that they seemed rather to proceed from the
casualty of occurrences, than any subtilty of his. This cast the poor Oloria
into perplexities beyond expression, and inflamed her desire to excesses
unimaginable. And as if Liante had premeditated to consume that passionate
admirer of his perfections, the more she importuned him with her unwelcome
kindnesses, the more he addressed his Courtships to Amiclea, whom though he
feined to love only for divertisement, her Image was imprinted in the Center
of his Heart. Which possessed Oloria with so devouring an Envy, that it
deprived her Soul of all sort of contentment and repose; I might style that
torment of here is Jealousy, if she had ever communicated her affection to
Liante, and he given her any hope of reciprocating her flames; but no such
correspondence having past between them, me-think's the name of Envy does
better represent her pain, understanding but too well, by the faithful report
of her Looking-glass, the advantages Nature had bestowed on her Sister above
her; and seeing Amiclea preferred before her by him whose senses she desired
to captivate, and render susceptible of her resentments.

Prudence and Decency permitted not Olavius to break the Ice, and offer his
Daughter to Liante, lest that might give him occasion to think that he
intended to sell his favors to him, and press him with a bond which ought to
tie none, but those that are willing. Polemander (so was Olavius Son named) who
would have been very glad to have had him for a Brother-in-law, that already
professed to be his friend, desired nothing so eagerly as to see Liante's Eyes
turned toward his Sister Oloria; But what Gins and Netts soever the Fowlers
use, the Birds do not always light where they could wish. Thus Liante was
esteemed by her whom he neglected, and adored her who had not yet Judgment to
discern his Desert, nor recompense his Love.

In this condition to divert the cares, which disturbed his thoughts, by the
importunity of the one, and the insensibility of the other, there being every
day occasion of action, he watched for some opportunity of rendering himself
remarkable by his valor. Few days passed without some desperate Sallies,
Skermishes, Assaults, or Surprisalls, wherein Liante was continually one of the
forwardest to charge, ad last in the retreat: And diverse single Combats were
fought betwixt particular Gentlemen, wherein the besieged were sometimes
Conquerours, sometimes conquered, according to the chance of Arms.

Liante intended to challenge Mieslas, and take an honorable Revenge of the
unworthy outrages which he had received from his Barbarism; but Olavius (who
tendered his preservation as his own Son's) advised him first to make his
trial upon some other, lest undertaking a Combat with too much unadvisedness
he should not come off with his Honor. At length having obtained leave (not
without much persuasion) of the chief Commanders, he put on a suit of black
Armor imbellished in the extremities of the Joints with fillets of Gold; and
having chosen in the Palatine's stable an Horse of the same color, caparison'd
with black Velvet enriched with a golden Purle, and all his furniture of the
like trimming, he sent a Trumpeter forth to invite any Gentleman of the Royal
Army to break a Lance, and unsheath his Cimeterre, in favor of the Lady whom
he chiefly honored.

Upon this invitation appeared in the Field, mounted on a stately Steed, more
white than the newly fallen Snow, a Knight of an admirable presence, covered
from the Head to the Knees with an Armor of refined Silver, so curiously
wrought, that the value of the Mettle, though pure and precious, was surmounted
by the rarity of the Workmanship. The harness of the Horse was set all over
with plates of burnisht Silver, which made a show like so many several Looking
glasses, according to the motion of the Palfrey, no less courageous than full
of graceful pride; a Milk-white Plume shadowed the Torse of his glittering
Helmet, and floted in agreeable waves upon his shoulders: His Port was full of
sprightly Activity, in his Countenance he seemed another Mars; and his
Carriage made appear less fierceness then Courage. Liante could not have picked
out a more worthy Adversary to content his Vanity.

Scarce were they come within sight of each other, but the Trumpets on both
sides sounded; and the Champions, having taken space enough to make a full
Career, incountred with such Violence and Dexterity, that sitting as immovable
as Mountains, their Lances (being broken to the very Handles) sent their
splinters into the Airy Region; then casting away their Truncheons, they ended
their course, in so exact and handsome a manner, that it seemed rather a
Turnament than a Combat: And to conclude with their Swords what they had begun
with their Lances, they both drew and rejoined upon their Manege; but having
both Armor of proof, they hack't a long time before either of them received
any wound. At length the white Knight thinking to cut Liante over the Beaver
with a back-blow, his Horse curvetting received it upon his Head, the pain
whereof made him rear on end, beating the Air with his Fore-feet ready to cast
his Rider.

But that which troubled Liante most, was to feel the reins in his hand and
the bit out of his Horse's mouth; for, his Adversarie's Sword having cut the
head-stall, the Bridle fell presently from him. The fieryspirited Beast, which
could neither be tamed nor guided by him that backed him, enraged with the
smart of his wound, running full gallop cross the field, carried Liante toward
the besieger's Trenches. He, who would rather have embraced Death from a
generous Enemie's hands than fall into Mieslas power, seeing the unruliness of
his Horse, leap't nimbly out of his Saddle, and returned on Foot to present
himself to the Silver Knight, who pursued him fullspeed.

But when his Adversary was come within hearing, a clear voice out of the
Silver Helmet pierced his Ears, saying, Knight, I will not make use of this
advantage which Fortune has given me, true valor is not to be tried upon
such unequal terms: Liante (who gave himself for Dead, imagining that his
Enemy came with such fury to make his Horse dance upon his belly) received a
new Life, when he heard the beloved voice of that person whom he esteemed
above all Creatures breathing. So the white Knight had scarce set foot to
ground, but he in the black Armor bowing his Knee, and lifting up his Beaver,
cried alowd; Brother, as it never was my intention to offend you, so I will not
defend my self against you; although I should give you my Life, I should not
conceive that I had satisfied the least of those Devoirs which I owe you.

By this you may know it was Iphigenes, who being no less desirous of Glory,
than Liante of putting himself in credit, had undertaken this Combat in that
white Armor; and upon Liante's words he presently replied, My dear Brother,
it is you that have overcome me; yet alas! you are ignorant of your victory.
But this is no place for us to dispute of Courtesies, lest we should be
suspected of some private intelligence and treason. Rise quickly, and let us
give notice to our several Parties, that after knowing each other, our long
education together having rendered us Brothers by Alliance, we would not renew
the tragical spectacle of Eteocles and Polinices, nor change into Horror the
Admiration which we desired to breed in the beholders of our Courages. We may
confer secretly in the Night, or interchangeably make known our intentions by
Letters, and other means which subtility will suggest to our inventions, for
the advancement of his Majesty's interest: And to the end we may have no
advantage of each other, return you to the City upon my Horse, which I give
you, I being sure to have yours restored me, in regard he has taken his
course toward the Quarters where I have a Command.

Liante took Iphigenes advice; so the two friends parted to the great
astonishment of the Enemies, who observed these passages at a distance. But
when they understood that the Combat, which they had so gloriously begun,
before they knew each other, was terminated, after their discovery, by the
force of their ancient friendship, which snatched their Arms out of their hands,
there was not one but rather commended them for that generous affection, than
condemned them for want of courage, deploring the uncivil condition of civil
Wars, which constrein sometimes, in like Occurrences, friends to murder
Friends, and Fathers to plunge their Weapons in their own Blood.

Only Mieslas, (whose Rigor could not be satisfied with less than the ruin
of Liante's Honor and Life) gave out in all Companies that he had basely
begged his Life of Iphigenes, against whom (such is the blindness of Fury) he
murmured and expressed much displeasure, that he had not made use of his
advantage to rank Liante among the number of the Dead. And in regard the
motion of that sordide interest, which made him so thirst after Liante's Blood,
could not be published without his own disparagement, he covered it with the
Cloak of the Public Cause, endeavoring to make that poor Gentleman's revolt
more odious than the Lithuanian's, he being a Native of Polonia, and owing
all his Fortune to the King's munificence: But the barbarous Sarmatian was not
so ready to declare the occasion he gave his Ward to take that desperate
course, and in those commotions to secure himself among the Rebels. Nay, his
Brutality transported him so far, that he stuck not to tax his own Son of
intelligence with the Enemy, because he had left Liante living, when he might
have killed him, or at least made him Prisoner, which he rather desired: Not
contented to resemble Hogs-heads, which (being filled with new Wine) bedawb
themselves with their own froth, he thought that during this revolt of
Liante's, was the only Harvest-season for him to reap his Estate, by virtue of
the King's Letters of confiscation: Which he obtained at his first request,
His Majesty being willing to oblige Him, whom he esteemed one of the best
Politicians in his Army; and besides to terrify, by this example, any other
Polonians from assisting the Lithuanians in their Rebellion.

This Grace made Mieslas triumph, and boast that he had done Liante more harm
with a sheet of Paper, than his Son with his Sword. Fame with her airy trump at
length conveyed these Bravadoes to Liante's Ears, which kindled a rage in his
courageous breast as unutterable as insupportable; Insomuch that returning to
his former Despair, he persuaded himself (considering Mieslas as his scourge)
that Honor obliged him to take away that Wolvish Gardian's Life, or lose his
own. In this resolution he sent him a Challenge to fight with him on
Horseback in the view of both City and Army. At first Mieslas scoffed at his
Childish indiscretion (as he termed it) slighting him as much as the grand
Apollo in the Metamorphosis did Citherea's little Son. But at length feeling
his reputation pricked, and his Choler incensed by some notorious reproaches
and braving Language in the Letter of Defiance (whereof Liante had dispersed
diverse Copies through the Camp) he resolved to dispose himself to chastise
that peremptory Boy publicly, as a Pedagogue would correct his Scholar: These
terms Passion made him utter against his youthful adversary.

This Challenge, being so divulged, could not be unknown to Iphigenes, who
would not be diswaded from being a Second; as well to purge himself of that
stain wherewith his Father had indevoured to blemish his fidelity to the King,
as to preserve the Life of him that gave him his, (in case Liante should gain
the advantage) or Liante's, on whom his own Life depended, in case Mieslas
should have the better, which was most probable. I will not stand to
particularize the several equipages of these Combatants, there being this
difference betwixt Tournaments and Duells, that in the former every one studie's
what is most magnificent and pompous, not what most serviceable; in the later
the richness or curiosity of the Armor is not so much considered, as the
excellency of the temper. However they were not negligent to show themselves in
good order, and upon the best Horses they could purchase.

Iphigenes having sent back Liante's black Horse, obliged him by that action to
return him his, lest that exchange might breed any suspicion of intelligence:
yet they took others for this second encounter, that breathed Fire out of their
Mouths, and threatened Death with their Looks. Mieslas appeared in gilded
Armor, upon a pide Horse of a size bigger then ordinary: Iphigenes was mounted
upon a Sorrel, well maneged and ready, armed as before, but with a coat, after
the Sarmatian fashion, over his Armor, all imbrodered with Gold.

Liante marched proudly out of the City upon a stately Bay horse, trapped with
black, in the same Armor he wore in the former Duel, but with some different
trimming: His Second, who was the young Polemander, seemed rather dressed than
armed, Inexperience making him go to this shock as to a Wedding. His Armor was
Gras-green, artificially set out with scales of burnisht Silver; a delicate
Plume of white and green, curiously mixed, over shadowed all his Casket; his
Horse of a Dapple-gray color, (whose Make and Manegement was fitter for a
Festival show before Ladies than exploits of War) was harnessed with a
Caparison of green velvet, enriched with a Silver imbrodery; his Deportment
spoke him rather a spruce Courtier than a resolute Soldier: In sum, he was a
fit Subject to honor the triumph of Iphigenes victory. The glory of making his
essay of Arms against the King's Favorite, and a Palatine of so eminent esteem
in Polonia, heightened his courage; and his vanity promised him a success that
should make him touch the Firmament with his Crown. But Heaven which disposes
the events otherwise than Men propose them to their fancies, made this Gallant
a prey to him whom he thought to devour; and Iphigenes, who was Courtesy it
self, became to him like the Lion of Samson's emblem: For, instead of
swallowing him, he gave him Life, and in the Effects of this Valor he made
him feel the proofs of his Civility.

For, as soon as they were come into the Field, and the Judges had assigned the
ground, every one resolved to do his best, except Mieslas, who carried himself
negligently in that Action, as if he disdained to measure his Sword with a
Novice, or had been to play at cuffs with a Boy. At length having taken the
space that was convenient for their Horse's full Career, they charged each
other with such impetuosity, that the banks of Boristhenes returned by frighted
Eccho's the sound of their Palfrey's thundering Feet, and his Waters hasted
away for fear. Iphigenes, whose dexterity on Horse back was beyond comparison,
having hit Polemander in the right place to make him quit his Saddle, carried
him so furiously from his Horse to the Earth, that with the force of the fall
he seemed to have dug his own Sepulcher in the Sand. The weight of his
Arms, the violence of the Shock, together with the tender Age of that young
Astianax, cast him into a Trance, which depriving him of the ability to rise or
move, made him appear, as if his Soul, not daring to withstand so invincible an
adversary, had left his Carcass as a trophy to the Victor's glory.

Iphigenes seeing him in no fighting condition, turned his Eyes whither his
Heart was already flown; But Heavens! what saw he? his Father in the greatest
danger that could befall an Enemy; For, as he gave his Horse the half-turn, to
set him in his Career, the right stirrup brake, which discomposed his Port, and
rendered him incapable of executing what his Vanity made him believe
unquestionable: For, the heaviness of his Armor weighing him down in the
Saddle, that inconvenience hindered him from ordering his Lance, which glanced
without effect under Liante's Arm, who having dexterously directed his, where
the point found entrance, the thrust was so violent, that had not Mieslas been
well fixed in his seat, he had doubtless held Polemander company: However it
bare his Body so far backwards, that his Crest almost kissed the Crupper, and the
Lance flying in pieces, a splinter entered into his Horse's shoulder, the pain
whereof disabling him for such an encounter, put his Rider beyond his
schoole-play, and in no small apprehension. Liante without losing time, having
cast away the truncheon that remained in his hand, drew his Sable, and his
Horse being swift of foot and ready at hand, he presently gained the Crupper
of his no less arrogant than inhumane Enemy; and began to deal blows so thick
upon him, that you would have thought you had heard all the Cyclopes beating
upon one Anvill. Who ever saw a furious Bull tormented with the stinging of a
Gad fly; or a great wild Boar lugged by the Ears by a young Mastiffe, may the
better fancy that lusty Sarmatian assaulted by the generous Liante. At length
the little stone cast down the great Colossus; it happened thus.

Mieslas seeing his Horse useless, and one Leg hanging without a stirrup,
thought to alight, judging that he might better defend himself on Foot, than
in that incommodious posture; but having his Sword in his hand, and being
encumbered with his Armor, his other foot remained engaged in the stirrup; The
Horse who had not yet lost all his fury, perceiving this disorder, began to
kick and drag Mieslas after him some steps, which so crushed and bruised him,
that he thought he had been at the last period of his Life. Then was it in
the brave Liante's power to take a full revenge of all his barbarous dealings,
by making his Horse trample his unworthy Soul out of his conquered Body. But
Iphigenes, seeing the danger of him from whom he had his Being, leaving his
adversary on the ground, ran presently to Mieslas, whose deplorable condition
sufficiently implored his succor: At length he stopped the fugitive Horse, and
leaping from his own, he cut the stirrup that trailed his Father's Body, which
was in little better case than Polemander's. He was already without motion,
and questionless had taken his leave of the World, if the pious Iphigenes,
opening his Headpiece, had not given him some Air; which he no sooner felt,
but he recovered Breath, not without voiding blood at the Nose and Mouth in
great abundance.

After some passages of the triumphing Liante, the desire of preserving Mieslas
drew these words from Iphigenes Mouth (which his high spirit would never have
permitted his Tongue to utter, if his own person had been reduced to the
greatest of extremities) Liante, it is now in thy power to rid thy self of both
Father and Son at once, if thou permittest thy Vengeance to despise my
Friendship: but know that Heaven never leaves Ingratitude unpunished; content
thy Ambition with the advantage the Chance of Arms has now given thee, without
abusing by Insolence thy Victory; and if thou art as good a Friend as a stout
Champion, go succor him whom I have reduced to the same danger as thou have my
Father. Brave Iphigenes, replied Liante, thy Friendship, which shall never die
in my Soul, shall always have more power over me than the Outrages of that
Tyrant; It is pity that a Son so full of Virtue should proceed from a Father
so worthy of Hatred. ADIEU, and know that thy Will is the Chain of my Freedom.

This said, he passed as quick as a flash of Lightning, spurring toward
Polemander, in whose pale Face Death had already placed her Ensigns. Having
loosened his Helmet, he saw his Eyes begin to open, as if he came from the
other World. But not to spend any longer time in this Relation, at length every
one returned to his Quarters the best he could, leaving the judgments of the
Spectatours suspended upon the strangeness of this encounter; which gave scope
enough for discourse on both sides. But let this suffice, that all acknowledged
the hand of Heaven upon the Arrogance of Mieslas, had compassion on Polemander,
esteemed the fortunate Valor of Liante, but extolled to the Skies the Courage
and Piety of the Palatine of Plocens.

To express the rage that seized Mieslas, when (come again to himself) he
represented to his thoughts the Affront he had receiven in the Face of the
whole Army, were impossible; Eloquence want's terms to relate the Excess of
his Fury. Sometimes he accused Heaven as the Cause of his Disaster; Sometimes
he condemned his Servants for bringing him that Horse; Sometimes he was in
the humor to die, rather than survive such a disgrace; Sometimes instead of
acknowledging the courtesy he had received from his Enemy, he seemed as if
(like a Torrent or Thunderbolt) he would force through the Walls of the
besieged City to tear the heart out of Liante's Bosom. He that has e're
beheld a Bear, wounded with an Arrow sticking in his Flank, beat himself
against the Shaft, take it in his Teeth, and striving turn it within his
Entrails, has seen an emblem of Mieslas Passion, which bred such torment in
his mind, as cannot be expressed but by the Name of Despair. All bruised as
he lay in his Bed, being hardly able to move, he studied memorable revenges
against him to whom he owed his Life. But leaving him to foam out his Choler,
let us see what Liante does within the City, where there were not Laurells
enough to make him Crowns, nor Praises significant enough to extol his Merit.

The indisposition of Polemander, somewhat disturbed the Inhabitants rejoicing;
but the public Good always overbalancing the disaster of any particular
person, it did not diminish the applauses of his Gallantry; Besides, he having
no other harm than what he received by his fall, the care of his Parents, his
own youth and good constitution soon restored him to a condition that promised
more Hope than Fear of his recovery.

Mean time, whilst the Brother's Body was healing, the Sister's mind impaired;
For, Jealousy, which is a Love that is sick, increased in Oloria's Heart
proportionably as Liante rendered more evident Demonstrations of affection to
Amiclea. And now his thoughts being swelled with the glory of this Victory,
what durst not he promise himself? as you may well imagine, his Mind being
naturally ambitious, he easily suffered himself to be carried upon the Wings
of the Wind, feeling a pleasing murmr of popular praises buzzing in his Ears.
Neither was he deceived; For, Olavius conceived such an opinion of him, that
thence-forwards he deliberated at what rate soever to make him his Son-in-law,
imagining that that commotion being ended, it would be no hard matter for him
to procure a revoking of that confiscation, which Mieslas had obtein'd of his
Estate; or rather to make it one of the Articles of their Capitulation, if they
should come to treat with the King for the repose of Lithuania.

But as the Heart being seated in the middle of the Breast as the Center of
humane Bodies, leans however more to one side than the other: So although
Liante composed his Countenance and Gestures, and ordered his Speeches in such
manner, that he seemed to share his respects equally betwixt the two Sisters,
it was impossible for him to hinder his Eyes (which are the Windows of the
Soul) from betraying his inclinations; For, the presence of the Object beloved
to a Lover as the Needle of a Compass, touched with a Load stone, is to the
Arctick Pole. His looks discovered his thoughts, which sallied out at the same
port-holes, that gave Entrance to those Desires, which, like thieves, stole
away his Heart. At length ( Amiclea being yet too young to understand the
Language of his Eyes) Liante, unable to support any longer the torment he
endured by reteining his Passion prisoner, it happened that the same day he
broke his tedious Silence to declare to his new Idol the Sacrifice he offered
her of his Affections, poor Oloria unfortunately arrived to Shipwreck her Hopes
against the Rock of Disdain, discovering to Liante her Jealousy, before she
had disclosed her Love.

I will not stand to repeat their Discourses, loath to fill up this Paper with
frivolous words, contenting my self to say that Liante's aversion against
Oloria was much augmented, when he had read the malady of her Mind, and that
impertinent humor, whereby she seemed to impose Laws to his Will, as if she
had already gained an Empire over his Soul. And being very ingenious (without
disobliging her otherwise) he made her understand in handsome terms that he
cared as little for her Affection as her Jealousy, and that his sight was not
yet so bad, but that he could discern Objects more capable of contenting his
contemplation. But he continued his addresses with much fervency, and daily
increased his Indearments to Amiclea, who though yet young enough not to resent
the assaults of that Passion, which is so contagious, that few are exempted
from it is infection, even of those that most condemn it; yet she was not
composed of Ice, nor any insensible Materials.

That inclination of inflaming Lovers, which is so natural to the Female Sex,
sharpen's Virgin's wits betimes, and rendereth them subtle and full of Malices
before their Age can afford them a perfect knowledge. This ray of Honey, those
enchanting words and obliging devoirs opened Amiclea's Eyes, and gave her
considerations for Liante, which before she did not conceive. But as that Sex
is born to dissimulation, the cleerer she saw the more she feined to be
blind, and hearing his Complaints, she made as if she understood them not.
Insomuch that after he had displayed the secrets of his Heart, and discovered
the honor and integrity of his pretensions to her, she studied to deceive his
Passion with a more reserved carriage in his conversation. Mean time this
artificial behavior, covered with the cloak of innocent Childishness, was
such a bait or gin to entrap Liante's heart, that he cherished not his own
thoughts, but when they represented to him the Object which gave them Being.

The Eleventh Book.
ARGUMENT.
Iphigenes and Liante's private Meeting and Conference. Iphigenes Plot to
reduce the Lithuanians, and extinguish Liante's affection to Amiclea. He is
taken Prisoner (with his own consent) by Liante. The Lithuanians exultation at
this Prize; their treatment of Iphigenes. The Palatines of Troc and Minsce's
Wives and Daughters fall in Love with the beautiful Prisoner. Their endeavors
to enjoy him, and supplant each other. Iphigenes Jealousy, and Distemper at
Liante's passionate Research of Amiclea. Love persuades Iphigenes to reveal his
Secret to Liante; Bashfulness disswades it. Amiclea, enamored of the fair
Prisoner's perfections, offers to procure him Liberty, and escape with him. His
civil refusal of her Courtesy. The Divertisements of Iphigenes in his
Prison. He relates his own Story to the Ladies under borrowed Names. His
Apprehension at Liante's Moral, or Exposition of his Fable. At Liante's and
the Companie's importunity he transvests himself to the admiration of both Men
and Women. Mieslas is enraged at his Son's captivity: Offers to Ransom him:
Sends Liante a Challenge. His Answer. The Resentments of those in the Royal
Army, and at the Court, for Jphigenes imprisonment. The King's Letter to the
Rebels in his behalf. Their Consultations and Answer. Iphigenes discreet
Advice, and Letter to the King. The Conflict of Love and Virtue in Melindra's
breast. The old Palatinesse's Jealousy of their Daughters for Iphigenes.
Liante's Vmbrages of Iphigenes for Amiclea. Their Speeches, after Liante had
discovered his Passion. Liante departs discontented. Iphigenes distemper at his
distaste. The contention of Jealousy and Honor in Liante's heart. Finding no
invention to get Iphigenes handsomely out of Minsce, he returns to give him an
account of his endeavors. Their Conference. Liante thinking Iphigenes was his
Rival, construes all his protestations of Friendship to a contrary sense.

DO you not think it time that Iphigenes should come to cast Water on that
Fire, lest the flame grow unquenchable? If Oloria was tormented with her
Jealousy, Iphigenes received no favorable treatment from his Passion; only
Amiclea, without engaging her own Liberty, subtilely triumphed over Liante's.
But what remedy shall we find for Iphigenes, to mitigate his ineffable sorrow
for being deprived of Liante?

He that compared the Fire, which causes Love, to Thunder, was not mistaken
in his Analogy: For, the effects of both are mavelous, the one bruise's and
consume's the Bones, without making the least contusion in the Flesh, and
preserving the Scabbard, melt's the Blade: the other has Subtilities and
Inventions beyond the reach of thought to dazzle the Eyes of the most
circumspect. Nothing is impossible to him that Love's: Iphigenes practiced such
secret and facile Intelligences with Liante, that if they had been both in the
same Camp, they could not have had more convenience to communicate their
thoughts. In Day time their Conference was by Letters, which, fastened to
Arrows, they shot into certain places at prefixed hours; In the Night they
found opportunity enough to Discourse together, without apprehension of being
over heard by any witnesses. Once, after diverse other particulars. Iphigenes
regretting that Peaceable time, wherein they enjoyed in the Forest of Plocens
with more freedom each other's conversation, and wishing to see the like
season, that he might in his own government impart his honors, and estate to
his dear Brother. Of what Peace, and what pleasure ( replied Liante) do you
speak? For my particular I do not think that in all my Life I ever felt a
greater disturbance in my thoughts, than what glanced into my Breast from the
penetrating Eyes of Serife; For, those extravagant illusions so overwhelmed my
Reason, that I thought I should have lost it in a Labyrinth of conceptions so
confused, that I may call that disaster happy which released me out of that
error. But now my Condition is quite altered; For, if during that Peace; I felt
a War within my self, in this War I have met with so great a Calm and so sweet
a Peace, that I hold nothing so delicious as the double Prison wherein I am.

What Prisons are those? answered Iphigenes. The first, said Liante, is the
enclosure of these Walls, but the second, and most agreeable, is an Object
whose Captive I am; but my thraldom is preferable to any Liberty. At this word
a cold sweat trickled along Iphigenes Face, and hardly could he forbear in
falling to a trance; yet recollecting his Spirits, he pressed Liante to tell
him, what Object that was to whom he had so dedicated his services.

Hereupon Liante, as if he had resolved to discompose the frame of Iphigenes
intellect, and absolutely turn his Brain, began to make him a lively
description of Amiclea's beauties; which was less welcome to his Ears, than the
news of approaching Death. But when he added, that those perfections being
not yet come to Maturity, that green fruit was so tart, and crabbed that it
rather set the teeth on edge, than gave any delight, and by reason of her
tender years (which rendered her not only insusceptible of Love's flames, but
incapable of acknowledging his affection) that in the same place where his
desires had their Birth, his Hopes did find their Funeral, Iphigenes
recovered breath. And, as every thing has two handles, and its counterpoise,
when Liante added to the Passion he endured for Amiclea, that which he made
poor Oloria suffer, our amorous Palatine was yet better satisfied; imagining
that this Contradiction would hinder Liante from making any great progress in
Amiclea's affection.

But from this Fever, he fell into an hotter, the storm beginning afresh with
more impetuosity in his thoughts, when he heard Liante protesting, that the
Jealousy of the One served as a spur to incite him to be more eager in the
research of the Other, wherein he believed his endeavors would not be
fruitless, in regard of the particular advice he had of Olavius design to give
him one of his Daughters; and that his last Victory had reduced him to that
point, that he was contented to grant him his own choice, hoping to make the
confiscation of his Estate be revoaked by their treaty with the King for the
appeasing of those tumults in Lithuania.

See how Jealousy transport's the best composed Brains. Iphigenes, who had
all his Lifetime showed so much Discretion, and Reservedness in his Actions,
suffering himself to be carried away with the stream of Fury, broke forth in
these Words: Ah! Traitor, and the most defiled with infidelity of any the World
produce's? Is this the promise so often repeated in the solitudes of my
Palatinate, when thou sworest (but with Oaths which flew away with the Winds)
never to love any but me, and never to suffer thy Soul to entertain any other
Flame? Is it thus thou will now renounce the too too easy, too too credulous
Serife? That Serife, who has no Eyes but to contemplate thee, and who love's
her Heart only because of thy Image which is so lively imprinted in it. That
Serife, who has been more tender of preserving thee, than her own Life, who
would have raised thee to greater Honors, and Riches than thou can hope for
in any other place. And fool, as she was, she turned all thy Discourses to
her own advantage, and fed her vanity with the praises wherewith thou
extolled'st her perfections, with as much treachery as flattery; And after this
should she esteem the fidelity of any Man? May the Heavens afflict her with
some new torment, (if there be any greater than that which thy disloyalty
make's her suffer) if ever she put's confidence in such faithless Souls. Thou
should have killed her upon her Father's body, rather than have reserved her
to hear such language as is less supportable than Death.

If Liante was surprised at this Speech, let him judge that has remarked the
conduct of Iphigenes hitherto. He thought he dreamed, or that Iphigenes
raved. For, to what purpose should he bring again upon the Stage, the sweet
illusions of the Forest of Plocens, when Almeria was beloved by Iphis, or when
Calliante acted the passionate Lover of Serife? At length, Brother (said he)
What is in your mind? I think the Charms of that enchanted Forest possess you
yet, or (which is more likely) you sleep, as Lions do, with your Eyes open.
You may be confident that I shall never relinquish (but with my Life) that
Friendship which I have sworn to you as my Brother, and the dearest Friend, I
have or ever shall have: And I believe no less of you, than that you are
likewise so desirous of my Good, and advancement (according to the testimonies
you have so often rendered me) that you will not hinder me from embracing a
good Fortune, when it thrust's it self into my Hands, after having persecuted
me from my Cradle, and made me feel in the Current of my days the most
rigorous Effects of her Tyranny. Indeed if I saw any other door, than that
which is now opened before me, whereby I might get out of the Dungeon of my
Disgraces, I would most willingly pass that way; but if you consider the
condition of my affairs, you will see that I am like a drowning Man, that
catche's at any thing he can reach (not always what he would desire) to save
himself from perishing. Your Father, my Persecutor, has rendered me so odious
in the King's sight, that I have more reason to fear his indignation, than hope
for any favor in Polonia; which make's me resolve either to lose my self in
the overthrow of Lithuania, or if it raise it self again out of it is ruins,
thereby to repair those of my Fortune. Would to God I might be permitted to
spend my days with you; For, if I enjoyed that happiness, all my ambitions
might expire, knowing with the power you have, that I could expect no less than
great effects of your exceeding Love. But did not you take notice that your
pleasant raving made you speak like a Woman, as if that Serife to whom I vowed
my Affections, were any other than your self? So, you might make me believe
that I am Almeria. See how far our past follies transport us, agreeable
follies however, since they please you; but very bitter to me, whom they had
almost bereaved of sense.

This long reply having given Iphigenes some leisure to appease the tumults of
his Passion, and re-consult his Judgment, the fear of having too unadvisedly
discovered his condition, quickened his spirits speedily to repair that fault,
and crush the Scorpion upon his sting: I spoke (said he) in my Sister
Clemencia's Name, to whom you have so unworthily falsified your promise.
Whereunto Liante thus answered: Wherefore do you accuse me, Iphigenes, of a
crime whereof your own Soul is guilty, breaking so cruelly that Faith, which
you had so solemnly sworn to Modestina, to comply with the barbarous
inclinations of your Father, who make's you change Youth for old Age, Beauty
for Ugliness, a Virgin for a Widow, your Equal in years for one that may be
your Mother? and all this to satisfy his Avarice and Ambition, and augment
your Titles with the Style of Prince; as if the King's Favor, which your
absence has not quite extinguished, could not raise you high enough, and heap
as much Riches upon you as you can desire.

Hereunto Iphigenes could make no reply, but to end all those debates, he
wished, that one of them two were a Woman. Not so, said Liante, for, I love you
too well to desire you so great a mischief, and for my own particular, as long
as Heaven give's me strength to hold a Sword in my hand, I will hinder Mieslas
well enough from razing me out of the rank of Men. See then, answered
Iphigenes, how much I exceed you in Friendship; For, you would not change your
Sex for Love of me, and I would be glad to be a Woman to stop your
inconstancy. Whilst we amuse our selves with these Chymericall, and
impossible imaginations, said Liante, we dissipate our Spirits, which should
rather lend their attentions to more serious thoughts, and employ them with our
endeavors to procure the public Peace, thereby to find the assurance of our
private intentions.

This said, they parted, Iphigenes returning so perplex't in mind, that he
knew not how to find a thread to guide him out of the Labyrinth of his
confusions. At length after long musing, sometimes concluding, then altering
what he had concluded; Sometimes resolving, then revoking his Resolutions,
being agitated with more several motions than the Sea has waves, Love, the
true Mercury of humane spirits, suggested an invention to him, that could not
proceed but from a soul extremely passionate.

Was it not a mavelous piece of sublime Policy to join the public Peace with
his private Tranquillity, and the service of his Sovereign with the contentment
of his own Soul? But in this design it was requisite to proceed like Watermen,
who turn their backs to the place whither they row: For, Iphigenes conquered by
suffering himself to be conquered, and made appear by a memorable example of
Love and Fidelity, that there was a Zopyrus yet living in the World.

The Spagirists in seeking the Union of Essencos, have by the Sympathies and
Antipathies found out the dissolving of all natural Bodies, how solid foe're
they be, and this by the means of some slight ingredients, and with a simple
dew: Spiritual Chemistry taught Iphigenes not only to dissolve that factious
Body, which formed the revolt of Lithuania, by giving himself entrance into
Miesce, there to sow the powder of Gold with the dew of sweet words and fair
promises: But also to unite himself to Liante, the enjoyment of whom he
esteemed more desirable than the possession of a Crown. However he thought it
not fit to communicate his secret to Boleslaus, lest opposing the coldness of
his Age and Judgment, against the ardours of his Youth and Passion, he might
divert or thwart his enterprise; neither did he judge it expedient to reveal
it to Liante, although he was to be the Effecter of his design, as he was
the Cause. So, having well adjusted his measures he determined, for the safety
of his Country, to do like Curtius, (who cast himself into a Gulf) by
delivering his Person into his Enemie's hands, there to endeavor their
Reunion and Submission to the King's Service, and at the same time divert
Liante's design for Amiclea.

At their review Iphigenes, seeming to have seriously deliberated upon what
Liante had proposed at their last meeting, said, that he disapproved not his
re-search to Amiclea, considering that he hoped to reenter into the possession
of his Estate by that alliance; But if he would contribute his industry to
pacify those Commotions of Lithuania, by reducing the Rebels to their due
obedience to his Majesty, He assured him that he would not only re establish
him in his inheritance, but render him (next the King) the greatest and richest
Nobleman of all Polonia and Lithuania. This Proposition was specious enough to
ravish the heart, and open the Ears of the ambitious Liante; But observe in
what consideration the Point of Honor is to a Generous Spirit.

Your promise is very great, answered he, But if, to obtein all that you
proffer, I must commit (I will not say) Treason or Disloyalty, but the least
Treachery, move me no farther; For, might I be rewarded by the purchase of a
whole Kingdom, I would not violate my Faith, nor offend the Hospitality of
Olavius, who by his Courtesies has heaped upon me so many extraordinary
Obligations, that I must remain his debtor all my Life, and at the last yet die
insolvable. Besides I have such confidence in the Gallantry of your Soul ( dear
Brother) that I believe a base action can have no admittance into your
thoughts; For, I know how high an esteemer, and how jealous a preserver you
ever have been of Honor. Iphigenes having commended the generosity of Liante's
answer, told him, that he was so far from engaging him in any dishonorable
act, that he would first remit his own Person into his Hands, to open him the
way they were to follow for the reducing of Lithuania unto the King's
Subjection.

Liante having asked him the particulars of that enterprise. First, (said he)
after your having worsted my Father, I would have you have the honor of taking
me Prisoner, and then being with you I will teach you the secret to content
all those who have so much obliged you; and without injuring them or blemishing
your own honor, make you the most considerable Subject in this Kingdom.

The pledge that Iphigenes offered was so precious (giving himself in pawn to
the Lithuanians) that Liante believed his Heart intended no other than what his
Tongue declared. Therefore having importuned him to give a more particular
instruction of his Design; Brother (said Iphigenes) The King before my coming
to this Siege, commanded me expressly by Letters to return to Court, assuring
me that I should be better welcome than ever; and that at length the Sun of
Truth had pierced and dissipated the Fogs of my Envier's Calumnies:
Nevertheless the desire of rendering him some remarkable testimonies of my
Fidesity in the occurrence of this War, made me prefer the toils and perilis
of this Martial Life before the delicious Recreations of Cracovia. This
assurance of his Majesty's Affection, beget's in me an hope, nay a
Confidence, that (his favor to me being not extinguished) upon the first
notice of my imprisonment, he will at what rate soever purchase my
releasement, either by ransom, or by force. Now, what fairer opportunity can
you desire to regain your inheritance than this? especially when I shall have
certified His Majesty that not any desire of revolting or disserving him,
induced you to associate your self with these Rebels; but the fear of falling
into Mieslas Hands, and the Despair whereinto his cruelty reduced you. I will
do more; For, being fully informed of his Majesty's temper and intentions, my
fancy promises me that I shall dispose the two Palatines ( now besieged) to
lay down their Arms, and restore Peace to this Province, with such advantages
to their Families, and the whole Country of Lithuania, that the Generality of
this Nation shall have cause to extol their Sovereign's goodness, and They be
particularly obliged to his Clemency and Liberality.

How should Liante not be overcome by the charms of these Propositions, which
were so far above his Hopes, that he scarce durst soar to them with his
Desires? And although he advised Iphigenes (if he were not very well assured
of the King's affection) not to expose himself to that adventure, nothing under
Heaven being more uncertain than the inclinations of Men, and especially of
Princes, whose chiefest tie is their Interest: yet he was constreined to yield
to Iphigenes entreaty, which overbalanced his persuasions. Then they agreed to
contrive the taking of Iphigenes so, that (although it was premeditated) t
should seem casual. Their plot was thus.

Iphigenes for certain days successively should ride pckeering, and discharge
his Pistolls against the Gates of the City (as Gentlemen usually do to show the
gallantry of their Courages and Activity, trusting for their retreat to the
goodness of their Horses, and swiftness of their Course;) after which, at a
prefixed time, Liante should set some Soldiers in Ambuscado to invest him.
Which was as handsomely effected as ingeniously projected.

At this news represent to your imagination the fury of Miestas, the trouble
of the Royal Camp; and on the contrary the rejoicing of the besieged, and with
what Laurells they loaded Liante's head. Olavius being no longer able to
contein his joy, ran to embrace him, and extolling his fortunate Valor to the
Skies, he offered him the choice of his two Daughters, with such a part of his
estate as he would please to demand for a Dowry.

Liante, well contented with those triumphs and trophies, which they erected to
a Victory that cost him so little, perceived thereby how vain the judgment of
the World is, and that as punishments are not always inflicted on the most
wicked persons, but the least fortunate; So Glory was an infamous Courtisan,
which cast herself not always into the Arms of the most valiant, but most
successful: And to incite Olavius the more to press him to accept a Present,
which he so passionately desired, with an artificial modesty he pretended
that he was unworthy of so much favor, being at that time a distressed
Gentleman, banished from his Country, and dismantled of all his Estate by an
injust Confiscation.

Whereupon Olavius, falling of himself into the Nets, replied, That the
restitution of his inheritance would be the least part of the brave Prisoner's
ransom, wherewith he had enriched their City, and that he ought not to stick
upon that consideration, in regard he had always respected him more for his
Virtues than his Fortune, esteeming it more advantage for his Daughter to have
a Man that wanted means, than means that wanted a Man. But Liante demanding
time to deliberate more at leisure upon that business, desired him to think of
treating Iphigenes with such Civility, that he might have just occasion to
commend rather than complain of Lithuania. Which was performed in such
honorable manner, that if the gallant Iphigenes had been Governor and Master
of that rebellious City, he could not have received greater respect. He had
no other Prison than his own Parolle, Liante rendering himself pledge for his
fidelity.

Since the beginning of the Siege, the two Palatines of Troc and Minsce had
secured their Wives, Children, and what they had of most considerable value in
the Castle, as the place of greatest safety; there Liante likewise had his
Quarters, near which they conducted Iphigenes into a Chamber, so richly
furnished, that in the King's Palace he could not have been lodged more
splendidly. Good Cheer was no more wanting than all sorts of Games and
honorable divertisements. The company of Ladies was his ordinary attendance;
For, they had no sooner tasted the inevitable charms of his conversation, but
they became more licourish and greedy of it, than Bees are of Flowers, or their
Hony-combs.

If that beautiful Face (which showed to Mortals the image of the Angels)
had infected with it is pleasing Poison the Court-Ladie's hearts, imagine you
how those of Lithuania could be exempted from that delicious contagion; you
would have said, that this new Sinon had been come to bring the Grecian fire to
reduce that Ilion to ashes, and that being a prisoner in Body, his design was
to inthrall and torture all their Minds. For, that agreeable venim, which is
swallowed by the Eyes according to the variety of Spirits, conveyed into their
hearts such secret flames, and those flames caused such torments, that he
seemed to have the same destiny as Sejanus Horse, who put all places in
disorder where he was received.

Bogdales had a Wife so advanced in years, that the blood of her veins (which
ought by the course of Nature to have been Icie) seemed exempted (by the
benefit of her Age) from those ardours, which are only excusable in youth;
with her was retired into that Castle a Daughter, which He had married to a
gallant Nobleman of Lithuania, who not delighting to be enclosed within the
walls of that besleged City, kept a flying Army in the Field, accompanied by
the Palatine of Trod's Son, his Brother-in-law. His merit was sufficient to
have made all the Affections of his Wife terminate in his Person; but the
Perfections of the beautiful Prisoner so perverted her Reason, that as the
Primum Mobile by a violent motion drawe's all the other spears after it, she
could not hinder her Heart from following her Eyes, whose too inconsiderate
looks betrayed the licentiousness of her thoughts. So that the Mother, and the
Daughter were both taken in the same snare at once.

Neither could Olavius Wife (as wise and reserved as she was) withhold the
motions of her Mind from Dancing the same brawle. And as if that rare Object
had been formed on purpose to ruin the constancy of the most continent, few
saw him without taking pleasure to behold him, and few beheld him without
strange allarms and agitations of Spirit. That fire must be very fierce which
presently take's in green Wood.

Amiclea, who never yet felt any resentments for Liante, that deserved the
mentioning, was presently all inflamed with that Fever, whose fits are so
agreeable, that those who resent their Heats and Colds fear nothing more than
to be cured of that Disease. On a sudden of ignorant she became knowing in
the Art of Love, judging by the pains which she endured, that which she had
caused to Liante's Heart. Oh Liante you will be henceforwards but a difformed
Esau, this white Jacob will supplant you and you will see the ruin of your
pretensions arise from the same ground whence you expected your establishment.

Only the poor Oloria remained constant in her affection to him who despised
her; For, her Soul being filled with the Idea of that first Object, was
insusceptible of any other impression. If Iphigenes had been a Man, what vanity
would he have conceived in his thoughts, seeing himself the blank of so many
desires? But being such as Nature had created him, those Roses were to him but
Thorns, and those Adorations Importunities.

To relate the distemper which these new Passions bred in those weak Brains, I
dare not undertake, much less to express the confusions that imbroyled their
thoughts; For, Love, Envy, Despair, Jealousy, Shame and Desire, were as many
Worms, or rather Vultures that gnawed continually their Breasts. Even the Men
that were too attentive in the contemplation of that Angelical Face, had not
their minds free from disturbance; For, believing him a Man, they wished him of
the other Sex, that they might in some kind settle their complacency on his
perfections: And the Ladies who thought him not a Woman, esteemed themselves as
happy to have amongst them that beautiful Prisoner (to whom they were all
slaves) as the Trojan youths were to enjoy that samous Beauty of Greece within
their walls. Oh Iphigenes! as those who cast artificial Fireballs, are burned
oft-times themselves; So among so many storms which thou excitest, thou art not
without some agitation.

With what Pencill shall I delineate the division of those Spirits? The old
Ladies were ready to die with Despair and Shame, to see themselves in an Age
(which according to the Laws of Nature protected them from the Tyranny of that
little Boutte-feu which inflames Heaven and Earth) become Subjects to unjust
and infamous Desires (whose sweet cruelty was more redoubtable to them than the
pangs of Death) and be afflicted with a languishing Pain that could expect no
other remedy than the Grave.

Bogdale's Daughter, a Lady full of Honor, and who would as soon have cast
herself into a Fire, as violated the Faith she owed her Husband, felt her
Heart however, in spite of her resistance, tickled with that gentle Flame
which so many persons cherish, and so few extinguish; But to apply the remedy
of the least Word, was a thing whereunto she would less condescend than endure
the severest of Torments. Mean time the ardour of her Desires, like that in
Furnaces, redoubled it is violence, being enclosed, and having no place for
evaporation.

As for Amiclea, though she began to have age enough to discern, she had not
enough to dissemble sufficiently her Resentments: For, a first love is like new
Wine, which burst's the Vessel if it has not vent. Whilst for Liante her
mind was less agitated, it was easy for her to contein herself: But a vehement
and extraordinary Passion is not so easily concealed, which made her above all
the rest give evident demonstrations of her flame. Which was very excusable in
her; For, besides the glory of captiving so gallant a Spirit, and possessing so
accomplished a Body, what Soul is so stupid as not to be pricked with the spur
of ambition, seeing a Noble person illustrated with such eminent Dignities, and
accompanied with Riches that had no limits (since they were founded upon the
favor of one of the greatest Kings of Europe) Besides the common desire of all
young Gentlewomen to be highly and richly married, and render themselves
agreeable and admirable to all Eyes?

In sum, Iphigenes was the Object of all those Ladies Esteem, and of their
attendants, as they were the Butts of his Contempt; But as they accounted
themselves honored with his company, so and conceived himself importuned by
their's. At length Oloria as well as the rest, if not in effect, at least in
appearance, seemed to be intrapped in his Snares: For, whether out of a desire
to be revenged of Liante's scorns, or (which is more probable) to reduce him
to her affections by the sting of Jealousy, she feigned at first to love
Iphigenes, and stuck not to give him several manifest proofs of her
inclinations: But by little and little she engaged herself so far, that her
Counterfeiting became a Reality. Which made her fall from bad to worse, and in
stead of a Body run after a shadow, which fled from her: For, if she had been
so unfortunate as not to be able to cast any bait before Liante's Heart, that
might oblige him to set any value upon her Affection, judge you how that train
could take in Iphigenes Bosom, who was so little capable not only of
satisfying her desires, but of having any inclination for her.

Thus our lovely Prisoner, the Rock and stumbling- block of their thoughts, was
innocently culpable of all their pains. But he had more intricate troubles to
quell in his own breast, without imbroyling himself in their follies: For, he
was not like the Sun, which warmeth all things else, not having any degree of
heat within himself. If he bred torments in their Minds, he suffered penance
for that guilt in his own. With what countenance, in your Opinion, could he
behold the submissions and devoirs, wherewith the passionate Liante besieged
the Heart of the disdainful Amiclea? what despite possessed him to see the
Pride of that scornful Rival, who robbed him of that which he esteemed most
precious, the affection of Liante? and this without any other advantage than
that of her habit. If you had seen him at any time contemplating his excellent
Features in a Looking-glass, you would have said that he had been making a
strict inquiry in that Crystal, concerning the Victory which his Beauty, in
the Full, gave him over the Cressant of Amiclea's. Nothing remained in his
opinion, but to unseel Liante's Eyes, and let him understand his condition, to
make him quit the Passions and Pretentions he had for that unpolisht Diamond.
But this was the main difficulty, which bred a disturbance in his thoughts, no
less dolorous than the throes of a Woman, who desiring to conceal her labor
dare's not cry out in her greatest extremity. Poor Iphigenes! who shall deliver
thee of these mortal anguishes?

An ancient Historian make's mention of a Soldier, who despairing of his Life
by reason of an intestine Pain, which tormented him, casting himself into the
hottest of the Battle to purchase an honorable Death, received a thrust with a
Sword through the Body, which broke an Impostume within, and was so favorable
to him, that he found health where he expected Death. Oh how desirable were
that stroke with the Tongue, that would make Liante understand what the
Pudicity of Iphigenes forced him to conceal, with so much prejudice to his own
contentment! Sometimes he resolved to write, and employ to that Office the
whiteness of Paper, which is incapable of blushing; But representing to his
more serious consideration the diverse inconveniences that might proceed from
committing that secret to a Letter, and it is weakness in comparison of the
force of words pronounced Viva voce in like occurrences, he changed that
Resolution. And then, as if he would premeditate the Speech of his
manifestation, the disorder of his thoughts stifled the words in his mouth, and
reduced him to the terms of enduring the obscure Death of Silence, rather than
prolong his Life by a Discourse, which in his own judgment he should never
have the confidence to utter.

Oh sacred Bashfulness! a quality inseparable to all well borne Souls, how thou
paintest with different colors the Faces of such as are subject to thy
allarmes! Those wherewith the agreeable Aurora imbellisheth every morn the
Horizontall Line, appear not with more variety. Is it possible that Iphigenes
wit so full of subtility, and whose quaint inventions were so esteemed at
Court, should remain sterile in this occurrence, when the most important
affair that ever he managed in all his Life was in agitation? In sum, we
must conclude, what valor soever we admire in him, there was yet some dram of
the weakness of his Sex, which has the property of being extreme subtle in
matters of small consequence, but little capable of great enterprises.

Dispatch brave Iphigenes, and quickly ravish Liante's Heart by a free
Declaration; this Pill is somewhat bitter. this Draught unpleasant to the
taste, But it must be swallowed, for his good as well as yours. You possess
such great advantages in all respects above your Rival, that you shall only
need to unveile your self to cover her with darkness, or do her the same
affront as the Sun's arrival does to the Heaven's meaner Lights. Let but
Liante know what you are, and Farewell all Amiclea's, farewell Rebellion, and
all the pretensions he has in Lithuania. After many such debates within
himself, at last he was resolved; nothing was wanting but a fit opportunity to
reveal this grand Mystery.

But whether the Jealousy of those Ladies that besieged him, or whether the
Palatines had commanded them to let Iphigenes have the least private Conference
that might be with Liante, lest they should plot some conspiracy, it being a
Maxim of War always to distrust an Enemy; The time passed, and Iphigenes
consumed like a Torch, that give's light to others, and has nothing but
darkness for it self, meeting with no occasion to make this desired Discovery
to Liante. Not but that he spoke with him every day, but it was in the
presence of many shee-witnesses, in whose hearing he had no will to
communicate that Secret. Insomuch that in this condition he languished, being
Heart burned with Jealousy, which like a devouring fire incessantly increased,
as he perceived Liante more earnest, and public in his research of Amiclea,
declaring himself upon all occasions her Vassal, though (her Eyes being
dazzled with the luster of the rare Prisoner's beauty) she made no great
account of his services.

It would be a no less tedious than difficult task to relate the different
effects of those Ladies passions; For, if Envy agitated the old Matrons,
Jealousy bred no less distemper in the young Damsell's thoughts. I shall
content my self to remarke only their contrarieties. The two Palatinesses
strove with an envious Emulation, which should render best Offices to the
Prisoner, so far forth as to let him sufficiently know, if he would have
understood them, that those indearments proceeded as much from Love as
Courtesy. The Palatine of Troc's Daughter managed her affection with more
Dexterity; yet Iphigenes perceived but too plainly all her subtilities. Oloria
less circumspect in her carriage, discovered through her simplicity so much
folly, that she made Pity grow where she intended to Plant Desire. The
tender Amiclea, by reason of her youth, being more inconsiderate, and by
consequent more hardy, not contented with a free manifestation of her
inclinations to Iphigenes, promised him to contrive his escape, upon condition
that he would carry her with him and make her his Wife, in acknowledgement of
the liberty which she engaged herself to procure him. But he who was more
bound by his own will than his Parolle, and more imprisoned by his Passion than
those Walls, although the Gates had been set wide open, would not have gone out
of that place. whereinto he had invented such stratagems to enter. So that
thanking her for her courteous offer (for being a Prisoner upon Parolle he
would not for a World falsify his word) he left her in a continual Fever,
whose violence was redoubled sometimes by Jealousy of her young Rivals,
sometimes by the fury of the old, who under pretense of watching his
deportments, were angry that her Age and Beauty gave her more access to
Iphigenes than any other. In a word, they were like so many Archers, who shoot
all at the same Mark, yet take their aim from several stations.

Among diverse other means which those amorous Ladies used to make time seem
less tedious to Iphigenes, besides Gaming and Waling (whereof he had full
liberty, so that he were accompanied) the divertisement of Conversation, as it
was most agreeable, was most usual with them. Among other exercises of
Conversation, some there are consisting of the commendable and witty invention
of Words or Fancies, which only tend to an honest and recreative
Communication. Some of the most ingenious of those Rivalls made use of this
means, to make their adored Object covertly understand diverse things which the
Gravity and Modesty of their condition permitted them not to disclose any other
way. To this Iphigenes made Dissimulation his Buckler, seeming as if he
conceived not their meaning, although he penetrated to the bottom of their
Hearts.

One day it happened that to entertain the Company, it was proposed and resolved,
every one should tell a Story, and that He or She who, according to most
Voices, could relate the strangest Evenements, should be recompensed with a
Garland of Flowers, and a Kiss from all the rest of the Assembly. I should spin
out the Thread of this History to a too unmeasurable length, if I should stand
to repeat what every Lady and Gentleman of that Society related. Besides, my
intention being only to write the History of Iphigenes, I do not think my
self obliged to mention any thing, but what concern's him, or fell from his
mouth in this occurrence; which was a sit occasion (as he thought) to open
Liante's Eyes, and gently prepare him to receive the light of that Truth, which
he desired to make him comprehend.

So then, after it was come to the beloved Prisoner's turn to speak, and that
by industrious excuses (purposely invented) he had sharpened the desire of his
Auditors (whose Ears were no less covetous of hearing, than their Eyes charmed
with seeing him) as if he had been overcome by the entreaties of so many
persons worthy of respect, he acquitted himself of the charge imposed upon
him, beginning his discourse in this manner.

Since these Ladies and Gentlemen who have spoken before me, have imbellished
with such exquisite Flowers of Rhetoric the strange Evenements which they have
reported as well of Men as Women, it would be a vain ambition in me to aspire
to the atchivement of the promised Crown, and that delicate Kiss which is the
Crown of that Crown, if my Hope flattered me not that the strangeness of the
Fable I shall tell you, would supply my defect of Elegance; For, already I
renounce the prize as in reference to the Ornaments of Language, and other
parts requisite to the perfection of a Discourse: But whether I am too
indulgent to my own Judgment, or that the Truth is such, as that it make's it
preferable, I never hitherto read any Story comparable to the strangeness of
what you now shall hear. For, I beseech you (worthy Assembly) Can there be any
thing more miraculous, than that the same person should be both Man and Woman
without being an Hermaphrodite? Consider how this Prodigy can enter into your
thoughts; and if your imaginations cannot form the Idea of this Miracle,
acknowledge e're I proceed, that what I shall let you hear surmounteth all
conception. If your Spirits were no less amazed than delighted with the
extraordiary accidents you have already heard, you are to consider that those
happened to Men or Women distinctly; But what Monster, in your Opinion, should
he be, that without being bathed in the Fountain of Salmacis is neither Man
nor Woman, and yet is both Man and Woman? But not to hold your Ears any longer
in suspense, abusing the favor of your attention, my Narration shall here take
it is beginning.

Then, mixing the real Story of his own Birth and Education, and his
inviolable affection to Liante, with the Fable of Iphis and Ianthe, illustrated
by the Pen of the most ingenious of the Roman Poets, He disguised all the
passages so quaintly, and amplified his Relation with such eloquent
Expressions, that he left all their Ears (as it were) gaping, and their
Spirits suspended with admiration at the strangeness of that Metamorphosis, and
the delicacy of his Language: When Liante (who perceived by their indulgent
looks, that all the voices were ready to allot the Crown to Iphigenes, and that
Kiss, of which (for Amiclea's sake) he was most passionately covetous) said,
Ladies I oppose your Votes, and believe that the prize will be adjudged to
me, if you do me Justice.

What Justice? replied the Palatiness of Troc. Madam, answered he, that I may
relate a verity lately arrived, which surpasses in strangeness the vanity of
this fiction, wherewith Iphigenes has fed your Ears. If you allow me the
advantage that Histories have of Fables, I am confident I shall win. Iphigenes
no less astonished than the rest, casting his Eyes upon Liante's Face (the
ordinary aim of his tendrest looks) disposed himself to hearken with attention,
when Liante explained his Speech in these words (which sounded as the voice of
Thunder in the Ears of the troubled Iphigenes:) Without borrowing any other
personages than who are present in this Room, I will change you this Fable into
an History, and by the judgment of Iphigenes himself (after I have related it)
I question not but the prize will be mine without contradiction. In few words,
Ladies, this Fable is nothing else but the History of Iphigenes and my self; do
you not see, by reflecting upon the Names, how that of his feined Iphis agrees
with his own, and mine with Ianthe's?

If the roof of Heaven had seemed to break over Iphigenes head, he would have
been less surprised than at this Discourse, whereof dreading the sequel more
than the hand of Death, he endeavored to divert it, or at least remit it
until another time, and that he had conferred in the interim with Liante, who
(he believed) had sounded the depth of his intentions. But seeing that he
could not withstand the Torrent of the Lady's curiosities, who pressed Liante
with no less importunity to speak, than he conjured him to be silent; at
length he was constreined to make use of that authority which his Friendship
and Quality had always given him over that beloved Brother-in-law, forbidding
him under pain of his indignation to proceed any farther until he had spoken
two words with him, which he esteemed of no slighter importance than his Life.

The grave and stern Countenance, with the sharp and angry tone, wherewith
Iphigenes pronounced that threat, stopped the current of Liante's Speech no less
miraculously than a little Remora make's a tall Ship stand still in the midst
of the working Ocean, though the winds had filled all her Sails. Iphigenes
without losing time, presently demanded of Liante in private, after what manner
he intended to recite that History; and having learned that he would only
apply it to their recreative transformations in the Forest of Plocens, not a
little pleased that Liante had penetrated no farther into his Secret, serenity
returned into his Face, the panting of his Heart ceased, and having recollected
his Spirits he said to the Assembly; My Laidies, that which Liante is about to
tell you, is indeed a real History, but it seems as like a Fable, as my Fable
has th'appearance of an History; it is the relation of his Follies and mine,
wherein I am confident you will find nothing of such admiration, but that it is
strangeness will excite you rather to laughter than astonishment. Therefore
without despairing of the Crown, and the Favor that is to follow it, I shall
let him speak, beseeching you not to ground your Sentence upon the Art of his
Eloquence, which is able to illustrate the meanest Subjects, and make a
Crystal pass for a Diamond.

This said, they having all re-taken their seats, composed their gestures, and
prepared their Ears for attention, Liante repeated all the Mistakes,
Disguisements and pretty Contrivances practiced for their recreation in the
Woods, in the same manner as has already been described; whereunto he added
the transvestment of his Sister Modestina, and how she had been treated by
command of the barbarous Mieslas. But having run through this long Navigation,
without touching any Rock, just at the Haven's mouth he cast Iphigenes into a
new perplexity. For, coming to mention the non-consummated Marriage of
Iphigenes and Modestina, and the pretentions of the Princess Respicia, adding
the Passions of some other Ladies in the Court, and the report that was spread
through all Polonia of his affections to the Shepherdess Almeria, he
represented Iphigenes so chaste, so bashful, and so little inclined to Women,
that he made him appear not only as the virtuous Hyppolitus, but so like that
Iphis in his own Fable, (who of a Woman was transformed into a Man) that
without changing the name you would have thought he had been concerned in that
Metamorphosis.

This redoubled Iphigenes Fever, confirming his suspicion that Liante had
discovered something of that Mystery, which he had always been so careful to
conceal. At length Liante returning to his Passions, or (as he called them)
his illusions for Serife (whom he described with terms beyond my capacity to
rehearse) My Ladies (said he) To the end you and all these Gentlemen may
believe me, entreat the beautiful Palatine to dress himself in some of your
clothes, (I assure my self your requests will be as commands to him) and I
believe that there is not any among you, but will acknowledge that I was
happily deceived; for as He is too fair for a Man, He is so perfectly
handsome in a Woman's habit, that (without excepting her who possesses me)
the most amorous of herself among you all, I am confident will freely yield to
Him the Palm of Beauty.

Iphigenes hearing this was like unto a Man, who saved from Shipwreck by some
sloting Board, is troubled to get on shore, the waves sometimes pitiful,
sometimes cruel, driving him toward the Land, and then snatching him back
again into the Sea; sometimes raising him above the Water, sometimes plunging
him into their briny-bottom. For, seeing Liante's Shafts come so near the Mark
of the Truth, he began to harbor a fear that his secret had been disclosed
before its time: On the other side he was transported with joy to see Liante
fall of himself into the Nets which he laid for him, and make so clearly
manifest, unawares, the most tender Resentments of his Soul.

Liante's persuasions so prevailed with the Ladies, that they overwhelmed
Iphigenes with Conjurations to give their Eyes the contentment to behold under
some of their rich ornaments the choycest Jewel of Nature's precious Treasury.
Whereunto Iphigenes after many excuses condescended, to their unspeakable
admiration, and the absolute ravishment of Liante's Heart, which was his only
ambition, and for which consideration he was no less willing to transvest
himself than they earnest to desire it, to the end he might again in that
equipage dazzle Liante's Eyes, and renew in his Breast that Idea which had
rendered him his slave in the Forest.

This transformation gave birth to many quaint conceptions, and agreeable
entertainments in that Assembly; But at length the Council was called to
deliberate, who was to have the prize: And it was concluded, that it could
appertain to none but Iphigenes or Liante, who in stead of disputing which
should receive it, contosted which should remit it to his Competitour. Their
civil contention would never have found a Period, if by this expedient
Iphigenes had not ended it, suffering that Garland of Flowers to take place
among the dressings, wherewith the Ladies had adorned his Head, and giving
Liante the Liberty to take the other part of the prize from their Lips. This
Decree being put in Execution, after much recreative Discourse and
Compliments, Iphigenes quitted his Woman's apparel, to the Ladies as well as
Gentlemen's great regret: For, that splendid attire so increased his Charms,
that all their Spirits were enchanted with his sight: And Liante in particular
felt his heart so divided betwixt Serife and Amiclea, that like a Ship agitated
on the Sea with contrary winds, he knew not to which Port to steer his Course.

But whilst we amuse our selves too long in the Relation of what passed
within those besieged Walls, we forget to take notice of what was acted
without. The Besiegers advanced their Trenches, and the King's Army received
daily new supplies. Yet the Besieged possessing the Outworks, and having
strength and convenience enough to Sally, scarce any day passed without some
notable skermish. He that could express the trouble of the Camp, when
Iphigenes was taken Prisoner, would be no bad Orator; But the fury of
Mieslas, of necessity, must be covered with the Veil of Silence. For, the
Love which he bare to his own Blood, to that Son, who was the Pillar of his
Fortune, and the best Child upon the Earth, together with his implacable hatred
to Liante, bred a strange Tempest in his Thoughts. He was no sooner cured of
his contusions, and able to manege his Horse, but he made several Courses to
the Citty-gates, thundering out such Bravadoes and Threats, as would have
frighted People less resolute than those that kept that place. At length he
motioned the ransoming of his Son; But Iphigenes, who was not yet ready to go
forth, having private intelligence with Liante, made their demands be so
excessive, that he, who was no less covetous than cruel, would as soon give
his own blood as stand to that bargain; And imagining that Liante, was chiefly
in fault, he sent him a Paper containing this

CHALLENGE.
THou owe the advantage of our last Encounter to my Misfortune rather than
thy Valor; and my Disaster proceeded from a defect in my Horse, rather than
want of Courage in me. Fortune, the sworn Enemy of Virtue, does always oppose
the most Worthy, it being her ordinary Custom to Favorise the least
deserving. The testimonies that I have given, in so many places, of my Valor,
will not permit that a Fall from my Horse should blemish my Reputation. Those
that shall undervalue Me for that Mischance, will show themselves as very
Fools as thou, who gloriest in thy pretended Victory, without remembering thy
self, that three days before, my Son ( less powerful in Arms than I) gave
thee thy Life. Now, if thou have as much Courage as Vanity, I invite thee to
restore Me with thy Sword, what thou think thou have gained of Me with thy
Lance. For to leave My Honor in such feeble and childish Hands, is a thing I
can less endure than Death. Thou may come with assurance, since I pretend
nothing but to give Thee thy Life, after I have conquered Thee, which I shall
do without much difficulty. If thou fear Me, and desire that I should
pardon Thee, send back my Son.

Judge you, by these terms, of the Fierceness and Pride of that Sarmatian.
This defiance ran through several hands, Liante not being able to conceal
it, by reason it was brought publicly by a Trumpeter. It gave occasion of
laughter to the discreetest Perusers; For, Vanity is generally accompanied with
this Misery, that the more it strive's to be elevated and flies toward Glory,
the deeper it plunges it self into Contempt. Only Iphigenes was discontented
to see that every body blamed (though justly) the extravagance of his Father:
For, as Fathers are blind and indulgent over their Children's imperfections, So
Children cannot acknowledge the defects of their Parents. Those that commanded
within the City would not suffer Liante to render Mieslas the satisfaction he
desired by a second Combat. Which obliged him to return by the same Trumpeter
this

ANSWER.
Courtesy obliges me to acknowledge, that the advantage I had of you
proceeded rather from your Misfortune than your Fault, and from my good Fortune
than my Valor. Indeed it was not without displeasure to my self, that I spilt
your Blood, since I would willingly spend mine own to spare yours, performing
therein the office of a Guardian to him, who abusing the rights of Tutelage,
has violently wrested out of my hands the Estate which my Father had purchased
for Me. Be assured, Mieslas, that those supreme Powers, who make use of the
weakest things to confound the most Mighty, will first or last give Me a full
Revenge of the Rigours which you have exercised upon mine Innocence. If I were
Commander of this place, I would give you that satisfaction with my Sword,
which you desire, and I am resolved to let you have, as soon as I am at my own
Liberty: But being only a private Soldier, I cannot dispose of my self
without my Captain's consent. It is not that I dread your Choler, for I have
already learned the means to quell your Fury. The Testimonies that you boast to
have given of your Valor, are below that stroke which overthrew you. I Will
begin the same Game again with you when you please, after I am at my own
command. I have yet the same Heart, and the same Art, and, what is more, the
same Desire of giving you your Life, if you fall again into my Mercy. Although
the Laws of all good Chivalry would dispense Me (without any Interest of my
Honor) from fighting a second time with one, who is already indebted to Me
for his Life, as every body knowe's you are. Your Son ( more happy in his
imprisonment then he was with you) is not

so much in my power as I am in his. You must capitulate with others about his
Ransom. For my part I hold my self as glorious in having been conquered by his
Gallantry, as it is honorable for Me to have remained Victorious over your
Arrogance.

This Answer made the haughty-spirited Mieslas ready to tear down the Heavens
with Fury: For, nothing so outragiously torment's the Fancy of a Vain Man, as
when the too good opinion he has of his own desert is undervalued with
contemptible terms. But there was no other remedy than making a Virtue of
Necessity, and applying the Balsome of Patience to his Sore. All the brave
Courages of the Army (Iphigenes being taken) seemed to be stupefied, and
rendered like Bees that have lost their Sting: For the presence of that
Magnanimous Palatine gave them I know not what Spirit, which animated them to
generous Actions; and as if he had been the Soul of that great Body, you would
have said it languished, being deprived of the Star that gave it Life. And at
the Court his imprisonment was so resented, that it seemed as if the Sun had
lost it is Light, or at least the Day Star fallen from the Sky.

To relate the Ladies Complaints, and especially the Princess Respicia's
sighs, were as if you would count the Stars, or number the Tears of Heaven
in a great Shower. The Queen herself (as discreet and reserved as she was) had
no small pain to hide her Inclination under her Majestic Modesty; and not
being able to contein the Natural distillation of her Eyes, she covered her
particular sorrow with the Veil of the public Calamity. And the King, touched
with tenderness for so dear a loss, notwithstanding his other indispositions
besides Age (which is a continual Malady, and can never be cured but by the
Grave) resolved to arm himself, and go in person to his Camp, if the Rebels
released not his Favorite. To which effect he presently dispatched a Post to
them, that they might know his Will in these Words.

THE KING'S Letter to the REBELS of LITHUANIA.
I Am informed that by Treachery you have taken Prisoner my Cozen, the Palatine
of Plocens; you wanted but that to raise your Rebellion to the height, and draw
upon your Heads all that a King can have of Thunder and Indignation. Treason,
the inseparable Companion of Revolts, has given you that advantage, which you
could never hope for by the way of true Valor. But the God of Revenge, (
Protector of Kings, who Reign by him, and are his lively Images on Earth) will
make Me take such Vengeance on your Insolence, that if you come not to
acknowledge your faults, your Punishment shall serve for a memorable Example to
Posterity. You will never find any Spirit so depravedly reprobate (unless it
be infected with the same Contagion that has poisoned you) that can authorize
your Arms against the Fidelity which you owe Me by Nature, and to which you
have solemnly engaged your selves by Oaths: For, there is no Cause that can
justly dispense any Subjects of the Obedience, which they owe to their
Sovereigns. But admit your Arms were as just as they are criminal, you cannot
refuse to release, upon reasonable Ransom, him whom Fortune has delivered into
your hands. You are not ignorant that I love him for the esteem I make of his
Virtue; Therefore let Me know at what rate you will set his Liberty, that I
may content your Avarice. Which if you refuse to do, and that suddenly, know
that within few days you shall see Me at the Head of mine Army, encamped
before your Walls, which I will thunder down with an hundred Cannons; And if
you abuse my Clemency, I shall never thence forwards express my Pleasure to you
but by their Mouths.


This was spoken like a King, and a King transported with Passion for a Subject
full of Merit. This Letter was received with all the respect that true Subjects
owe their Sovereign; And the Copy was sent to the other Palatines, and
Noblemen of the League, who kept the Field, to have their advise concerning
what Answer they should return. Hereupon a general Council was held at
Minsce, wherein nothing was treated but what came to Iphigenes knowledge by
Liante. To say how glad he was to see what esteem the King had of him were
superfluous. But not having rendered himself a Prisoner voluntarily, to be
released against his Will, and fearing to leave Liante so embarked in the
affections of Amiclea, that he should marry her in his absence, He searched
among his thoughts what Invention he might find, either to draw Liante from
among those Rebels, or remit them all into the King's, favor and mediate an
atonement for the Peace and Benefit of the whole Kingdom.

As a little salt season's a great deal of Meat, and a little Levine
communicate's its spirits to a great lump of Dowe: So oftentimes one Grain of
particular Interest does much good or harm in public affairs. Who would have
said that Love could suggest such devices? And who may not think that this was
the only point which Archimedes demanded, to remove the whole Earth from it is
Center? At length by Iphigenes own advice (whereof Liante was the secret
Interpreter) it was concluded, that they should keep the Palatine of Plocens,
and make him as their buckler against their Prince's sury; perchance in
imitation of Themistocles, who made himself a Rampire of the King of Persia's
own Son against the violence of that Monark's rage.

Liante engaged himself that Iphigenes should intercede for them, so that they
would condescend to Reason, without prejudice to their Liberties and
Immunities, for the preservation whereof they had taken Arms. Hereupon a
Gentleman was presently ordered to go to the Court with

THIS LETTER FROM THE LITHUANIAHS, TOKINK SIGISMOND AUGUSTUS.
Dread SOVEREIGN,
YOur thrice-humble, and thrice faithful Subject's and Servants, the
Palatines, Castellains, Gentry, and Commons of your Duchy of Lithuania, united
for the defense of their Lives, Estates, and Liberties, do with all humility
represent to your Majesty, That they acknowledge You for their Natural Prince
and Sovereign Lord, ordained by God to hold the Reins of their Empire, and that
they will never decline from the respect, fidelity and obedience which they owe
to your Royal Majesty. Neither in effect have we taken Arms to form any
Revolt ( for we detest Rebellion as the blackest and basest crime in the
World) but to deliver our selves from the Iyranny of our Enemies, who besieging
your sacred Person, will not allow us any access to expose our reasons before
Your Majesty, Whereby we have been enforced to have recourse to our Arms as an
help which Nature teaches us, for the assurance of our persons, the exempting
of our selves from their domination so insupportable to us, and the maintenance
of our Rights, Privileges and Immunities, which is all the glory of our
Country. Sacred SIR, It is Your Patrimony, Your Inheritance, We are Your
Children, Your Natural Subjects, the Sheep of Your Flock; we most willingly
submit our selves to your Scepter, and desire no other Liberty than that of
Your Commands: But as you are just, and established by God to do us Justice,
We desire no better than to be under the Yoke of your Laws, so that they be
not dictated by the Mouths of our Adversaries, and that They draw them not by
surprisall from Yours. Whether we will or not, we are obliged to acknowledge
You for our Master, by the right of Succession which You have from Your
Predecessors, and render the same devoir to Your Posterity, if Heaven blesses
you with any. Which the Polonians cannot say, for they are too jealous of
their election, to bind their obedience to the Lineage of a Prince. God shorten
our days to lengthen yours: But if he should call you to his Glory, and from
this Earthly Kingdom to the Crown of Heaven without Heirs, Your Majesty may
judge if our Condition would not be like unto that of slaves; and if the
Polonians ( whose voices are vendible at Elections) would not sell us to what
Master they pleased. SIR, we are resolved to die every Man, rather than
endure such an affront, and give away our Liberties at so cheap a rate. A
glorious Death shall always be more acceptable to us than an infamous Life,
and which should blemish our Names in the memory of our Posterity. For, what
would our Nephews say of us, if they should find that in our days without the
shedding of our bloods we should submit our necks to the Yoke of the
Polonian's servitude, whom we have in former times discomfited, and reduced to
shameful conditions? Your Predecessors, by the Arms of our forefathers, have
gained Victories over them, which made them triumph with their Crown for the
space of two complete Ages. Great KING, take notice of these truths, and that
if Your Virtues have made you be elected by the Polonians, it was because they
found nothing in any other State so worthy of reigning over them, as in the
Throne of Lithuania. Shall their Charms gain so much power over your Spirit,
endued with such wisdom and rare conduct, as to induce you to lop off with Your
Sword Your natural Branches, in favor of those wild Plants worthy of so much
hatred? SIR, we humbly beseech Your Majesty to maintain us in the same
Honors, Prerogatives, and Liberties, as we enjoyed under your Ancestors; and
that for having been always faithful to you, our recompense may not be an
ungrateful bondage under a cruel Nation, which we have ever abhorred;
especially since (having carried out of this Country the Bodies of our
Princes, to seat them in their thrones) they have endeavored to withdraw their
Hearts, depriving us of the effects of their benevolence. If we must die, can
we face Death in a more just quarrel than this, which we defend, not to the
prejudice of Your most excellent Majesty, but against those Tyrants which abuse
Your Facility, and the goodness of Your Royal Disposition? If Your Majesty
comes in Person to our siege, what a glory will it be to us to fall under the
victorious Sword of so great a Monarck, and render him our Lives to whom we
owe them? By this means we shall wash away, with our own Blood, the fault,
wherewith we should be shamefully taxed by our Posterity, if we should be so
base as to leave them this thraldom for inheritance at a cheaper rate. This
we shall expect with a constant and undaunted courage. And since the Fortune
of our Arms ( favorised by Heaven) rather than any treachery, has delivered
into our hands a Person, who of all the Polonians was most dear to you, and
who, by the virtues which We daily discover in him, makes appear the
Excellency of Your Majesty's judgment in the choice of those whom you will
honor with your Affections: Your Majesty must give us leave to make a Rampire
of that Treasure which is fallen to us, and which shall serve us as a Buckler
against the violence of your Choler and Vengeance. For, when the mouths of
your Cannons shall begin to express your Pleasure against our Walls, the first
Gabion that we will oppose shall be the body of the Palatine of Plocens, your
Creature; knowing that you bearing the image of God on Earth, will not destroy
the work of your own hands, nor give your self entrance into our City, by a
breach besprinkled with the blood of a Person so considerable in your esteem.
But if that hinder you not from executing your rigours, what Grace can we
expect, but that of those who have lost all hopes, seeing him so cruelly
treated whom you honor with your Favor? But we promise our selves better
things from the Clemency and Prudence of Your Majesty, and that as Father of
Your Country, you will not procure its ruin. And although the persuasion of
our Adversaries should make you construe our legitimate Defense a Crime, we
are assured that Your Wrath and Chastisements will never fall upon us without
the mixture of Love and Pity. Permit, Great KING, that appealing from Your
Majesty to Yourself, we may obtain either an amicable Conference, to decide
our Differences with the Polonians, or a free Audience at the Tribunal of Your
Sovereign Justice, to spare the blood of Your Subjects; And there we hope to
advance such powerful Reasons, that if Might oversway not Equity, we shall
gain the Cause, and give for Motto of our Triumph; The virtue of SIGISMOND has
raised him to the Throne of POLONIA, But the Love of LITHUANIA has overcome
SIGISMOND.


To this long Declaration Iphigenes (who in his Captivity enjoyed as much
Liberty as he would take) had the permission to annex his Letter to the King;
nothing being impossible for him, having Liante for Mediator; To whom he
showed his dispatches: And in respect they tended only to the Peace and Union
of those two Nations under the King's Obedience, Liante was glad to be an
instrument of so good and laudable an Enterprise.

The substance of his Informations to the King imported, That it was rather by
good Fortune than bad, that he had fallen into the Lithuanian's hands, or at
least, that it was so fortunate a misfortune, that he thank't Heaven for
nothing so much as that Disgrace; not only that thereby he had rendered some
testimonies of his fidelity to His Majesty from whom he had received so dear a
proof of his affection, by the cars he expressed of procuring his Liberty: But
that he had found the means by his imprisonment (so that His Majesty would be
pleased to let it continue somewhat longer) to reduce the exasperated Spirits
of those Rebels to the regulated temper of a just Obedience: Which he
esteemed so feasible, that if his Majesty would condescend but a little, he
doubted not to purge them of their Factious humors, and make them understand
their duties. That he had observed among them the seeds of great Affection and
Respect to their Natural and Legitimate Prince; And that, with the least
shower of clemency powered down upon those Plants, they were likely to produce
acceptable fruits in their season. That he being born a Polonian, desired, as
much and more than the other Palatines, the glory of Polonia and the advantage
of his Country; But having considered that Peace with their Neighbors was the
maine means to make Polonia flourish, and that to subdue by violence the
Lithuanians (a Nation both redoubtable, and in his judgment invincible) was an
enterprise so far from any likelihood, that it was rather an exposing of
Polonia to the Conquest of Lithuania, than a way to reduce Lithuania under the
subjection of Polonia. That that Province being altogether as vast and
powerful as Sarmatia, it might balance and counterpoise the authority, and
pre-eminence of the Polonians; who of Elder Brothers without contradiction,
might be supplanted by their younger, if they came to dispute it by force of
Arms, whose Evenements are so full of uncertainties. That it was only allowing
some part of the inheritance to those second Children, who perchance being
treated with moderation would be contented with little. That he must not
think to give them the portion of the Eagle ( which is the Arms of Polonia) who
leave's nothing to the other Birds; otherwise the armed Knight ( which is the
Arms of Lithuania) pretending to the booty would fight for his share of the
spoil. That he had felt the pulse, and sounded the dispositions of the
principal Authors of that Revolt, whom he found resolved to die for the
defense of their Liberties ( a pecious Pretext and capable to make the whole
Earth rise) or (if they did submitt to the Crown of Polonia) to participate in
the Charges and Government of the State. These with diverse other heads by way
of advice did Iphigenes write, and sent them to the King with the following

LETTER.
SACRED MAJESTY:
TWo grand benefits I hope to reap by the damage of my imprisonment; One, to
re-purchase my self your Opinion, if I have lost it, or preserve it if I have
yet any place in your Favor. The Other, to arm such endeavors for your
present service as may style me a faithful Servant to so Royal a Master.
SIR, I am your subject with many others, but I am, besides, the particular
Mark of your Liberalities and Beneficence, which make's me the Blank of Envy
and Detraction ( if Envy can have any Blank) But I hope by this occasion which
I have now in hand (or rather in whose hands I am) to make the malice of my
Enviers burst, as certain venomous Creatures are observed to do at the smell of
Roses. For, if Your Majesty will be pleased only to prolong my imprisonment,
and authorize by your approbation according to the advice I have sent you with
this present) my Negociations and Proceedings, I doubt not in short time to
reduce unto such terms the affairs of this Civil War, that Your Majesty
triumphing in the midst of your Enemies, shall see them beg mercy at your
Feet; which I kiss with all humility in acknowledgement, and thanks for the
care you take of my enlargement out of this servitude: Happy servitude!
amiable Prison! since it is for the service of a King, whose Goodness exceed's
his Greatness, and who deserve's that the Extremities of the Earth were the
Limits of his Dominion; Yet would it be inferior to his Virtue. Agreeable
Prison! wherein I manage the Liberty of my Country; which never can have place
but in the Public Tranquillity. SIR, all the fruit of War is Peace: But He
that can gather that sweet fruit, blessed by Heaven and desired on Earth,
without watering his Palms with Blood, and his Olive-Branches with Tears, is
he not much happier? Who doubts but the refreshing breath of gentle Zephyrus,
is more agreeable than the blustering blasts of rigid Boreas, and that the
ways of Mildness are the best and most advantageous to Monarks, who can show
by nothing better than Clemency that they are the livelie Images of the Deity?
This makes me beseech Your Majesty to speak always like a King in your
Letters, expressing your Courage and Indignation by threatenings, but within
your Heart to reserve inclinations to Mercy and Forgiveness: Considering that
you Command Men, and Men that are freeborn, People of an haughty Spirit, and
whose untractable dispositions naturally make them rather break then bend. It
is fit that your Majesty imitating the Divinity, which you represent to us on
Earth, should make the voice of your Thunder be heard over the Rebell's heads,
to the end the astonishment may keep them All in Fear, although the Blow hit
very Few. And let not your Majesty stick to hazard my Life, or apprehend
exposing it to the Mutiny of an enraged Rabble; For, as I shall not preserve it
but only for your service, I cannot lose it better than for so glorious a
cause. I would I had a thousand Lives, and that it were but my losing of them
all to give you a full testimony that I am the most faithful, as the most
obliged to Your Majesty of all your Subjects. I shall add this word for the
consideration of Liante, who amazeth all Polonia, that being a natural
Polonian, he should espouse the Lithuanian interest. Your Majesty may please
to take notice that the Despair, whereunto the rigorous treatment of my Father,
his Guardian, has reduced him, compelled him to that extremity, rather than the
desire of disserving Your Majesty, or favorising their Rebellion. When I shall
inform Your Majesty one day, what drove him into that Desperate Course, you
will acknowledge that it was rather a Necessity unavoidable, than any Design
accompanied with Malicious ingratitude: Hereof I have daily experience by the
assistance which I receive from him for the advancement of Your Majesty's
Service among these Mutiniers. If by the confiscation of his Estate Your
Majesty has made him feel the severitie of your Indignation, when you shall
understand the truth, and that his Services shall have averred his innocence,
and cleared his accusation, he hopes, with the rest, to taste the fruits of
your Clemency, as I am laden with those of your Liberality.

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful and most obliged Subject, Servant
and Creature, IPHIGENES.


The King having received this Packet, seriously reflected upon the advice of
his beloved Favorite, of whose wit and virtue he had always made no mean
account, but nothing comparable to the esteem he conceived of him on this
occasion, seeing with what Prudence and Conduct he changed his private
Disaster into the Public good. And in effect he served the King in this
occurrence as the Dolphin is said to serve Fishermen, who finding him in their
Nets, after stroaking and caressing him, cast him again into the Sea, because
he leads into their hands the other Fishes, which in great trains attend him
as their Prince. But alas! as in a calm season when the Dolphins sport above
the water, it is the infallible presage of a storm; So, while Iphigenes
labored, in playing, to procure a public tranquillity, a Tempest arose with
such impetuosity, that he had almost perished; neither could it be appeased
notwithstanding all his industry, but by wracking the secret which he had so
many years concealed.

Whilst the King was deliberating his affairs, having commanded the most
trusty, and best experienced of his Council to advise concerning the means of
quenching that fire which threatened both his States of Polonia and Lithuania
with a vast ruin, Iphigenes by a sudden Gust saw all his hopes upon the very
brink of Destruction. For, Olavius seeing the great ascendant Liante had over
the Spirit of Iphigenes, and that He had no less over the King's; The Politic
Lithuanian conceived that there was no better means to moare his Vessel at
Anchor, and secure himself from the Shipwreck that threatened his Fortune, than
by marrying his Daughters. The aspiring to the alliance of Iphigenes, was what
he desired more than he durst hope. Oh! if Amiclea's glances had penetrated
as deep into that Favorite's breast, as they had done in Liante's, what great
matters would he have promised to his Ambition! But (besides that he knew
Iphigenes was Married to Modestina, and was not ignorant of the Designs of the
Princess Respicia) seeing the great indifferency that beloved Captive showed
for all Women, as he lost the Hope of atchieving so high an advantage, he
quitted the thought of desiring it. Which made him turn all his pretensions
toward Liante, promising himself to obtain of the King by Iphigenes, what he
should demand of Iphigenes by Liante.

If this Palatine had an ambition to make Liante his Son-in-Law, Liante was no
less desirous than He to contract that alliance: But he was not so simple as
to take the Elder for the Younger, there was no darkness impenetrable to the
sight of such a Lover.

Since Oloria had turned her Eyes toward Iphigenes, being transported with
the ravishing Garb of that beautiful Object, she slighted Liante's scorns;
The same cause made Amiclea disdain the esteem which Liante made of her, and
nothing was so irksome to her, as when he entertained her with the discourse
of his Passion.

Melindra, Daughter to the Palatine of Troc, being assaulted on one side by
the Legitimate Affection and Fidelity, which she owed to her absent Husband,
and on the other by the Charms which the presence of Iphigenes cast into her
thoughts, felt Combats of Love and Honor in her Heart, whose convulsions
approached the torments of a Woman in travel, who would but cannot be
delivered. The Conflict or violent opposition that Heat and Cold make in the
concavity of a Clowd, is some resemblance of the Contradictions in her Mind.
And after many passionate Complaints continuing to aggravate her sore with a
thousand various imaginations, she impoisoned the Humor more, and sometimes
shunned the remedy, sometimes desired it with impatience. Nevertheless she
remained so firm in the steps of Virtue, that although her languishing looks,
broken sighs, and tears discovered plainly enough her distemper to Iphigenes,
yet she observed a severe silence, never giving her Tongue the liberty to say
any thing, but what was within the bounds of a modest Civility. Wherein she
made appear as much virtue as the two old Palatinesses showed little; For, they
were grown so jealous of their Daughters, having discovered their inclinations,
that like Furies they were perpetually haunting them, and reprehending in them
a fault, which they authorized in their own deportments. I will not stain their
memory with the extraordinary means, which they used to inveigle this Fish into
their Nets. Imagine you only what Women can do, or rather what they cannot
do, when animated with a violent Passion, and in an Age whose weakness
redouble's the other's force. At length Despair had made them commit a
treachery, and change their inclination into vengeance, if the Public
necessities had not retarded them in their Private animosities. So they
borrowed of Time and Patience the succor of Hope, which is always ready to
assist the most miserable.

But Iphigenes, who had been beaten with fiercer, and more dangerous storms at
Court, laughed at those Feminine divisions, and looked (as from an eminent
place) upon those frail Vessels, agitated with that violent tempest, as a
Shittle-cock in the Wind, and the subject of his Disdain. The assault which I
am now going to relate was otherwise resented, for it came from the Place that
was only capable of putting Iphigenes beyond his Temper and Art of
Dissimulation.

You may conceive already, that it proceeded from Liante, whose Spirits being
settled, after the motion which Iphigenes transvestment had caused in his
breast, relapsed into the vehemence of his Passions for Amiclea; whose Scorns
befrosted his Pretensions, as much as her Graces inflamed his Inclinations. At
length, the Eyes of those that love, being very quick-sighted, he perceived
it was only the presence of Iphigenes that ruined his Designs, and that his
Idol was so possessed with the Idea of that beautiful Palatine, that no other
could find admittance into her Soul.

This presently bred Jealousy in Liante, and so much power has the Tyranny of
Love above the ties of Friendship, that he felt the later diminish, as fast as
the other dilated it self in his thoughts. He wished he had some occasion not
to love Iphigenes so well; but his indearing deportments, his virtue, and
(above all) that incomparable Modesty, which accompanied all his Actions,
wrested out of his Mind all thoughts of loving him less. Afterward,
considering to what danger that brave Palatine had exposed himself to save his
Fortune, and the promises he made to raise him to the most eminent Dignities
of Polonia, if he would follow his advice (which he had always found as
advantageous as sincere) that expunged all manner of Gall out of his Heart, and
restreined him from doing or saying any thing, that might be prejudicial to so
pure and inviolable a Friendship. One of whose principal Effects being
Confidence, he resolved to open his Heart to Iphigenes, and discover to him as
well the extremity of his Passion for Amiclea, as the pricking torments of his
Jealousy.

But when he had displayed all his distempers, the End of his Discourse was
the Beginning of Iphigenes pains; for fearing nothing so, much as the loss of
that Heart, which he desired to keep entire to himself, it was an
inconceivable torture to his Mind, to see him so violently bent upon another.
Object Whereupon he thus spoke to Liante; I marvel not at your being in
Love, for the Subject deserves it; But your Jealousy put's my senses beyond
all temper; for (I pray) what occasion have I ever given you to doubt of my
Fidelity? Observe Liante, how far my Friendship extends: if you had but said to
me, Iphigenes, I would not have you look upon such a Lady, although her Image
were never so deeply engraven in my Soul, I would tear it away, or pluck the
Eyes out of my head, if they were so rash as to cast but one glance upon her. I
am sure if I had brought yours to this test, it would not have endured the
touch, and you would defend your disobedience by the advantages that Love, who
is but a Child, possesses over those Spirits that are subjected to his Empire.
See, Liante, how I surpass you in all things, and (which is as much to your
shame as my honor) in the Prerogatives of Friendship; which is vainly reported
to equalize Friends, since you are inferior to me by so many degrees, that you
dare not think in my favor, what I would willingly execute for your
Consideration. What imagination possesses your mind? do you think to make
Amiclea love you against her will? Certainly you understand very ill the
motions of Love, which have no other foundation but the Liberty of choosing,
and therefore it is called Dilection, as if one should say an inclination of
Election. And you are very ignorant of the humor of Ladies, who (like
shadows) do usually follow those that fly them, and shun those that follow
them. You have reason to say that Amiclea love's me; he must be blind that
perceive's it not; so do many others, whose Passions are very irksome to me:
my Ears are daily stormed with her Complaints, and these importunities which
are so unwelcome to me, would be such favors to you, as would elevate your
thoughts to the Skies. But what should I do in this case? I can no more hinder
her from loving me, than compel her to affect you. Affection is not so easily
put off as a Garment, nothing is more difficult to be done by devoir than to
Love. She knowe's that her desires are without hope for my particular, and yet
I cannot disabuse her of her Error, nor dissuade her from amusing her Fancy
after a Subject, which cannot lawfully be here is. I would, for your
satisfaction, that it were in my power to transplant her Passion, and turn it
from my self to you; if this were possible, you should find that among all the
Friends in the World there never was any more faithful, nor more desirous of
pleasing you than I am.

At these words Jealousy resigned the possession of Liante's Heart; and he,
acknowledging the engagements he had to the incomparable Friendship of
Iphigenes, said to him: I think Heaven has created you to serve as a Spectacle
of admiration to all those that see you, but much more to those that frequent
you. It is impossible to hate you, and know you; But what say I? I maintain one
cannot know you without loving you, no more than see the Sun without light or
heat. But what can be the reason, that (like that glorious Planet) you cause
such ardours in these feeble Souls, without conceiving the least degree of heat
in your own? For, never Man was so beloved of Women as you are, and (I think)
never any cared less for them than you. What? Do you then love none so well,
but that you could leave her if a faithful friend should entreat you to be
unfaithful to her?

Hereunto Iphigenes made answer, A perfect Friend will never desire any thing
so dishonorable as infidelity; but if any Friend of mine should be much
inflamed for some one of that Sex, (who to me are all indifferent) I should
make no difficulty to resign an affection, wherein I were no otherwise engaged
than by a Civil respect; especially if he had been the first pretender. For,
I hold it the greatest injury that can be done to a Friend, to endeavor to
spoil his market in matter of Marriage, and that there is nothing more capable
of breaking all Friendship, than Jealousy proceeding from such a cause; in
regard it is an offense beyond reparation. There is not he breathing among
Mortals but knowe's that Love and Royalty admit of no Companions, and that
they are two Torrents which overturn by the impetuosity of their Course all
sort of Obstacles.

Dear Iphigenes, replied Liante, I think thou have undertaken to transport me
quite beyond my self, making me see in thee, not the Image, but the Essence of
the most perfect Friend under the Circumference of the Firmament. I deliver up
my Arms, Dear Brother, and in all ways acknowledge my self conquered by thee;
But since thou have given me so many times my Life, now thou give me the
Courage to desire thee to preserve in me thy own handiwork, and release me
from the trouble that torment's me. Know then, that without the possession of
Amiclea I cannot live. And to embrace the Body of one, whose Heart is with
another, is a thing I can as little endure, as to be tied to a breathless
Carcass; It would be a punishment to me, not a pleasure. Therefore I beseech
thee to further me in the Conquest of her Affection, and favorise this
alliance with thy assistance. I am but too certain of her Parent's consent, and
that they are no less willing to make me their Son-in-law, than I desire to
have their Daughter to Wife.

Then, after some other discourse, conceiving that nothing hindered him from
being beloved by Amiclea, but the Passion which consumed her for Iphigenes,
Liante continued his supplication to him to deprive her of all Hope of enjoying
him, that she might likewise lose the desire, flattering his imagination that
thereby her Love, having no more wings to raise it self, would doubtless fall
to the ground; the only means of curing that Disease in her Fancy, and to
pluck the Thorns out of her Heart, being to put the Rose out of her reach.
Alleging that to persuade her to divert her thoughts another way, and fix
them upon a subject to whom she might easily and justly pretend, he had a
thousand reasons, and wanted no inventions to lend him merits that he
possessed not, and convey them into the belief of that Lady. That if, by his
mediation, he purchased her Affection, he would esteem that favor above the
benefit of his Life (for which he remained his debtor) in regard Life would be
loathsome to him, if he could procure no admittance into Amiclea's Heart.

Imagine you into what extremities Iphigenes saw himself reduced, not being
able handsomely to refuse serving Liante in an occasion that he dreaded the
most, and which was most destructive to his own desires. Having remained long
time in this perplexity, as motionless as if he had seen a Medusa, or been
stunned with some violent blow, at length recollecting his Spirits, and like
Anteus, receiving vigor from his fall, he gave his voice passage to pronounce
these words.

Liante, if you knew the harm and injury you do me, you would have some
compassion of my suffering, and acknowledge that you condemn me to a
punishment much less supportable than Death, by entreating me to serve you in
this occurrence. I know you will say, that the trial of a Friend is in
difficult matters, and time of need; But if we ought to love another, by the
model of that Love which we owe to our selves, it followe's necessarily that
our own interest ought to have the precedence, according to the order of the
most perfect Charity. It is not yet time for you to know the injury I receive
thereby, nor the extreme damage and hinderance it will be to your Fortune,
which I intended to raise above all other Grandeurs in Polonia, except the
Royal Dignity. I see plainly that it is the luster of some pleasures, and vain
pretensions, that make's you precipitate your self from this Pinnacle, and seek
your fall, where you thought to raise your self. Questionless I shall be a
Cassandra to you, and tell you diverse truths, but you will believe none. Well,
Liante, perchance my Death will open your Eyes, and then (by a remorse too late
and out of season) you will regret that you had caused it to one, who prepared
for you the happiest Life that your imagination could fathom. Nevertheless I
will drink this Cup of bitterness, which you present me, and although it be
to me a poison beyond remedy, I will swallow it, to show the force of my
Friendship to the prejudice of my Love, to a Man, who (I believed) could not be
capable of ingatitude.

Hereupon Liante thinking he had discovered all the secret, said; Brother,
have I caught you? I knew this straining would so torture you, that in despite
of your dissimulation, I should at length wring out of your own Mouth the
verity, which you hid in the bottom of your Heart. You love Amiclea then, for
whom you counterfeited so much coldness and indifference; and, thrusting Time
back by the shoulders expecting the conclusion of the Peace, you would amuse
me in the interim with promises of imaginary dignities, like those who give
Children Cherries with certain magnifying Glasses, that make them show as big
as Apples: To the end at the same time you may kill two Birds with one bolt,
and by breaking your Faith to the Sister deprive the Brother of a Love, which
he preferr's before his Life.

At length after a tedious Conference to this effect, Liante being persuaded
by the suggestions of Jealousy, that the fair Palatine was the only obstacle
of his pretentions, in a discontented humor quitted the room, leaving
Iphigenes with such a tempest in his thoughts, as you may fancy, Love,
Despite, Shame, Choler, Despair, and Sorrow (which then tormented him all
together) by their impetuous blasts were able to raise in a Lover's mind. Yet
being resolved to suffer all extremities, rather than break absolutely with
Liante, he searched among his thoughts for Excuses, and some Reasons to pardon
his ingratitude. And after a thousand Musings, and as many extravagant
Discourses, Alas! said he to himself; It is thou (I phigenes) who art cause of
thy own mischief, yet thou accusest the innocent, thou hidest his Eyes and
complainest if he hurt thee. Restore, restore his sight by discovering to him
what thou art, and then thou will find that as the shadows of the Night fly
from the Presence of the Sun, So all his Suspicions will vanish when thou shall
let him see the clear Day of Truth.

Thus Iphigenes sometimes injuring Liante, sometimes crying him mercy,
sometimes accusing, sometimes excusing him, digested that bitterness with such
anguish, that (if a timely shower of tears had not wetted the Wings of his
agitated Spirits, benumbed his Senses, and at last closed his Eyes) he was in
danger of falling into a Frenzy.

Mean time Liante neglected no endeavors to get Iphigenes out of the City,
judging that in respect He had entered upon his Word, his Honor was engaged to
remit him in the same condition as he took him: Besides, the interest of his
Love instigated him shrewdly to expedite that enterprise, imagining, as a
Loadstone loses it is faculty of attracting iron in the presence of a Diamond,
that he should never be able to draw the Affections of Amielea to him, as long
as her Eyes had that beautiful Palatine to contemplate. But as it is no less
easy to be caught in a snare, than hard to get loose; So in the Wars a Man
may be soon made prisoner, but not so suddenly enlarged. Liante to acquire the
glory of that Prize, had conducted that intelligence without communicating it
to the Palatines of Minsee and Troc: But to make Iphigenes escape without
advertising them, had been to expose his Person to a shameful punishment, and
declare himself an Enemy and a Traitor to the public good: So that he knew
not what to resolve. On the other side, the Passion he suffered for Amiclea
never gave his Mind any truce: yet to marry one that loved him not, in that
great Aversion and Perplexity of Spirit, (the Idea of another Object having
wholly prepossessed her thoughts) he saw as little likelihood as contentment.

In this anxiety he went to tell Iphigenes, that without his Counsel he
could not find a thread to lead him out of the Labyrinth, wherein he had
engaged himself by entering into Minsce. Iphigenes, who had no desire to go out,
was glad to take this advantage of Liante, saying, That coming in upon his
word, he thought the Gates should be open for him when he pleased. And,
Liante having told him the difficulties and obstacles he found in procuring
his enlargement, he continued; See what a great Name you have in appearance
among the Rebels, and how little Power in effect. It is not so with me in the
King's Party; For, I am so confident of His Majesty's goodness, that he will
receive you graciously, and when I shall have acquainted him with the motives
of your. Despair, that he will re-establish you in despite of Mieslas in your
Estate, and confer such Dignities upon you as you can never hope to gain by
this Rebellion. And if you will decline those thoughts of Marriage with Amiclea
(which are as ruinous to you as grievous to me, for Reasons which it is not
yet time to tell you,) Let me alone with the conduct of your Fortune, and
assure your self, that I will not only repair the Breaches of it, but raise it
to such an height, that your desires will scarce be able toto reach it.

Passion is a deceiving Medium, through which we cannot rightly discern the
sincerity of any thing. Liante being prepossessed with a false suspicion and
prejudice against Iphigenes, thought all his Potestations and Promises but
only inventions to deceive him; especially in regard they tended to make him
break those Bonds, which he esteemed above all Honors or Liberty: And not
conceiving wherefore he should have such repugnancy to his Marriage, he
resolved to play the Adder, stopping his Ears to that wise Charmer, and press
all he could his Alliance with Amiclea.

Whereupon he answered, That he was not so little judicious, as to leave a
certainty for an uncertainty, and a Prey which he had already in his Hands, to
follow a new Sent; No, he was too well skilled in hunting to take the Change.
That he preferred the conq^^st of his Mistirs above the King's favor. That
he hoped his particular Peace should be included in the public Articles.
That he knew no better means to engage the Lithuanians to insert that Clause
in their Capitulations, than by his Alliance with Olavius. That that was his
last resolution, the Plank and Anchor of his Shipwracked Fortune; That all
persuasions to the contrary should move his Heart no more than the Sea's
insulting Billows displace the sturdy Rocks.

This hurried the thoughts of Iphigenes beyond the bounds of Patience, seeing
the obstinancy of that inflexible Courage: yet he moderated his passion a
little, not without letting appear some sparkles of his inward fire by these
words. You cannot restore me my Liberty, and you will marry Amiclea against my
Will. Well, Liante, know that being more powerful than you in all respects, I
can take again my Liberty when I please, and hinder you from having Amiclea to
Wife. For, I know, unless I am so contented, that she will rather consent to
Death, then your Marriage: As for my going out of this Castle, take notice that
I have as many sally-ports as there are W. (he would have said Women, but not
to discover himself too much, he said) Windows.

This made Liante believe (see how one absurdity drawe's on another) that
Iphigenes made use of some Magical charms to purchase himself the King's
favor, rise to such high Dignities, acquire Honor in the War, gain the
Affections not only of Ladies, but of all the World, and make his escape out
of Prison, either by flying like Dedalus, or transforming himself into a Bird.
In this Opinion he said, That cannot be done without sorcery.

I will use no other Charms, than those which Nature has placed in my Face (
replied Iphigenes) nor any other Arms than those of my Tongue. Then (answered
Liante in a fury) complain not against Me if you get not out of Prison; And
do what you can, I defy all your enchantments, White or Black, Natural or
Diabolical, for hindering Me from marrying my Mistress, since I have her
Father's word, on which depend's her Will by the Law of Filial Obedienoe and
Paternall Authority. With that he flung away, as full of Anger as he left
Iphigenes oppressed with Sadness.

The Twelveth Book.
ARGUMENT.
Iphigenes to content Liante seems to solicit Amiclea in his behalf. His
Speeches to Her, Liante standing behind the Hangings in the same Chamber. Her
sharp Replies. Liante's fury at Her slights. Iphigenes and Amiclea's endeavors
to appease his Rage. Liante, transported with Love, contracts with Her Parents
to marry Amiclea contrary to Her Will or Knowledge. Her Sister Oloria informs
Her, and She acquaints Iphigenes with these Proceedings. Iphigenes falls
desperately Sick with Grief for Liante's unkindness to Him, and his obstinate
Research of Amiclea. The Politic Boleslaus, under pretense of being an
Apothecary, conveye's himself into the Castle with the King's Physicians that
came to attend the Prisoner. Iphigenes after a passionate Declaration of his
Distemper, swounds in Boleslaus Arms. His perplexity, and Invention to assuage
the Palatine's sorrow. To disabuse Liante and withdraw his affection from
Amiclea, He discovers the whole Mystery of Iphigenes Birth, Education and
Passion for Him. Liante's astonishment at this Relation, with his Speeches to
Boleslaus. The Amazement, and Joy of Iphigenes upon Boleslaus assurance of
Liante's mutual flames. Boleslaus brings Liante to Iphigenes Chamber. Their
Passionate Deportments at this interview. Their perfect Reconciliation. Their
Plot to cheat the Eyes as well of Amiclea and Oloria as the rest. Olavius in
hope to match his Daughter to Iphigenes, disposes the Lithuaninans to an
accommodation. Iphigenes receives a Commission from the King to treat with
them. Mieslas, during the Treaty, endeavors to intercept Liante at his return
into the City. The Policy and Resolution of Iphigenes to defend Him. Next day
He is stayed, and accused of Treason by his enraged Father. Mieslas to break
off the Treaty, and entrap L'ante (if he sallied) gave out that He would
execute Iphigenes with his own hand as a Traitor. Liante with a strong Party of
Lithuanians rescues the supposed Iphigenes, takes Mieslas Prisoner. Amiclea to
release or revenge her beloved Iphigenes, in a suit of Polemander's Armor
sallies among the rest, is taken by the Royalists, and given by the General to
Iphigenes. He returns with his Shee-Champion to Minsce; Excuses her
disguisement to Olavius and her Mother. Receives a Plenipotentiary power from
the King to agree with the Lithuanians: The Pastimes during the Treaty.
Liante's Grace and re-establishment is included in the Articles. The Peace
concluded, Iphigenes is sent for to the Court: Is magnificently received by the
King. He obtains Liante's pardon, and re-instates him in the King's favor. The
King offers his Sister Florimunda in Marriage to Iphigenes in satisfaction of
his acceptable services. His modest refusal. The Queen's importunity to effect
that Alliance. His seeming consent and resignation to their Majesty's Commands.
Iphigenes discovers to the King in private the whole secret of his Birth,
Education and Affection to Liante; Implores his assistance for the
accomplishment of his desires. Their Plot to stop the Rumor of his Marriage to
Florimunda, and suppress her Passion, by reporting that He was impotent. The
Princess Respicia's distempers at this News, and Her endeavors to make good
Her Dispensation. Modestina and Aretuza are sent for to the Court. The fears of
the later, the Jealousy and passionate Expressions of the other against
Respicia. The Palatine of Minsce brings his two Daughters to Court, challenging
Iphigenes and Liante of their promise to marry them. The King opposes his
authority to their pretentions, makes Mieslas condescend to give Liante one of
his Daughters. He produces a concealed one named Virgenia or Iphigenia. The
contestation of Modestina, Respicia and Amiclea for Iphigenes. The King
appoints a day for hearing, and undertakes to content them all by his Award.
His speech to the Queen and Assembly, while Virgenia (dressed like a Bride) is
conveyed into a private Gallery, and Liante reassumes the form of Almeria.
Boleslaus by the King's command brings forth Iphigenes sumptuously apparelled
in Man's clothes, Leading Liante in a Woman's. Their Deportments and Speeches
to the Assembly. The several censures of the Spectatours. The Archbishop
declares Iphigenes Marriage to Modestina void: Affiance's him to Almeria. The
destemper of Mieslas at this sight. They retire and change Clothes. The King's
private Discourse with the three Pretendants in mean time. Liante by the King's
command reenters the Stage in Man's apparel with the real Iphigenes attired
like the supposed Iphigenia. They are publicly contracted. Mieslas is deceived
in his own Daughter. The Queen's and Infanta's discourse concerning the
betrothed Couples. His Majesty's grave Speech to the Assembly, unfoulding the
secret of Iphigenes Birth. The amazement of the Hearers. Miesias fury against
Liante is turned to Joy and Kindness. The King appoints a day to celebrate
their Marriage with magnificent solemnities. Iphigenes, more in favor than
ever, Marries and advances all his Friends and Attendants. Liante's Dignities
increase proportionably to the favor his Wife procured him. Their life at the
Court. The Moscovians invade Polonia. Mieslas, by his Daughter's means is made
Lieutenant General. Ambition incites Liante to assist in that Expedition; Love
and Honor forbid Iphigenia's stay behind him. Their Gallantry in the Battle.
Mieslas is slain; The General dies; That Charge is conferred upon the two
Favorites. The Triumphs that were made them at their return to Court. Liante
is re-instated in his Inheritance, and made Lord high Marshall of Polonia.
Cassin, Pomeran and the rest are Honorably rewarded by His Majesty, for their
valorous deportments in his Service.

THis distance and coffeehouse having continued for some days, the
inamoured Prisoner, desiring to leave nothing unattempted to Conquer Liante's
Heart, sent to beg a visit of him. Courtesy, so natural to persons of Noble
birth, permitted him not to refuse so small a favor to so great a friend;
Besides, the hope he had that Iphigenes, repenting himself for having thwarted
his design, might happily assist him in the purchase of Amiclea's Love,
induced him to satisfy his desire.

Being come into the presence of him, whom he had so dearly loved, and so
much disobliged, touched with a thousand remerses, he had not the confidence
to invisage him. Iphigenes, perceiving the perplexity, and trouble in his
thoughts, by the changing of colors in his Frace, after many passionate
Reproaches and Complaints against his ingratitude, said; You foster an Opinion
as I would have dissuaded you from the Alliance with Amiclea, that I do hinder
her from consenting to the Marriage proposed betwixt her and you. If I make you
see and hear the contrary of your Error, what can you allege for your excuse?
But to speak verities to one that is incredulous, is to sow good Grain on an
infertile Ground.

I am not so wedded to incredulity (replied Liante) as not to believe what I
see and hear; but you must pardon me if I have no Faith in your last words,
since they are directly contrary to your former, from which (if you remember) I
could gather no other sense, than that you would hinder Amiclea, to the utmost
of your power, from giving her consent to make me her Husband.

I is true (said Iphigenes) that if I did by the least compliance bewraye an
inclination to answer the Love, (which you cannot but perceive she bears
me) it would be a sufficient Remora to stay the Vessel of your Designs,
were it going full-saile upon the Sea of the fairest hopes that could be
imagined. But if I have never amused her in her pretentions; if I have been to
her Ears a perpetual Advocate pleading the Cause of your Merits, before the
tribunal of her Heart; if without cease she has rejected my persuasions, not
so much for the affection she bear's me as the aversion she has to you;
aversion which is changed into horror, since she has understood that with
her consent, or by force you have boasted to obtain the possession of her, and
that it is impossible for her to avoid being married to you; if I have always
endeavored to rebate the edge of her indignation, and moderate her bitterness
against your proccedings: In sum, if I have stripped my self of all the right I
might pretend in her to invest you with Her affections, where will you find a
Face to blush enough at the indignities, which you have not only made my
Innocence suffer, but wherewith you requite the Services I have rendered you? Of
all this it is easy for me to give an invincible proof, if you do but take
order that Amiclea may come to see me, and if you have the patience to see and
hear, what she will say, when she think's you absent, and you stand hid
behind the Tapistry: But I have something else to communicate to you more
serious than these fopperies of Love, which ought at least to give some respite
to Men's Spirits in such times of trouble.

It is true the King wages War against you very gently, upon the hopes that I
have given him of mediating, in time, a good agreement that may spare the Blood
of his Subjects: you have indeed occasion and some reason to amuse your
thoughts with that Passion, which is the employment of those that have nothing
else to do (during this kind of cessation of Arms) but to busy their wits
with the ordinary exercise of Gentlemen in times of Peace; which is, to make
Love. Now, as I will not hinder you from this, so I entreat you by all that
can oblige a generous Spirit, by the reverence which you owe to your Sovereign,
by the care of your particular Fortune, by the advancement of the public good,
I would add by the Friendship which you have born me (if there remained any
spark unquench't of that sacred fire) that you would not oppose any obstacle
to the Treaty, which I pretend to make by the Commandment, and for the service
of His Majesty with the Lithuanians. Let us, like those two great Captains of
Greece, who being Enemies deposed their private grudges to succor their
Country by a Friendly intelligence. And although, for my part, I protest, I
have not any Gall against you; however your Heart is to me, you ought for your
Countrie's good to contribute your assistance, unless you will contract the
stain of an impiety, that will render you odious to God and Man. If this
difference be but reconciled, let your rigor execute upon me afterward all
that your umbragious or Choleric humor can suggest; I will have no better
destiny, than what is spun by your hands, nor survive the loss of your
affection.

I Doubt not that your principal intent (said Liante) is to procure the
agreement betwixt Lithuania and Polonia, ( an enterprise which I exceedingly
commend, so it be conducted with Sincerity and Judgment, and for which I
would willingly employ my Blood and Life, it being (in my opinion) the richest
Monument a Man can crect for himself, to die for the repose and safety of his
Country:) But why cannot you perform that public Office, without traversing
the particular inclinations I have for Amiclea, as if that alliance imported
any thing to the service of His Majesty, or the Public? If it please you to
assist me in the one, I promise you to contribute my best endeavors for the
advancement of the other.

Then Liante having put Iphigenes in mind of his promise to let him hear the
persuasions wherewith he would mollify Amiclea's Heart, and induce her to
embrace his Affection; Iphigenes renewed his engagement to him. Whereupon leave
being obtained of Olavius for her to visit the Prisoner, Liante repaired
joyfully to the place appointed, to see the Despair of his pretensions.

This Sentinel was no sooner set, but Amiclea (who had already received
intimation privately from Iphigenes of the Design) being come into the
Chamber, after the ordinary Civilities, He entertained her with this
discourse: Madam, all the ill treatment you see me suffer in this place
proceeds only from an opinion crept into Liante's fancy, that I hindered you
from Marrying him; you know in what terms I have always represented to you
the merits of that Gentleman, and that to divert you from the Passion which you
are pleased to express toward me, I declared the impediments that debarred
me from acknowledging so great a favor in such manner as my devoir and
Courtesy would oblige me to, if I were free. Therefore I beseech you to quit
the desire of a person, who cannot lawfully be yours, and apply your Heart to
him, whom your Parents have designed you, and who so perfectly honor you, that
I believe nothing can be added to the greatness of his affection. I am incited
to make you this request, by the ancient Friendship, which from my infancy I
have contracted with Liante, the selicity I wish you and (if I may dare to make
this addition) the desire I have of moderating my restraint.

Seigneur Palatine ( answered Amiclea,) you are a better Friend than faithful
Lover; I have told you so many times that it is as impossible for me to lodge
Liante in my Heart, as displace you; you continue deaf to my Complaints, yet
you would have me be exorable to his; you are too blame to condemn me for a
fault which you authorize in your self, and persuade me by your words what
your Example disswade's. For, if you will not receive me into your Affection,
for some weak reasons wherewith you oppose my importunities, why should not I
defend my self from his alliance for many good and powerful ones, which I have
so often inculcated to you? I know not with what Antipathy Nature has imbued
my Soul against him, but however I strive to compel my humonr, I can see
nothing in him that pleases me. And what probability is there then, that I
should render my self to the violence whereby he pretends to force me to a
consentment? He deceive's himself if he think's to win me that way; For, in
stead of attracting my affection he will incense my hatred; But in d^sobliging
he has obliged me, for by letting me understand his jealous d^sposition
before I was any way engaged to him, he give's me timely warning not to
contraot my self to a Man, from whom I can expect nothing but Tyranny. What? He
styles me His Mistress, yet he would ah easy treat me like a slive, and impose
upon me Laws not according to Reason, but his humor. If he desire's that I
should participate of that ardour, which he saye's he indure's for me; Does he
not see by that foolish rule, that he will oblige me to cherish all those that
shall but seem to Love me? He would have me Love him, but not you; indeed a
pertinent injunction; if he conceit's that he deserve's Love more than you,
why will he constrain my Liberty? Have not I more reason to desire him not to
Love me, (in regard I have no inclination to him) and suffer me to Honor you
since I Love not my own thoughts, but when they entertain Me with the agreeable
Representation of your Merits? Does he think thus to inthrall the Liberties of
Persons, who are nothing inferior to himself, and already take upon him the
severe Authority of an imperious Husband, in stead of keeping himself in the
respects of an observant Lover? I know not whence can proceed those thoughts;
neither, if he should persuade himself that his services ought to oblige me to
be his, do I know that he has rendered me any so remarkable as deserve my
Liberty for recompense. If his Sighs, his Tears and Complaints, which are as
many importunities to me, are taken for current payment, it is not at the rate
of such slight things (and which are but Water and Wind) that I will purchase
to my self a slavery. He has often told me that his Life depended so upon the
possession of me, that without it he should die; but I do so abhor him since I
have discovered his humor, that I will rather marry a Grave than engage my
Faith to him.

But said Iphigenes, since he love's you so excessively, you cannot without
ingratitude do less than give him your Heart in exchange for his, which he
has remitted into your hands. I cannot give an Heart that is not mine,
answered Amiclea, and (what Friendship soever there is betwixt you) take that
from you which is yours by my Free-gift, to give it him; it is easier for me
to return him his own, which I never entertained though he offered it often; or
at least entreat him to take it again, and bestow it on some other Subject
more fit than I am to support his Tyrannies. You know (replied Iphigenes) that
the Law of Gentlemen permit's not any generous Spirits to play the supplanters
to their Friends, and that Liante being the first pretender to your Service, I
may not embrace that Design until he has quitted it, or that you have quite
broken with him.

As for the first (said Amiclea,) it depend's on him, and I know not (he is so
obstinate in his own mischief) whether he will let go that which he hold's
but by imagination; The second is fully resolved on for my part: For, I have
desired him so many times not to importune me any more with his Tears and
Sighs, that I know not what pleasure he take's to Shipwreck his Vows so often
against a Rock that laugh's at his Disasters. In a word, whatsoever You can say
or He do, I will never be his in Body nor Mind. I have not so little
courage, but that I know the way to set a period to my Life, when I shall
perceive it worse than a thousand Deaths.

After diverse other Speeches to the same effect, Iphigenes said, Madam, let me
entreat you to quit that resolution so cruel to him, and so unpleasing to me;
Unpleasing to me, out of the sorrow I conceive, because I cannot answer your
Affection as I would: And cruel to him, because I know if this news come's to
his Ears, it will be the message of Death.

Imagine you with what perplexities the afflicted Liante heard from the Mouth
of his Mortal Goddess the sentence of his condemnation: with what reproaches
did he not charge her Severity in his Mind, yet he loved her never the less;
on the contrary her Cruelty and Ingratitude like two whet-stones sharpened his
Passion, and rendered it more fervent. At length being no longer able to
sustein the violence of his distemper contrary to the promise he had made
Iphigenes not to appear, he left his Post in fury, and (his Eyes overflowed
with Tears, and his Heart swelled with Sobb's) he cast himself at Amiclea's
feet, at the same instant as she had taken Iphigenes Hand and was raising it
to to her Lips. This Action with the discourse he heard had almost transported
him beyond the bounds of respect: At last having obtained some truce of his
Passion, he disburthened his mind in these words.

Since after so many fruitless Sighs for having been the faithfullest of
Lovers, I am paid with ingratitude by one, whose Heart I never thought capable
of such a Vice, and for having offended the Heavens by honoring too
religiously a Creature, I feel the punishment of my Idolatry in her disowning
me: Since the Respects and Services which I have rendered her are held
Offenses: Since I am betrayed by him in whom I reposed my greatest confidence,
and despised by her whom I esteemed most, what do I more in this Life, unless
it be to prolong the insolences of Fortune, who is never weary of persecuting
me? Cruel AMICLEA, more hard than the Rocks, more deaf than the Sea, less
exorable than Death, finish, finish thy work pierce with the point of this
blade (offering her his Poniard) this wretched Body, which thou so hate, and
send away that Soul which is so importunate and irksome to thee. I shall esteem
this last Office an Act of Pity, and to make appear that thy disdain is less
supportable to me than Death, thou shall see me honor the Effect of thy
Cruelty to the last Moment of my Life.

Amiclea (although she had been advertised of his being hid in the room,) was
however so troubled at his presence, and so frighted to see him in that
desperate posture, that her voice cleaving to the Palate of her Mouth, she was
not able to frame an answer. Iphigenes fearing, lest she refusing to take that
Weapon, Liante's fury might transport him to plunge it in his own bosom,
presently seized upon his Arm, to wrest that murtherous blade out of his hand.
Liante seeing Iphigenes disarming him, If that Lady (said he, looking on
Amiclea with an Eye full of Love and Anger) has not the courage to advance the
term of my miserable Life, cut thou (if thou have ever loved me) the Thread of
my Days; and since thou have robbed me of my Heart, where all my hopes were
seated, make an End of thy Felony by Ending Me.

Guess you if these furious words which the extremity of grief forced out of
Liante's Mouth, were not sufficient to draw tears from the tender Iphigenes
Eyes. Amiclea being recovered of her amazement, to appease the fury of that
mad Lover, resolved to use him more gently, and, with a more pleasing tone,
show him how much he was too blame in suffering himself to be so transported
with Passion: But as Medicines are useless to those whose Diseases are
incurable, or who are not disposed to receive them: So Despair had so stopped us
all the advenues of Reason in Liante's Soul, that he thought there was no
other way but through the Gate of Death, to get out of his inconsolable torment.

I should be too tedious if I stood to relate the diverse arguments, whereby
Iphigenes and Amiclea endeavored to appease the frantic transportments of his
Mind. But sometimes vomiting Blasphemies against Heaven; Sometimes tearing the
Earth with Execrations; Sometimes cursing himself; Sometimes quarrelling with
Providence; Sometimes accusing Amiclea, and then craving her Pardon; Sometimes
reviling Iphigenes, then condemning his own rash Judgment, He did and said
such things as are more fit to be wrapped up in silence, than displayed upon
this Paper; and which made evidently appear that if Anger be a short Fury,
Love is a pure Folly. At length having received from Amiclea no word of
consolation that might preserve his Hope in that tempest of Rage that assailed
his thoughts, after no mean contention with Himself, he went out of the
Chamber, in the same manner as an enraged Bull breake's through the Ranks of
those that see him baited, invoking Heaven and Earth to assist him in a Revenge.

Soon after Liante's departure Amiclea was called away by her Governess, who
attended her in the next room; Iphigenes being left alone had his thoughts so
divided betwixt the interests of Love and Honor, that his pains, exceeding the
bounds of any expression, cast him into a languishing indisposition, which
within few days rendered him so feeble, that he was enforced to confine his
distressed body to his Bed: where he appeared with such advantage, that his
sickness seemed to have cast him down, the more to raise the luster of his
Beauty; which being then betwixt Pity and Envy ravished those Souls that had
not rendered themselves before to Passion. The Ladies (who were as if they had
been chained to his Bed-stead) strove to outvy each other in inventing remedies
for his Body, and divertisements for his Mind: And the Palatines, both of
Minsce and Troc, came frequently to visit him, promising to give him all the
contentments he could desire of their Courtesy.

Mean time Liante gaping still after his Prey, resolved to have Amiclea, though
against her Will, not to give himself the Lie; founding his determination upon
this belief, that Time would bring all things to perfection, and that which was
forced in the beginning, might be made willing in the End. Her Father had
already given him his word, and was much displeased that the obstinacy of his
Daughter should oppose his Promise and Authority. By Polemander's means he
gained likewise the Mother's consent, who thinking him an advantageous Match
for her Daughter, made no account of her contradiction. The Contract was agreed
on without Amiclea's knowledge, but being informed of all the passages by
Oloria (whom Despair had almost distracted) she comforted her with this
assurance, that she would never consent to marry Liante, nor any other until
She were provided; which somewhat qualified her jealous Sister's pain.

Amiclea was not long before she gave Iphigenes notice of those proceedings,
which gave so furious an assault to his debilitated Heart, that increasing the
violence of his Fever, the Physicians began to distrust his Recovery. This
news was presently noised in the Camp, and thence carried to the Court; and
that which the Lithuanians most feared (which was a suspicion that he had been
poisoned by them) was the first impression His Majesty's mind received.
Whereupon he sent them Letters, more bloody than Tamberlan's Crimson Flag; To
which they returned their Excuses and Protestations of innocence; But Poison is
not purged by Oaths, and those who are so abominable as to pracise such
baseness, make no great scruple of being perjured.

The King presently dispatched his own Physicians and Surgeons with command to
attend the Person of Iphigenes. They were very civilly received by the besieged
Party, as had already been those whom the General and Mieslas had sent from
the Camp. Boleslaus, who was touched with a more then Fatherly tenderness for
his dear Foster-Child, found means to slip himself in amongst the Physicians,
feining that he was an Apothecary. The Physicians in their Consultations found
that Iphigenes Body was not prisoned, but their Learning did not reach so far
as to read the Disease of his Mind.

They being retired, when Boleslaus appeared before the Patient's Eyes, already
clouded in the shade of Death, they received some vigor; and his Spirits as it
were, wakening out of the slumber wherewith Passion and Mellancholly had
oppressed them, his Tongue loosened it self to utter with a faint and almost
dying voice these words. Father, I bless the Heavens who have sent you hither
(as a Tutelary Angel) to render me the last devoirs as of your officious
Piety I have received the first; your Arms which have heretofore served me as
a Cradle, must shortly do me the office of a Biere; for, I can no longer
support the Sorrow that destroye's me. I have nothing else to recommend to you
but the Care of my Honor, which I have always maintained inviolable in
despite of those mischiefs that have persecuted me, Be sure that the Earth
may cover my Secret with my Body, since I have chosen to die rather than
disclose it. Since that I die before the time which your Prudence had
determined to discover it, I applaud the Providence of him under whose will run
all the Moments of our Life. For, to survive the loss of Liante's Friendship,
is a thing which I cannot do if I would, and which I will not do though I could.

Here Tears, Weakness and Grief stopped the passage of his voice, and he fell
into a Trance, out of which it cost some time to recover him. Imagine you how
Boleslaus was afflicted seeing him in so great Extremities, and knowing so
little whence proceeded this indisposition. At length having settled his dear
Nursling in a little better temper as well of Body as Mind, and desiring him
to let him understand the ground of his Disease: Father (said Iphigenes) Let
me die in silence, and do you only have a care of that Honor after my Death,
whereof you have been so jealous during my Life.

The discreet old Man knowing with whom he was to deal, and that Iphigenes
loved not to be press't, feined to resolve to die with him, as not having the
Heart to behold the Day after the loss of him, whose consideration made him
love its light.

Iphigenes, moved with Pity at the old Man's tenderness, to hinder him from
dying, seemed to re-affect the desire of Living; and, to unload his Heart of
that sad burden which oppress't it, he took the pains to relate him every
particular that had passed since his imprisonment, and how he had voluntarily
made himself be taken, as is already mentioned. By which Discourse Boleslaus
seeing clear to the bottom of his Soul, and reading there the Cause of his
distemper: Take courage (said he) we shall not die of this sickness, if we
will be ruled by good advice.

Father (answered Iphigenes) when things are desperate, it is no time to
consult but to suffer: It will be easier and better for me to die, since I am
already so near it, than re-enter into a thousand Deaths by recovering my
Health. Liante's Heart being dead to me, I have nothing more to do in this
mortal Life. After Boleslaus had used diverse arguments to persuade Iphigenes
to banish the ungrateful Liante out of his thoughts, as unworthy of the favor
of his Affection, He answered, Father, do not increase my torment with
vilifying him whom my Soul honors; For, notwithstanding all your allegations
and his unkind usage, I cannot divert the inclinations of my Heart, nor change
the resolution of Loving him, but by losing my Life. Therefore if you love me
(as I have no reason to doubt) and if you will oblige me to love you yet more
(if it be possible) I beseech you go without delay to him, and conjure him not
to fly from Iphigenes, who would seek and run after him, if his Sickness did
not fetter him. Tell him that if I had contracted with him but a common
acquaintance, Civility would oblige him to visit me, much more since he is
cause of this extremity, whereunto I am reduced. Tell him I quit him of the
Promise he made me to restore me my Liberty, when I committed my self into
his hands; That I will not constrein him to quit Amiclea; That I will rather
take upon me the care of soliciting against my self his Marriage with her;
And that he would vouchsafe only to see me, and close my Eyes, that, with
the favor of Heaven, I may likewise die in his. Hereunto I pray, good Father,
study no Excuses nor Replies, if you desire that I should Live.

Boleslaus, who knew the Palatine's humor, promised a punctual performance of
his commands, adding for his comfort, that by the long experience he had of
Liante's Disposition, he doubted not to render him more flexible and sensible
of his torment. And then having dexterously taken his time, Dear Child (said
he) since you have so changed into Nature this Love, that it is become an
accident inseparable to your Being, by undertaking to preserve your Life, I
will also aim at the preservation of your affection; and since I find you
cannot live content without Liante, I must use some invention to reduce that
Heart into your power.

At these words you would have thought Iphigenes had been raised again out of
the Grave; or at least that he resembled a dainty Flower too much beaten with
the Sun's Rays, which re-take's new vigor by the coolness of the Dew. In a
word, Iphigenes was a Woman, and among so many Heroic virtues which she
possess't, the Natural inclination of that Sex to curiosity could not be
extinguished in Her.

The subtle Senior perceiving it, made himself be entreated a while; at
length, after many circumstances, he said, Child, it is no time to spare when
a Man is come to the last penny of his stock. The last thing we must do in
this World is to die; to prevent that Check, and prolong that fatal hour,
nothing ought to be left unattempted. When you would have discovered your self
to Liante in the Forest of Plocens, you were pressed only with a temptation;
Now you are constrained by necessity. You will say that the remedy is not yet
in season, and that it will be the ruin of your Fortunes: If you die, your
Fortunes will be otherwise lost; after Death, Physic is of no use. You will
allege this remedy is very hard to digest, and I will answer you that pain is
cured by pain, there is no Medicine but is unpleasant; yet to avoid Death you
must neither spare searing nor incisions. You will reply that the apple is now
much less ripe than at that time, in regard Liante is filled with Gall, not
inflamed with Love; then I must tell you, that to quench a Fire People carry
Water, and Diseases are cured by their contraries. It is now time or never to
open Liante's Eyes, and make him see how much he is to be blamed for
entertaining any suspicious or jealous thought of you, Nature having opposed
the obstacles you know of to the pretensions, which he believ's you have for
Amiclea. In sum, I will manage this discovery with such circumspection, that
there can arrive no damage to you; For, in sparing you the shame of telling it
(the only Subject of all your Sorrow) I will leave you in the power of denying
that truth, and rendering ridiculous those that should offer to mention it. At
first I will sound Liante by Enigma's, Circumlocutions and Figures; and
according as I shall find him bite at that bait, I shall know how to draw him
to the Bank; but before I unveile the whole Mystery to him, I will oblige him
by such horrible Oaths to keep it secret, that if he should have a desire to
reveal it, he cannot without fearing a punishment of Thunder from the Hand of
the King of Heaven.

All this Discourse was so many words of Life to the distressed Iphigenes; and,
if an Angel had spoken to him, he could not have heard him with more joy and
attention than he did Boleslaus. Then (pricked with curiosity) saying, But
how? The old Man stopped his Mouth with this answer: A Man must never say, I
will do this, or I will say that, and in such a manner I will conduct my
Design by reason of the incertainty of Events; and the obscurities wherein the
Future is involved; But when things have had a good issue, one may say, I have
done this, and my design succeeded thus. I will do nothing but what you shall
know, yet give me a little liberty, and permit that in imitation of most
discreet People, I may do somewhat before I speak. And be assured that this old
Man (whom Experience has no less improved than Age rendered hoary in your
service) has some Masterpieces of subtilty which he employe's not but upon
great occasion; and that he who delivered you out of the Prison in the Forest,
and freed you from the Claws of those Harpyes, will also draw you out of this
Mire, if you will follow his Advice with Patience, and resolve to further your
own Recovery.

This said, Boleslaus went to put in execution his Design, which succeeded to
his wish; but not without much trouble, many subtle inventions, and at length
a full relation from beginning to end of Iphigenes Birth and Education, as has
already been described; whereby he made Liante see as clear as the Day the
reasons that had retarded Iphigenes in the discovery of that Miracle, his
design to declare it first to the King, that His Majesty might see how false
and impertinent had been the Calumny of his Enviers, and (being re-established
in his favor) the resolution he had to invest Liante in the possession of all
his charges and estate, by giving himself to him according to the sacred order
of Matrimony.

This transported Liante with such astonishment for a while, that he knew not
whether he was a sleep or waking; yet the serious deportments of the grave
Boleslaus, made him give credit to this Story, and this belief was perfectly
confirmed, when he repassed through his Memory all the tokens of Love rather
than Friendship, that he had remarked in Iphigenes, his carriage to him in his
Infancy, his chaste deportments at the Court, his continual contempt of Women,
his incomparable Beauty, his passionate expressions of affection to him in the
Forest of Plocens, while the one acted Serife, the other Almeria; besides,
diverse other Caresses, Wishes, Sighs, Languors, and such like demeanours, the
sparkles of that Fire which can as little be concealed as avoided.

Oh Liante, what glory after so many pains! He that has long been kept in
darkness, coming on a sudden into the Sun is in a manner blind, the Light,
which make's every one else see, depriving him of sight: So Liante, though he
held as true as Oracles, all that Boleslaus had told him, yet he remained as
void of Speech and Motion as one that is incredulous or stupid. The entrance of
his Heart was too narrow to let in at once the throng of affections, that
thrust and crowded to be introduced; the multitude of thoughts quelled him;
the Honors and greatness proposed to him by that Party were above his
Ambition, and beyond his Hopes; his own Patrimony, usurped by Mieslas, seemed
nothing to him; But above all, the so many attractive Charms, wherewith Nature
had enriched Iphigenes Face, was the Primum Mobile that transported him. Adding
thereunto so many rare virtues, so many singular qualities, such Courage, and
Valor, which Dexterity in all generous exercises, and chiefly such exemplary
Piety, as rendered him the delight of all those that accosted him, filled him
with the Benedictions of Heaven and Earth, begat him an high renown, with the
King's favor; which doubtless would be redoubled at the discovery of this
Marvel; Oh Liante, what transportments? Then reflecting his consideration upon
himself, he could not imagine that he had merit enough to oblige Iphigenes to
so constant a Friendship, as that, which he had always expressed toward him,
loving him from the tenderest of his years with such sweetness and cordiality;
after this, returned to his Memory how compassionately in all his troubles he
bare a share of his sorrows; how he always maintained his cause against his
own Father; conveyed him out of Prison; secured him from the dangers wherewith
the Cruelty of Mieslas threatened him; so courteously entertained him in his
Palatinate; had given him his Life in the Combat; voluntarily rendered himself
a Prisoner to enjoy the contentment of his conversation; and besides all this,
the extreme and admirable Modesty, that made him resolve to die rather than
speak one word, which he thought too bold for a Soul to utter, that make's
profession of Honor, with a numberless multitude of other Virtues, which
glittered in that matchless personage like Stars in a serene Night.

Whilst Liante's brain was agitated with a thousand such imaginations,
Boleslaus reading the convulsions of his Mind by the alterations in his Face,
knew not however in what manner he resented what he had told him, and whether
he conceived it right or wrong, (whereon depended his Life or Death, and, what
was yet more dear, the contentment or ruin of Iphigenes) until Liante
breaking the silence of his long amazement thus began; Friend, I am like a
Glass or Bottle with a narrow mouth, which being too full of liquor cannot
discharge itself. My Spirits are so ravished and over whelmed with the
transportments of Joy and Wonder at the recital of so great a Marvel, that
although I see my self awake, and believe what you tell me, yet methink's I
Dream, or am possessed with the fondest imagination that e're disturbed a
Brain. At length after condemning his own demerits, and comparing them with the
excellencies of Iphigenes, he continued saying Dear Boleslaus, I prithee
mollify that Hbroick courage for me, which ought justly to be offended with my
Levities, indiscretion and ingratitude, to the end, according to the
Dispositions you shall find in that generous Soul, I may at least endeavor by
my Death to express the remorse I now conceive for having so ill ordered my
Life, and so unworthily abused his Friendship.

If you stay till you are killed by one that love's you more than himself, you
will live to a fair Age (said Boleslaus) his desire is to see you Live
contented, not Die with displeasure; and assure your self that as his Love was
always greater than your Injuries, so your Transgressions are less than his
Clemency.

The variety of thoughts that mustered in Iphigenes mind, whilst Boleslaus
was carrying this Message (whose report was the sentence of his Life or Death)
I must leave to your imaginations; Neither am I able to relate the Anxieties of
Liante's mind, whilst that trusty Agent flew toward Iphigenes, to tell him
in a jesting manner (...), that Liante took all his Discourse for Enchantments,
that he rejected all He had told him of his Birth and Education as a thing no
less incredible than improbable.

At which Narration Iphigenes, ready to expire with grief, said; Father, I
would to God my Death had preceded this news; Oh! why did not I descend alive
into my Grave? Hereat Boleslaus clearing the clouds of his Countenance, and
bursting into a laughter, said, I told you thus only to try your constancy;
take courage, the Victory is our's; I bring you Liante more gentle than a Lamb,
he com's to present his throat to your hand that you may Sacrifice him to your
Revenge. He believe's all that I have told; him only the despair of obtaining
pardon for his ingratitude to you, hindering him from coming to demand it in
person, he has made me his Ambassador. Then having related every particular
passage betwixt him and Liante, and disposed Iphigenes to receive him, He
presently went to conduct him into the Prisoner's Chamber.

Liante was so sensible of having disobliged so admirable a constancy as that
of Iphigenes, that he approacht his Bed with no less throbbing of Heart and
confusion of thoughts, than if he had been going to receive the punishment of
some heinous Crime: And shame raised tumults not much less disorderly in
Iphigenes mind, seeing himself necessitated to acknowledge what he had so long
kept from the World's notice.

He that had beheld the penctentiall tears of the one, and the modest blushes
of the other, would have thought he had seen red Roses impearled with the dew
of Heaven. I had rather confess my ignorance than imbark my self in the
relation of Passions, which must be consigned to Silence, since he that would
express their mutual satisfactions must be transformed into the Resentments
of their Souls. Those two Hearts opened themselves so perfectly to each other
in the presence of the Old Man, Depositary of all their thoughts, that there
remained nothing that might oppose the perfection of their chaste Love. There
full reparations were made by Liante, and his Excuses received by Iphigenes:
There absolute Remissions cast all offenses into Oblivion; There Iphigenes
charging herself with one part of the fault for having concealed her Secret so
long from her dear Liante, and Liante accusing himself to excuse Iphigenes,
bred a sweet contention which pacified all other quarrels. There were made all
the Promises, and plighted all the Faiths necessary to swear an inviolable
Fidelity. There Suspicions, Diffidence, Vmbrages, Choler, and all other
Failings were so buried, that the wounds left only scarrs in show that they
had been.

In conclusion, to hide the blazing of this mutual Fire from other's view, it
was decreed in their secret Council (whereof Boleslaus was the President) that
Liante feining not to desire to force Amiclea's will, should seem to have cured
himself of her Contempt by Despite, and turn his affection toward Oloria, in
compassion of her Sufferings, and for consideration of her Constancy rather
than her Beauty. As for Iphigenes (all Obstacles and Scruples being now taken
away) It was judged convenient that he should make open profession of
caressing and serving Amiclea, not without some handsomely contrived inventions
for the deferring his re-search until the treaty of Peace was concluded. And
to render their Design less perceptible, they added this industry, That Liante
should continue in his dissatisfaction of Iphigenes, and (although absolutely
free from Passion for Amiclea) should however still make a show of Jealousy,
at least of Envy and Choler against him, as having robbed him of that Lady's
Heart, which he pretended.

As they resolved, so was it executed: Insomuch that Oloria became no less
contented to see him (who had so much despised her) make his addresses to her,
than Amiclea to see herself delivered of his importunities, just as she was
upon the point of rendering herself to the imperious compulsion of her Parents.
But when she knew it was to give Iphigenes the place, whose mutual Love was
the height of her Desires, you may imagine, in that condition, if she could
refrain from telling her Mother (Iphigenes having enjoined her to keep it
secret, purposely that she should divulge it;) and her Mother, being a Woman,
could not hold long from acquainting her Husband, which raised his thoughts to
the Skies, being carried upon the Wings of the Hope he conceived to have the
Favorite of Polonia for his Son-in-Law.

This imagination contributed not a little to the advancement of the King's
service, and the public Peace. For Olavius having great credit in the
Lithuanian Party, induced them to submit to diverse of the King's Demands,
desiring to conclude the Peace, that those alliances might be brought to
perfection.

Whilst our Lovers swam in the contentment of their reciprocal affections,
the World, which, like the Sea, has nothing more constant than its
inconstancy, and whose most fair days are the least certain, prepared them an
horrible Tempest. The King, at the return of his Physicians, being informed of
Iphigenes recovery, dispatched Deputies from his Council to the Camp, with a
Commission to Iphigenes to treat with them and the principal Officers of his
Army, concerning an agreement with the Lithuanians, and the general Peace.
Hereupon there was a Cessation of Arms on both sides, seconded by a Truce for
certain days; during which time those of the Besieger's Army went freely into
Minsce, and the Besieged had liberty to go into the Camp, or where else they
listed. Iphigenes, with the Commissioners of the Lithuanians, going daily into
the Camp to treat with the King's Officers, had advanced their affairs to such
a forwardness as promised an happy conclusion: But when they came to the
Article, that concerned the re-establishment of Liante in his Estate,
endeavoring to content the Palatine of Podolia (who could not be persuaded to
that restitution) by means of an alliance betwixt that young Nobleman and one
of his Daughters, the furious Sarmatian refusing to consent to either,
re-entertained in his brutall Mind the desire of executing upon Liante that
barbarous Design we have already mentioned, and which cannot be rehearsed
without shame. For this effect he set his Engines on work, who were not so
secret in the Conduct of their business, but Iphigenes had notice of their
proceedings; And being informed that contrary to the public Faith this
enterprise was to be attempted at his retreat into Minsce, (where as being a
Prisoner he was obliged to render himself every Night) he implored the
General of the King's Armie's succor to hinder that violence. Which was
effected according to his desire, Liante being retired into the Castellain of
Cracovia's Quarters, who in despite of Mieslas ambushes caused him to be
safely convoyed into Minsce, Iphigenes still accompanying him, with a
resolution to treat his own Father like an Enemy, if he had come to assault
them. This so enraged Mieslas, that the next day he resolved to be revenged
of his Son; therein not much unlike an irritated Mastif, who bite's the stone
not being able to reach him that threw it. And in effect when he thought to
return, after the Assembly, according to his Custom into the City, Mieslas
seized on him, saying, that as a perfidious Traitor to the King and Public,
he would sacrifice him to Example, and like a brutall and unnatural Brutus
make him die by his own hands in the view of the whole Army. Iphigenes who knew
that such an execution could not be done without the forms of Justice, and
besides feeling himself innocent, submitted without resistance, desiring that
they would execute upon his person all the cruelties they could imagine, if
they found him guilty of any persidious Action toward his Prince or Country.
This was only a pretense which Mieslas had framed to effect what you shall
hear.

The rumor of Iphigenes affections to Amiclea, and the report of their
Marriage being noised through the City of Minsce, by the communication of the
Besiegers with the Besieged during the Truce, the Royal Camp was filled with
this news, and at last it came to the Palatine of Podolia's Ears. This
incensed him with the greatest indignation against his Son, that he had ever
yet conceived; nothing being more sensible to Parents, than when their
Children marry against their Wills, and match themselves with persons whom they
think not fit for them. Hereupon he took occasion to detein his Son, and
accuse him of Treason against the Polonians, because he was about to contract
an Alliance with the Lithuanians. Besides, being a Man of Blood and Slaughter,
he produced diverse Arguments against the Treaty of Peace, and hating mortally
the Lithuanians, he could not endure that they should participate, as
Compatriots, of the honors of the Crown of Polonia, which was the principal
point of all the Treaty. Insomuch that desiring to hinder this agreement, he
took this pretense of keeping his Son, knowing that those of Minsce would
presently take Arms hereupon, and so the Truce should be broken.

As he presupposed, it succeeded; For, immediately the Lithuanians shut their
Gates, enclosing and keeping Prisoners no small number of the Royal Army,
besides those that were delivered as hostages for the person of Iphigenes. This
bred much confusion and tumults on both sides: Whereunto Mieslas added this
stratagem.

There were certain Soldiers, who for some crimes were condemned to Execution.
One of these he caused to be clad with a Suite of the same color of that
Iphigenes then wore, and the next Morning, having commanded a Scaffold to be
raised in sight of the whole Camp and City, he gave out that with his own hand
he would cut off his Son's head, for being a Traitor to His Majesty. The
fatal hour being come, he drew up all his own quarters in Battalia; then
having ordered the Criminal to be set upon the Scaffold, and clothed the
Executioner with an habit not unlike his own, by this spectacle he intended to
take away from those of the City all hopes of re-possessing Iphigenes, by whom
they expected much favor from the King in the conclusion of the Peace.

Iphigenes being kept close Prisoner in a Chamber, knew nothing of all this;
But what became Liante at this deplorable sight? What Amiclea? what Olavius?
what the Palatine of Troc? What all the Ladies? What all the Inhabitants of
Minsce? It was then no time to sit in consultation; all of what quality soever
demanded a Sally, which could be no more refused by the Palatines that
commanded, than a passage hindered to the fury of an impetuous Torrent.

Liante like the Poet's desperate Coroebus, seeing his Cassandra dragging to
the Block, placed himself at the head of this resolute Party; and flying out of
the City-gates with no less fury than a fell Lyoness hast's from her Denn to
rescue her stolen Whelps, filling the whole Forest with her horrid roaring,
precipitated himself to seek Death in the thickest of the Enemie's Squadrons,
being resolved to die a thousand times or save Iphigenes Life.

If all things else give place to Love, it was verified at that time; for, if
the assault was violent on the Lithuanian's part, the resistance was but weak
on the Polonians, in regard diverse Soldiers (not well pleased to see their
companion executed) made way forth Assailers, and gave them so clear passage
by their flight, partly Voluntary, partly Forced, that Liante arrived at the
Scaffold as sudden as a flash of Lightning; where terribly slashing the
Executioner (whom he took to be Mieslas) he thought at the same time to rid
himself of a mortal Enemy and save the Life of a Person whom he esteemed the
dearest in the World. But having found out the deceit, he ceased not to end
the Hangman, and set the Criminal at Liberty, having cut the Cords that bound
him, and given him an opportunity to escape in the Throng.

Never were greater feats of Arms seen done by Man, than those which Despair,
Love and Anger produced from Liante in this Action, thinking he had fought in
the presence of the person beloved, whom he desired to give the strongest
proof of affection that is betwixt Mortals (which is) to lay down his own Life
to preserve another's.

Mieslas, who suspected they would make a Sally, had prepared himself with a
considerable Party of Horse to intercept them in their retreat, and enclose
them between the Army and his Men. But having a bad Cause, and a cruel
Resolution to cut them all off, especially Liante, if he fell into his hands,
his Enterprise turned to his own confusion, and he found himself intrapped in
his own snares. For, they, having released the Criminal, another strong Party
was sent out of Minsce to succor the former, and facilitate their retreat.
Insomuch that Mieslas and his Men being engaged betwixt both Parties, the
Soldiers were almost all killed, his Horse was shot under him, and he being
wounded in the Thigh, besides bruised with a fall, and laden with Arms, was
constrained, with an incredible Despair, to render himself Prisoner, and remit
his Life to the mercy of Liante, who threatened him with the cruellest of
Deaths, if it appeared that he had attempted any thing against Iphigenes.

Mieslas to save his Life assured Liante, that Iphigenes had no other harm
than to be locked up in a Chamber, and that he had devised that Plot to
execute a Criminal in his place, thereby to spare his Ransom, and hinder the
alliance he intended to make with the Lithuanians. Upon this assurance Liante
having commanded him to be slung upon an Horse, led him with diverse others in
Triumph through the City. To express the shame and rage of that brutall
Podolian would require terms that never yet were heard.

As there were diverse Polonians taken, so there were some Lithuanians that
remained as pledges in the King's Camp, as well of those that had engaged too
far in the Enemie's Quarters, as those that were shut out of the Gates of
Minsce; lest among Friends they should likewise let in Enemies, as is often
seen in like occurrences. Among the rest was found a Gentleman extremely young,
and whose mavelous beauty attracted the Eyes of every one, exciting much more
Envy than Pity, and much more Pity than Anger. He was led to the General,
who wondered that he had taken Arms at such tender years. After some demands
he desired they would give him leave to see Iphigenes, who (he believed)
would know him, having seen him in Minsce. The General commanded his desire
should be satisfied: Do you ask if the Palatine of Plocens was astonished to
see that there was more than one Lady in the Army that bore Arms?

This was the pretty Amiclea, who upon the news of Iphigenes Execution had
taken a sudden resolution to die, or revenge the Death of him whom she loved
with so much Passion. And seeing that all sorts of People took Arms to follow
Liante in that expedition; shall a Lover (said she to her self) be said to
have less courage and fidelity than a Friend? No, no, I must, I will die
gloriously; for, to survive such a loss is a thing impossible for Amiclea. In
this Resolution she went to her Brother Polemander's Armory, and having taken
one of his Suits of apparel with an Armor, she mounted one of her Father's
best Horses, the Servants thinking her to be Polemander; and in this equipage
she ranked herself among those that sallied, and engaged so far among the
Enemies, that she remained Prisoner.

This was a singular testimony of Affection and Generosity; and Iphigenes
feining to requite this Obligation by consummating of her hopes, was grieved at
the Soul that he could not recompense so great a Love as he could have
desired. If there was much joy within Minsce for the taking of Mieslas, and a
great deal of glory for the triumphing Liante, there was no less sorrow for
the loss of Amiclea; no body could give an account what was become of her,
neither should they ever have imagined she had done what she did; Some were
of opinion that her Love for Iphigenes might perchance, through Despair, have
made her make away herself in some secret Place, a violent remedy, yet
frequently enough practiced by weak Spirits.

She was sought for in every corner, but found no where; every one lamented
her loss, but the sad Parents above all, in respect that being assured of
Iphigenes Life they lost by this means the hope of an alliance, which they
held infallible by the imprisonment of Mieslas, and the promise of Iphigenes.
Who being set at liberty by express command from the Castellain of Cracovia,
General of the King's Army, took Amiclea with him to his Tent; where being
presently admitted, He said, Seigneur Castellain, I beseech you do not refuse
me one grace that I shall demand at your hands.

Seigneur Palatine, answered the General, since the King denies you nothing, I
should be very ill advised not to agree to any thing that you shall be pleased
to desire within the compass of that Power which His Majesty has committed to
me, especially being enjoined by particular Letters from him to give full
credence to your Counsels.

My Request (replied Iphigenes) is only that you will give me this Prisoner,
who is of such quality, that I hope to get my Father exchanged for him. Sir,
(answered the General) you may dispose of him as you shall think fit, the
Palatine, your Father, is the only cause of his Misfortune: For, against all
the Laws of Arms, having violated the Truce, he is but justly fallen into the
Ditch which he had dug for the Besieged.

My Lord (said Iphigenes) his particular disaster will be a benefit to the
Public; For, whilst he is in the Lithuanian's hands, we shall be better
able to conclude the Treaty of Peace according to His Majesty's command, and
renew the Truce. Mean time you shall see that this pretty Prisoner's Eyes are
more redoubtable than his Sword, and that naked he is more powerful than
armed; with that lifting up Amiclea's Headpiece, a long Tress of golden hair
fell about her shoulders: And judge you (continued he) if I could perish
being defended by such fair hands, It is not needful to relate the
astonishment of those that were present at this agreeable Spectacle, where Love
and Loyalty appeared in a new equipage. If diverse would have esteemed
themselves happy to serve so exquisite a Beauty, how happy ought they to
account Iphigenes, who was beloved and served by her with such proofs of
Affection?

The Palatine of Plocens word obliging him to render himself prisoner again to
the Lithuanians, besides his own inclinations, and the desire he had to free
his Hostages from further trouble (of whom Pisides was one) he returned with
his pretty Champion; who not daring to appear before her Parents in that
manner, desired Iphigenes to make her Peace, before she came in their sight.
His excuses for Amiclea's disguisement were so well received, that Olavius and
his Wife commended her for that adventure as an Heroic Act, and which would
afterward make her be reckoned among the Amazons.

Mieslas being shut up, like a mad wild Beast, in a Tower (where for his Son's
sake he was treated according to his Quality) the Treaty of Peace went
forwards. The Truce was re-established more free than before: the King disowned
Mieslas for having acted against the Law of Arms, and sent a Plenipotentiary
power to Iphigenes to agree with the Lithuanians.

During this Conference there was nothing but Sports, Tournaments, Dancings,
Comedies, Banquets, and all sorts of rejoicing of both Parties, infallible
presages of an happy Peace. Among other Plays represented at the Castle of
Minsce, for the recreation of the Besieged, and those of the Camp that came to
visit them, Liante commanded the Players to act the Tragedy of Iphigenia,
Agamemnon's Daughter, as being a lively Image of that which had passed in the
deliverance of the Criminal, who should have been executed in the place of
Iphigenes: Wherein there was not any of the Spectators so dull, but easily
comprehended that the Hind placed in Iphigeniae's stead, represented the poor
Soldier whom Mieslas made pass for Iphigenes; that the Anger of the Goddess
offended for her Stag, expressed the indignation of the King for the
imprisoning of his Favorite; every one interpreted this Emblem according to
his own fancy; But no body could conceive that the Marriage of Pylades with
Iphigenia, had any relation to our Lovers, and that Orestes being cured of the
Furies, signified the appeasing of Mieslas Fury: Yet He began to be more
tame, seeing himself a Prisoner. And as there is no man so covetous, who will
not be prodigal of his Estate to save his Life, the Proposition of restoring
to Liante what he had so long detained from him, and giving him one of his
Daughters in Marriage, seemed no more so strange to him.

There is no Creature so daunted as a Wolf, when he is caught in a snare;
nothing so tractable as a cruel Man, when he is in his Enemie's power. This
fierce Palatine condescended to whatsoever they would, esteeming it a favor if
Liante (quitting the pretentions he had to Clemencia, whom he had promised to
the Prince Cassin) would take any of his other Daughters, leaving him the
benefit of his Estate during his Life. But Liante seemed to slight his Offers,
not to give any occasion of distaste to the Palatine of Minsce, who was desirous
to make him his Son-in-law.

Mean time the Article for the restitution of Liante's Estate passed among the
Commissioners of the Treaty of Peace, which at length was concluded by the
diligence and dexterity of Iphigenes, who had all the glory of that good
Office. This Treaty being ratified by the King, the Peace was proclaimed with
incomparable rejoycings on both sides. That done, the Siege was forthwith
raised, the Soldiers disbanded, Arms laid down, the Prisoners released, and
Mieslas got off better cheap than he expected.

Iphigenes was immediately repealed to the Court; where both their Majesty's
burned with impatience to see him crowned with Olivebranches interwoven with
Laurells and Palms. There he promised Olavius to use his endeavors to procure
the King's consent to his marriage with Amiclea, and Liante's to Oloria; which
the Palatine of Minsce held for a singular obligation, and the two Sisters were
infinitely pleased. The joys of Cracovia at the beautiful Palatine's return,
may be guessed by the regrets of the inhabitants of Minsce, who by his absence
thought they endured a perpetual Eclipse, and could almost have wished that
the War had still continued, to have enjoyed the happiness of possessing him
longer.

To relate the Pomp and Magnisicence of Iphigene's reception, were to undertake
the description of a great King's entrance into some Metropolitan City. For, as
the King, to show that the sending him into his Palatinate, was a reason of
State rather than a disgrace, would have his Courtiers accompany him when he
left the Court; At his return he commanded all those that desired to please
him, should go to meet him, that the World might see he re-entred more in his
favor, than he was before; and that if formerly he had loved him by
inclination, then he cherished him for Reason, and (if a Subject can oblige
his Sovereign) by obligation. So, all those of the Court went to receive him at
a good distance from the City; even his Enemies, who saw themselves his
Footstool, rendered him that Devoir; and although they had done him all the
ill Offices they could devise, they prudently covered under Dissimulation the
Despite which gnawed their Hearts.

Mieslas besides his re-purchased Liberty was ravished to see so many Laurells
shadowing his Son's Temples, and so many Praises and Benedictions showring down
upon his head; conceiving that he had a share in those applauses, in regard a
virtuous Son is a Crown to his Father. His Sister Clemencia, who for his sake
was much cherished by the Queen, could not contein her joy to see her Brother
appear like the Sun crowned with Rays.

As there was no interest that touched Iphigenes heart so near as that of
Liante, his re-establishment was one of the first things he moved to the King;
and having made His Majesty see into his intentions, and consider the Despair
which had enforced him to cast himself among the Lithuanians, with an
advantageous representation of what he had contributed, for His Majesty's
service, to the Treaty of Peace, the King (who was a very gracious Prince)
received him into Grace, and promised Iphigenes not only to revoak the
confiscation of his Estate, but to re-establish him therein, and contribute to
the augmenting of his Fortune according as occasions should be presented. This
was a good beginning for Liante, who participated more than any other of the
influences of his beautiful Star.

But shall we say nothing of the contentment of the Princess Respicia, who was
now arrived at the top of her Desires? For, she had received from Rome the
dispensation that was required to make the Marriage of Iphigenes with Modestina
be declared void; Insomuch that relying upon her beloved Palatine's promise
she held the consummation of here is unquestionable.

It is not my design to describe here the manner of the King's and Queen's
entertainments and reception of Iphigenes, the pleasure of the Ladies, and the
joy of the whole Court at the appearance of that welcome Sun upon the Horizon
of Cracovia. I shall only say that their Majesty's, being cured of the
suspicions which the Malice of his Enviers had cast into their Souls, conspired
who should give the greatest testimonies of Benevolence to him, whom the voice
of the People (which is commonly that of God) styled the PEACE MAKER of
POLONIA, the RECONCILER of the POLONIANS and LITHUANIANS, the ANGEL of PEACE,
the GLORY of his Country, the HONOR of his Family, and the JOY of all his
Compatriots.

They often consulted together with what worthy recompense they should requite
the Services and Merits of such a subject: At length not being able to offer
him any part of that Kingdom (whereof they had only the use, not the
propriety) they believed that nothing could oblige his Noble spirit so much as
some eminent Alliance, that might approach him to their Parentage and the
Honor of their Blood. So, whether it was their own motion, or whether the
Princess Florimunda, the King's Sister, had spoken any thing to the Queen,
having taken her part of the Court-vertigo by the infection of Iphigenes eyes,
yet had through Modesty concealed her affection; Which way soever it happened,
they determined to give him the Infanta in marriage with a dowry suitable to
her quality.

In the presence of this great Star neither Modestina, Respicia, Amiclea, nor
any of the rest whose pretentions being hidden, their flames were the more
violent, appeared with any luster; there was nothing but Despair in their
Hearts, Sobs in their breasts, Sighs in their Mouths, and Tears in their Eyes.
But how, think you, was Iphigenes surprised, when the King, in presence of the
Queen, told him in his closet the honor he intended to do him, making him his
Brother-in-Law by giving him his own Sister to Wife?

At which words he fell upon his knees before their Majesty's, and represented
to them all the arguments he could devise to divert them from that Design,
which he assured them would be as ruinons to him as honorable; For, That
lifting him aloft as the Eagle does the Tortoize, threatened him with a fatal
fall; That being raised from a Molehill to a Mountain, that Eminency would
expose him to the outrageous Tempests, and Thunderclaps of Envy and
Detraction; that thereby he should become the Blank and Butt of all the
wounding Tongues of those, who having seen him their equal would cast
despightfull glances upon the elevation of his Fortune. That he knew not how
the Lady Infanta herself stood inclined, who perchance would be unwilling to
abase herself so low as to marry a private Gentleman, who was nothing in the
World but what it pleased His Majesty to make him. That competent Fortunes, as
the most certain, were the most desirable. That he beseeched His Majesty to
consider, his Enemies would attribute to his Ambition, what proceeded from his
Royal Benevolence. That he was too conscious of his own mean condition to
entertain a thought of lifting his Eyes toward a Subject of so high a Dignity,
whose too great luster would dazzle him in stead of giving him light. Therefore
he conjured His Majesty to preserve in him the work of his own hands, and not
render him unhappy by too much happiness. That as Lamps (if overfilled with
Oil) go out, So Fortunes that are too vast commonly come to nothing. That
queasy stomachs ought not to be overcharged with Meat, nor weak-braines with
much Wine: That the Fabric ought to be proportionable to the Foundation, lest
it should fall to the ground by it is own weight. That this were to set a Statue
of Gold and Silver upon a Pedestall of Clay, and expose him to the fury of all
the Grandee's jealousies, in stead of sheltering him from their rages. And for
his last Reason he reserved his Marriage with Modestina, after which (he
having concluded with the humblest supplications, and the most indearing
Conjurations he could invent to turn away that tempest from him:) The King
answered gravely in these words.

That all his Reasons were full of Humility, Modesty, Fidelity, and Prudence,
but yet they ought to submit to his Command. That such was his Will, which he
could not resist without Crime. That it was the Propriety of Kings, and the
greatest point of their resemblance to God, to raise the poor out of the Mud,
and place them among the Princes and most considerable Persons of their
Kingdoms: Otherwise the Little ones would never become Great, and the wheel of
Fortune would remain without motion. That Virtues were more desirable and
estimable than Birth, and since they made the first Nobility, and that by them
in the beginning of Monarchies were seated upon Thrones those that had most
merit, it was but reasonable to prefer them before Scepters and Diadems. That
his Sister's mind was but too well known to him, who (besides that she was
ready to submit in all things to his Will) had a particular inclination to him,
which made her desire that Marriage. That in stead of being abased, she would
esteem her self exalted, and in stead of losing her glory by that alliance,
she would communicate her splendor to him. That had it been in his Power to
have given him a part of his Kingdom, he would have done it as a testimony of
his affection and gratitude: But, having no Crown more illustrious than that of
his Blood, he had determined to give him the Infanta Florimunda with means
sufficient to maintain so honorable a Consanguinity. That this Match in stead
of exposing to, would exempt him from the Malice of his Enviers, by the same
reason as the Stars are exempted from Eclipses by their elevation and distance
from the Earth. That during his Reign he ought not to fear any retrogradation
or Declining of Fortune, in regard He was a Prince that did not take pleasure
in destroying his own Creatures; besides the assurance his opinion gave him
that Iphigenes, by the Prudence of his conduct, would give his Sovereign no
such occasion. That He would so establish him, that after his decease, no
power of Polonia should be able to diminish his Grandeurs. As for his Marriage
with Modestina, he replied, that it was declared void by a Breviat sent from
Rome to the Arch bishop of Gnesna to be notified in public; which having been
procured by the Princess Respicia, should serve for the Infanta Florimunda. The
King ended his Speech with Such is our absolute WILL and PROPER MOTION, which
are terms so sovereign and sacred, that the Oath of the fabulous Deities by
the River Styx was not more inviolable.

The Queen added hereunto her persuasions mingled with entreaties, and such
certain testimonies of the Infanta's affection to Iphigenes, that it plainly
appeared to proceed as much from the Princesse's own soliciting, as their
Majesty's deliberation. Insomuch that the fair Palatine was enforced to yield
to so many sweetly imperious violences, and receive with acknowledgements full
of modest bashfulness, what he could not refuse without highly offending their
Majesty's, and irritating the Infanta beyond hope of Pardon. Neither had he
been so indiscreet, if Nature had not opposed to that eminent Fortune the
obstacles you already know: Which he was even ready to declare to the King and
Queen; But considering that she (how great soever in Dignity) was yet of that
Sex, to which Prudence forbid's the revealing of any secret without
deliberation, he forbore, reserving that manifestation to the King only, whose
authority and advise he intended to implore for the effecting of his
intentions.

The Queen was no sooner gone forth, but she met the Infanta, who was as
impatient to know the result of their Mediation, as the other was to tell her
it; whereof Florimunda conceived such joy as cannot be comprehended but by a
full-ripe Virgin, who receive's an assurance of marrying him whom she love's
with passion. After the Queen's departure, lest the rumor of his marriage with
the Infanta should be noised about the Court, Iphigenes judged it requisite to
squeeze the Scorpion upon the wound, and apply speedily the remedy to that
growing mischief.

So, having beseeched the King to give him a private Audience, wherein he
promised to discover the most mavelous History he ever yet had heard, He
related him that of his Birth, Sex, Education, Elevation, Progress, Fortune,
and unparalleled affection to Liante; in sum, he concealed nothing from his
Master, of all the remarkable passages expressed in this Narration; and at the
close of his recital, casting himself at his feet, embracing and kissing them,
and washing them with his tears, he humbly besought His Majesty to look on him
as his poor and unworthy Creature, and dispose of his Fortune according to his
good pleasure.

The King's astonishment at this strange Story can less be described, than a
flash of Lightning, or the Sun shine be represented in painting. His
admiration was such, that he remained a long while without being able to
speak but with his Eyes, which were fixed with much amiableness upon Iphigenes.
This first assault wanted not much of converting his Amitre into Amorousness
and making his Favorite become not his Master, but his Mistress. Yet His
Majestic's old Age which invited him to Temperance, his singular affection to
the Queen, (who reigned over his Heart by her Virtues, as much as he ov^^
(...) Subjects by his authority) the Fear he had of resuscitating her
Jealousy, and making her believe as truths her former suspicions, together
with the long practice and deep rooting his Soul had taken in Piety and
Moderation, suppressed the impetuosity of his desires. But nothing bridled him
more powerfully than the extraordinary Modesty he had always observed in
Iphigenes, knowing that to be a Rock against which all unjust pretentions
would suffer Shipwreck; Besides, reading at that same instant in that lovely
Face such chaste Characters, and so severe a sweetness as stifled in their
Birth all licentious imaginations.

In this occurrence it would be an injustice to conceal the due praises of
that Prince, who made a Buckler of virtue against the weapons which Love,
hidden within Iphigenes Eyes, treacherously darted against his Heart. But to
deny that the affection, which rendered Iphigenes his Favorite, was much
increased, by the discovery of his condition, cannot be, without taking from
so virtuous a Prince the quality (which is common to all great Persons) of
being extremely courteous to Ladies.

I will not extend my self in relating the Protestations the King made to
preserve him in his Favor and Friendship, notwithstanding this Change; nor the
praises of his Beauty which were as extraordinary as the subject was beyond
Nature's ordinary compositions. At last after diverse Caresses and Compliments,
accompanied with thanks and resentments of obligation to the deserving
Iphigenes, His Majesty conjured him to declare freely and fully his desires,
promising by the Faith of a Prince to endeavor the effecting of them to the
utmost of his Royal power.

Hereupon Iphigenes illuminating his Beauty with a lively and graceful
vermillion, which or'e-spread his cheeks; confessed to His Majesty That after
the glory of his Benevolence, the height of his desires was the legitimate
possession of his beloved Liante. How chaste and warrantable soever are the
flames of honorable Virgins, it is impossible for them to acknowledge their
Loves without painting their Faces with those Colors which render the Aurora
so agreeable; as if it were as great an imperfection in them to love, as it is
a perfection to be lovely. The King perceived by that livery of virtue the
chastity of that generous spirit, which increased his esteem of Iphigenes. And
being informed how that Passion had taken its birth in a manner from their
Cradles, that a mutual inclination had given it Being, Nourish't,
Entertained, and Elevated it to its perfect state, he thought it a renouncing
of all Humanity to disapprove so legitimate an Affection.

Then, having demanded of Iphigenes in what manner he should manage the
discovery of that secret, which would astonish not only all Polonia, but the
whole Universe; our Amazon, who had principally premeditated that part, gave
His Majesty the Overtures; which he approved in all their circumstances,
according as shall be declared in the Sequel of this Declaration. Only to
hinder the design the King had for his Sister from being divulged, it was
thought expedient to apply a speedy remedy, and raze the Passion out of that
Princesse's heart, by making her believe that Iphigenes was incapable of
performing the Rites of Marriage: (an Opinion able to befrost the most ardent
flames.)

This invention the King found very pertinent, and to execute it subtilely he
went to the Queen, who had already made the ordinary congratulations of joyful
news to the Infanta (but with the seal wherewith Ladies are accustomed to
close their secrets, that is, a prayer to say nothing, as if a third Person
were obliged to conceal that which they cannot keep in their own breasts:) And
Florimunda had so well and discreetly kept this agreeable tidings, that she
had already communicated it to all her Gentlewomen, but with the same caution
as the Queen had told it her; and they all promised her to be silent, but with
this reservation, when they had no body to speak unto. Presently among
themselves there was no other discourse than of their Mistresse's sudden
marriage, and the more their Tongues itched to be tattling, the stricter their
Command was not to mention it.

The King not knowing that the Queen had been so forward, told her that
Iphigenes had acquainted him with other matters than what was spoken in her
presence; and he was now fully satisfied, that those many Excuses and
Conjurations, which he had made to them not to press him to marry the Infanta,
proceeded not from any want of Desire, (he not being so blind as not to see
the advantages he should receive by so glorious an alliance) but from a
natural disability to answer the expectations of a Bride. For proof whereof
he alleged to her the non-consummation of his Marriage with Modestina,
besides that extraordinary Continence which he had always showed at the
Court, opposing such cold reservedness to the flames of so many Ladies, that
burned so inexpressibly for his Beauty.

The Queen amazed at this news, was sorry she had so soon given her
Sister-in-law joy of a Contentment, that was vanished e're possess't, like
Lightning which die's as soon as it is born. After some ingenious (but not
offensive) reproaches to the King for his former jealousies of her, and having
condoled that defect of Nature in so beautiful a person, Her Majesty
continued; But that which troubles me most is the consideration of your
Sister, who will find no small pain to cure herself of her Passion, and must
sigh in vain for an imperfection beyond remedy. It is easy (replied the King)
to pluck up a Plant but newly set, and dispossess her heart of a Passion, which
has yet searce taken Root.

^ perceive (answered the Queen) that you are a stranger to your Sister's
thoughts; she confessed to me when I presst her to discover her resentments,
that long before the fair Palatine left the Court, she had great inclinations
to affect him. But the respect she bare you, with that which she owed to her
own quality, hindered her from disclosing her mind; the greatness of her
courage, proceeding from her Birth and Virtue, vanquished her Desires; and
although the violence of her Passion was extreme, she would rather have buried
it is impetuosity under the Ashes of Death, than have rendered it visible to the
prejudice of her Modesty. But as soon as she understood that your intentions
concurred with what she desired more than she hoped for, she declared
herself, the readiness of her obedience proceeding as much from her own
interest as her respect to you. I have already wished her happiness in the
accomplishment of her desires by the Consent of Iphigenes, so that now I know
not how to carry her the sad news of the Death of her Hopes, and the Funeral
of her Contentments. But this I must injoyne you (answered the King) For, since
you have committed the fault by your precipitation, it concern's you to repair
it.

How the Princess Flormunda was afflicted when the Queen made her this
recantation, I must leave to your Conjectures. But as the Passions which
terminate in the Sense, lose their Effect and force in the privation of the
Cause which gave them Being (like Bees that leave their lives with their
stings) It was no very difficult matter for the Infanta to cure her self of a
Disease, which brought it is remedy in the acknowledgement of his infirmity.
(The ardours of those who are inflamed for the Beauty of an agreeable Face, are
quenched as soon as any Sickness has withered the flowers of that Complexion,
or any Accident rendered the shape deformed: And those who covet Marriage for
the enjoyment of Pleasures, which of unlawful are thereby rendered honorable,
easily quit their weaned from the Hope of possessing what they desire.)

Florimunda nevertheless prudently dissembled her regret, and having in effect
nothing that troubled her so much as that she had discovered her Passion too
openly, she labored all she could to beget a belief in those to whom she
had communicated it, that it had been more to comply with the King, than for
any inclination of her own, that she had entertained the thought of Marrying
Iphigenes; And that His Majesty, (like a kind Brother, being unwilling to
press her to a thing which she had given him to understand was as little
agreeable as advantageous to her,) had desisted importuning or therein,
expecting some more eminent Alliance.

All this could not be carried so secretly, but that the Wind whispered it in
the Ears of the Princess Respicia, who (upon intelligence of the King's Design
of Marrying his Sister with Iphigenes, besides the rumor of his impotency)
took the allarm so hot, that her Mind, tormented with several resentments,
endured no less agitation than a Ship tossed in the contention betwixt the
Winds and Tide. At length she did like those that the Tempest drive's against
the Rocks, who save their Lives in seeing their Vessel split. She fancied to
herself that the Palatine, being more jealous of maintaning the promise he
had made her, than ambitious of the Honor that was proposed him by Marrying
Florimunda, had invented that Plot to dispense himself hand somely of that
alliance, which would have exposed him to the Envy of all the Grandees. And, as
Desire is a grand Master of Persuasion, she easily believed what she desired.
Reasons were not wanting to confirm this Belief. For, she had never observed
any thing in Iphigenes, but what was Generous. The proofs of his valor were
not unknown to any but strangers; All Polonia had seen him perform Exploits of
War, which Fame had not Tongues enough to celebrate. If he was so able for
Mars, could he be inept for Her whom Vulcan surprised with that God? This is
a Charity which his Enemies do him (said She not without Sighs) because he
has the Face of an Angel, they say he is no Man; and his Enviers call him
Effeminate; suppose he be so, is he the less fir for Women? That he has not
accosted Modestina, was because Mieslas always hindered him. It is upon the
delicacy of his Complexion that they have built this Lie.

Thus did the abused Princess flatter herself in her own misfortune, being
resolved to see the effect of the Dispensation, which she had procured from
Rome with so much trouble. Having conjured Iphigenes herself, and solicited
him by Mieslas to make good his word to her; his answer still was, that his
first Marriage being declared void, he would marry her if she were so
contented: Hereupon She importuned daily the Archbishop to produce her
Dispensation, which was in his hands. But nothing in this case could be done
in the absence of Modestina, whom (notwithstanding all the oppositions Mieslas
could make) the King (incited thereto by Iphigenes) commanded to be sent for to
the Court. With her came Aretuza, Mother to Iphigenes, who though faithfully
advertised of all these passages by Iphigenes and Boleslaus, was ready to die
with Fear, distrusting the success of that strange Discovery.

To repeat the reproaches Modestina made to her fair Husband, the injurious
terms she gave Respicia, and the reolution she took to oppose herself till
Death against the dissolution of her Marriage, I esteem needless. He that can
imagine the resentments of a Wife affronted in that manner, may guess how far
her Choler transported Her.

On the other side Olavius having intelligence of the Princess Respicia's
pretensions, of the arrival of the Dispensation, and of Modestina's and
Aretuza's coming to Court, conceived (for the interest of his Daughter) that
he was obliged to carry her thither. So, with his Wife, Polemander, his two
Daughters Oloria and Amiclea, he took his way to Cracovia, to see if he could
accomplish the two alliances which he had projected with Liante and Iphigenes.

The Prince Cassin resolved to keep himself reserved in the research of
Clemencia, until he saw the success of his Mother's pretensions. Simphorosa,
his Sister, grew every day in Bigness and Beauty, but she was yet so tender,
that although she was capable of breeding desires in others, she was not of
entertaining any in herself; And by reason of her youth and attractive
sweetness, she was called in the Court the Fair INNOCENT.

There was no body but the King, Iphigenes, Aretuza, Liante and Boleslaus that
knew the Stratagem, which was then to be put in execution in the face of all
the Court.

Liante being importuned by Oloria, gave her not much satisfaction, but
remitting himself to the King's will, and deferring her until he were
re-established in the Estate, which the Palatine of Podolia detained from him,
he amused her expectation. The King to prepare all things for his design, made
Mieslas condescend to give Liante of all his Daughters (except Clemencia) her
whom he should fancy most, promising to give her a portion himself, and leave
him the use of Liante's Estate during Life. It was not hard to persuade the
Sarmatian to embrace this offer, whereby (besides the great advantages that
accrued to him) he saw all sorts of Enmity, Hatred, and Contention cease. As
for those that were immured in the Cloister, their Veils (besides their
natural deformities) were as a Buckler against all Worldly pretensions. So
that there was no remedy but to produce Virgenia (who for her resemblance of
Face and Fashion to Iphigenes was commonly called Iphigenia, yet the World knew
her not till then to be Mieslas Daughter.)

Against all the oppositions Oloria could make to hinder this alliance, the
King's authority served for a defense and excuse for Liante; and although the
Palatine of Minsce murmured against this proceeding, he was enforced to give
over his suite, the supreme Law being the Prince's Will.

That being thus determined, the next question was to which of these three
Graces Iphigenes should appertain; to Modestina, Respicia, or Amiclea. The
beautiful Palatine, who knew he could be enjoyed by none of them, gave
himself to them all with so cheerful and free a behavior, that each of them,
thinking she had the pre-eminence in his affection, raised the Trophy of her
Hopes to the Glory of possessing him. Each one presumed on her prerogatives,
and put her pretentions in the first place.

MODESTINA alleged that in all Justice IPHIGENES belonged to her; For, she
was married to him, he was her Husband. RESPICIA founded her plea upon her
high Birth and Riches. AMICLEA drew her pre-eminence from her Beauty. All three
made their Buckler of the Word and Promise of the Palatine.

For, he had said to his dear Modestina (whose disaster he did really lament)
that he would never leave her as long as she would have him for her Husband:
Whereupon she being resolved never to say otherwise, held her victory
infallible. Respicia, (supported by the Paternall authority of Mieslas and the
acknowledgement Iphigenes had made that he never gave his consent to the
Marriage of Modestina) esteemed her Conquest no less certain. And Amiclea
recollecting in her Memory the many Caresses, inamored expressions, and
several demonstrations of affection, wherewith Iphigenes had fed her Fancy in
Minsce, (besides the immortal obligations she had acquired upon that generous
Spirit, by her sallying out of the City in her Brother's Clothes and Armor to
succor him; And then consulting often with her Looking glass to remarke the
great advantages Nature had given her over her two Rivalls) could not persuade
herself if the fair Palatine had any Love, that it could be for any but her.

Imagine you if the Queen and the Infanta laughed not at these vanities; and if
they had not occasion to say that there was a great Process for a barren
ground. All stood in expectation of the voice of the Oracle, which was the
sentence of the Archbishop, who being informed by the King of the reality of
the Story, and rendered participant of the Stratagem, after some usual
formalities, pronounced the Marriage betwixt Modestina and Iphigenes void, by
default of Consentment given in an age incapable of determining Wills.

It would be hard to represent the resentments of the poor Modestina, when
she heard this Sentence, which seemed no less cruel to her than if it had
condemned her to Death; Nevertheless she held yet by one thread of Hope, the
word of Iphigenes. In this World the one's loss is another's gain. This Decree
opened the Heavens to Respicia, and made her sing the Triumph before a perfect
Victory. For this Marriage being dissolved, she believed there would be no
further obstacle to her pretensions; when Amiclea opposing herself to Her
Designs, summoned Iphigenes to perform his promise to Her.

It were impossible to relate the Discourses that Jealousy (which is an
enraged Fury) put into the mouths of these Rivalls, Which had made diverse
Quarrels and Combats, but that the King by his Prudence knew how to calm those
storms. Modestina endeavored to excite her Brother to fight with Iphigenes:
(Consider you to whom she addresst herself, and what pleasure the King took to
hear her persuasions, which Liante repeated to him.) Respicia pressed her Son,
the Prince Cassin, to challenge Olavius or Polemander, to revenge her of
Amiclea. Oloria conjured Polemander to engage in single Combat with Liante. And
Amiclea was so transported with rage, that she was almost resolved to re-arm
herself to take Prince Cassin's Life in revenge of Respicia's opposing her
desires. At last being not able to engage any others in their quarrels,
Passion so bemadded them, that (had they not been hindered) they would have
ended their differences with Poniard and Pistol (wherewith they had each armed
themselves) unfit instruments for the use of such delicate Hands.

In what contentment did His Majesty's fancy swim, seeing the Cards thus
shuffled to his own desire? At length being willing to terminate all these
differences (whereof he reserved the knowledge to himself) in as gracious as
mavelous a manner, he promised to content them all by his Judgment without
commanding (like the Hebrew King) that Iphigenes, should be divided. Hereupon
He prefix't a certain day to pronounce the decision of this controversy,
which (according to the opinion of the Pretendants) for one Happy was to make
two Miserable.

The whole Design being conducted with an admirable secrecy, the Queen and the
Infanta Florimunda accompanied with only four, or five of the principal
Ladies of the Court, seated themselves in the King's Chamber by his command.
Then were called in the most part of those, whom we have named in this
History, and those who had most frequently been in Iphigenes company, (for he
suggested to the King the contrivance of all this Design) Especially the three
Rivalls, Modestina, Respicia and Amiclea; the Palatine's three Principal
friends, Pomeran, Pifides and Argal; The Palatines of Minsce and Troc with
their Wives; Oloria followed her Mother, and Melindra here is; Polemander
accompanied his Sisters; Perpetua was introduced as Governess to Modestina;
Aretuza entered with Mieslas, as those who next to their Son and Ward had the
principal interest in this business. Of Boleslaus being there, you need not
doubt; the Prince Cassin accompanied his Mother, and Clemencia attended on the
Queen.

The Archbishop being instructed what he was to do, was admitted, as he
that should give a blessing to the Feast, with other Prelates and
Ecclesiastics of note, who knew nothing of the Design. Mean time the King had
commanded that Virgenia, (natural Daughter to Mieslas) should be conducted
into his Closet, dresst like a Bride, and as if she had been then to be
contracted to Liante, who with Iphigenes, sumptuously apparelled, was brought
into the same closet; where, in Coffers (whereof Iphigenes had the Keys) were
Garments necessary for the representation of the Comicall Action we are now
relating.

The King having left them in his closet, returned into his Chamber, where
during that grand Assembly, having briefly, but with much gravity represented,
That God having created Man free, there was nothing that he abhorred more than
to see Wills constrained; That being by the Providence of Heaven elevated to
the Throne, to represent on Earth the Image of God in Heaven, he would never
endure that the person whom he honored with his Favor should be forced in
his inclinations, especially in that which of all things in the World ought to
be most free, that is, Marriage. That he had underhand intimated to the
three Contendants a secret Cause which ought without further dispute make them
quit their pretentions; But that their Passion being stronger than their
Reason, they flattered themselves with a Belief, that his Information was,
only an artificial Pretense to make them desist from an Enterprise, wherein
they could reap nothing but Shame. That by the mouth of the Church, Iphigenes
having been declared free from his first Bonds, his Will was that he should
not be fettered a second time contrary to his own desire. That it was
sufficient, that against the Motions of his own Mind he had already once
testified his Obedience to his Parents by tying himself to Modestina, without
submitting again his Will to their's for an Alliance disproportionable; That
the Age of the Princess Respicia did oblige him rather to reverence her as a
Mother, than cherish and research her as a Wife; That her Daughter Simphoroza
was yet too young for an Husband; That Amiclea might be dispensed from
Marriage for the same Reason, besides that the promise of a Prisoner is never
held to proceed from any other motion than Compulsion. And in sum, as well
against that, as the paternall authority of Mieslas, he opposed his Royal and
Sovereign Power, to remit purely and freely Iphigenes in the Liberty of his own
Choice. That he had sounded his Intentions, and being fully informed thereof
by his ingenious Confession, he had besides alleged very pertinent Reasons,
that hindered him from Marrying any of those three that desired him. Which made
him engage his thoughts elsewhere, and contract a Marriage in private (which
was then to be made evident and confirmed by the Church) with a simple
Shepherdess named Almeria, whom he found according to his own Heart, and who
possessed as much ingenuity, Virtues and Graces as she had little Beauty. That
he had made him see so clear into the Purity, Innocence and Sincerity of that
Affection, that in stead of blaming him for having abased his Spirit to a
Subject so inferior to his Birth and Condition, he esteemed him the more,
judging how faithful would he be to his King who had so religiously
preserved his Faith to so mean a Creature. That for these considerations
imposing Silence to his Father and Mother, and rejecting the Pretensions of the
three Rivalls, his Will and Pleasure was, by virtue of his full and absolute
Power, and of his Royal Authority, that that Marriage should be celebrated by
the Archbishop, who had disannulled the former, and that immediately in the
presence of all that Company, the Rustic Almeria having been brought secretly
into the Palace for that purpose by his Command.

These last words pronounced with a serious and Majestic accent, stopped the
mouth (not without an extreme impatience) of the irritated Mieslas, who
intended to do no less then kill Almeria with his own hands, or make her be
poisoned within few days after her Marriage. What discourses in the Thoughts,
what Thoughts ran through the Minds of the three Rivalls, what pain had they to
hold their peaces in so fair and so pressing an occasion to speak! One only
thing gave them the respit that Heartbreaking Grief denied them, which was,
that this ceremony was only to contract Iphigenes to Almeria, the Marriage
being remitted to a more pompous solemnity; insomuch that they promised
themselves, during that intervall, to use new endeavors to break that
alliance, and procure the accomplishment of their own pretensions; For, if
betwixt the Mouth, and the Glass arrive diverse accidents, several means might
be found in that interim to divert that blow which was so fatal to their
Hopes: Besides, not daring to oppose the King's Will in his own presence, every
one remained in silence, when the King turning himself toward the Archbishop,
asked him if he was not ready to recive the Promises of the future Marriage of
the Palatine of Plocens with the Shepherdess Almeria?

Whereunto the Prelate made answer, that he saw nothing to hinder him from
obeying so Just a Command, in regard Kings may dispossess their Subject's
Parents of the Power which they have in such cases over their Children, and
dispense these of the Obedience which they owe to them; the Regal Authority,
as a grand Sphere, embracing the Paternall under it; For, Kings are above the
Laws; and Favorites sometimes above the Kings. This Conceit made the King
laugh.

Then the betrothed Pair being demanded, the Commission of bringing them in
was given to Boleslaus, who being the maine Engine in this stratagem, whilst
the King was making his Speech, had made Virgenia retire herself into a Gallery
near the Closet, whilst he dressed Liante in a Woman's Habit, plain and modest,
but decent and honorable enough; then having ordered his Hair, and rendered his
Complexion more tawny by the application of some of that liquour mentioned in
our Rural recreations, no body could discern him to be other in that
equipage than the same Almeria, whom Pisides, Argal and Pomeran had seen in the
enchanted Forest of Plocens.

The hour was purposely appointed in the Evening, and the King's chamber
disposed in such sort that all the light that appeared, was directly in the
Eyes of the Assembly; those that were to, be contracted remaining on the darker
side. When they saw Iphigenes come in, imbellished with all the advantages of
rich Ornaments, leading the comely Almeria by the hand, the difference of their
Complexions made every one compare them in his imagination to a black Pigeon
paired with a white. What other thoughts passed through the several fancies of
the Spectatours, your Conceptions must supply the defect of my Expressions.

The Queen and the Infanta Florimunda cherished an Opinion, that he had
purposely made choice of that Creature to cover his imperfection, having to
that end implored the assistance and goodness of His Majesty. The three
Rivalls, who knew themselves Greater and more Beautiful many degrees, believed
that their Splendour would easily dissipate the Clowdiness of that obscure and
homely Mistress. Mieslas was enraged that he durst not speak. Aretuza was ready
to die with apprehension, seeing the moment approach that would discover her
deceit. Only the Archbishop saw clear through all these shades, the rest
(ravished with astonishment) held all their Thoughts suspended, and their Eyes
fixed, sometimes upon the incomparable Beauties of Iphigenes, sometimes
contemplating the Countenance of Almeria; in whose Gesture and Grace they could
read nothing of Rustic.

Being placed at the best advantage for their Design, Iphigenes having
premeditated his Speech, said; That preferring his Faith above all the Honors
and Wealth in the World, he was come thither (under His Majesty's Favor) to
testify, in the Face of the whole Court, that which he had given to the
virtuous Almeria in the obscurity of the Plocensian woods; and show her, as
she had been his only consolation during his disgrace, that he would make
her partaker of the Favors, wherewith His Majesty was pleased to honor him.
That he was not ignorant of the several censures the World would make upon
his Choice, saying that for a Man whom Fortune, by the Favor of a great
Monarch, had raised to such eminent Dignities, he was unworthy of that
happiness, suffering his thoughts to crawle after a subject so
disproportionable to his quality. But he was able to justify his action by
examples, as well sacred as profane, of the greatest Kings and Princes of the
Earth, who had not disdained to make slaves their Wives; he was not however so
much invited by their imitation as his own inclination; Affection proceeding
from Election, not those other considerations which Humane Prudence dictate's
to those who prefer its Maxims above their own contentment. That the Repose of
the Mind (wherein consisted the greatest felicity on Earth) was not an Effect
of the multitude of Riches or Honors, (since to the contrary they begat
Inquietudes and Trouble) but of the satisfaction which every one draw's from
himself by setting limits to his Desires and Fortunes. That the King, his
Master, had already made him too great, since he was elevated by his Favor to
Dignities beyond the aim of his most aspiring wishes; That (being supported by
so high a protection) he might have pretended to a more advantageous Party,
but seeing himself raised to an eminent Condition, which permitted him not to
content himself with an ordinary Match, He had made choice of a Wife, whose
quality was extraordinary mean, according to the Judgment of Men, but whose
Virtues and rare Perfections had won his Heart, and rendered him entirely
here is. That in time he would make appear that Almeria's extraction was not
inferior to Modestina's, to whom he did no injury, since the Justice and
Judgment of the Church had declared their Marriage void. That he had diverse
other Reasons to oppose against the Pretensions of Respicia and Amiclea, but
for Modestie's sake he should forbear to publish them, being contented to
submit himself to his Majesty's Will, under whose favor he humbly beseeched
the Lord Arch bishop to receive the Faith which he would plight to Almeria Who
taking her turn and counterfeiting her Gesture and Voice, lest she should be
known to be Liante, said in few words; That her ambition had never aspired to
so much Glory as to appertain to Iphigenes; but the Providence of Heaven having
looked upon her Humility, she gently condescended to its Ordinance; And,
besides the servitude and subjection which were due to His Maiestie's commands,
that the Charity she owed to her self Commanded her not to reject so good a
Fortune, whereof however she esteemed her self unworthy.

Then the King calling Pisides, Argal and Pomeran (being already informed of
their disguisements in the Forest) asked them if they knew not that
Shpepherdess to be the same Almeria, in who^ they had remarked so many Virtues,
and such Dexterity in the exercises of hunting and Arms in the Forest of
Plocens; which verity they unanimously confirmed; For, they really believed it
to be so, in regard they having discovered only the deceit of Serife (as has
been already said) the condition of Almeria was yet unknown to them.

Upon this acknowledgement the King uttered many favorable expressions in
praise of that Gentile Amazon giving covertly to understand That Modestina was
neither richer nor of a better Family than She, and that Time (which brings
the secretest things to light) having made her known to the World, diverse
astonishments would be either redoubled, or cease. That they would be
redoubled by seeing the proofs of her extraordinary valor, or would cease when
they should find that Iphigenes could not make a better choice, what merits
soever those other pretenders conceived they possessed more than Almeria. These
words were Riddles to the Hearers but you shall shortly understand the
explication of these Oracles.

The King having left speaking, every one remained without replying any thing;
and in this silence the words usual at the solemnities of Contracts being
interchanged by the Parties, the Archbishop con^^^ned them by his Benediction.
That done, Iphigenes prostrating himself before the King, said, That among so
many favors wherewith His Majesty had gratified him, he accounted that in the
first rank, in regard without it all the rest would have been less sensible to
him there being nothing in the World that satisfie's a Lover so much as to see
himself in the possession of that which he loves.

Almeria kneeling afterward, and kissing the King's hand, said three or four
words of like Compliment, with such a grace, that the Queen was constrained to
say, that Shepherdess had been bred in some other place than the Woods, and
that she saw nothing of Rustic in Her.

Thereupon they retired themselves, and the King having commanded that Liante
and Iphigenia should be brought forth to be contracted likewise, Mieslas
starting up said to the King; SIR, I hope I shall have more contentment by this
second alliance than the former: to whom the King suddenly replied, when you
shall know what I have to tell you, I am confident the one will be as
agreeable to you as the other.

Heavens grant it, answered Mieslas, but my advancing was to advertise your
Majesty that the Daughter which I give Liante is named Virgenia, and not
Iphigenia, only by abuse some call her so, because of her resemblance to her
Brother.

We will call her then Virgenia, ( replied the King) because she is a Virgin,
and Iphigenia also, because she is more like her Brother than two drops of
water are like each other.

The King said this to amuse them, and give Iphigenes time to put on his
Woman's habit, and Liante to re-take his own clothes with his former
complexion. Mean time he gave order to Boleslaus that they should not come
forth of his Closet, until he gave the command to call them: Then having
taken aside the Queen, the Infanta, and the three disgraced Graces, he began
to tell them, as a secret, of the impotency of Iphigenes, who had not taken
that Nymph, but to cover his imperfection from the Eyes of the World. Thereupon
having given them leave to reply, the Queen and the Infanta, being forbidden
by Modesty to speak in a business wherein they had so little interest, confined
their thoughts to silence, leaving the field open to the three passionate
Pretenders.

MODESTINA, who was the most interessed, as having her Husband torn out of her
embraces, replied, That to give her the liberty of Speech after so solemn a
Contracting, was to bring a Physician after Death; besides that the absolute
Will of His Majesty was an inviolable Law to her, which must be obeyed without
murmuring; Yet if she might be lest to her own free disposition, she would
content herself to spin out the rest of her days with Iphigtnes without
experimenting him for an Husband any otherwise than she had thitherto;
accusing him of little Friendship in that he had not discovered that defect to
her, which she should have hidden as well as that Country-wench: So Jealousy
made her term Almeria.

The Princess RESPICIA, who persuaded herself it was a false report, protested
that it was the Virtues of Iphigenes which made her desire him, not his
Beauties, nor the consideration of pleasure; (judge you how her Tongue
corresponded with her Heart) and that notwithstanding his Infirmity, she
would have Married him, having already Children enough to preserve her Name and
Memory.

AMICLEA, who had abated somewhat of her ardour, would not however seem less
affectionate than the rest, and following their track, her Ditty was to the
same Tune. The King hereupon told them that Marriages contracted with such
persons were invalide. Then, replied MODESTINA, that which is now in agitation
will be of no force. There are some private Reasons ( answered the King) which
will make it authentic. Kings, said RESPICIA, have always some reasons of
State which pass all Ordinary Rules; they can do, undo, do again; they play
with their Subjects as if they were Tennis-balls.

The King smiling at this freedom of here is, replied; Princess, when the Scales
are fallen from your Eyes, adn the Veil of Passion taken from before your
Reason, I assure my self that you will rather pity than envy Iphigenes. Your
favors, answered the Princess, will render him always more worthy of Envy
than Pity. Upon these words Boleslaus returning into the King's Chamber gave
him notice by a private sign, that all was ready.

Whereupon he presently commanded him to call Liante and IPHIGENIA to be
contracted by the Arch bishop: The Ceremony being past without any
contradiction, the two Lovers standing hand in hand, Liante accompanied his
costly apparel with so gallant a Garb, that he seemed quite another Creature
than Almeria; and those precious Rayments wherewith Iphigenia had splendidly
adorned her self, added such Iuster to her natural Beauty (augmented by the
vermillion of shame which overspread her Cheeks) and her attire had such
conformity with that which Virgenia wore, when she was brought into the
Palace, together with the favor of the Time, Place, and Shadiness of the
Chamber, that no body could know her on the sudden for Iphigenes; there was not
one but had his Eyes dazzled at the splendor of so rare a Beauty, and not one
Soul in the whole Company so Envious, as not to confess, seeing those two
Lovers that they were, as the happiest, so the handsomest Couple in the World.

Mieslas was the first couzened; Insomuch that he cried out alowd, he did not
think he had been Father of so beautiful a Daughter. What think you, Madam,
said the King turning to the Queen, were it not an impiety for a Father to
disown so admirable a Daughter? She seems to me an Angel rather (answered
the Queen) and that she has more reason to acknowledge the Heaven for her
Father than Mieslas. Indeed, said Florimunda, it were great Pity that such a
Jewel should be hidden; hence-forwards this Lady will be one of the richest
Ornaments of the Court. That Is evident (replied the King) and Liante shall do
well to be careful of her, for if so many Ladies were inamoured of her
Brother, her penetrating glances will engender no less flames in diverse
Courtier's Hearts.

The Royal Chamber seemed at that time like a Serene Heaven, wherein their
Majesty's were the greater Lights; the others the meaner Planets, as the
Infanta Florimunda, Modestina, the Princess Respicia, Amiclea, Melindra, and
poor Oloria quite Eclipsed. But what Rank can we give to the fair IPHIGENIA,
unless it be that of the Planet that bear's the Name of the Goddess which
causes Love?

When Oloria saw that glorious Star, she would have hidden herself from her
own Eyes. The changing of her Color showed sufficiently the distemper of her
thoughts, but all the Assembly was so attentive in contemplating the
incomparable IPHIGENIA, that no body took notice of her alterations. She
confess't her self vanquished by that eminent Beauty; therein she read the
cause of Liante's scorns, whom in her Heart she called Traitor, for having
spoken of Affection to her being prepossessed with that Object; She had
nothing left to support her senses in that Despair, but this sorry consolation,
that her Sister Was as much excalled in Beauty, as She surpassed her in
handsomness. At length she excused her unfaithful Lover, as having made a
choice so worthy of his Judgment, that she herself was constain'd to approve
it.

The Queen having for some time held her Eyes attentively fixed on IPHIGENIA'S
Face, turned to Florimunda, saying, Sister, by the Life of the King, my Lord, I
do not think it is possible to find through the whole World two Faces more
like than those of the Brother and the Sister; There is but one Letter's
difference in their Names, but in their Faces I find not the least tittle of
exception; and if Iphigenes were in Women's clothes, I believe we should hardly
be able to distinguish them.

Iphigenes hearing this Discourse, notwithstanding the gravity and modest
bashfulness, wherewith he had studiously composed his Conntenance, could not
refrain smiling, but with so pleasing a grace, as obliged the Infanta to reply;
Madam, There is no difference but in their action; For Iphigenes has I know
not what of Martial in his Face, but this Lady has a certain sofclier look so
full of attraction, that her sweetness charm's me.

What Philosophical severity would not have changed countenance at these
Speeches? The King had all the pain imaginable to contein himself, seeing so
universal an Error. Then, the Infanta speaking again to the Queen, said,
Madam, does not your Majesty perceive that this Nymph Almeris, whom Iphigenes
has chosen for his Wife, excepting her complexion (which is somewhat tauny by
being much exposed to the Sun) has some resemblance to Liante? I did think so
(replied the Queen) but not to interrupt the King who was speaking, I forbore
declaring of my sense.

The King who made a show of not hearing this Discourse, knew that artificial
things (like Paint) are but of little durance; and if he should differ the
discovery of that Secret much longer, he should lose the pleasure of his
Stratagem. For, he overheard already the Palatine's three friends, Pomeran,
Pisides and Argal saying to each other, Would not you say that were Serife? I
must confess I never saw any Sister so perfectly a Brother.

Clemencia hearing the high praises every Spectator gave to the perfections of
her Natural Sister, would willingly have quitted the quality of Legitimate to
have possessed so eminent a Beauty: and a secret worm of Envy gnawing her
Heart, made her conceit that the extolling of Iphigenia's graces was the
eclypsing of here is. The Prince Cassin, who could have wished to himself as many
Eyes, as the Poets gave Argus, the better to contemplate IPHIGENIA, could not
forbear, saying, that Liante was the happiest of Men. As many Heads as many
Opinions, as many Mouths as many Censures. Only poor Aretuza dreading the
success of this adventure, was like one that hold's the Porringer whilst the
Surgeon is opening his Vein; the Cruelty of Mieslas swam in her Fancy, his
inhumane humor dazzled her Eyes with terror; and although she was in the
King's Court (a sacred and inviolable Sanctuary) and under his protection; yet
she trembled like a Pigeon that see's a Gerfaulcon near him.

LIANTE and IPHIGENIA being contracted, the King promised Mieslas to pay his
Daughter's Dowry, and gratify Liante with such pensions and Honors, as he
should not grudge to leave him the use of his Estate during Life, ordeining
that the first Male-Child that should proceed of that Marriage should bear the
Name and Arms of the house of Mieslas, and the rest Liante's.

All the Ceremony being past, the Queen and Florimunda, according to the
ordinary curiosity of great Ladies, would have had Iphigenia come near them,
that they might examine her Beauties, and make trial of her Wit. But the King
who knew that Gold would not endure the Touch, commanded Boleslaus to
re-conduct the new Contracted Couple into his Closet, until he should give
order for their coming forth together with the former, like the four wheels of
a Triumphant Chariot.

Which done, beating the Iron while it was hot, and not to give leisure to the
assistants of discoursing and communicating their Opinions, having prepared
their attentions by promising to tell them one of the strangest Evenements any
Age had produced upon the Theater of the World, he related summarily the
History of the Birth, Education and Fortune of Iphigenes, with the principal
Passages already declared in this Narration. And then turning to Mieslas,
Behold (said he) Seigneur Palatine the memorable Marvel your Rigor has
produced; are not you happy to have brought into the World a Daughter that
surpasses so many Men in Valor and Generosity, and so many Women in Beauty?
And let me tell you, if for preserving this Miracle of Nature, you should
conceive any displeasure against your Wife, who has showed herself so discreet
and virtuous, and endured your insupportable humors with such patience, you
would be the most unworthy Father and Husband that ever the Sun beheld;
Neither must you think ever to appear in my presence, or stay within my
Dominion, if you should dare to attempt any thing against the Mother or
Daughter, whom I take into my safeguard and especial Protection. See how the
Heavens overcoming your Malice by singular Mercies, have rendered you more
happy than you, imagined; upon whose gracious Obligations prepare henceforwards
a due Repentance and Acknowledgement of their Goodness. And you, discreet
Aretuza (who have had this laudable industry to elevate your Child with so much
Virtue and Prudence, by the care of this aged Man, whom you made her Governor)
rest contented and without Fear: For, besides the security you may expect from
me for your own Person, know that I will raise your Son-in-law LIANTE and your
Daughter IPHIGENIA to such a degree of Fortune, as many Mothers would desire
none but Daughters upon the same condition. Neither shall this Happiness
terminate in them alone; our Intention and Will is, that all those who have
contributed any thing to her preservation, shall be participant of her
preferment. And you, Fair Ladies (said he to the three Pretendants) who have
so honorably loved the beautiful Palatine, change your fruitless Love into a
just Friendship, which will be more advantageous; cease to afflict your Souls
with sighing after a vain and sterile Passion, and reserve your selves for the
joyful solemnity of Her Nuptials, who honors you as she ought. These two
alliances which you have seen contracted are but one; only the habits being
changed made LIANTE Almeria, and an IPHIGENIA of Iphigenes. Whereof you may be
more fully satisfied, if you take the pains to go into my Closet, or desire to
see them again here. I prepared all things in this manner purposely to increase
your astonishments, and make you know that the Heavens work miracles on Earth,
and before our Eyes.

This Discourse of His Majesty bred such an amaz^ment in the Spirits of all the
assistants, that Admiration transported them beyond themselves. But the most
transported of all was Mieslas, not with Choler but Joy, and his Heart (before
more rigid than the senseless Rocks) being mollified with these words,
discharged it is Rancour in a shower of Tears: He cast himself at his
Majesty's knees, and embracing them could not thank sufficiently the goodness
of that great Prince: He did not pardon his Wife, but ask't her pardon. It was
a pleasure to see that Father and Mother weep for Joy, and all the rest with
Tenderness, Astonishment and Pity.

He that could relate the diverse Resentments of so many persons as had part
in that Commune rejoicing, were no bad Orator; yet it is better concealing
than expressing them, since Silence is an effect of Admiration.

The Queen's and Infanta's impatience made them advance into the Closet, where
they found IPHIGENIA in the disposition of a Criminal, that expect's when the
Judge will pronounce the sentence of his Condemnation. Liante possessed with a
joy beyond belief, felt his Heart dance with excess of Contentment. Poor
Virgenia (who had waited in the Gallery all ready, like one that were to be
Married) was found with her Governess ignorant of all this, and with a conceit
that the Company was then coming to assist at the Ceremony. In sum, the Truth
was discovered, the Mask laid aside, and every one spoke according to his own
Sense. Only the three Rivalls (happy, in their unhappiness, by their own
Cures) became the Subject of Laughter and Divertisement to the Gallants of the
Court.

The King, to enrich this Evenement, and render it yet more illustrious, gave
order to honor the Marriage (which was solemnly to be celebrated) with such
Pomp, Tiltings, Masks, Banquets, and other Magnificences, that he seemed (like
another Assuerus) to desire to show upon this occasion the greatness of his
Glory, and the splendor of his Royal Liberty.

The beautiful Iphigenes who had been the Subject of Sighs to so many Ladies,
became the Object of Admiration to the Men, when he was become Iphigenia; and
although Liante alone had the privilege of possessing her, she could not
hinder others from Loving and Honoring. Whilst these splendide preparatives
were making for the Wedding, Iphigenia (who was more in credit than ever with
the King) contrived diverse other Alliances. That of the Prince Cassin with her
Sister Clemencia was concluded. Pisides, whilst he was an Hostage for
Iphigenes in the Castle of Minsce, became a Prisoner to Amiclea, but durst not
disclose his Passion, for fear of being accused of Presumption, and paid with
a shameful Repulse; Besides incurring the displeasure of Iphigenes; But the
shades being dissipated, he declared himself to Iphigenia, who procured him
Amiclea to Wife. Argal was contented with Oloria; and Pomeran, whom Iphigenia
cherished particularly, received Modestina for his M^stress. Polemander chose
Eleonora, Iphigenia's Ward and Daughter to Stanislas. Only Respicia remained
in her Widdowhood, and her Daughter Simforoza in the expectation of some great
match, when her Age should render her Marriageable.

All Parties were content. Oh Hymen! what Cures after so many wounds, what Joy
to all these persons tossed with so many Storms, to see themselves so suddenly
arrived at the Port, and set on shore with as much Happiness as safety.
Virgenia likewise was not ill provided; For, by Iphigenia's means, (to whom
every one was desirous to be allied, being the chief person in His Majesty's
Favor) Her Husband was a Castellain of Lithuania, near Kinsman to the Palatine
of Troc, named Aradius, who was one of the gentilest and most accomplished
Gentlemen about the Court. These were the fruits of the Peace and
Reconciliation of POLONIA and LITHUANIA.

The Solemnity of this Marriage being past, Iphigenia desired His Majesty to
honor the rest likewise with his presence. Which shortly after were solemnized
accordingly, with such a train of Feasts and public Expressions of Joy, that
Cracovia seemed to be the only Theater of Pleasure. Peace having thus
restored to Polonia that abundance and felicity which commonly does attend it,
you would have said that the Golden Age had been come to sojourn with that of
Iron.

Our incomparable Amazon guiding the Bark of her Fortune in this full Sea of
Favor with such Dexterity, that she seemed to have Married Good-luck with
Desert, never ceased until she had placed her Dear Liante in the same Degree
of Favor with the King as she possessed; and the King discerning so many
Dispositions in that Gentleman worthy of his Benevolence, loved him first for
Iphigenia's sake, but afterward for his own Merits. It is no small advantage
for a diseased Person to have some one to help him into the Bath. Diverse very
deserving Men remain in Obscurity for want of some to expose them to the
Light, and make them known to those, who like Gods on Earth do spin the Thread
of meaner Mortall's Destinies.

Liante's access being thus facilitated, he was forthwith installed Palatine
of Plocent; not long after he became Lord Chamberlain, then Lord High-Steward
of the King's Family, and so increased daily in Dignities proportionably as he
advanced in Favor.

Iphigenia being contented to see him well anchored about the King, studied
nothing so much as to ingratiate herself with the Queen, which Design (by a
great Assiduity about Her Majesty's Person, and with Submissions and Respects,
that would have enchanted Marble) she suddenly accomplished. For, the Queen
who was no ill-willer of here is, whilst she thought her a Man, finding her of
her own Sex redoubled her Affection; and the Infanta Florimunda did no less:
Insomuch that those two Princesses in their Concord had only this Debate, and
in their Discord they accorded in this point; Which should love her most.

Florimunda who had every day full liberty to review that same Face, which she
had so much esteemed in Iphigenes, and being ravished besides, with the
sweetness of her Conversation, could not choose but love her with a Friendship
beyond ordinary; And the other Ladies, who have been ashamed to discover their
Passions whilst they esteemed her as she seemed, made no difficulty of
declaring the violentest motions of their Hearts, when they saw her to be one
of them.

But whilst I stand to represent the happy Estate and Deportments of our
Lovers, I forget to tell you how they acknowledged the Friendship of those, who
attended them in their meaner Fortunes. Our Favorites (who advanced their
Grandeurs by way far different from that of others, who scrape all they can to
themselves) had nothing in greater re-commendation than to establish their own
Fortunes by doing or procuring good to others; like the Sun, who cast's his
Rays outward, and shine's not but by the comunication of his Light. No body
could approach them without resenting the effects of their perfect Courtesy,
no more than stand near a Fire without participating of it is heat.

As occasions served they failed not to represent unto His Mejesty the merits
of their Friends: Mieslas was made Lord Chamberlain when Liante was raised to
the charge of Lord High Steward, and that without Envy: For, being fully
reconciled, and esteeming him as his Son by his Marriage with Iphigenia (after
the manner of most Parents) he desired his advancement rather than his own.

The Prince Cassin, who ambitioned a Government with impatience, obtained (at
their request) of the King a promise of the first Palatinate that fell. All the
rest were either made Lords Castellains in several places, or had considerable
Offices given them about the King or Queen. Only Boleslaus, in whom Ambition
was quite extinct, desired to end his days with his dear Foster Child, who
esteemed and honored him as her Father.

The POLONIANS have two powerful and very bad Neighbors, the MOSCOVIANS
toward the Septentrion, and the Turk in the Oriental part: Against the
inundations of these two Torrents they are forced to raise and repair their
banks continually. The grand KNETZ, or Duke of Moscovia, has always an Heart
burning to see the Kings of Polonia extend their Dominions beyond the
Boristhenes, having one foot in Russia: This displeasure incites him oftentimes
(either out of Ambition, or to exercise his Soldiery) to make Incursions with
his Army into that part called the POLONIAN RUSSIA.

News being brought to the Court at Cracovia, that this Enemy was raising
very considerable Forces to invade Polonia, it was resolved to prevent his
Design, and oppose his fury by incountering him upon the Frontiers of his own
Territories. The Lord High Martial of Polonia was appointed General of the
Army; and because he was very aged and sickly, the Lieutenant Generalship was
given to Mieslas, with a promise of the first Office of Marshall that should
be vacant. which his Daughter, to content his Ambition, procured him. The
occasion seemed so fair that all the grand Gallants of the Court resolved to
bear Arms in that Expedition.

Liante, who burned with desire to show that by his Services he would
endeavor to deserve those favors he daily received from His Majesty, would
be of the number; and notwithstanding all the instances the King could make to
retain him in Cracovia, he would not be induced to submit to that Obedience,
which (...) termed shameful and unworthy of a Man of Honor.

Iphigenia (who during the Peace could not forget the exercises of Chivalry,
and who had been one of the chief in all their Tiltings) determined to
accompany her Husband to the field, and bear Arms. Whatsoever the Queen, the
Infanta and all the other Ladies could allege, it was impossible for them to
extinguish in her that Martial humor, which she had so long practiced. She
was never so much esteemed as in this occurrence; Envy it self, which carrie's
the venime of Aspes under its Tongue, could not forbear commending her; All
said that with that living PALLADIUM they were assured of the Victory, and that
no less than the Fortune of Caesar attended that invincible Amazon.

The King himself could not sufficiently admire and applaud the Greatness and
Gallantry of her Spirit, and had the infirmities of his Age per^^^^^ him, he
would gladly have been a Spectatour of her br^^^ Exploits. Lopez the famous
Comicall Poet of Spain, handsomely inferrs, that those who are descended of
generous Parents cannot but be inclined to Heroic Actions; And in regard his
Language is graver and more graceful than I am able to render it, for the
satisfaction of the Lorers of that Tongue, I have here placed a Copy of his own
Verses,

Ni por el yole el Elephante grave,
Ni ^^as por el Agua el Foenix nuevo,
Ni entierra el Pez ni por la mar el Ave,
Ni menes en el air el Topociego,
Ni en tierra seca el Ruysen^or suave,
Ni el Platano en la Arena, el Cisne en fuego,
Ni el Hombre que es de Padres principales,
Sin las hazanas a su nombre yguales.
In Icy Clymes no Elephants do live,
Nor Water a new Life to the Phaenix give;
Fish cannot dwell on the Earth, nor Birds in the Deep,
Much less the Mole in the Ayry Region creep;
The barren Heaths sweet Nightingales disclaim,
Plane-trees love not the Sands, nor Swans the Flame:
Neither can Persons borne of Noble Sires
Be void of Noble Hearts, and high Desires.
To ask whether Liante and the rest of the Gentlemen, mentioned in this
History, had honorable Commands in this Army, were a frivolous question: It is
but considering what favor can do in like occasions. Polonia never saw a more
complete Army, nor Gallanter men; They repulsed the Enemy (who exceeded them in
number) so far into their own Country, that those that came to assault, were
hardly able to defend themselves. Having taken and sicked diverse places in
Russia, and discomfited the Grand Knez Forces, they returned laden with
Laurells and rich Boety, with a General applanse and magnificent Triumph. But
Fortune, who is never fully indulgent, mingled, according to her custom, some
Gall amongst this Honey, which was by the death of Mieslas; who in routing the
Enemies, engaged himself so far in the pursuit of the fugitives (whereof he
had made an horrible slaughter) that at length Despair having rallied them,
they gave him a fresh charge; and being but weakly attended, he was forced to
resign his Life, and fall a Sacrifice to the irritated fury of the
re-assembled Enemy.

Thus he buried himself in the Tomb of Honor, which he had always so much
desired, like Sampson who died in the midst of his Enemies, or him that was
squeezed to Death under the Elephant which he had killed. If he had been less
courageous, he had enjoyed more fruits of his Victory, and seen himself Lord
High Marshall of Polonia; For, he who had commanded the Army in that
expedition, ended there his days, not by the hand of his Enemies, but Sickness
and Old Age. So that all the charge fell upon our two Favorites, who like
CASTOR and POLLUX shared the honor with such equality, that both refusing it,
both increased their praises.

I am not able to make a relation suiteable to the memorable testimonies of
Valor, that day, rendered by our generous Amazon, and Liante fighting before
her; who vexing that a Woman should lead him the way to honorable Dangers, and
teach him his Lesson in Marse's School, striving to surpass himself he showed
by his blows (which never fell in vain) that be was Master of as an uncommon
a Puissance, as incomparable Dexterity. Cassin, P^^^ander, Pisides, sides,
Argal, Pomeran, and Aradius, signalised themselves by Acts of mavelous
Prowess; and Boleslaus, as old as he was, gave proofs of no less Courage in
this warlike exploit, than Prudence in the more Peaceable transactions.

Majestic were the Triumphs which the King made for his Favorites at their
return to Cracovia, making them be proclaimed, the Preservers of their
Country; and to crown this Victory with a worthy acknowledgement, every one
that had rendered himself remarkable in that Action received a particular
recompense from His Majesty. The Prince CASSIN was rewarded with the Palatinate
of PLOCENS, Liante reserving to himself that of PODOLIA, where all his own
Estate lay, and the memory of his own Father and Father-in-law were yet recent.
The Office of Lord CHAMBERLAIN was conferred upon POMERAN, as well in
consideration of his own virtue, as for MODESTINA'S sake whom he had Married.
All the rest likewise tasted of his Majesty's Favors, according to their
Merits and Qualities: And Liante was confirmed in the Office of Lord High
Marshall of POLONIA, to the Shame and Heartbreaking of his Enviers, the Joy of
his Friends, the singular Contentment of IPHIGENIA, the Glory of the KING, and
full Satisfaction of his own Desires. In honor of whose triumphant Memory and
completed Happiness, a Poet of the times affixed these

VVISHES.
IN Fine thus Fortune ceased to frown,
And Passion's storms were overblown;
Our matchless Lovers thus (made free
From the foul breath of Calumny)
Raised to the Top of their Desires,
Quenched and revived each others Fires.
Let then no Torments of the Mind
Disturb their Calm; Let no unkind
Aspect, with Grief or dismal War,
Their fortunate Conjuncture mar;
Supernall Powers, bless their repose,
And never let Thistles choke this Rose.
Fly from their thoughts Chimera's vain
Of Hatred and Umbragious pain,
That their linked Souls may fully prove
The sweets of Pleasure, Peace and Love;
And after all their Tempests may
Ride safe at Anchor in the Bay.
These Surges being past and Minds appeased,
I hope, like them, my Readers will be pleased.
FINIS.

