A FORM OF COMMON PRAYER, WITH THANKSGIVING, FOR THE Late Victory By His
Majesty's Naval Forces: Appointed to be used in and about London, On Tuesday
the 14th of August; And Through all ENGLAND, On Thursday the 23d of August.



Set forth by His Majesty's Authority.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1666.

The Order for Morning Prayer.
Let him that ministers read with a loud voice these Sentences of Scripture;
and then say the Exhortation that follows.
I Exhort, that first of all supplications, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men;

For Kings, and for all that are 2.
in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.

For this is good and acceptable in the sight of 3.
God our Savior.

DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moves us in sundry places, to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should
not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly
Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart,
to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite goodness
and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins
before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet
together, to renderthanks for the great benefits that we have received at his
hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy Word, and to
ask those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the
soul: Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as are here present, to
accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the
heavenly grace, saying after me.

The Confession to be said of the whole congregation after the Minister, all
kneeling.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, We have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep, We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts, We have offended against thy holy laws, We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done, And we have done those things which we
ought not to have done, And there is no health in us: But thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us miserable offenders; Spare thou them, O God, which confess their
faults; Restore thou them that are penitent, according to thy promises declared
unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord; and grant, O most merciful Father, for
his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the
glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone standing; the people still
kneeling.
ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and has
given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his
people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: He
pardons and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his
holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repentance and his
holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and
that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last
we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The people shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen.
Then shall the Minister kneel, and begin the Lords Prayer; the people also
repeating it with him.

OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Then likewise he shall say,
O Lord open thou our lips.

Answ. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Priest.

O God, make speed to save us,

Answer.

O Lord make haste to help us.

Here all standing up, the Priest shall say,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Priest.

Praise ye the Lord.

Answer.

The Lords name be praised.

In stead of Venite exultemus shall be sung or said this Hymn following; one
Verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and people.
NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us: but unto Ps. 115. 1.
thy Name be the praise.

Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks: yea unto Ps. 75. 1
thee do we give thanks.

For great things are they, that thou have done: Ps. 71. 17.
O God, who is like unto thee?

Thou art the God, that does wonders: Who is Ps. 77. 14, 13.
so great a God as our God?

The Lord has done great things for us: yea the Ps. 126. 3, 4
Lord has done great things for us, for which we rejoice.

Thou art our King, O God: the Help that is done Ps. 44. 5. Ps. 74. 13.
upon earth, thou do it thy self.

Through thee have we overthrown our enemies: Ps. 44. 6.
and in thy Name have we trod them under, that rise up against us.

For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my sword 7.
that shall help me.

But it is thou, that savest us from our enemies: 8.
and put them to confusion, that hate us.

We gat not the Victory through our own sword: 3.
neither was it our own arm, that helped us;

But thy right hand, and thy arm, and the light 4.
of thy countenance: because thou had a favor unto us.

If the Lord had not been on our side (now may Ps. 124. 1^.
we say:) if the Lord himself had not been on our side, when men rose up
against us;

They had swallowed us up quick: when they 2.
were so wrathfully displeased at us.

Yea, the waters had drowned us: the deep waters 3, 4.
of the proud had gone even over our souls.

But praised be the Lord: who has not given 5.
us over as a prey unto their teeth.

Our help stands in the Name of the Lord: who 7.
has made heaven and earth.

God has showed us his goodness plenteously: Ps. 59, 10.
and God has let us see our desire upon our enemies.

Therefore will we offer in his dwelling an oblation with great gladness: we
will sing praises unto Ps. 27. 7.
the Lord.

Let Heaven and Earth praise him: the Sea, Ps. 69. 35.
and All that moves therein.

Sing unto God, O ye Kingdoms of the earth: O Ps. 68. 32.
sing praises unto the Lord.

Ascribe unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people: Ps. 96. 7.
ascrive unto the Lord worship and power.

Ascribe unto the Lord the honor due unto his 8.
Name: bring presents, and come into his courts.

O love the Lord, all ye his Saints: for the Lord Ps. 31. 26.
preserves them that are faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud doer.

Blessed be the Lord our God from everlasting, Ps. 106. 46.
and world without end: and let all the people say, Amen.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: And to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Asserte Domino. Psalm. xxix.
BRing unto the Lord, O ye mighty, bring young rams unto the Lord: ascribe unto
the Lord worship, and strength.

Give the Lord the honor due unto his Name: worship the Lord with holy worship.

It is the Lord, that commands the waters: it is the glorious God, that
makes the thunder.

It is the Lord, that rules the Sea; the voice of the Lord is mighty in
operation: the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice.

The voice of the Lord breaks the cedar-trees: yea, the Lord breaks the
cedars of Libanus.

He makes them also to skip like a calf: Libanus also, and Sirion like a young
unicorn.

The voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire, the voice of the Lord
shakes the wilderness: yea, the Lord shakes the wilderness of Cades.

The voice of the Lord makes the hinds to bring forth young, and discovers
the thick bushes: in his temple does every man speak of his honor.

The Lord fitteth above the water-Iloud: and the Lord remains a King for ever.

The Lord shall give strength unto his people: the Lord shall give his people
the blessing of peace.

Exultate, justi. Psalm. xxxiii.
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: for it becomes well the just to be
thankful.

Praise the Lord with harp: sing praises unto him with the lute, and instrument
of ten strings. Ssing unto the Lord a new song: sing praises lustily unto him
with a good courage.

For the word of the Lord is true: and all his works are faithful.

He loves righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of the
Lord.

By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the hosts of them by
the breath of his mouth.

He gathers the waters of the sea together, as it were upon an heap: and
lays up the deep, as in a treasure-house.

Let all the earth fear the Lord: stand in awe of him, all ye that dwell in the
world;

For he spoke, and it was done: he commanded and it stood fast.

The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught: and makes the devices
of the people to be of none effect, and casts out the counsels of Princes.

The counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever: and the thoughts of his heart
from generation to generation.

Blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord Jehovah: and blessed are the
folk, that he has chosen to him to be his inheritance.

The Lord looked down from heaven, and beheld all the children of men; from the
habitation of his dwelling he considers all them that dwell on the earth.

He fashioneth all the hearts of them: and understands all their works.

There is no king, that can be saved by the multitude of an host: neither is
any mighty man delivered by much strength.

A horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man: neither shall he deliver
any man by his great strength.

Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: and upon them that put
their trust in his mercy.

To deliver their soul from death: and to feed them in the time of dearth.

Our soul has patiently tarried for the Lord: for he is our help and our
shield.

For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have hoped in his holy Name.

Let thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon us: like as we do put our trust in
thee.

Deus noster refugium. Psalm. xlvi.
GOd is our hope and strength: a very present help in trouble.

Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved: and though the hills be
carried into the midst of the sea.

Though the waters thereof rage, and swell: and though the mountains shake at
the tempest of the same.

The rivers of the flood thereof shall make glad the city of God: the holy
place of the tabernacle of the most Highest.

God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall help
her, and that right early.

The heathen make much ado, and the kingdoms are moved: but God has showed his
voice, and the earth shall melt away.

The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord: what destruction he has
brought upon the earth.

He makes wars to cease in all the world: he breaks the bow, and knappeth
the spear in sunder, and burns the chariots in the fire.

Be still then, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen,
and I will be exalted in the earth.

The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

The first Lesson is part of the 16. Chap. of the first book of Chronicles,
beginning at the 7. verse to the end of the 36.
THen on that day David delivered first this psalm to thank the Lord, into the
hand of Asaph and his brethren. Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his Name,
make known his deeds among the people. Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him,
talk you of all his wondrous works. Glory ye in his holy Name, let the heart of
them rejoice that seek the Lord. Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face
continually. Remember his mavelous works that he has done, his wonders, and
the judgments of his mouth. O ye seed of Israel his servant, ye children of
Jacob his chosen ones. He is the Lord our God, his judgments are in all the
earth.

Be ye mindful always of his covenant: the word which he commanded to a
thousand generations; Even of the covenant which he made with Abraham, and of
his oath unto Isaac: And has confirmed the same to Jacob for a law, and to
Israel for an everlasting covenant, Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of
Canaan, the lot of your inheritance. When ye were but few, even a few, and
strangers in it: And when they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom
to another people: He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea, he reproved kings
for their sakes, Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.
Sing unto the Lord all the earth: show forth from day to day his salvation.
Declare his glory among the heathen, his mavelous works among all nations.
For great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised: he also is to be feared above
all gods. For all the gods of the people are idols: but the Lord made the
heavens. Glory and honor are in his presence: strength and gladness are in his
place. Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the people: give unto the Lord glory
and strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name: bring an
offering, and come before him, worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. Fear
before him, all the earth: the world also shall be stable, that it be not
moved. Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice: and let men say
among the nations, The Lord reigns. Let the sea roar, and the fullness
thereof: let the fields rejoice, and all that is therein. Then shall the trees
of the wood sing out at the presence of the Lord, because he comes to judge
the earth. O give thanks to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures
for ever. And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together,
and deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy Name, and
glory in thy praise. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever and ever: and
all the people said, Amen, and praised the Lord.

After the first Lesson shall follow Te Deum Laudamus in English.
WE praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all angels cry aloud: the heavens, and all the powers therein.

To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin: continually no cry,

Holy, holy, holy: Lord God, of Sabbath.

Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty: of thy glory.

The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee,

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee.

The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee.

The noble Church throughout all the world: does acknowledge thee.

The Father: of an infinite Majesty.

Thine honorable: true, and only Son.

Also the holy Ghost: the Comforter.

Thou art the King of glory: O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor the Virgins
womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of death: thou did open the kingdom
of heaven to all believers.

Thou fittest at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come: to be our Judge.

We therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy saints: in glory everlasting.

O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heritage.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever.

Day by day: We magnify thee.

And we worship thy Name: ever world without end.

Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy upon us: habe mercy upon us.

O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.

O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never he confounded.

For the second Lesson, 1 Pet. II.
WHerefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and enbies,
and all evil speakings; As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word,
that ye may grow thereby: If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious: To
whom coming as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of
God, and precious, Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an
holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. Wherefore it is contained in the scripture; Behold, I lay in Sion a
chief corner stone, elect, precious. And he that believes on him shall not be
confounded. Unto you therefore which believe, he is precious; but unto them
which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made
the head of the corner, And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even
to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were
appointed. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation,
a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praise of him who has called
you out of darkness into his mavelous light: Which in time past were not a
people, but are now the people of God: which had not obtained mercy, but now
have obtained mercy. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as
evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God
in the day of disitation. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the
Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme, Or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may
put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. As free, and not using your
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. Honor all
men; love the brotherhood: Fear God; Honor the King. Servants be subject to
your masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for
your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for
it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were
ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye
should follow his steps. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.
Who when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously. Who his own self bare
our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live
unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going
astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.

BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited and redeemed his people.

And has raised up a mighty salvation for us: in the house of his servant
David.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets: which have been since the world
began.

That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hands of all that hate
us.

To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers: an to remember his holy
covenant.

To perform the oath which he swear to our forefather Abraham: that he would
give us;

That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies: might serve him
without fear;

In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life.

And thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways.

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people: for the remission of their
sins.

Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the dayspring from on high has
visited us.

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and to
guide our feet into the way of peace.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and the people standing.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord; who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and buried; he
descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended
into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.

And after that, these prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister
first pronouncing with a loud voice,
The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy spirit.

Minister.

Let us pray.
Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Then the Minister, Clerks and people, shall say the Lords prayer with a loud
voice.

OUr Father which art in heaven: Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then the Priest standing up, shall say,
O Lord show thy mercy upon us.

Answer.

And grant us thy salvation.

Priest.

O Lord save the King.

Answer.

And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.

Priest.

Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.

Answer.

And make thy chosen people joyful.

Priest.

O Lord save thy people.

Answer.

And bless thine inheritance.

Priest.

Give peace in our time, O Lord.

Answer.

Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.

Priest.

O God make clean our hearts within us.

Answer.

And take not thy holy Spirit from us.

In stead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer shall these two be used.
O Almighty God, the sovereign Commander of all the world, in whose hand is
power and might which none is able to withstand; We bless and magnify thy
great and glorious Name for this happy victory the whole glory whereof we do
ascribe to thee, who art the only giver of victory. And we beseech thee, give
us grace to improve this great mercy to thy glory, the advancement of thy
Gospel, the honor of our Sovereign, and as much as in us lies, to the good of
all mankind. And, we beseech thee, give us such a sense of this great mercy, as
may engage us to a true thankfulness, such as may appear in our lives by an
humble, Joy, and obedient walking before thee all our days, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. To whom with thee and the holy Spirit, as for all thy mercies,
so in particular for this victory and deliverance, be all glory and honor
world without end. Amen.

O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face of their enemies; We yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our
deliverance from those great and apparent dangers where with we were compassed.
We acknowledge it thy goodness that we were not delivered over as a prey unto
them; beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward us, that all
the world may know that thou art our Savior and mighty deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The second Collect for Peace.
O God, who art the author of peace, and lover of concord, in knowledge of
whom stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom; defend us thy
humble servants in all assaults of our Enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The third Collect for Grace.
O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day; defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Here follows the Litany.
O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Sun, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy, from envy,
hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness,

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil,

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death,

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition, privy conspiracy, and rebellion, from all false doctrine,
heresy, and schism, from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and
Commandment,

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, by thy holy Qativity and Circumcision,
by thy Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation,

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine Agony and bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious
Death and Burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by the coming
of the holy Ghost,

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment,

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Charles, our most
gracious King and Governor.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious Queen Catherine,
Mary the Queen Mother, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests and Deacons, with
true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their preaching
and living, they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute Justice, and to maintain Truth.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations Unity, Peace and Concord.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy Commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord:

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred, and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world,

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world,

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Priest.

O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.

Answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.
O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we make
before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress us:
and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the
devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the providence of
thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David, have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ;

Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

Priest.

O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us,

Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.
WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy Name, turn from us all those evils that we most
righteously have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only Mediator
and Advocate Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Most gracious and glorious Lord God, who by thy great power have made, and
by thine infinite wisdom do dispose and order all things, the Protector of
those that trust in thee, and their Deliverer in time of their distress: Our
Enemies compassed us about on every side, but thou have delivered us by thy
mercy. They were many, and did rage horribly, but thou, O Lord, who dwell on
high art mightier; They intended that mischief, which through thy goodness to
us they were not able to perform; And when they had marked us out for ruin,
thou did then bring upon them swift destruction. Out of the deep of the Sea
we cried unto thee, O Lord, and thou did hear us. We acknowledge and confess,
O our God, that it is not our own strength that has helped us, not the number
of our Ships, nor the courage of our Soldiers, nor yet the conduct of our
Commanders, but thy alone wisdom and power that has defeated the counsels and
broken the strength of our Adversaries. It is thine own right hand that
purchased us this Victory. We want words to express our thankfulness, and
thoughts to conceive the greatness of thy manifold Deliverances; yet be thou
pleased to accept the best praises that we can give, which we desire now to
render unto thee from the bottom of our souls; and grant, O Lord, that we may
never forget this thy wonderful blessing, which thou have vouchasafed not only
to us, but to all our succeeding generations, that it may still prove an
incitement unto us to obey and serve thee in holiness of life; and that
improving this Victory to thy glory and our own good, we may obtain the like
happy success in all our future Enterprises, to the glory of thy Name, through
Jesus Christ our only Savior and Deliverer. Amen.

Then shall follow this Prayer; which shall be used continually as long as the
Navy is abroad.
O Most glorious, and powerful Lord God, who alone have spread out the heavens,
and compassed the waters with bounds, until night and day come to an end; at
whose command the winds blow and who rulest the raging of the sea; Thou art
terrible in all thy works of wonder, the great God to be feared above all. We
therefore adore thy divine Majesty, acknowledging thy power, and imploring thy
goodness. Be pleased to receive into thine Almighty and most gracious
protection the persons of thy servants that fight for us, and the Ships and
Qavies in which they serve: preserve them all from the dangers of the sea, and
from the violence of the enemy, and from every sad accident: that they may be a
safeguard to our most gracious Sovereign, and his Kingdoms, and a security for
such as pass on the seas upon their lawful occasions. Help, Lord, and save them
for thy mercies sake; that they may return in safety, with honor and victory,
and good success, to enjoy the blessings of the land, and the fruit of their
labors; and that all the inhabitants of these Islands, being blessed with plenty
and prosperity, peace and quietness, may serve thee our God in righteousness,
and true holiness, and with a thankful remembrance of all thy mercies may ever
praise and glorify thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer of Saint Chrysostom.
ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord to make our
common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three are
gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests; Fulfill now, O
Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Cor. 13. 14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

The Communion-Service.
The Priest standing at the North-side of the Lords Table, shall say,
OUr Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.

ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid: cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of
thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
holy name, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Minister.

GOd spoke these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God: thou shall have none
other gods but me.

People.

Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likenese of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them; for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister.

Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that take th his Name in vain.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor, and
do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our heart; to keep this law.

Minister.

Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister.

Thou shall do no murder.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister.

Thou shall not commit adultery.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister.

Thou shall not steal.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

Minister.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing
that is his.

People.

Lord, have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts, we
beseech thee.

Let us pray.
ALmighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite; have mercy
upon the whole Church, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant Charles our
King and Governor, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things
seek thy honor and glory: And that we and all his subjects (duly considering
whose authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in
thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed word and ordinance, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, who with thee and the holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever one
God, world without end. Amen.

O Almighty God, the sovereign Commander of all the world, in whose hand is
power and might which none is able to withstand; We bless and magnify thy
great and glorious Name for this happy victory, the whole glory whereof we do
ascribe to thee, who art the only giver of victory. And, we beseech thee, give
us grace to improve this great mercy to thy glory, the advancement of thy
Gospel, the honor of our Sovereign, and as much as in us lies, to the good of
all mankind. And, we beseech thee, give us such a sense of this great mercy, as
may engage us to a true thankfulness, such as may appear in our lives by an
humble, holy, and obedient walking before thee all our days, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: To whom with thee, and the holy Spirit, as for all thy
mercies, so in particular for this victory and deliverance, be all glory and
honor world without end. Amen.

O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face of their enemies; We yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our
deliverance from those great and apparent dangers wherewith we were compassed.
We acknowledge it thy goodness that we were not delivered over as a pray unto
them; beseeching thee still to contiuue such thy mercies toward us, that all
the world may know that thou art our Savior and mighty deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle, Phil. 4. 4.
Rejoice in the Lord always: and again I say, Rejoice. Let your moderation be
known unto all men: The Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing: but in every
thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made
known unto God. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Finally, brethren, whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report: if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on
these things. Those things which ye have both learned and received, and heard
and seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. v. 43.
YE have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate
thine enemy: But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you,
and persecute you: That ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven; for he makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends
rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what
reward have ye? do not even the Publicanes the same? And if ye salute your
brethren only, what do you more then others? do not even the Publicanes so? Be
ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

I Believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of
all things visible and invisible:

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten of his
Father before all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God,
begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom all things
were made: who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from heaven, and
was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made in an, and was
crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate; He suffered, and was buried, and
the third day he rose again, according to the Scriptures, and ascended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of the Father. And he shall come again
with glory to judge both the quick and the dead: whose kingdom shall have no
end.

And I believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds
from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe one
Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of
sins. And I look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to
come. Amen.

Then follows the Sermon; and after that shall be said.

LEt your light so shine before men, that they S. Mat. 5. 16.
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do to S. Matt. 7. 12.
you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets.

Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church militant here on earth.

ALmighty and everliving God, who by thy holy Apostle have taught us to make
prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for all men; We humbly beseech
thee most mercifully (to accept our alms and oblations, and) to receive these
If there be no alms or oblations, then shall the words (of accepting our alms
and oblations) be left out unsaid.
our prayers, which we offer unto thy Divine Majesty, beseeching thee to
inspire continually the universal Church with the spirit of truth, unity, and
concord: and grant that all they that do confess thy holy Name, may agree in
the truth of thy holy Word, and live in unity and godly love. We beseech thee
also to save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors, and
especially thy servant CHARLES our King, that under him we may be godly and
quietly governed. And grant unto his whole Council, and to all that are put in
Authority under him, that they may truly and indifferently minister justice, to
the punishment of wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of thy true
Religion and Virtue. Give grace, O heavenly Father, to all Bishops, and
Curates, that they may both by their life and doctrine set forth thy true and
lively Word, and rightly and duly administer thy holy Sacraments. And to all
thy people give thy heavenly grace, and especially to this Congregation here
present, that with meek heart and due reverence they may hear and receive thy
holy Word, truly serving thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of
their life. And we most humbly beseech thee of thy goodness, O Lord, to comfort
and succor all them who in this transitory life are in trouble, sorrow, need,
sickness, or any other adversity. And we also bless thy holy Name, for all thy
servants departed this life in thy faith and fear; beseeching thee to give us
grace so to follow their good examples, that with them we may be partakers of
thy heavenly kingdom. Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

Then shall be added this Prayer following.
O Lord God our strength and our salvation; We thy unworthy Servants, the
sinful People of these three Nations, (whom by thy miraculous Providence thou
did lately rescue from the Miseries of a civil War at home, and bast now
crowned with victory against a potent Enemy abroad) in grateful acknowledgement
of the so great, and often repeated Mercies, are here now before thee with
humble, yet inflamed hearts, desirous to offer up unto thee our Sacrifice of
praise and thanks; calling Heaven and Earth to witness with us, that as it was
the Miracle of thy mere Mercy, which raised us out of the depth of those
miserable Confusions, in which we lay; So it is thy Power alone, O our God, by
which we stand; thy good Providence, by which we prosper. More particularly,
with the highest expressions of our devoutest hearts we magnify thy great and
glorious Name, O Lord our God, for that remarkable Victory, wherewith thou have
lately blessed the Naval Forces of our gracious Sovereign. O continue forth thy
loving kindness toward him: Let thy tender Mercies prevent, and follow him all
the days of his life: Let his Reign be prosperous, and his Arms victorious; and
let the blessings of safety and happy success attend all those that fight his
Battles. Subdue more and more unto him the People that is under him, and the
nations under his feet. Preserve him from the gathering together of the
froward, and from the Insurrection of the evil doers. Let no weapon that is
formed against Him prosper; but make Him and His always to return with Honor
and Victory, and Joy, and Triumph. O let all the Blessings of Heaven and Earth
be poured out upon the sacred Head of thine Anointed, and from thence flow down
even to the skirts of the meanest of His people, in Peace and Plenty, and
Prosperity: That so both Prince and people may with one mind, and with one
mouth glorify thee, O God most gracious, for this thy unspeakable goodness;
not only presenting thee (as this day) the fruit of the lips, giving thanks
unto thy Name, but also through the entire course of a holy life ever offering
up unto thee souls and bodies, which thou have created, redeemed and preserved,
to be a living and holy Sacrifice acceptable unto thee through Jesus Christ: To
whom with thee, O Father Almighty, in the unity of the holy Ghost, be glory in
the Church throughout all ages world without end. Amen.

ALmighty God, who have promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in thy
Sons Name; We beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us that have
made now our prayers and supplications unto thee; and grant that those things
which we have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be
obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Priest shall let them depart with this blessing.
THe peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

The Order for Evening Prayer.
Let him that ministers read with a loud voice these Sentences of Scripture;
and then say the Exhortation that follows.
I Exhort, that first of all supplications, 2 Timothy 2. 1.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men;

For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a 2.
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

For this is good and acceptable in the sight of 3.
God our Savior.

DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moves us in sundry places, to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should
not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly
Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart,
to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite goodness
and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins
before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet
together, to render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his
hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy Word, and to
ask those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the
soul: Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as are here present, to
accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the
heavenly grace, saying after me.

The Confession to be said of the whole congregation after the Minister, all
kneeling.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, We have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep, We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts, We have offended against thy holy laws, We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done, And we have done those things which we
ought not to have done, And there is no health in us: But thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us miserable offenders; Sspare thou them, O God, which confess their
faults; Restore thou them that are penitent, according to thy promises declared
unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord; and grant, O most merciful Father, for
his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the
glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone standing; the people still
kneeling.
ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and has
given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his
people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: He
pardons and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his
holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repentance and his
holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and
that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last
we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The people shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen.
Then shall the Minister kneel, and begin the Lords Prayer; the people also
repeating it with him:

OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Then likewise he shall say,
O Lord open thou our lips.

Answ. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Priest.

O God, make speed to save us.

Answer.

O Lord make haste to help us.

Here all standing up, the Priest shall say,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

Answer.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Priest.

Praise ye the Lord.

Answer.

The Lords name be praised.

Then shall be sung or said this Hymn following; one Verse by the Priest, and
another by the Clerk and people.
NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us: but unto Ps. 115.
thy Name be the praise.

Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks: yea unto Ps. 75. 1
thee do we give thanks.

For great things are they, that thou have done: Ps. 71. 17.
O God, who is like unto thee?

Thou art the God, that does wonders: Who is Ps. 77. 14. 13
so great a God as our God?

The Lord has done great things for us: yea the Ps. 126. 3
Lord has done great things for us, for which we rejoice.

Thou art our King, O God: the Help that is done Ps. 44 5. Ps. 74. 13
upon earth, thou do it thy self.

Through thee have we overthrown our enemies: Ps. 44. 6.
and in thy Name have we trod them under, that rise up against us.

For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my sword 7.
that shall help me.

But it is thou, that savest us from our enemies: 8.
and put them to confusion, that hate us.

We gat not the Victory through our own sword: 3.
neither was it our own arm, that helped us;

But thy right hand, and thy arm, and the light 4.
of thy countenance: because thou had a favor unto us.

If the Lord had not been on our side (now may Ps. 124. 1.
we say:) if the Lord himself had not been on our side, when men rose up
against us;

They had swallowed us up quick: when they 2.
were so wrathfully displeased at us.

Yea, the waters had drowned us: the deep waters 3, 4.
of the proud had gone even over our souls.

But praised be the Lord: who has not given 5.
us over as a prey unto their teeth.

Our help stands in the Name of the Lord: who 7.
has made heaven and earth.

God has showed us his goodness plenteously: Ps. 59, 10.
and God has let us see our desire upon our enemies.

Therefore will we offer in his dwelling an oblation Ps. 27. 7.
with great gladness: we will sing praises unto the Lord.

Let Heaven and Earth praise him: the Sea, Ps. 69. 35.
and All that moves therein.

Sing unto God, O ye Kingdoms of the earth: O Ps. 68. 32.
sing praises unto the Lord.

Ascribe unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people: Ps. 96. 7.
ascribe unto the Lord worship and power.

Ascribe unto the Lord the honor due unto his ^.
Name: bring presents, and come into his courts.

O love the Lord, all ye his Saints: for the Lord Ps. 31. 26.
preserves them that are faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud doer.

Blessed be the Lord our God from everlasting, Ps. 106. 46.
and world without end: and let all the people say, Amen.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: And to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall bei: world without end.
Amen.

Jubilate Deo. Psalm. LXVI.
O Be joyful in God, all ye lands: sing praises unto the honor of his Name,
make his praise to be glorious.

Say unto God, O how wonderful art thou in thy works: through the greatness of
thy power shall thine enemies be found liars unto thee.

For all the world shall worship thee: sing of thee, and praise thy Name.

O come hither, and behold the works of God: how wonderful he is in his doing
toward the children of men.

He turned the sea into dry land: so that they went through the water on foot;
there did we rejoice thereof.

He rules with his power for ever, his eyes behold the people: and such, as
will not believe, shall not be able to exalt themselves.

O praise our God, ye people: and make the voice of his praise to be heard;

Who holds our soul in life: and suffers not our feet to slip.

For thou, O God, have proved us: thou also have, tried us, like as silver is
tried.

Thou broughtest us into the snare: and laidst trouble upon our loins.

Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water,
and thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

I will go into thine house with burnt-offerings: and will pay thee my vows,
which I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth, when I was in trouble.

I will offer unto thee fat burnt-sacrifices, with the incense of rams: I will
offer bullocks and goats.

O come hither, and hearken, all ye, that fear God: and I will tell you, what
he has done for my soul.

I called unto him with my mouth: and gave him praises with my tongue.

If I incline unto wickedness with mine heart: the Lord will not hear me.

But God has heard me, and considered the voice of my prayer.

Praised be God, who has not cast out my prayer: nor turned his mercy from me.

Bonum est confiteri. Psalm. xcii.
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord: and to sing praises unto thy
Name, O most Highest;

To tell of thy loving kindness early in the morning: and of thy truth in the
night-season;

Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the lute: upon a loud instrument,
and upon the harp.

For thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy works: and I will rejoice in
giving praise for the operations of thy hands.

O Lord, how glorious are thy works: thy thoughts are very deep.

An unwise man does not well consider this: and a fool does not understand it.

When the ungodly are green as the grass, and when all the workers of
wickedness do flourish: then shall they be destroyed for ever; but thou Lord,
art the most Highest for evermore.

For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, lo, thine enemies shall perish: and all the
workers of wickedness shall be destroyed.

But mine horn shall be exalted like the horn of an unicorn: for I am anointed
with fresh oil.

Mine eye also shall see his lust of mine enemies: and mine ear shall hear his
desire of the wicked, that arise up against me.

The righteous shall flourish like a palm tree: and shall spread abroad like a
Cedar in Libanus.

Such as be planted in the house of the Lord: shall flourish in the courts of
the house of our God.

They also shall bring forth more fruit in their age: and shall be fat and well
liking.

That they may show how true the Lord my strength is: and that there is no
unrighteousness in him.

Laudate Dominum. Psalm. cxlvii.
O Praise the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God: yea, a
joyful and a pleasant thing it is to be thankful.

The Lord does build up Jerusalem: and gather together the outcasts of Israel.

He heals those that are broken in heart: and gives medicine to heal their
sickness.

He tells the number of the stars: and calls them all by their names.

Great is our Lord, and great is his power: yea, and his wisdom is infinite.

The Lord sets up the meek: and brings the ungodly down to the ground.

O sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing praises upon the harp unto our
God.

Who covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth: and
makes the grass to grow upon the mountains, and herb for the use of men.

Who gives fodder unto the cattle: and feeds the young ravens that call upon
him.

He has no pleasure in the strength of an horse: neither delights he in any
man's legs.

But the Lords delight is in them that fear him: and put their trust in his
mercy.

Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Sion.

For he has made fast the bars of thy gates: and has blessed thy children
within thee.

He makes peace in thy borders: and fills thee with the flower of wheat.

He sends forth his commandment upon earth: and his word runs very swiftly.

He gives snow like wool: and scatters the hoar-frost like ashes.

He casts forth his ice like morsels: who is able to abide his frost? He
sends out his word, and melts them: he blows with his wind, and the
waters flow.

He shows his word unto Iacoh: his statutes and ordinances unto Israel.

He has not dealt so with any nation: neither have the heathen knowledge of
his laws.

The first Lesson is 1 Samuel 2. to 11.
ANd Hannah prayed and said, My heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is
exalted in the Lord: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies: because I rejoice
in thy salvation. There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside
thee: neither is there any rock like our God. Talk no more so exceeding
proudly, let not arrogancy come out of your mouth: for the Lord is a God of
knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. The bows of the mighty men are
broken, and they that stumbled, are girt with strength. They that were full,
have hired out themselves for bread, and they that were hungry, ceased: so that
the barren has born seven, and she that has many children is waxed feeble.
The Lord kills, and makes alive, he brings down to the grave, and brings
up. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich: he brings low, and lifts up. He
raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the
dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of
glory: for the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world
upon them. He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent
in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail. The adversaries of the Lord
shall be broken to pieces: out of heaven shall he thunder upon them: the Lord
shall judge the ends of the earth, and he shall give strength unto his king,
and exalt the horn of his anointed.

Magnificat.
MY soul does magnify the Lord: and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

For he has regarded: the lowliness of his handmaiden.

For behold, from henceforth: all generations shall call me blessed.

For he that is mighty has magnified me: and holy is his Name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout all generations.

He has showed strength with his arm: he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts.

He has put down the mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble and
meek.

He has filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he has sent empty
away.

He remembering his mercy has helped his servant Israel: as he promised to our
forefathers, Abraham and his seed for ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

The second Lesson is, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
BUt of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto
you. For your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so comes as a
thief in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden
destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they
shall not escape. But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should
overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of
the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep
as do others: but let us watch and be sover. For they that sleep, sleep in the
night; and they that be drunken, are drunken in the night. But let us who are
of the day, be sover, putting on the breast plate of faith, and love, and for
an helmet, the hope of salvation. For God has not appointed us to wrath; but
to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that whether we
wake or sleep, we should live together with him. Wherefore comfort your selves
together, and edify one another, even as also ye do. And we beseech you,
brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord,
and admonish you; and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake.
And be at peace among your selves. Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that
are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all
men. See that none render evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow that
which is gold, both among your selves, and to all men. Rejoice evermore. Pray
without ceasing. In every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you. Quench not the spirit. Despise not prophesnings.
Prove all things: hold fast that which is good. Abstain from all appearance of
evil. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your whole
spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it. Brethren,
pray for us. Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss. I charge you by the
Lord, that this epistle be read unto all the holy brethren. The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

Cantate Domino. Psalm. xcviii.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he has done mavelous things.

With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: has he gotten himself the
victory.

The Lord declared his salvation: his righteousness has he openly showed in
the sight of the heathen.

He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all the
ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God.

Show your selves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands: sing, rejoice and give
thanks.

Praise the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a psalm of thanksgiving.

With trumpets also and shawms: O show your selves joyful before the Lord the
King.

Let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world, and they
that dwell therein.

Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together before
the Lord: for he is come to judge the earth.

With righteousness shall he judge the world: and the people with equity.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and the people standing.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord; who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and buried; he
descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended
into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.

And after that; these prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister
first pronouncing with a loud voice,
The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy spirit.

Minister.

Let us pray.
Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Then the Minister, Clerks and people, shall say the Lords prayer with a loud
voice.
OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then the Priest standing up, shall say,
O Lord show thy mercy upon us.

Answer.

And grant us thy salvation.

Priest.

O Lord save the King.

Answer.

And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.

Priest.

Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.

Answer.

And make thy chosen people joyful.

Priest.

O Lord save thy people.

Answer.

And bless thine inheritance.

Priest.

Give peace in our time, O Lord.

Answer.

Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.

Priest.

O God make clean our hearts within us.

Answer.

And take not thy holy Spirit from us.

Instead of the first Collect shall these two be used.
O Almighty God, the sovereign Commander of all the world, in whose hand is
power and might which none is able to withstand; We bless and magnify thy
great and glorious Name for this happy Victory, the whole glory whereof we do
ascribe to thee, who art the only giver of Victory. And, we beseech thee, give
us grace to improve this great mercy to thy glory, the advancement of thy
Gospel, the honor of our Sovereign, and, as much as in us lies, to the good
of all mankind. And, we beseech thee, give us such a sense of this great mercy,
as may engage us to a true thankfulness, such as may appear in our lives by an
humble, holy, and obedient walking before thee all our days, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: To whom with thee, and the holy Spirit, as for all thy
mercies, so in particular for this Victory and Deliverance, be all glory and
honor world without end. Amen.

O Almighty God, who art a strong Tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face of their Enemies; We yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our
deliverance from those great and apparent Dangers wherewith we were compassed.
We acknowledge it thy goodness that we were not delivered over as a prey unto
them; beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward us, that all
the world may know that thou art our Savior and mighty Deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do
proceed; Give unto thy servants that peace which the world cannot give, that
both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that by thee we
being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and
quietness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son,
our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly Father, High and Mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the
only Ruler of Princes, who do from thy Throne behold all the dwellers upon
earth; most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, and so replenish him with the grace of
thy holy Spirit, that he may always incline to thy Will, and walk in thy way;
endue him plenteously with heavenly gifts; grant him in health and wealth long
to live; strengthen him, that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies, and
finally after this life he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for the Royal Family.
Almighty God, the Fountain of all goodness, we humbly beseech thee to bless
our gracious Queen Catherine, Mary the Q. Mother, James Duke of York, and all
the Royal Family; Endue them with thy holy Spirit, enrich them with thy
heavenly grace, prosper them with all happiness, and bring them to thine
everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Clergy and People.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels; send down upon
our Bishops, and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their charge, the
healthful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, pour upon
them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the honor of
our Advocate and Mediator Jesus Christ. Amen.

O Lord God our strength and our salvation; We thy unworthy Servants, the
sinful People of these three Nations, (whom by thy miraculous Providence thou
did lately rescue from the miseries of a Civil War at home, and have now
crowned with Victory against a potent Enemy abroad) in grateful acknowledgement
of thy so great, and often-repeated Mercies, are here now before thee with
humble, yet inflamed hearts, desirous to oster up unto thee our Sacrifice of
praise and thanks: calling Heaven and Earth to witness with us, that as it was
the Miracle of thy mere Mercy, which raised us out of the depth of those
miserable Confusions, in which we lay; so it is thy Power alone, O our God, by
which we stand; thy good Providence, by which we prosper. More particularly,
with the highest expressions of our devoutest hearts we magnify thy great and
glorious Name, O Lord our God, for that remarkable Victory, wherewith thou have
lately blessed the Naval Forces of our gracious Sovereign. O continue forth thy
loving kindness toward him: Let thy tender mercies prevent, and follow him all
the days of his life: Let his Reign be prosperous, and his arms victorious; and
let the blessings of safety, and happy success attend all those that fight his
Battles. Subdue more and more unto him the People that is under him, and the
Nations under his feet. Preserve him from the gathering together of the
froward, and from the insurrection of the evil doers. Let no weapon that is
formed against him prosper; but make him and his always to return with Honor,
and Victory, and Joy, and Triumph. O let all the Blessings of Heaven and Earth
be poured out upon the sacred Head of thine Anointed, and from thence flow down
even to the skirts of the meanest of his People, in Peace, and Plenty, and
Prosperity; That so both Prince and People may with one mind, and with one
mouth glorify thee, O God most gracious, for this thy unspeakable goodness;
not only presenting thee (as this day) the fruit of the lips, giving thanks
unto thy Name, but also through the entire course of a holy life ever offering
up unto thee Souls and Bodies, which thou have created, redeemed and preserved,
to be a living and holy Sacrifice acceptable unto thee through Jesus Christ: To
whom with thee, O Father Almighty, in the unity of the holy Ghost, be glory in
the Church throughout all ages world without end. Amen.

Then shall follow this Prayer, which shall be used continually so long as the
Navy is abroad.
O Most glorious, and powerful Lord God, who alone have spread out the heavens,
and compassed the waters with bounds, until night and day come to an end; at
whose command the winds blow, and who rulest the raging of the sea; Thou art
terrible in all thy works of wonder, the great God to be feared above all. We
therefore adore thy divine Majesty, acknowledging thy power, and imploring thy
goodness. Be pleased to receive into thine Almighty and most gracious
protection the persons of thy servants that fight for us, and the Ships and
Navies in which they serve: preserve them all from the dangers of the sea, and
from the violence of the enemy, and from every sad accident; that they may be a
safeguard to our most gracious Sovereign, and his Kingdoms, and a security for
such as pass on the Seas upon their lawful occasions. Help, Lord, and save them
for thy mercies sake; that they may return in safety, with Honor and Victory,
and good success, to enjoy the blessings of the land, and the fruit of their
labors; and that all the inhabitants of these Islands, being blessed with plenty
and prosperity, peace and quietness, may serve thee our God in righteousness,
and true holiness, and with a thankful remembrance of all thy mercies may ever
praise and glorify thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer of Saint Chrysostom.
ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord to make our
common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three are
gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests; Fulfill now, O
Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Corinthians. 13. 14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1666.


