A FORM OF PRAYER AND Thanksgiving To Almighty GOD, To be Used throughout the
Cities of London and Westminster, and elsewhere within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, on Sunday the Eighth Day of this Instant September: And in all other
Places throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, on Sunday the Twenty second Day of the same Month: For
Granting to the Forces of His Majesty, and His Allies, so great Success in
taking the Town and Castle of NAMVR; And for Protecting His Majesty's Sacred
Person from the many Dangers to which He was so frequently Exposed during that
Siege.

By Order of the Lords Justices.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. MDCXCV.

A FORM of PRAYER and THANKSGIVING to Almighty God, to be Used throughout the
Cities of London and Westminster, and elsewhere within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, on Sunday the Eighth day of this Instant September: And in all other
Places throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed on Sunday the Twenty Second Day of the same Month.
The Service for that Day upon which the Thanksgiving shall be Observed, must
be used, except where it is here otherwise ordered.

The Prayers shall begin with these Sentences.

NOt unto us Psalm. 11.^.1.
, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise, for thy loving mercy,
and for thy truths sake.

The Lord has done great things for us; yea Psalm. ^.^.4.
, the Lord has done great things for us already, whereof we rejoice.

Instead of the Venite, this Hymn shall be used.

SIng we merrily unto God our strength: make cheerful noise unto the God of
Jacob Psalm. 81.1.
.

We will rejoice in thy salvation: and triumph in the name of the Lord our God
20. 5.
.

Lord thou art become gracious unto thy land: the have turned away the
captivity of Jacob ^5. 1.
.

Thou have forgiven the offense of thy people ver. 2.
: and cove^ed all their sins.

Thou have given victory unto Kings: and have d^livered David thy servant from
the peril of t^^ sword 144. 10.
.

Thou have mightily delivered thy people: even the sons Jacob and Joseph ^^. 15.
.

The King shall rejoice in thy strength 21. 1.
, O Lord exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation.

The Lord will give strength unto his people: the L^^^ will bless his people
with peace 29. 11.
.

Some put their trust in chariots 20. 7.
, and some horses: but we will remember the name of the L^^^ our God.

Be thou exalted 21. 13.
, Lord, in thine own strength: so will sing and praise thy power.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Proper Psalms. XXXIII. XLVII. LXII.

Proper Lessons. The first, Isai. 26. to ver. 13. Te Deum.

Proper Lessons. The second, Heb. 11. ver 24. to ^. Jubilate Deo.

After the Apostles Creed, and the Lords Prayer. the (...) shall be as
follows.

Priest. O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.

Answ. And grant us thy salvation.

Priest. O Lord, save the King.

Answ. Who ^utteth his trust in thee.

Priest. Send him help from thy holy place.

Answ. God ^vermore mightily defend him.

Priest. Let his enemies have no advantage against him.

Answ. Let not the wicked approach to hurt him.

Priest. En^^^e ^y Ministers with righteousness.

Answ. An^ make thy chosen people joyful.

Priest. Give (...) ^o our time, O Lord.

Answ. Because (...) is none other that fights for us, and only thou, O God.

Instead of the first Collect, the following Prayer shall be used.

O Eternal God, our heavenly Father, whose Name is the God of Hosts, who art
the only giver of (...) Victory; We yield thee our hearty Praise and
thanksgiving for the late signal Deliverance, and glorious Success thou have
vouchsafed to our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Allies. We adore and bless
thy Divine Goodness, that thou did not give them over as a Prey to Cruel and
Blond-thirsty Men; but have taught their Hands to War, and their Fingers to
Fight, and have showed them a mavelous great kindness in a strong City. We
humbly pray that these, and all other thy Benefits, may raise in us, and in the
whole Church of God, a spirit of Holy Joy, and Christian Charity, a spirit of
fervent zeal for thy Name and Glory, and a steadfast Faith and Perseverance in
thy Pure and Undefiled Religion, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and
Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for the King, to be constantly Used while His Majesty is Abroad in
the Wars.

ALmighty and most gracious God, who have been our Deliverer in the day of our
distress, and have Raised up thy servant King William to be the happy
Instrument of our Deliverance: And have also wonderfully Preserved him in those
great Dangers to which he has been so often exposed both by Sea and Land: We
humbly beseech thee still to continue him under the merciful care and
protection of thy good Providence; to preserve him from all secret and
treacherous Practices and Attempts; to stand by him, and to cover his Head in
the day of Danger; to bless him with good Success; and to bring him back in
safety to our comfort: And likewise to give us grace to live worthy of these
Mercies, in all thankful obedience to thee, and in dutiful subjection to his
Majesty, whom thou have set over us, and whom we beseech thee long to preserve
and continue to us for thy Mercies sake, in Jesus Christ our blessed Lord and
Savior. Amen.

The Collect for Peace.

O God who art the Author of peace and lo^er of concord, in knowledge of whom
stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom; defend us thy
humble servants, in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Collect for Grace.

O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day; defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Here solloweth the Litany.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: Spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious ^ou^, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us, good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all blindness of heart; from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy; from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin; and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh, and the devil,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From lightning and tempest; from plague, pestilence and famine; from battle,
and murder, and from sudden death,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all sedition, privy conspiracy and rebellion; from all false doctrine,
heresy and schism; from ha^^ness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and
Commandment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation; by the holy Nativity and Circumcision;
by thy Baptis^^, Fasting and Temptation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

By thine Agony and bloody Sweat; by thy (...) and Passion; by thy precious
Death and Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the coming
of the holy Ghost,

Good Lord, deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our wealth; in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in (...) true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and ^^mess of life, thy servant William, our most
gracious King and Governor;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love; and
that he may evermore (...) affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and ^^^per, giving him the victory
over all his enemies;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve Ca^^^^ the Queen Damager, her
Royal Highness (...) Princess Ann^ of Denmark, and all the Royal family;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, ^blests and Deacons, with
true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their ^^^ching
and (...), they may set it forth, and show (...) accordingly;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom (...) understanding;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Ma^^^^ates, giving them grace to
execute Justice, and maintain Truth;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may (...) thee to (...) and keep all thy (...).

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all nations, unity, peace, and concord;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the w^ of truth, all such as have erred
and are received;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as d^stand, and to comfort and help
the weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger,
necessity, and tribulation;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that tra^ by land or by water, all
women laboring of t^ all sick persons and young children, and to show pity
upon all prisoners and captives;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide (...) the fatherless children
and widows, and all that a^ desolate and oppressed;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon a^ men;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our ^se the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time (...) may enjoy them;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repen^^nce, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy (...) Word;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God: We beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ, hear us.
O Christ, hear us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Christ, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Lord, have mercy upon us.
Our Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be ^^ne in earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.

Answ. Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful; mercifully assist our prayers that we make
before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress us;
and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the
devil or man works against us be brought to naught, and by the providence of
thy goodness then may be dispersed, that we thy servants, being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Chirst our Lord.

O Lord, arise, help us, deliver us for thy names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.
Graciously look upon our afflictions.
Pitifulty behold the sorrows of our hearts.
Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.
Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.
O Son of David, have mercy upon us.
Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ; graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

Priest. O Lord. let thy mercy be showed upon us.

Answer. As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray,

We humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities; and
for the glo^^ of thy Name, turn from us all those evils that (...) most
righteously have deserved; and grant that (...) all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and ^^^fidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in ^^ess and
pureness of living, to thy honor and (...), through our only Mediator and
Advocate, (...) Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the end of the Litany, after the Collect [ We humbly beseech thee, O
Father, etc.] shall be said these following Prayers.

O Lord God of our salvation, without whose Aid and Influence all our Strength
is weakness, (...) Courage rashness, and our Counsel folly; We (...) unworthy
servants do magnify thy great and ^^^^ous Name for this and many other most
gra^^^s Preservations thou have vouchsafed His Ma^^^^ Royal Person, and for
that eminent, and (...) remarkable Victory, wherewith thou have late^^^
wonderfully blessed the Arms of our Sovereign (...) and his Allies. O continue
forth thy loving (...) is toward him: Let thy tender mercies pre^^^ and follow
him all the days of his Life: (...) his Reign be Prosperous, and his Arms
Vi^^^s; and let the blessings of Safety and happy ^^ess attend all those that
Fight his Battles. ^^rve him from the gathering together of the (...), and from
the Insurrection of the evil doers. (...) Weapon that is formed against him
prosper, (...) make him always to return with Honor and (...). O Let all the
Blessings of Heaven and (...) poured out upon the sacred Head of thine
Anointed, and from thence flow down even to the skirts of the meanest of his
People, in Peace, and Plenty, and Prosperty: That so both Pr^^^ce (...) People
may with one mind, and with one month glo^^fie thee, O God most gracious; for
this thy unspeakable goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, who art a strong Tower of Defense unto thy Servants against the
face (...) their Enemies; We yield thee praise and Thanksgiving for our
Deliverance from those great an^ apparent Dangers wherewith we were compass^^.
We acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were (...) delivered over as a Prey
unto them; beseechin^ thee still to continue such thy mercies toward (...)
that all the World may know that thou our Savior and mighty Deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The General Thanksgiving.

ALmighty God, Father of all mercies, we th^^ unworthy servants ^o give thee
most humbl^ and hearty thanks for all thy goodness and (...) kindness to us and
to all (...) [ This to be said when any that have been prayed for, desire to
return praise.
particularly to those who desire (...) offer up their praises and
thanksgivings thy late mercies vouchsafed unto (...)] We bless thee for our
creations ^^^servation, and all the blessings (...) life, but above all for
thine ^^^mable love in the redemption of the world by Lord Jesus Christ; for
the means of grace, and the hope of glory. And we beseech thee gi^^ that due
sense of all thy mercies, that our (...) (...) be unfeignedly thankful, and
that we may (...) forth thy praise, not only with our lips, but in (...), by
giving up our selves to thy service, (...) walking before thee in holiness and
righteousness (...) our days, through Jesus Chrilst our Lord; (...) whom with
thee and the holy Ghost be all honor (...) glory, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer of S. Chrysostom.

Almighty God, who host given us grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common ^^^lications unto thee, and do promise, that when (...) or three
are gathered together in thy Name, thou (...) grant their requests; Fulfill now,
O Lord, the (...) and petitions of thy servants, as may be (...) expedient for
them; granting us in this world ^^^^ledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come (...) everlasting. Amen.

2 Cor. 13.14.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be (...) us all evermore. Amen.

(...) the Communion-Service, between the Commandments and the Epistle, shall
this Collect be used, instead of the Collect for the King, and of the Collect
for the day.

O Eternal God, our heavenly Father, whose Name is the God of Hosts, who art
the only giver of ^^^ory; We yield thee our hearty Praise and thanksgiving for
the late Signal Deliverance, and ^^^rious Success thou have vouchsafed to our
Sovereign Lord the King and his Allies. We adore and bless thy Divine Goodness,
that thou did not give them over as a prey to cruel and bloodthirsty men;
but have taught their Hands to War, and their Fingers to Fight, and have showed
them a mavelous great kindness in a strong City. We humbly pray that these,
and all other thy Benefits, may raise in us, and in the whole Church of God, a
Spirit of Holy Joy, and Christian Charity, a Spirit of fervent zeal for thy
Name and Glory, and a steadfast Faith and Perseverance in thy pure and undefiled
Religion, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Then shall follow the Epistle. Phil. 4.4. to v. 10.

Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say r^joyce. Let your moderation be
known unto (...) men. The Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing but in every
thing by prayer and supplication wi^ thanksgiving, let your requests be made
known (...) to God. And the peace of God which passes all (...) standing,
shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Finally, brethren,
whatsoever thin^ are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pur^, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things ar^ of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things. Those things which ye have both learned and received,
and hear^ and seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you.

The Gospel. S. Mark 8.34. to the end.

ANd when he had called the people unto him, with his disciples also, he said
unto them, whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me. For whosoever (...) save his life shall lose it; but
whosoever shall (...) his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall
(...) it. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain (...) whole world,
and lose his own soul? Or what (...) a man give in exchange for his soul?
Whosoever ^^^^refore shall be ashamed of me, and of my wor^s, (...) adulterous
and sinful generation, of him al^^ ^all the Son of man he ashamed, when ^e
comes (...) glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.

Then the Nicene Creed. After that the Sermon.

After the Prayer [ For the whole State of Christ's Church, etc.] this Collect
shall be used.

O Almighty God, the Sovereign Commander of all the world, in whose hand is
power and might, (...) none is able to withstand; We bless and mag^^ (...) ^ame
for this eminent Success, the whole (...) whereof we do ascribe to thy most
wise and gra^^^ Providence. Grant, O Lord, that we may (...) love this great
Blessing to the advancement of (...) Gospel, the honor of our Sovereign, and
as (...) as in us lies, to the good of all mankind. And (...) beseech thee
give us all such a sense of this thy (...), as may engage us to a true
thankfulness, (...) as may appear in our lives, by an humble, holy, (...)
obedient walking before thee all our days, ^^^ugh Jesus Christ our Lord; To
whom with thee (...) the holy Spirit, as for all thy mercies, so in ^^^ticular
for this happy Advantage thou have given (...) ever the common Enemy, he all
glory and honor (...) without end. Amen.

A Prayer for all Mankind, especially for the Reformed Churches.

MOst gracious and merciful God, who art the Savior of all men, especially of
those that believe, and vast commanded us to make prayers and inte^^^sions for
all men, desiring that all may be saved, (...) come to the knowledge of the
Truth: We hum^^^ beseech thee to extend thy mercy and compassion to all
Mankind; more particularly to the Reformed Churches, and especially to those
who are still under Persecution for Truth and Righteousness (...). Relieve them
according to their several necessities; be a shelter and defense to them from
the fury of the Oppressor: Let the sighing of the Prisoners (...) before thee,
and according to the greatness of (...) power preserve them that are appointed
to (...) not the poor always be forgotten; let not the ^^^ent abiding of the
meek perish for ever. (...) mercy them that are banished for the Testimony
(...) thy Truth: Gather thy dispersed together, and (...) store the outcasts of
thy People; and in thy (...) time bring them home to worship thee in (...) own
Land: And whatsoever they have lost for (...) sake, return it to them,
according to thy gra^^^ Promise, in the manifold Blessings of this and a ^^ter
Life: Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his T^^^bles. And we beseech thee to
enlighten all those (...) are in Darkness and Eerour, and to give them
^^pentance to the acknowledgment of the truth; (...) all the ends of the Earth
may remember themsel^^^ and be turned unto the Lord: And we may all (...) come
one Flock under the great Shepherd and ^^shop of our Souls, Jesus Christ, our
Blessed S^^^our and Redeemer. Amen.

ALmighty God, who have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy
Sons Name; We beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears (...), that have
made now our Prayers and Supplications unto thee, and grant that those things
which (...) have faithfully asked according to thy Will, may ^^tually be
obtained, to the relief of our necessity, (...) to the setting forth of thy
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Priest (or Bishop, if he be present) shall let them depart with this
Blessing.

THe Peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge (...) love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: and
the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be
amongst you, and remain with you always. Amen.

FINIS.

