Causes of an Humiliation Appointed by the Commission of the General Assembly,
to be observed through this whole Kirk, on the last Sabbath of March, and first
Sabbath of Aprile, 1653.
AS we conceive, that the many crying evils, for which the Lord has been and
is smiting us, which has been held forth formerly as causes of Solemn
Humiliations, should be seriously laid to heart and mourned for, and especially
that maine and Fundamental evil, the woeful source and root of all our other
Provocations, the contempt of the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, the
ignorance of him amongst the generality of the Land, and the great negligence
even amongst the best of seeking to him for Reconciliation with God, and
entertaining Communion with God through him, and obtaining grace from him for
walking acceptably in our Persons and Callings; So particularly we judge the
Lord in his Providence is calling us to mourn before him;

I. For the growing evidences of his displeasure against the Land, in the
continuance of his sad afflictions upon all ranks of Persons, notwithstanding
our former Humiliations before him, the Lord testifying his anger even against
the prayers of his People: and no wonder, considering the great abuse of that
holy Ordinance by our formalities and Fasting unto our selves and not unto God.

II. The grouth of sin of all sorts; particularly, Pride, Uncleanness,
Contempt of Ordinances, Oppression, Violence, Fraudulent dealing, and that
under the Rod, the most part of the People are growing worse and worse, and
revolting more and more, few or none accepting of the punishment of their
iniquity, and laboring to get their uncircumcised hearts humbled.

III. The increase and heightning of all our woeful differences and divisions,
to the great scandal of the Reformed Christian Religion, and apparent ruin of
the Work (...) Reformation established amongst us, if the Lord in mercy do not
prevent.

IV. The many sad encroachments from diverse hands made and like to be made
upon the precious Liberties of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, a precious trust
committed to us from him, and transmitted to us from our zealous and faithful
Predecessors, who, in the obtaining and preservation of them, loved not their
lives, even unto the death.

V. The general distemper on the spirits of all sorts of People, all or the
most part of all ranks in this time, while the Lord is casting down what he
builded and plucking up what he planted, seeking their own things and few or
none seeking the things of Jesus Christ.

For these, amongst many things, we desire the People of God throughout the
Land may mourn, every man searching his way, and saying, What have I done,
rather then to lay all the weight on the sins of others; And withal, humbly to
pray, That the Lord would power on the Land the spirit of mourning and
repentance, that, in the depth of his own wisdom and goodness, he would find
out ways of healing of our woeful differences, and in the mean while possess
our hearts with the spirit of love, steadfastness, and a sound mind, and with
resolution and courage for enduring whatsoever the Lord in his wise Providence
shall call us to suffer in the maintenance of his truth.


