The CIVIL ARTICLES OF LYMERICK EXACTLY Printed from the Letters Patents:
WHEREIN They are Ratified and Exemplified by Their Majesty's under the Great
Seal of ENGLAND.

R Monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) R
IE MEINTIENDRAY HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Published by Authority.

DUBLIN, Printed by Robert Thornton, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers.
1692.

THE Civil Articles of Lymerick.
GUlielmus and Maria Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex
and Regina, Fidei Defensores, etc.
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint salutem:
Inspeximus Irrotulament. quarund. literarum patentium de confirmatione geren.
Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicessimo quarto die Februarii, ultimi Praeteriti in
Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Recordo, remanen. iH haec verba.

William and Mary. by the Grace of God, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas certain Articles bearing date the third day of October. last past, Made
and Agreed on between Our Justices of Our Kingdom of Ireland, and Our General
of Our Forces there on the one Part, and several Officers there, Commanding
within the City of Limerick in Our said Kingdom, on the other part. Whereby Our
said Justices and General did undertake that We should ratify those Articles
within the space of eight months, or sooner; and use their utmost Endeavors
that the same should be Ratified and Confirmed in Parliament. The Tenor of
which said Articles, is as follows, Viz.

ARTICLES Agreed upon the Third Day of October. One Thousand Six Hundred and
Ninety One.
Between the Right Honorable, Sir Charles Porter, Knight, and Thomas
Coningsby, Esquire Lords Justices of Ireland; and His Excellency the Baron De
Ginckle, Lieutenant General, and Commander in Chief of the English Army; On the
One Part And the Right Honorable, Patrick Earl of Lucan, Piercy Viscount
Gallmoy, Colonel Nicholas Purcel, Colonel Nicholas Cusack, Sir Toby Butler,
Colonel Garrett Dillon, and Colonel John Brown; On the other Part: In the
behalf of the Irish Inhabitants in the City and County of Lymerick, the
Counties of Clare, Kerry, Cork, Sligo, and Mayo.
In Consideration of the Surrender of the City of Lymerick and other Agreements
made between the said Lieutenant General Ginckle, the Governor of the City of
Lymerick, and the Generals of the Irish Army, bearing Date with these Presents,
for the Surrender of the said City, and Submission of the said Army: It is
Agreed, That

I. THE Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, shall enjoy such Privileges in the
Exercise of their Religion, as are consistent with the Laws of Ireland; or as
they did enjoy in the Reign of King Charles the II: And their Majesty's, as
soon as their Affairs will permit them to Summon a Parliament in this Kingdom,
will endeavor to procure the said Roman Catholics such farther Security in
that particular, as may preserve them from any Disturbance, upon the Account of
their said Religion.

II. All the Inhabitants or Residents of Lymerick, or any other Garrison now in
the possession of the Irish, and all Officers and Soldiers, now in Arms, under
any Commission of King James. or those Authorized by him to grant the same in
the several Counties of Lymerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork, and Mayo, or any of them;
and all the Commissioned Officers in their Majesty's Quarters, that belong to
the Irish Regiments, now in being, that are Treated with, and who are not
Prisoners of War, or have taken Protection, and who shall return and submit to
their Majesty's Obedience, and their and every of their Heirs, shall hold,
possess and enjoy all and every their Estates of Freehold, and Inheritance;
and all the Rights, Titles and Interests, Privileges and Immunities, which
they, and every, or any of them held, enjoyed, or were rightfully and lawfully
Entitled to, in the Reign of King Charles the II, or at any time since, by the
Laws and Statutes that were in force in the said Reign of King Charles the II,
and shall be put in possession, by order of the Government, of such of them as
are in the King's Hands, or the Hands of his Tenants, without being put to any
suit or trouble therein; and all such Estates shall be freed and diseharg'd
from all Arrears of Crown-Rents, Quit-Rents, and other public Charges incurred
and become due since Michaelmas, 1688. to the day of the date hereof: And all
persons comprehended in this Article, shall have, hold, and enjoy all their
Goods and Chattels, real and personal, to them, or any of them belonging, and
remaining either in their own hands, or the hands of any persons whatsoever, in
trust for, or for the use of them, or any of them: and all, and every the said
persons, of what Profession, Trade, or Calling soever they be, shall and may
use, exercise and practice their several and respective Professions, Trades and
Callings, as freely as they did use, exercise and enjoy the same in the Reign
of King Charles the II: Provided, that nothing in this Article contained, be
construed to extend to, or restore any forfeiting person now out of the
Kingdom, except what are hereafter comprised: Provided also, That no Person
whatsoever shall have or enjoy the benefit of this Article, that shall neglect
or refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance made by Act of Parliament in England,
in the First Year of the Reign of their present Majesty's, when thereunto
required.

III. All Merchants, or reputed Merchants of the City of Lymerick, or of any
other Garrison, now possessed by the Irish, or of any Town or Place in the
Counties of Clare, or Kerry, who are absent beyond the Seas, that have not bore
Arms since their Majesty's Declaration in February 1688. shall have the benefit
of the Second Article, in the same manner as if they were present, provided
such Merchants, and reputed Merchants, do repair into this Kingdom within the
space of eight months from the date hereof.

IV. The following Officers, viz. Colonel Simon Lutterel, Captain Rowland
White, Maurice Eustace of Yermanstown, Chievers of Maystown, commonly called
Mount-Leinster, now belonging to the Regiments in the aforesaid Garrisons and
Quarters of the Irish Army, who were beyond the Seas, and sent thither upon
affairs of their respective Regiments, or the Army in general, shall have the
benefit and advantage of the second Article, provided they return hither within
the space of eight months from the date of these Presents, and submit to their
Majesty's Government, and take the abovementioned Oath.

V. That all and singular, the said persons comprised in the 2d and 3d
Articles, shall have a general Pardon of all Attainders, Outlawries, Treasons,
Misprisons of Treason, Premunires, Felonies. Trespasses, and other Crimes, and
Misdemeanors, whatsoever, by them, or any of them committed since the beginning
of the Reign of King James the II: and if any of them are attainted by
Parliament, the Lords Justices and General, will use their best Endeavors to
get the same repealed by Parliament, and the Outlawries to be reserved Gratis,
all but Writing-Clerks Fees.

VI. And whereas these present Wars have drawn on great Violences on both
parts, and that if leave were given to the bringing all sorts of private
Actions, the Animosities would probably continue, that have been too long on
Foot, and the public Disturbances last: For the Quieting and Settling therefore
of this Kingdom, and avoiding those Inconveniences which would be the necessary
consequence of the contrary, no person or persons whatsoever, comprised in the
foregoing Articles, shall be Sued, Molested, or Impleaed at the Suit of any
Party or Parties whatsoever, for any Trespasses by them committed, or for any
Arms. Horses, Money, Goods, Chattels, Merchandises, or Provisions, whatsoever,
by them seized or taken, during the time of the War. And no person or Persons
whatsoever, in the Second or Third Articles comprised, shall be Sued,
Impleaded, or made accountable for the Rents, or mean Rates, of any Lands,
Tenements, or Houses by him or them received or enjoyed in this Kingdom, since
the beginning of the present War, to the day of the Date hereof, nor for any
Waste or Trespass by him or them committed in any such Lands, Tenements, or
Houses: And it is also agreed, that this Article shall be mutual, and
reciprocal, on both sides.

VII. Every Nobleman and Gentleman comprised in the said 2d and 3d Article,
shall have liberty to Ride with a Sword, and Case of Pistols, if they think
fit: and keep a Gun in their Houses, for the Defense of the same, or for
Fowling.

VIII. The Inhabitants and Residents in the City of Lymerick, and other
Garrisons, shall be permitted to remove their Goods, hattles, and Provisions,
out of the same, without being viewed and searched, or paying any manner of
Duties, and shall not be compelled to leave the Houses or Lodgings they now
have, for the space of six weeks next ensuing the Date hereof.

IX. The Oath to be administered to such Roman Catholics as submit to their
Majesty's Goverument, shall be the Oath abovesaid, and no other.

X. No person or persons, who shall at any time hereafter break these Articles,
or any of them, shall thereby make, or cause any other person or persons to
forfeit or lose the benefit of the same.

XI. The Lords Justices and General do promise to use their utmost Endeavors,
that all the persons comprehended in the abovementioned Articles, shall be
protected and defended from all Arrests, and Executions for Debt or Damage, for
the space of eight months, next ensuing the Date hereof.

XII. Lastly, the Lords Justices and General do undertake, that their Majesty's
will Ratify these Articles within the space of eight months, or sooner, and
use their utmost Endeavors, that the same shall be ratified and confirmed in
Parliament.

XIII. And whereas Colonel John Brown stood indebted to several Protestants, by
Judgments of Record; which appearing to the late Government, the Lord
Tyrconnel, and Lord Lucan, took away the Effects the said John Brown had to
answer the said Debts, and promised to clear the said John Brown of the said
Debts; which effects were taken for the public use of the Irish, and their
Army: For freeing the said Lord Lucan of his said Engagement, past on their
public Account, for Payment of the said Protestants, and for preventing the
ruin of the said John Brown, and for satisfaction of his Creditors, at the
instance of the Lord Lucan, and the rest of the Persons aforesaid, it is
agreed, That the said Lords Justices, and the said Baron de Ginckle, shall
intercede with the King and Parliament, to have the Estates secured to
Roman Catholics, by Articles and Capitulation in this Kingdom, charged with,
and equally liable to the payment of so much of the said Debts, as the said
Lord Lucan, upon stating Accounts with the said John Brown, shall certify
under his Hand, that the Effects taken from the said Brown amount unto; which
Account is to be stated and the Balance certified by the said Lord Lucan in
one and twenty days after the Date hereof:

For the true performance hereof, We have hereunto set our Hands, Char. Porter.
Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De. Ginckle.
Present Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash.


ANd whereas the said City of Limerick has been since, in pursuance of the
said Articles, surrendered unto Us. Now know ye, that We having considered of
the said Articles, are Graciously pleased hereby to declare, that We do for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, as far as in Us lies, Ratify and Confirm the same,
and every Clause, Matter and Thing therein contained. And as to such Parts
thereof, for which an Act of Parliament shall be found to be necessary, We
shall Recommend the same to be made good by Parliament, and shall give Our
Royal Assent to any Bill or Bills that shall be Passed by Our Two Houses of
Parliament to that purpose. And whereas it appears unto Us, that it was agreed
between the Parties to the said Articles, that after the words, Limerick,
Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo, or any of them in the second of the said Articles,
the words following; Viz. And all such as are under their Protection in the
said Counties, should be inserted, and be part of the said Articles. Which
words having been casually omitted by the Writer, the omission was not
discovered till after the said Articles were Signed, but was taken notice of
before the second Town was surrendered: And that our said Justices, and General,
or One of them, did promise that the said Clause should be made good, it being
within the intention of the Capitulation, and inserted in the Foul Draught
thereof. Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Ratify and Confirm
the said omitted Words, Viz: [And all such as are under their Protection in the
said Counties] Hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Ordaining and
Declaring, that all and every Person and Persons therein concerned, shall and
may have, receive, and enjoy the Benefit thereof, in such and the same manner,
as if the said Words had been inserted in their proper place, in the said
second Article; any Omission, Defect, or Mistake in the said second Article, in
any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, and Our Will and Pleasure is, that
these Our Letters Patents, shall be Enrolled in Our Court of Chancery in our
said Kingdom of Ireland, within the space of one year next ensuing.

In Witness, etc. Witness Our Self at Westminster, the twenty-fourth day of
February, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae Quarto per Breve de
Privato Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Premissor. Predict. Ad Requisitionem
Attornat. General. Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae pro Regno Hiberniae.
Duximus exemplificand. per Presents. In Cujus Rei Testimonium has literas
nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Testibus Nobis Ipsis apud Westmon. Quinto die Aprilis, Annoque Regni eorum
Quarto.

Bridges
Examinat. per nos

S Keck Lacon Wm. Child
In Cancel. Magistros.




