LETTER FROM THE COMMISSION OF THE General Assembly OF THE Church of Scotland
TO THE Honorable Council and Inhabitants of the Scots Colony of Caledonia in
America.

Dated at Glasgow, July 21, 1699.

GLASGOW, Printed by Robert Sanders, One of His Majesty's Printers. 1699.

Much Honored, and dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Grace,
Mercy and Peace be multiplied unto you.
Though in the wise and powerful providence of GOD, who has determined the times
before appointed, Acts 17.26.
and the Bounds of every man's Habitation, you are now separated from us by a
vast Ocean; yet you are not disjoined from our Hearts; nor shall these Waters
ever quench, nor Time, nor Distance wear out our Love to you: Ephesians. 1.16.
We cease not to make mention of you in our Prayers to God for your
Preservation, and for the Prosperity of your Souls; nor to offer Him our
humblest Adorations, and thankful Praises, for the wonders of His Kindness, and
Mercy to you (whereof we have received most refreshing Accounts,) and to us in
you, whom we justly consider as a worthy part of our selves, both as we are a
Civil and a Religious Body: and pray we may have reason always so to do.

We acknowledge the special merciful hand of our gracious good God, hitherto
most signally and visibly appearing in the first proposal, in the Management,
and in the Conduct of this Great, and Generous Undertaking, in which you are
now so far, and happily engaged; That in a poor Nation, altogether unacquainted
with the carrying on of such great Designs, so many Persons of all Ranks and
Qualities should Unite together in such a Contrivance: That they got the
opportunity of having a Prince, and Estates of Parliament ready to give Life by
Law to the same: That they who were generally Strangers to Trade, should have
been induced to venture so considerable a Stock, to the surprising of those
Abroad, and themselves at Home; when they could not but lay their Account with
many Difficulties, and much Opposition: That these noble Patriots should
continue so firm, and willing to contribute their several Proportions of Means,
and endeavors to set it so fairly on Foot, notwithstanding of several
unforeseen Disappointments, and Oppositions: That these Disappointments and
Oppositions, which seemed to look toward it with no promising aspect, have
fallen out rather unto its furtherance: That a Land known to all the World to
be a fit Seat for such an Undertaking, should have lain hitherto neglected by
our more potent Neighbors: That you the first noble Adventurous have been led
out of your Native Country under Divine Direction to this Land, which the Lord
had espied and reserved for you, Ezekiel. 20.6. Exodus 19.4.
and to which he has born you, as on Eagles wings, through the Dangers of the
great Deep, and as it were aloft over amazing Difficulties, and has piloted
you safely in to that Void, but commodious Dwelling, whilst you mean while,
like Abraham, Heb. 11.^8.
(in a manner) knew not whither you went: That He has kept you, in so long,
doubtful, and hazardous a Voyage: That so few, comparatively, have died by the
way, or since your Arrival; All this is the doing of the Lord, Psalm. 118.23.
and his marvelous doing, and calls for the humblest, and heartiest Praises,
and most devoted Services from you, and from us.

We have in part heard of the Providence that have gone over you, since your
Landing, and have rejoiced to hear of the good hand of our Gracious God
continued upon you for Good, in your acceptableness to the Natives: Psalm. 24.1.
Deuteronomy. 32.8. Psalm. 30.9.
That He whose the Earth is and the fullness thereof, even the most High, who
divided to the Nations their Inheritance, and separated the Sons of Adam, has
made room for you with the free consent, and good liking of these Natives, the
Natural Lords of the Land; and in the Preservations you have been under, and
the Successes you have obtained, whilst envious Neighbors, who covet more than
they are able to possess, Isa. 5.8.
Joining Land to Land, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the Earth,
are seeking to molest you, and turn your Possessions into Esek and Sitnah: Genesis
26.20.21.
That God has hitherto maintained your Reh^both, and, we trust, shall maintain
it, and make you fruitful in the Land.

Amidst the refreshful Relations we had of your happy Successes, it was most
afflicting to us to hear of the Death of our dear Brethren Mr. James and Mr.
Scot your two Ministers, whom we sent along with you, for the Comfort and
Edification of your Souls; and we find you have been sensibly affected with the
same: He is the Sovereign Lord who was pleased to mingle that bitter Water
among your Wine, that, amidst the many signal Smiles of Providence bestowed on
you, you met with this frowning Cloud, to allay both your, and our Joy; But who
may say to the Almighty, Dan. 4.35.
What do Thou? Let us adore the only wise God in this Dispensation, as
calling you to an higher valuing of Gospel Ordinances, and, by the want of
them, to more enlarged desires after them, and a more diligent Improvement of
them when restored; and as calling us to a more vigorous and tender concern in
providing for your Souls Food and spiritual Benefit.

To have and improve the glorious Gospel in its Ministry and Ordinances, is the
happiness of a Place and People: Where these are, Glory dwells in that Land,
and without them, there is no Glory: Psalm 85.9. 1 Samuel 4.21.22.
Let Men's Dwellings upon Earth be Fertile and Barren, Wealthy or Poor, Peaceful
or Perilous; this compensats the Inconveniences of the one, and is the richest
Advantage of the other: How sweet is the Life, and secure is the Protection of
these who dwell under the Wings of the God of Israel, Ruth 2.12.
and the warm Influences of his Ordinances in their Life and Power!

The Honorable Court of Directors, by their Applications to the last General
Assembly, and to us, have been careful to represent your Desires to have more
Ministers sent you, and very forward in contributing what was proper for them,
to accomplish the same: And we hope we may say, it has been the good Hand of
God in answering their Endeavors, and ours, that we herewith send you Four of
our Brethren, Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, and our Fellow-Workers unto
the Kingdom of God; Men who have a great Zeal for you, and have very cheerfully
hazarded their Lives, in addicting themselves unto this Ministry, whom we
beseech you to receive, and submit your selves unto in the Lord: Though we might
use much boldness in Christ with you, as our Spiritual Children, in
Recommending them as our Brethren; yet it is under an higher and more august
Character they come unto you, and under which you are to receive them, as the
Servants of the Living God, as the Ambassadors of Christ, as Men ready to
spend and be spent in the Service of your Faith and Joy, and in communicating
this Gospel to the Gentiles in the Regions beyond you: 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.13.
Do you therefore Esteem them very highly in Love for their Works sake,
entertain their Message, encourage their Endeavors, and strengthen their
Hands: We trust they shall, through Grace, make full Proof of their Ministry
among you; 2 Cor. 10.6. Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19.
Do you also fulfill your Obedience to them in the Lord, as Men that Watch for
your Souls, and must give an Account; That you may be their Hope and Joy, their
Glory and Crown of Rejoicing, in the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
Coming; and they may Labor amongst you, and give up their Account of you in
that Day with Joy and not with Grief; for that is unprofitable for you.

We have fully Instructed them to set up a Christian Discipline, and Order in
your Church; 1 Cor. 14 ^^.
for God is not the Author of Confusion but of Order and Peace in all the
Churches of the Saints; and in this they will stand in need of some of you to
be joined with themselves, as Elders and Office-Bearers in the Church,
Overseers of the Manners of the People, and Assistants in the Exercise of
Discipline, and Government: And we hope such of you as shall be orderly Called
hereunto, will reckon it your Duty to embrace the same, and discharge that
Office with Christian Meekness, Prudence, and Faithfulness: And we are
confident of the Zeal and Love of all of you in every thing wherein they may
need your Assistance: Nor will the Church of Scotland be wanting in what may be
requisite from time to time, toward the maintaining the Gospel among you, and
diffusing its Glorious Light and Influence upon the Neighboring Gentiles; that
they to whom Christ was not heretofore spoken of, Romans 15.21.
may see; and they that have not heard may consider and understand.

And now Honored Friends and Dear Countrymen, whilst you are far from us, 2
Cor. 11.2.
our Bowels earn toward you, and we are Jealous over you with a godly
Jealousy, lest any among you forget the Obligations of their Birth,
Sacramental Entrance into, and Education in a Christian Church, their Vows in
the day of their Distresses or Fears, the marvelous loving Kindness of the Lord
in your Preservation hitherto, and Establishment; and what Duty and Service
these wonderful Providence you have met with and still are under do require;
lest there should be any Achan in your Camp to trouble your Israel, and kindle
the Displeasure of your God, provoking Him to turn against you to do you Evil,
after he has done you Good. And we hope you will consider what we say as
proceeding from the warmest Affections of your tender loving Mother the Church
of Scotland.

Remember then in the first Place, That God is the Sovereign Lord, and absolute
Proprietor of all the Earth; it is He who has appointed a Place for you, and
carried you safely to it. He it is, even the Lord of Hosts, who fights your
Battles against those who would disturb your Settlement: From Him you derive
your Original Right and your Security; acknowledge Him then as your Great
Landlord with Sincere and Upright Souls: All you enjoy is His, all you expect
is from Him; Pay therefore unto Him due Homage for all: Serve Him who is your
God, and the God of your Fathers, and the God of this Nation to which you
belong; and cleave to Him with upright Hearts; For the Lord is with you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
while ye be with Him; and if ye seek Him, He will be sound of you; but if ye
forsake Him, He will forsake you.

You are not left like the blind Heathen to grope after Him, as in the Dark;
Acts 17.27.
He has been, and Is nigh unto you, and your Eyes have been opened (even all
of you, at least, by Christian Education) to behold him, not only in his
wondrous Works, which all Men behold; but in the most wonderful of all his
Works, in his Glorious Gospel: By this you have been taught that God is a
Spirit, John 4.24. Deuteronomy. 12.4, 31.
and you must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth: You shall not do so unto the
Lord your God, as the Heathen do unto their Gods, who stupidly, and blockishly
Worship their blockish Idols; 2 Kings 17.26.27.
but you must remember the Manner of the God of the Land from whence you came,
and serve him after his own Manner revealed in his Gospel. There you have been
instructed that in all Places his Eye is upon you, and he observes your Hearts
and Ways in Caledonia no less than in Scotland: Psalm. 139.9.
The Wings of the Morning, and the uttermost Parts of the Sea hide not from
him: All are his Territories and under his Dominion: It Is there you Learn that
in every Nation and in every Place, he that fears God, Acts. 10.35. 1 Timothy
2.8.
and works Righteousness, that lifts up holy Hands without Wrath, or
Doubting, is accepted of him; but that the Workers of Iniquity can no where
escape his Notice, nor get out of the Reach of his Justice, but by Flying in to
Christ, and taking Refuge in that blessed Hope which the Gospel sets before
them.

We beseech you to Ponder these Things with all due Seriousness; Let them be
ever present to your Minds, with a Practical Influence, and Operation upon your
Spirits, and your whole Deportment; that you Reverence, and Serve, Trust and
Adore, Love and Obey that God whose you are, and whose are all your Ways: To
him you owe your present Settlement, and your future Hopes; See and enjoy his
Bounty and Kindness in all: Labor to know and discern, upon Gospel-Evidence,
that he bestows outward Blessings upon you from his Love in Christ: This will
make your Caledonia to be a Land of Promise, and a Pledge of that better
Inheritance reserved in Heaven for you, where all the Gold and Riches of the
Earth, the Things most Valued by Men, heaped together, do make but a faint
Metaphor for the Pavement of that most Glorious City: And after all the
Acquisitions of this World, what is a Man Profited if he lose his own Soul?

Let such as are yet Strangers to Christ, repent of all their Sins committed in
Scotland, or since their Arrival in their New Dwellings, and consider with
Astonishment, with Gratitude, with relenring Sorrow and Shame, how many
hundreds of Leagues they have been carried fafe, through the Vast Abyss, when
there was but the thickness of a Plank between them and Death, and consequently
between them and Hell; How near they have bordered upon the confines of
Eternity; and how dreadful it will be at last, if the Waves and Billows of
Divine Wrath shall go over their Souls for ever. This is the Doom that every
Sinner must undergo by himself, if it be not taken off by his Surety; and such
as Fly not to the Gospel-Sanctuary, and Refuge, their Sin will surely find them
out, wherever they go.

We do most earnestly Entreat and Obtest you the Honorable and Worthy Persons
in whose Hands the Government is Lodged, that you not only be shining Paterns
your Selves, in all Sobriety, Holiness and Virtue; But that, with the outmost
Diligence, and vigilant Care, you procure, that the Deportment and Behavior of
all under your Authority and Influence, be such as becomes the Gospel; by
Commanding every one to do their Duty, by enacting strick and wholesome Laws,
and Executing those Laws impartially, and speedily; That no Wickedness be
Countenanced, or in the least connived at; For why should you bring Wrath upon
your selves, and the Land, and provoke the holy God to blast all your
Undertakings? And why should you Forfeit his Blessing and Favor promised to
Righteous Rulers, and make your Selves Partakers of other Men's Sins? For
whatever is committed through your Forbearance, and Remisness in Government, is
justly Chargable on you: Every Man is Guilty of that Sin which he Reproves not,
which he does not Testify against, which he can, but neglects to hinder in
another; But most of all, such as are Rulers of others, and must give an
Account of them to God, as well as of themselves. Lev. 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy Heart, thou shall in any ways rebuke
thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him: And in the Margin it reads, That
thou bear not Sin for him: This is a Law given unto all; But the peculiar End
of Magistracy is, to be a Terror unto Evildoers, and for the Praise of them
that do Well; To set their Eyes of Favor upon the Faithful of the Land; and to
cut off all Wicked-doers from the City of the Lord.

There is yet a special Obligation upon you, in the Planting and Erecting of a
New Colony, to take Care that Religion and Virtue be planted and thrive in it.
Owe you not this return to God, who has brought you thither, and who preserves
and prospers you? Owe you it not to your Selves, least you Forfeit his merciful
Kindness, and turn it to bitter Displeasure? Owe you it not to the Nation you
are come from; to the Gospel you have Received, and Professed, and to the People
you are come among; that they receive not Scandal, and ground of Offense
against Christianity, from the ungodly Lives of Professed Christians? Have you
not Advantages, beyond the Government of your Native Land, or any other of a
long continuance, where there are so many Corruptions, and rooted Habits of
Vice, among the people to be eradicated? Your Commonwealth is in its Infancy;
you have in your Hand the first Forming of it: your People yet but few, in
Comparison, and their Hearts, we trust, yet tender, under the sense of Divine
Goodness, as well as the Apprehension of yet impendent Dangers; and so more
easily formed into Obedience and Virtue. Are ye not all persuaded, that, Prove.
14.34.
as Righteousness exalts a Nation, and Sin is the Reproach of any People; So
it must be verified in a very special and eminent Manner upon you, That there
is a Just and Righteous God, who will call every one to a Reckoning, both for
their Personal and for their Stational Actions? Are you not Convinced that
Sobriety, Temperance, Diligence, and all other Moral and Christian Virtues, are
truly your Temporal, as well as your Eternal Interest; that your Worldly
Affairs cannot thrive without these; That these are true reason of State, by
their propitious Influence on Society; and true point of Honor, preventing the
Baseness and Infamies of Vice, and rendering the Righteous Man more Excellent
than his Neighbor, solidy Brave, Generous, and Great? Have you not before your
Eyes fatal Examples of the sad Effects of Immorality, and Debauchedness in
other Colonies, some of which, instead of Propagating the Gospel, are become
Nurseries of Scandal to Infidels; and have drawn down many formidable
Judgments on themselves? Has not the Dissolution of Manners weak'ned,
enervated and broken some of your Neighbors, and rendered them an easy Prey to
their Enemies, and the Objects of Divine Vengeance, for their Corruptions, and
their Cruelties.

We beseech you, for the Lord's Sake, for your own Souls Sake, and for the Sake
of your Country, and of your Posterity, for all that is, and ought to be
Sacred, and Dear to Christians, or to Men, that you withstand, and prevent the
corrupting of your Infant Colony, that you Oppose and Stop the first
Appearances or Occasions of Vice amongst your People; and keep them close to
the strict Rules of Christian Morality, and a Gospel adorning Conversation.

Can any think but the Divine Majesty will resent, and Avenge the Hellish,
Unnatural, and Uncreaturly Profanation of his Dreadful and Holy Name, (a Sin
void of Tentation, and full of Horror) or that ever the Heathen will be
induced to Adore that God, whom his own Worshippers Trample upon, and Contemn
by profane Swearing? And, whereas Oaths, amongst all Nations, are, and ought
to be esteemed most Sacred, and binding; What Veneration or Credit will they
give to the Oaths of those, who Prostitute them, though it were but in trivial
Occurrences of Law, (a sad abuse of Judicatories in many Countries, which we
wish you to avoid) much less, when they are made the miserable Blemishes and
Stains of common Discourse.

Will not Drankenness weaken and brutify your People, and spoil all honest
Commerce, and manly Conversation, and prove an inlet to all Mischief? A
temperat People are Bold and Adventuring, Wise and Courageous, and attended
with many temporal Blessings of an outward, prosperous and flourishing
Condition: while Drunkenness besots, dispirits, befools, and wastes a Nation.
Let this Vice be curbed among you in its first beginning: And that vile and
wretched Custom detested that has unhappily obtained here, of doing all
Business over a tippling Bottle.

1 Cor. 6.19.
Let all Uncleanness be abhorred: Pollute not the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
which your Bodies are, Consecrated to him in Christian Baptism; 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
but let every one possess his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor; lest the
Place of your Settlement be defiled, and the Land Spue you out, as Canaan did
its Inhabitants. And let Interest oblige you to extraordinary Caution, and
Watchfulness over the People, with respect to the Not ves, in this Matter; lest
their Resentment prove a Mean of your Ruin; and, if they should be provoked to
avenge Indignities done them, and Injuries of this kind, your fall could not
but prove Disgraceful and Unpitied.

Let your Laws strike severely against Idleness, and want of Employment, the
Parent of much Mischief and Beggary. Idle People are not only Useless, but
Burdensome in a Commonwealth, Sowers of Sedition, Discontented, and seldom
better exercised, than to find out base and dishonest Ways, whereby they may be
maintained, in pampering of sloathful Lusts. Let Industry be reputed
Honorable, and Diligence in Employment a Character of Virtue, worthy of the
highest Respect: Let not the foolish Notion ever get Footing with you, which
has been one great Cause of the Poverty of our Nation at Home, and our
Reproach among the Rich, and Trading Nations Abroad, That it is below a
Gentleman to follow Trade and Employment.

Let not only all Falsehood in Words and Actions be severely punished, as what
is inconsistent with Humane Society, and Enervats and Destroys Trade; (Faith,
and uprightness in Dealing, being the Life and Soul of Commerce, Prove. 10.9.
and the best Foundation of Success, for he that walks uprightly walks
surely) But likewise Discourage and Disgrace Self-seeking, and Narrowness, to
the prejudice of the Public: Let not every one seek his own Things, to the
Detriment of his Neighbor, but every one the Good of others, and common
Benefit; for in the Interest of the Public, and Prosperity of the
Commonwealth, that of each particular Person consists, and is best secured.
Especially this is to be looked to, in the beginning of a Settlement, and
Infancy of a Government; where Public Spiritedness and Self-denial, as they
are Gospel-precepts, so, will be found best Principles of Policy; whereas
Self-seeking has ever been the Bane and Ruin of many promising Undertakings.

We cannot forget to Recommend to you Brotherly-Love and Concord, and that you
Live in Peace and Unity among your Selves; a Thing no less Profitable to you,
than Pleasant to the God of Peace, and suitable to the Christian Name: This is
our Lord's New Commandment left by Him in Legacy to all his Followers, Joh.
13.34, 35.
that they Love one another: By this even the Heathen-Nations shall know that
you are the Disciples of the Prince of Peace. We need not tell you what is the
Common-remark on these of our Nation, that, however Hasty, Impatient, and Warm
they may be in their Debates, while at Home; yet they are Noted as Exemplary to
others, in an affectionat Concern in, Sympathy with, and close Adherence to one
another, when Abroad. We heartily Wish this may be Verified of you, now when
you are far removed from your Native Land, and placed amidst envious
Neighbors, who are waiting for your Halting, and would make it their Work to
Improve, to your Hurt, any Difference that might arise among you.

Let righteous Judgment be Executed betwixt Man and Man; for the Judgment is
the Lords. Let it be done Impartially, without vexatious Quibbles or dilatory
Forms, and Dispensed either Gratis, or upon a public Salary; so as no
Magistrate may Gain by Fynes of his own Imposing; a Practice most hurtful in
your Native Land; whereby the Covetous are Tempted to Squeeze and Oppress, and
those of a more honest and free Disposition, to become over Slack, left they
should appear gripping for their own Interest. And in general, whatever
Scripture or solid Reason has Discovered to you to be Wrong, or of ill
Consequence, in the Customs you have seen at Home or else where, and in the
Errors of other Plantations, let these Things be carefully Avoided in your New
Government.

The Eyes of God, of Angels and of Men are upon you; The World begins to take
Notice of you, as a most hopeful Colony, to the Envy of your Enemies, and the
Joy of your own Country and Friends. Remember, as you are a People of great
Expectation, and of great Advantages; So your Honor and Renown, your Temporal,
as well as your Spiritual and Eternal Gain shall be Great, if you improve your
Talent, and Manage the Price put in your Hands, Wisely and Well; but if
otherwise, your Reckoning must be Sore and Heavy, and your End Inglorious.

We again Repeat our most earnest Entreaties unto you, our Dear and Honored
Friends, that you be very Exact, Vigilant, and Conscientious in Modeling your
New Colony to all Virtue, and Godliness; Especially in the first Beginning;
which is of vast Importance in all great Undertakings; And a due Care of which
will render all after Proceedings Easse, Pleasant, and Succesful; That you bend
your outmost Endeavors, both by Example and Law, to make Righteousness,
Sobriety, and Godliness appear in the Eyes of others, as they are in
themselves, Amiable and Honorable; And all Vice and Impiety, Detestable and
Infamous; So as a vicious Person may look like a Monster, and Object of Horror
amongst you: Thus, Religion and Virtue will Incorporat into your very Customs
and Constitutions, and your Laws and Persons will be Venerable, without the
grievous Necessity of being Severe; and God will Bless you, and Delight to
Dwell among you; Isa. 62.4. Ezekiel. 43.
and your Land shall be called Hephzi-bah, and the Name of your Place
Jehovah-shammah, the Lord is there. But if any will do Wickedly, if Men will be
Foolish and Froward, your Duty to God, and Mercy to the Community, calls for
Speedy and Exemplary Justice, that you may put the Evil away from among you,
and that Others may Hear and Fear.

As we Recommend unto you a Just and Christian Regard to all Gospel Ordinances;
So in Particular, a Religious Observance and Sanctification of the Lord's Day,
the Neglect of which will ly heavy on Governors, the Command being peculiarly
given to them, as Persons that must Answer for their Children and Servants, and
for the Stranger that is within their Gates, as well as for Themselves: If the
Sabbath of the Lord be Profaned, Lev. 26.43.
He will cause your Land to Enjoy its Sabbaths, by Desolation. But if you
Sanctify the Holy Day of Rest unto the Lord, he will Procure and Maintain Rest
for you in your Land.

And as we are hopeful of your Just and Faithful Dealings with all Men, whom
you may have Occasion to Negotiat, and Trade with; So we Recommend, not only
Equity and Justice, but, obliging Kindness toward the Natives; That your
People may not only have their Conversation Honest among the Gentiles, but
winning and engaging, by Beneficence; That they, Beholding and Enjoying the
Benefit of your Good-Works, may Glorify God in the Day of your Visitation. If
you Partake of their Temporal Things, are you not bound to Minister unto Them
of your Spiritual Things? Verily, their Debtors you are; And not only is it the
Interest of your Trade, and your Safety, to keep good Measures with them; but
it is your positive Duty, for which the Lord seems in a peculiar Manner to have
Designed your Plantation, as its most glorious End; To Propagat the Light of
his Gospel amongst them, and that Heavenly Wisdom which is more Precious than
all Riches, and whose Merchandise is better than the Gold of Ophir or Darien:
It Is by their Consent that God Confirms your Right, therefore Cherish them, as
your Brethren, of the same Blood, and Kindred in Adam; And Endeavor that you
may have them also your Brethren in Christ; not only, let no Stumbling Block,
or Occasion of Offense, be laid before them, but all due Encouragement given
them, to Embrace the Everlasting Gospel. Let them see what Veneration, and
Regard you Pay to your Ministers, as the Servants of the most High God, who
must Labor amongst them; and to the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, as the Common
Means of your and their Salvation.

It will be needful you Study their Genius Well: For some of these Nations are
Naturally more Sincere, and Simple; Others more Subtle, and Treacherous; But,
Generally, all of them, Especially in the Beginning, Suspicious and Jealous,
Credulous, and Apt to take Ill Impressions, and not Easy to Quit them; Also
most Revengful, and Cruel, where they can be Masters, upon the Apprehension of
the least Injury done them, to which they have got too many Irritations, by
other Europeans, who have come among them. Therefore, there is need, you be, in
the midst of them, Wise as Serpents, and Harmless as Doves: You are always to
be very Watchful, and upon your Guard, that you may prevent Surprizals, and be
able to Defend your Selves, if they should take up any Prejudice, and
Irritation, Groundlesly, against you: Be very Concerned to See that none of
Yours Injure, or Disoblige Them in the least, without Due and Speedy
Punishment, and that more severely Inflicted, than for these Injuries done by
any of you against another of your Selves. And, beside the Punishment you may
find Just, and Necessar to Inflict, be sure any Damage they Sustain be
Repaid, though it should be done by the Public, when the Offending-Party is not
able. By any Means, by continual Converse, endeavor to Civilize them, and
cultivat any Principles of Natural Understanding, and Reason, they have, which
will indeed require great Prudence, and Dexterity in the Management: And when
they see Piety, Sincerity and Equity Flourishing among You; it will be the most
Effectual, and endearing Tie to Knit them to your Interest.

Be careful in doing Justice betwixt Masters and Servants: Let their Service be
a reasonable Service, and Time allowed them for their Public and Private
Worshipping of God, for they are your Brethren: And when their Time Expires;
let them meet with such Encouragement, as may always Engage them to continue,
and Settle among you: whereby, from time to time, you will be Strengthened, and
Increased, and Others Encouraged to come unto You.

If You shall have Servants for Life, or Slaves, of other Nations; (for the
Natives of Darien, we consider as your Confederats and Allies) as we Wish you
to be Tender, both of their Souls and Bodies, and to Encourage their Conversion
to Christianity, by all proper Means; So we do not Urge that their absolute
Liberty, and Freedom from their Service, should, as in some other Places, be
made the immediate Reward of their Professing to Receive the Gospel: For this
has tempted Masters to withhold them from the Means of their Conversion, lest
they should be Indammaged by the Lose of their Service; and has occasioned the
Slaves to make Counterfeit Professions, to gain their Liberty. But we Recommend
a Gentle-Rule, a Mild Treatment, and that full Access and Time be Allowed for
their Christian Instruction, and let such Rules be agreed on, as that these at
least of them, who shall, not only Profess the Christian-Religion, but have such
a Gospel-Adorning Conversation, as may Recommend them to the Consciences of the
Godly, as Christians indeed, may have their full Freedom by such Means, and
upon such Terms, as may be Safe and Advantageous, both to their Masters and
Them. Immortal Souls are of great Value, and the Blessings of These, who are
ready to Perish, are not to be Despised.

We shall, in the next Place, particularly Address our Selves to You, that are
in Military-Charge, and have Command over the Soldiery, whether by Land or
Sea: It Is on you, Honored and Worthy Gentlemen, that a great Share of the
Burden of the Public Safety lies; you are, in some Respect, both the Eyes, and
Hands of this Infant Colony: Many of you have been lately Engaged in a Just and
Glorious War, for Retriving, and Defending the Protestant-Religion, the
Liberties, and Rights of your Country, under the Conduct of a Matchless Prince,
And now, when through the Blessing of the Lord of Hosts, His and Your Arms have
procured an Honorable Peace at Home; You, and others with you, have, with much
Bravery, embarked your Selves in a Great, Generous, and Just Undertaking, in
the Remote Parts of the Earth, for Advancing the Honor and Interest of your
Native-Country: If in this you acquit your Selves like Men, and Christians;
Your Fame will be Renowned both Abroad and at Home. We cannot Foresee what
Opposition you may meet with from the Malice of Men, who Envy the Prosperity of
Others, and seek to Enhance to Themselves that Part of the World whether you
are Going, which may justly Oblige you anew to the Trial of your Arms: And in
that Case, you are Called to Use your Valor, and Courage, but not to Lean unto
it, nor Trust in the Arm of Flesh. Seek to have the Lord Going before you, Isa.
52.12.
and the God of Israel to be your Reerward. And Remember what is given in
Charge to the Armies of Israel, when the Host goes forth against thine
Enemies, Deuteronomy. 23.9, 14.
then keep Thee from every wicked Thing, lest the Lord, seeing Wickedness, and
Prophanity in your Camp, be provoked to Turn away from you. How Reproachful
would it Prove to the Profession of Christianity, if, by the lewd Practice of
any among you, the Pagan-Nations should have Ground to Apprehend, that you
Entertain that Hellish, and false Maxim of the Atheistical Debauchees of this
Age, which even the Refined Heathen Abhor, That it is a Point of Gallantry, and
a necessary Qualification in a Soldier, to cast off all Thoughts of God, of
his own Soul, of Heaven, and Hell; As if These, who are continually Conversant
in the Jaws of Death, were less Concerned, than Others, to Mind their Future
State; or that Wicked, and Profligat Men, could Adventure to Encounter with
Death, which to Them is a King of Terrors, with that Boldness and fixed
Resolution, in Lawful and Allowable War, that is to be found with the Upright
Man, who can encourage Himself with the Thoughts of This, That his Latter-end
will be Peace? Do not Pagan, as well as Christian, Histories, furnish
sufficient Instances of the Noblest Hero's, and bravest Commanders, who were
Themselves Patterns of Virtue, and a Terror to the Vicious, and Profane? And,
sure, the most Eminent of Saints, Recorded in the Holy Scriptures, have been
most Courageous Warriors, and the Best of Soldiers. Let Us therefore
earnestly Entreat, and Obtest You, who are Commanders and Officers, to go
before your Soldiers, in all Manner of Holy Conversation. The Characters you
bear, by the Stations you are placed in, the Respect you owe to the Honor,
Credit, and Welfare of your Native Country, and that New Part of it, the Colony
you are now Going to, your own Temporal, as well as Spiritual, Interest, and
the Happiness of These under your Charge, do all call aloud on you, to Use your
outmost Endeavors, for Curbing, by Exemplary Punishment, and Marks of
Disgrace, in any of your Soldiers, who may be Guilty of them, the Horrid
Wickedness of profane Swearing, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Profaning the
Lord's Day, Neglect of Gospel Ordinances, Falsehood, Treachery, Oppression, and
Idleness the Mother of All Wickedness, and other Enormities; the Suppressing of
all Which we have already Recommended to the Honourable-Council of the Colony:
nor shall we need to Enforce this on you, so far as your Stations call for it,
with any other Arguments than what We have Offered to Them, Which we Entreat
you Seriously to Mind. And, for the Encouragement of all under your Command to
Carry, as becomes Christian-Souldiers, in the Way of Well-doing; Let their due
Allowance be Punctually given Them; Preferment, and Reward, Impartially, and
Readily Bestowed on the best Deserving of Them: That Wickedness being
Disgraced, and Banished; Piety Encouraged and Flourishing in your Camp; you may
have Confidence toward God, that the Lord will be your Protection, and will
Delight to go Forth in the Midst of You.

Though much of what We have Written be Addressed, Principally, to the Governors
and Magistrates of the Plantation, and Others bearing Office among you; Yet it
does likeways Concern every one of You, Our Beloved Friends, and Dear
Countrymen, for whom the Desire of our Souls, and Prayer to God is, that you
may be Saved, that God may Countenance, and Bless your Undertakings, and Crown
Them with Success, that His Almighty Power may be a Wall of Fire about You;
But, above all, that his Gracious Presence, in his Ordinances, may be the Glory
in the midst of you; and that your Souls may Prosper until you be Transplanted
into the better Mansions above, that Kingdom which is beyond the Injuries of
envious Enemies, a Kingdom that cannot be Shaken, and whence you shall go forth
no more.

We have found it Necessary, from a sense of our Duty before God, and our
tender Regard, both to your Souls, and your outward Welfare, to lay before
your Governors the indispensible Obligations of their Station, as
Christian-Magistrats, to Set up, and Maintain a Holy, Righteous-Government over
you, and to Suppress, and Punish all Vice, with the Greatest, and most
Impartial Severity. As this is absolutely Requisite to the very Civil Subsistence
of your Colony, so we hope it will not be grievous to any of you, and that
there is not one Soul so Degenerous, and Dissolute in your Society, as, but to
Wish for a Connivance to any Immoral or Profane Practice: And, if there be,
such a Person is a Burden and Plague to the Rest, that deserves to be cut off,
lest the Body be Infected, and the heavy Judgments of God be pulled down on
the Community. We are, therefore, Confident that you will Obey, not only for
Fear, but, for Conscience Sake, and for your own Interest; That you will Pay
all Submission and dutiful Deference to your Rulers; That you will, with
Patience, and Contentment, bear the Toils and Fatigues of your first
Settlement, not Murmuring, for what Uneasiness may as yet be in your
Circumstances; but Waiting upon the Land, in an Humble, and diligent
Application to your present Work, till He in his infinite Mercy, give you a
confirmed Rest in the Land: For, though you do not find such Fruits attending
your present Labors, as may Answer all the Expectations you had; Yet Patience,
Diligence, and Industry will overcome your first Difficulties; And, through the
Blessing of God, you shall find the Promise made out unto you, That the Hand of
the Diligent makes Rich.

And we Ob^est you, by the Mercies of God, in Jesus Christ our Savior, that in
your several Stations, you Walk Worthy of the Lord, unto all Well-pleasing;
That you give no Offense to the Gentiles, but be exceeding Wary and Tender of
whatever may Scar them, from Christianity, or doing any thing Unbecoming the
Church, and Members of Christ; That you be Blameless and Harmless, the Sons of
God, without Rebuke, shining as Lights in the World; That you be Diligent and
Faithful, Sober and Loving, among your Selves; and Obsequious to them that are
Over you, whether in Matters Religious or Civil; And that you be every one
Exemplary, Encouraging, and Edifying to one another, in Godliness, and in
whatever tends to Common-good.

Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are True, whatsoever things are Honest,
whatsoever things are Just, whatsoever things are Pure, whatsoever things are
Lovely, whatsoever things are of ^ood Report, if there be any Virtue, and if
there be any Praise, think on these Things.

And, Particularly, we Recommend unto you, Frequency and Fervency in Prayer,
both apart, and in Christian-Societies, or Fellowships together. It Is God most
High, who Performs all Things for You, on Whom you must Depend, for all your
Mercies, and all your Hopes: And therefore, from the uttermost Ends of the
Earth, lift up your Cry unto Him, who is the Hearer of Prayer: and you shall
not seek his Face in Vain.

That we be not further Tedious to you, hoping our Dear Brethren the Ministers,
we have sent to Labor among you, in the Work of the Lord, shall be Furnished
by Their Great Master, so as to afford you from his Holy Word, such
Instructions and Directions, from time to time, as your Case shall require, to
whom we entreat you to Hearken; that you may be mutually encouraging to one
another in the Lord your God: We only Repeat these Memorable Words, which we
Wish may be indelibly Engraven on your Hearts: The Lord is with you, 2 Chronicles.
15.2.
while you are with him; and if you seek him, he will be found of you: but if
you forsake him, he will forsake you; And all your forward Expectations, and
blooming Hopes shall be Blasted and Wither, and your Colony laid Desolate, your
Names, instead of Honor and Renown, shall be Branded with Infamy, Hissing and
Scorn; and your Blessings turned unto Curses; and the Lord shall Pluck you up,
Deuteronomy. 29.21.
and not Plant you, and shall separate you unto Evil, after he had said, he
would do you Good.

But, Beloved Brethren, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany Salvation, though, for your Warning, we thus Write; and that the Lord
will preserve you steadfast in Holiness, and Faith; and will Plant you in that
Place destinated for you, and make you a Name of Joy, and Renown among the
Nations.

Now, to Conclude, we Recommend these few Words of Exhortation, proceeding from
a most Tender, and affectionat Concern, for your Good, to your most serious
Consideration, and to the Blessing of God. To him we Commend all of you, and to
the Word of his Grace, which is able to Build you up, and to give you an Inh
ritance among them that are Sanctified, through Faith that is in Christ; To whom
be Glory, For Ever and Ever. Amen.

FINIS.

