THE Civil ORANGE: OR, THE United Hearts of England.
Being the Courageous Protestant Boys Resolutions against the Enemies of the
Church and State,
To the Tune of, Now, now the Fight's done.
(1)
NOw now all our doubts and our troubles are cleared,
And every Protestants Heart may be cheered;
For here is brave Orange that Sailed over the Seas,
Which gives to all Souls in the Nation much ease,
He venter'd his Life in this Nations de^ence,
Oh still let us prize this true Protestant Prince.
(2)
The Glory of Britain begins to appear,
And Protestants may be released from all fear;
^he Romans we now do resolve to run down,
(...)e fear no^ their Malice, although they may frown;
An Army we have that will drive them from hence,
And bravely fight under a Protestant Prince.
(3)
What danger did seem for to threaten this Land,
While R^me and her Agents contending did stand?
They reckoned that Protestants must be subdued,
But the^ shall no longer this Nation delude,
O^r thundering Cannons shall Papists convince,
While here we fight under a Protestant Prince.
(4)
Let every Soul lay his hand on his Heart,
And rather with Life, nay, and all Riches part,
Then once to appear in a Cowardly strain,
Since such a brave Hero sailed over the main,
Let Us stand by his side in the Nations defense,
For he is a most noble brave Protestant Prince.
(5)
It is not Tyrconnel, nor each Popish Slave,
That e're shall be able this Land to out-brave;
Should it be our Fortune with them to engage,
They shall not live to tell what was done in this Age:
Our Noble Commanders are Persons of Sense,
And we'll all fight under this Protestant Prince.
(6)
We know if they could but a full Conquest make,
We certainly soon should be brought to the Stake;
According to what they have done heretofore,
They dearly thirst after true Protestants Gore;
But now having Power to drive them from hence,
We'll make them all quake at a Protestant Prince.
(7)
If need should require an absolute aid,
There Is hundreds and thousands of every Trade,
That freely would leave all their Callings to fight,
With Courage to maintain the Protestants right,
And drive all the Treacherous Enemies hence,
So long as we have a true Protestant Prince.
(8)
Some Persons of late they did strive with the stream,
And merely led on by a fair Golden Dream,
And never consider what might be their Doom,
By acting so much for the Agents of Rome;
Oh! how they reflect on their former Offense,
And tremble at seeing a Protestant Prince.
(9)
Brave Orange he does a Free Parliament call,
In order to give satisfaction to all,
That while great Concerns they do fairly Debate,
Great Britain may flourish both in Church and State,
And Popery utterly hurried from hence,
Since we do enjoy a true Protestant Prince.
(10)
All Protestant Souls will together Unite,
And like Noble Hero's will valliantly fight,
Before we will unto our Enemies yield,
We all are resolved to dye in the Field;
Our Courage is able the World to Convince,
We'll fight by the side of a Protestant Prince.
(11)
Great Britain and Hollands each flourishing Fleet,
As soon as they are fitted and perfect complete,
Will Challenge our Foes to fight on the Main
Should France have the mighty Armado of Spain:
The Noise of our Canons shall send them from hence,
And show them the strength of a Protestant Prince.
FINIS.
Printed for I. Fack, 1689. in the beg. of Feb. 1688.


