CATO MAYOR or THE BOOK OF OLD AGE First written by M.T. Cicero.

And now Excelently Englished by William Austin of Lincolnes Inn Esquire With
annotations upon the names of the men and places.

Printed for William Leake.

JGoddard sculpsit.



CATO Major: OR, The Book of Old Age.

First written by M.T. CICERO.

And now excellently Englished by William Austin of Lincolns Inn, Esquire.

With Annotations upon the names of the men and places.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign
of the Crown in Fleet Street, between the two Temple gates. 1648.

THE STATIONER To the READER.
THis most excellent Book, entitled Cato Major de senectute, little in bulk,
but filled with pithie, and substantial diseourse, smoothly couched, elegantly
and delightfully conveyed in every line, written long since in the Latin
Tongue, by that most rare and grave Consul and Senator of Rome, the glory of
his time, M. T. Cicero, Prince of Orators; needs no man's commendations, (all
his works being so famous and renowned amongst the learned,) so that I might
well be silent, had not I judged it fit to give the Reader an account how it
came in this manner to be divulged; It falling accidentally into my hands, and
I finding the translation and notes to be the labor of a worthy Gentleman of
great parts, learning and sufficiency, whose name was thereunto: And the Book it
self, for variety of elegant passages and deep Philosophical discourses, being
both delight full and useful; Personated by the most learned, ancient, and
grave Senators, Grandees of that age, abasing and depressing all youthful
lusts, commending and strengthening the venerable life of old age, showing the
current of virtue wherein it ought to run, with the distance betwixt it and
youth, and how many ways it does exceed the same, with the advantages it has
beyond youth; declaring how they slighted death in this their age, comforting
themselves in all its Imperfections, with that expected Immortality at hand,
the more aged they then were. And having received the approbation of this
learned Piece, from diverse persons of judgment and understanding, I was upon
these and other like considerations, moved for the general good, to publish it
thus abroad unto the world, believing that it will be a delight to the Aged,
and a great benefit to the unlearned in the Latin Tongue, who may in their own
Language read the sage wisdom of former times, and see how the infirmities of
age are recompensed with more rare perfections of mind, and that it does not
so much destroy, as change the delights of youth for better; and so be prepared
to bid that welcome which is approaching toward them. If the excellency of
this work, with the worthiness of the Author and Translator, shall gain
acceptance with the lovers of wisdom, it will answer the expectation, and
reward thc care of the Publisher.

THE PRAEFACE Or Epistle of 1. MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO TO 2. TITUS POMPONIUS
ATTICUS.
CHAP. I.
O TITUS, if I ease the care,
which sticks in your breast,
Which now does vex and trouble you,
wherewith you are oppressed;
Shall it be thought,
Worth ought?
FOr I may well salute you O ATTICUS, with those Verses, wherewith that right
worthy, though not welthy man [3] ENNIUS, saluted [4] Flaminius; and although I
surely know, that you are not so troubled day and night as was he, (for I have
perceived the moderation of your mind, and I understand that you not only
brought a Surname from [5] Athens, but also humanity and wisdom) yet
notwithstanding I suppose, that you are sometimes much troubled with these
matters, where with I my self am: the remedy for which griefs is both
greater, and to be referred till another time. Now it seems good unto me to
write something of old age; For I will assay to ease both you and my self, of
the burden (which is common to us both,) either of the age present, or of the
age to come, though I know for truth that you will bear the weight of it
moderately and wisely as you do all things; but as soon as I determined to
write of old age, you came into my mind worthy of this gift, which might be
equally used by us both; and believe me, the making of this book was so
delightful to me, that it did not only wipe away all the griefs of mine age,
but made it easy and pleasant. Wherefore Philosophy can never be sufficiently
praised, which whosoever follows, may live all his life time without
molestation, of which we have In a book of the Consolation of Philosophy which
is lost.
spoken much already, and intend to speak more hereafter: But this book of old
age. I have sent to you, not attributing all the speech to [6] Tithon, as [7]
Aristo Chius does, least it should seem of small authority, but to [8] Marcus
Cate the old man, whereby it may carry the greater grace and preeminence, at
whom I make [9] Scipio, and [10] Laelius, wondering that he bear his age so
easily, and he answering them; who if he speak more learnedly, then he was wont
to do in his books, you must attribute it to the Greek tongue: in which it is
well known he was very studious in his age. But what need more words? for now
the speech of Cato himself, shall declare all our determination of old age.

I. TABLE of Annotations.
1. MArcus Tullius Cicero, The Author of this Book, and many other most noble
and excellent works, both of Philosophy, and Oratory, he was the son of a
Knight at Rome, he passed most of the most honorable offices in Rome, he was a
faithful and earnest lover and defender of the Commonwealth, which began to
decay at his death, having lost so good a member; he was banished, and after
beheaded, by the commandment of Antonius and Octavius. 2. Titus Pomponius
Atticus, an honorable man, and a great friend to Cicero, he lived in great
credit, both with the Romans and with the Athenians, from whence he brought the
Surname of Atticus. 3. Ennius an ancient Poet, borne at Tarentum, he was
brought to Rome, by Cato. vide numero 8. and 13. 4. Flaminius a grave Senator,
to whom Ennius wrote a Book of consolation, when he grieved for his brothers
expulsion out of the Senate. 5. Athens a city in Greece, between Macedon and
Achaia, built by Cecrops, who reigned 50. years there, it was called Athens by
Minerva, who is also called Athene; it was the place or university of learning.
6. Tithon the son of Laomedon, beloved of Aurora; he was counted a fool,
because when he was very old, be requested to be turned into a Grasshopper, and
might have had immortality. 7. Aristo Chius a Philosopher of the I Will Coas, who
dedicated a Book to the former Tithon. Cicero writes thus of him: elegant and
courteous Aristo; but that gravity which ought to be in a Philosopher, was not
in him; many excellent things were written by him, but they carry no grace. 8.
Marcus Portius Cato, whom Cicero here makes one of his speakers in his
dialogue, was a man of great honor, authority and severity; he was twice
consul, he was the first raiser of his house; he was wont to say that he
repented three things; one that ever he went by water, when he might have gone
by land; the second, that he let pass an idle day; the third, that he told any
secret to his wife. 9. Publius Scipio, the adopted son of Affricanus Major, the
second Person of this dialogue, was of Kin to Cato; he by the counsel of
Cato, was sent to Carthage, in the third Carthaginian war, and utterly
overthrew it. 10. Caius Laelius, the third person in this dialogue, was an
excellent young man, a near friend to Scipio, of whose friendship Cicero wrote
a book de Amicitia.
The Speakers. M. CATO. P. SCIPIO. C. LAELIUS. CHAP. 2.
SCIPIO. I Am often wont (good M. Cato) with this my friend Laelius, to admire
among other things, your excellent and perfect wisdom; but especially that we
never perceived, that your old age was troublesome, which is so grievous to
most old men, that they say they bare a burden more grievous then [1] Aetna.


CATO. Scipio and Laelius, you seem to wonder at a thing not very hard: For
that age is only grievous to those that have no taste of wisdom and learning
in themselves to make them live happily: but to them which see all perfection
and consolation from their own experience, nothing can seem heavy which the
necessity of nature brings: of which sort old age is chief, which all desire
to obtain, and blame being obtained; such is their unconstancy, foolishness
and perversity, they say that it creeps upon them ere they are Turpe est
dicere non putaram.
aware. First let me ask, who bade them over reckon themselves? for how much
sooner does age creep on youth, then youth on childhood? then, how much more
grievous would their age be to them, if they should as well live to the eight
hundred year, as to the eighty year? for the former age (though long,) when it
is past, can assuage a foolish old age, with no comfort Wherefore if you were
wont to admire my wisdom (which I wish were worthy of your opinion or our
surname) in this I am wise that I follow nature as a god, and her I do obey, by
whom it is not like that when the other parts of our age are well set down,
that the last part as it were by a careless Poet, should be neglected. And it
is very necessary that there may be some end of our bodies, like the fruits of
trees, and of the earth, which wither and fall away, with a timely ripeness,
which ought of a wise man to be patiently borne; for what other thing is meant
by the [2] battle of the Giants against the Gods, but the resisting of nature?


II, TABLE of Annotations.
1. AeTna a mountain in Cicilia, that casts forth flames of fire at the top;
the Poets feign that Jupiter set this hill on the head of Tiphoeus the Giant,
which fought against him in the battle of the gods. 2. The battle of the
Giants is in Ovids Metamorphosis, where he fains that they heaped hills on hills,
thinking to win heaven, but were destroyed with lightning.
CHAP. III.
LAELIUS. BUt Cato, you shall do a very acceptable thing to us, (that I may
also promise for Scipio) if (because we would, and we hope to be old men) we
may learn by you before, by what means and reasons we may most easily bear
that age incroaching on us.


CATO. I will do it Laelius, especially if as you say, it will be acceptable to
both of you.


SCIPIO. Surely Cato unless it be troublesome to you, we would learn what it
is; as if you had gone some long journey, wherein we must enter to follow you.


CATO. I will do it as I may Scipio, for I have often been at the complaints of
men of my sort, (for as the proverb is, Pares cum paribus facillime
congregantur.
birds of a feather fly together.) which [1] Caius Salinator, and [2] Spurius
Albinus, men that have been Consuls, and almost my equals in years, were wont
to make, as well for that they wanted pleasures, as that they were despised of
them that were wont to worship them, which men seemed to me to accuse that
which was not to be accused. For if that should fall out by the means of age,
the same by use would happen to me and to all other old men, many of whose ages
I know without complaint, which are no whit greived that they are released from
the bonds of lusts, neither are they despised of their friends; but the fault
of such complaints, is in the manners not in the age. For moderate, courteous
and gentle old men do lead an easy life, but inhumanity and importunity is
hateful in all ages.


LAELIUS. It is as yon say Cato; but it may be that some will object that to you
by reason of your riches, plenty and dignity, your age seems tolerable; but
that cannot happen to all men.


CATO. Truly Laelius, that is somewhat, but in no wise are all things under
that predicament; for as [3] Themistocles is reported to have answered a
certain [4] Seriphian in a braul, when he told him that he had gotten renoun
not by his own, but by his countries glory, neither (answered Themistocles)
should I be unrenouned, were I a Seriphian, nor thou renouned, were thou an
Athenian: so it may be said of age, for it cannot be pleasant (no not to a wise
man) in extreme poverty, nor grievous to a fool in great plenty.


III. TABLE of Annotations.
1. Caius Livius Salinator, Consul with M. Valcrius Messalla, 562 years after
the building of Rome. 2. Spurius Postumus Albinus, Consul with Quintus Marius
Philippus. Anno 568. ab urbe cond. 3. Themistocles an excellent Atheman, who
lived very dissolutely in his youth, but in his agebore himself with great
honor and credit; he was of excellent memory, he slew himself, because he
would not see the overthrow of his country. 4. A Seriphian of the Isle Seripho,
which was amongst the Cyclades; it was a place of much infamy, by reason
offenders were thither banished.
CHAP. IV.
THe aptest weapons of age ( Scipio and Laelius,) are arts and exercises of
virtue, (which observed at all times) when you have lived long, bring forth
wonderful fruit, not only because they will never fail you, no not in the
extreemest part of your age, (which is much) but because the confidence of a
life heretofore well led, and the remembrance of many good deeds, is exceeding
pleasant. I being a young man, so loved [1] Quintus Maximus the old man, (he
which took [2] Tarentum) as if he had been my equal in years. For there was in
that man, gravity seasoned with courtesy, neither had age changed his
conditions; yet when I first began to love him, he was not very old, but well
stricken in years. For the year that he was first Consul, I was borne, and in
his fourth Consulship, I being a young stripling, went with him to [3] Capua;
in the fifth year, I went [4] Questor, to Tarentum, then [5] Aedile; four
years after I was made [6] Praetor, which office I bear, Consul. 550 years, ab
urbe cond.
Tutidanus and Cethegus, being Coss. briefly for Consul.
Coss. and at that time he being a very old man, pleaded the [7] Cincian laws;
He not only waged war stoutly when he was very old, but by delaylng battle,
overthrew youthful [8] Hannibal, of whom our friend [9] Ennius thus writes.

One man to us by long delays, restored the Common wealth.
He never loved vain glory more then he esteemed our health.
The glory of the man therefore
Shall still remain and flourish more.
But with what vigilance did he take Tarentum, when in my hearing he answered
[10] Salinator, who having lost the town, fled into the Castle, and bragging
said, O Quintus Fabius, by my means thou have taken Tarentum; very true, (said
he smiling) for if thou had not lost it, I had not won it; neither was he
more excellent in war, then in peace, who being the second time [11] Consul,
[12] Spurius Carvillius his colleague in office, not assisting him, he of
himself resisted with all his might [13] Caius Flaminius the [14] Tribune of
the people, who against the whole authority of the Senate, went about to divide
the Picean [15] and Galicane fields, to each particular man; when he was [16]
augur, he durst boldly affirm, that that was done with the best aspects, which
was done for the safety of the Commonwealth. I know many excellent things of
the man, but nothing more admirable, then how he bore the death of his son
[17] Marcus, a singular man, and a Consul. I have in my hands the praise of
the man, which when we read, what Philosopher do we not contemn? yet was he not
more excellent abroad, and in the eyes of the people, then at home, and in his
private house; what speeches, what precepts, what knowledge of Philosophy? and
(for a Roman,) very learned; he kept all things in memory, not only civil but
external wars; whose conference when I did greedily enjoy, I did divine (as
it has sithence happened) that he being dead, there should be none of whom I
might learn. But wherefore speak I so much of Maximus? because you may see
that it was detestable to be spoken, that such an old age was miserable.

IV. TABLE of Annotations.
1. QUintus Fabius Maximus, of the house of the Fabii, a noble and right
valiant kindred; his family alone with their kindsfolks, and adherents, often
overthrew Veients: till at last being entrapped by deceit, near the river
Cromera, they were all slain in the battle, except one that remained at Rome
being a child, of whom long after came this Quintus Maximus, who lived to be 5
times consul and once Dictator; he was called also Cunctator or the delayer,
because, he by delays overcame Hannibal. 2. Tarentum, a most famous city in
Graecia, built by Tarent, the son of Neptune, and by him so named; it had
great wars with the Romans, in the time of Cato. 3. Capua the metropolitan
city of Campania, built (according to Livie,) by Capys the captain of the
Samnites, of whom it took the name; it had great wars with the Romans, in the
time of the Carthaginian war. 4. Q^aestor, an ancient office among the
Romans, instituted first in the time of Numa Pompilius; he was togather the
tribute, and money of the people, for the wars or otherwise; The Treasurer. 5.
Aedile, he that had the care of the reparations of the Temples of the gods, and
the Theaters of the common people, and the plays. 6. Praetor, An office in the
city like our L. Major, but of greater authority; for by his power he might
make, and abolish Laws at his pleasure. 7. The Cincian law, was first made by
M. Cincius, against bribery. 8. Hannibal a valiant captain, and governor of
the Carthaginians; he often overthrew the Romans, but he was utterly overcome
by Scipio Affricanus, and (as Plutarch writes) at last he poisoned himself with
poison he had in a ring. Eutropius writes he was stoned to death by the
Carthaginians, for some offense; but Livie says he was crucified on a cross.
9. Ennius vide 2. 10. Salinator, Consul with Claudius Nero; he defended the
Tarentins against the Romans, he flew Asdruball coming to help Hanniball his
brother. 11. Consul when Tarquinius Superbus that ravished Lucrecia was slain,
and his stock banished, the office of Consul instead of King began among the
Romans; it was performed by two men, they had as great authority as the King,
only they were but in Office one year. 12. Spurius Carvillius, Consul with
Cato, in the year of Rome 526. 13. Caius Flaminius Tribune when Cato was
Consul, who afterward being Censor, expulsed Caius out of the Senate, 14.
Tribune was as it were the Solicitor for the people, being first created after
the Volsian and Sabin wars. They grew to so great authority, that sitting in
the Senate, they would cross whatsoever was decreed, if they liked it not;
they ever withstood the Senate for the people; it was a very factious office
and full of strife, often setting the people together by the ears with the
Senate, and the Senate with them. They might not come into the Temples. 15. The
Galicane fields were won from the Frenchmen, and were to be divided to the
soldiers. 16. Augur, was in great reverence with the Romans, they were as
Priests, and by looking into the intrals of beasts, and birds, they prophesied
of things to come. They were first derived from the Hetrurians; they had a
College, and as it were a consultation-house, to meet and confer of Comets and
Signs in the air, for the good of the common people. 17. Marcus Fabius, he was
the son of Maximus, he was second Consul, once in the year of Rome 506, and
again in the year 508; in his first Consulship, he overcame the Carthaginians
by Sea.
CHAP. V.
NEither can every man be such as was Scipio, or Maximus, that the overthrows
of Cities and battails by land, and fights by Sea, triu^phs and victories, may
be recorded of them; yet the old age of a private life well and quietly before
lead, is very light and pleasing. Such as we read the age of [1] Plato was, who
writing in the 81 years of his age dyed; such was the age of [2] Socrates, who
is said to have written the book [3] Planathenaicus, in the ninety fourth year
of his age, whose Master [4] Gorgias Leontinus, lived an hundred and seven
years, neither did he cease from his study, who when he was asked why he would
live so long, answered, that he had no cause yet to accuse age of; an excellent
answer, and worthy of so learned a man. For fools lay the faults of their own,
on age, which Ennius did not, of whom I spoke before.

Like to a valiant horse which often, in running man the best:
At Mount Olympus, being old, is let alone at rest.
He compares this age, to the age of a valiant and victorious horse and him
you may well remember, for the eleventh year after his death T. Flaminius, and
Marcus Attillius were made Consuls, but he dyed when he was threescore and
ten years old; Cepi^ and Philippus being Consuls the second time, when I
(being threescore and five, in good strength and with a clear voice) pleaded
the [5] Voconian Law. For so long lived Ennius, he bore two burdens, old age,
and poverty, in such sort, that he seemed almost to be delighted with them.

V. TABLE of Annotations.
1. PLato the son of Aristo and Periander, borne at Athens, the same year
and day that Apollo was borne at Delos, a swarm of Bees when he was young
light on his mouth, when he lay in his Cradle, in token of his Eloquence to
come, he was Scorates, his Scholar, after whose death he went to Philolanuan
among the Pythagoreans, and from thence to Egypt, where he was healed of a
disease by the Seawater, wherefore he was wont to say, the Sea ebb dand flowed
all manner of diseases. When he dwell at Athens, he brought into one volumn, all the works of Pythag. Heraclitus, and Socrates Dionysius the Tyrant, when he had
caused him to be sold, and hearing that he was safely returned into his own
Country, wrote to him that he would not either speak or write evil of him. Who
answered that he had not so much idle time, as once to think of him; he dyed
being 84 year old. 2. Socrates, the son of Sophroniscus a Lapidary, and
Phenareta a Midwife, borne at Athens, master to Plato, a man of great patience;
he had two wives, Xantippe, and the daughter of Aristidas; he was wont to say
that whether a man did marry or no, he should repent; he was often troubled
with the scolding of Xantippe his cursed wife, but never moved. Alcibiades whom
he dearly loved, was wont to tell him that he could not abide the railing of
Xantippe: yet quoth Socrates I can, for I am used to it; but quoth he can
thou abide the gagling of thy Geese at home? Yea quoth Alcibiades, for they lay
me eggs; so quoth Socrates, Xantippe brings me children. He seldom wrote any
thing, saying that wisdom should be printed in men's hearts, not on beasts
skins. He was judged to be the wisest man that lived, by the Oracle of Apollo,
for which he was envyed, and accufed that he would not worship Images, and was
condemned by fourscore judges to be poisoned, which was forthwith done by the
executioners. 3. Panathenaicus, a book which Socrates wrote of all the noble
ghests, and deeds of the Athenians, which Book is lost. 4. Gorgias of Leontia,
an excellent Rhetorician, the Scholar of Empedocles, and master to Socrates,
and other excellent Philosophers; he got so much by his Art, that he first set
up a golden Statua, in the Temple of Apollo. He dyed as Plyny says, being a
hundred and nine year old. 5. The Voconian Law, was made by Caius Voconius,
which was that no man should make his daughter his sole heir, which was after
repealed by Domitianus Caesar.
CHAP. VI.
BUt when I consider in my mind, I find 4. causes why age may seem miserable;
the first that it hinders men from doing their affairs; the second, it
weakneth the body; the third, it takes away all pleasures; the fourth, that it
is near death; of these causes as much as they may prevail and are just, if
you please we will see a little.

Does age hinder us from our affairs? From what? From those which are done in
youth; and in strength, are then the businesses of old men nothing? Which
though with weak bodies yet with strong minds may, be done? Then neither
Quintus Maximus, nor [1] Lucius Paulus, your father Scipio (the father in Law
to my now dead [2] son) and other old men, when with counsel and authority
they defended the Commonwealth, did nothing. The [3] Curii, the [4] Fabritii,
the [5] Corimcam did nothing; it happen that [6] Appius Claudius was blind in
his age, yet he doubted not when the Senate inclined to Peace with [7] Pyrrhus,
to say that which Ennius has set down in verses, Whether now bend your minds,
a headlong fall to bring,
Which heretofore hadwont to stand, as straight as any thing.


And many other things most gravely; for you know the verse and Oration of
Alpius is extant, and these things he did seventeen year after his second
Consulship, when there was ten years betvveen each Consulship, and he had
been [8] Censor before the first, of which war of Pyrrhus before spoken, it
is recorded it was great, for so we have received it from our forefathers.
Therefore they bring nothing, which affirm that old age is not busied in
affairs, and they are like them which say, the Pylatin sailing does nothing,
when some mad fellows climb the ropes, others leap up and down the hatches
and others Pumpe: But he holding the Stern, and sitting quietly in the Poope,
does not as the young men do, but far better, and that of more import; great
matters are compassed, not by strength, swiftnes and celerity of body, but by
counsel authority, and vvisdome: of which things age is not deprived, but
stored; unless you will say that I, who have been soldier, Tribune, and
Legate, and Consul in diverse vvarres, do now seem to loyter when I wage not
war, yet do I prescribe to the Senate what things may be done, and I show
them long before, how Siege may be laid to subtle [9] Carthage, of which I
will never cease to fear, till I be assured that it be rased to the ground,
which victory I beseech the immortal Gods to reserve for you O Scipio, that
you may follovv the example of your Grandfather; from whose death it is now
this 33 years; yet his fame remains to all posterity, he dyed a year before I
was Censor, nine years after my Consullship, who (I being in the office) was
the second time made Consul. Therefore if he had lived an hundred year should
he have been aweary of his age? Running, leaping, tilt, and barriers, are not
fit exercises for age, but wisdom, counsel and discretion, which unless they
had been in old men, our ancestors would never have called the chief council a
A Senio.
Senate. Among the Lacedaemonians, they which bear greatest Offices, as they be,
so also are they called old men, and if you will read of forrainge matters, you
shall find many Commonwealths overthrown by young men, but restored and held
up by old men. Tell me how you have lost your great Commonwealth so quickly?
Thus it is answered in the play of the [10] Poet Naevius.

* In the Play called Attellana.
There came forth new Orators, fools, and young men. For rashness is a
quality of youth, but prudence of age.

VI TABLE of Annotations.
1. Lucius Paulus Aemylianus, an excellent man, father to Scipio, and brother
in Law to Cato. 2. Cato the son of Cato Major, who valiantly fighting under
Paulus Aemylius against Perseus, was slain; he married Tertia the daughter to
Paulus Aemylius. 3. Curii. 4. Fabritii, a noble stock, not only memorable for
their severe life, but their justice and continency, because one of them when
he might have had Pyrrhus poisoned by the Samnites, he refused it as
dishonorable. 5. Coruncani, such another noble family; one of them being a
very wiseman, was sent Ambassador to the Queen of Illyria, and was slain in
his return back, contrary to the Law of Arms. Another dyed in a battle
against Amilcar in Sicilia. 6. Appius Claudius a Senator of Rome, who having
not been a long time in the Senate by reason of his blindness, when he heard
that the Senators for the confirmation of a Peace between them and Pyrrhus;
would admit him into the City, he came thither, and with all his might,
dissuaded them. 7. Pyrrhus King of the Epirots, descended by the fathers side
from Hercules, and by the mothers side from Achilles, who when the people would
have slain him for his fathers cruelty toward them, he was by his mother
conveyed to Heroa the wife of Glaucus King of Illyria, from whence being 11
year old he came to his own Kingdom, where he grow up in all virtue, and after
aided the Tarentines against the Romans, at last he was slain with a Tyle
sheard, at the taking of Argos. 8. Censor, an Office at the first created by
the Senate, to look to the Tables of the Laws, and such like, they grow to
such pride and authority, that they would tax all men, correct the manners and
discipline of the Senators, make whom they listed chief, and displace whom
they listed, from the Office of Senator, as Cato Major did; the first Censors
were Papirius and Sempronius. 9. Carthage cbiefe City of Lybia, built by Dido,
70 years after Rome; it had three long wars with the Romans, Haniball being
their Captain; but he being slain, the Senate by the counsel of Cato sent P.
Scipio into Africa, who in the third war 'utterly destroyed it, and raced it
to the ground. 10. Naeuius a comicall Poet, who writ Satyricall plays, in the
time of the first Carthaginian war, which war he also wrote in verse, he
was banished at length for his railing.
CHAP. VII.
BUt you will say, their memory is wasted; it is truth, and I believe it, unless
you exercise it, or be dull of your self by nature. Themistocles knew all the
names of the citizens of Athens, and do you think, that when he was aged, he
would so much forget himself, as to salute [1] Lysimachus, by the name of [2]
Aristides? And for my own part, I not only remember the names of those men
which now live, but also their fathers and grandfathers, neither do I fear to
read monuments, least (as they say) I should lose my memory, for by them the
memory of the dead is revived, neither ever did I hear any old man, that had
forgot where he had hid his treasure. All things that they care for, they
remember, who to them, and to whom they owe any thing. How much have the
Lawyers, Priests, Augurs, and old Philosophers remembered? Memory remains in
old men, if they continue studious and industrious, and that not only in states
of honorable men, but also in the private and quiet life. [3] Sophocles wrote
Tragedies in the extremest age, who because of his study, when he seemed to
neglect his household affairs, was brought into Question by his own sons, that
according to our custom, that the good; of old men that dote and cannot well
use them, should be taken from them; so that the Judges would remove his goods
from him, as from a dotard, and givethem to his sons. Then the old man is
reported to have recited a Tragedy of [4] Oedippus Coloneus (which he had last
written, and had in his hands) and to have demanded whether that seemed the
verse of a dotard or no, for which he was delivered, and freed by the sentence
of the Judges, whether has age therefore made [5] Hesiodus, [6] Simonides, [7]
Stesicorus, or those whom I spoke of before, [8] Isocrates, Gorgias, [9] Homer,
or the Prince of Philosophers, [10] Pythagoras, [11] Democritus, Plato, [12]
Zenocrates, or afterward [13] Zeno, [14] Cleanthes, or him whom you saw at
[15] Rome, [16] Diogenes the Stoic to be dumb or cease in their studies? were
not all these men's studies like to their life?

VII. Table of Annotations.
1. LYsimachus son of Agathedes who for some offense, Alexander caused to be
cast to a hungry lion, whom he very valiantly slew, and plucked the tongue out
of his head, with bare hands; wherefore ever after he was greatly honored and
esteemed of Alexander. 2. Aristides, a noble Athenian in the time of
Themistocles, with whom he falling out, about one Stesilea a beauteous maid,
whom they both loved, was by him banished, and after being restored by Xerxes
the Persian King, he passed many great offices in Athens, but at last died so
poor that he had not enough to pay for his burial. 3. Sophocles, an excellent
Tragedian in Athens, he was called for his excellent sweetness of speech Apis,
or the Be; he wrote twenty three Tragedies, some say more; he lived almost a
hundred years, and obtained twenty three victories, whereof the last so
evercame him with joy, that he died immediately; his sons were three,
Jophontes Leostines, and Aristo. 4. The Tragedy of Oedipus Coloneus was
written by Sophocles. This Oedipus was son to the King of Thebes, and having
slain Laius his Father, not knowing him to be so, he married his own mother,
and on her begat two sons and one daughter; after having knowledge what he had
done, he pulled out his eyes, and dyed miserably, his mother hanged her self,
and his two sons slew each other, and after, when after the custom of the
Country, their bodies should be burnt, the flame parted, and would not burn
whole; so great was their hatred in their life, that dead, one fire would not
burn them. 5. Hesiodus being sent by his father into a mountain to keep
sheep, dreamed that he was suddenly made a Poet, and afterward wrote a
catalogue of noble weomen, and many other works. 6. Simonides a Poet, who
would boast that in the fourscore year of his age, he taught verses; some
think that he wrote the Art of memory; it is said that when he was one day
bidden to a banquet, he was suddenly called out from dinner, and before he
returned, the house was fallen down, and all the ghests so pasht with the
ruins, that when they came to bury them, no man knew which was which; but
Simonides, by reason of his excellent memory, remembering in what place every
man sat, and their aparel: showed to each man which was his friend; he dyed
when he was ninety years old. 7. Stesicorus, A Poet of Siculia. 8. Isocrates
an excellent Orator of Athens, he was borne the same day that Diana was, and
lived seventy years. 9. Homer Prince of the Poets, was blind; he wrote the
war of the Grecians with the Trojans, which he called Illiads; he is and has
been of great estimation, so that Alexander having taken a most rich casket,
among the spoil of Darius, thought it so fit for nothing as for Homers books,
he lived a hundred and eight years, the place of his birth and Parents are
unknown. 10. Pythagoras called the Prince of Philosophers, being indeed the
first that called himself a Philosopher, he was born at Samos, and was the
son of a Carver, he had as it is reported 600 Disciples, among whom was
Architas the Tarentine. He first taught that the souls of men departed went
into other bodies; which that he might the better persuade, he affirmed that
when he was first born he was Athalide the son of Mercury, and did obtain
of him this boon, that he only of all men, might remember all the bodies that
ever he should be changed out of. Which he obtained, and after affirmed that
Athalide being dead, he was changed into Euphorbus, who being stain at Troy,
he was born again in the body of Hermotinus, and after his death into the body
of Delias, a fisher man, who was also called Pyrrhus, and lastly he was made
Pythagoras. And that so all other men's souls did in like manner; only they
always forgot from whose body they last came; he abstained from all flesh, and
fed only on roots and herbs; he would be called Philosophus, that is a lover of
wisdom, but not Sophius, that is wise, for he said that none but God was wise.
He dyed at Metapontum, being 99 year old. 11. Democritus, born at Abderites,
his Father was a very rich man, so that he feasted Xerxes great Army that
drunk Rivers dry. After his Fathers death he went to travail, and returned
very poor, where under the city walls he builded himself a silly cottage, where
he lived contemplating the works of nature. He affirmed that all things were
made of Atoms, such as we see fleet in the sun in a shiny day, he was wont
to laugh always what chance soever happened: (as on the contrary Heraclitus
always wept,) He willingly abstaining from meat, died when he was 104. years
old. 12. Xenocrates born in Calcedonia, Plato's scholar, he was somewhat
blunt, and very earnest and dry in his Communication, he loved Plato very much,
he lived chastely and holily, and wrote many good works, and died being
fourscore and twelve years old. 13. Zeno, the son of Pyrelus, and the
adopted son of Parmenides, he learned his Philosophy of his adopted father,
wherein he was so excellent, that Plato and Aristotle, affirm he first
invented logic; he was the beginner of the Stoics, and is therefore called
the prince of that sect, he was a Governor in the Commonwealth, he for the
good of his Country, conspired against Dionysius a Tyrant, but was taken in
the action, and being examined of his confederats, he accused all the Tyrants
chief friends, and told him that if he would hear him in private, he would
discover more; whereupon the King bowing down his head to hear him, he bit of
his nose; for this he was pounded in a stone mortar, to make him confess; but
he biting of his tongu, and spitting it in his tormentors face, died being 98.
years old. 14. Cleanthes a Stoic Philosopher, and Scholar to Zeno; he bore
labor and grief, with such cheerfulness, that he was called an other
Hercules. He was very poor, and when he wanted money to buy paper, he wrote the
saying of Zeno, on bones and shells. 15. Rome built first by Romulus and Remus,
two brethren, a City too well known of some, sufficiently of all. 16. Diogenes
the Cynick Philosopher, who when his father was imprisoned, fled to Athens, and
became Antisthenes Scholar. He lived ninety years, and died as some say of the
biting of a mad dog, others say holding his breath he stiflled himself. His
Scholars made a Tomb for him, and on the top thereof they set a dog. His
witty and satyricall learning, are known of most men.
CHAP. VIII.
BUt that we may omit these divine studies, I can name some of the [I] Sabine
fields, country [2] Romans, my neighbors, and familiars, then whom none take
more pains in the fields, either in sowing, gathering, or sorting the fruits,
yet among them it is no marvel; for there is none so old, but that he thinks
to live one year more; but they labor in things which they know do not at all
belong unto them, and as our friend Statius Caecilius says in his Synephebis,
they plant trees which shall not give fruit till another age, and after they
are dead; which makes the husbandman, when any asks him for whom he sets
those trees, to answer, for the immortal gods, that would not that I only
should receive the fruits of the earth from my predecessors, but leave them
also to my posterity. That same [3] Caecilius wrote thus of age.

If old age brings no other faults, this one enough will be
By living long they often behold the things they would not see.
And many times the things they would; but youth it self is subject to that
inconvenience. But he wrote yet worse of age then that.

In age I take this thing to be the greatest misery,
To think the younger sort of men do hate, their company
Nay rather pleasant then hateful is their company. For as wise old men are
delighted with young men, endued with a vertuo us disposition, and their age is
made the easier that are worshipped and beloved of such; so wise young men are
rejoiced in the precepts of old men, by which they are led to the studies of
virtue; neither do I perceive that I am less pleasant to you, then you are to
me. Now you see that age is not faint and negligent, but laborsome and always
doing something, and endeavoring in such things as every man's study was in his
former li^e; but how if old men learn in their age also? as we see [4] Solon,
boasting in his verses, that he learned something every day, grew an old man,
as I my self have done, who now in my age, have learned the Greek tongue, which
truly I took greedily, as it were to satisfy a continual thirst, that those
things might be known to me, which you now see me use in examples. And when I
heard also wha^ [5] Socrates had profited in music, I would have learned that
^oo (for your ancients learned music,) but truly I bestowed my pains in
learning.

VIII TABLE of Annotations.
1. SAbin fields, a place where Cato had a country house, not far of from
Rome. 2. Country Romans, it is thought that he meant Fabritius. 3. Caecilius
Statius a comicall poet, he wrote the comedy of Synephebis, of two young men
brought up together from their youth. 4. Solon one of the seven wise men of
Greece, he was the son of Epistides, and born at Salamina, therefore called
Salaminus, he made many good laws at Athens, he builded a city in Sicilia, and
called it after his name Solos, he died when he was ninety years old, and was
buried at Salamina. 5. Socrates.
CHAP. IX.
NEither do I now desire the strength of youth, no more then when I was young,
I did desire the strength of a Bull, or an Elephant; for that which is
naturally ingraffed in a man, that it becomes him to use, and to desire to do
nothing above his strength. For what speech can be more contemptible, then that
of [1] Milo Crotoniata, who when he was an old man, and saw the wrestlers
exercising themselves in the [2] Chase, is reported to have beheld his Arms,
and weeping to say, But these are now dead; no, not them so much as thou thy
self thou trifler; for never wast thou ^nobled by thy virtue, or wisdom but
by thy beastlike force and strong arms. [3] Sexius Aemylius spoke no such
thing, nor [4] Titus Coruncanus many years before, nor Publius Crassus of late,
of whom laws were prescribed to the Citizens, whose wisdom continued till
their last gasp.

IX. TABLE of Annotations
MIlo Crotoniata, a man of such strength, that at the games at Olympus, he came
in with an ox on his shoulders, which with his bare fist he slew, and some say
immediately eat him; his death for all his strength was miserable; for coming
into a wood in his age, and seeing a tree gape in the midst, being by some
means cleft, he trusting to his former strength, thought to rend it in pieees,
but putting his fingers into the rift, the tree suddenly closed, and he being
caugbt by the hands, was there devoured by wolves. 2. The chase at mount
Olympus, where once in five years, were runnings, wrestlings, and such like
for games, first instituted by Hercules, who there first wrestled himself,
they were had in such estimations among the Grecians, that they counted their
years by them. 3. Sextus Aemylius, a man excellently skilled in the laws and
ordinances of Rome. 4. Titus Coruncanus he first professed the laws; none of
his writings remain, but many of his witty sayings are to be found in Authors.
5. Publius Crassus a very rich man, and skillful in the laws of Rome, he was
Consul with Africanus.
CHAP. X.
BUt it may be thought that an Orator may be weakened with age. For that office
consists not only of wit, but also of strength of body, strong sides and
voice; yet that shrilnesse of voice does altogether show it self, I know not by
what means in old age, which I my self have not yet lost, and yet you see my
years; notwithstanding the speech of an old man, is comely, quiet, and
remiss; and the gentle and decked Oration of an eloquent old man, makes
audience to it self, which singularity if you cannot obtain, yet may you give
precepts to youth; for what can be more pleasant, then old age, guarded with the
studies of youth? Shall we not then leave that strength at least to age, that it
may teach youth, bring them up, and instruct them in all good duties? then
which what can be more necessary, or more excellent? So that to my
understanding [1] Cnaeus and Publius Scipio, and your two grand fathers, Lucius
Aemylius, and Paulus Affricanus, seemed happy in the company of noble young
men. Neither are any masters of good Arts, to be thought unhappy though through
their pains in teaching their strength wax old, and decay; for that defection
and failing of strength, is oftener caused by the faults of youth, then of age;
for an intemperate and lustful youth, delivers a corrupt and decrepit body
to age. Yet (2) Cyrus (in (3) X^nphon) on his death bed, denies that ever he
felt himself much weaker by age, then he was in his youth. I remember (4)
Lucius Metellus, when I was a boy, who four years after his second Consulship,
was made High Priest, and served in that office 22 years, he was of so good
strength and health in his last age, that he required not youth. I need not
speak much of my self, though it be a thing that belongs to old men, and it is
granted to our age for do you not see how often (5) Nestor does brag in Homer,
of his own virtues? for he had then lived three ages of man. So that he needed
not fear least that speaking the truth of himself, he should be counted in
solent or talkative; for as Homer says, out of his mouth flowed words more
sweet then honey, which made that [6] Captain of Greece, never wish that he had
ten such as strong [7] Ajax, but ten such as wise Nestor, which if he might
obtain, he doubted not but that [8] Troy should soon be overthrown. But I
return to my self, I am now in the fourscore and fourth year of mine age, I
cannot truly say as Cyrus did, but I would I could; yet this I can say, that
though I am not of so great strength as I was being a soldier in the
Carthaginian war, or Questor in the same war, or Consul in Spain, or four
years after, when being Tribune of the soul diers, I fought at [9]
Thermopylae, ( Marcus A^tillius Glabrio being Consul) yet as you see old age
has not altogether weakened me, it has not overthrown me. The Courts want not
my strength, nor the pleading places, nor my friends, nor my Glyents, nor my
ghests. Neither did I ever assent to that old and lauded proverb, that warns a
man to be old quickly if he will be an old man long; but I had rather be an old
man man less while, then make my self an old man before I were. So that as
yet no man could come and find me idle at home, yet have I less strength then
either of you; neither have you the strength of [10] Titus Pontius the
Centurion; is he therefore better then you? But let him make much of it, it
will not endure long. Milo is said to have entered the Listes of Olympus with a
live Ox on his shoulders; whether had you rather now have this man's strength
of body, or Pythagoras his strength of wit, to be given you? To conclude, use
that strength which you have while you have it; but when it is gone, require it
not, unless you think it a seemly thing of young men, to require their
childhood again, and ancient men their youth; There is but one course of age,
and one way of nature, and the same simple, and to every part of age its own
timelines is given; for as infirmity belongs to childhood, fierceness to
youth, and gravity to age, so the true ripeness of age has a certain natural
gravity in it, which ought to be used in it own time. I think you have heard
Scipio, of King [11] Massinissa, what he does at this day being a man of ninety
years old, when he goes any whether on foot, he will never ride in that
journey how far soever it be; likewise, when he rides a journey he will never
alight, neither could any storm, make him wear his hat; surely there is great
dryness of body in him, therefore he may well execute all the offices and
duties of a King. Thus you see exercise and temperance, way preserve some of
the former strength even in old age.

X. TABLE of Annotations.
1. CNaeus and Publius Scipio were brethren, and called the thunderbolts of
war; Publius was Affricanus, his father, and Cnaeus father to Scipio Nausica.
2. Cyrus. There were three of this name; two Kings and one Poet, who for his
fingular wit was made a Bishop by Theodosius the Emperor. 3. Xenophon a man of
great wisdom and beauty, the son of Grillus. He was Scholar to Socrates. 4.
Lucius Metellus, Consul with M. Fabius Aburb. condit. 506. He was High Priest,
twice Consul, Dictator, master of the Horse, and Decemvir; He first led
Elephants in Triumph, in the first Carthaginian war, in his age he lost his
sight when he would have spoiled the Temple of Vesta. 5. Nestor King Pylion,
son of Nelius and Adonidis, a man of great experience and wisdom, he went
with Agamemnon to Troy and lived three hundred years. 6. Captain of Greece
was Agamemnon, the son of Atreus King of Argives, he led the Army of the
Grecians to Troy, to be revenged for the Rape of Helen, where when he had
obtained the victory, returning home, Clytemnestra his wife presented him with
a headless shirt, which while he was putting on, and searching where to put
forth his head, Aegisthus his wifes adulterer slew him. 7. Ajax a strong and
valiant Captain under Agamemnon, who striving with Ulysses for the Armor of
Achilles and being overcome of him, ran mad and slew himself. 8. Troy a
famous City in the lesser Asia, built by Tros King thereof, it was three times
sacked, twice by Hercules, and l^stly clean overthrown by Agamemnon, and the
Greeks, for the cause above said. 9. Thermopylae a mountain in Grecia, so
called of the hot matters that flow from thence; there was fought a great
battle between Attilius Glabrio, and Antiochus King of Macedon, at which was
Cato. 10. Titus Pontius, who when the Capitol had be enlike to be taken, swam
over Tibur; Pliny writes that he had the sinews of his arms and hands double.
11. Masinissa King of Numidia, he was received into the Roman lea^gue by
Publius Scipio Africanus.
CHAP. XI.
STrength is not in old age; neither indeed is strength required of age;
therefore both by the laws and statutes, our age is free from those offices
which cannot be exercised without strength; therefore we are not compelled to
do those things which we cannot; no, nor so much as we can; but some men are so
weak, that they can scarcely execute any office or duty of life at all; yet
that is not the proper fault of age, but most commonly of sickness; how weak
was ( Scipio) the son of Publius Africanus, he which adopted you Scipio? of
how small or rather of no health? which had it not been so, he had shined like
another light in the city; for to his fathers magnanimity of mind, in him was
added most plentiful learning; what wonder is there then in old men, if they
be sometimes weak, since youth it self cannot avoid it? Age is to be resisted,
Laelius and Scipio, and his faults are to be ruled with diligence; we must
strive against age as against a disease; we must have a care of our health; we
must use moderate exercises; so much meat and drink must be taken, that the
strength may be refreshed, not oppressed, neither must we only feed the body,
but the mind and understanding much more, for they also are extinguished with
age, unless you always add to them by study, and instill as it were oil
into a lamp. For though men's bodies grow heavy, and weary with much exercise,
yet the mind is made more light, and ready by exercising it self. They whom
Caecilius calls foolish old men, are such as are credulous, forgetful and
dissolute, whith are not generally the faults of all age, but of a sluggish,
drowsy and slothful age. For as wantonness and lust is more in young men
then in old, and yet not in all young men, but in the dishonest; so that folly
of age which is wont to be called doting, is in lightheaded old men, but not
in all; Appius being both an old man, and a blind man, governed four valiant
sons, and five beautiful daughters, a great household, and many retayners,
for he had his mind ready bent as a bow, neither fainting did he yield to age.
He held not only authority, but also command over his own, his servants feared
him, his children reverenced him, he was dear to all, the ancient manners and
discipline of the country flourished in that house. For age is so excellent,
if it keep its authority, if it be bound to no man, that even to the last
gasp, it bears rule over its own. And as I like a youth in whom there is
some gravity, so I like an old man in whom there is some youthfulness, which
who so observes, may be an old man in body, but in mind he never shall be. I
am now writing my seventh book of [1] Originales, and of excellent causes,
whatsoever I have heretofore defended, now especially I compile oratio^s, I
handle the soothsayers, the Priests, and the Civil law. I also use the Greek
tongue much. And after the manner of the Pythagoreans, for to exercise my
memory, I call to mind in the evening, what I have spoke, heard, or done all
that day. These are indeed the cases of the mind; these the exercises of the
wit, in which studies while I busy my self, I do not greatly desire the
strength of body; I am present with my friends, I come into the senate often,
and of my own accord, I bring discourses, long and well thought upon, which I
there defend not by strength of body, but of mind, which if I could not do, yet
lying on my bed, the remembrance of the good I have done, would much delight
me. But hitherto I have so lead my life, that I am yet able to perform the
like; fore one which lives in these labors and studies never perceives how
age creeps on him; for it does by little and little wax old, without feeling,
neither is life suddenly dissolved, but by long continuance exstinguished.

XI. TABLE of Annotations.
1. THe Book of Originals, was in manner of a Chronicle, which Cato wrote;
there are but a few fragments of them extant, the rest are lost.
CHAP. XII.
THere follows the third Objection to age; they say that it wants
pleasures. Oh excellent gift of age, if it take away that which makes our youth
vicious; therefore hear now, O ye excellent young men, the old oration of [1]
Architas the Tarentine, a singular and worthy man, which was delivered me when
I was a young man with Q. Maximus at Tarentum. He said that there was no
deadlier plague given by nature tomen, then the pleasure of the body, the
greedy lusts whereof are rash and unbrideledly, stirred up to get and gain.
From hence are derived treasons, from hence arise the overthrowes of
Commonwealths, and the privy conspiracies and whisperings with the enemies.
That to conclude, there was no wickedness, nor no evil deed, to the
undertaking of which, the lust of pleasure did not incite a man; and that
whoredom, adultery, and all such evil was stirred up by no other bait then
pleasure. And forasmuch as nature, or some God, has given nothing more
excellent to a man, then his mind; to this divine gift, there is no greater
enemy then pleasure. For lust bearing rule, there is no place for temperance,
neither in the Kingdom of pleasure can virtue consist. To the better
understanding whereof, he bade one imagine in his mind some one nusled in as
great pleasure as could be, he thought that no man would doubt, but that while
he was thus delighted, he could deeply consider of nothing in his mind, nor
perform any thing by his reason; therefore nothing is so detestable as
pleasure, especially if it be great, and of long continnance, for then it
clean extinguisheth the light of the mind. These things [2] Nearchus the
Tarentine, our friend, who was in the league of Rome, said, that Architas spoke
to [3] Caius Pontius, the Samnite, his father of whom Cons. An. 333.
Spurius Posthumus, and T. Viturius, the Consuls were overcome, in the [4]
Caudine war, and that he had heard it of his ancestors, when there was present
at that speech Plato of Athens whom I find to have come to Tarentum, Cons. An.
337.
Lucius Camillus and Appius Claudius being Consuls. But to what end is all
this? that you may understand that if we cannot despise pleasure by wisdom
and reason, we ought to give great thanks to old age, which brings to pass,
that we shall not lust to do that which we ought not to do. For pleasure the
enemy of reason hinders counsel, and as I may so say it blinds the eyes of
the mind, that it cannot have fellowship with virtue. It was against my will,
that I cast [5] Lucius Flaminius, the brother to that valiant man Titus
Flaminius, out of the senate, seven years after he had been Consul; but I
thought his lust was noted; for he when he was Consul in France, was entreated
to behead one of his prisoners for sport, by a Harlot in a banquet, which he
did; he, his brother Titus being Censor, (who was next before me) escaped; but
to me and Censor with Cato.
Flaccus, such heinous and wicked lust could not be in any wise allowed, which
with his own private shame, might join a blot to the Empire. I have often heard
it of my Elders, who said that they have heard it of old men, that Caius
Fabritius was wont to marvel, that when he was Embassad or with King Pyrrhus,
he heard [6] Cinaeas the Thessalonian say, that there was An Epicure of the
sect of Aristippus.
one at Athens, who professed himself a wise man, and affirmed that all our
actions ought to be referred to pleasure: and that M. Curious and T. Coruncanus
were wont to wish that he could persuade that thing to Pyrrhus and the Samnits
whereby they might be the easilier overcome, when they had given themselves to
pleasure. Marcus Curious lived with [7] Publius Decius, who in his fourth
Consulship, five years before Curious was Consul, bequeathed himself to death
for the Commonwealth. Fabritius and Coruncanus knew him well, who as well by the
life, as by the deeds of this Publius Decius of whom I speak, did judge, that
there was some other thing more excellent in its own nature, then pleasure to
be followed, which every good man, pleasure being contemned, ought to seek
after. But to what end speak we so much of pleasure? because that you may see
that no blame, but much praise is to be given to age, because it does not lust
after pleasure, which is so dangerous a thing.

XII. TABLE of Annotations.
1. ARchitas of Tarentum, a Pythagorean Philosopher; he was the Governor of
the city, he learned Geometry of Plato, and by that art made an artificial
dove which flew like a live one. 2. Nearchus a Pythagorean Philosopher, and
Host to Cato, as Plutarch writes. 3. Caius Pontius the son of Hernius, who
wished that he might live till the Romans grew covetous, for then he thought
that they might be overcome. 4. Caudine war, was fought at a woody hill so
called, between the Romans and the Samnites. 5. Lucius Flaminius, Consul 562
years ab urbe cond. who after he was put out of his degree of Senator by Cato,
sitting in the lowest and common place of the Theater, was so pitied by the
People for his humility, thatwith great acclamations, they advanced him to the
seat where the Consuls sat. 6. Cinaeas Scholar to Demosthenes; a man of such
eloquence, that by his persuasion, Pyrrhus gat many cities, and therefore much
honored by him. 7. Publius Decius Coss. with Fab. Max. Quintil. An. ab urb.
cond. 458. his father fighting against the Latins, (when by the oracle of
Apollo it was told that that Army should have the victory whose Captain was
first slain) he valiantly and willingly cost himself among the enemies, and
for the good of his country was there slain, whose example his son following
did the like.
CHAP. XIII.
AGe wants banqueting, gluttony, and quaffing; it is also without surfeting,
drunkenness, or dreaming; but yet if we may any ways take some pleasure,
(because we do not easily resist her flatteries (for divine Plato calls
pleasure the bait of evils, because men are caught therewith as fishes with a
hook) tho age despises immoderate banquets, yet may it be delighted with
moderate meetings. When I was a boy I remember I have seen [1] Caius Duillus,
the son of Tribune with L. Menenius.
Marcus, he which first overcame the Carthaginians by sea, coming from supper,
he took great pleasure to have lighted torches carried before him, and
musicians to play before him, which use he being a private man, without any
example, had taken to himself. But wherefore speak I so much of others? I will
now return to my self. First I had companions like my self, and diverse
companies and fellowships, (I being Questor) were by me in, stituted; (the holy
writs of the [2] great mother being performed) I did banquet then with my
equals, neither did I esteem the delight of those banquets, by the bodies
pleasure, more then for the company and conference of my friends. Well did our
Ancestors call the sitting together of friends at a feast A con. and vivo.
Convivium, because it has a conjunction of life: better then the Greeks,
which call it both compotatio and concaenatio, a drinking together, and a
supping together. But I am delighted with moderate feasts, for the delight of
conference, and that not only with my equals, of which but few now remain, but
also with men of your age, and with you, and I give great thanks to age, that
has taken away the desire of meat and drink in me, and increased the desire
of study; but if any of these things do also delight any man, (least I should
seem to be at utter defiance with pleasure, in which peradventure there may be
a natural mean,) I do not see but that in these pleasures themselves, age may
have sense and feeling. For those stewardships in feasts, do much delight me,
and that speech which is used by the chief [3] steward in his drinking, after
the manner of our ancestors, and the use of moderate and little cups, as it is
written in the banquet of Xenophon; also that cooling in the Summer, and again
either the Sun or the fire in the winter, which I am wont to use among the
[4] Sabines, where I daily fill up a Table with my neighbors, and we spend the
time as much as we can with diverse conference, sometimes even till midnight.

XIII. TABLE of Annotations.
1. Caius Duillus who triumphing for the first Carthaginian victory, was not
content with one days triumph, but caused torches to be ligh^ed in the night,
and musicians to play before him. 2. Great mother, was the image of Sibella, of
Phrygia, or the mother of the gods, which was brought to Rome from Pisunt,
whereupon the Romans made great plays, called Megalesia, and also solemn
feasts yearly. 3. Stewards was as we choose King and Queen, in our sports at
Christmas; they were chosen in feasts among the Guests, either by lot, or
voices; they were to be as it were masters of the feast, and tell pleasant
stories to the Guests, to pass the time withal. 4. Sabins where Cato had a
farm before he came to Rome, and there he lived not far from the city.
CHAP. XIV.
BUt there is not so great a tickling as it were of pleasure in old age, no nor
so much as a desire for nothing that is not wanted is desired. Sophocles
answered well to one that was well in years, who demanded of him if he
sometimes used not rebus Venereis
dalience, nay God forbid quoth he; but I have willingly fled from them as from
a cruel and furious master. For to those who do desire, it it is grievous to
want it; but to them that be satisfied, it is better to be without, so that
they want not, that desire not. Therefore I say that it is better not to desire
then to enjoy. But if youth do enjoy these pleasures in greater measure, Age
also does not altogether want them. For as in the Play of the [1] Poet Turpius
Ambinius, he that sits in the nearest gallery is more delighted, yet is he
also delighted that sits in the furthest. So youth beholding pleasures more
near, is peradventure more delighted, but age beholding them afar off, is
delighted as much as is sufficient. But how great is the pleasure of age, when
the mind, releafed from the slavery of lusts, ambition, contention, emnity, and
all other such like concupiscence, may be secure, and as they say, live at home
with it self at rest? But if it have supply, and as I may call it, food of
learning and study, there is nothing more pleasant then a quiet old age; we
have known that [2] Caius Gallus your fathers familiar friend Scipio, dyed when
he had been studious in Astrology, and Cosmography; how often did he write both
night and day? and how much did he delight to tell us long before, of the
Eclipses of the Sun and of the Moon? Yet is age delighted in more light yet
notwithstanding ingenuous studies. How did Nevius rejoice in his Bellum
Punicum? How did [3] Plautus delight in his Truculentus? How in his Pseudalus?
I have seen also the old man L. Andronius he was made free for his good wit by
L. Salinator
Livius, who set forth a book six years before I was borne, Centonus and
Tutidanus being Consuls, and he lived till my youth; what shall I speak of
Licinius Crassus, or of the Pontifical or civil Laws, or of this Publius
Scipio who the other day was made High Priest? All these whom I have here
remembered, being old men, I have seen flourishing in these studies; but what
pains did An excellent Orator.
Marcus Cethegus also take in pleading, being an old man, whom Ennius does
rightly call the marrow of eloquence? what therefore are the pleasures of
banquets, or plays, or whores to be compared to these? But these are the
studies of learning, which surely with the wise and well nurtred, will grow up
and increase together with their age? as the commendable verse of Solon does
import Assidue discens plurima fio senex.
that he grew old, learning every day something; then which pleasure of mind,
what can be greater?

XIIII. Table of Annotations.
1. TUrpius Ambinius a poet, who flourished in the time of L. Sergius, Artilius,
Praenestius, and others. 2. Caius Gallus Sulpitius was tribune, the year before
being Praetor he prognosticated the ectipse of the moon, by the commandment of
the Consul; he was anorator, and studied much the Greek Tongue. 3. Plautus a
Com call poet, and very fimous, but poor; he was a miller and all day ground,
and in the night he wrote plays, whereof his Truculentus and his Pseudolus
were two.
CHAP. XV.
NOw I come to the pleasures of husbandmen, with which I am incredibly
delighted, which seems to me to come nearest the life of a wise man, neither is
it hindered by age. The countrey-mans business lies on the earth, which never
refuses to be delved, neither ever does it render what it has received,
without usury, though some time with less, yet for the most part with greater
gain. Yet am not I only delighted with the fruit, but also with the nature, and
force of the earth it self, which after it has received the seeds into its
softened and wrought bosom, first it keeps it in, being harrowed, of whence
this word occatio.
Harrowing which does this, is named; afterward being heat with its vapor and
embracement, it spreads abroad, and brings forth an herby greenness, which
fastened with the little strings of the root, by little and little increases,
and being erected upon a knotty stalk, is at the last as it were included in a
sheath, out of which when it grows, it yields fruit like grains, and it is
fortified from the biting of the lesser birds, with the defense of the beards.
What should I now rehearse the setting, springing, and increase of vines? I
must needs say, (that you may know the pleasure and quietness of mine age) I
cannot be satisfied with delight. I omit the force of all things nourished by
the earth, which of a little grain of a fig, or Grape, brings forth such
great Trunked bodies, and boughs of Trees; twigs, plants, grafts, sets, roots,
do they not so spring as may delight any man with admiration? The vine which by
nature is falling, and grows downwards, unless it be under-propped, to the
end she may erect her self, catches hold with her windings as with hands, on
whatsoever it meets, which as it creeps with manifold turnings, the art O
husbandry corrects with a grafting knife, least it should become wild and
overgrown; therefore in the spring in those branches which be left, it brings
forth as it were at the joints of the twigs, the buds, of which after comes
the grape, which increasing by the moisture of the earth, and the heat of the
sun, is at the first but bitter, but after growing ripe, it becomes sweet, and
being clothed with the broad leaves, it is defended from the scorching of the
sun, yet wants it not moderate heat, then which what can be more pleasant to
the taste, or more delightful to the eye? the profitablenesse whereof does not
only delight me, as I have said, but also the dressing, and nature of it. The
order of the props, the joining of the tops, the setting and the tying of the
vines, and the cutting of some, and the sparing of others, does much delight
me; what shall I say of the watering, digging, and decking of the field, by the
which the earth is made much more fruitful? what shall I say of dunging, and
of the profit thereof? I have spoken sufficiently in that book which I wrote of
country businesses, of which learned Hesiod made no mention when he wrote of
husbandry. But Homer who as it seems to me, lived many years before, brings
in [1] Laertes tilling and digging the earth, to lessen and forget the care and
grief he had taken for the want of his son, who was gone to Troy; but
countrey-affairs are not only pleasant for corn, vineyards, medows, and
groves, but also for gardens, orchards, pastures of cattle, swarms of Bees,
and all manner of variety of pleasant flowers; neither does planting only
delight me, but also grafting, then which the art of husbandry has found out
nothing more ingenious.

XV. Table of Annotations.
1. LAertes son of Acoisius, and father to the wise Ulysses, that went to
Troy.
CHAP. XVI.
I Could proceed further in the country delights; but I fear I have been
somewhat too long already, but you must pardon me, for I am provoked by the
delight which I take therein; and indeed old age, (that I may not seem
partial, to free it from all faults) is somewhat talkative. But Marcus Curious
when he had triumphed over the Samnites, the Sabins, and Pyrrhus, spent the
last part of his age in that kind of life; whose farmehouse when I behold,
(for it is not far from mine) I cannot sufficiently admire, both the
continency of the man, and his manner of life. The Samnits once brought a a
great sum of gold to this Curious, as he was sitting in his countrey-house by
the fire, but he refused it, saying that it was no commendable thing in his
mind to have gold, but to command them which have gold. Could not such a mind
make age pleasant? But I return to Contrymen, least I should depart from my
self. In those days there lived old men and Senators in that country, so that
it was told [1] Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus, that he was created [2] Dictator,
when he was a plowing in the field; even he at whose command [3] C. Servilius
Hala slew Spurius Melius, who aspired to the Kingdom; Curious and others were
called out of their farme-houses to the senate, whereof they that weresent for
them, were called Viatores; was therefore their age to be called miserable, who
were thus delighted with husbandry? truly in my opinion, no life is more happy,
either in the tilling it self, (which is very healthful to a man's body) or as
I have said in the pleasure, plenty, and abundance of all things, which either
appertain to the service of man, or the worship of God. And because some do
much desire this pleasure, let us now close again with pleasure. The
Country-cellar of a frugall and diligent master, is always full of wine, and
oil, and his house is replenished with all things needful; it abounds with
porke, kid, lamb, poultrey, milk, honey, etc. also his garden is to the
husbandman another storer, and then hunting and hawking makes his life the
sweeter. What should I speak of the greenness of the meddowes, of the order
and fashion of the vines, and olive trees? I will soon conclude, there can be
nothing more profitable for use, or more pleasant in show, then a well tilled
field: To the enjoying of which age does not hinder, but rather entice and
allure us. For where may a man be better warmed in the winter, either by the
sun or the fire, then there, and where better cooled in the summer, either by
the shadow of trees, or the rivers of water, then there? therefore young men
have their weapons, their horses, their spears, their swimming, the ball, the
club, and their races, and they leave to us old men the cards and the tables
which we sometimes use when we list; for age may be right happy without them.

XVI. Table of Annotations.
1. Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Tribune of the soldiers. Anno 370. he was made
Dictator, when he was found in the field at plow, with his face and hands all
dirty. 2. Dictator was the most excellent office among the Romans; he was also
called Magister populi; he was never created, but when there was some sudden
uproar, that threatened the overthrow of the Kingdom; no man might appeal from
him, but all estates obeyed him. Titus Largius was the first Dictator; no man
might hold it above sixmoneths, because it was of sokingly and absolute power;
but Coesar when he gat it, was so ambitious, that he kept it till his death. 3.
Caius Hala slew Spurius Melius at the commandment of Quintus Cincinnatus the
Dictator for aspiring to be king, for which he was made Master of the horsemen,
Anno aburbe cond. 316.
CHAP. XVII.
THe Books of Xenophon are profitable for many respects, which I pray you read
diligently as you do; how copiously is husbandry handled in that book of his,
which is entitled Oeconomicus of the care of a private family? and that you
may know, that nothing seems more kingly, then the art of tillage, Socrates
in that Book speaks to An excellent Physician, he cured, King Philips eye when
it was shot out with an arrow.
Critobulus, saying that [1] Cyrus the less king of Persia, a man excelling in
wit and glory of Government, when Lysander of Lacedemonia, a virtuous man came
to him at A Town in Persia
Sardis, and brought him gifts from his fellows, he bore himself very
courteously toward him, and showed him a certain piece of ground hedged in,
and artificially planted, when Lyfander wondering at the greatness of the
trees, the excellent order they were set in, the ground pure and well wrought,
and the sweet odor that the pleasant flowers cast, said that he not only
admired his wit, but also his diligence by whom knots were drawn and set; Cyrus
answered him, that they were all of his drawing and invention, and that he set
them down, and that most of his trees were set with his own hands. Then
Lysander beholding the goodly proportion of the Kings body, and the glorious
splendour of his Persian purple garment, fet with gold and precious stones,
said, rightly do they report thee happy Cyrus; for to thy virtue thou have
blessed fortune added; and this fortune old men may have, neither does age
hinder us, but that we may exercise arts and husbandry even till the last part
of our life. We have heard of [2] Marcus Valerius Corvinius who lived a hundred
years, and in his age remained in the country, and became a tiller of the
ground, between whose first and sixth Consul-ship was forty and six years.
Therefore all the age that passed in a man till his old age, was accounted of
our Ance stors but as a race of that length which directed to honor, so that
the last age is more happy then the middle, because it has more authority and
less labor, The highest perf^ction in age is authority. How great Majesty was
in High Priest. Anno 671.
L. Cecillius Metellus? how great in Attillius Coss with Sulp. Paterculus. Anno
672.
Collatinus? whom the general consent of all nations did allow to be the
chief among the people; the verses on his sepulcher are well known. By right
therefore he is to be held noble and of authority, in whose praises the reports
of all men do consent, what men of wisdom have we seen of late? Pub. Crossus
the high Priest, and a ter him Marcus High Priest. Anno 671.
Lepidus that succeeded him in the office; what should I speak of Paulus or of
Affricanus, or of Maximus whom I named before? Not only iu whose speech, but
also in whose looks remained authority. Age has (especially honored age) such
reverence, that it is more to be accounted of, then all the pleasures of youth.

XVII. TABLE of Annotations.
1. CYrus Minor reigned in Persia 353. years after the building of Rome, in the
times of Aggaeus and Zacharias the Prothets in Judea. 2. Marcus Valerius
Corvinus, fighting against a French souldur, that challenged him in the lists,
a crow came and sat upon his head, and smo^e her wings in his enemies face, and
so blinded him, that Valerius obtained the victory, and ever after was called
Corvinus; he was after both Consul and Dictator.
CHAP. XVIII.
BUt you must remember that in all this speech, I have praised only that age,
which is built on the foundation of youth, from whence it happened that that
speech of mine, wherein I affirmed that age to be miserable, which only
defended it self by speech, was so generally applauded of all men; for neither
gray hairs, nor wrinckles, get authority suddenly, but the honest and
virtuous deeds of the age before spent, obtain the chiefest fruits of
authority. For these things are honorable, which do seem but of small account.
v.z. to be saluted, to be sought unto, to have place given to them, to be risen
unto, to be brought in, to be conducted out, and to give counsel, which both
among us, and in other well mannerd cities is observed diligently. It Is said
that Lisander of Lacedemon, of whom I spoke even now, was wont to say, that
Lacedemon was a most fit and honest habitation for old age; for nowhere was
that age more reverenced or honored then there. It comes now to my mind that a
certain old man at Athens, at the plays coming in among the people, no man
would give him room; but when he came among the Lacedaemonians, (who when they
come of an embassage, sit all in one place) they all rose up to him, and
received the old man to sit with them: to whom when great praise was given for
the courteous deed, one of them said, that the Athenians knew good manners, but
would not use them. Many excellent Ceremonies are observed in our College of
Auguries, whereof this which we speak of is one, that every man in their
consultations, gives his opinion according to his age, the oldest first, and so
downwards; for Augurs are not only preferred before some that are honored, but
also before many which besides their years and gravity are in office; what are
therefore the pleasures of the body, to be compared to the rewards of
authority, which whosoever make th use of, seems to me to have gone well
through the interlude of his life, and not like an unskilful player, to fail
in the last act.

CHAP. XIX.
BUt old men are froward, unconstant, peevish and crabbed, and we complain
also that they are covetous; but these be the faults of the manners, not of the
age; but way wardnesse and those faults may have some excuse, though not
justly, yet such may seem probable. For sometimes they think they are mocked or
despised, and besides every small offense to a weak body is grievous, all which
not withstanding may be sweetened both by good manners, and arts, and that may
well be seen both in the life and the play of those two Brothers in [1] Adelphus
in [2] Terence; how much crabbednesse in the one, and how much courtesy in the
other? Even so the case stands; for as all wines do not grow sour and tart in
continuance, so not all age. I like severity in an old man, but not
bitterness. Bnt as for covetousness in age, I know not what it means; for
there can be no greater absurdity, then when the journey is almost done, to
take care to provide much more provision.

XIX. TABLE of Annotations.
1. ADelphus a comedy written by Terence, wherein is showed the difference of
ages in two brothers, the one Mitio a mild gentle man, the other Demea a
froward perverse man. 2. Terence born at Carthage, he wrote six Comedies which
are now extant; some report that he wrote more, but they were drowned in a ship
at sea; he was well-beloved of Scipio and Laelius.
CHAP. XX.
THere remains the fourth cause which seems to vex and grieve our age very
much; the approaching of death, which surely follows age at the heels. O The
fourth Objection to age, neernesse to death.
miserable old man, whatsoever thou be, which can not learn in all thy life
forespent, to despise death, which is either plainly to be neglected, if it
kill the soul with the body, or to be desired if it bring happiness after
life; for no third way is found; what should I then fear, if after death I
shall be either nothing, or else happy? but what fool (though he be a young
man) is there that can tell whether he shall live till night? for That age has
more causes of death then Age has; young men sooner fall into diseases, their
sickness is and more grievous and dangerous, hey are healed with more pain and
trouble; so that few of them come to be old, which if some of them happen to
do, they live more prudently and better then before; for understanding,
counsel and reason is in age, which if it were not there, there could be no
Cities. But I return to death, which as it were hangs over our heads; think
you, that it is the particular fault of age, when you see it common to youth? I
have well perceived not only by the death of my dear son, but also of your [1]
brothers, Scipio, who were expected to great dignity, that death is common to
all ages.

XX. TABLE of Annotations.
1. PAulus Aemylius had four sons, two by adoption, and two by another wife, of
which last two, the one died five days before his triumph, and the other three
days after. His sons by adoption were Scipio and Fabius.
CHAP. XXI.
BUt the young man hopes to live long, which the old man cannot. He hopes
foolishly; sor what is greater folly, then to account uncertain things for
certain, false for true? the old man has nothing to hope for more; therefore
he is in better state then the former, seeing that what the other wishes for,
he has obtained already; the young man would live long, the old man has lived
long. O you immortal gods, what is there in man's life, that is of any long
continuance? for let us live long, and we expect the years of the King of the A
place near the seashore of Gades.
Taresians; for I have seen it written, that there was one Arganthonius at
Gades, which reigned eighty years, and lived an hundred and twenty; but to me
nothing seems of long continuance, of which there is any end; for when that
end shall come, then that which is past flies away like smoke, and that only
will remain, which you have obtained by virtue and good deeds; the hours you
see runs on, and the days, and the months, and the years; neither does the
time past ever return, nor can any tell what will follow. That time which a man
has given him to live, he ought to be contented with it; for a good actor is
not applauded in the midst of a Scene, so a wise man's praise comes not till the
end. The time of our age is short indeed; but long enough to live well and
honestly. But if your age seem longer then your youth, you ought to grieve no
more then the husbandman does, when the sweetness of the spring is past, that
the summer and the winter are come. For the spring does as it were signify
youth, and shows what fruit will come; the other seasons of plucking and
gathering the fruit, are compared to the latter times of our age. For the fruit
of age as I have said, is the memory of the abundance of good deeds heretofore
done; all things which are done by the rules of God, and nature, are to be
accounted good; but it is a rule of nature that old men must die, which also
happens to young men though they resist it. Therefore a young man seems to
me to die like fire put out with water, but old men like fire which being put
out by no force, is quietly consumed of it self; and as apples on trees being
not ripe, are plucked of by violence, but being ripe they fall of themselves: so
force takes away the life of young men, but ripeness of age the life of old
men: which consideration is so pleasant to me, that I seem to behold the eatth,
as a quiet port, whether after a long and troublesome navigation I shall
arrive. The end of all ages is certain, but the end of old age is uncertain
(which is death,) and a man may live therein uprightly, and contemn death;
hence it comes that old men are more bold and hearty then young men, which made
that Solon answered to [1] Pysistratus the Tyrant, when he asked him what made
him so bold, he answered, old age. But the end he answered, old age. But the
end of life is then best when nature, (the mind being well, and all the senses
perfect) does dissolve the same work, which she her self has made. For as
that workman which has made a ship or building, knows best how to unjoyn it:
so the same nature which has made a man, best dissolves him; that which is
newly joined, is hardly sodered, but old work is easily taken in pieces. Now
that little time of life which we have, is not to be greedily desired of old
men, nor without cause to be refused, and Pythagoras forbids that unless the
Emperor (which is God) command; we ought not to depart from our station and
guard of life, it is the [2] speech of Solon the wise, when he wishes his
death to be lamented of his friends. I believe he would be dear to them. But I
know not if Ennius wrote better or no.

No man shall weep my death
Nor spend a sighing breath.
It seems he thinks not that death to be lamented, which obtains
immortality. Now for the sense or pain of dying, if there be any, it remains
but a small time, especially in old men. But this ought to be considered of in
youth, that we might learn before to neglect death, without which meditation
no man can be of (...) quiet mind. It Is certain we must die, but when,
uncertain, whether to day or no we know not; therefore who can be quiet in
mind, while he fears death continually hanging over his head, concerning
which there needs no long disputation, when I remember not only [3] L. Brutus
who was slain in delivering his country, not only Slain by Hanniball in the
Carthage war.
M. Marcellus whom after his death, his cruellest enemies could not suffer to
want honorable burial, and many others; but also our legions of soldiers,
who as I have written in my book of Originals, have often gone into those
places with a cheerful and constant mind, from whence they never looked to
return. Shall therefore wise and learned old men, fear that which young men,
rude, and unletterd have contemned? Truly me thinks that the satiety of all
things makes also a satiety of life. There are certain studies in children,
shall young men desire them? there are others in youth, shall age require them?
and there be studies in the last age: therefore as the studies of former ages
fail, so do the studies of old age, so that when the satiety or fullness of
life comes, it brings also a fit time for death.

XXI. Table of Annotations.
1. PYsistratus King of Athens, the son of Hippocrates, he reigned at Athens,
when Servius Tullius reigned at Rome; he made the first library at Athens,
which after, Xerxes carried into Persia. 2. The speech of Solon is in latin,
this. Mors mea ne careat lacrymis, linquamus amicis
Maerorem, ut celebrent funera nostra fletu.
Thus in English. Let not my death want tears, but leave to all
Sorrow and groans, to make my funeral.
3. Lucius Brutus, he deposed Tarquinius Superbus; it is said that when for
fear of Tarquin he counterfeited himself mad, he was entreated by Tarquins
sons to go with them to the oracle of Apollo, to make them sport by the way,
whether they went to know which of them should reign after their fathers
death; it was there answered, that he which did first kiss his mother, should
rule, whereupon they hasted home apace to their mother, but Brutus
understanding the oracles true meaning, fell to the earth and kissed it, as
being the general mother of all, by which means he after expulsing of Tarquin
for the rape of Lucretia, did govern the commonwealth himself, and was the
first Consul; he put to death his own sons for taking part with Tarquin; he
was stain by the lake Regulus in a battle.
CHAP. XXII.
I See no cause why I should not dare to tell you my opinion of death, which I
seem to behold the better, because I am so much the nearer it. I do verily
believe that your fathers, P. Scipio and C. Laelius most honorable men, and my
good friends, do now live, and indeed such a life as is only worthy to be
called a life. For while we are shut up in the fetters of this body, we
perform a certain grievous burden, and duty of necessity. For the soul is
divine, and is thrust down from a most heavenly dwelling, and is as it were
drowned in the earth, a place contrary to divine and eternal nature; and
surely I think that the immortal gods have put souls into men for this
cause, that beholding the earth, and the order of the heavens, they should
imitate them in the order and constancy of their life; neither does reason and
disputation only drive me to think so, but the authority and opinion of the
best Philosophers. I have heard that Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans, that were
almost our neighbors, who were called [1] Italian Philosophers, never doubted,
but that we had our souls chosen out of the most divine essence. I have heard
also that Socrates who was judged the wisest in all the world by the [2] oracle
of [3] Apollo, did dispute concerning the immortality of the soul. But what
need many words? so I think, and so I have persuaded my self, that seeing
there is such swiftness of understanding, such memory of things past, such
foresight of things to come, such arts, such sciences, and such inventions;
that that spirit which contains these things, cannot but be immortal. And
for as much as the soul is always moved, and has no beginning of motion,
because it moves it self, nor shall have no end of motion, because it shall
never leave it self; and seeing that the nature of the soul is simple of it
self, and has nothing mingled with it contrary to it; I believe it cannot be
divided, and therefore cannot die; and it is a great argument that men know
many things before they are borne, because when they are boys and learn hard
arts, they so swiftly conceive innumerable things, that they seem not then to
learn them, but as it were to remember them again. These are almost the very
words of Plato.

XXII. Table of Annotations.
1. PYthagoreans, he calls them his neighbors, because they were of
Calabria, which joined on the borders of Italy and Rome. 2. Oracle of Apollo,
stood in Delphos an Isle, where in the name of Apollo, the devil through a
brazen image made doubtful answers to questions that were asked; it continued
till the birth of Christ, and about that time it ceased. 3. Apollo the son of
Jupiter and Latona, born at one birth with his sister Diana, in the Isle Delos;
he is accounted for the son and the god of Physicians, Musicians, Painters
and Poets.
CHAP. XXIII.
1. Cyrus the great, (in Xenophon) at his death said thus, Do not suppose O my
dear children, that I when I shall depart from you, shall turn to nothing, or
become no where; for while I lived with you, you did not see my soul, but you
understood that it was in my body, by the things which I did; therefore believe
that it is the same still, though hereafter you shall not see it. For the
honors and good name of noble men should not live after their deaths, if in
their lives their souls or minds, did nothing worthy remembrance. Verily I
could never be persuaded that the souls of men did only live while they were
in mortal bodies, and not afterward, nor that the soul is any longer
foolish, then while it is in the foolish body, but that after being freed and
pure from the mixture of the body, it becomes wise; and seeing that man is
dissolved by death, the end of all other things is apparent; for all things go
from whence they came; the soul only, neither when it comes nor when it
goes, does appear. Now there is nothing more like death then sleep; and the
souls of them that sleep do greatly declare the divinesse thereof; for
sometime they are freed from the body for a time, and do behold many things to
come, whereby may be gathered what they will after be, when they have clearly
freed themselves out of the bonds of the body; wherefore if the soul be thus
immortal (says he) worship me as a god; but if it die with the body, yet ye
fearing the gods, which do behold and govern all this fair world, shall keep
my memory inviolable. This spoke Cyrus on his deathbed.

XXIII. TABLE of Annotations.
1. CYrus the great son of Cambises, he slew Astyages, last King of the
Medes, and translated the monarchy to the Persians rule. He left behind him two
sons, Cambises and Tranvazares.
CHAP. XXIV.
BUt if you please, let us see a little of our later times; no man shall
persuade me Scipio, that either your two grandfathers Paulus and Africanus, or
the Uncle of Africanus, or many other excellent men whom it is not now
necessary to name; would have endeavored so much in great affairs, unless
they had known that in their posterity their memory should live together with
their praise. Do you think (that after the manner of old men, I may boast
something of my self) that I would have taken such pains in the City, and in
the Camp, if I should have ended my fame together with my life? Were it not
better to lead a quiet and peaceable old age, without labor and contention?
but I know not by what means, the soul lifting it self up does so behold the
memory that shall be left to posterity, as if it should then live when it had
once died. Which unless it were so, that memory remained, and the soul were
immortal, scarce would any excellent mind endeavor to get renown and glory.
But suppose that every wise man dies with a good soul, and every fool with a
bad: does it not seem to you, that that soul which knows more, and is of
deeper understanding, does see that it shall go to a better place then that
soul whose intellect is more dull and mortal? Truly I am verry desirous, to
fee your fathers whom I love so well, and I not only wish to see them whom I
have known, but also them of whom I have heard and read; therefore from the
place whether I am going, shall no man withhold me, nor from thence as a ball
strike me back; and if any god would grant me to be now a child in my cradle
again, and to be young, I would refuse it. Neither would I, having run my
full course, be called back again. For what profit has life, or rather what
trouble? but say it have some commodity, yet when it has a fullness and
satiety, it ought to have an end. I will not deplore my life forespent, as many
learned men have done; neither do I repent that I have lived, because I have so
lived that I think I was not borne in vain; and I depart out of this life, as
from an Inn, not as from a continual habitation; for nature has given us a
place to rest in, not to dwell in. O happy shall that day be, when I shall come
into the company and counsel of those men, of whom I spoke before, and not
only to them, but to my dear son Cato, then whom no man was better, or more
excellent in piety, whose body was by me interred, which thought to dye before
him; but his soul not forgetting me, but continually beholding me, is gone
thither, where he perceived that I should come; whose death I did the better
bear (not that I take it very patiently) but I comforted my self with this
hope, that I should not live long after him. And in these things Scipio (for
you say that you and Loelius were wont to marvel at it) is mine age light, and
not only not troublesome, but also pleasant. But if I do err that the souls
of men be immortal, I do err willingly, neither will I while I live be
wrested from mine opinion wherein I am delighted; but if when I am dead (as
some small Philosophers say,) I shall feel nothing, I fear not least the dead
Philosophers should laugh at this my error. But if we were not immortal, yet
it were to be wished that a man die in his due time; for of nature as of all
things else, there is an end. But old age is the last act of our life as of a
play, of which there ought to be an end, especially when there is satiety and
fullness of time joined with it. Thus much I had to say concerning old age,
which I wish you may obtain, that those things which you have heard me speak
of, you might know by experience.

FINIS.
PRinted or sold by Wlliam Leake, at the sign of the Crown in Fleetstreet,
between the two Temple gates, Thief Books.

Callis learned readings upon the statute 23 of H. 8. Cap. 5. of Sewers.

Perkins on the Law in English. 8o.

The Parsons Law in English. 8o.

Topics in the Laws of England, 8o.

Nyes artificial Fire-workes and Gunnery.

Wilbies second set of music, 3. 4. 5 and 6. parts.

The Fort-Royall of the Scriptures, or a vade mecum Concordance, presenting to
the world a 100 of the most useful heads of Scripture, common placed for
present use.

Mathematical Recreations. 8o.

Dellamans Use of the Horizontall Quadrant. 8o.

Garden of Natural Contemplations by D. Fulke. 8o.

Brinlleys Corderius in English. 8o.


