Mr. CHUTES Case Upon the Lady Dacres Appeal in, 1685.
THE points of the Lady Dacre's Petition of Appeal, are to reverse two points
by way of Explanation of the Lord's Order made upon a Solemn Hearing in the
House of Lords, upon Mr. Chute's Appeal in November, 1680.

The 1st. Touching the Maintenance of her Younger Grandchildren.

The 2d. Touching a Specific Legacy of Goods at Sutton Court.

And as a new Appeal for Relief, touching Goods at Dorset House, given her as
pretended by Mr. Chute's Grandfather's Will in 1659. of about 900. l value.

And that she is by the Court of Chancery lately ordered to pay 20 l per Annum,
as a rent for the Vine-House; and 20 l per Annum for Fuel by her spent there.

As to the First Matter of Reversal,

1st. The Lord's Order was, that a Clause in a Decree in 1668, for allowing the
Lady 120. l per Annum, for Maintenance of the said Children should be reversed,
and consequently that the Money paid her for it, should be applied toward her
other demands from Mr. Chute.

But now she says that she has since discovered Mr. Chute's Father's Will,
charging his Estate with Maintenance for the Children, which had she had before
(she is Confident) the Lords would not have reversed that decree.

But yet it is fully proved she did before know of that Will, and in Truth it
is not to the purpose, for it does not charge the Estate at all; nor was the
Decree for the Maintenance grounded on it, nor did it mention it. And therefore
could not (were there any thing in it) be used by her.

2d. As to the Specific Legacy of Goods at Sutton Court; The Lords Order is
plain and possitive, that she shall have no benefit by that Legacy, till the
Debts are paid, and that the value shall be applied to pay her Debt, when she
first had it, which was in 1659. and yet she would, by a Pretense of
Explanation have that Order set aside, and have it presently allowed her, although
the Debts were not paid in 20 Years after, and note that by his Will, he says
he looks upon those Goods, not to be the further from his Son.

As to the new Matters of Appeal.

Touching the Pretense to the Goods at Dorset House, the Will was plain that he
gave her such Goods only as should be at Sutton Court at his Death. And those
she had by the said Decree.

And although by her Bill in Chancery in 1662, she might claim those at Dorset
House too; yet Mr. Chute's Father was charged with them in 1666. by the Decree
upon her Bill as assetts to pay debts, and so he applied them. And she never
excepted to the Masters Report of that Charge, but acquiessed ever since,
thereupon without any claim for 20 years.

As to the 20 l per Annum for the House; it is proved (by several Gentlemen
living near the said House) to be worth 50 l per Annum.

And as for the 20 l per Annum for Firewood, it is likewise proved that the
said Lady Dacres burnt to the value of 70 l per Annum.

These two last are the only Points, wherein the Lady Dacres appeals against
the Chancery to the Lords.

In all the other Points, she appeals to the present House of Lords against the
last.


