THE CITY LAW, SHOWING The Customs, Franchises, Liberties, Privileges, and
Immunities of the famous CITY of LONDON. Together with the Names, Natures,
Kinds, Jurisdictions, Powers, and Proceedings of the several Courts within the
same: AS ALSO The Titles, Qualities, Advantages, and Profits of the several
Officers, and Offices in London: And in whose dispose those Offices are.
Necessary to be known to all Merchants, Citizens, Tradesmen, and others.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Timothy Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop
within the Inner Temple Gate, 1658.

TO THE READER.
ALthough the Antiquity, Honor, and Dignity, of the Famous City of London is
known to all Nations; Yet the Courts, Customs, Vsages, Franchises, Liberties,
and Immunities thereof have been only within the cognizance of the learned
Counselors, and some particular Officers of the same City. And the books and
Records wherein the same do lie dispersedly, being many and very ancient, and
privately kept in the City Libraries and Recordhouses and all men can not have
access thereunto, but some of the City Counselors having carefully and
Judiciously perused those books and collected the same Customs, Privileges,
and Immunities, with the manner of the pleadings in the City Courts and
digested and disposed the same into a good order and method; and it being
conceived that the same are of general use and cencernment, and fit to be
known by all Merchants, Tradesmen, and others; trading in and about London,
and to all Counselors, Attorneys, and Solicitors, that practice there: The
same are hereby made public for their Information, direction, and
satisfaction.

An Alphabeticall. TABLE OF The principal Matters contained in this BOOK
A
ARrest on the Thames, without a Sergeant, page 20.105. Aldermen not to be
impannelled. 33. Acquittances alleged to be in foraigne Parts. 93. Action of
account. 103. Amerciaments. 106. Of Jurors. 108. Of Attorneys. 109.
B
Burgage, City held in Burgage. 6. Bill, no Marchandizes to pass without bil.
32. Beadels Office. 58.
C
Cornehill, Tonne there. 22. Citizens may bequeath their Tenement. 63.
Contribution by obligees. 81. Custom, What Custom discussible by Mayor and
Aldermen. 94. Custom to buy and sell in public places. 110.
D
Debt: Actions of Debt. 3. Debt: Pleas of Debt. 3. Devise: Who may devise. 7.
To wife only for term of life. ibi. Discontinuances: No discontinuances within
the City of Assizes. 67. Debtor arrested before the day, etc. 104.
E
Election of the Mayor. 28. Sheriffs. 31. Aldermen. 33. Common Officers. 34
Beadles. 34. Porters of the Gates. 34. Wardens of London Bridge, etc. 34.
Chamberlain, etc. 35. Air at the Tower. 37. Enquests Fapingdam. 53. Exigents.
59. Execution of goods and body. 107.
F
Freebant, due to Widows. 17. Fee: Mayors fee at Kings Coronation. 23.
Foreign attachment. 81. Foreign matters pleaded out of the City. 87
Fugitive Citizens. 93
G
Goods fixed. 41
H
Houses in the City decayed. 26. Hustings: What pleadable there. 42.
House-hire. 79
L
Landlords. 106.
M
Ministers of the City. 2. Malefactors to come before the Mayor. etc. 5. Mayors
Sword. 31.
N
Nusances: Assizes of Nusances. 4.
O
Ordinances penal made by the Mayor and Aldermen. 4. Orphans. 10. Marriage.
12. Of Obligations. 89.
P
Process, and abreviating thereof. 5. Prisoners condemned. 21. Penthouses. 27.
Proof in foreign attachments. 85 ^^acitum captionis and detentionis. 93.
R
Recognizances: Of Recognizances, and executions thereupon, 3. Retaile:
Foreigners may not retayle. 13. Replegiarie. 55 Removing of plaints. 104.
S
Southwarke, the Stews there. 25. Summons of Jurors. 43. Of Aldermen. 59.
Scire fac. Sheriffs Courts. 86.
T
Testament nuncupative. 8. Defective, effectual. 8. Rent thereby devised. 8.
Traspasse by, and to the wife. 79 80.
V
Vouching to warranty. 47.
W
Writ of Error. 14. Wager of Law by a Freeman. 77. Warning to the Landlords.
106. Wither nam. 22.
THE ANCIENT CUSTOMS AND Approved Vsages of the Honorable CITY OF LONDON.
THE Mayors Court is held by custom of the City before the Mayor and Aldermen
that are for the time, in the Chamber of Guild Hall, or in the Hastings, from
day to day at their will. There are treated, determined, and discussed, the
pleas and matters touching Orphans, Apprentices, and other business of the
same City; And there also are redressed and corrected the defaults and
misprisons of such things which are against the Customs and Ordinances of the
City, as well at the suite of the party, as by enquest of office and in other
manner by suggestion, according as the cases demand And there they use to order
the Bakers, Brewers, Victuallers, and Tradesmen, and to treat and ordain for
the Government of the City, and for maintenance of the peace of our Sovereign
Lord the King, and other points necessary concerning the said City, by their
discretion, and according to that the time requires.

Item, Of the Ministers of the City.
the Officers and Ministers of the said City, being found in default, are
justifiable before the Mayor and Aldermen, as well at the suite of the parties,
by process made, as in other manner, according to the said Mayor and Aldermens
discretion.

Item, Of Actions of Debt.
the said Mayor and Aldermen have used there also to hold and determine pleas
of Debt and actions personal whatsoever by bill: as well between Merchants and
Merchants, for merchandise, as between others that will take them by process
made against the parties.

Item, the Mayor and Aldermen, Of recognisances and executions thereupon.
or the Mayor and Chamberlain of the City, may take before them in the said
chamber a Recognizance of Debt of all such as will make any, and of what sums
soever; And if the day of payment be incurred, then he to whom the Recognizance
is made, out of this Record, shall have execution of all the goods of the
Debtor, and the moity of all the Tenements within the said city by extent: and
at a certain rate according to the course of the common Law, Of pleas of Debt.
Stat. of Smithfield.


Item pleas of Debt, according to the Ordinance, called The Statute of
Smithfield, are determinable only before the Mayor and Aldermen, according to
that which is more fully contained in the Ordinance thereof made.

Item, Of Assizes of Nusances.
the Assizes of Nuisance are determinable by bill before the Mayor and Aldermen,
which bill shall be served by the Sheriffs, And the parties shall be summoned
on the Wednesday against the Friday, and then the Mayor and Aldermen ought to
proceed in plea, according as is contained in the Ordinance of assize, of
Nuisance in the said City.

Item, Of making of Ordinances.
the Mayor and Aldermen have always used to make penal Ordinances upon
victuals, and for other the government of the said City and of the peace,
according to their discretion and advice, and to proclaim the same Ordinance
within the said City openly for to be held and kept in the name of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and of the City, upon pain thereof ordained, and the
same pains to levy of all such as do against the Ordinances aforesaid, etc.

Item, Of Male-factors.
the Mayor and Aldermen have always used to cause to come before them the
Malefactors which have been taken and arrested within the said City, for
carrying of tales, and spreading abroad of news imagined in disturbance of the
peace, makers and counterfeiters of fall Seals, false Charters, and for other
notorious defects, and those which they have found culpable of such misdeeds by
confession of the parties, or by enquest thereof made, shall be punished by
setting in the pillory, or further chastised by imprisonment, according to
their merit, and according to the reasonable discretion of the said Mayor and
Aldermen.

Item, Of change of process, and abbreviating of delays.
the Mayor and Aldermen may by usage of the said City change process, and
abridge delays in actions personal, as well before themselves, and in the
Sheriffs Court: and make new Ordinances such personal pleas, the which
Ordinances they conceive to be reasonable and profitable to the people.

Item, That the City of London is held of our Sovereign Lord the King in free
burgage.
it is to be understood that all the city of London is held of our Lord the
King in free burgage, and without mesne: And all the Lands and Tenements, Rents
and services within the said city and the Suburbs thereof, as well in
rendition, as in demeasne, are devisable by usage of the said city: So that men
and women by usage of the said city, may devise their tenements, rents, and
reversions within the said City, and Suburbs thereof, to whom they will, and of
what estate they will, And may also devise a new rent to rise from their
tenements, in manner as they like best, And those which are freemen of the
same City, may devise their tenements in mortmain, as appears by the Charter
of the king thereof made.

Item, That infants within age, nor woman covert qaron, may not dewise.
He that holds tenements with others, may devise that which to him helongeth
without more ado. But Infants within age may not make a devise, nor women
covert may not devise their tenements by license of their husbands, nor in
other manner during the coverture.

Item, That a man cannot devise. his tenements to his wife, but for term of
life.
the husband may not devise his tenements to his wife for a higher estate then
for term of life, and the wife cannot claim other estate, upon pain to lofe
the whole. Neither may the husband devise the tenements descended to his wife,
nor the tenements which the husband and the wife have jointly purchased. But if
the husband and the wife have tenements jointly to them and to the heirs of the
husband, the husband may devise the reversion. All testaments by which any
tenements be devised, may be enrolled in the Hastings of Record, at the suite
of any which may take advantage by the same testaments. And the restaments
which ought so to be enrolled shall be brought before the Mayor and Aldermen in
full Hasting, and there shall the said testaments be proclaimed by the
Sergeant, and the same also to be proved by two discreet men well known, the
which shall be sworn and, examined of all the circumstances of the said
Testaments and of the estate of the Testator, and of his seal, and if the
proof be found good and loyal and agreeable, then shall the said Tastament be
enrolled in the same hastings of record, and the Fee shall be paid for the
enrolment, and no Testament nuncupative nor other Testaments may be enrolled of
record except that the seal of the Testator be put to the same Tastament.
Testaments Nuncupative
But the Testaments that may be found good and loyal are effectual, although
they be not enrolled, nor of record.

Item, Of testaments defective, yet effectual.
The testament within the said City ought by custom of the same City, to be
adjudged effectual, and executory, having regard to the Testators wills,
although that the words of such testaments be defective, and not according to
the common Law.

Item, Of Rent devised by testament.
where a reversion or rent be devised by testaments enrolled of record in the
Hastings, the same reversions and rents Pass presently after the death of the
Testator; so as those to whom such rents be devised, may distreine for their
rents and make avoury, and those in reversion may sue a Writ of waste at their
will without other attournment of the Tenants. And they may plead for the same
enrolments if need be, although they have not the saidtestaments in hand, and
the same Custom holds place of Charters, Indentures, and other writings
inroled in Hastings of REcord, and such inrolements have always been used; so
that the testaments be proclaimed and proved in full Hastings as aforesaid. And
the Charters, Indentures, and other writings ensealed may be accepted. And the
conusances and confessions of women, have been received before the Mayor and
one Alderman, or before the Recorder and one Alderman, or before two Aldermen
for necessity, as well out of the Court, as in. So that the same Charters,
Indentures and other Writings so acknowledged, be after entered and enrolled in
some of the Hasting sand the Fees thereof paid, as the manner is.

Item, Rent devised without clause of distress.
where a man has devised by his Testament, enrolled, a certain Rent to arise
out of his Tenements within the said City, without clause of distress: yet by
usage of the City he to whom the devise is made may distraine, and avow the
taking if the rent be behind. And in the same manner shall be done, of all
ancient rents, called Quit rents, within the same City.

Item, Of Orphans.
The Mayor and Aldermen that are for the time, by custom of the City, shall
have the Wardship and Marriages of all the Orphans of the said City, after the
death of their Ancestors, although the same Ancestors do hold to them, and the
City, of any other Lord, by what service soever.

And the same Mayor and Alderought to enquire of all the Lands and Tenements,
Goods end Chattles, within the said City, appertaining to such Orphans, and
safely keep them to the use and profit of such Orphans, or otherwise commit the
same Orphans, together with their Lands and Tenements Goods and Chattles to
other their friends by sufficient Surety found of record in the Chamber of
Guild Hall, to maintain conveniently the said Orphans during their nonage, and
their Lands and Tenements to repair, and the said Goods and Chattles safely to
keep: and thereof to render a good and loyal account before the said Mayor and
Aldermen, to the profit of the same Infants when they shall come to their age,
or when they shall be put to a mystery, or shall marry by the advice of the
said Major and Aldermen.

And that in all cases, except that it be otherwise ordaind and disposed for
the same Orphans, or for their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattles, by
express words, contained in the Testaments of their Ancestors.

And no such Orphans ought to be married without the assent of the said Mayor
and Aldermen. To marry by the assent of the Mayor.
And also where Lands or Tenements, Goods and Chattles within the said City,
are divised to an Infant within age, of one City, or of the same City, living
his Father, that such an Infant, is no Orphan: yet by usage of the said City,
the said Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattles, shall be in the custody of
the Mayor and Aldermen, as well as of the Orphans to maintain and keep them to
the use and profit of the same Infant: except that the Father of the infant or
some other of his friends, will find sufficient surety of record to maintain
and keep the said Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattles, to the use and
profit of the said Infant: and thereof to render a good and loyal account, as
is aforesaid.

And it is to be understood, That the goods of the testator shall be parted
into three parts
that where a Cityzen of the same City has a wife and children, and dies: all
the goods and chattles of the said party deceased, after his debts be paid,
shall be divided into three parts: whereof one shall remain to the dead, and
shall be distributed for his Souls benefit: and the other part, shall be to his
wife: and the third part to his children, to be equally shared between them:
notwithstanding any Will made to the contrary.

And therefore as well the wife, as the children, may have their recovery and
suit to demand such goods and chattles against the Executors or other
Possessors of the said goods and chattles, before the said Mayor and Aldermen
by Bill.

Item, By ancient custom of the said City, That No Forreigner shall sell
Victual, or other Merchandise, to any other forreigner by retayle.
it was not lawful for any Stranger or Forreigner, to sell victual, nor other
Merchandise, to any other Stranger or Forreigner within the same City, to sell
again: nor for any such Stranger or Forreigner to sell victual, or other
Merchandise within the City by retayle.

Item, By ancient custom of the said City of London, the Citizens, Ministers
of the same City, ought to obey no Commandment, nor no Seal, but only the
commands, and immediate Seal of our Lord the King: Nor ought any Officer of
our Lord the King to make seizure, or any execution within the said City, nor
within the Franchize thereof by Land, or by Water, but only the officers of
the said City.

Item, Of a Writ of Error.
Of Judgments given in the Sheriffs Court in actions personal, or in Assizes
taken before the Sheriffs, and Coroner by custom of the said City; the parties
against whom such Judgments are given, may sue a writ of Error, directed to
the Mayor and Sheriffs, to reverse the said Judgment in the Hasting, if the
Judgment be reversible.

And although such judgments be affirmed in the Hasting, yet the same party may
sue another Writ of Error directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs, to cause to
bring the Record and Process before the Justices assigned, at St. Martins the
Great, as it has been done heretofore.

But if any party, by such judgment given before the said Sheriffs, be convict
in debt or in damage; and for that cause be committed to prison, until he
has made agreement, and after pursue a Writ of Error to reverse the judgment
in the Hasting: or, although the Judgment be affirmed at the Hasting, and the
said parties will sue another Writ of Error to reverse the same Judgment
before the Justices assigned at St. Martins the great, as before is said: Yet
not. withstanding, the same party which is so imprisoned, ought not to be
delivered out of prison hy ancient custom of the City, by reason of such a
Writ of Error, before that he has found sufficient surety within the said
City, or put the money in the hands of the Court, to pay him that shall
recover, or in case that the said Judgment be afterward affirmed.

And in case that such a Writ of Error be sued to reverse any Judgment given
in Hasting before the Justices assigned at St. Martins the Great, and it be
commanded by Writ to warn the parties, and to cause them to bring the Record
and Process before the same Justices, then shall the parties be warned as the
Law requires.

But no Record shall be brought before the said Justices in writing by custom
of the City: but the Mayor and Aldermen shall have forty days respit assigned
by the same Justices after their first Session, there to be advised of the said
Record, and of the Process thereof: and at first Session of the Justices, after
the forty days the said record and process shall be recorded before the same
Justices, by the mouth of the Recorder of the said City or tenus.

And of Judgments given before the Mayor and Aldermen in the Chamber of
Guild Hall; according to the Law of Merchants, no Error was ever writ to be
sued.

Item, By ancient custom of the City, all the Liberties, Privileges, and
other Customs pertaining to the same City, ought to be recorded by mouth,
without being put in any other manner in writing.

Item, The Citizens of London by custom of the City, ought not to go out of
the City, by writ, or other manner, to pass in any Enquest.

Item, Of not putting Citizens in Enquest out of the city.
Wives after the death of their husbands, by custom of the City, shall have
their free banks: that is to say, the wife after the death of her husband,
shall have of the tenement within the City, whereof her husband dyed seized in
fee, and in which tenement the said husband and she were remaining together at
the time of the death of her husband, the Hall, the principal chamber, and the
celler, wholly: and her easement in the Kitchen, the chief table and curtilage
in common, or other necessaries to her appertaining for term of her life.

And at what hour that she shall marry, she shall lose the free bank, and her
dower thereof, saving to her the dower of her other tenements, as the Law
requires.

Item, Every Freeman using a Mystery may by usage of the same City, take an
Apprentice to serve him, and to learn his Art and Mystery: and that by
Indentures that shall be made between him and his said Apprentice.

The which Indentures shall be examined and enrolled of record before the
Chamberlain of GuildHall. And such Apprentice may bind himself, or his
friends may put him to his Master by their Indentures, if he be of convenient
age, according to the discretion of the Chamberlain, or of the Mayor and
Aldermen, if need be.

And no Apprentice by custom of the City may be put for less term then 7.
years: and the Indentures ought to be enrolled within one year after the
making thereof under a certain pain therefore limited: and after such
Apprentice has well and loyally served his term, he shall be a Free man of
the City without other redemption, where no other may come to the freedom
without redemption, save such that are born within the said City, of what
Country soever they be, of the allegiance of our Lord the King, by usage of
the said City, are also Freemen by their Mystery having regard to the
privileges of the Franchise, as such as have been Apprentice, or otherwise
have come to the Freedom by redemption.

And women covert that use certain crafts within the City by themselves without
their husbands, may take women to their Apprentices, for to serve them, and
learn their Crafts.

And the which Apprentices shall be bound by their Indentures Apprentices to
the husband and his wife, to learn the Mystery of the wife, as is aforesaid.
And such Indentures shall be enrolled, as well of women, as of men.

And it is to be understood, that every one having such apprentice, may sell
and devise his said apprentice unto whom he will of the same Art, as is
chattell.

Item, To arrest on the River of Thames.
The River of the Thames does serve as the bounds of the Franchise of the City,
for part and parcel of the City: and the same River, and all appertaining to
the said River, being within the said Franchise, has been always in the
government of the same City, as parcel of the City aforesaid: aswe I the one
part of the River, as the other.

And the Sheriffs of London that are for the time being, have always used to
make arrests, and serve executions at the suit of the parties, in the said
River of Thames, viz. from the East part of London Bridge, until the return:
and from the West part of the said London Bridge unto Stanes Bridge.

Item, The said Sheriffs of London ought by usage of the City co have
forfeitures of the chattels of all kind of Fugitives and Fellons and of Derdans
within the said City, and the said River of Thames, in aid of their Farm
which they pay yearly to our Sovereign Lord the King.

Item, By custom of the City, no attaint is maintainable, nor lies within the
same City.

Item, By ancient custom of the City no man remaining within the same City,
was wont to be taken or carried out of the said City, by color or claim of
villenage, before that the matter was discussed by course of Law.

Item, if a Freeman of the said City, coming or passing with his merchandise
elsewhere out of the same city, be constrained to pay Toll, or other custom,
or that his Wares be arrested, or stayed wrongfully and without reasonable
cause, and that it be sufficiently witnessed by men of credit: then, if
afterward; the goods or Marchandizes, of him that did the wrong, or the Goods
or Merchandises of others of the same Village where the wrong was done, be
found within the City of London, the use is at the suggestion of the party to
arrest such goods and merchandises by the Ministers of the City and to detain
them in the name of Withernam, Withernam.
until agreement he made with the said Free man for the damages which he has
sustained by the cause, saving always reasonable to answer that party, as well
to the one party, as to the other,

Item, Of the Tonne in Cornhill.
The Citizens of London of ancient time, ordained a house, called the Tonne in
Cornhill, To which house the Constables, Bedels, and other Officers and people
of the City into the same, have used to bring and there for the time, to
imprison the trespassers going in the night against the peace married men and
women found in adultery, and Chaplains and others religious, found openly with
common women, or with other men's wives in the night, in suspicious places, and
after, to lead them before their Ordinaries.

Item, The City of London has conusance of Plea by the Kings charter.

And there is a use, that no Freeman of the same city shall implead another
Freeman of the same city, otherwhere then in the same city, where he might
have recovered within the said city, upon pain of losing their Freedom.

Item, Of the Mayors fee at the Kings eoronation.
He that is Mayor of London for the time, shall have a Golden Cup at the
Coronation of every King. And also there are other privileges pertaining to
the said Mayor and City, at such coronation of the King, according to the
ancient custom of the city.

Item. The use is, that the chief Butler of our Sovereign Lord the King shall
be the chief Coroner of the city of London: and the which Coroner has used to
make by Writ, a Substitute in his place, which Substitute is called Coroner:
and before whom the Indictment and Appeals are taken within the said city,
before the two Sheriffs, and the Coroner jointly.

Enquest taken upon the death of a man, upon the first sight of the body are
chosen out of the four Wards next adjoining, and summoned by the Bedels of the
same Wards.

And all other enquests taken before the Sheriffs Coroner jointly, ought to be
arrayed and summoned by the Sheriffs and their Officers.

Item, Heretofore where any Theife being in the Goal of Newgate, has appealed
another Theife, being in some other Goal that Theife remaining in the other
Goal was wont to be sent for by Writ to the said Goal of Newgate, to answer
to the said appeal, and to have his deliverance there.

And in the same manner, if a Theife being in another Jail, has appealed
another man abiding in the said Goal of Newgate, or any other of the said city
the same appealor being in another Goal, shall be brought by Writ to the said
Goal of Newgate, to maintain his said appeal there: and no Theife being in
the Goal of Newgate taken with the manner shall be carried out of the said
city to be at his deliverance, before the Mayor of London, and other Justices
assigned for the said Goal of Newgate.

Item, Southwarke.
Because that the Village of Southwarke, and the Common Stews, over the River
of Thames, Common Pleas.
are so near to the said City of London, and that Thieves and other misdoers
are oftentimes from thence coming and repairing, and oftentimes after their
Theeveries and Fellonies committed within the said City, fly and withdraw
themselves out of the same City, unto the said Stews, and to the said Village
of Southwarke, within the Franchize there, being out of the power of the said
City, where they abide and watch their times, to return to do mischief: Whereas
the ministers of the same city have used at all times to pursue and search for
such Thieves and Evill-doers at the said Stews, and in the said Village of
Southwarke, as well within the Franchife, as without, and to bring them to the
said Goal of Newgate to attend their deliverance there before the Justices, as
well upon suspicions as at the suit of the party.

Item, Of Prisoners condemned.
Where prisoners are condemned or arrested and committed within the said City,
and be committed to prison at the parties suit, and after be sent for by a Writ
to the Exchequer, or in other places of the King with their causes, the same
prisoners after that they be delivered in the King Court ought to be sent back
again to the said City to answer the parties, and attend their deliverance.

Item, Of houses decayed within the City.
Those which have tenements within the said City, shall not be suffered to
despoile or wast their own tenements, nor them to take down in disorderly sort,
nor to the disgracing of the said city, except it be to amend or re-edifie the
same.

And if any man shall do or begin to do it, he shall be restrained by the for
the trespass, according to the custom of the City.

Item, if Walls, Penthouses, Of Penthouses. Defects in tenenements.
or other tenements what soever within the said City, extending toward the
highwayes, be so rotten and feeble, that people dare not pass that way for the
danger of their sudden fall: then after that testimony be given to the Mayor
and Aldermen, by the Masons and Carpenters that are sworn to the said City, or
it be found in the Wardmore that the perillis such then the same Mayor and
Aldermen shall warn the party to whom the tenements belong to amend and
redress them as soon as he may well do the same. And if after such warning,
the said tenements be not amended, nor begun to be amended within 40 days
after: then shall the said tenements be amended and redressed at the costs of
the same party.

And the said tenements shall remain in the hand of the said City, until the
costs, thereupon bestowed, be fully levied, if the possessors of the Mayor and
Aldermen, and punished said tenements, have no other tenements, nor goods, nor
chattls within the City.

And if he has other tenements, or goods, or chattels, within the City, the
costs shall be levied of his goods and chattels, or of his other tenements, if
need be.

Item, What house soever that is found within the said City, or the Suburbs, to
be covered with Reed, or with Shingle: he to whom the house belongs, shall pay
to the Sheriffs that are for the time 40 s. and shall be made pull down the
said covering

Item, if any house within the said City be on fire so that the flame of the
fire be seen out of the house, the dweller in the house shall pay unto the said
Sheriffs 40. Of. the election of the Mayor.
s. at the first demand.

Item, The Mayor and Aldermen, and Sheriffs, and all other Officers and
Ministers of the said City, are elected by the same City, viz. At the time when
the Mayor shall be chosen the Commons of the said City shall by usage, be
assembled at Guild have and the same Commons shall make election of two wise
men of the said City of the which, one shall be Mayor: and the names of the
said two prudent men, shall be reported before the Mayor and aldermen, that are
then for the time, in the chamber of Guild Hall: and then one of the two shall
be chosen Mayor, by the Mayor and Aldermen there, by way of lot. And the said
Mayor so newly chosen, the morrow after the Feast of St. Simon and Jude shall
be presented to the Barons of the Exchequer at Westminster, or in absence of
the said Barons, to the Constable of the Tower: and afterward shall be
presented to the Lord our Kings own person, according as it is contained in
the Charter of the said City. And the said Mayor shall have the government of
the same City, under our Lord the King, for the year following.

And the said Mayor shall have 50 Marks a Year, for the weighing of corn, and
50 marks in the time of peace, of the Merch. of Amiane, Corby and Neele,
according to the ancient custom thereof made. And every Mayor shall hold his
general Court at Guilhall the Monday next after the Feast of Epiphany: And
there shall be assembled all the Aldermen of the said City and all Constables,
Scavangers, and Bedles, of the Wardmotes, held by the Aldermen: and the
defaults found in the Wards, shall be enquired of and examined: And the
Constables Scavangers, and Bedlles, shall besworne anew, to execute well and
loyally their Office, for the time that they shall be Officers.

And the Mayor that is for the time, by custom of the said City for
maintenance of the peace and tranquillity within the same City, has power to
arrest and imprison the disturbers of the peace, and other evil doers for
resistances, ill speeches, and other defaults, according to his discretion,
without being for the same empeached, or sued afterward,

Item, No Mayor shall be chosen within the said City, Of the fame.
before he has been Sheriff of the said City, by the space of a year before.

Item the Mayors of London which have been for the time, Of the sword.
have used to have their swords carried upright, before them, within the said
City, and without: without holding down their swords in any man's prefence
except in the presence of our Lord the King: and that sword is called the Kings
sword.

Item, Of the election. Of the Sheriffs.
the Sheriffs of London are chosen by usage of the said City on St. Matthewes
day in Guild hall, viz. One shall be chosen by the Mayor or Guardian, that
shall be for the time: and the other by the Commons: And the Sheriffs shall be
afterward sworn within the said Guild Hall: and afterward on the morrow of
St. Michaels, shall be presented in the Exchequer, or to the Constable of the
Charter of the said City.

And the said Sheriffs shall have free election of all their Officers and of
their Farmers and Bayliffes as well within the said City, as in the county of
Middlesex, and of the Goalers of the Goales, within the said City, at their
will, and at their peril.

And the same Sheriffs pay and are accomptable yearly to the Exchequer of our
Lord the King, for the Farm of the said City, and of the county of middlesex,
according to the form of the said charter of the City And by reason of which
Farm, the said Sheriffs ought to have the ancient prizes and customs of the
Merchandises coming within the City and going out: and forfeitures, fines and
amerciaments, and all other commodities of ancient time belonging to their said
Offices.

And no Merchant shall pass not of the said City, by Land, or water, by wagon,
or cart, horse, or bridge, without a Bill given ensealed by the said Sheriffs.
And those which are Foreigners ought to pay for their passage, according to
the ancient custom.

Item The said Aldermen be chosen by the people of the same Wards; Of the
election of Aldermen, and of their Offices.
and the which Aldermen ought to hold their Wardmotes, as the custom is, and
survey and redress the nusances and defaults in the same Wards: and shall take
order concerning victuals, as elsewhere is declared more fully in the Articles
of Wardmoats. And the Aldermen have power by usage of the said city, to arrest
mis-doers, and commit them to the enstody of the Sheriffs, until they be
examined, and delivered by the same Mayor, and the same Aldermen

Item, That Aldermen shall not be empannelled.
An Alderman after that he has been once made Alderman, or a Sheriff after
that he has been a Sheriff shall not afterward be empannelled, nor put in
any Enquest within the same City, by usage of the said City. And of every
Feoffment and Seisin delivered within the ward the Alderman of the Ward where
the tenements are shall have his Fee for Seisin viz. 2. s. and his Bedell 6. d.

Item, The Aldermen ^. s. the Beale 6. d. Of the election of common Officers.
All other common Officers of the aforesaid city as Recorder, Chamberlain,
Wardens of the Bridge common Sergeants at Law, common Sergeants at Mace, common
Clerk and Sergeant of the chamber, are chosen by the Mayor and Aldermen, and
by the commons. Bedels elected by the Aldermed, and by the men of the ward.
And the Bedels are chosen by the Aldermen, and by those of the Ward, And all
the gates of the city ought to be in the hands and government of the said city,
except Bishops gate which gate belongs to the merchants of the Hans, Porters of
the Gates chosen by men of the City.
according to the form of the composition. And the Porters of the said city
are chosen by the same city.

Item, Touching the Keepers of London bridge.
The Wardens, of London Bridge are chosen by the Mayor and Aldermen, and by the
commons of the said City: The which Wardens have the charge of the said Bridge,
and the governance of the Tenements within the said City, pertaining to the
same Bridge. And every Cart or Wagon, going or coming upon the same Bridge with
Merchandises, shall pay to the use of the said Bridge, 2. d.

And every Ship or other Vessel with Merchandises passing by water to the said
Bridge, toward the West, Cart or Wagon th pay 2. d.
with the Mast standing: so that the Bridge must be drawn up, shall pay for
the passage to the use of the said Bridge two pence, Vessles Westminster 2. d.
Vessels Eastward 6, d.
and that Vessel passing there also toward the East shall pay six pence: and
the same Wardens are every year acountable before two Aldermen, and four
Commons thereto assigned.

Item The Chamberlaind of Guild hall chosen by the Mayor and Aldermen, and by
the Commons: Of the election of the Chamberlain and his Office.
and it pertains to the Office of the said Chamberlain to oversee and keep
all the Books, Rolls Records, and other Monuments, and Remembrances, that
there ought to remain of Record, and the treasure, if there be any; and also
to keep and maintain all the Rents and Tenements pertaining to the said
chamber. Of the Rents belonging to the chamber.

Of the tenements and goods of Orphans.




And he shall also keep the Tenements and the money and the goods and chattles,
which are devised or descended to Orphans: until they be committed to other
persons, nor otherwise disposed by the Mayor and Aldermen.

And he shall cause the Indentures of Apprentices to be enrolled, and he shall
make those Apprentices to serve.

And for such as are made free by redemption, he shall set the Fines of such
redemptions, and he shall take fines of such as are rebellious to their Masters
or Guardians, and for certain other defaults committed against the Ordinances
of the City.

And the money thereof coming, he shall receive and keep, and out thereof shall
pay to diverse Officers their wages as to the Recorder, common Sergeant at Mace,
and shall make other disbursments pertaining to his office, and shall render an
accoumpt once in the year, how much he has received, paid and spent: and that
before two Aldermen and four Commoners, assigned by the May or and Aldermen.
Of priviled^ in the circu^ of the Justic^ at the Tower of London.


And also the Cityzens of London heretofore have claimed and ought to have many
liberties and privileges in the Air at the Tower of London, viz. They ought
to have their porter stand within the gates of the Tower and the porter of our
Lord the King shall be within.

And their Usher at the Hall door, without where the Pleas shall be held
within the Tower, during all the Air, for the bringing in of the people of the
City, which have to do in the same Air.

And the Usher of our Lord the King shall no otherwise meddle there, during all
the Air of that thing which appertains to the Office of the Sergeant. And
that the Citizens shall make no other oath, but by the Faith they owe to our
Lord the King.

And that the Sheriffs of London shall have the custody of all the prisoners
in all the Air. And that none of the said City of London, or in the Suburbs
thereof except that the Plea be fore begun, in the Husting of London, and after
be removed before the said Justice in Air, because that he which is impleaded
does vouch a Foreigner to warranty, who has nothing within the franchise of
the said City, but by disseisons made in the said City, after the Summons of
the Air.

And that the Pleas begun in the Court of London, and there depending, ought
there to be ended, and ought not to be sent or removed before the Justices of
our Lord the King: except some matter be alleged by one of the parties, of
which the court cannot hold conusance, nor has power to determine thereof.

And their are many other points and privileges, which will more fully appear
in sundry Eyres, holden at the said Tower of London.

And also, many other liberties, privileges, and customs, are pertaining to
the city of London: whereof no man can remember them all to set them down in
writing, being only recorded by mouth, when they came in truth by custom of
the same city, viz at the last Air held at the Tower of London, they ought to
be bound by the customs: where upon, the same Citizens did sue their Petition
to the King, in these words: The Cities Petition to the Kings.


HIGH and Mighty Lord: whereas your said City is founded upon the Franchises,
and free ancient Customs, and not upon the common Law, as other Cities of your
Realm. The city is found upon franchises and free ancient customs.
More it is enacted by the Great Charter, That the city of London should enjoy
all its Franchises and free customs unblemished and the same Franchises and
customs, be to them by your Progenitors granted, and by your self confirmed:
and they ever from time to time used in Eyres and elsewhere before the
Justices, at what hour they do come, in deed, or in demanding their
Franchises and customs: and that by a Statute made after the last Air, and to
put their franchises and customs in certain: which things, no man can remember.

May it please your Majesty, to command all the said Justices, that they be
ordered, in point of challenge of their said franchises and customs, as they
were wont, anciently to be ordered in other Eyres before the Statute, and that
by no Statute repugnant to their said franchises and customs, they be bound or
deprived of their Franchises, and ancient customs: and thereupon a Writ was
sent to the Justices to surcease.

Whereas in time past, A Writ to surcase.
there arose by some a matter of doubt, of, and upon the most ancient custom
had and used in the city of London, An ancient custom in the city of London
for tenants for fixing goods.
of those things which by tenants for term of life, or for years, were fixed
to the houses, without special license of the Lord of the Soil, whether they
should remain to the Lords of the Soil, as parcel of the same: or whether it
should be lawful for such Tenants, at the end of their term, all such things
that be fixed, to remove.

Whereupon, ancient Books being viewed, and many Records searched, and ancient
proceedings, and Judgments of the said city: It was declared by the Mayor and
Aldermen, That by the old prescript custom of the aforesaid city, That every
of the said kinds of easments fixed to houses, or to the ground, by such kind
of Tenants, without special and express license of the Lord of the Soil, if
they be fixed with nails of Iron, or of wood, as Pantises, Glass, Locks,
Benches, or such like: or if they be affixed with Lime or clay, commonly called
Mortar, as Furnace, Lead, Candirons, Chimneyes, Corbels, Pavements, and such
other: or else, if Plants they be rooted in the ground, as Vines, Trees,
Orchards etc. It shall not be lawful for such Tenants, at the end of there
Terms or at any time, to pluck down, remove, or root out them, or any part of
the premises by any means, but they always remain to the Lord of the Soil,
as parcel of the same Soil or Tenements, Mustings.
etc.

It is to be understood, that all the Lands and Tenements, Rents and Services
within the city of London, and in the Suburbs thereof, are pleadable at
Guild Hall within the same city, in two Hustings: whereof the one Husting is
called, Husting of Plea of Land; and the other Hasting is called, Husting of
Common Pleas: And the which Hustings, are held in the said Guild Hall before
the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of the said city every week, the days
Monday and Tuesday, viz. On the Monday to demand the demaudauts, and to award
nonsuites, to allow essoynes, and the Tuesday to award the default, and to
plead. Writs of right Pattents.


But for certain times, no Hastings may be held by the custom of the city
before said, viz. Husting of plea of Land, ought to be held a week by it self
at the aforesaid days. But, the enrolments and titles of the said Hustings,
make mention of Monday only.

Writs of Right Pattents.
In Husting of Plea of Land are pleaded Writs of Right, Pattents directed to
the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, which Writs have this process by custom of
the city, viz, The Tenant or Tenants shall first have three summons at the
cenements demanded at three Hustings of Plev of Land next ensuing after the
livery of the Writ, and of the Hustings without demanding the tenements at any
aforesaid.

And after the three summons ended, three essoynes at three other Hustings of
Plea of Land then next ensuing; and at the next ensuing after the third
essoyne, and the Tenants making default, process shall be made against them by
a grand cape, or petit cape, after the appearance, and other process at the
common law.

And if the Tenants shall appear the demandants shall count against the
Tenants, in the nature of what Writ they will, except certain Writs which are
pleadable in Husting of Common Pleas, as shall be declared afterward, without
making protestation to see in the nature of any writ.

And the Tenants shall have the view, and shall be essoyned after the view, as
at the common law. And the Tenant shall have an essoyne after every appearance
by custom of the City.

And although that such a writ be abated after the view by exception of
joint-tenancie, or other exception dilatory, and other such Writ be revived,
the tenants by the custom of the City, shall have the view in the second Writ:
notwithstanding the view before had. And if the parties plead to judgment, the
judgment shall be pronounced by their Recorders mouth, and six Aldermen were
wont to be present, at the least, at the giving of every such judgment.

And every Bedell of the City, by the advice of his Aldermen, The Jurors
summoned.
against every Hustings of Plea of Land, shall summon 12. men Freeholders,
being the best and most sufficient of his Ward, to come to Guild hall, for to
pass in an Enquest, if there be need, for the rest of the freeholders in the
said Ward. And if the parties plead and descend to an Enquest, then shall the
Enquest be taken of the people inheritors, having at the least frankten ement
of the same Ward where the Tenements are, and other three wards next to the
place where the Tenements are: so that four sufficient men of the same Ward,
where the Tenements are, shall be sworn in the same Enquest, if there be so
many.

And no damages by custom of the City are recoverable in any such Writ of
Right Pattent. And the Enquest may pass the same day by such common summons of
the Beadell, if the parties be at issue, and the Jurors come.

And otherwise, process shall be made to cause the Enquest to come at another
Hasting of Plea of Land ensuing, by precept of the Mayor, directed to the
Sheriffs:

And the Sheriffs shall be ministers by the commandment of the Mayor to serve
the writs, and to make execution thereof: Notwithstanding that the original
writ be directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs jointly. And it is to be
understood, that as well the Tenants as the Demandants may make their Attorneys
in such Pleas.

And if the Demandants count against those Tenants in the nature of a Writ of
right, and the parties descend to an enquest upon the meereright, then shall
the enquest be taken of 34. in the nature of a grand assize, according as the
custom requires: so that always six be of the Ward, where the Tenements be,
if there be so many of the same ward empannelled in the Enquest of 24. Vouching
to warranty.


And the Tenants in all such writs may vouch to warranty within the said City;
and also in a foreign county, if the Vouches have no tenements within the
City. And if the Tenants in such writs do vouch to warranty in a foreign
County, in which case process may not be made against the vouches by law of
the said City, then the Record shall be made come before the Justices of the
Common Pleas, at the suit of the Demandant, and there process shall be made
against the vouchee: and when the voucher shall be ended in the said Bench,
then shall all the plea be sent back again to the Hasting, there to proceed, in
the plea, according to the custom of the City, and according to that which is
fully contained in certain Statutes.

And also if the Tenants in such writs plead in bar by a release, bearing
date in a foreign County, or plead other foreign matter, which may not be
tried within the said City: then the Demandant shall bring the process into
the Kings Bench for to try the said matter, as it is alleged, and according as
it is found, the plea shall be sent back again into the Husting, there
further to proceed according as the case requires, and all the same time, the
plea shall cease in the Husting in manner as it is done at this day.

And also, it has been used heretofore, that a man might sue in the Husting of
plea of Lands, for to have Execution out of certain Judgments given in the
Husting and that by Bill, in the nature of a scire face, without Writ.

And it is to be understood, that the summons which are made to the tenants, in
such writs of Right, may be made two or three days, before the said Husting,
or the morrow next before the said Husting.

In the Hustings of Common Pleas are pleadable Writs, Awrit of exgravi qurelea
called Ex gravi querela, for to have execution of the tenements out of the
Testaments, which are enrolled in the Hustings. Writs of Dower, unde nihil
habet. Writs of Gravelkind of custom, and of service, instead of a Cessavit.
Writs of Error of Judgments given before the Sheriffs Writs of waste Writ, de
partitione facienda between Coparteners, Writs of quid juris clamat and per
quae servitia, and others: The which Writs are close, and directed to the Mayor
and Sheriffs; And also Replegiaries of things taken, and of distresses
wrongfully taken, are pleadable before the Mayor and Sheriffs, in the same
Husting of Common Pleas, by plaint without writ.

And it is to be understood, that the same Sheriffs are ministers to execute
the office, and serve all the Writs and Replegiaries, by a precept of the Mayor
directed to the said Sheriffs; and the process is after this manner.

First in a Writ of ex gravi querela warning shall be given to the tenants viz.
two or three days before the Husting, or in the morning before, as in a Plea
of Land, and so shall be done of all other summons touching the same Husting.

And if the warning be given and testified by the Sheriff or his Ministers, the
tenants may be essoyned once; and if the tenants make default at the said
warning testified, then shall the grand Cape be awarded: if they appear, they
may be essoyned after the view: and thereupon all other process shall be made
fully, as is said in a Writ of Right Patent in the Hustings of the Pleas of
Land.

Item, In a Writ of Dower, unde nihil habet, the Tenants shall have at the
beginning three Summons, and one essoyne after the three Summons, and
afterward shall have the view: and after the view one essoyne: and the tenants
in such a Writ of Dower shall have the view, although they enter by the same
husband of the Demandant: and also notwithstanding the husband died seized.

And also the Tenants may vouch to warranty, and be essoyned after every
appearance: and also other process shall be made as in a writ of right, in the
Husting of Plea of Land.

And if the Demandant recover Dower against the Tenants by default, or by
Judgment in Law, in such a Writ of Dower: and the same woman demandant shall
allege in Court of Record, that her husband died seized; then the Mayor shall
give commandment to the Sheriffs by precept, that they summon an Enquest of
Neighbors, where the Tenements are, against the next Husting of Common Pleas,
to enquire if the husband died seized, and of the value of the tenements, and
the damages shall be enquired of by the same Enquest.

Item, In a Writ of Gravillete the tenants shall have three summons and three
essoines, they shall also have the view, they may vouch to warranty, Denizen,
and Forreigner, and they shall be essoyned, and they must enter their
exceptions; and all other process shall be made, as before is declared in a
writ of Right, in the Husting of Plea of Land; saving, if the tenant make
default, then the demandant shall have Judgment to recover and hold for a year
and a day upon this condition, that the tenant may come within the same year
and day next ensuing, and agree for the arrearages, and find Surety, as the
Court shall award to pay the Rent within the services loyally after ward and to
have again his tenements.

And within which year and day, the tenant may come and cause the demandant
come in Court by a Scire fac. Ascire face brought by the tenants with in the
year and day
and have again his tenements, doing as is aforesaid.

Then after the year and day, the demandant shall have a Scire fac against the
tenant to come and answer if he can any thing say, A sctre fac brought by the
demandant after the year and day
wherefore the said demandant ought not to held the tenements quietly to him
and his heirs for ever.

And if the tenant come not, or if he come and can say nothing; then the
Judgment shall be, that the Demandant shall recover the tenements quietly for
ever, according to the Judgments, called Shartford, by custom of the foresaid
City.

In a writ of wast process shall be made against the tenants by summons
attachments, Of a writ of waste.
and distresses, according to the statutes thereof made: and if the tenants
come and plead, then he shall have noe essoyne and so after every appearance;
and if he make default at the grand distress then there shall be a
commandment to the Sheriff by precept from the Mayor that the Sheriff should
see the place wasted, That the Enquest shall not tax, but simple damages and
the court shall treble it. This is enacted by the Statute of Gloc. capiat.
and enquire of the waste and damages according to the statute, and that the
enquest should return at the next Husting of Common Pleas, and the Plaintiff
shall recover the place wasted, and treble damages by the Statute.

Item, In a Writ of Error of Judgment, given in Court before the Sheriff, in
actions personal, and in assize of novel disseisin or mortdancestor, taken
before the Sheriff, and Record; the Writ of Error shall be directed to the
Mayor and Sheriffs, and the Mayor shall make his precept to the Sheriffs, to
cause them to bring the Record and process at the next Husting of Common
Pleas, and that they warn the parties to hear the Record.

And after that the Record and Process be in the Husting, although the
Defendant come by the warning, or make default, the errors shall be assigned,
and there the Judgment shall be affirmed, or reversed, as the Law requires.

And it is to be understood, that by the usage of the said City, when a man is
condemned in debt, or attaint of damages in any action personally before the
Sheriffs, and brings such a Writ of Error, he himself which brings the
writ ought, and was wont, before that he be delivered out of prison, to find
sufficient surety of men abiding in the same City, before the Mayor and
Sheriffs, to pay the money, or to have the body forthwith coming, in case that
the Judgment be affirmed.

And so it shall be done where damages shall be recovered in Assizes, before the
Sheriffs and Coroner, etc.

Item, In a Replegiarie, Replegiarie
the process is such: If any man take a distress in an other man's ground
within the said City, he to whom the goods belong may come to one of the
Sheriffs, and have a minister by commandment of the Court, to go to the party
that took the goods: and if he may have the sight, to take the same goods by
two wise men: and then there shall be a plaint made in the Sheriffs paper in
this manner: Such a one makes his complaint against such a one, of his goods
unjustly taken in his house or in his freehold, in such a Parrish.

And the same party shall there find two sufficient pledges to pursue his
plaint, and to make return of the goods, or the price thereof, in case that
the return be awarded and so he shall have the deliverance And the parties shall
have a day prefixed at the next Husting of Common Pleas: the Sheriff shall make
a Bil containing all the matter and the plaint, and shall bring the same Bill to
the same Husting and there it shall be put on the File, and the parties shall be
called for. At which day the one and the other may be essoyned of common
essoyne.

And at what time soever the Plaintiff makes default, return shall be a warded
to him that has them, and the return in such case is awardable three times,
by the custom and at the third time not replevisable: And at what time soever
he that has them, makes default, then it shall be awarded that the same goods
shall remain to the Plaintiff. viz. they shall remain without recovering of
any damages.

And if so be, that the Sheriff may not have a sight of the distress taken,
then he shall so certify in the said Husting, and there shall be awarded a Writ
of Withernam, and thereupon process shall be made. And if the parties come, and
avoury be made, they may plead to a Judgment, or to an issue of enquest,
according as the case requires.

And the parties may be essoyned after every appearance. And if the party
claim property in the distress, then that certified in the Husting, process
shall be made by precept, directed to the Sheriff, to try the property.

And though the party be essoyned to serve the King in a Replegiary, and at the
day that he has by essoyne makes default, or brings not in his warranty, he
shall be amerced.

In a writ de partitione fac. to make partition between partners of tenements
in London, a writ close shall be directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs, containing
the matter according to the form of such a Writ. And the parties shall be
warned by precept of the Mayor, directed to the said Sheriffs: and the tenants
may be essoyned, and if they come, they may plead their matter: and if they
make default, the Partition shall be awarded by default:

Item, Of the Bedle
every Bedle by the advice of his Alderman, against every Husting of
Common Pleas, shall summon 6 Freeholders, the better and sufficienter of his
Ward, to come to the aforesaid Guild Hall, to pass in Enquest, if there be
need, if there be so many Freeholders in the said Ward. And the Enquest shall
be presented, as is aforesaid, in the Husting of Plea of Land.

Item, Of Exigonts
Briefs of Exigent are demandable in the Husting, as well in the Husting of
Common Pleas, as in the Husting of Pleas of Land.

But those Exigents that are demanded in the one Husting, shall not be demanded
in the other Husting. And at the fifth Husting, the outlawries and veniries
shall be awarded in full Husting before the Mayor and Aldermen, by the mouth of
their Recorder.

And also all Judgments that are given in Husting, after every Husting shall be
enrolled, and sent to the Chamber of Guild Hall aforesaid.

Item, It is to be understood, that all the amerciaments made at those
Hustings, do appertain to the Sheriffs of the City.

Item, The Aldermen of London are summoned to come to the husting, Of summoning
the Aldermen to the Husting.
and they ought by usage of the said City to be summoned by an Officer of the
Sheriffs, Of exigents Of summoning the Aldermen. to the Husting
sitting upon a horse of a 100. S. price at least

And if it happen, A tail
that between Merchant and Merchant, or Citizen and Citizen, there be debate of
Debt, and a tail be showed forth by the party, and such tail be denied, the
party that brings the tail shall make his proof according to the Law
Merchant but shall prove the same by Citizens or Merchants, or other good and
loyal men, Of assize of Mertdancester.
and not by villains.

Item, The Assizes of Mordancester are held and determinable before the
Sheriffs, and the Coroner of London, on the Saturdayes, from fourteen deyes to
fourteen days at the Guild Hall: the process wherein is in this manner, viz.

He that will have such assize, shall come in the Husting, or in the
congregation of the Mayor and Aldermen in the Chamber of Guild Hall, any monday
as it is said in the assize of freshforce and shall make a Bill containing the
form of assize of Mortdancestor, according to the case, and the Bill shall be
enrolled,

And afterward the common Clerk shall make another Bill, containing the whole
matter of the first Bill, making mention of the title of Husting, or of the day
of the Congregation of the Mayor and Aldermen: and that Bill shall be sent to
the Sheriffs, or to one of them to serve according to the custom. And which
Bill shall be ferved by any Sergeant, or other Minister of the Sheriffs, viz.

The said Minister the Wednesday next after the livery of the Bill shall make
his summons at the tenements demanded by witness of two Freemen of the
City, which ought to be at Guild hall the Saturday next ensuing, to array and
summon the Jurors: and so afterward against the Saturday from fourteen days
to fourteen days at their wills and so may the tenants sue if they will for
their deliverance.

And the arraignments of the panneis of such assizes shall be made by the
Sheriffs and their Ministers, or by the Mayor and Aldermen, if any of the
parties shall come to demand upon reasonable cause, in manner, as the use is in
assizes of fresh force.

And in such assizes of Mortdancestor, the parties may be essoyned as at the
Common Law, and the tenants may vouch to warranty within the said City, and
also in a foreign County, if the Vouchee have no tenements within the City.

And if the tenants plead a Release, bearing date in a foreign County, or
other foreign matter that may not be tried within the City, or that they vouch
to warranty in a foreign County, him that has nothing within the City: then
at the suit of the party the Record shall be brought in the Court of our Lord
the King by a writ delivered to the Sheriffs and Coroner, and there shall such
foreign pleas and foreign voucher be tried, and determined, and after sent
back to the said Sheriffs and Coroner to go forward and proceed, according to
the custom of the City.

And continuance shall be made in such assizes upon the causes aforesaid, and
upon other reasonable causes.

And when the Assizes shall be determined, and Judgment ought to be given, then
the same Assizes shall be engrossed, and entered of record by the said Sheriffs
and Coroner, and after sent to Guild hall, to remain there of Record, in
manner as the Assizes of fresh force ought to be.

The City of London, A custom that freemen of the City of London may bequeath
their tenements of which they were solelyscized.
is an ancient City of our Lord the King, that now is and of his Progenitors:
In which City such a Custom is held, and where of the time is not to the
contrary, has been held, that every Freeman of the aforesaid city, being soly
seized of any Lands or Tenements within the aforesaid City by all the time
aforesaid might and may bequeath such his Temements to any person or persons it
likes him best, as well secular, as religious, in see-taile, or for term of
his life etc.

Item, Assizes of novell desseisin called fresh force of lands and tenements,
and rents, within the City of London, of desseisins made within 40 weeks, are
held and are determinable before the two Sheriffs, and the Coroner of the said
City in common every Saturday in Guildhall, except certain times that the
assizes may not be held for reasonable causes: and therein the process in this
manner, viz.

When any man is agrieved and disseised of his Freehold within the City, or
Suburbs thereof: he shall come to any husting held at Guild Hall, or for want
of the husting to the Chamber of Guildhall, to the congregation of the Mayor
and Aldermen any Monday, and there shall make a Bill, and the Bill shall be
thus.

A. of D. complains of intrusion against C. of E. of his free tenement, in
such a Parish of London, or in such a Parish in the Suburbs of London.

And the same Bill shall be enrolled: and thereupon another Bill shall be made,
containing the whole matter of the former Bill by the common Clerk of the
City, making mention of the title of the husting or of the day of the
Congregation of the Mayor and Aldermen.

And that Bill shall be delivered to the Sheriff, or to one of them, to make
process, and do right to the parties.

And then ought the Bill to be served the Wedensday next ensuing viz. The
Sheriffs Officer to whom the Bill is delivered, shall summon the tenant, or
the tenants mentioned in the said Bill of assize, by the view of two Freemen of
the City and that at the tenements where the disseisin is made, or at the tenee
ments where out the Rent is supposed to be issuing, and it shall be said there
to the tenants, that they keep their day at Guild Hall the Satturday then next
ensuing at their peril: And the names of the two summoners shall be endorsed
upon the Bill: and then the Plaintiff may sue to array the assise, and summon
the Jurors against that Satturday, or against other Satturdayes after, at his
will.

And so may the tenants sue for their deliverance, if they will, and such
summons shall be made the Friday before the satturday.

And the arraynments at the perils of the Jurors, shall be made by the
Sheriffs or their Officers, or by the Mayor and Aldermen, if any of the
parties upon a reasonable cause will pray the same.

And afterward the same assizes shall be pleaded, and ruled for the most part
also as it, otherwise at the common law.

And if a Release, bearing date in a foreign County, Bastardy, or other
foreign matter, which cannot be tried within the said City, be pleaded in such
assizes; then else Plaintisse may sue, to cause the Record to be brought to the
Court of our Lord the King, to try the matter there as the case requires: and
when the matter shall be determined in the Kings Court, all the process shall
be sent back to the said Sheriffs, and Coroner, or to their Successors, or to
proceed forward, according to the custom of the City, in manner, as it has
been heretofore.

And it is to be understood, That no discontent is within the City of assizes,
etc.
that there has not been any discontinuance in such assizes: neither is there
any mention made in the Record, of the days between the assize brought, and
the day that the assize shall be taken, or Judgment given; if it be not for a
necessary cause, or that such assizes be taken before the Sheriffs and Coroner
as is aforesaid, and Judgment be thereof given: then shall such assizes
determined, be entered of Record: and after shall be brought into the Chamber of
Guildhall, to remain there in the Treasury as of Record.

And it is to be understood, that a man may not enter into any tenements within
the said City by force nor hold any tenements by force and arms in disturbance
of the peace, etc.

Imprimis.
It is to be understood, Of the Sherisss. Court.
that the Sheriffs holds the Courts of our Lord the King before them in the
Guild Hall of London, and pleas of debt, of any sum whatsoever, and of all
actions personals, at the suit of the parties.

And each of the said Sheriffs holds his Court at Guildhall by himself
severally, and that by virtue of the plaints and quarrels made before the one
and the other of the same Sheriffs, as well in their Countors as at Guildhall
according to the custom of the aforesaid City.

And every of the said Sheriffs use to hold by himself two general Courts in
the week, and every day for the deliverance of forraigners and strangers, if
need be, if they be not let by Festival days, or other reasonable causes.
Item.

The Clerks and Officers of the said Sheriffs presently upon the plaints
made, use to award a capias, or other process against the Defendants, by the
testimonies of the Sergeants of the said Offier thereto deputed, as well in the
said Countors, as at Guild Hall: and it is the use to award a capias in plain
of Debt, Account, Covenant, and other Actions personal whatsoever, etc.

Item. Action of debt.
He that is so arrested at the suite of the party for Debt, or other action
personal, may find Sureties in the said Courts, or elsewhere, before the
Sheriffs, or their Clerks thereto deputed, to come to the next Court at the
said Guild Hall, holden before the same Sheriff, before whom the plaint was
made, upon this condition: that if the Defendant come not at the said next
Court to keep his day: then he shall be condemned in the debt mentioned in the
plaint Saving the Plaintiff, if he be present, or may well come in Court,
shall be examined upon his Oath, what sum is clearly due to him, and for what
cause, more then which is found to be due by examination: the Plaintiff shall
recover nothing but his damages which shall be judged by taxation of the
Court, or by enquest, if need be.

And if the Defendant cannot be found, then shall the main pernors be taken and
charged for the Debt and the aforesaid Damages.

Item. Action of trespass.
If there be a plaint of trespass of battery, of goods taken, or other
personal action, where a man ought to recover damages, if the Defendant make
default in such case after that he is arrested, and has found sureties, as is
aforesaid: then he shall be judged, as convicted, and the Plaintiff shall
declare by bill the cause of the suite, and the quantity of such damages and
such place.

And thereupon an enquest of office shall be brought from the same place to
tax the damages for the Plaintiff.

And if the defendant be not to be found, the main Pernors shall be charged as
before.

And if the Court may be truly certified by the same Enquest, or by sufficient
examination of the Plaintiff, that the Defendant is not culpable in such case,
the Plaintiff shall recover nothing, notwithstanding the default, etc.

Item. When any such main pernors be arrested, and committed to prison, because
the principals are not found: yet notwithstanding whenever the principal may
be found, and is under arrest at the suit of the maine prenors, then the said
maine prenors shall be delivered.

If a man be arrested in a plea of Account, and find Sureties to come at his
day, or if he do not plead to the issue, or plead in Judgment, and find
Snreties to attend until the suit be determined, according to the Custom of
the City: yet notwithstanding at what hour that the principal Sureties will
come into Court: then if the Sureties come, Auditors shall be assigned to take
the Account in presence of the Plaintiff, and the main pernors.

And the Sureties, shall be demanded if they know any thing to say in discharge
of the Account. And if the Sureties will not come, then the Plaintiff shall
recover his arrearages, by examination and his Oath. And in the same manner it
shall be, if the defendant be convict of Accounts by enquest,

Item. Of common Freemen of the City, and of those that be resiant in eht same.
If a plaint be made against any Freemen, being sufficient, or against another
sufficient man, and resident within the City: such a Defendant shall be
summoned by any Sergeant of the Sheriff to come to Guild Hall to answer to the
party Plaintiff at the Court of Denizens.

At which Court, if he make default, he shall be amerced, and the grand
distress shall be presently awarded by usage of the City: and it shall then be
awarded, that the doors of the Defendant shall be fastened and ensealed until
he shall come to answer to the party plaintiff.

And at every Court of Denizens that he is demanded, and comes not, he shall
lose his issues. And if he break the sequestration and that be testified in
Court by the Sergeant: then it shall be awarded, that the defend, be arrested
by his body. And if he pay a fine for the contempt and when he is so arrested,
he shall find sufficent pledge to come then at the next Court, to answer to
the party, upon a pain limited before the capias is awarded.

And if such a defend make more delays, and it be testified by the Sergeant,
that the defendant like to escape a way, or is not sufficient: then shall be
awarded the capias to take his body, or to arrest, and take his goods,

And that after the Defendant has accorded with the plaintiff, there shall be
a commandment, that the Defendants door shall be opened, and the goods taken
and of them to make return at the Court as of foreign attachment.

Item. If any parties come and plead to the Enquest. or in Judgment, then they
shall be ordered according to the usages of the City without any essoyne had as
such personal actions before or after. Challenges after default.


And although that such a Defendant that has pleaded to an Enquest, make
default after the Enquest be joined: yet notwithstanding if he come afterward
when the Enquest shall be charged, he shall have his challenges to the Jurors,
and shall give his evidences, notwithstanding the default.

Item. That when the Enquest is summoned, and veturned in court, the Defendant
is not demandable. How a Freeman ought to wage his law with seven men's bands.
After the parties be at issue of enquiry, the same parties are not demandable
before that the Enquest be summoned: but the Enquest may be summoned as well at
the suit of the Defendant, as at the suit of the plaintiff.

And it is to be understood, that in a plea of Debt, the Defendant may wage his
law by usage of the said City that he owes nothing to the plaintiff, viz. If
he be a man in the franchise within the City, or resiant within the same City
with seven men's hands, whereof his own name to be one: And such Defendants may
make their Law presently in Court, if they have men ready, or otherwise shall
have day to wage the Law, the next Court holden.

And if the Defendant be a Forreigner Stranger and not resiant in the City, How
a for reigner ought to wage his law with 3 hands.
he may wage and make his Law presently with three hands, his own name being
one, that he owes nothing to the plaintiff, and so be quit.

And if he have not two men ready to make an oath with him: This is neither-law
nor custom used at this day.
then the defendant at the request of the plaintiff, ought to go under the
custody of a Sergeant of the Court to 6 Churches nearest to Guild Hall, and in
the same Churches to swear that the oath which he took in Guild Hall was good
And then the Defendant shall be brought back to Guild Hall and have his
judgment to be quit, and the plaintiff shall be amerced. And in the same
manner it shall be done in other actions personal, where the Law wager is
allowed. And where women be in such cases impleaded and wage their Law, they
may make their Law with men or women at their will. That freeman ought to Wage
Law in a plea of trespass with 7 hands


Item, If a Freeman within the City be impleaded by way of trespass for goods
taken, or for Battery, where no blood is drawn, nor no wound apparent: and for
other trespass supposed to be don against the peace, such a Freeman so
impleaded, may wage, and make his Law by the usage of the City, that he is not
culpable with seven hands as is aforesaid.

Item, Actions of Debt or of Covenant are maintainable against Exec. and Admin.
without especiality, and such Exec. and Administrat. by usage of the said City
when they come to answer, they may have their Law by so many hands as the Court
will award upon these words, That they know nothing of the duty, nor of the
contract, nor of the covenant, and that they think in their consciences that
their Testator at his death, ought nothing to the Plaintiff, nor had broken
any Covenant: and by such manner be discharged.

And if a man be impleaded by plaint of Debt, for victuals dispended in the
house of the Plaintiff, or of rent of his houses, let called Hushire: in which
cases the Defendant shall not have his Law, nor no protection in such cases has
been allowed.

Item, Where a woman that has a husband uses any Craft within the said City
by her self only, wherewith her husband does not meddle: such a woman shall be
charged as a sole woman for all that which touches her said Craft.

And if the husband and the wife be impleaded, in such a case, the wife shall
plead as sole in a Court of Record, and shall have her Law and other advantages
by way of plea, as a sole woman, and if she shall be condemned, she shall be put
in prison, until she has made agreement. Item, The husband nor his goods,
shall be in such a case charged nor impeached, etc.

Item, If a woman that has a husband, A house hired by a woman sale
as a woman sole hire any house or shop within the City, she shall be charged to
pay the rent of the said house and shop, and shall be impleaded and pursued as
a sole woman, by way of debt, if need be, notwithstanding that she was married
at the time of the Lease, the lessor not knowing thereof. Trespass done by the
Wife.


Item, If a plaint of trespass be made against a man and his wife for a
trespass, done by the wife solely, then the wife shall answer sole without her
husband, if the husband come not, and shall have plea as a sole woman, and if
she be attainted of trespass, she shall be condemned, and committed to prison
until she has made a greement.

Item, Trespass don to the Wife.
If a playnt of trespass be brought by the husband and the wife, of Battery
done to the wife, in such case the wife shall be received for her self, and her
husband to pursue and recover damages against the defendant, although the
husband be not present.

Item, Action of debt
where a plaint of debt brought against the husband and the plaintiff
acknowledges that the husband made the contract with him by the hand,
intervening and transaction of the defendants wife, Aid of the Wife
then the same defendant shall have aid of his wife, and shall have day, until
the next Court, to consult with his wife: and the same day shall be given to the
Plaintiff etc.

Item, How a man shall he termed a Freeman of London.
When any defendant in plea of debt or other action personal, wageth his law
as a Freeman of the City, and the plaintiff demands how he is free, it
behooves that the defendant allege, that he is free by redemption: and if he
say that he is free by redemption, the plaintiff may cause that the defendant
to show his Record at the next Court. And if he fail of his Record, then he
shall be attainted and adjudged convict in the cause. And if the defendant
allege that he is free by birth, the plaintiff may say that he was not borne
in the City and that shall be enquired by the Enquest taken in the said City,
of such a place where the defendant will allege that he was borne, and that
issue is peremptory.

Item, Of contribution by obligees
where two or more are obliged with in the City by obligation of debt, and
every of them in the whole sum: then if one of the obligees pay the whole, or
he to whom the obligation is made, brings a suite in the same City, and
recovers the debt against one of the obligees solely: then he that paid the
debt or is so condemned may sue against the other obligees by playnt or debt,
jointly or severally to make contribution: so that every one shall pay his part,
according to the usage of the said City, saving reasonable answer to the
parties.

Item, Of foreign attachments
when a plaint of debt is brought before any of the said Sheriffs, and
testimony is given by the Officer, that the defendant has no: sufficient
within the said City, and it is alleged, that the defendant has goods and
chattles, or debts in other hands, or in others keeping within the said City,
and the plaintiff prays that such goods and chattles may be arrested, and an
extent may be made of the debts, then at the suite and suggestion of such
plaintiff, such goods and chattles shall be arrested wheresoever they be found
within the City, and an extent shall be made of the debts at the peril of the
plaintiff: and this done the plaintiff shall pursue at four courts before the
same Sheriff before whom the plaint was affirmed until the defendant be four
times demanded: And if the defendants come not at the fourth Court, and has
made four defaults, then shall the goods and chattles arosted, be taken and
delivered to the plaintiff. And if the goods amount not to the value of the
debts, then the debts extended in the hands of the debttors shall be levied and
delivered to the same plaintiff in part of payment of the debt demanded.

And such arrests of goods and extents of the money are called foreign
attachments, according to the custom of the City: And thereupon the plaintiff
shall find sufficient surety to the Court by pledge, before that the livery
there of be made upon this condition, to make restitution to the defendant of
all the goods and chattles so taken, or of the value of the same, and of such
money whereof he has had execution, if so be that the defeudane come within the
year and the day next ensuing into the Court, and that he can discharge
himself, and justify by law that he ought nothing to the plaintiff, at the
time in the plaint mentioned. And if the same defendaut will come within the
year and the day, as is aforesaid, before execution, or after, and find surety
to justify himself, and plead with the plaintiff then he shall have a scire
fac. out of the same Record against the party, that has had such execution, to
warn him to come to the next Court, if he knows any thing to say, why
restitution should not be made in manner aforesaid.

And if he against whom the scire fac. is sued, be warned, and and make
default, or that it be testified, that he has nothing in the City: Scire fac.
then he that made the scire fac. shall have restitution of all such goods and
chattels so taken, or of the value thereof, and of all the moneys which the
party has received by the foraigne attachment.

In the same manner he shall have restitution, if he can discharge himself by
way of plea. And in the same manner restitution shall be made, according to the
rate of proportion, if the defendant can discharge himself by way of plea of
parcel of the debt, although he cannot discharge himself by way of plea of the
whole. And if the party that has had such execution be not sufficient to make
restitution in the manner aforesaid, then his pledges shall be charged.

And if he upon whom such foreign attachment is made, come not within the
year and the day to justify himself, as is aforesaid, then he shall be barred
for ever after

And it is to wit, that having such foraigne attachment, if any other will come
in Court of Record before the 4 default be recorded, The proof in foreign
attachment.
or before execution be sued, and be ready to prove that the goods arrested were
his proper goods at the time of the arrest made, and yet are, and not his for
whose goods they were arrested, and that that party for whose goods they were
arrested has no property in the same goods nor any other whatsoever, but
himself alone, to the value of a groat, then he shall have the proof, and shall
answer in manner aforesaid, by himself, and shall have delivered unto him all
such goods so arrested, or parcel thereof, according as he has made the proof
thereof.

Item, Of the same
Likewise a servant shall make proof of his Masters goods being in his custody,
according to the discretion of the Court. And also if the defendant in such
foreign attachment come in Court at the 4 default recorded or before, he shall
be received to plead with the plaintiff: And in the same manner shall be
received if he come before execution sued: so that the plaintiff be present in
Court, or otherwise be warned. And in the same manner, in such foreign
attachment those in whose hands any goods be arrested by suggestion of the
plaintiff. And those in whose hands any moneys be extended may come in court
of Record before the same Sheriff and be excused and discharged by their oath,
that they have no such goods in their custody, and that they owed not a penny to
such defendants at the time that the arrests and extents were so made, in their
hands.

Item, Of foreign matter pleaded out of the City.
where a man is impleaded before one of the Sheriffs of London, by plaint of
debt and the plaintiff shows forth an obligation, bearing date in London in
proof of his debt, whether the said obligatian be simple or endorsed, or by
Indentures concerning the same in such case, by usage of the City, the
defandant shall not be received to plead any acquittance or release of the
plaintiff, bearing date in a foreign County, nor any payment made nor
condition, nor other matter which may not be enquired and tried within the same
City

And if the defendant in such a case plead any such accquitance, or release, or
allege any payment, or other matter to be done in a foreign County, out of
the said City, to put the Court out of jurisdiction; and if that such a
defendant will not say any other matter, he shall be concluded for default of
answering. But, if it happen that the endorsement of the obligation or the
Indentures thereof made do make express mention of doing or performing any
condition, or if other matter be alleged by the defendant, then the Court
shall surcease, and it shall be said to the plaintiff, that he sue at the
Common Law. And in the same manner is used a plaint of trespass, and other
actions personal of bargains, and contracts made within the said City, and
the defendant shall not be received to plead, nor allege a matter out of the
said City, if not such a matter that may be enquired of, and tried within the
same City.

Item, Of an obligation dated at a certain place.
Where an obligation is produced, which bears not date in any certain place,
and the plaintiff in this court does allege that the said obligation was made
in a certain Parish within the City of London, and the defendant alleges,
that the same obligation was made in a certain place out of the City, and be
ready to aver the same, and therewithal does plead a matter there, in
avoidance of the said obligation. And the plaintiff offers to try by the
Country, that the said obligation was made within the City of London, in
manner, as to the Court, shall seem good, in such case is used to take the
enquest in London, and the Parish where the plaintiff counced that the
obligation was made, if the plaintiff pray the same. And if it be found that
the obligation was made in London, as the Plaintiff has proposed by his
co^ur, then shall the desendant be condemned in the debt and in the damages to
be taxed by the same Enquest.

Item, Of a double obligation.
where an obligation is made double by endorsement, or by Indentures, and the
party bound is impleaded, and acknowledges the obligation, and the day of
payment is incurred, as it may appear by the same obligation; yet
notwithstanding the plaintiff ought to recover but only the clear debt which
is behind, and that by the oath of the plaintiff, or by the true information
of his Attorney, if the plaintiff be not present, and not the double debt
contained within the said obligation. And his damages shall be taxed him by the
Court, according to the time past by their discretion, or by the Enquest.

And although the defendant in such a case, against such a double obligation
made, pleads that it was not his deed, or that he has performed the days of
payment contained in the said endorsment, or in the Indentures thereof made, or
other like matter, and thereupon puts himself upon the Enquest, and it is
found against the defendant by verdict of the Enquest: Yet the plaintiff shall
recover nothing but that which is clearly found due by the Enquest, viz. the
single duty, and his damages, taxed by the same Enquest. And if the obligation
be single, which is showed forth, and the party defendant does acknowledge the
obligation and the day be past, and the defendant alleges that the plaintiff
is paid parcel of the debt, then the plaintiff at the request of the
defendant shall be examined by his oath, how much money is behind.

And in such a case, the plaintiff shall recover nothing over that which he will
swear is due and behind, and his damages shall be taxed by the Court. And if
against such a single obligation made the Defendant plead that it is not his
deed, and it be found that it is the defendants deed, yet the plaintiff shall
recover nothing but what is found due by Enquest, and clearly behind, and his
damages taxed by the same Enquest; and the defendant in such a case shall be
fined for denying his deed, and in other cases shall be amerced.

Item, Of an obligation upon certain conditions
where an obligation is made of a certain sum upon certain conditions to be
performed by the endorsment, or by Indentures thereupon made, and thereupon a
plaint is made, and the parties be at traverse, and at issue upon some
especial condition broken and it is found by the enquest upon the parties own
showing against the defendant, which is so bound and that he has broken that
condition; yet the plaintiff shall not recover the whole obligation, but he
shall recover the damages which he has sustained, by reason of the condition
broken: and the damages shall be taxed by the same Enquest, and the obligation
shall be saved, for the saving of the other conditions hereafter. But some make
a question of this custom.

Item, Of acquittances and other evidences alleged to be in foreign parts
If an obligation of debt be showed forth, and the defendant alleges that he
has an acquitrance or Indentune, or other things ensealed by the plaintiff,
the which may stand him in stead, and be a discharge against the plaintiff, if
he had them ready in hand, and say further, that the miniment, are in a
foreign County and out of the City, and be ready to make oath thereof; then
the same defendant after his oath made shall have a day assigned by the Court to
have his said miniments ensealed at a certain Court after, according to the
distance of the place, and thereupon shall find pledge at his peril; to come
at his said day, and bring the same deed,

And if he make default at the day, or if he fail of that which he alleged,
then he shall be condemned in the said obligation, and damages shall be taxed by
the Court, saving that the Plaintiff, or his Attorney, shall be examined of the
duty.

Item, Of fugitives.
If a plaint of debt be made against a Freeman and resiant within the City, or
by the Law of the City, has a summons, because of the Franchise, if the
plaintiff come to the Sheriff and bring with him six or four Freemen and
credible of the said City, that will testify, that the defendant is flying
away, and that he will withdraw and absent himself; then the said Sheriff upon
their testimony, may arrest the said defendant by his body or goods, as of a
Forraigner, etc.

Item, The Sheriffs may hold before them pleas, of taking personal things,
instead of a Replegiate, and avowry may be made, and return awarded to such
pleas as in the Husting, if the cause touch not Freetenants: And such a suit is
called A plea of taking and detayning of goods
de placito captionis and detentionis catallorum, and pledges shall be found to
make return of the goods or of the value, as in a Replegiate.

Item, The defendant shall answer, and the plaintiff very presently.
It is the usage of such actions personally before the Sheriffs that at the
first day when the parties appear, and the plaintiff has counted against the
defendant, the same defend shall answer the same day without having any day
given him to emparle: And in the same manner, if the defendant pleades any plea
or matter alleged against the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall presently reply
without having a days respite to emparle, without the assent of the parties.

Item, What custom shall be discussed by the Mayor and Aldermen.
If some customs or usages are pleaded or alleged in the Sheriffs Courts,
whereof the Sheriffs nor their Ministers be fully informed: then such customs
and usages shall be discussed by the Mayor and Aldermen, and that before
Judgment thereof rendered.

And it is to be understood, that no adjornment is made in the Sheriffs
Courts, nor any day given by pre-appointment, but only that the parties should
keep their day at the next general Court, if it be not upon some special
cause.

Item, Of actions of debt.
Actions of debt are maintainable by usage of the simple grants and
assignments, and of pledges, and of a covenant simply without specialty.

Item, Of Tailles ensealed
A Tail of debt ensealed by the usage of the said City, is as strong as an
obligation: and when a plaint of debt is made, and such a Tail ensealed showed
forth in proof of the debt, the defendant shall not have his law that he owes
nothing, nor any other matter, no more then against an obligation. He may well
say, that the day of payment is other then the Plantiff counts.

Item, Of taking Kecognizances
the Sheriffs of London use, and each of them by himself. to take
Recognizances of debt in their Courts, of what sum soever: And if the day of
payment be past, and the money not paid, then at the suite of him, to whom the
Recognizance was made, if he be a Denizen, all the goods and chattels of the
Recognizor found within the City, shall be taken and delivered to the party, to
the value that the debt, contained in the said Recognizance, amounts to,
without extending any land of the Recognizor: And if the year be past, then a
scire fac. shall be sued against the Recognizor to come in, if he knows any
thing to say, wherefore execution shall not be made of his goods, as is
aforesaid: the which Recognizance shall be entered in the Sheriffs paper.

Item, Safe custody of prisoners.
The Sheriffs may hold by usage what prisoners soever before them condemned or
committed to their custody, as well in their houses, where they are then
dwelling, as in common Goales, which they are always to hold in ward, and not
to go at large out of their houses, or the aforesaid Countors.

Item, Of plaints between Merchants, and Merchants.
In plaints of debt and accounts, and other personal contracts between
Merchants and Merchants, if the plaintiffes counts that the defendant at any
Merchandising Village or in a place merchantable within the Realm did bargain
for, and buy of the same plaintiff some merchandises, or received his money to
pay and deliver unto him, or to render account in any place within the said
City. Note this well.
And if the parties he at travers, and plead to issue of Enquest, then shall the
enquest be taken of the people of the said City, and of the merchandising
town, where the contract is supposed, to this intent, that such merchants, may
have notice of the same contract.

Item, Of the same.
The Sheriffs of London have always used to hold pleas before them between
what merchants soever, where both parties are Merchants, of all bargains and
personal contracts, which touchcing merchandise made beyond Sea, at the
merchandising town or place merchandizable, where the bargains and contracts
are made by express words upon payment, or delivery, of the merchandise, or to
render account within the said City of London. And in such a case if the
parties descend to an issue of Enquest, then shall the Enquest be taken of men
remaining within the same City, viz. of Merchants traveling that use to pass
over the Sea, which best may have knowledge of the aforesaid bargains and
contracts.

And if any foreign Merchant and Alien be party to the plea and such enquest
be to be taken, then the Merchant Alien shall have the moity of the Enquest of
his own Country men, Which withdraw them selves out of the City.
etc.

Item, If a plaint of debt be made, and it is testified by the Minister that
the defendant is not resiant within the City, that he has absented himself and
carried away his goods. And it is testified, that he has lands or tenements
within the City, then at the pursuit of the plaintiff, the plaintiff ought to
hold them by the same extent, until he be satisfied of his money due unto him,
finding sureties to uphold the tenements conveniently, and also to repay the
defendant the money received in the mean time, if it be so that the same
defendant come in Court of Record within a year and a day after the delivery
made, and can discharge himself, that he owes nothing to the plaintiff.

Item. Examination in a plea Personal.
The Sheriffs use to examine the parties in all actions personal depending
before them, if any of the parties desire the same, and to proceed to judgment,
according as it is found by examination.

Item, Where any personal action is depending before either of the said
Sheriffs, Of the same
and some matter is alleged by the defendant in bar of the action, or a
thing material to delay the plaintiff. And if the plaintiff puts himself
upon the oath of the defendant peremptorily, that the plea or the exception
given by the same defendant is not true, then the said defendant if he be in
Court, or if he be resiant within the City, and that he may conveniently come,
by the discretion of the Court, then he shall make his oath that his plea or
exception that he has given is good and true. And if he come and refuse to
make such an oath, then he shall be held as convict in the cause, and thereupon
the plaintiff shall recover that which lies in demand, according as it may be
found by examination of the plaintiff, or by enquest of office, if need be.
And if he make the oath, the plaintiff shall be outed of his suit or action,
if he for his part will not swear that the suite or other matter alleged by
him is not good and true

And if such an oath be required of the plaintiff, and the plaintiff take the
oath, he shall recover by the same oath if the exception be material, and so
are such oaths peremptory, of the one part, and of the other, according to the
matter of the Exceptions.

Item, Of default after mayn prise.
If a man be arrested by a plaint of debt, or by other personal action, and
find surety to be ready at the next Court, before the Sheriffs to answer to
the Party: At which Court although the defendant be demanded in convenient
time, to come and save his maynprise and he make default, and the default be
recorded, yet if the same defendant come, sitting the same Court, he shall be
received to plead, saving that in such a case he shall lose the advantage of
his Lawwager, although he might have had his law, if he had come in time.

Item, Of amending Bills.
Where parties appear in the Sheriffs Court, the usage is that the
Plaintiffes may amend their plaints, and their Bills, before that the said
parties be at issue, or plead to judgment in Court of Record.

Item, Acton of account.
In an action of account before the Sheriffs, the plaintiff by usage of the
City may not count that the defendant was his Bayliffe in any case, but
Receiver of his money, or of his goods.

Item, An action of account is maintainable by usage against a woman sole, and
against Infants within age, if they be Merchants, or if they keep common shops
of trade, or of Merchandise. And actions of debt in the same manner of that
which touches their trade, or their merchandises.

Item, Of plaints removed out of the Shrieffes courts.
Where pleas are depending before the Sheriffs, the usage is always that the
Mayor of London, that is for the time, may send to the Sheriffs to cause the
complaint and the process to be brought before him and their Aldermen, to
determine and discuss the same complaint before them, or to send back the said
complaint before the same Sheriffs, further to proceed in the said process,
according to that which the Mayor and Aldermen shall see fitting to be done,
and to command the Sheriffs to surcease at their wills.

Item, Where the debtor shall be arrested before the day contained in the
obligatio Of fugitives.
When a debtor is bound within the said city by obligation in a certain sum,
to pay at a certain day to come, the which debtor was held sufficient at the
time when he was bound, and after is become fugitive, or not sufficient, then
if the creditor come before the Mayor and Sheriffs of the said City, making
such a suggestion, and has with him six or four credible men of the same
City; that will truly testify that the debtor will withdraw, and convey his
goods out of the City, or that he is not sufficient to make payment, then the
Mayor; or one of the Sheriffs, before whom the suggestion is made, uses to
arrest the debtor, although the day contained within the obligation be not yet
come, and to keep the same debtor in prison, until the day of payment be
come, or otherwise, that he shall find pledges to attend at the same day, and
so to arrest for Houshire before the day, Houshire.
if the tenant be fugitive.

Item, To arrest a debtor without a sergeant.
If a Freeman of the City find his debtor suddenly within the same City, which
debtor has absented himself before, or that he be sugitive, and the which
debtor will escape away, before that the creditor can have an officer, the
usage is in such a case that the Freeman himself, with aid of his neighbors
without other officer, may arrest his debtor, and carry him to the office of
one of the Sheriffs, and there make his suit, as the law requires, etc.

Item, Of merciments.
Touching the amerciaments taken upon the plaints in the Courts of the
Sheriffs, it is used, if the demand be of 40. s. or under, to take 4. d. and
if they pass 40. s. the usage is to take 12. d. for the amerciament.

Item, Of Landlords.
If a lessee within the City be fugitive, or absent himself, whereby his goods
within the house be arrested, yet the lessor called the Landlord, shall be
served before all others for the rent of the house, being behind by two years,
and for so much money, goods shall be left within the said house, to the use of
the said Landlord.

And although that such a Farmer within the said City commit Felony, Of giving
warning to the Landlord.
or other contempt, for which his goods and chattels are arrestable, and
subject to forfeiture, yet the lessor by usage of the City shall be paid for
his rent behind, by two years, as is aforesaid, of the goods found within the
same house.

Item, Warning to the Tenant.
Where there be tenants within the City holding at will, and will go out of
their houses, and surrender the same up, they shall give warning to the lessor
before their departure, viz. of the houses that they have to farm for 40. s.
rent, and under, they shall give warning by a quarter of a year before the
departure, at the peril of the tenant.

And in the same manner, Of Execution at the. choice of the Plaintiff.
warning shall be given to the tenant, if the lessor will put out the tenant,
etc.

Item, When a man is condemned at the parties suit in debt, or in damages
before the Sheriffs, the party that has so recovered may make choice to have
the body of him which is condemned, committed to prison, until he has made an
agreement, or to have of his goods, at his peril.

Item, Of Maynpernors, and Attorneys received in the counters.
The pledges and Maynparnors, and Attorneys taken and received within the
Sheriffs Countors, and other process there made, are held to be of record, as
well as at the Courts holden within Guildhall.

Item, Of Attorneys.
Every Alderman of London, may by usage, record Attorneys in pleas, depending
in the Sheriffs Courts, and elsewhere in the Hustings, and in the Chamber.

Item, Of day given to the Enquest.
When an Enquest between parties is joined, and sworn before the Sheriffs in
pleas personal, if the parties will agree, the Court by usage may give day to
the Enquest, to advise themselves of their verdict, until some day ensuing, in
manner as the parties may accord, and that at the peril of the plaintiff, if
any Juror dye, or any other case happen in the mean time.

Item, The amerciments of Inroes.
The Jurors which are summoned in an Enquest, are not to be amerced, although
they make default above 3. d. but if they tarry long, and will not come, the
Sheriffs by usage may shut up their doors, and constrain them to come.

Item, Enquest of Office.
The Enquests of office which are taken by the Sheriff to inquire of frayes
and batteries made against the Peace, are not traversable by new Enquest by
usage, but at the parties suit, every party shall make his answer,
notwithstanding the Enquest of office.

Item, It is to be understood, that there be other points and usages touching
the Sheriffs Court whereof a man cannot have remembrance of all, etc.

Item, Of general Attoenies.
That all general Attorneys made and received within the Countors of the
Sheriffs of London, are held to be upon record, as well as if they were taken
at the Courts held at Guild Hall. And such Attorneys are and ought to be entered
in the grand paper of the aforesaid Sheriffs, for the fee thereof due etc.

Item, That none shall offer any injury, in deed nor word to the Sergeants, or
to the Bayliffes of the said City, nor that none disturb them in doing
execution of judgments, attaches, distresses, or other things which pertain to
Bayliffes, or Sergeants to do, and which are commanded them, upon pain of
imprisonment, and to make ransom, according as the custom wills to be done.

Whereupon, Custom for citizens to buy and sell in publicks and open places.
as to the taking of the said sait the action lies, nor for that the City of
London, is an ancient City of the King of England that now is. And that in the
said City there is held, and time out of mind, whereof the memory of man is not
to the contrary, has been holden a common Market every holyday, as well for
the Citizens of the said City, as for all other men whomseover, to buy and to
sell all, and all manner of things and merchandises, in all public and open
places within the City, and the Suburbs and Liberties of the same: so that one
of the contractors be a Freeman of the said City of London. And the said
defendant says, that as to the trespass, when etc. A. B. was possessed of the
said salt, and he so being of the said salt possessed, etc. that is to say, on
the 20. day March, etc. in the fifth year of the King that now is, being a
holyday, the said A. B. in one open place, viz. in an open shop of the
defendants, situate in the parish of St. etc. London, aforesaid, of the said
City of London, openly did sell to the aforesaid defendant, the aforesaid salt,
and the cover thereof for 10 l. which the said defendant so the said A. B. then
there did pay. By reason whereof, the said defendant in the time and place
where the trespass is supposed to be done, etc. the said Salt of his Cover
then and there took, and carried the same away, as lawful it was, etc. which
said taking and carrying away of the said Salt and Cover are the same taking
and carrying away of the said Salt and Cover, whereof the said plaintiff, etc.
And the said plaintiff by his aforesaid Attorney comes and requires,
according to the custom of the said City of London, how the said defendant is
a Free man of the said City.

And the said defendant, by his Attorney aforesaid, says, that by his
Apprentiship, that the Twentieth day of May, in the seventeenth Year of the
Reign of King H. 8. He by the Name of Thomas Barn of Dale in the County of
Liccester, Husband. was Apprentice unto John Ward Citizen, Alderman and Grocer
of London, and in his Apprentiship, stood according to the custom of the said
City, and admitted into the liberty of the said City, and sworn in the time of
John Rudston, then Mayor of the said City, and John Husse, then Chamberlain
thereto and entered in the book, which is signed with the letter M. of the
buyings and admissions of Freemen as of Record before the said Chamberlain
fully appears.

Moreover, that the said Defendant will verify, that the said John Batemanson,
in the narration and plaint aforesaid nominated, and the said I. B. in the said
Record, before the said I. H. Chamberlain nominated, are one and the same
person, and not diverse, and as well by the name of I. B. as by the name of I. B.
always hitherto known and called, and so he says, etc.

And the said Defendant says that he is a Freeman of the said City of London,
by his Apprenticeship, according to the custom.

All and every which matters, he the said defendant is ready to verify, as the
Court, etc. and demands that if the aforesaid defendant, etc.

The King to his well-beloved, and faithful William Merre Adam of Shopenhange
and to Walter of Padenham, assigned for the assessing of the tallage, or
customs, within Our Cities, Burroughes, and Demesnes, within the County of
Oxon, greeting.
OUR Citizens and Merchants of Our City of London, In the white book the 3.
part of the 3. book fol. 50.
have showed to us.

That whereas some of them have used to be brought diverse their goods and
merchandises from London unto Henley, in the County aforesaid, there to be sold
upon Market days, and with them to trade from week to week.

And that some of them buy diverse Goods and Merchandises in the parts there
adjoining, to be brought to London, for their profit to be made thereby.

And they hier little houses and places in the said town of Henley, from
term, to term, as well for the aforesaid goods and Merchandises brought
thither to be laid up until they may conveniently sell the same.

As also, for the aforesaid goods and merchandises brought there in the said
parts, to be laid up until conveniently they may carry the same from thence.

And any certain houses, or Lands, or Tenements there they have not; neither
make they any abode in the same place; neither are they in Scot and Lot with
the men of the same town.

Yea, nevertheless, Ye by occasion of such their houses, places, and goods,
and their merchandise, so put in the same do thereupon very unjustly distreine
them the said Citizens and Merchants to pay Tallage for Custom, as if they had
their Houses, and Lands, and tenemants, and made their continual abode, or
were in Scot and Lot with the said men; to the great damage and burden of the
said Cityzens and Merchants.

And because it is not agreeable to Right, that Our said Citizens and Merchants
in the said case should be taxed with the men aforesaid, especially seeing that
they may freely exercize their Merchandises throughout all Our Kingdom, etc.
are taxed for their Merchandises in Our City aforesaid, with their fellow
Citizens there, as often as any tallage (or custom) shall happen to be
assessed upon the commonality of that City.

We command you, that you do not assesse them our said Merchants and Citizens,
with the men aforesaid, in the case aforesaid. But that you suffet them in this
behalf, to be in peace so long, notwithstanding as there shall not be other
cause, wherefore they ought to be seized there.

Witness my Self at Westminster, the XIII Day of February, in the VI. Year
of Our Reign.


Item, In the same book the 4. part fol. 6. B. side.

For driving of Carts.


That no Carter within the Franchize drive his Cart any faster when it is
empty, then when it is laden, for eschewing of diverse perils and grievances,
upon pain of forty Pence to the Chamber, and his body to prison at the will of
the Mayor.

Item, In the same book the 4. part, sol. 6. B. side
For that the course of water of Thames, which wholly appertains to the City,
is greatly disturbed by the purpresture of the keys, and other adjesments made
in the said water, to the great peril and damage of the whole City.

And for the eschewing of greater perils and damages in time to come, It is
ordained by the Mayor and Aldermen, with the assent of the Commons, That
hereafter no purpresture shall be made by the making of Keys, nor in any other
manner upon the water of Thames, without view of the Mayor and Aldermen, and
Commons, and unless their opinions and Judgments be, that such purpressture
will not be unto the danger or hinderance of the City.

A TABLE OF Sundry Offices and Rooms in the City of London, within the Lord
Mayors gift.
ALvegers, Searchers, and Sealers of Woollen Cloth. Attorney ship in the
Sheriffs Court. Baker of the Bridge-house. Bayliffe of the hundred of Osalston.
Baliwick of Southwark. Beadelship of the Court of Request. Bell man. Clarkship
of the Lord Mayors Court Clarkship of the Papers. Clarkeship of the Chamber.
Clarkeship of the Counters. Clarkeship of the Bridghouse. Clarkeships of the
works and Reparationstuffe. Clarkeships of the Court of Request. Clarkeship of
the Commssioners for the enlargement of Prisoners in execution in the Counters.
Clarke of Bridwell. Clarkeship of Blackwell Hall. Clarkeship of the
Commssioners for enlargement of Prisoners in the Kings Bench. Common
Sarientship. Common Pleaders. Common Hunt. Common Cryers. Common Controler.
Comptroler of the Chamber. Collector of Scavage. Collectors of Wheeleadge on
Loudon Bridge. Conduit at Dowgate drawing Water Forrintaker. Gauger of Wines and
Oil. Keeper of Blackwell Hall. Keeper of the Storehouse in Blackwell Hall.
Keeper of Worsted Hall. Keeper of Bay Hall. Keeper of the Conduit at Newgate
Keeper-ship of Ludgate. Keeper-ship of Newgate. Keeper ship of the Counters.
Keeper of the Counters in Southwark. Keeper of Bothlen. Keeper of the Sessions
house. Keeper clean of the Market and Market house in Newgate Marketand
Collectors of duties there. Keeper of the New-buriall place. Keepers of the
Wood and Coals for the poor in several places Measurage of Silks, Cloth and
Linen Meat Weighers. Measurage of Cottons. Mesurage of Bays. Packer ship.
Prothonotoriship. Portership of Blackwell Hall. Portership of the Bridge house.
Remembrancer. Renter-ship of the Bridge house. Renter-ship of Finsbury. Sword
bearer. Second biriship. Solicytor ship. 3 Sergeant Carvers. 3 Sergeants of the
Chamber: Sergeant of the Channel. Stewardship of Sonth wark. Stewardship of
Finsbury. Town Clarke ship. Under Sherifewick. Under Water Bayley. Weigher of
Raw silks. Water Bailey. 2 Yeomen of the Chamber. 4 Yeomen of the Waterside.
Yeomen of the Channel. 6 Young men.
PROFITS TO Be received by the Lord Mayor yearly, and other Profits arising
otherwise.
Scavage.
IT appears by several Acts of Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, one
taken Anno. 4. E. 4. another taken, Anno 6. E. 4. by an Act of Parliament. 19.
H. 7. Cap. 8. and by other Acts of Court, and by continual usage, that the
Moity of the Profits, of the Office of Collection of Scavage, is due to the
Lord Mayor.
Measurage of Linen Cloth and Silk.
Item, There is yearly due, and paid to the Lord Mayor of the Profits of the
Officers of Measurage of Linen Cloth and Silk which is collected by virtue of
an Act of Common Council, made An. 4.5. P. M. 1. l. Item, By virtue of an Act
of Common Council, made Anno 4.5. Pet. M. and of Orders of Court, Anno 4.5.
Pet. M. there is to be paid to the Lord Mayor, toward the Feast kept at
Guild Hall. 1. l. Item, There is paid yearly out of the Chamber, in respect of
Waxherrings, and Scurgion, which was wont to be yielded to him by the Merchants
of the Still-yard. 5. l. 5. s. 8. d.
Wines.
Item, Paid by the Chamberlain yearly, in respect of 4 Tons of Wine, sometimes
allowed to the Lord Mayor, to cause his right of making six Freemen in his
year. 80. l.
Major Sheriffs.
Presenting Mr. Sheriff at the 18.16.8. d. Exchequer. 18.16.8. d. Packer
yearly, per annum. 100. marks.
Cole-Meators.
Cole. Meators yearly, 10, l. a piece. and since this rate appointed, these
places yield a greater sum. 7 eild, per annum, 80. l. a piece 3. per an 10. l.
a piece. 3. The two last of the ancientest, are to be disposed for the Profit
of the chamber. 7 eild, per annum, 80. l. a piece 3. per an 10. l. a piece. 3.
Gawning.
Gawning, besides the Rent to the Chamber. The Escheatership for London. The
Escheatership for Southwark. The profit of the office of the Cockets.
Reversion of five offices to be granted yearly at the request of the Lord
Mayor to have one of them which shall first fall, or of four; and the
Clarkship of the Lord Moyors Court, apart by it self, to be granted to one of
the Under-clarks, serving in the same Court, after he shall have served there
seven years.

The Clarkship of the Court of Conscience to be granted to the under-clark of
the Lord Mayors Court. 180. l.

FINIS.

