DIVI BRITANNICI: BEING A REMARK Upon the LIVES of all the KINGS Of this Isle,
FROM THE YEAR OF THE WORLD 2855. UNTO THE YEAR OF GRACE 1660. By Sir WINSTON
CHVRCHILL Knight.

Divus Habebitur Augustus Adiectis britanius Imperio Horat. Ode 5. Lib. 3
Engraved allegorical depiction of Father Thames and Britannia (attended by
three putti) sitting either side of a column topped with a crowned eagle; the
masts of ships are visible in the background.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, to be sold by Francis Eglesfield, at the
Sign of the Marygold in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXV.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Woodcut headpiece depicting a royal coat of arms within a decorative border.
TO HIS MOST Sacred Majesty CHARLES II. By the Grace of GOD KING OF Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
GREAT SIR,
IF the Reading of History in General, be not only a Recreation, but a
Restorative, and such, as by which some Princes have recovered the Health of
their Bodies, others the Distempers of their Mind, many have learned to settle,
and most to preserve the Weal of their Estates; meeting therein with diverse
Occurrences, which (as Demetrius Phalaris once hinted to the first Ptolomey of
Egypt) none of their Friends or Followers would, or perhaps durst mind them
of, then certainly the Records of those stupendous Works performed in almost
all Ages, by those DIIFORMES your Great Progenitors (many of whose Words were
taken as Oracles, their Actions as Examples, and their Examples as Laws) cannot
but be a Subject worthy your Royal Regard: and possibly not less pleasant then
useful, whilst in comparing Glory, it will appear how happy you are made by
their Virtues, how much happier by your own, in which theirs, drawn by various
Lines, seem to concenter, or rather are represented to Admiration; not unlike
those Pictures of some Illustrious Personages, which containing diverse Figures,
do one way show the Faces of sundry of their Ancestors, but another way that of
their own only, in the Circ^mference whereof all the former are very plainly
comprehended.

In this Confidence I have taken a Pattern of Duty from the Ancients, whose
Custom it was, Adi^^ Cesarem per Libellum, presuming the more upon your
Majesty's gracious Acceptance of the Work; in that it was designed to be a
Monument of my own Gratitude, as of your Greatness, and the only Instance of
Duty I could give at that which was indeed the worst of Times; being begun when
every Body thought that Monarchy had ended, and would have been buried in the
same Grave with your Martyred Father: when those Paricides who gloried in
having banished you like Tarquinius (for so they blasphemously called you,
though they could not add Superbus) resolved to Extirpate all Goodness as well
as all Good Men; when none of Us that had served that Blessed Prince, had any
other Weapon left us but our Pens to show the Justice of our Zeal, by that of
his Title; when for want of Ink black enough to Record the Impieties that
followed, we designed to write them in Blood: Writing and Fighting being alike
dangerous, and necessary. When lastly, we had no good Omen but what seemed the
worst of all, to see your Majesty like the good Emperor Mauritius heretofore
(who is said to have been carried up and down, in his Swadlingbands, by an
Empusa, or Familiar Spirit, but without taking any hurt) hurried from one
Country to another, in the Infancy of your Power, by a Devil in no measure so
Innocent as that, who though he was able to do you no more hurt, intended
questionless the same Violence to your Sacred Person, as was offered to that of
your Fathers, had not your Tutelar Angels, like those which are said to have
preserved Lot from the Sodomites, shut the Door of Government upon him, and
baffled his Ambition by the Revolt of those whom himself first taught to
Rebel: the blasting of whose Grandeur, as it was a happy Presage of the
Establishment of yours (whose Empire, after you lost your Country, was
preserved entire in the Hearts of your People) so it raised our Faith to the
Expectation of those happy days, which (blessed be God) we have since seen;
wherein your Majesty having by your Clemency charmed our Fears, as by your
Power commanded our Obedience, and by your Justice secured our Affections, we
now stand bound with a threefold Cord of Allegiance, that cannot easily be
broken, it being no less impossible for your Dominions to cease, then our
Desires to serve you; and since it is known you are as well Entitled to your
Fathers Virtues, as his Kingdoms, what have we more to wish, but that you may
prove as like the Second, as he was to the first Caesar, Et ut Nomine SECUNDUS,
sic Majestate AUGUSTUS: So prays,

Great SIR, Your Majesty's Most Loyal Subject, and most humble, faithful, and
obedient Servant, WINSTON CHVRCHILL.

Woodcut headpiece with an angel against a decorative pattern of grapes, vines
and flowers. Divi Britannici.
THERE have not been wanting in all times, some faithful Ministers of Fame, who
rescuing out of the jaws of Time, the memory of such renowned Persons, whose
Names have been less mortal then their Bodies (their Honor continuing like the
Perfume in their Ashes, uncorrupted in the midst of Corruption) have obliged
the latter, by the knowledge of the glory of former Ages, and given occasion of
a modern fiction, not inferior to any of the Ancients, viz. Vid. Vis. Verulam.
Instaur. Mag.
That there is a Medal hanging at the thread of every man's life, wherein his
Image is stamped; which Time (waiting on the fatal Sisters) catches up as soon
as the thread is cut, and carrying it a little way, throws it out of his bosom
into the River Lethe, where many little Birds flying about the Banks, catch it
up, and bearing it a while longer in their Beaks, either through weariness or
negligence, let it fall into the River again, where certain Swans swim up and
down, and as often as they find a Medal with a Name in it, carry it to the Temple
of Immortality, there to remain a Monument to succeeding Generations The
Mythologie whereof appears in that continued account we have had throughout all
Ages, from the very time of those (...) so much admired in the infancy of the
World, called in holy Writ Nephilim, i. e. From (...) nascor, and (...) Terra.
(...), Sons of the Earth, which our Vulgar Translation renders Giants, of
which rank I take the three famous Sons of the Patriarch Noah to be the most
renowned in their Generations, amongst those that were called the Genesis c. 6. v.
7.
Sons of God: but the principal in story amongst those that were styled the
Sons of Men, I take to be Tytan, Saturn, and Typhon, the last of whom in the
life of Apolonius is styled the terrible Giant.

2. These Ovid. Metamorph.
Giants we read had a design to take Heaven it self; a fiction that answers the
Story of Babel, and though they failed in the attempt, yet the Poets (who were
the Trumpeters in that War) gave them not long after the title of Gods, and
from thenceforth brought the Empire of the whole Creation to fall under the
Government of Vid. Laciant. de falsa Relig. lib. 1. cap. 11.
three only (by which number some take the Trinity to be darkly represented,
whereof Trismigistus and the Philosophers coeval with him might have some
imperfect Glimpse, by their acquaintance with the Books of Moses, of which
there were false Copies enough to fill all the World with Fables.) The first of
these Gods was Euhem. Messen.
Jupiter, who being the great Emperor of the East, from whence the day first
opening made it seem the lightest, as well as the highest part of the
Hemisphere; he was styled (...), the God of Heaven. Pluto who was the Second,
having the great Monarchy of the West, his Territories pointing toward the
fiery descent of the Sun and night, he was termed Diagoras.
(...), the terrible God, or the God of Hell. The last of the three was
Neptune, who having no certain Province assigned him, was allowed to be Lord of
the Seas, which (Figuratively speaking) was as much as Lord of the whole Earth.
Plutarch. in Themist.
It being from that time believed, that who so ruled the Seas must by
consequence have the dominion of the Land, whereupon Homer Iliad. 15. seu 0.
Homer salutes him by way of Sanction with the Attribute of (...), which we may
english, Sovereign of the Seas; And accordingly the first Writers of our
History have been willing the World should believe, that old Albion who first
gave name to this Isle, was himself Surnamed Mareoticus, for that he did by
right of his descent from Neptune (...) (as Is. Causah. Com. Polyb. in p. 209.
Polybius expresses it) i. e. claim the dominion of the Sea; but in Process of
time the number of these Cicer. de Not. Deor. Lucan lib. 7. deriveth the Custom
of making Gods.
Dii populares came to be numberless. Eusebius reckons out of Hesiod no less
then Thirty thousand, and St. Augustine brings the number to three hundred
thousand; so that it is probable that that ancient History of the Gods written
by Euhemerus Messenus was very voluminous, and we are little beholding to the
chief Priests of Jupiter that imbezel'd it, to the end (as Lact. de falls.
Relig. L. 1. Cap. 11.
Lactantius tells us) that the vanity of their Theology might not be detected.

3. In the next period called the Historical Age of the World, beginning with
the A. M. 3174.
Olympiads, there were several Tutelares, things something less then Gods, yet
esteemed to be more then men, whereof there were as many as there were Nations
in the World, each having its proper and peculiar Demagogues: The Germans
followed Mars, the Cimbrians Apollo, the Iberians were governed by Hercules,
the Romans had almost as many Tutelares as Families, but Vide Hollingshed
Descript. Brit. Fol. 22.
some are of opinion that every Nation had its Saturn, Jupiter and Hercules, in
the first place he that had the Kingdom in possession being styled Saturn, his
eldest Son and Heir apparent Jupiter, his Nephew or Heir presumptive, Hercules.

4. After these came in play those they called Conditores, that were the first
great Landmarks to the most ancient Chronologers, as Agis amongst the
Phrygians, Herodotus with the Bithinians, Endimion the Arcadians, Achilles
amongst the Epirots, Hector the Trojans, etc. Of every one of these the first
Historians give the like description, as the old Geographers of the unknown
parts of the World, fancying nothing but impossibilities in Nature. Of which
sort we find no less then six eminent amongst our own Historians, which we may
term our Divi Britannici, some of them famed from the most early beginnings of
any Records; whose ambition whilst they lived, though it were not to be bounded
within the limits of such a Portion of the Earth, as was sometimes called
another World; yet being dead, their memory is confined within the narrow
bounds of a homely distichon, as unpolished as his Genius that wrote it.

Dr. Vilvin Medic.
Celta BRUTUS 1, CAESAR 2 Romanus, Saxonus ENGIST 3
KNUTE 4 Danus, VICTOR 5 Normannus, Scotusque JACOBUS 6.
THE ANTIQUITY OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
5. From hence some begin the Epoche of our British Empire, making it little
short in point of Antiquity, of any of the four great Monarchies of the East
(perhaps the Assyrian only excepted, and that by the Chaldee not the Persian
computation) which need as much the support of Tradition to ascertain their
Age, Alterations, and Successions as ours; for as Solon was upbraided by an
Egyptian Priest with the ignorance of his own Countrymen, for that they were
but Babes (as he termed them) in the knowledge of the first state and original
of their Country; whereof they of Egypt (as he affirmed) could give a better
account then the Grecians themselves, however then esteemed the most learned
people of the World; So the very best as well as the Thucidides. Zenophon.
Herodian. Herodotus.
first of their Writers, were not ashamed to confess that they grop'd in the
dark, and took up many things (...), upon trust from others; neither have the
Roman Historians both of the Varro. Pliny. Diocles. Fabias Pictor.
first and Maximus. Silenu^. Tymaeus. Marcelinus.
second fyle been less modest in acknowledging that they did come saeculo
secutire, the truth of whose errors being so fatal to those that copied after
them, that they brought themselves under a mistrust. Several of our own Gildas.
Ninius. Bid. Gerald. Cambr.
Writers have chose rather to wrong the Age they lived in, by seeming to
detract from the Reverence due to Tradition, then to offer the least violence
to their own Credits, by ransacking the Treasury of Time, for that which would
not pass for current Truth, approved by the Touchstone of universal consent;
and hence it is that the whole Period betwixt Brute and Caesar passes rather for
a Monastic Revelation, then any authentic Revolution, having but a single
Jeoffry of Monmouth.
Voucher, who (like Alexander the Great when he looked into the Sanctum
Sanctorum) seems to have seen nothing but a Cloud, and was (say some) the more
confident in imposing what he pleased on the easy faith of that age he lived
in, because he found them delighted with the vanity of being so abused.

6. Take we then the Era of our Monarchy with as much modesty as truth, from
the better known Government of that Janus of our Isle Cunobeline, who first bid
adieu to the barbarity of that darker Age he lived in: a Prince that had the
most glorious Landmark to his Chronology that ever nature knew. The first
appearance of that Sun Chr. Jesus.
of Righteousness (born in the latter end of his Reign) whose Beams enlightened
Nicephorus lib. 2. c. 20.
his Territories, whilst most of the Kingdoms in the World were obscured with
universal darkness. Tertullian.
Tertullian that lived not long after, taking thence occasion to upbraid the
unbelieving Jews, by telling them that the Britains whom the Romans could not
conquer, were yet subject unto Christ; and to say truth, their obedience to the
Cross, was the chief cause of humbling themselves under the Fasces; Lucius
being the first King that stipulated for the enjoyment of his own Laws at the
price of a Tribute, which if it were some diminution of his Majesty, was made
up with advantage by his Successor Constantine the Great, whom therefore the
In M. Ant. In Arc. Cott.
Panegyrist not unfitly styles Divus Orbis (Britanniae) Liberator.

7. However in respect the Romans had some hold-fast here for near a hundred
years after Constantine's death, it may be by some perhaps thought more
reasonable to begin our Computation from Vortigern, who having neither
Competitor nor Compartner in the Government (there being not one Roman left in
the whole Isle to control or contend with him) was without doubt the first
that (as Tacitus speaks of Augustus) Nomine Principis sub Imperium accepit,
circa An. Chr. 440. At what time all the Neighbor Princes round about him were
under the common yoke of Servitude. The French themselves, who stand so much
upon the Antiquity of their Monarchy, falling short of this Account near four
hundred years; who being governed by Dukes till the year 420, had not in almost
thirty years after, any more of France in their Entire possession, then that
Canton which the Romans called Belgicum, which was the more inconsiderable, by
being parcel'd out into many Petty As were Burgundy, Lorrain, Guien, Aquitain,
Normandy, Champagne, F^ix, Orange, etc.
Royalties, that could not unite till the time of Charlemaine, who lived about
the latter end of our Heptarchy; after whose death, the whole fell into five
pieces again, four whereof ceased to be French, which gave so great disturbance
to all their Kings of the Second and third Race, that they were so far from
being Masters of that little that they had, that they were scarce Vide Du
Serres in Proem. Hist.
Lords of themselves; being forced to pawn the best part of their Inheritance
to enable them to keep the rest; none of their Successors being in condition to
redeem any considerable part, till Lewis the Eleventh, who happily having
recovered the Earldom of Provence and Duchy of Burgundy, made his boast that
he had brought his Kingdom Horse de Page. Much more distorted was the Empire of
the Spaniards, if so be we may allow them to have any thing like absolute
Sovereignty, till this very last Age, when Ferdinand the Second, worthily
reputed their first Monarch, happily united Castile and Aragon, with their
Appendixes; their Predecessors till then being so inconsiderable, that the
Kings of Scotland took place of them. In how obscure a condition all the
Northern Kings were (for by that common appellation those of Muscovy,
Sweadland, Denmark and Norway, past undistinguished till about the year 800) I
need not say: Since by being thought not worth the conquering, there was not
much more notice taken of them, than of the rest of the barbarous Nations their
Neighbors, who may be rather said to be ancient then honorable, the Germans
only excepted, of whom to speak slightly, were to defile our own nest, since by
them we derive our selves from Kings as great before the Flood as since.

The Precedence of the Kings of This Isle.
8. Now as the Monarchy of this Isle is (as Lanquet the Chronologer expresses
it) antienter then the Records of any time, so the Kings thereof having held
out a Succession of an hundred thirty nine Kings (where as France reckons but
sixty four, taking in First, Second, and third Race) have by the right of
Custom (as our particular Law expresses it) Du temps don't memory ne curt a le
contrary, and by the consent of all Nations (which is the Law universal to
Ratify and Regulate all respects) taken and been allowed the As appears by the
old Roman provincial.
second place; inter Super Illustres (for by that term Civilians make a great
distinction and difference in point of Majesty, even amongst Kings themselves)
A term which who so understands not, may see the difference plainly in that old
Formular printed at Strasburgh, Anno 1519, where there is set down a
Quadrupartite Division of Supreme Principality, the first place allowed by them
(as reasonably they ought) to their own Sovereign Kesar, i. e. the German
Emperor: the Second to Romischin Koning, i. e. the King of the Romans his
Successor, and their Countryman too. The third place they gave to the Vier
Gesalbt Koning, i. e. the four anointed Kings. In the last place came the Mein
Koning or Ordinary Kings. The difference betwixt these last and the Quatuor
Vncti (which were the Javin. Theatramundi.
Kings of France, England, Jerusalem, and Sicily) was this, that with the holy
oil they received the Title and Adjunct of Rhivallus ap Took in Carism. Sanct.
Cap. 6.
Sacred, being therefore anointed In Capite, to signify their glory, above the
other Princes of the same Rank. In Pectore to denote their Sanctity; In
Brachiis to Emblematize their power: this appears by the Styles of the Literae
Formatae, the ancient forms of Addresses, and the Frontispicians to the ancient
Councels, where we find the various Styles of Sanctio, Sacrietas, and
Divinitas, applied to these; to those were given only that of Dominatio, and
sometimes Celsitudo Regia; conformable to this were all the phrases of the
ancient Laws of this Realm, which Style the Crown Lands Cook sur Littleton
Sect. 4.
Sacra Patrimonia, the Prerogative Royal Sacra Sacrorum, the Laws themselves
(in respect they take their life and being from the King) Fortescu. Leg. Aug.
fol. 8.
Sanctae Sanctiones. The Kings presence was held so Sacred, that if a Plowd.
Com. 322.
Villain heretofore cast himself ad Sacra Vestigia (as they phras'd it) his
Lord could no more seize him than if he had been in the Sanctuary, before the
Altar; it being upon the same Ground as great a crime to strike in the Court as
in the Church: and as if this were not enough, they ascribe unto the King, as
unto God, Infallibility, Edw. 4. 25. and 24.
Rex non potest errare, Immortality, Crompton Jurisaic. fol. 134. Plowd. 177.
B. 1 Ed. 5.
Rex non potest mori (for in all Pleadings they never mention the death of the
King, but call it the Demise) Justice in perfection, Rex non quam injuriam
fecit; Omnipresence, in so much that he cannot be nonsuited in any of his
Courts, because he is supposed to be always present; and for the same reason
all Persons are sorbid to be covered in his Chambers of presence, though he be
not there. Lastly, they give to him, as to God, the Issues of Life and death,
Jus Vitae and Necis.

The Kings of this Isle, the First Anointed Christian Kings.
9. And as the Quatuor Vncti were before all other Kings, so I take it that the
Kings of this Isle ought to have the preference amongst them, for that they
were the first Rhivallus ap Took in charism. Sanct. Cap. 6.
anointed Christian Kings, as appears by the undeniable Testimony of the
learned Gildas in his Book De excidio Britanniae, written above a thousand
years since, which I take to be beyond any Remain of the like Extant in any
Records of the Eastern or Western Empire. De Comitiis Imperat. Cap. 2.
Onuphrius would have that Ceremony to begin in the East, with the Emperor
Justin, circ. Ann. 525, but most of the learned Writers upon this Subject
differ in opinion from him; supposing he was more beholding for that honor to
the gratitude of the Orthodox Clergy (whom he always favored) then to any real
truth or Certainty in the thing. The vulgar Historians will have it to begin in
the West, with the Merovignian line, amongst the French; but neither does Du
Hailan, Tilly, nor those of the best Authority agree to it: Regino and Sifridus
go no higher then King Pepin, who they say was the first anointed by Boniface
Arch Bishop of Ments, Ann. 750, which mistake may possibly be better
understood, by distinguishing betwixt the Ceremonies of the Regal, and those of
the Ecclesiastical Unction, the last being no more but a sacred complement used
in those times, as a preparatory designation to an expected Regality; whereof
our own History is not without some Instances, in which we find that Egbert Son
to the great Mercian Offa, was anointed in the life time of his Father, Ann.
780, which was twenty years before Charlemaine, who is supposed by most Writers
to have been the very first King of the Francks anointed, by Leo the Fourth
Ann. 800. The like we read of Elfred the Son of Egbert, anointed by the same
Pope, near about the same time, in the presence of his Father; but taking it to
be as early in use with them, as they themselves would have it thought to be,
yet falls it short of the times of our King Arthur, affirmed by J. of Monmouth
to be a King anointed, Cirea Ann. 505.
and perhaps with sufficient Reputation, if his be considered with the
concurrent Testimonies of Bid and Malmesbury, who prove the frequent use of it
here not long after: as likewise that of St. Oswald the most Christian King,
Ann. 635, that was two hundred years before Pepin. As for the Kings of
Jerusalem and Scicily, however reckoned in the Rank of the four, yet were they
not in being for near five hundred years after; the honor they had therein,
being by composition with the Pope, to whom they humbled themselves for this
advancement, so far, as to declare themselves content to hold their Kingdoms of
the Church: whereas both Ours and those of France, claimed only by divine
Right, confirmed (if the Traditions of that age might be credited) by
manifestations from Heaven: the Oil that consecrated those of France, being
brought down by a Dove in a Golden Viol, and continued many hundred years after
unwasted at Rheims; that of ours being said to have been confirmed to be
celestial by three distinct manifestations, in three different Ages, which
certainly were as much abused themselves, as they abused us, if they conspired
to transmit an untruth to us no more to their own advantage. The first in the
time of St. Oswald before mentioned, when it is said that there descended a
great Quantity of holy Oil like Dew from Heaven, and fell upon him, by the
sight and scent whereof (for it perfumed the place) diverse People were
converted to the faith, as Bede Hist. Aug. lib. 3. c. 3.
Bid affirms. The Second was at the time when the English Line were cut off by
the Danes, beyond any hope of Recovery, the Danes being in quiet Possession of
the Throne, when St. Peter appearing to the holy Monk Brightwold, assured him
that England was God's Kingdom, for whose Successors he would take due care;
and at the same time gave him a little Cruise of Oil, telling him further, that
whomsoever he anointed therewith, that man should be King, and have power to
heal the People by his Touch; which was accordingly performed in the Person of
Edward the Confessor, on whom the Monk privately bestowed the holy Unction;
with which he received likewise the gift of healing that disease called by
Physicians Now called the Kings Evil, See Polidor. Virgil. Hist. 8.
Scrofula, continued to our Kings in a wonderful manner to this very day,
insomuch that it is notoriously known how a Maid at Deptford, born blind by
reason of that distemper, was cured by no other visible means but the Touch of
a Cloth dipped in the blood of the late King Charles the Martyr. The Third
Manifestation was in the time of Henry the Second, who having banished St.
Thomas Beckett, the Virgin Mary appeared to the holy Exile, as the Clergy of
that age styled him, and delivering into his hands another Golden Viol, in form
of an Eagle, assured him that all the Kings who were anointed with the oil
therein, should be Patronizers of the Church, and as long as they kept that
Sacred Viol, this Blessing should rest upon them, that if any of their
posterity should happen to be beaten out of their Kingdom, they should be
peaceably restored again; Which Oil Walsingham (an Author of unquestionable
Credit) affirms to have remained unwasted, to the time of Henry the Fourth, who
(says he) was anointed therewith; but amongst other the dismal mischiefs
attending the fatal War of the two houses of York and Lancaster, this was not
the least, that it gave opportunity to some Sacrilegious hand unknown, to
convey this Viol away, who stealing the Gold, could not yet rob us of the
Blessing, which has been miraculously made good to us, in the happy
Restoration of our present Sovereign Charles the Second, of whom we may say,
with respect to this providence as the Poet in another case, Horace.
Hic posuisse gaudet.

In him likewise we find that other blessing confirmed, in the gift of healing
that noisome disease before mentioned, which by long continuance of time, having
become Hereditary, has now got the known name of the King's Evil, so called
because it is hardly to be cured by any other human means, but by the Kings
touch only, whereof we have every day so many and great Examples, that I shall
forbear to say what might perhaps be pertinent enough to this Subject.

The Kings of this Isle the First Christian Kings in the World.
10. But besides that of their Chrism, there has been a further Circumstance of
personal Excellence peculiar to the Kings of our Nation, above most (not to say
all) other Princes, in respect to the Sanctity of their blood, as deriving
their Bale. lib. 2. Gildas. lib. de victor. Au. Ambrosii.
descent from the first Christian Marc. Sabel. in Anead. 7. lib. 5. Bale lib. 2.
King, and the first Christian Emperor of the World, and so allowed by the two
great Councels of The first Anno 1335. the last, Anno 1414.
Bazil and Constance; for however the King of France would be thought Fills
aisne de l'Eglise, and accordingly styles himself Christianissimus, i. e. (as
they themselves interpret it) Primus Christianus; yet it is notorious that our
first Christian King Lucius was three hundred and five years before their first
Christian King Clouis; and Constantine our first Christian Emperor, no less
than 466 years before Charles their first Christian Emperor. And it is as
evident that the very Title it self of Bid vit. Oswaldi.
Christianissimus, take it in what sense they please, was in use with us above
two hundred years, before any of their Kings took upon them to usurp it; add to
this, that the Kings of England deduce a Bed. Hist. Eccles. Angl.
Lineal descent from the Loins of Christian Princes, for the space of near one
thousand and three hundred years together, without any Interruption, or
breaking of the Line, which no other Princes of the World besides can pretend
to, or scarcely have been Christians half that time (those of France only
excepted) but then it is further noted, that there have been more Princes out of
our Royal Stock, Priests, Confessors, Martyrs, and Saints, than of any
Vincentius.
other Royal Stock in the World, those of France not excepted.

11. The Excellence of the British Empire upon a Threefold Account.
The next thing considerable after the natural Dignity inherent in the Person
of our Kings, is that honor which may be said to be peculiar to them,
resulting from the Topical Excellence of their Dominion, which as it is now
branched into three Kingdoms, so it may be said to have ever been thrice
famous, 1. For being disjoined from all the World. 2. For having no need of the
rest of the World. 3. For being it self esteemed another World.


Though there seems to be no great matter in that remark of the Poet, when
speaking of us, 1. In being disjoined from all the World.
he says that we were Toto divisos Orb Britannos, but what may be as
applicable to any other Islanders in the World, as to Us; yet there is an
Emphasis in the Conceit, that shows he intended it for an Elogy, as did our
Countryman Mr. Waller by that queint Paraphrase of his.

It Is not so hard for greedy Foes to spoil
Another Nation, as to touch our Soil.
Which agrees with that we find in old De excidio Jerus. l. 2. c. 9.
Hegesippus, who personating King Agrippa speaking to Claudius of the Britains,
concludes much like Florus speaking of the Ligurians, Major erat Labor invenire
quam vincere; as if the difficulty of conquering lay in the difficulty of
finding them out: hereupon the Isle was called by the Ancients In Catalect.
Virgil. de Sabino.
Insula Ceruli, the Isle of the Sea. So Lucan speaking of Cesar's conquest
here, says Lucan. Pharsal. 3.
Vincula dedit Oceano. Now the reason why they called this the Isle of the Sea,
more than any other Island was, because that Britain (says the Paniger.
Maximian. Dict. Si mihi.
Panegyrist) did not seem as the rest, to be comprehended by the Sea, but to
comprehend the Sea it self; the Ancients taking this Isle to be the very utmost
bounds of Nature, beyond which there was no day or light: which when Agricola
had detected, by compassing it with his Fleet, Tacitus says of him, that he
did Aperire maris secretum, enter into the very Closet of the Sea; and hence it
was that Emeritae apud Gionhernon. p. 49.
Augustus claiming the Dominion of this Isle, in right of his Uncle Julius,
whose Heir he was, as Claudius after him in his own right, looked upon
themselves to be by a Parasiopesis, Lords of the Sea; the first giving
thereupon for his Symbol a Dolphin, the last a Ship; and from them our Kings
have ever since, with no less reason, but more right, prescribed to be (...),
being in this more properly like Gods (as Holy Writ styles Kings in General)
than any other Princes whatever: For that they do Incubare Aquis (as a T^. Dun.
Sermon. 43. on the Anniverse of the 5th. of November. alluding to the 1. Genesis 2.
Divine of great Eloquence has expressed it) Move upon the Waters with such
mighty Fleets as seem to give Laws to that Indomitable Element it self.

2. In having no need of the rest of the World.
12. The next Excellency ascribed to this Isle was, that it had no need of any
other part of the World; Quae toto vix eget Orb: The reason whereof is plain
from what has been said before, Nam qui mare teneat cum necesse est rerum
potiri, says Cicero: He that possesses the Sea must necessarily command all
things, but to recite the benefits of the Sea, were to enter upon a Subject as
profound as that is, and give occasion to our next Neighbor the Dutch (who can
give a better Account thereof than our selves) to upbraid our glory, with the
shame of having so long suffered their depredations, who with indefatigable
Patience penetrate the Womb of that dark Element, to seek for Treasure, which
we either know not how to find, or how to value. Pass we then to the
consideration of the Land only, on which Charles the Great (who was wont to
call it the Storehouse of the Western World) made this observation, that it
not only stands in no need of any other part of the World, but every Nation
else stood in need of it: Cujus totus indiget Orbis open, Nature and Providence
having placed us so advantageously, as to supply the whole World out of our
Superfluities, being stored with all sorts of Grain (says Zosimus) with all
sorts of Cattle (says Tacitus) with all kind of Timber (says Caesar) with all
kind of Minerals (as Strabo) with all kind of Jems, but especially Pearl (as
Suetonius testifies) indeed with so much variety of all things necessary,
profitable and delightful; that without vanity we may conclude as Ad An. 1246.
Matthew Paris does, that England is the Lady, Queen, and Mistress of the Sea.

13. All Nations have been ambitious to make themselves Masters of this Isle.
A Mistress that has had many Suitors of almost all Nations, to whom the
ROMANS, that exacted Homage from all others, willingly paid Homage themselves;
there having been no less than twenty of their Emperors to Court her here in
Person, the Canine appetite of whose insatiable Ambition (having before
devoured all other honors) was not to be Satisfied with any other Title, but
that of Britannicus.

Divus habebitur Augustus,
Horace Od. v. lib. 3.
Adjectis Britannis Imperio.
Less ambitious but not less amorous, was the Sanguine SAXON, who bewitched with
the beauty and fertility of the place, quit the certain profits of his old
Inheritance at home, for the uncertain hopes of new here, purchasing with the
loss of their Lives, a Title as mutable and frail as their fortune. The DANES
their Successors esteemed the Conquest of this Country worth the unpeopling
their own; Invading the Invaders with such incredible numbers, as left their
Wives and Children without defense there, whilst they strove to Captivate those
here; surprising the Saxons, as the Ichneumon does the Crocodile, which finding
his Jaws open to devour his prey, leaps into his mouth, and makes a passage
through his Bowels. The NORMANS and they, like little Torrents, hastening to
loose themselves in the fathomless depth of our British Ocean, which changed
their Natures as well as their Names, and gave them another Spirit, fit for
another World; for so was this Island esteemed, and accordingly is to be
considered in the next place, as the third and last Instance of its glory.

3. In being it self esteemed another World.
14. It was a great advance of Cesar's name, and made no small noise through all
the Streets of Rome, when they heard he had past the danger of that dark Ocean,
Qui geminos interluit Orbs:

When he had shot that dismal Gulf, which ran betwixt two Worlds, under the
Arch of Heaven; and as it was scarce credible that he could e're return, so
upon his Return, they looked on him as come from the Gods, and with a suitable
adoration he was saluted by the Senate, with that Title of Divus, never given
to any before, but whom they thought Immortal; but this glory of his like that
of Lightning frighted them, at the same time it shined in their faces, to that
degree, that the horror continued in their apprehensions to the very time of
Caligula, who designing to transport his Army out of Holland into Britain, was
on the sudden surpised with such a Pannick Fear, at the Sight of our dark Sea,
that as one deprived of all sense of honor, he contented himself with having
only looked toward us, and returned Laden with no other Spoils than a few
Cockle shells gathered in the Belgic Shore. The like apprehensions had those
Legions in Gallia, whom Claudius sent to attend him in his expedition here,
mutining against their Officers, and crying out with one voice, that they would
not make War in any other World, but their own. This conceit of Britains being
another World, held to the middle times, as appears by that Title given to our
Countryman Constantine, styled by the Panegyrist, Divus Vrbis and Orbis, etc,
(meaning Britain) and accordingly it is reported that when the British Soldiers
saluted him Emperor at York, they presented him with a Tufa, or Golden Ball,
as a Symbol of his Sovereignty over the World of Britains; upon which (being
the first of that kind) he after his Conversion to Christianity, placing a
Cross; it is since become the usual Ensign of Majesty, and usurpt (I will not
say how improperly) by all other Christian Princes, being reck'ned amongst the
Regalia, as the Crown and Scepter: neither has this conceit of Britains being
another World been so antiquated, but that Urban the Second had respect
thereto, when in the Council of Cleremont, he caused the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury to sit at his Feet, and Decreed that he should take the same place
in all future Councils, Tanquam alterius Orbis Pontificem. The Reason of this
Conceit, came not from the distance of the place, so much as the greatness of
the Isle, the greatest, says Tacit. vit. Augusti.
Tacitus, ever known to the Romans, the greatest, says Java, Borneo, Sumatra,
and Madagascar being not discovered at that time.
Dionisius, ever known to the World; and truly if we make our Computation (as
the Ancients did theirs) from the Limits of the Sea, which (as I noted before)
they thought to be comprehended by Britain or within it; the bounds thereof
will appear to be boundless, extending to those far distant Regions (now become
a part of us and growing apace to be the bigger part) in the Sunburned America.

Grotius, Silvar. lib. 2.
Finis hic est, qui fine caret. Quae meta Britannis,
Littora sunt aliis, Regnique accessio tanta est,
Quod ventis velisque patet.
15. But I am loath to lessen our greatness by Extending it, The Geometrical
Greatness of the British Empire.
since the Isle it self without Consideration of any of its Appendixes,
Contains Ground enough within the Integral Limits of its Terra firma, to keep
up the Repute of being styled, as we find it in Aristides by way of Excellence,
(...), the great Island; for by the narrowest Computation of our modern
Geographers, it is not less than Dion. in Ser. reckon^ h 891 miles.
eight hundred Italian miles in length, and above four hundred broad, but
taking in the By the Greek Writers called the Hesperides.
Sorlings, at the South west Cape of the Land, and the Isle of Schetland
(generally supposed to be the ancient Thule (that was always reckoned a part of
Britain) at the utmost North cast point with the lesser Islands thereunto
belonging, it is little less than 1500 miles long, the breadth since the
addition of Ireland, bearing a due proportion by the present scale; and
therefore it is no marvel that upon the Division of Christianity into Nations,
at the two general Councels of Constance and Pisa (the first the very greatest
that ever was, the last not the least) England gave voice as one fourth part of
Christendom, the other three being France, Germany, and Italy, which being
Iberia Major contained Spain as Iberia Minor.

16. The Land for^e of this Isle.
Others there are that take the measures of our greatness from the number of
those Forces this little spot of Earth has maintained in all ages; the
Reputation of whose Victories both at home and abroad, has added so much more
to the Opinion, Strangers have had of our Grandeur, by how much they find their
own Historians more faithful Witnesses to our Glory, than any born amongst our
selves. How far famed were those 6000 Tribelius Max. carried hence to
strengthen Otho's Faction in Germany, neither was there a less value put upon
those 8000 transported away by Honorius Flac. to make good Vitellius's party.
More famous but less fortunate were those 10000 (for they were no less) that
were tempted by Claud. Albinus, to partake of his Fate in France. Numberless
were the numbers on which Constantine founded his greatness, as appears by that
Little Britaigne in France, called before Armorica.
Province (whereof a remnant only peopled) that thereupon took its name from
us. Constantine the Second carried away no less than 30000, to maintain the
hope he had conceived of being Lord of the greater as well as the lesser World.
These were extraordinary Levies, yet perhaps not exceeding those ordinary
Forces, kept in standing pay to supply every Quarter of the Empire; there being
scarce any Governor of a Province, that had not a Guard of Britains to attend
about his Person, such was the Reputation of their faith and courage. At
Constantinople the Greek Emperors had a Guard of 2000 (as Bodinus computes
them) which they called the Barangi. The Prefect of Rome had for his standing
Guard two Bands of them more, called Invicti Juniores Britannitiani. The
Western Emperors had their Praesentales or Lifeguard besides, styled
Exculcatores Jun. Britan. 500. The Prefect of Gaul had a Horse Guard called
Britones Magistri Equitum Galliarum. The Pro-Consul of Spain had a Foot-Guard
of about 500 called Invicti Juniores Britones; besides these we find in Germany
the Cohort called Ala Britannica Milliaria, containing about 1105 footmen, and
132 Horsemen: In Illyricum, another called Britones Seniores; in Egypt Ala
IIII. Britonum, nay they were dispersed to the furthest parts of the East: for
we find in Armenia Cohors XXVI. Britonum, besides Cohors III. and Cohors VII
Britannitiani sub Magistro Peditum in Panonia, Cohors Prima, Aelia Britonum;
and several others mentioned in the Notitia Provinciarum, to the number of not
so little as fifty or sixty thousand: all these were abroad, whilst at home
there were no less than 190000 Foot, and 17000 Horse, as appears by
Constantine's Establishment, set forth by Panciroll.

17. Less known was the Militia of the Saxons than that of the Romans, in
respect they had no Invitations to any Action abroad, excepting only that
single Undertaking in Barbary, Ann. 905, when they unpeopled the City and
Country round about Arzilla, contenting themselves with that Insulary glory
they had gotten here, by conquering a Nation who had so long disputed with the
most powerful People in the World. So that the best measures of their strength
is to be taken from that of their Weakness, having lost (if their own
Historians tell Truth) no less than 200000 men before they had half finished
that great work; yet some thought it strange they lost no more, considering how
those Blood-thirsty Heptarchs their Masters accounted the Lives of their
Subjects the least part of the Price of their Victories, being so prodigal of
blood, that they fought no less than Malmesbury, Vit. Elfredi.
nine set Battles in one year, wasting their strength to that degree, that by
subduing they became subdued. The Danes falling in upon them before they could
recover their spirits, oppressed them with greater Numbers than they the
Britains before, vying with them both in fame and force, till there were as
many engaged on either side, as would have reduced far greater Territories than
those they came from, had not divine Justice made use of them as a Scourge to
each other.

18. What the number and strength of the Norman was, may be nearly computed by
what he did abroad in that holy, and what he suffered at home in that unholy
War commonly called the Barons War: The first for Religion, the last for
Liberty. The one having consumed as many lives as there were stones in the
Walls of the holy City they fought for; The other not so fatal, because poised
with a more equal force, but altogether as formidable; there being at least
50000 always ready to do Execution on either side. So stood the Case for the
first two hundred and fifty years after the Entrance of W^lliam the First. The
Computation of the middle times must be taken from the Preparations of Edward
the Third when he took two Jo. King of France. Dav^^ King ^f Scots.
Kings, and mist but little of taking two Kingdoms at once, engaging himself in
a double edged War, that ended not with his own life nor theirs; wherein though
it is supposed he exhausted as much of the Force as the Treasure of the
Kingdom, yet he did not so weaken his Successor Richard the Second; but that
he was able to take the Field with 300000 Foot, and 100000 Horse, attending him
(as Walls ngham Vit. R. 2.
Walsingham tells us) whose Testimony has the more Credit, by how much it is
Seconded by Emil. vit. Car. 6.
Emilius the French Historian, who had no cause to magnify the number of the
English at that time. Later Computations may be taken from the Preparations of
Henry the Eight at Bullen, and of Q. Elizabeth at Tilbury, at either not so
little as 185000 foot, and 40000 Porse in readiness for present Service; for I
am willing to pass by the consideration of those vast numbers, which supported
that unnatural Quarrel betwixt the two fatal Houses of York and Lancaster, and
much rather to forget the late War betwixt K. Charles the First, and the
Republican faction; wherein it is believed there were no less than 300000 Foot,
and near 100000 Horse actually engaged in Arms; it is almost incredible to tell
what numbers appeared in Arms at the Reception of King James, when he made his
first Entry into England: but what we saw with our own eyes at the happy
Restoration of our Sovereign that now is must not be concealed, whose
Lifeguard at his Landing, were no less than 50000 of the best Horse in the
World: not reckoning those appointed for the defense of the Realm. However all
the Computations of our Land Forces fall so short of our Maritime, that as
there is no Comparison to be made betwixt them, so we may say that we have
rendered our selves more formidable at Sea by our Canon Law, than any other
People by any Law of Arms whatsoever.

The Kings of this Isle are absolute Princes.
19. The last instance of the super-excellent Majesty of the Kings of this Isle
is, that they hold of Bracton lib. 5. Tr. 3.
God to themselves and by their Sword, not Ex foedore contracto, as anciently
the Kings of France, nor Ex formula fiduciae, as yet the Kings of Spain;
neither yet Jure restricto, as the Kings of Hungary, and the Kings of the
Romans; much less Ad placitum populi, as those of Poland; Nec Jure plebiscit^,
as anciently those of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, who till of late, were as
precarious, as those of Poland. But as those who succeeding the Cesars (to whom
this of All other Provinces were Praesidial, and subjected to the Senate.
Britain whilst it was under the Romans was particularly appropriated) became
by their voluntary resignation of the Government, repossest of the primier
right of their Ancestors, Vt pro derelicto (as the Amifaeus de jure Majest.
lib. 1. c. 2.
Civilians express it) or by way of Remitter (as our own Lawyers term it) being
absolutely independent and supreme, as any of the Roman Emperors their
Predecessors were; Qui tot and tantas obtinuere Libertates quot Imperatores
Imperia (says M. Paris) and therefore when the Emperor Sigismund came over
hither, to mediate a peace betwixt our Henry the Fifth, and the French King; he
was stopped before he Landed by the Duke of Gloucester, and diverse of the chief
Nobility, who coming into the very water with their Swords drawn in their
hands, stayed his Boat, and suffered him not to Land, till he had declared, Nil
se contra Regis Superioritatem praetexere. So likewise when Sir Hen. Wotton
State Observations 208.
Baldwin the Greek Emperor came hither, to pray aid of Henry the Third (being
beaten out of his Country) the King sent him a Check instead of a Complement,
for Landing in his Territories before he had leave given him so to do; being
Jealous least it might be thought that he had pretended to something as an
Emperor that might be Interpreted Superiority, he himself being Monarcha in
Regno suo, as we find in the old Lawyer Baldus, and descended from Ancestors,
that had the Imperial Style of See the Charter of the Abbey of Malmesbury
MCCCCLXXIV.
Rex Regum, not only in respect of their having Beauchampe King of the Isle of
Wight. The Kings of Man. etc.
Kings to their Subjects, but in regard to their enjoyment of all those
fundamental rights, which make up the whole Systeme of Supreme power, by the
Feudists indifferently termed Jura Regalia, and Jura summi Imperii, by the
Civilians Sacra Sacrorum, by our own Lawyers sometimes Prerotiva, sometimes As
being so Inseparable that they cannot be dissolved by any humane power.
Inseparabilia, which that they may be the better understood, I shall consider
them as I find them Clapmarus lib. 1. de Arean. Imper. Cap 11.
divided into ten parts, reducing those ten (like the Decalogue of old) into
two General Heads of Power.

i. e. Leges Ponere. Legibus Solutum esse.


20. For the First, The Kings of this Isle have ever been the Lawgivers.
it is to be understood that however the Kings of this Isle have been pleased
for the better and more equal Administration of Justice, to Indulge the three
Estates of the Kingdom (who were heretofore called their Great Council, but
since the Parliament) with the privilege of making, enlarging, diminishing,
abrogating, repealing and reviving all Laws, and Ordinances, relating to all
Matters, whether Ecclesiastic, Capital, Criminal, Common, Civil, or Maritime:
yet it must be understood after all, that neither houses of Parliament, now
both joined together, have in themselves no power as of themselves, to do any
thing without him (much less That is not only to be understood to his Dis
nherison but the Diminution of his Prerogative. Cook 4. Part. Institut. fol. 25.
against him) no more than the body can make use of any of its members longer
than it is actuated by the Soul. For from him they have their life and motion,
Vt Caput principium and finis (as the Lawyers express) it is he that gives them
their Inchoation, Continuation, and Dissolution. It Is true that each Law
receives its form Ex traduce Parliamenti, that is (as our vulgar Statutes
express it) by advice and consent of the Lords and Commons, who sit with the
resemblance of so many Kings, but they find but the grosser substance, or the
material part, it is the Royal Assent that Quickens and puts the Soul, Spirit,
and Power into it. A Roy's avisero, only much more A Roy ne veult, makes all
their Conceptions abortive, when he pleases; So that they can be but the
Lawmakers, but the King only is the Lawgiver; and therefore Styled in the old
Books, The Life of the Law, and The Fountain of Justice.

The Kings of this Isle how far above Law.
21. This prerogative (I speak it out of a great States-mans observation)
consists in this, not that Kings need not observe their Laws (for that were a
Brutal Tyranny insupportable in the most barbarous States) but that they may
change them. And therefore St. Augustine made that a reason why the Emperors
of old were not Subject to their own Laws, because (says he) they might make
new when they pleased. Now if the King of England should exceed the bounds of
his own Laws, which if it were lawful were no way convenient for him (it being
that becomes the wisdom of Princes (says Cicero) to consider not how much
they may do, but what they ought to do) in which sense Senec. de cons. lat.
cap. 6.
Seneca is to be understood when he said that diverse things were not lawful for
the Emperor himself who might do all which he pleased; It might be rather said
in that Case (as Grotius excellently distinguishes) that he did not rightly,
then that he went beyond his right: The Restraint by his Coronation Oath being
like a Silken Coard, that may be stretched without breaking upon any
extraordinary force and violence offered, as we see it happens upon the
discovery and for the prevention of any public mischief or Inconvenience:
Where our Kings have, De proprio Jure, suspended the Laws for a time; that is,
until by advice with his Parliaments he might formally alter, or totally repeal
them. Add to this, that every Custom (which is a Branch of the Common Law) is
void, Si exultat se in Prerogativam Regis, which I suppose is to be understood
of the lesser Concerns of his Prerogative in points of Pre-eminence relating to
civil Actions or Privileges personal; for as the Learned in the Laws tell us,
no Sale of his Goods alters his Propriety, no Occupancy bars his Entry into his
own Lands, no Laches in point of time prejudices him as it does private men:
Again in doubtful cases (say they) Semper presumitur pro Rege, No Estopel binds
him, nor Judgments final in Writs of Right. These and many more such as these
there are which we may call Minima Inseparabilia, but in all cases where his
Prerogative in point of Government is prejudiced, there our great Gownmen hold
that he cannot be restrained, no not by an Act of Parliament; nor is he to be
restrained as I take it in lesser cases, unless named. And to this it was
questionless that the Sage Bracton and the Learned Plowden had respect when the
one said the King was above Law, to'ther that he was not bound by Law, and if
it were not so, there would be no power left in him to grant any special
Charter; that in its proper nature is no other than a Dispensation with the
positive Laws, which can be understood to be binding to the King no otherwise
than according to the natural Rule of Order, as they are essential to the
support of his Government. In which Case Kings like good Husbands may be said
to be Subjectis suis Subjectos, moved by a Principle of Affection that
voluntarily limits it self according to Rules of Prudence, which upon all
Emergencies of State on extraordinary occasions are wrested or broken as he
himself only sees cause, there being a necessity upon which the common safety
depends, that at such times Princes should be absolute, and that no less
perhaps for the Subjects sake than their own: Plin. vit. Trajan.
Nil majus a te Subjecti animo factum est, quam quod Imperari Coepisti; and the
learned Grotius gives the genuine reason for it in his Treatise of Sovereignty;
because (says he) as no man can be limited but by something superior to him;
Seven Imperial Rights Inherent in the Kings of this Isle.
so no man can be superior to himself. But in respect that I find Seven
general Topics of absolute Sovereignty agreed by all the Feudists; We will
examine the Prerogative of the Kings of this Isle with relation to each of
those Particulars apart.

1. Census nummorum.
22. The first I take to be that unlimited power of giving the form, weight,
allay, and value to all Moneys, which as it has been always and in all Nations
esteemed a Prerogative purely Imperial, so it has been as ancient in use here
as the knowledge of Money it self, and so uncontrolled that we find some of our
Kings (I speak it not to their honor, since the abasement of Coin is certainly
an abasing of Majesty, as betraying a necessity that shows a defect in
Government) have imposed upon us Copper, others Tinn, and Hen. 8. at Bulloigne.
One once Leather Money, making it as current as Silver or Gold; neither have
any of our Kings at any time Communicated this Privilege to any of their
Subjects (though some of them have had the Title of King conferred on them) but
have kept that power in their own hands, as one of the great Inseparabilia, not
to be parted with: Whereas the Kings of France, who have been more pressed and
less provident in that point, have thereby given occasion to those Allodiarii,
that enjoyed that privilege, to esteem themselves (as indeed they were)
absolute and free Princes, stiling themselves accordingly, Dei gratia, to
publish they owned no Subjection.

2. Jus Vectigalium.
23. The Second Prerogative styled Jus Vectigalium (which I take to be that
Seld. Dissertat. ad Flet. 478. 479.
Jus Caesarium first brought in by the great Lawyer Papinian Temp. Imp. Severi)
is diversely understood; sometimes comprehending all those Duties which the
ancient Feudists place under the heads of Angariae and Parangariae; by some
extended to Plaustrorum and Navium praestationes; by others to those Jurafisci,
under which our Civilians comprehend almost all kind of Impositions and
Services Pecuniary and Personal. Under all or either of these considerations,
we find the Kings of this Isle, as well entitled as any other Princes of the
World, both De facto, and de Jure; whereof there needs no other proof in the
time of our primitive Kings the Britains, than the Impresses on their Coins,
stamping sometimes an Ox or Sheep, sometimes a Blade of Corn, other while
Instruments of Husbandry, or perhaps an Armed man, or Chariot and Horses,
denoting (as the skilful in that Science tell us) the several Tributes and
services to which those Moneys had respect, or for which they were paid. Then
passing by the Romans, we find amongst the Saxons (the next to them) this
Prerogative exercised by several Names, as first by that of Fitzherbert Not.
Brev. 226.
Thol or Tol, a Tax pro liberate vendendi and emendi. Secondly by the names of
Bordland, Drofland, Burland, and Drinkland: Names given according to the
several Natures of the Duty they related to, being generally called in
Cromton's Translation of Canutus's Laws, Firmae adjutorium, that held all the
Danes time, and was by the Normans comprehended under the common name of Mat.
Paris Edw. 1. Cap 35. Ed. 3. H. 4. H. 5.
Curialitas: The Common Lawyers have taken it in several Senses; when it
respects Releif for War, they term it 25 Ed. 1.
Aides; when it is related to a civil supply, they style it Loane-money; which
however latter times have familiarly called Benevolence, yet we find by the
Stat. of the twentieth of Hen. the Sixth, The King demanded it in right of his
Sovereignty, and by Law, and accordingly appointed Commissioners for gathering
it, who extorted it with Penalties: so in the seventeenth of the said King, the
same was demanded upon pain of Imprisonment and Confiscation of Goods. It Is
true that Statute of H. 6. seems to be branded by a Repeal in the third of
Queen Mary: But that Law that Repealed it being afterward it self Repealed,
the King seems now in Remitter to his ancient Right, a Right so ancient, that
it suffers more perhaps by its Antiquity, than any unreasonableness in the
thing.

24. Touching that called Jus Comitiorum, I need say nothing; 3. Jus Comitiorum.
it being so well known that no man can be an officer of this Realm, that holds
not of the King, whether it be Jure Magistratus, or per Deputationem; either as
being Commissioned by a Writ, or by Patent from him, Et sine Warranto
Jurisdictionem non habent, says Bracton; neither can any of them so much as
appoint a Substitute under him, but is bound to Officiate, propria Persona, the
Justice in Air only excepted, and that by a particular Statute, for Reasons
therein expressed: So that by consequence the King must have also in him that.

4. Jus Armorum.
25. Jus Armorum, which our Lawyers call the defense of the Force of Arms, and
all other force against the peace of the Kingdom, which the Civil Law brings
under those two heads, Bellum decernere, and Foedera inire. This is so inherent
a right in our Kings, that it seems to have been always lodged in Scrinio
Pectoris, in the Shrine of his own breast, as appears by the practice of all
Times; but it may suffice to look no further back than that Address of the
Parliament to King In the fifty fourth year of that King.
Edward the Third, where they humbly beseech him to enter into League with the
Duke of Brabant, and those Addresses in the eighteenth and forty fifth year of
the said King, which I should have first mentioned, in the first whereof they
desire him to break the peace with Flanders, in the other to declare against
the Easterlings. So in the fiftieth year of the said King, praying some
alteration of the Articles of peace made with the Hollanders; The Kings answer
was, he would do what seemed meet to himself. The same Answer was given in
Terminis by Richard the Second his Grandson, on the like occasion; So by Henry
the Fourth, in the second year of his reign; Henry the sixth, in the II. of
his, upon Petitions against Merchants Strangers, that related to Violations of
a Peace concluded. And as by the Julian Law Lib. 3. it was deemed Capital for
any man without leave of the Emperor to take upon him to denounce War, so it
is declared Traiterous by our Law, and void in it self, if any Subject shall
presume to do the like without the Kings Commission: Neither is it so in the
Case of a particular Person only, but if the whole Body of the people of this
Nation should take upon them to do the like, absque assensu Regis; The Judges
holding that where a War shall be so declared against any in League with the
King, without his consent and allowance, the League is not thereby broken: The
like holds in all cases of Confederacies and Combinations, which forced the
late Rebels in the time of Charles the First, to declare this Kingdom a
Commonwealth, before they could prevail with any Foreign Princes to treat with
them, and very few did it then: Wherefore it is recorded as a wise answer of
that Parliament in the Seventeenth of Richard the Second, who when that King
out of a necessitous compliance with the People, offered them leave to take
into their consideration some concerns of War and Peace; Replied, It did not
become their Duty, neither in Truth durst they presume, ever to Treat of
matters of so Transcendent Concernment.

No doubt then can there be of that Jus Foecialis, 5. Jus Foecialis.
or right of Legation in directing, sending, and receiving all Embassies, which
Curtius calls Jus Regium, a Power so Singular and Absolute, that, as Bod. de
Repub.
Bodin and In State Christ. printed Anno 1657.
H. Wotton, both men of sufficient Authority affirm, diverse of our Neighbor
Princes (who yet call themselves absolute) as the Kings of Hungary, Poland,
Denmark, Bohemia, etc. have nothing like it, being bound up to consult with
their People about all public concerns, before they can make any Conclusion of
Peace or War: Whereas all Addresses of State are made to Our Kings (as I showed
in part before) without any Obligation of their parts, to communicate any thing
to any of the Members of their great Council, Privy Council, or Common Council,
much less to either of the Ministers of State, whether Secretaries or others,
however sworn to Secrecy and Trust. Nor needs there a more pregnant Instance of
the Kings inherent and determinate Prerogative in this point, than that verbal
Order of King Henry the Eight to the Lord Gray Governor of Bullen, who upon a
dispute about demolishing a Fort the French were then erecting, by the name of
Chastilons Garden, contrary to the Sense of all the Lords of his Council,
expressed, in Scriptis, and which was more, the formality of his own Letters,
confirming their Order; did by a verbal Commission only, privately whispered to
him, Justify him in flinging down that Work, which was a manifest breach of
the Peace with the French, and consequently a Capital crime in the Governor,
had not the same breath that made him forfeit it, given him his life again;
which President as it was very remarkable, so it proves that which follows.

6. Jus Vitae and Necis.
26. Jus Vitae and Necis, that highest power of Life and Death, to be only in
the King, being signalized by the Ceremony of carrying the Sword before him in
all public Processions; and is in truth so ancient and undoubted a Right of
the Crown, that upon this Account only, we find all the Pleas touching life and
member to be called by the Lawyers, Placita Coronae, and all Capital Offenses
of high treason are termed Crimina Laesae Majestatis; in proceeding whereon, no
Original Writ is necessary as in civil Causes, but every Constable (as the
Kings Deputy) may, Ex Ossicio, without any Process, seize on any Murderer,
Traitor, or Felon: and till the Statute of Magna Charta 17 of King John, it is
manifest that every man's Person was so subjected to the King by his Oath of
Allegiance, from those words De vita and de membro, that the Vita and
Membrasunt in Potestate Regis. Bracton l. 1. fol. 6. and Cap. 5. Sect. 18.
King at his pleasure might Imprison any man without process of Law, or giving
any cause for it; and however the King has been pleased to circumscribe himself
by Law since for the greater assurance of his Grace to his People; yet the
Judges have still so far respect to the Kings honor in this particular, that
upon the Commitment of any person by the Kings Command, or by Order of the
Lords of his Council, they do not take upon them (as perhaps by strictness of
Law they might) to deliver the Person, till the Cause be first shown; and then
expecting a Declaration of the Kings further pleasure, bind him to answer what
may be objected in the Kings behalf.

7. Jus Rerum Sacrarum.
27. The last and highest Prerogative (as being purely Spiritual) is that Jus
Rerum Sacrarum, to which no Princes in the World had a fairer Pretense than
those here, if considered as the only Christian Kings, fostered with the milk
of a distinct National Church, The Kings of great Britain the only Kings of a
distinct national Church.
that may as properly be called the Sister, as those of France, Germany and
Italy are called the Daughters of Rome; and therefore the Pope when he
naturalized (as I may say) all the Christian Nations within the bosom of the
Church, he declared the Emperor to be Filius Major; the French King Filius
Minor; but our King Filius Adoptivus: neither matters it much though they prove
our Church to be the younger Sister, that disparagement (if any it be) being
abundantly recompensed by being (as indeed she is) the most innocent, the most
beautiful, and perhaps the most fruitful Parent of the two: having Matriculated
no less than eight Nations (now as great almost as her self) in the first Ages
of Christianity, and been the Foster-Mother to as many more in this last and
most knowing age, The Protestant Religion more properly called the Catholi^k
Religion than that of Rome.
whereby the Reformed Religion (as it is now vulgarly called to difference it
from that of Rome) is become as universal as that they call (with so much
Ostentation) Catholic; which if confined within the Range of the Church of
Rome is not above a Purchase Pilgrim. cap. 13. lib. 1.
fourth part of Christendom, if so be the Computation of our modern Geographers
be not mistaken, who put Sweden in the Scale against both the Iberia's, Italy
and Spain; and England, Denmark, and the Hans Towns against France (which yet
we know is Checkered in their Religion, having diverse Towns of the Reformed
Judgment, besides those Lesser Congregations in Poictou, Gascony, Languedoc,
and Normandy) and take out of Germany (supposed to be the third part of Europe)
two entire parts (the whole being divided into three) that at this day are
integrally Protestant; that is to say, in the East, Poland, Lithuania, Livonia,
Podolia, Russia minor, with diverse Parts of Hungary, and Transylvania, even to
the Euxine Sea; in the West, the Cantons of Swizzerland, the United Provinces,
with the Grisons, and the Republic of Geneva; the South and North parts being
yet more entirely Protestant, and the heart of it every whit as sound as the
exterior parts: Witness the free Cities, and those large Countries, the
Patrimonies of the Psaltzgrave, the Dukes of Saxony, Brandenburg, Wittenburg,
Lunenburg, Brunswick, Mecklen, Pomerania, Sweburgh, Newburgh, and Holst; with
those other under the Prince of Anhalt, the Marquess of Baden, the Landgrave of
Hesse, and in fine almost all the Princes of Germany (I think we may except
only the Dukes of Austria and Bavaria, in whose Countries yet are many
Protestant Families of note) to all which joining those out-lying Plantations
in the furthest part of the less known World, containing many a Sunburned Saint
(those of the Reformed Religion there, being infinitely more extensive and
Populous than those of the Popish Persuasion) and all these with Universal
consent acknowledging our King as Head of the League within the Protestant
Pale; as it will extend the Borders of our Church beyond what is commonly
apprehended, so it so far magnifies the Majesty of the King of England, whether
considered as Propagator fidei in the Protestant Phrase, or Defensor Fidei, in
the Pope's style; that it may as truly be said of him, as of Claudius, when he
was Lord of Britain, An^nimi Epigra. vet. Lib. 2.
Oceanus medium venit in Imperium.

Now because the Supremacy, in Ecclesiasticis, is so nice a Point, as the
Popish Faction render it, many of whom not comprehending the Legality, much
less the necessity of its being Entrusted with the King only, have been more
obstinate in the defense of their Allegations than their Allegiance; it may be
reasonable to examine the matter of Right by the matter of Fact, as that by
Common Usuage, which our Common Lawyers Date Bracton fol. 314. Cook sur Lit. l.
2. Sect. 170.
Du temps il ny ad memoire de Contraire, from the Authority of which Age, we
may conclude the practice (whatever it has been) to have gained the form and
effect as well as the honor and repute of a Law, according to that known
Maxim, Cook sur Litt. lib. 3. Sect. 659.
Quod Prius est Tempore, potius est Jure.

Pass we then through those four noted Periods: 1. From the time of Lucius, the
first Christian King of the Britains, to that of Constantine, the first
Christian King or Emperor of the Romans, reckoned about a hundred and fifty
years. 2. From that Time till the Conversion of Ethelbert the first Christian
King of the Saxons or English, supposed to be three hundred and sixty years
more. 3. From thence to the time of the first King of the Norman here, which
was not so little as five hundred years more, at what time the Pope first put
in his Claim. 4. From thence to the time he let go his hold again, which being
about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign (whose Ambassador he refused to
treat with) makes up near five hundred years more, and if in all that long
series of Christianity, it shall appear by consent of all Ecclesiastical
Writers, in all times, that the King has ever been deemed to be Papa Patriae,
Jure Proprietatis; and Vicarius Dei in Regno, Jure Possessionis; I hope then
the Imputation of Heresy and Schism laid upon Henry the Eight by Paul the
Third, for taking upon him to be the Supreme head of the Church within his own
dominions, will vanish as a Result of Passion, and Our present Kings be Judged
in Remitter to their ancient Right, or (as the Law Books Express it) Enson 25.
Assis. pl. 4.35 Ass s. pl. 11.23 Edw. 3.69.11 H^n. 4.50. Tit. Remitt. 11.
melior Droit.

Lucius and those claiming immediately from, by, and after him, I take to be
stated in a double right; Ratione Fundationis, and ratione Donationis. For (as
the Lawyers have it) cujus est dare ejus est disponere: Now that all the
Bishoprics of this Isle were of his Foundation and Donative, appears by all
our books (says the Sur Lit. Cap. Discontinuance, Sec. 648.
Lord Cook.) The first Canons receiving Sanction Ex Divinitate Principis (as
the Canonists express it) till such time as that Foundation laid by him was
buried in the Rubbish of Dioclesian's Persecution. After which we have no
Constat of any Ecclesiastical Polity till the time of Constantine, who having
recovered the Church out of its Ruins, and laid a new Superstructure of his
own upon the Old Found, is upon that Account both by Eusebius, and Socrates
styled the Great (and it is well they called him not the Universal) Bishop: His
Power being no less extensive than his Dominions; the Eusebius. vit. Constant.
Cap. 24. L. 4.
first of them pointing at his power in General, calls him (...); The Socrat.
Hist. Eccles.
last referring to his more immediate power over the Clergy (for to say truth
he precided even in Rome it self) styles him (...), i. e. Pontifex Maximus.

From the time of this Constantine the Great till that of Pope Gregory the
Great, neither heard those here any thing of the Church of Rome, nor they of
Rome any thing of the Church here: That Pope being so little known to, or
knowing any thing of the concerns of this Isle, that when accidentally he saw
some little Some it seems of the Pagan Saxons then newly planted here.
Children who had been brought from hence, he asked whether they were
Christians or no, and it being as Ignorantly answered him, That all the Natives
here were Pagans, he out of his singular Zeal to Christian Piety sent over
Austin the Monk to bring them under his Apostolical Obedience: By which we may
rather Understand a subjection to the Roman Faith than to the Roman Church; for
that Rome being at that time but a private Diocese, had not Credit enough to
give Laws to all the Churches of Italy, much less to Impose upon those further
off; for every body knows how they of Sygonius lib. 9. de ^eg. Italiae dicit,
non debere Ambrosianam Ecclesiam Romans ^egibus subjicere.
Millan (not to mention any other) contested with them for the Precedence many
years after: And for the Independency of the Churches in Baronius An. 1059.
Spain and France, there needs no other Proof than what we have from that
Magisterial Monk's own Relation before mentioned, who as he passed through
France in his way hither, observing how different their Forms of Divine Service
were from those at Rome, and how repugnant their Discipline to any thing he had
been before acquainted with, was so surpised with the Novelty that he could
not forbear Cum una sit fides, cur sunt Ecclesiarum consuetudines alterum
missarum consuetudo in Sanct. Romans Eccles. atque altera in Galliarum etc.
Expostulating the Reason with his Ghostly Master, whose pious Answer (yet to
be seen at the end of his Printed Works) is worthy Notice, who after an
excellent discourse upon that Subject concludes, that as their Liberty did not
offend him, so neither did he desire that his Authority should offend them: but
as soon as this Austin came hither he found yet more matter of Amazement. For
part of the Isle being Pagans and part Christians, these last seemed to him to
be more inhospitable than the other; at least they were so far from submitting
to his Legatine Authority after the Ignorant Pagans had owned it, 1 Cor.
14.1.11.
that (as St. Paul expresses it) by not understanding one another, each seemed
to the other alike Barbarian; whereby it so fell out that they fell from
Arguments to Arms, and he having no probability of Subjugating them under his
Jurisdiction, Baptized almost as many of them in He caused 1200 Monks of the
Britains to be murdered at one time.
Blood as he did in Water; but as it appeared that he brought them no new
Faith, so neither would they suffer him to bring in any new Law amongst them,
defending their own Church so well with their own Cannons, that neither he, nor
any of the Roman community could break in upon them, or infringe their liberty
in the least for the space of near five hundred Years, when Henry the Second,
reducing both State and Church under like Paction of Servitude, forced them by
the laws of Conquest to part as well from their Ecclesiastical as Civil Rights,
and at the same time they became no Church, to become no People, being so
Cantoniz'd with England, that they were no longer considerable; which had yet
been Impossible for him to have Effected, had he not at the same time he set up
his own, declared against the Pope's Supremacy.

But to proceed from that of the Britains to consider the Primitive State of
the English Church, it may yet be allowed for good Prescription (and that we
know is a Lit. Sect. 170.
Title implies a long continued and peaceable Possession derived ab Authoritate
Legis) if it can be made out that any of the Saxon Kings, converted by the
aforesaid Austin from the time of the Proto-Christian King Ethelbert himself,
until the Norman Conquest, did at any time so far Agnize the Pope's Authority,
as to forbear the Exercise of any part of that Spiritual dominion which they
challenged Proprio Jure. For as it is evident that they did constrain as well
Ecclesiastics as Laics to submit to the final determination, as well of
Spiritual as Civil Pleas in their temporal Courts, so they not seldom made the
Ecclesiastical Censures without, and sometimes against the Consent of the
Bishop, if it displeased them, even after Excommunication pronounced; and did
they not Leg. Alfred. cap. 8. p. 25.
dispense even with the Offenses themselves, if they were only As were Priest
Marriage, Basterdy, Non-residency, Pluralities, etc.
Mala per accidens, and not mala in se (as the Casuists distinguish.) Nay did
they not permit even Nuns to marry against the usual practice of those Times,
and the Judgment of the Church, doing many other things of the like nature,
which whosoever reads M. Paris Florentius Eadmerus etc. will find more at large
than becomes the brevity I design; and all this they did without any Exception
or Scandal, or (to use Baronius Tome 3. Anno 312. N. 100.
Baronius his own Phrase) Sine ulla Ecclesiarum Labe.

Indeed such was the plenitude of their Ecclesiastical Power, that each King of
them was (as the Priest prayed at their See the old formula* continued til H.
6. time.
Coronation that they might be) Sicut Aaron in Tabernaculo, Zacharias in
Templo, Petrus in Clave; as appears by their several Edicts yet Extant; Some
for the better Observation of the Leg. Alured. C. 39. P. 33.
Lords day, Some for the due keeping of Bid lib. 3. Cap. 8.
Lent, Others for the right administration of the Jornal. l. 761. C. 2.
Sacraments, the Regulation of ^eg. Canut. C. 7. p. 101.
Matrimony, and ascertaining the degrees of Leg. Alured. u^ sup^a.
Consanguinity, Some for permitting Divorces, others for perfecting Contracts;
in fine they did whatever might become the wisdom and honor of such as had the
sole care of the Church, all Christian Obedience being enforced Providentia and
Potentia Regis (as Hoveden fol. 41^.
Hoveden expresses it) or as we find it in some 2 H. 4. N. 44.
Records, Justitia and fortitudine Regis; for however the Bishop was always
joined in Commission with the Lay Magistrate, as having in him Jus Ordinis (as
some Bel^arm. Pontif. lib. 4.
Divines call it) yet this was not so much in affirmation of his Ecclesiastical
as for Prevention of his disputing the Regal Authority, and to take off all
clashing Treisden Eccles. Juris. Regis.
Inter Placita Regis and Christianitatis Jura, that is to say in M. Paris's own
words, ne contra Regiam Coronam, and dignitatem aliquid statuere tentaretur
Episcopus, who was to the King as the Archdeacon to him Tanquam Oculus Regis,
as the other was tanquam Oculus Episcopi.

But the greatest Instance of all was, that of the Jan. Anglor. lib. 1. Page 85.
Investiture of the Bishops by the King; who gave them the Ring and the
Pastoral Staff, the ancient Emblemes of Supreme dignity and Authority, which
he himself had accepted at his Coronation: the first signifying the Power of
Joining such an one to the Church; the last denoting the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, in Foro interiori, or as some term it, in Foro animae; but he
kept the Scepter in his own hand as the proper Ensign of that Jus Potentiae, or
Sovereign Power, by which he stood particularly obliged to defend the Church;
to which King Edgar doubtless Referred when he told his Bishops at a general
Convocation, Ego Constantini, vos Petri gladium habetis in manibus; and as
Christ commanded Peter, as soon as he had drawn his Sword to put it up again;
so did he (as Christ's Representative) forbid St. Dunstan (who would be thought
St. Peter's) to sheath his weapon when he began to draw upon the Lay
Magistrate, and would have been meddling with those things that were as Socrates
expresses it.
(...), forbidding any Inquity to be made, de peccatis subditorum: Add to this
that in all general Councils the King himself presided, Tanquam Papa Patriae;
Thus Ina (for I choose to begin with him, because Baronius styles him Rex maxim
Pius) presided in the great Synod at Winchester, An. 733. by the Title of Tom.
9. Anno 740. N. 14.
Vicarius Dei. Jornal. Lib. 761.
Edgar at another meeting gave the Law to all the Clergy, Tanquam Vide Tit.
Gar. Edgar.
Pastor Pastorum; The like did Ethelred under the style of Eadmer. 146. 16.
Eadmer. 155. 6.
Vicarius Christi; after him again Canute presided in another Council at
Winchester by the Title of Leg. Canut. l. 26. p. 106.
Dei Praeco once, and another time at Southampton, under the style of Divini
Juris Interpres; neither was Edward the Confessor behind any of them, when he
made his Ecclesiastical Laws by the Title of Leg. Ed. Confess. C. 17. p. 142.
Vicarius Summi Regis. These Titles I have the rather mentioned to show what
divine Office was esteemed to be in the King properly, who having a mixture of
the Priest and Prophet with that of his Kingship, was obliged to be solicitous,
tam de Leg. Inae. in prefat. p. 1. apud Jorvalens. Col. 761. 41.
Salute animarum, quam de Statu Regni, as Jorvalensis expresses it; and
however, our wise Lawmakers heretofore (not to say Law-masters) who were very
nice in wording all the ancient Statutes relating to the Supremacy, have not
thought fit to style the King a Spiritual Person (although they knew him to be
(...)) but Persona mixta cum Sacerdote.

And accordingly it is well Argued by a Modern Vid. Lib. Intit. Animadver. upon
the Book Intit. Fanaticism Fanatically Imputed to the Catholic Church by Dr. S.
Writer of no mean note, That his Authority must be Equivalent with any of
those Popes, at least, who were Laics at the time they were chose ^o that
Supreme Dignity. For whilst there is no Qualification in their Office of Papacy
to render them so far Ecclesiastical as to consecrate any Bishop personally,
but that of Necessity they must do it (as he notes) by their Bull; it must
necessarily follow, that that Bull (being a deputation granted to some Bishop
to do the Office for him) differs very little if any thing from that of the
Kings Commission in the like Case. And if it had been otherwise Understood in
former times, it had been in the power of his Unholiness to have extinguished
the Function of Bishops in any Princes Dominions whatever.

The first Pope who found out a way to supplant the Kings Authority in
Ecclesiasticis, by seeming to support it, was Nicholas the Second, one of the
most subtle of all the Roman Prelates, Contemporary with Edward the Confessor,
one of the weakest of our Kings; who created a Title to himself by Implication,
whilst he persuaded the King to accept of a Bull of Confirmation from him,
whereby granting him Vide Twisden ut supra.
Plenam Advocationem Regni and omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum; he made that
seem to be of grace only from him, which before was of right in the King: Of
which Artifice his Successor Gregory the Seventh took no small advantage, when
he put in for a share of the Supremacy with William the Conqueror, making that
single President the Found to Claim 1. The Investiture of Bishops, which I take
to be that directum Dominium held by the King, Jure Patronatus; in
acknowledgment whereof, the Clergy pay him their first fruits. 2. The benefit
of the Annates, which was a Chief Rent out of all the Spiritualities. 3. The
Power of Calling Synods, by which he might Impose upon the Government. 4. The
Right of Receiving Appeals to Rome, which overthrew all the Kings Courts. 5.
The sole power of disposing and translating Bishops, which made them his
Homagers and Feifes. 6. The Power of altering and dispensing with Canons. 7.
The Privilege of Sending a Legate to reside here; as a Spiritual Spy to detect
all the Secrets of State, and be a kind of Check-mate to the King himself.

But William the Conqueror, as he was a Prince that was apter to invade other
men's Rights than to part with any of his own, so finding his prerogative
sufficiently guarded by the ancient Laws of the Land, then called the Laws of
King Edward (which was not the least Reason he continued so many of them as he
did) would by no means yield to him so long as he lived: his Son William Rufus
continuing yet more obstinate, who after the death of the aforesaid Gregory
surnamed Hildebrand, would admit of no Pope, but what himself approved of: So
that for eleven years together there was no Pope acknowledged here in England;
which may be a good president for any that shall hereafter hold (as some of
their Catholic Doctors have as far as they durst affirm) that there may be
Auseribilitas See Dr. Dun 43 Ser. preached on the 5 Nov. at Paul's cr^ss.
Papae; neither would he permit appeals or any Intercourse to Rome; which when
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury (being a natural Italian) attempted to bring
about, he first rifled him and then banished him: neither was his brother Henry
the First less tenacious of his Right, as appears by those Instructions given
to his Bishops when they went to meet Calixt the Second at the Council of
Reimes; whom he forbad in the first place to appeal to the Pope upon any
grievance whatever, for that himself (he said) would be sole Judge betwixt
them. 2. He commanded them to tell the Pope plainly; if he expected his ancient
Rent here, he would expect a Confirmation of his ancient Privileges. 3. He
directed them to salute the Pope and receive his Apostolic Precepts, Sed
superfluas Inventiones regno meo infer nolite. The Contest betwixt the
Archbishop Becket, and Henry the Second shows what temper he was of: for he
opposed both the Pope and the Bishop so long that they had undoubtedly cast him
out of the Church, but that they feared he would not come in again: only King
John (who therefore stands a singular example of Infamy) designing to make
himself higher than any of his Predecessors, by stooping so much lower, quit
his being King to make himself a Tyrant; in order whereunto he voluntarily laid
down his Diadem at the feet of Innocent the Third's Legate, becoming thereby
guilty of such an unparalleled vileness and abjection of spirit, that nothing
can excuse but the known distraction that was upon him, when wrack't betwixt
two Extremes of hate and fear (his Enemies pressing hard upon him, whilst his
Friends forsook him) he to avoid the being split upon either Rock, cast himself
upon the Quick-sand of the Popes protection, submitting to an act of Penance
that showed the weakness of his Faith more than of his Right, his renouncing
the Supremacy at that time being no more to be wondered at than his renouncing
Christianity it self at another time; but his Son recovered the ground his
Father lost, when he brought the whole Kingdom to resent the Indignity so far,
as to Join with him in demanding satisfaction of the same Pope, and not content
with a bare Disclaimer, forced the insolent Legate to fly the Kingdom, timens
pelli sui (as the Record has it) neither stopped they there, but voting that
submission of his Father a breach of his Coronation Oath, entered so far into
the Consideration of the whole matter of the Pope's Usurpation, as to make that
Statute of Proviso's, which after brought in those other 27 and 38 Edw. 3. and
that brought on the Treaty betwixt that King and Gregory the Eleventh, which
after two years debate ended with this express Agreement, Walsingham Hist.
1374. Page 184.
Quod Papa de caetero reservationibus beneficiorum minime uteretur, which
Dignities Henry the Fourth made no scruple to collate to his own use,
notwithstanding his being anointed with that Oil which came from Heaven, the
virtue whereof was to incline all the Princes that were inaugurated therewith
to be favorable to the Church: His Son Henry the Fifth (for his exemplary
Piety styled the Prince of Priests) thought fit to demand of Martin the Fifth
several Ecclesiastical Privileges, which his Predecessors had got from the
Kings of England at several times, and his Ambassadors finding the Pope to
stick at it, and give them no ready answer, told him plainly, That the King
their Master intended to use his own mind in the matter, whether he consented
or no, In vit. Hen. Chichley Page 56, 57. Edito Anno 1617.
Vtpote quae non a necessitatis sed honoris causa petat.

Thus the Papal power as it was interrupted in all times, so from this time it
sensibly languish'd, till it received its fatal blow from Henry the Eight, who
(if I may so say) did as it were beat out the Popes Brains with his own Keys;
and had he not afterward used violence to himself, by referring the point of
his Supremacy to the Parliament, to be confirmed by Statute Law, that was
sufficiently firm'd before by the Common Law, that cannot change; he had
undoubtedly been more absolute Lord of himself than any Christian Prince
whatever, and acknowledged Head of the Church, nullis Exceptionibus (as Tacitus
expresses it in another case:) but laying the burden of that weighty Question
of the Supremacy upon the Shoulders of Divines, which had been better supported
by those of the great Lawyers; he was perplexed with many Scruples, and in the
end forced to enter the List in Person, and fight the Antiqu. Brit. Eccles. p.
384. 37.
Pope at his own weapon, the Pen; wherein (by great good fortune, being a great
master of defense that way) he had the better of it, and by the Authority of
his Example drew many to Second him; his Supremacy being afterward Justified by
the whole Convocation of Divines in both the Universities, and most of the
Monastical and Collegiate Theologues of the whole Kingdom, whilst only four
adventured to assert the Pope's Right to be de Jure divino.

29. And now to conclude this whole discourse, The Government of this Isle
always Monarchial.
it may perhaps be thought a Point of glory not unworthy our Remarke, to
observe that the Government of this Isle was never clothed in any other form,
but what appeared Monarchial, notwithstanding the many chances and changes (I
cannot say alterations) which Time conspiring with Fate has brought forth,
wantonly disposing the Scepter of these Isles, not only to several Persons, and
Families, but different People and Nations. The Genius of the very first
Natives, the Aborigines (as Caesar observes of their Ancestors the Gauls)
being always inclinable to be ruled by one single Person, affecting Monarchy as
Naturally as the Greeks did Aristocracy, the Romans Democracy, or the Germans,
and indeed all the Northern Nations Oligarchy; and however we read of no less
than four Kings in Kent, by which may be guest a proportionable number of the
like kind in other Provinces, which Caesar had no Knowledge of; yet it appears by
those who wrote after him with more certainty, That all these Reguli were under
one Chief, Tacitus.
to whom it matters not what Title was given by themselves, Speaking of
Caraciacus.
since Tacitus calls him (more Romano) Imperator Britannorum. After the Romans
got the Government into their hands, though there was a seeming Pentarchy, yet
the Emperor (says Herodian) reserved to himself all Appeals from the
Presidents and Lieutenants, not excepting the Cesars themselves here. During
the Saxon Heptarchy, when each of those Royteletts had a distinct Legislative
power within his own Kingdom, striving like Twins in the Womb of their
Conquest, which should be born first; yet one (says Bid) was saluted by
common consent with the style and Title of Rex Anglorum. So during the
still-born Tetarchy of the Danes, Knute was not only Primus, but Princeps;
Uniting the Trine Power of his Predecessors in his single Person. Neither did
the Genius of the Normans affect any other form, notwithstanding the intestine
Feuds betwixt diverse of those Kings and their Nobles (these striving to recover
what they had lost, those resolving to keep what by advantage of time and
sufferance they had got) engaged them in desperate Resolutions; for however the
Populacy prevailed against King John, Henry the Third, Edward the Second, and
Richard the Second, taking the boldness to commit so many Insolences as
sullied the memory of those times, and gave Strangers occasion to brand the
whole Nation with one of the basest Characters that malice could invent (Les
mutins Anglois) yet was not their ill disposition heightened to that degree of
madness, as to follow Providence in the pursuit of their Liberties, beyond the
bounds of Magna Charta; for though they left succeeding Ages a President they
never found, in deposing the two last (acts no less dishonorable to themselves
than them) yet they admitted the Son of the one, and the Uncle of the other to
succeed: Nor was it want of power to do otherwise; Vox Populi being at the same
time Preached up by no meaner a man than the Primate of England, to be Vox Dei,
and passed for as good Divinity as Policy. The like may be observed in those
disorderly times, when the two fatal houses of York and Lancaster justled one
another out of the Throne with such alternate success as gave advantage to the
Plebiscitum, to Elect which they pleased; the Sovereignty being so weakened by
the blood lost on either side, that the people had it in their power, not only
to turn the Scale as they thought fit, but to break the Beam of Majesty, on
which the weight of that destructive Quarrel hung; and so by taking away the
Cause have prevented the Occasions of ensuing mischiefs; yet still we find they
kept within the Circle of their Allegiance, and though they directed it
variously to several Lines, yet all tended to supporting the main Nave of the
Monarchy, continuing the Government (as it had ever been) in a single Person:
which Devotion to Monarchy was (as St. Hierome observes in one of his Epistles)
rewarded from Heaven with this great blessing upon the Incolae in general of
this Isle, That by their Obedience to one Prince, they were the more easily
brought to the belief of One God, who blessed their early Faith with the Honor
of having the First Christian King, and Emperor of the World amongst them.

30. But This last Age of ours, I confess, has brought forth an unnatural Race
of Men, who inspired with the discipline of Daring beyond any of their
Ancestors, put out the Laws first (as The Author of the Book called the Modern
Politician.
one observes the Lights use to be in such Case) and after committed a Horrid
Rape upon the Body Politic, begetting such a Brood of Monsters as made all the
World (and themselves at last) afraid; whilst they spurned at all Authority
with such resistless fury, as raised the Dust of their Errors to such a
portentous height, that it not only endangered the putting out the Eyes of
Justice (half blind before) but darkning the very lights of Nature and Piety:
The two Houses of Parliament first dividing from the King; after, from one
another. So that the Commonwealth appeared like the German Eagle with two heads
pecking at the main Body. Yet even during this fatal Confusion, the Government
under these (...), may be said to be as that under the Ephori, which Plutarch
calls Sufficiently Monarchical.
(...); there being one Cromwell.
who (like the Beast mentioned in the Revelation) having power above the rest,
played the State Jugler, and revived Monarchy (as Chemists do plants) out of
the Salt of its own Ashes, making himself more than a King by the same
principles with wh ch he destroyed Kingship, anointing himself with Blood
instead of Oil; the date of whose Rage (I cannot call it Reign) holding no
longer than to show the World the Vanity of his Usurpation, the Curse of his
Ambition descended upon his Son; who distempered with the Fumes of his
ill-gotten glory (like the Drunken Tinker, that by an Artificial Metempsychosis
was made believe he was a Prince, and dreamed of nothing but power and
greatness, till translated by the help of a second Napp into the Ditch out of
which he was first taken, his grandeur forsook him with his Sleep) quickly fell
out of his Throne and broak his Neck; after which Catastrophe the abused
populace (like Water, which heated contrary to its nature returns to its first
Condition, and becomes so much the colder) submitted themselves to their lawful
Sovereign, with like Zeal as they fell off from him in the first place; their
affections returning like the Tide (of which there can be no reason given)
moved by the hidden force of an unwritten Law within their Nature, which
turning round (like that Rota the Usurpers would have fixed) showed that it was
not agitated by the Power of Intelligences (as some think) but by the immediate
hand of Providence: from the Constancy of whose motion, every good man expected
that Revolution (which, blessed be Heaven, we have since seen) long before,
although (being oppressed with the weight of those great Concerns that depended
on it) it mo^'d a while but slowly.

Horace Ode 34. lib. 1.
-- valet ima summis
mutare, and insignem attenuat Deus
Obscura Promeris.
THE FIRST DYNASTY OF BRITAINS.
Woodcut headpiece with an angel against a decorative pattern of grapes, vines
and flowers. OF BRITAINS.
TO endeavor to find out the Original of the Britains, I take to be as hard a
Task, as that put upon the two Centurions, who were commanded by S^n c. Na^ur.
Quest.
Nero to find out the Head of Nyle. Neither can it reasonably be supposed, that
I should further go into the Wild of this History, then I find vetustatis and
veritatis vestigia; the tract of some that have gone before me: since we have
no Landmarks to guide us, but what have been set up by Strangers, whilst all
the Natives have kept themselves out of sight, and all the Treasures of
Knowledge were locked up in the Druids i. e. in scrin^o p^ctoris. An expression
scophically used by my Lord Bacon, in respect they used no Books.
Library; from whom, neither the awe of Caesar's Majesty, nor the dread of his
Legions, could extort any other discovery, then what could be made out of the
Observation of their Manners and Customs, which being congenial with those of
their next Neighbors the Gauls, gave him, and from him most other Writers,
cause to believe them a Branch of the same Stock; who being situate in the
same Zone, under the difference of little above two C^imes, as they could not
but have one Complexion, so Utriusque sermo haud multum diversus, says
Tacitus. Neither were their Names less consonant then their Language, the one
called Cymber deriv^d Kimber, vel Kimper. i. e. miles Britannic^.
Cymbri, the other Cambri (...), i. e. nebul^ a nebulosis sedibus.
Cambri, both indifferently A C^lte Rege Galliae Lugduneus, A. M. 2125. quo
temp^re Joseph venditus in Aegypt^.
Celti, which Bochartus derives from the Chaldee Chelta, originally given by
the Phenicians (as he says) that called this Isle Barat-Anae, which by
contraction (he might have said corruption) came to be afterward Britannae,
whence the Greeks in the Age following had their BPETANNIKH.

Lay we then aside those Vulgar Etyma's of (...) and (...), by which some
modern Philosophers have labored to prove the Britains the only men of Metal
(if I may so say) from the very time of Strabo, whose Authority they urge, to
prove this Isle most famous for the great quantities of Lead and Tynn, that was
exported hence. Neither can we but reject those exploded denominations, or (as
the learned Camden quaintly calls them) Divinations, or Dreams of Hispanorum
Regio.
Bretta, E f^rma candida stuyd.
Bridcaine, or Pridcaine, Libera Dania G^wpus beccanu^.
Bridania, E Bruto and Brito.
Brutaneia, Britonia, and I know not what more of the same stamp, which have
past for current but a little while: Of all which I shall only say thus much,
That they were fancies which showed a wantonness of Wit, that may perhaps be
more reasonably excused then defended: The vanity of Invention being an
Epidemical Disease, that has infected most of the Sons of Mercury in all Ages
and all Nations, there being something in it that looks like Piety: Nam mentiri
clarorum imagines est aliquis virtutum amor (says Pliny) which Error, whilst
some of our graver Authors have with no less affectation attempted to correct,
they themselves (like great Physicians in the time of great Plagues) have been
overtaken with the general Infection; as that renowned President of Antiquaries
Mr. Camden before mentioned was, who excusing his weaker Brethren with a Detur
venia Antiquitati ut miscendo falsa veris, etc. did not suppose he had so
prophetically apologiz'd for his own Brith-Tania; which being delivered as an
Origination of Celtick and Greek, upon further inquiry proves to be no part of
either Speech, at least not in that sense he uses it. For taking the h out of
Brith to accommodate the word (as he designed) to Brittannia, it then becomes
Brit, which is no word of any signification in the Welsh Tongue, and
consequently by the razing out that single Letter, all the varnish of his fancy
comes off, and spoils the painting that lay under it. But if the principal
reason of his leaving out the h (which might be the more excusable in respect
it has been taken to be an ominous letter to this Nation) were to make that
Sybilla lingua (as he calls the Welsh Tongue) more smooth and polite, why then
did he not leave out the two it is also? the continuance whereof makes his
Etymology subject to an unanswerable objection in point of Novelty: for that
there is no ancient word any where to be found that has a double t in it, as
his Brittannia has. Now if both the tt's and the h had been omitted, it had
then been Bri-tannia; which as it is less constrained, so it is more acceptable
to every common Reader, but especially to those that are Natives. For that Bri,
lingua vernacula, signifies Honos, and so the name of Britains would have
employed as much as the Honorable Nation: in which sense I could be content to
rest my self, without farther search, if the Critics would have allowed his
Tania to have been Greek for Regio: but this being modestly doubted by the
learned Spelman, and utterly denied by the famous Causabon (who took it so ill
to have a Greek word obtruded upon him, that he never heard of before, that
amongst his excellent Epistles yet extant, there is one letter purposely, not
to say passionately, written to Mr. Camden upon this subject, by which he
requires him to prove it Greek if he could) I must conclude, as by his
returning no answer to that bold Challenge, I suppose he himself did, that it
was not the least of his learned mistakes. However, the Greeks were beholding
to him for the honor intended them: whilst by that single termination of
Tania, he endeavors to prove them the only Godfathers to many other great
Nations, besides this of ours: viz. those of Aquitania and Turditania, no mean
People: and those of Lusitania yet greater; with those of Mauritania and
Turgitania, more famous then they: and yet there is another Kingdom (which it
seems he forgot) that could more certainly have proved their Denomination from
the Greeks, that is the great Kingdom of Batania, which before the Greeks
possessed it, was called the Kingdom of Bastian, in the Land of Palestine.
Neither has he made mention of another greater perhaps then all these put
together: to wit, that mighty Empire of the Chynenses, who in their native
Tongue call their Country Taine, which comes as near Tania in sound as may be,
but nearer yet in the sense: Taine importing as much as the Realm or Region,
(...): Take we then Tania to be heathen Greek, as he puts it, yet it will seem
strange that a people so rich in words as the Greeks were, should borrow half
an Etymology of such a barbarous People as they took the Britains to be: and
stranger it is, that the Britains (if we suppose they gave themselves the name)
should call themselves Blew Noses, though they were so: as well might they have
named themselves Cornuti, from their custom of wearing the skins of Beasts with
the Horns upon their heads, after the fashion of their Ne^ghbours (not to say
their Ancestors) the Germans. And in like manner, and for like reason, might
the Germans have been called Brittanni, upon the account of Painting: it being
as much in use with them, as with those here; with this difference only, that
they painted the skins of the Beasts they wore, these their own skins.

That the Original Names of Nations have been derived from some observation or
remark of the first Nomenclators, upon the Natures and Customs that seemed to
them most singularly notable, will, I think, be agreed by every body, as that
the Galeates or Gauls were so named from their (...).
Milk-like Complexions, in like manner as the Moors were, from their black and
swarthy Visages (...).
. The Sarmatians (under which denomina^ion passed those of Poland, Russia,
Muscovy, and the hither Tartary) took their names from their (...) and (...).
Lizard-like Eyes: As the Numidians anciently called Nomades, from their being
generally Herdsmen or Feeders of Cattle: The Tuscans and Sabins were indebted
for their names to the Time of their Sacrifices, as the Artotyritae to the
(...) and (...), in respect they offered Bread and Cheese to their Gods.
Infamy of theirs: The Persians were so called with respect to their Habits or
Garments: as the Saxons, our Ancestors, from their Seaxes or Skeens. Some have
been denominated from what they usually eat or drank: as the Pharmacotrophi in
Asia from their feeding on venomous Creatures; and the Cremyones from their
drinking broth made of Onions: And why may not the Britains be as well supposed
to have taken their (...) from their (...) or (...); a Drink known to be
peculiar unto them, and so singularly famous, that Aeschylus, Sophocles,
Archilocus, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Helannicus, Athinaeus, and all the
Classick Greek Authors have made more or less mention of it: the last of which
being the first Author wherein we find the express word (...), his Authority
(being a known Critic) may go far in the matter: Now he calls this (...), i.
e. Vinum hordeaccum, Barley Wine: which Sophocles renders (...), cervisia,
which word may indifferently be taken for Ale or Beer: and Archilocus tells us,
that no People in the World but the Trojans (whom some will have to be
Ancestors to the Britains) ever used the same, or any kind of drink like it.
Caesar affirms that all other Nations of the known World drank Wine or Water
only; but the Britains, says he, (who yet have Vines enough) make no other use
of them, but for Arbours in their Gardens, or to adorn and set forth their
houses, drinking a high and mighty liquor, different from that of any other
Nation, made of Barley and Water, which being not so subtle in its operation as
Wine, did yet warm as much, and nourish more, leaving space enough for the
performance of many Efficit egregios n^bilis Ala viros.
great Actions, before it quite vanquished the Spirits: Now as the Britains were
famed for this Ale of theirs, so the Ale ^t self was afterward no less
renowned (as Theophrastus and Helannicus both affirm) for a certain Root that
they usually put into it: from whence it is supposed it took its Denomination,
as the Britains theirs from it. This Root was called by the Greeks (...) (which
sounds something better then Brith-Tania) by the La^ins called after their
manner Britannia (as Not. Hist. lib. 25.3.
Pliny tells us) who cries it up as the most approved Drink in the World
against those Diseases called by the Greeks Stomacace and Scelotyrbe,
p^oceeding from a Scorbutical Distemper (which therefore we may venture to
English Scurvy-grass-Ale) the most excellent and ancient Drink of this Isle.
But however our Antiquaries do differ about the name of the Isle, they all
agree in the descent of the first Inhabitants; affirming them, as most of the
Inhabitants on this side the World, to be the offspring of Josephus and
Zonares vocant Gallos and Cimbros (...), Gomari.
Gomer, whose truly unlucky name (if so be Melancthon interpret it rightly)
carried in it the Fate of his Posterity; ominously denoting the disadvantages
under which Nature and Providence had placed them: amongst whom none were yet
greater sufferers then the poor Britains, who in respect of their extreme
remoteness from all the rest of the World (there being none beyond them
Westward but those of Ireland, which Ptolomy makes to be a part of them) unless
that Terra Incognita, mentioned by St. Brandon, where the Souls of the just
Saints touch in their way to Purgatory, known by the name of O Brazil, beyond
the Isles of Arran (so often discovered and lost again) could never meet with
any opportunities of glory to give them the least repute amongst their
Neighbors in the Continent, nor indeed any invitements of Ambition, to show
they understood any Particle of Honor; In so much that when the Romans (those
great Monopolizers of Fame) came first hither, they not only despised them as
rude Barbarians; but after better acquaintance with them, took so little notice
of any thing they did, or suffered, as not to think it worth recording to
Posterity, whereby it so happens that we have not one brave Example to copy
after, but what is decypher'd in so small Characters, that it is scarce legible
at this day. Witness those gallant Resistances of Arviragus and Galgacus, the
one General of the South, the other of the North of this Isle, when they first
Invaded it; whose actions, though they possibly transcended, whatever passes
for wonder in our days, are so slightly and confusedly delivered by the most
exact of their Writers, that it has been doubted by some whether there were
ever any such Men; at least that the one is mistaken for Prasugatus, the other
for Marius. Neither have we much better account of that Freeborn Sylurian
Caractacus (who was not inferior to any of their great Captains, saving in
Fortune only) of whom we hear nothing beyond the bravery of his captivity,
which they set forth with that varnish of Ostentation, on part of the Victors,
as shows they designed to record their own, rather then his Glory. None of them
acknowledging any of the circumstances of Dishonor under which Caesar twice
suffered; once at Land, when he was disarmed by Which the British Historians
confidently affirm.
Nennius, fighting hand to hand: afterward at Sea, when he was routed by a
private Captain: Neither had we ever known it, had it not suited with the
design of one of their own Lucan.
Poets, to bring in Pompey upbraiding him with it, in that well known Verse:
Territa quasitis ostendit Terga Britannis. But that which discovers a more
intense prejudice and scorn of the Britains, was the calling their Innocence,
Ignorance: judging their Courage to be no other then an effect of Despair;
deeming their temperance, stupidity; their hardiness of Body, brutishness. A
silly sort of People, says Diodorus Siculus: because not so skillful in the
Art of Luxury as they his Countrymen. Naked Barbarians, says Dion: the more
shame their armed Legions were so bafled by them. In conjurat. Catilinari.
Genus huminum agriste sine legibus, sine Imperio libe um atque solutum.
An obscure People, not known to any of the Civil part of the World, says
another: yet we find mention made of their Fame in the Greek By no means an
Author then Polybius, who restifies that they drove a great Trade with the
Graecians.
Annals, from the very beginning of the first Olympiad, A. M. 3720. which was
200 years before Christ, at what time they themselves were not known to the
Greeks (if we may credit Contr. App^^n. lib. 1.
Josephus) at least not so well known as that Thucidides, Herodotus, or any
Historians of the first Class, thought them worthy of any mention by them, it
is true, Strabo takes some notice of them, but he reckons them (as we find St.
Epist. Roman.
Paul did many years after) amongst the Nations that were esteemed Barbarous.

Now whether we consider the Britains, as deriving themselves from Phoenitian,
Greek, or Gallick Stock; or whether we allow them the privilege of the most
ancient Nations in the World, to deduce a fine-spun Series from the Gods, and
so leave them as Aborigines: either way they have the consent of Antiquity to
support the Reputation of their being not only not obscure, but as noble a Race
of People as any other Gentile Nation whatsoever; perhaps more then the most,
if we examine the Testimony of their Laws, Language, or Lineage ('it is pity I
cannot say their Liberties) untainted to this day, Maugre the Tyranny of Time
and Chance: the Body of our Co^^'s Preface to his Thi^d Book of Reports.
Common Law being composed of such Elements as were taken first by Brute out of
the ancient Greek and Trojan Laws, as one of the most Sagest in that profound
Science tells us, whose testimony is confirmed by the learned Jan. Angl. lib.
1. page 17.
Mr. Seldom, in that place where he proves that London had its Municipal Laws
as soon, if not Languet.
before Rome it self. Now how excellent those Statutes must be, that have stood
the shock of so many Ages, and yet continued useful, I need not labor to
prove; but will content my self with the Authority of Page 39. Lib. Leg. A^gl.
He was Lord Chief Justice of England under H. 6.
Sir John Fortescue, proves the same by Reason: Quod si non optimae extitissent
aliqui Regum novissimorum Justitia, ratione, seu affectione concitati, eas
mutassent, aut omnino delevissent. Now as the wisdom of any People is to be
measured by that of their Laws, so is their Nobility to be judged by the
measure of their Wisdom: for however we seem to be partakers with the rest of
the world in the common Fate of being a Conquered Nation (there being no
Country in the whole Universe that have not been subdued, as well as we, by
others, or by themselves Seneca Epist. Ita fato placuit nullius rei eodem
semper statu stare fortunam.
: Yet our Ancestors had this to say in their behalf, which perhaps no other
conquered Nation can say, That as they disputed their Freedoms as long as ever
any did, having spent above a million of lives before the Romans could prevail
to cohabit with them; so after all, they made so good Conditions for
themselves, as to keep their own Kings, and their own Laws, being not obliged
(as all their Neighbors were) to be manacled by the Civil or Roman Law; so
that in this, their shame became their glory, whilst being a mixed, they yet
continued a mighty People, and gave the Rule to those that ruled them.

Neither was their Discipline in War inferior to their Government in Peace:
Witness the long resistance made against those, that having conquered almost
all the World before, never wanted fresh Supplies to reinforce their Losses: So
that the Britains in fighting them, v. Oresius l. 6. cap. 7. out of the best
Copy of Suetonius.
encountered upon the matter all those numerous and potent Allies, that were
obliged to take part with them. Yet we see, upon the very first dispute betwixt
them and the Romans (their own Writers being Judges) they acquitted themselves
so well in point of Conduct and Courage, that there needs no further Argument
to prove they had the better of Caesar, then the routing his Horse in the first
Expedition, and all his Dion.
Foot in the second: And after they were overpowered, one private Prince, with
the assistance of nine Provinces only, kept all the Legions at a Bay for some
years, which shows that to be true whereof we had had no proof, had not Cic.
A^t. L. 4. Epist. 17.
Cicero thought fit to take notice of it in his Letters to his Correspondent
Atticus, telling him that they had very good Fortifications and Works in the
most considerable parts of the Isle, which must be understood according to the
practice of that time. And though he did much, yet a Woman did more, who
rallying up as many of her Countrymen as durst dye, taught them the way to
live, by putting them upon the slaughter of 70000 of their chief Veterans,
reckoned by Dion to be the greatest loss the Empire ever felt, under that
effeminate Tyrant Nero; and so much the greater, by how much Dux Faemina Facti.
In fine, no People disputed their Liberties with less encouragements, or more
courage; and therefore Certe populi quos ille timorum Maximus hand urget leti
metus -- -- indetuendi Inferrum men's prona viris, etc Lucan. lib. 1.
Lucan could not forbear giving them that testimonial. And when they yielded,
'twas rather (as I noted before) by Composition then Compulsion, being, as
Tacitus reports of the Germans, Magis triumphati quam Victi.

And had the Pen been as much in use as the Sword, doubtless they had given as
good proof of the one as the other, having had the start, even of that proud
Nation the Romans, that undervalued them, in that point of Glory so much
insisted on, their Learning, the truest Badge of their so boasted Civility; for
except it were their Poetry in the beginning, and their Oratory in the last
place, what had the Romans to boast of. Can they show us (says the Learned
Seld. Poliolb. 166.
Seldom) any steps of the first, before Salinator, Navius, Paccuvius, Actius,
and some few others, who did not much precede Caesar: or any Constat of the
last, before Fabius, Pictor, Valerius, Annius, and some such, whose Names yet
survive their Works. Or what Records had they of the more useful parts of solid
Knowledge, as Physic, Mathematics, Metaphysics, etc. for which the Britains
were so famed: it is true, there was one Book of Physic very early extant
amongst them, which was said to have been written by Celsus, but suspected to
be a Translation out of Greek; but of the latter sort we find not any. Now if
they had neither the true knowledge of Nature, nor Numbers, of Mathematics,
nor Metaphysics, as by the confession of some of their Livy Decad. 1. Lil. 6.
Lucan, who makes a scoff at the Immortality of the Soul, and mocks the Britains
for holding that Opinion.
best Writers, it is plain they had not, how much then had the Britains the
start of them, especially if it be true which ^^ld. Poliol^. 166. Bales Century.
some have endeavored to prove, That Translated by Cornelius Nepes, and
dedicated to Salust.
Dates (however surnamed Phrygius) the very eldest Historian of all the
Gentiles, was a Britain; and if not by birth (as Joseph of Enon.
Joseph of Exeter would infer) yet certainly by Education; to which Testimony
is added that of Lib. 7. c. 5.
Pliny cited by Diogenes Laertius Vit. Philosoph. to prove that the Greeks
themselves (who were Schoolmasters to the Romans) had their first Rudiments of
Knowledge from hence. For as the Letters Cadmus brought to Thebes, were
supposed to have been first brought him from the Galeates or As V^rr^ de ling.
Latin. lib. 17.
Gauls, who (as Caesar affirms) were but the Britains Scholars: So those
Timagines carried to Athens, are by Lazz. l. 6. de Gent. migrat.
Lazzius more confidently affirmed to have been had from hence, which may be
something of the cause perhaps why the wise Masters that governed that State,
were called (...), or (as we find it in Lib. de Tranquil. c. 3.
Seneca) (...). Against this, I know, may be objected the Authority of Casar,
to prove the Britains understood not the Greek Tongue; the Objection being
grounded upon a Letter of his to Q. Ciser (then closely besieged) which was
written in Greek Characters, Ne intercepta Epistola (as himself gave the
reason) ab Hostibus cognoscerentur; which can be understood no otherwise then
either of some particular Cipher, which none but Quintilis had a key to, or
possibly some such kind of Cryptography, as De occulia literarum
significati^ne. Epist. Caii.
Probus Grammaticus tells us he frequently used, when he wrote to such of his
intimate Friends as Caius Oppius, and Balbus Cornelius, which was by way of
(...), or transposition of Letters, commuting the fourth Letter for the first,
etc. after which manner he sometimes wrote likewise to the Senate; many of
which tricks are in use to this day, and may puzzle those of the same Language
to find out the meaning: How else can Caesar be reconciled to himself, who
tells us, that all the Accounts and Reckonings of the Britains were in Greek
Ciphers; and if he did not, yet the Testimony of Strab. l. 4.
Strabo clears the point, who assures us there was a great Trade driven betwixt
them and the Graecians; which could not be if they understood not one another.
But besides this, we have some Plato in C^^^id.
Authority to induce us to believe, that those great Masters, Chilo, Thales,
Periander, and the profound M. Trismigistus himself, were beholding to the
Druids, for their reputation in the Mathematics: For till their arrival in
Circ. A. M. 3560.
Greece, the Graecians (says Plato) were but Children in that Science. But
what need we other proof of their great Learning, then what the Romans
themselves unwittingly give us: does not Caesar testify to their knowledge in
Astrology; Tacitus to their exquisite skill in The Art of Inspection into the
Intrals of Beasts
Extispacy (the Metaphysics of those times); Pliny to their Judgment in
Physic; Suetonius and diverse others to their perfection in Magic, both
Onomantical and Pneumatological, in both which they were very famous: The
Camdens Anagr. fol. 168.
Onomanty was a Mystery something like, if not the same, with that the Jewish
Rabbis called Bresith, and affirmed to be first revealed by God himself to
Moses, and after by him communicated to the LXX. but by what means transmitted
to the The Phoemetans spoke the Language.
Druids, is not certain, unless by Correspondence with the Magi of the East:
For that they were acquainted with the Books of Moses, and (as he) were learned
in all the Learning of the Egyptians, is not to be doubted: In this was lodged
all the Vid. Archangel. in Dogmat. Cabalist. cap. 19.
Learning of Numbers, whereby they took their Measures of good and bad Omens,
and accordingly to direct all their great Actions; as believing there was in
the Mystery of Numbers, a Power predominant over all Persons and Things: And
accordingly we find they preferred one Number above all the rest, as believing
the Fate of their Nation lay concealed in the womb of it; this was the Number
6, which was the just measure of the most ancient name of the Isle AABION, as
likewise of their Common Progenitor MESECH, and of his Sire JAPHET, to whom he
was the 6th Son; accordingly they divided the whole Isle into 6 parts, that is
to say (following the British Historians) Loegria, since properly called
England, which they divided into two parts; i. e. (as we find in Dion) (...)
and (...), the higher and the lower part; this latter called afterward by the
Romans, Pars Maritima; the other, Pars Interior. The second Division was
Albania, since called Scotland; divided likewise into the High-land and
Low-land; the Inhabitants of the Low-land were those the Romans called
Caledonii, and we properly Scots: Those of the High-land were the famous Picts.
The third Division was that of Cambria, since called Wales, divided into the
South and North Country; i. e. Demetia and Venedotia, as the Romans called it,
or as we find it Vide Seldens Book of Tithes, cap. 9. page 149.
elsewhere, Dextralis and Sinistralis Britannia. Now what the reason was that
they pitched upon an even Number (since all the Numbers that were of old
esteemed Sacred were odd) is not certainly known: But some think it was because
this of all others was the most perfect Number, being the true measure of Time;
there going just 60 times 6 days, and 6 over upon the whole, to make up a
complete Year, as we have since learned by the Julian Account, which probably
Caesar had first from their Scholars the Gauls. Others conceive they had some
respect to the Geometrical Form of the Isle it self, which is a Triangle that
has three Sides, and three Angles: but most like it is, that they were herein
guided by the number of their Gods, whereof they worshipped 6 only. But be the
reason what it will, we find by Observation since, that the Energie of this
Number has been more predominant in all the Changes and Alterations that have
happened in the various disposal of the Scepter of this Isle, than any other. For
taking the whole time in pieces, since there has been any mention of Kings
here, and you will find just 6 Periods or Intervals of Time, that the
Aboriginal Natives ruled here; each Space containing only 6 Descents. The first
Space made up of those the Romans called BRITANNI, or unmixt Britains; being
those that had the first and entire Rule without Interruption, till their
Arrival. The second Sort were those whom they styled BRITANNICI, i. e. Roman
Britains, such as were made up of their own Nation, either born here, or that
had made some great Atchievment here. The third Sort were called BRITONES,
which were properly the Camber Britains: then taking a general view of the
whole Series of Succession, from that to our Times, and it will appear there
has been just 6 Dynasties of 6 several Nations; that is to say, Britains,
Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans, Scots: And some have been so curious as to
observe that each of their several Brutus, Caesar, Eugist, Ca^^te, Victor,
Jaacob.
Chiefs had but just 6 Letters in his Name: which 6 Master Builders (like those
Politic Creatures the Bees, who make up their Cells with Poligons of 6 sides)
have reared their Empire upon 6 great Pillars; i. e. 1 Rex, 2 Prelati, 3
Proceri, 4 Nobiles, 5 Milites, 6 Civites; and adorned it with 6 different kinds
of Law; i. e. 1 Common Law, 2 Statute Law, 3 Civil Law, 4 Canon Law, 5 the Law
of Merchants, 6 Martial Law: And observing the same Rule in the Structure of
the Church as of the State, have ordained 6 Orders of Priesthood (as a Medium
betwixt the Greek Church that have but 5, and the Roman that has 9) These were
1 Clerks, 2 Subdeacons, 3 Deacons, 4 Priests, 5 Bishops, 6 Archbishops, who in
the Primitive and purer times of Christianity, are supposed to have taken their
turn^ to officiate daily in the Churches Service, dividing the Natural day into
6 parts, whereof each had four hours for his Devotion. The Pneumatilogical
Magic was that which was more properly called the Doctrine of Picard. in
Ciltopaedia.
Spirits, because it was performed by secret Intelligences, enforced with
unusual Conjurations; Sometimes drawn from the mouth of a Teraphius, a way much
in use amongst the Jews, and by them taught to the People of Melancthon
Camar^^. fol. 422.
Asia, and from thence brought, as it is conceived, by the Phoeni^iam hither:
Sometimes by the advantage of Divination ^er Speculum.
Catoptromantical Inspection, in imitation, as it is thought by the Learned
Poliolb. l. 1.
Seldom, of the Caballistick Doctors, when they consulted the Urim and
Thummim: By this Faculty they could disclose, it seems, the greatest Secrets of
Nature, and deduce the knowledge of hidden forms to strange and wonderful
effects, beyond what the Natural Chemistry of humane Understanding could ever
extract out of the choicest Elements of Reason. Of this kind the Roman
Historians Record wonderful Instances; but amongst the rest I take that to be
the most notable Example, when in the beginning of Su^t^nius.
Vespatians reign, at such time as Civilis raised the Rebellion amongst the
Batavi, the Druids foretold the Removal of the Romans out of this Isle (who
then had but begun to settle their Possessions here). They foretold likewise
the Translation of their Tacitus.
Empire to the Trans-Alpine Nations, which has a conceit so remote and
seemingly then so extravagant, that it was altogether slighted by Tacitus, as a
thing ridiculous to believe; the first part of which Prophecy was not fulfilled
in near 400 years after, when Victorinus, that governed here under Honorius,
was recalled to the defense of Italy, who drawing off all his Countrymen, An.
Chapter 407. left not so much as a single man of his whole Nation in the Isle: the
last was not accomplished till 800 years after, when Charlemaine was crowned
Emperor of the West in Rome, An. Chapter 800. Another Prediction they had more
ancient and more strange, and so much indeed the more wonderful, by how much it
seems little less then Evangelical; for they foretold that a Cl. Alexand.
Stro^. lib. 1. p. 117.
Virgin should bring forth a Son, as you may find by Cl. Alexandrinus,
Postellus, and other Dr. A^drews in his Exposition of the Commandments out of
the testimony of ^^stlius.
Authors of undoubted Credit: and this was so far believed both by them and the
Gentiles, that as these last had an The ruins of which are yet to be seen in
Cumberland, as the learned Camden tells us.
Altar upon the Banks of the Garrone dedicated to the Mother, so the Britains
had another dedicated to the Son, by the name of Belinadri, or the Golden Or
King.
God (for so Camden interprets it) or as we find it elsewhere, Belintucadri,
that is (by Solinus m^kes mention of an Altar in Caledonia dedicated to the
first begotten Son of God.
Solinus his Exposition) Omnia Sanans, or the All healing God; which as it
could not properly and truly be applicable to any but Christ, so it is not
against reason to think they might have some dark Discoveries of him, if we
consider how semblable a Prefiguration they had of his Birth, in the Offerture
of their Panchreston, or Misselto, described to be By the Sibill in Lactantius
Fermianus.
(...), a Medicine to heal all Diseases; which they gathered in no other Month
but that of December only, the Month in which he was born, and of all others
most Sacred amongst them: Nor had they a less probable Signature of his Death
and Passion, in the Peristerion or Vervain that adorned their Priests Caduces,
which as it was twined about the Staff, after the same fashion as Moses his
Serpent about the Pole, so who knows but it might have the same signification
to them, as the other to the Jews; that as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, so the Son of Man should be lift up for them: the Priests observing
the Ceremony of crossing themselves when they gathered this holy Plant (as the
Italians yet call it) Dextra manu sinistra Superposita modo furcae (says
Pliny.) I omit what some others have further noted upon the nature of this Herb
(being therefore called by the Greeks Peristerion, from (...), i. e. Columba,
quod columbae unice hac herba delectentur) with reference to the Holy Ghost,
that afterward appeared in that shape: Neither shall I make any descant upon
their Ritual use of Bread and Wine in their Sacrifices, as answering to our
Sacraments: though the learned Seldom be of opinion they thereby imitated those
of the Order of Melchisedec, the (...) of the Messiah: For since he that was
the Messiah did himself declare, it was hard to find faith upon the Earth, even
after the time that he was revealed from Heaven, it may seem strange that these
poor Islanders should see his Day so far off, by no other Light but that of
Nature: But considering how strangely they attained to that sublime Knowledge
of the Immortality of the Soul, which so amazed the Romans themselves, that, as
we may find by Longae (eanitis si cognita) vitae more media est. Lucan. lib. 1.
Lucan, they could not understand how Death, the ever before supposed end of
life, should be but the middle part, as he calls it; we may so far extend our
Charity toward them, from what we find in the Prophet Isa. 40.9.
Isaiah, as to believe they might be directed by the Secret Conduct of some
Divine Intelligence, to apprehend some transcendent Notions, not unlike those
of St. Paul in his Vision, which were not more lawful, nor perhaps possible for
them, then for him to utter in words, much less commit to writing. For we know
they were prohibited the use of Books, with relation to Solis nosse Deos, and
coeli numina vobis, aut solis noscire datum. Lucan.
Secrecy in Sacred Affairs; neither was it any scandal to their Religion to be
written in their Hearts only; however it put St. Origin no less to it, to find
out a Reason for their so early Faith, then Caesar and the rest of the Romans
were, to find a foundation for their so early Reason; it being much more a
wonder that they should appear so pious without the Knowledge of the true
Deity, then that they should be found so learned without any acquaintance with
Letters; Tradition proving a better School-Mistress to them, then Philosophy
was to any other Nation, which doubtless had rendered them sufficiently
glorious, had Posterity taken the same care to preserve, as they did to
transmit to them the excellent Relics of their Knowledge, which now being
lost in the Deluge of Time, and become (as a Lord Ba^^as Inst. mag.
wise man expresses it) Tanquam Tabula naufragii, are so battered and defaced,
that most men have thought them overvalued at the price of a private Belief;
for which cause, as I am not pressing to impose any thing herein discoursed
upon any man's Faith, much less to quarrel with his diffidence: So on the other
side, I would not be thought guilty of such an Indifferency, as might offer the
least occasion to any one to doubt of the Testimony I have given, but by no
means to condemn it. For in search of Skeptical Truths, every man should
preserve a Philosophical Liberty to himself, as in the acceptance of those
that are Historical, he may challenge a Dogmatical freedom; the reason for
justification of Matter of Fact in the Case of Antiquity, being so like that of
Opinion in point of Novelty, both in respect of the uncertainty, and the
inconvenience, that I shall not be ashamed to confess and conclude with my
Friend Curtius, Plura equidem Transcribo quam credo.
Nec etenim affirmare ausus sum qua dubio.
Nec subducere sustineo quae accepi.


Woodcut headpiece with an angel against a decorative pattern of grapes, vines
and flowers. I. CLASS OF BRITANNI, Brute, A. M. 2855. Malmude, A. M. 3522.
Belin, A. M. 3562. Ludbelin, A. M. 3880. Cassibelin, A. M. 3995. Tubelin, A. M.
3921.

BRUTE
Attributed coat of arms of the legendary Brute of Troy: a lion statant
guardant.THough there be many Modern Writers Polidor. Bocace. Vives. Camd.
Seld. etc
doubt, many of the Ancients do Caesar. Tacit. Bid. Girald. Camd. Malmesbury.
not confirm, and many both Ancient and Modern, do utterly William of Newburgh,
G^n^b^ the Abbot of Whethamsted, Daniel, etc.
deny the Story of Brute, and indeed the whole Contents of this first Class;
yet forasmuch as there are some found (and those of sufficient Credit) that
boldly Nenius, Faliesin. Leland. R. of Glocest. Huntingdon. Jeo. of Monmouth.
affirm it, and none can make any other but a conjectural disproof; I conceive
Antiquity may reasonably be excused, in claiming a Prerogative to uphold, at
least for not rejecting so received an Opinion, wherein though there may appear
some defects, yet (like those of an aged Parent) they ought to be concealed by
the Sons of Wit, least Novelty should take advantage to put a Scandal upon
Time, by calling Truth his Illegitimate Daughter. What Nation is there whose
Originals are so clear, but that there remains matte^ enough to dispute the
Authority of their first Writers, and Writings? How unreconcilable are many
passages in Herodotus, Helanicus, Josephus, and almost all the best Historians
of the first Age of the World? How inextricable are the Intricacies in the
Fasti Consulares, the Catalogue of the Roman Consuls themselves?
notwithstanding the great care they took to render their Annals certain: The
like may be said of the Assyrian, Persian, Egyptian, and Grecian Dynasty's:
neither need we much to marvel at it, since we find that a great part, not to
say most of the Historical part, even of Holy Writ it self, is so hard to
digest without a grain of Salt (as we say) that the quitting our Reason, is
made the merit, as well as the Foundation of our Faith: Much more tolerable is
it then, that the Actions, Order, and Successions of Brutes Posterity should be
so dark and dubious, in the Revolution of so many Ages, since the destruction
of From whence it is said he came.
Troy; the Circumstances of which Action are so different, both in respect of
the time, and the manner of it, that the whole Story, with its Dependencies,
stand vehemently suspected of being fabulous. Yet I do not take the
Antichronismes to be such as that we should thereupon blow off sixty Kings at
one blast (as Lewis the Reformer of the British History taxes Camden to have
done) the memory of some whereof has been continued by diverse ancient Towns,
which bearing yet their Names, gives us cause to believe they might be the
first Founders; as York supposed to be built by Eborac; Caerlile by Leyle;
Leicester by Leire; Ludlow by Lud. Others there are whose memory seems to be
perpetuated by their Cook's Preface to his third Report. Forteseu^ Lib. Aug. p.
32.
Laws and Constitutions, as those of Malmude, the famous Martia, Belin the
first, and Ludbelin. Some remain Superstites by the continuation of their Names
to this day in sundry Families of Note, derived for ought we know from them, as
Morgan, Eliot, Belin, Llhuyd, Ludlow, Blackdon, Price, Syltilt, etc. To diverse
others of whom there is no less doubt then of Brute, many Authentic Foreign
Authors give sufficient testimony: thus we find Brennus mentioned by Livy,
Cassibelin by Caesar, Cunobelin by Suetonius, Arviragus by Juvenal, Caractacus
by Tacitus, Coell by Utropius, Lucius by Eusebius; not to mention Belgus in
Pausanius, and Belguis in Justine, both supposed by Seldom to be mistaken for
Belinus, who, as we know, is elsewhere misnamed Branus; neither know I how it
came to pass, that Jeoffery of Monmouth (the first Discoverer of Brutes
History) lost so much reputation by it, if either the Authority of the Walt.
Archdeacon of Oxford, a grave and learned Author.
Person be considered from whom he had it (a Prelate of great Gravity and
Repute) or the Wisdom and Credit of those that Girald. Cambr. White, Verumnius,
Seldom, Lanbert.
followed him (one whereof affirms that he saw the Original which was brought
out of the Abbey of Be in Normandy) or lastly his own Authority, being Bishop
of St. Asaphs under King Stephen, and for his Eminence after made a Alphons.
Gatto de Gest. Pontific.
Cardinal; of whose Book, to speak freely, we may say as Cicero did of Caesar's,
Quantum Operibus suis detrahet Taken from the Opinion of Varro, who esteemed
all things as fabulous, which were writ before the first Olympiad, whereas we
see Plutarch began his Lives with Theseus, 2716. and Diodor. Siculus his
Bibliotheca from the destruction of Troy, 2783. the first at least 450, the
last about 200 years before that time.
vetustas, tantum addit laudibus. The greatest, if not the only Objections to
it being the Incoherence of the Chronology, which most men make the Touchstone
of History, whereas there is nothing more disceptious: For we see Figures
frequently mistaken by the most accurate and diligent Penmen of our own Times,
who stick not to screw up or let fall a year or two, nay sometimes ten, as it
serves to their purpose, to adjust their Reckonings, being the bolder with that
Liberty, upon experience that few men think it worth their while to examine
their falsehood, in respect it is a trouble that seldom makes the Reader wiser
in the business, who in actions of this distance, scarcely look any further
then to be informed (not persuaded) of the thing done. And so far I presume
Brutes Story will make it self good, with the hazard of as few absurdities as
any of the same date; in which confidence I leave it to the free Censure of
each Reader, with this Remark on^y, that If it be true that every little Star
Vid. in Vet. Script.

Is bigger then the Globe we tread on, far,
If distance can so much abuse the Sense,
Which chiefly does inform the Intelligence:
No marvel that such Antic Gests as those
Of Brute, and Trojans (scarcely fit for Prose)
Gain little credit, since there is few allow
Virtue to be the same thing then, as now.
Some doubt of Troy, others think Brute's a Fable,
Cause that Age did, what this has not been able.
Succeeding Times, if they allow our Story,
Will yet as much Demurr upon Our Glory.


MALMUD
Attributed coat of arms of Malmud: three crowns in pale. HAving pretermitted
the Particulars of the Story of Brute, and the Seventeen Kings his Successors,
as things so remote and uncertain, that no just measure can be taken either of
the Persons they lived with, or the Times they lived in: The next that appears
worthy of note is this Malmud, surnamed Dunwald, or, as the English Chronicle
has it, Donebant, who was to the Britains (as Numa to the Romans) the first
Law giver, and the Chief Priest, from whose Reign they dated the Knowledge of
all Civil, but more especially all Sacred Rites, which being kept in the
Cabinet of the Druids Breasts, tanquam in absconditis, as Gold and Jewels are
in a Mine, were cast into no certain form or fashion, till the use of Letters
was imposed upon them by the Romans, as a Badge of Subjection. Some thence
concluding all to be fabulous that happened before that time, without
considering, what violence they offer to the credit of those illegible Tables
of Noah, that comprehended the primitive Laws of Nature, which (however not
understood) were yet admitted by the Old World, as Relics of so
unquestionable Authority, that there is no less to be imputed to the virtue of
the Faith of that Age, then to the Patriarch's care, that they perished not in
the universal Deluge: The Britains having perhaps a better Constat of Girald.
Camd. Matt. Westminster. Whites Hist. Brit. Lib. 3. N. 14.
these, then the Jews had of those (yet either derived from the Authority of
Tradition) by how much they were left as a Legacy to succeeding Ages, and lost
nothing of their value in many hundred years after they were first delivered,
being the Original after which the great Legislator of the Saxons, King Elfred,
copied his Breviary of Statues (as the learned Lamb. de Leg. Anglic.
Lambert acknow^edges) or (which is of more Authority) as himself confesses in
his Title Page: which very Breviary is said to be the Foundation of that we
call our Common Law at this day; however, by reason of frequent Transcriptions,
Additions, and Amendments (like that of the Ship at Argos) it seems to be new
and another thing. Now for the rest of the Acts of this King, though perhaps
they are not to be justified, as those written by Thucidides, Zenophon,
Polibius, or Caesar, who were themselves Actors of the things, as well as in
the times they wrote: Yet they have the Testimony of some Relics, which (like
those two Procop. de b ll. Vandelic. Lib. 8.
Pillars erected at Tingis, that showed there had been some Colonies of the
Jews there, although no mention be made thereof in any of their own Writings)
support the honor of his memory beyond contradiction: Such were those
stupendous Works of his, commonly called the four great Causeys, that crossed
the whole Isle, erroneously supposed to be first undertaken by the Romans,
whereas they were begun by Caxton, Polichronicon, Hollinshed.
him, and only finished by them. The first, by him named Fordd-y-Brenin, or The
Kings Highway, leading from the Corner at Totnes in his own Country, passed
through the whole County of Devon, the Counties of Somerset, Gloucester,
Warwick, and Leicester, and ending at Lincoln; this the Romans called the
Fosse. The second, anciently called Guthelin-street, because it was reported to
have been finished by that King; beginning at Dover, running out as far as
Worcester, and from thence was carried to Cardigan in Wales: this the ancient
Britains called Peunguys; the Romans, Via Consularis; those of later times,
Watlin-street, or Werhem-street. The third called See Hollinsheds Description,
fol. 113. cap. 19.
Erming-street by the Saxons, or rather i. e. Mercurii Columna.
Irmanhull-street, began at St. David's in Wales, and crossed over all the
Countries betwixt that and Southampton, where it ended; this the Britains
called Croesfordd, and the Romans, Via Praetoria. The fourth began a little of
one side of Worcester, and passed on by York to Tinmouth, called Kikeneldis, or
Icknild-street, which I take to be its primitive denomination. And to these
that Reverend Seld. Poliolb. Cant. 8.
Monument (aged now above 2080 years, the shame and glory of the present Age)
dedicated by him to the Attae Rhwyscoll, i. e. All power, M. S. in archive Oxon.
Destinies, or Holy Powers that ruled the World, and by the Romans, at the
arrival of Claudius, consecrated to the honor of the great Goddess Diana, and
by King Lucius, upon the first entertainment of Christianity, to that great
Apostle of the Gentiles St. Paul. To this King likewise is ascribed the honor
of Founding those, rather ancient, then great Foundations of Fabian.
Blackwell and Guild Hall, heretofore parcels of his Court; the first continued
(perhaps ever since) as the great Mercatorium or Staple for Trade; the last, as
the great Orseddfaine, or Tribunal of Justice, both for City and Country. He
has the repute likewise of being Founder of those two ancient Buildings in the
West, Malmesbury and the Vyes, the first having the stamp of his Name yet upon
it. But if the Reader be not disposed to believe any part of this, or the other
Kings Legend, I shall conclude as I find a very reverend Author does, in the
like case; Malmesbury de Oest. Reg. Aug. Lib. 5.
Mihi debetur Collectionis gratia;
Sibi habeat electionis materiam.


BELIN.
Attributed coat of arms of Belin: a sun in splendor.THE next Dynast in order
of Fame, as well as in repute of Order, was this King, whom the Britains make
the common Root of that great Stock that has adorned their Pedigrees with so
many flourishing Branches, being the most Splendid of all their Princes, in
that he was in like manner esteemed by them to be a Representative of Apollo,
as Apollo was by the Ancients thought to be a Type of Christ: This appears by
the style they gave him, which I take to be one of the Attributes of that God,
calling him Belin Tucadre, i. e. The Healing King, or Healing God. For it was a
Policy much in fashion in elder times, and as it seems, as well understood by
the British as any other Gentile Princes, to take the advantage of assimulating
themselves to that Deity, which was most adored by their People, to beget the
greater reverence to their Majesty; and accordingly, in honor of the memory of
this man, who by some Writers is called The Golden Belin.
Belin, or Pelinor, and by others Belin the Great.
Belinvaure, all the successive Kings were styled As appears by the Names of
the following Kings.
Belin, as the Egyptian Kings were styled I harach, and the Roman Emperors
Caesar. The Vulgar turned Belin into Bren, and the Latin Writers following that
mistake, changed Belinus into Brennus, whereby it has so happened, that he is by
many Historians supposed (and as they think with sufficient probability) to be
the same Brennus that was so terrible to the Romans. Amongst those that deny
it, some doubt whether there were ever any such Persons, as the one or the
other: Others take the word Bren or Belin to be only terms of Majesty, and not
Names, which is an Opinion that calls in question all the best Pedigrees of
Wales. And some there are, who from the difference of the Names, infer a
difference of Persons, taking advantage thereby to discredit the Authority of
Jeffery of Monmouth, by seeming to uphold it; who makes Brennus and Belinus to
be two Brothers, and Sons of Malmud; but those that support the Credit of the
Personality of Belinus, and are willing he should be the same with the famous
Brennus that Sacked Rome, suppose there needs no better (...) to illustrate the
matter, then that account we have from the Oracle of Delphos, which says that
the same Brennus came (...), from the very farthest parts of the West, which
Catullus explains Britain; and whether he meant (...) or (...), the greater or
the lesser Britain, according to that Division made by Ptolomy, either makes
good the conjecture, as being (...), even Westward of the West; especially the
latter, which from thence (says Bochart) got the Name of Ebernia, now
corruptly Hibernia, which in the proper signification (as Melancthon tells us)
is Ultima habitatio. Now for the different sound of the Names of Belinus and
Brennus, it is no more then what we usually find in almost all Histories,
whereof diverse Seld. Poliolb. ^^lid. Virg. Gi^nan. Villani.
Learned Authors, and amongst the rest the Famous Seldom himself gives us
several Instances: But there is nothing of fuller proof then that Verse in
Eusebius; Sol and Osyris idem, Dionysius, Orus, Apollo. Nor is it less a
Question, Whether he that fired Rome, be the same that troubled Greece, then
whether either of them were Britains. But since it is admitted by T. Livy.
diverse Historians abroad, that they (if so be they were two) were both of
Celtick Extraction, and so positively asserted by so many Historians of our
own, that this Belinus was the man, I shall not make it more doubtful by
showing my self over-industrious in the proof of it; but conclude with like
modesty as the Poet in this, as in all things of like uncertainty: Si quid
novisti rectius istis,
Candidus Imperti, si non, his utere mecum.


LUDBELIN.
Attributed coat of arms of Ludbelin: a tree and beast.BEtwixt the last and
this Kings Reign, I reckon near about 330 years, by the Vulgar account, in
which Jeffery of Monmouth places a Succession of about 44 Kings: But Hollinshed
making a digression of 180 years (which cuts of 33 from the number) leaves him,
and Fabian, and the rest that follow them, to make out their Catalogue through
this dark Period as well as they can, wherein they could not (it seems) discern
Men from Trees, otherwise they would not (as they have) denominated the Isle of
Ely from Holy, the supposed Father of this King (which rather was Belly the
corruption of Belin) whereas the true derivation was from Helig a Willow, with
which sort of Trees that Isle abounds. That which illustrates the name of this
Eliod, or as he is commonly called by contraction, Lud, or rather Lluid, i. e.
the brown Belin, is that Urbicarii honor given him by consent of a most all
Writers, of being the Founder of the West wall, as the first Belin was of the
East wall of the City of London, to which the Gates yet bearing their Names,
give probable Testimony of their memory. However there are those that object
against both, and will have that of Belinsgate to be no more but as if one
should say, the Kings Gate; so called, because the Kings Toll and Customs was
ever paid and brought in there; and Ludgate to be no more but Portus Populi,
changing Lud into Leod, which in the old Saxon Tongue signified (as Verslegan
tells us) the Peoples Gate; a conceit as applicable to the Gate of any other
great City, as to this; wherein if private Criticismes might be admitted to
derogate from the authority of Antiquity, yet the Etymology Hermoldus Nigellus
gives of this Name, deriving it from Hludo, i. e. Preclarus, with whom the
learned Camden concurs, sufficiently repairs that Indignity, and excuses the
good Will of the good old Robert of Gloucester.
Monk, that for the same reason would have London to be quasi Ludstowne; a
conceit as allowable as that of Rome, from Roma, Romus, Romanus, or Romulus,
all averred by several Historians to be Founders of that City, out of respect
to the consonancy of the Names only, and would doubtless have passed for
current, had it not lately been exploded by a better Authority, which has
informed us that it was rather London quasi Lhondine, i. e. the City of
Shipping, with which agrees that of Huntingdon (one of as good credit as any of
his Time) who turns this Lud, or Lhuid, into Land, to render him the Prince of
Shipping: All that we hear of him in the British Story is, That he left two
Sons under Age, at the time of his death; the elder called by the Romans,
Androgius, the younger Theomantius; either of whom being unfit to succeed in
the Government, by reason of their Minority, the Britains (after the manner of
most Nations at that time) chose the nearest in Merit, as well as in Kin, to
succeed, which was their Uncle Cassibelin, or Belin the Yellow.

CASSIBELIN.
Attributed coat of arms of Cassibelin: three crowns in bend.THIS King, as he
was the first of all the British Princes that showed himself upon the Stage of
Action, so being not content to be Chief unless he were absolute, he made so
good use of the Accidental part of his Fortune, the minority of his two
Nephews, that he took the confidence (having first justled them out of all
hopes of succeeding their Father) to quarrel with all that stood near him in
the Government. Two there were more eminent then the rest, of whom it was
doubted whether their Malice or their Power were the greater; Comoc Prince of
the Attrebatii, and Imanuence Prince of the Trinobantes; the first a sullen
subtle man, the last more open, very rash, but Popular; neither of them so
confident in his Power, as affected with his merit; yet being united by the
concord of their Discontents, they began to swell and be tumultuous: but as
Wisdom when it wants Integrity (like Salt when it has lost its savor) is not
only as insignificant, but oftentimes more hurtful then Folly it self: so their
public Pretensions being tainted with private Malice and Ambition, lost so
much of the efficacy that was expected from so smart a beginning, that their
Forces not answering their forwardness, the one was compelled to submit to be a
Prisoner, the other an Exile. Comoc applied himself to Caesar, then in the
higher part of Gallia; and to make himself the more acceptable, presented to
him the young Prince Androgeus, as a Pledge for the homage of the whole Isle:
This gave that great Son of Fortune the first prospect of the greatest design
Humanity was capable of at that time, and so much the more worthy the thoughts
of him, who would be esteemed nothing less then a God, by how much the
Transports of his invincible Spirit, carried his Resolutions to the conquest of
another World, altogether unknown to his Countrymen, and scarce probable to
have been discovered by him, had not their fatal Ambition, destined to be so
officious to his, raised his Fame upon the Ruins of their own: Easier it was
for Co^^oc to prevail with Caesar to take the Sea, then for Caesar to prevail
with his Legions to quit it; who finding the Britains all in Arms, ready to
oppose their landing, refused to set foot on shore, till Mandubrace Son of
Imanuence (whose head Cassibelin took off upon his departure with Conioc)
having changed his Nature with his For the Romans called him Scaeva in respect
of the cruelty he showed to his Countrymen.
Name, leapt first into the Water, and by the fierceness of his Example urged
them to quit their Ships, who could not yet quit their fears. Now began the
Battle on which the Fate of Britain depended, which was so bloody beyond any
that the Romans had ever seen or felt before, that doubting the protection of
their Gods in a cause so injurious, they betook them to their Ships again, as
dishonourably as they left them, exposing Mandubrace to the mercy of his
Countrymen (once his only Friends, now his only Foes) who like a Tiger in a
toil, finding that the Tide forsook him as well as the Romans, fought it out
from Rock to Rock, till, with the loss of their blood who pressed upon him, he
had raised it again to such a propitious height, as served to carry him off
unto the Fleet: The experience of his single Courage gave the Romans such a
Test of what they were to expect from the collected Forces of his Countrymen,
that had not Casar himself afterward done the same thing that Mandubrace did
before (who catching up his Standard, leapt into the Ocean with it, as if
resolved to begin the second Fight, swimming like a true As descended from
Venus, whom A^s^nius describes to be Orta Salo, etc.
Son of the Sea) he had only come and seen, but not overcome: But this Onset of
his had a Success so much greater then that of Scaeva, as was his Fortune,
which always made the way where he could not find it. The Britains demanded a
Parley; Casar accepted it as an instance of Submission; but it proved only a
Trap to catch the Renegado Comoc, who coming to them as Ambassador from the
Romans, to persuade them out of their Liberty, lost his own: Neither proved
this a single loss to Caesar; for about four days after, his Fleet being
distressed with a terrible Storm, that rose upon the back of a Spring Tide, at
the time of a Full Moon, was drove out to Sea, and for want of advice of such a
Pilot as he, was broken all to pieces; which accident broke off the Treaty,
encouraging the Britains so far, that they who had before the care of a
defensive, began now an offensive War, Invading their Invaders; but their Skill
being no way answerable to their Courage, Casar found a way first to divide,
and after to dissipate their Forces, putting their distressed King, forsaken by
his People, as soon as by Fortune, to the worst of Extremities, to release an
old Enemy, that he might compound with a New, purchasing by the Freedom of
Com^t, a Peace that he knew would enthral his Country.

It Is hard for Kings to yield, but harder far
When he gives rules for Peace, that raised the War.
Who buys his freedom seldom ever thrives,
They make their Markets best that sell their lives.
TUBELIN.
Attributed coat of arms of Tubelin: a winged dog sejant. ANDROGIUS, the eldest
Son of Lud, proving as false to his Country, as to his own Blood, was, after
the death of his Uncle Cassibelin (who dyed Childless) put besides the
privilege of his Bi^th, and his younger Brother i. e. The pious King.
Tudorbelin, or as they called him vulgarly, Tubelin, and the Romans
Theomantius, was preferred to the Succession. A Person less active then his
Predecesso^, and less known then his Successor; but his Government fa ling ut
in such a juncture of Time, hen the Romans, having enough to do at home, went
not much abroad, he had the good bap to preserve the freedom of himself and his
People, without any great necessity of giving proof of his Fortune or Parts.
Britain being then, by the Tripartite Division of the Empire after Caesar's
death, become the Lot of Octavius, not yet grown up to be Augustus, he either
distrustful of the Fate of his own Greatness, or his Country-mens Ambition
(both alike dangerous whilst boundless) left it out of the Provincial Roll, as
being indeed out of the World (for so says Dion it was esteemed to be)
determining to confine his Empire within the limits Nature had set it, by the
Danub Northward, Mount Atlas Southward, the River Euphrates East, and the
British Ocean Westward: But this moderation of his not agreeing with the
activity of that rough Age (made up for the most part of men, that whilst they
were Children, seemed to have been nourisht with blood rather then milk) it was
not long ere their magnanimity, or the flattery of those nearest about him,
prevailed with him to enlarge his thoughts, as well as his Empire, and to found
his Glory (more majorum) in the pursuit of new Discoveries. So that having
before subjected all that lay within his view, nothing appeared to his
Imagination to be so near Horace. Od. 5. l. 3.
Divinity as the Conquest of the Britains, to which the Ambition of his
Predecessors having only pointed out the way, but not at all showed the method,
he thought it no allay to his Courage, to proceed with a circumspection
suitable to the greatness of the design; spending more Time and Treasure in the
preparation to, then the pursuit of his purpose: and having made choice of the
most eminent Persons to attend him, and accommodated all things suitable to that
choice, as if he had intended to bring another World to the conquest of this,
he began his March toward Gallia: The Britains though they natu^ally disdained
Servitude, frighted it seems by the noise of his approach (the Fame whereof
broke out like Thunder before a Storm) thought it no indignity to submit to the
tender of a Dion. l. 53.
Tribute; which (however it was blanched under the Title of a Strab. l. 4.
Free Will Offering to the Roman Gods) was exacted with that severity, that
Tubelin was fain to send his own Son Cun^belin to remain as a Hostage at Rome,
for performance of the Conditions; who living long there, pertook so much of
their fashions and manners, that he is worthily reckoned the first of the
Britannici, or civilliz'd Britains; by whom his Countrymen understanding that
they were marked out for Conquest, omitted no occasion of Complement after his
Return, whereby they might express themselves obsequious to the Romans, even to
a degree of Flattery, till they found their Liberty in danger by an Temp.
Tiberii.
Injunction sent them to admit Colonies amongst them; from which time they were
deaf to all Treaties, and prepared to make so obstinate a Defense against any
Invasion, that the Report thereof so frighted Caligula, whilst he was on the
other side of the Water, that he returned home content with a piece of Causing
his Soldiers to gather their Casks full of of Muscle and Cockle shells,
carried them to Rome as a Trophy of his British Expedition.
Pageantry, instead of a Triumph, which as it was the most Sordid, so it seems
to have been the most Ridiculous of any that we meet with in Story.

Woodcut headpiece with an angel against a decorative pattern of grapes, vines
and flowers. II. CLASS OF BRITANNICI, Cunobelin, A. M. 3934. Guithbelin, An.
Chapter A. M. 17. Belinarvirag, A. M. 0050. Meriobelin, A. Chapter 0098. Coelibelin, A.
Chapter 0129. Cymbelin A. Chapter 0156.

CUNOBELIN
Attributed coat of arms of Cunobelin: a Janus face. CUNOBELIN, or the Yellow
King, so called from the Emication of that Golden Age he lived in, to wit, at
the time of the birth of that beautiful Christ Jesus.
Child, which Tully dreamed he saw let down from Heaven, in a golden Chain,
which was verified in the 18th Year, or as some think in the 23 Year of this
Kings Reign, at which time the Temple of Janus being shut up in Rome, in token
of an universal Peace throughout the World: Some have supposed (and not
improbably) that be took thence occasion to make use of this Device which we
find on his Money, and elsewhere. But some others that have lately dived deeper
into the Mysteries of Antiquity, conjecture that he did hereby rather denote a
farewell to Barbarity; Janus being the Person that is said to have first
civilized the World (as this King did the Britains) and therefore painted with
two Faces, as bringing one shape out of another: a conceit tolerable enough,
and to me so much the more acceptable, by how much the same Canden.
Author (whose Authority may bear it ot) admits Cunobelin to be as Critical as
himself: most certain it is, that moved by an Emulation of the Roman Majesty,
whereof he had been an eye witness, when his Father, under pretense of sending
him to congratulate Augustus his success against M. Anthony, left him an
Hostage at Rome: he did endeavor by his own Example, to bring his Countrymen
into the Roman fashion of living; imitating them in the manner of their Houses,
eating, drinking, and clothes: Coining money in In A^chiv. Londin.
Gold and Silver, instead of their rusty Iron and Copper Ring^, valued by
weight, making their Money (More Romano) in Medals or Plates, in the one side
whereof, was some device queint enough for the invention of those Times; on the
other the face of the King; some whereof have been preserved to the glory of
this Kings memory, to this day, which being under a form so rarely found
amongst those of any other Nation, to wit, the device of the Jun. Nomensi.
Toruma ingrav'd in the Concavity of the Reverse, intitles the Nation to a
distinct Epoche, more renowned then most other States in the World can pretend
to. We find many different devices of this King; but this of Janus I take to be
the principal, and without doubt had some signal meaning, which the Critics
have not yet light upon, possibly to denote the Isle under two Heads at that
time, Caesar and himself, who ruled (as we may say) with a kind of double faced
Supremacy.

Cunobeline, whilst thou desir'st to be
Famed for a double faced Supremacy,
Bringing the Britains into the Roman fashion,
By eivilizing, thou undo'st thy Nation.
They Are Caesar's Subjects now, who erst were thine,
Ere long their Virtue will become their Crime.
For being true to both, they are true to none,
Two Heads may thus prove not so good as one.
GUITHBELIN.
Attributed coat of arms of Guithbelin: a branch (of laurel or wheat?).'IT IS a
question, Whether the last King were more happy in Himself, An. Chapter 17.
or in his Children, whereof he left no less then five Sons to succeed him, of
which only Adminius the Eldest. Guiderius the Second. T^godomous the Third.
Carast^^us the Fourth. Arviragus the Fifth.
One miscarried, who endeavoring to betray his Country in the life time of his
Father, was after his death put besides the Succession; and this King, his
second Brother, set up in his room; to whom there are so many different Names
given in different Transcripts, both British and Latin, as has occasioned many
doubts of his Person. His right Name was Caradec, which being too rough for the
Roman pronunciation, their Historians call him Caradocus. The Britains, in
respect of his being Prince of the Isle of Wight, which they called in their
Language Guith, styled him, after he came to be King, Guithbelin; as much as to
say, the King that came out of that Island; and the Romans thereupon,
Guiderius. So that ^t is no marvel if those that had no other Guides but Names
only, have found themselves misled in the dark places of the British Annals. He
began his Reign in the time of Tiberius Nero, for his sottishness nicknam'd by
his Countrymen, Biberius Mero, who leaving every Province to the protection of
its proper Strength, occasioned so many disorders as begot at last a Civil war
in his own Breast, as well as his Empire; his Covetousness striving in vain
with his Cowardice, to recover the benefit at least, if not the honor he had
lost. Britain was the place he always threatened, but with so palpable
Irresolution, that taking occasion from every little accident to alter his
purpose of Invasion, the Soldiers in scorn called him As much as to say in
English, Short Legs, meaning he had always one Leg in the Stirrup, but never
got up.
Callipedes; this added to the Fortune, more then the same of this King, who
all the time of his Government had no occasion given him of Glory, but found
the opportunity to learn, by observing that of his Neighbors, how to encounter
the dangers which afterward approached toward him, when his Brother Adminius
brought on Caligula to give him that false Allarum from the Holland Coast: Nine
years he ruled in peace, till the Ambition of Claudius, which transported him
as much beyond the bounds of his Reason, as those of his Empire, broke in like
the Ocean with a resistless Torrent, and bore away all before it: The Britains,
who could not withstand their own Fears, being less able to resist his Forces,
flying at the first sight of his Elephants, as if they had believed, there
could have been no greater a Beast in the World then himself; upon which
advantage he made himself Master of the Pass over the Thames, which yet he
dreaded more then that over the Sea, and so marched up to London; where the two
brave Brothers, Caradocus and Togodomnus gave him Battle, in which the last,
scorning to outlive the Liberty of his Country, fell a Sacrifice to the
Incensed Gods of the Isle: His Royal Brother, retiring as a wounded Deer
(forsaken by the Heard) to seek some shelter in the Neighboring Woods,
resolved to make head against those pursued him, as often as he reflected on
his lost greatness; but the danger approaching nearer, his Wisdom prevailed
with him to retreat, till he might fight with more advantage.

So the stall Stagg upon the brink
Of some smooth Stream, about to drink, Waller.

Surveying there his armed head
With shame remembers that be fled
The scorned Dogs; resolves to try
The Combat next: But if their cry
Invade again his trembling Ear,
He straight resumes his wonted fear,
Leaves the untasted Spring behind,
And winged with fear, out-flies the wind.
BELIN ARVIRAG.
Attributed coat of arms of Belin Arvirag: a Pegasus springing.FROM the
beginning of this Kings Reign (if so be we may not rather call it Rebellion) we
date the Dominion of the Romans in this Isle. Julius Caesar had the honor of
being the first Aggressor: Claudius laid the Superstructure upon his
Foundation: Domitian had the good hap (I cannot say Being more beholden to the
Virtue of his Lieutenants, then his own.
honor) to perfect the Work. The death of the last King, as it was no small
discouragement to the Britains (the brave Caractacus being at the same time
taken Prisoner) so it rendered the Romans so insolent, that all the Time of Who
succeeded Claudius.
Nero's Government, the Story is filled with nothing but Relations of Murders,
Rapes, and Rapines; wherein the Virtue of his Lieutenant Suetonius, seems to
have contested with his Masters Vices, for the Sovereignty, in suppressing by
his Wisdom, or qualifying by his Courage, their Outrage, whom he had
commissioned to perpretate all manner of Villainies; being a Person of that
excellent temper in War and Peace, that it could not have been expected the
Having lost in one single Battle with him 80000 men by common compute.
Britains could long have resisted, had not the flattery of his Countrymen
prevailed as much over him at home, as he did over those here: Representing the
state of things to that effeminate Tyrant, not according to the Truth, but as
they thought most agreeable to his humor. Whereupon he and the Consul
Petronius Turpilianus that succeeded him, being both removed, that base Fellow
Tribellius Maximus took place, whose unworthiness was such, that it provoked
his own Countrymen to rebel, as well as the Britains; but his Reign ending
with his Masters, during, all the time of Otho Galba and Vitellius his
Government (whereof he that held longest continued not above Eighth Months) the
Roman State was as busily employed in conquering it self, as before in
conquering others: so that they wholly pretermitted the thoughts of all Foreign
Attempts, till the entrance of Vespatian, who having laid the Foundation of his
Greatness here, resolved to give the Britains the first taste of his Power, by
sending over those three excellent Generals, Petilius Cerealis, Julius
Frontinus, and Julius Agricola; against whom there appeared for the Britains,
moved by the Example of their Neighbors, no less then by their own desire of
Liberty, three men of as great repute; that is to say, Arviragus, whom the
Natives, after the manner of the Romans, had saluted Imperator Britannorum, the
only Son of Cunobelin left alive; Venutius Prince of the Brigantes; and
Galgacus Prince of the Caledonii: These three divided the Forces of the whole
Isle betwixt them, thinking to have singled out the Roman Generals; but they
uniting, whilst the other fought by Parties (I cannot call them Armies) routed
them as fast as they met with them: upon which Arviragus, after the end of that
sharp War, strangely begun and maintained by his Sister Voadicia, which cost
near 100000 Roman lives, retired into the North, where some say he dyed; others
that he submitted to a Tribute, persuaded by his Wife Genissa, a Roman Lady,
and near Kinswoman to Claudius.

MERIOBELIN.
Attributed coat of arms of Merio Belin: a double-headed boar. AGRICOLA, having
by the death, or recess rather, of the last King (as appears by that piece of
Flattery of the Juvenal. Regem aliquem Capies, aut lle Temone Britannorum
excidet Arviragus.
Poet to Domitian his Master) cleared his way over the body of the Isle, as far
as Sterling in Scotland (the non ultra of those days) and planted Garrisons in
the most convenient places betwixt Glota and Bodotria, i. e. the two Arms of
the two contrary Seas, that run up into the Land there, now called the Frith of
Dunbritton, and the Frith of Edinburgh, the utmost Limits then designed: having
neither desire nor provocation to pursue the Britains any further, he resolved
to crown his Victory with subduing the perverseness of those that were already
in his power; whereby, whiles he aspired to no less advantage over his
Predecessors, in point of Glory, then he had over his Enemies in point of
Power, he showed the World that they only knew how to Conquer, but he, how to
make good a Conquest. The way he took to do this, was by permitting the People
their own Laws and their own Princes; allowing their Kings the Style, State,
and Complements of Majesty, after the rude manner their Ancestors had been
served in, himself in the mean time using the Roman fashions: so, as he seemed
rather to tempt them by his Example, then compel them by any Law to do the
like. The King that then ruled was this Meriadoc (whom the Romans called
Marius) supposed to be the Son of the last King, whom to caress, they called
Muegan, as much as to say the Freeman, which Complement so irritated those
under his Fathers Colleague Galgacus (who were driven into the inaccessable
parts of Scotland, and forced to endure all the miseries incident to a barren
Soil and unwholesome Air, whilst the other enjoyed all blessings but that of
Liberty) that their Envy turned to as great an Animosity against him and his
people, as against the Romans themselves, and from that very time, they wasted
one another with alternate Incursions, till an Enemy, that neither of them
dreamed of, broke in upon them, and did them more mischief then the Romans. The
only Action we find this Marius engaged in, was that Expedition against the
Picts (for by that Name continued the custom of going naked, and painting their
body like their Ancestors, the Romans distinguished them from the civilized, i.
e. the subjugated Britains) wherein he proved so successful in several Battles,
that the Romans, to encourage him and all his Successors, whom they designed as
Tacitus tells us, to be Servitutis Instrumenta, erected a Stone as a Trophy of
his victorious memory, by the Inscription of Marti Victoria, that has lasted
till of late years; the Glory whereof is denied him by some of our Modern
Antiquaries, who with more Envy perhaps then Ignorance, ascribe it to Marius
the Roman Consul, with as much reason as Lloyd the British Historian would have
him to be that Murigus, on whom he fastens so many wonders; both he and they
being confident, that in Relations at this distance, no man is of sufficient
Authority to suppress any man's fancy, much less condemn it.

COELIBELIN.
Attributed coat of arms of Coeli Belin: a crescent.THE good Fortune of
Agricola in reducing the Britains, proved most unfortunate to himself, while
the jealous Tyrant his Master, thinking the mock Triumph he had made but a
little before in Germany, was upbraided by the Fame of his real conquest here,
recalled him out of ours, to send him of an Errand into another World; whereby
the Britains being left to themselves, to contest with the Picts (who had
changed their Natures from the time they changed their Names, and become of
Friends the most mortal Enemies) knew not how to resist the approaching storm,
but were forced to give place, whiles they made themselves Masters of all the
Country about Edinburgh: the news whereof being afterward brought to Adrian,
when he was Emperor, he sent over Julius Severus, and purposed to follow
himself in Person, to chastize the Insolence of the one, and the Cowardliness
of the other: But Severus to render himself more grateful to the Britains, and
to show them that he had more of the Julius in his Nature, then the Severus,
brought over with him this Coel, the Princeps Juventutis, whom he knew they
longed to see, being the next of blood to the last King (some say his Son) whom
the Romans called Calius; who under the color of being sent for Breeding to
Rome, had been kept there as an Hostage, from the time of Marius his first
entering upon the Government: Long it was not before he had beaten back the
Picts; but before he could make ready the Laurel to present to the Old Emperor
his Master, he impatient of the Glory, was arrived in Person, who finding the
Picts retired into their Fastnesses, very wisely depopulated all the Country
round about, and so leaving out that which was not worth the trouble of
keeping, he secured the rest by that wonderful Work called the Picts Wall.
After this he established Coell in the Government over the Britains, and
appointed the Propraetor Licinius Prisons (whom he had purposely called from
the Jewish Wars) to be assistant to him: by whose advice Coel set up a
Municipal form of Government in all the Cities and great Towns, something like
that of the Romans, and sent abroad Judges into the Country, with Commission of
Oyer and Terminer, in all matters Criminal and Civil. Now because the People
were of different Nations, and bred under different Laws, part Britains, and
part Romans, they observed this Rule, to punish all Romans by Roman
Magistrates, all Britains by British; only herein they gave respect to the
Romans, to submit that all Process should be in Latin, which at first the
Vulgar sort of Britains could not well digest, because they understood nothing
of it; but sympathy of Manners and continuation of Commerce introduced at last
such an affection to the Language, that they became not only knowing in the
Tongue, but very Critical in that knowledge, arriving at a degree of Eloquence
and that led them to a perfection in the Of which they were wholly Ignorant
before.
Liberal Sciences, and in a very little time they were effeminated with all the
Arts of that wanton Nation; but as bad causes many times produce good effects,
so out of this Dunghill sprung that Flower the Luce, which garnished the
Temples of the succeeding King, who meeting with an Age that affected new
Notions, suffered himself to be carried away in the Crowd, till happily, and
perhaps unexpectedly, he arrived at last at the Doctrine of Christianity.

CYMBELIN.
Attributed coat of arms of Cymbelin: a cross. THE time ascribed by the British
Historians to the 3 last Kings (if there be no mistake in the Computation)
could take up no less then the Reigns of Six Emperors, Titus, Domitian, Nerva,
Trajan, Adrian, and Antonius; the two first of which were perhaps more unkind
to the Britains then to any other of their Subjects; but the two next permitted
them the benefit of their own Kings; the two last the privilege of their own
Laws: but more beholding were they yet to the Emperor Aurelius, who, if he were
not a real Christian (as some H^linshed, lib. 5. cap. 9.
Historians believe him to be) was yet (as it is reported of King Agrippa)
almost persuaded to be so, in that he frankly privileged all those of that
persuasion, and permitted this King to be the first professed Believer of any
Prince in the World: whereupon his Countrymen changed his name of Cymbelin,
into that of Levermawr, i. e. the Great Light, upon which the Romans called him
Lucius; a Name that seems to have been written with the Beams of the Sun, to
the Intent it might be legible throughout all the Ages of the World: in honor
of which Emperor, the said King entitled the first Canons that ere he made,
Leges Romanas and Casaris: Now however this was the first Christian King that
ever was, not excepting (with reverence to the Writers of their Legend be it
spoken) either Abdia. Hist. Apost. lib. 9. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Gundafer K. of India, converted by St. Thomas, or Nicet Choniat. in Andron.
Com. l. 2.
Abagar K. of Edessa, converted by Letters (as they say) from our Savior
himself: Yet we must not take the Era of Christianity within this Isle, from
the date of his Conversion: Since Gildas, whose Authority is not to be
questioned, deduces it tempore summo Tiberii, which falls out not to be above
five years after Christ's Passion; who, by the Dionysian Account, suffered in
the eighteenth year of the Reign of that Whom Tertullian would have be thought
a Christian himself, distinct. 80. c. in illis Clem. Prop.
Tyrant: However, those that think not fit to look so far back do yet admit
presidenti Arvirago, and to this, even the Roman Historians, that lived near
about the same time, give some probable Testimony; for what else can be
understood by that strange Lipsius interprets it Christianity.
Superstition of the Jews, wherewith Sueton. vit. Ner.
Suetonius complains, that Pomponia, the Wife of A. Plantius Lieutenant to
Claudius, here was infected: Judaism being thought by the Romans to differ from
Christianity in Specie only; and most of our Oildas, Simon Metaphrastes,
Suriu^, Cambden, etc.
Antiquaries of the best Credit, do affirm St. Peter to have been preaching
here near about the same time: So that the Conversion of Lucius may be esteemed
rather happy then early, who meeting with such a calm season, as did not nip
the Bud of his Devotion, before it was fully blown; it was no marvel (having
taken root so long before) it sprung up so suddenly, if so be we may call that
growth sudden, which yet rose by visible degrees, to that perfection it
attained to in his time: for it is worthy the noting, how the Britains, by
Conversation with the Romans, became knowing first in the use of Arms, after in
the practice of Arts and Sciences, natural, civil, moral and metaphisical: In
Cunobelin's time they refined their Money: In the time of Marius they learned
the Art of Fortifications: The last King before this Instructed them in the
Rules of Philosophy; This in the Rudiments of Religion, reducing it after into
practice, as diverse of our Ecclesiastical Writers inform us, by establishing
with his Royal Authority A. B. and Bishops in the Church, instead of those
Flamins and Arch-Flamins which were before in the Paganish Temples, wherein the
British Church had the start of all other Christian Churches in the World, in
point of honor, as well as Order: There being no Constat of so high a Title,
as that of Usher primord. Malmesbury.
Arch-Bish. in any of the Eastern Churches at that time; from whom, those of
Rome, and all the Western Churches, had theirs many years after: which shows
that his pious purpose was not to suffer Religion to loose any part of that
State and Majesty, which might preserve the Reverence due to it, and
accordingly he not only purged and prepared the great Pagan Temples, for the
Service and Honor of Religion, but erected many particular Seminaries, quae
Christianae pietatis extitere primordia, says Polidor, endowing them at his
own proper costs and charges: amongst the rest, I take that of Bangor to be as
the first, so perhaps the Containing no less then 300 Monks.
greatest Monastery, that ever was (I say not in this Isle only, but) in any
part of the World; whose Foundation was laid so deep, that none of the Emperors
in the Century following (who for the most part proved bloody Persecutors)
could undermine it: The Religious continuing safe in the peaceful Exercise of
their Devotions, till the Entrance of those cursed Pagans the Saxons, who
sacrificed them all in one day. But as he was the first Christian, so he was
unhappily the last King of this Class, who dying without Heir or Successor,
left his Orphan Country, not only dispairing of future Liberty, but subjected
to all the present miseries a dejected people could suffer under the Oppression
of a greedy, proud and cruel Nation, who kept faith with them no longer, then
till they could find an Opportunity to do otherwise; being not content to
command their Purses without they disposed of their Persons also, forcing them
to serve in their ambitious Quarrels abroad, and to follow the Fortune of their
several Factions, through all the disadvantages, that attended the injustice of
their Arms, till wasted and wearied to that degree, as rendered them unable to
defend themselves, they were necessitated to implore aid from those, who under
color of coming as Auxiliaries, proved of all others the most fatal Enemies,
taking their Country from them, and from their Country its name.

THE SECOND DYNASTY OF ROMANS.

Woodcut headpiece with an angel against a decorative pattern of grapes, vines
and flowers. OF ROMANS.
THE Romans (as most other Nations) were a People mixed Party per Pale, half
Latins, and half Sabins; and so equally Incorporated, that the one gave name to
the place they lived in, the other to the People they lived with. Rome was the
name of the City, Quirites the appellation of the Citizens. Some say the City
was in the first place called Aug. de Civit. Dei.
Febris, after the name of Febra the mother of Mars; Others suppose the Ancient
name to be Solinus.
Valentia, but Pier. Hieroglyph. lib. 36.
Pierrius affirms from the testimony of Gergithias, that the primitive name was
Cephalon a Gr. (...) Caput, a name (says he) occasionally given to it, out of
respect to a man's head of incredible magnitude that was found at the digging up
the foundation of the Capitol, or rather Prophetically given, as believing it
would be the head City of the World. There are who affirm it had Erithraeus
ind. Virg. l. 11.
three names, the first Sovereign, which was that of Romethe; the Second
Sacred, which was Plut. Vit. Romuli calls it (...) from (...) Flore^.
Anthusa, as much as to say Flourishing; the third was Secret, as having never
been published by any man (says Pliny lib. 3. Cap. 5.
Pliny) but once by Valerius Soranus, who for his bold Impiety (for so it was
then Esteemed) was presently put to death; the Romans superstitiously believing
(as all other Gentiles did at that time) that the good fortune of their City
was involved in the name, the discovery whereof by the help of some Charms,
might be a means to Rob them of their Tutelar Gods; and therefore to show that
this name was not so much as to be inquired after, they made the Image of the
Goddess Angerona (the presentative of the Genius of their City) with a As
Mussurius Sabinus, Varro, and others testify
Muffler on her mouth, to show that she might not speak. Something of the same
conceit was questionless, the cause that Posterity is left at such a loss in
seeking after the right name of this Isle of Ours, which seems to be rather
concealed by the Druides, than unknown to them; when Caesar could neither by
flattery or force extort the truth from them. Fabius Pictor tells us yet of
another name that Rome had; to wit Amarillis, so called from Amaris a Trench to
convey water, for that after they had Sacrificed to Vectumnius upon the
overflow of the Argean Sea by Tyber, the water returned to his own Chanel, and
thence by Aquaducts was conveyed to the City.

Thus it remains uncertain what the Original (not to say principal) name of
this great City was, and more uncertain when it took that name. Some fetch the
Era thereof Ab A. M. 2389. others looking back to the year 2336. But most of
the Vulgar Chronologers go no further than the year 3211. Some will have it
called Rome from Roma, Daughter of Italus, King of the Aborigines; Others from
Romanessa better known by the name of Saturn; Some again impute the honor to
Romanus Son of Ulisses and Circe; and there are who contend for Romus the Son
of Ematheon sent by Dyomede from Troy; but the Vulgar Tradition favors Romulus
(which yet Plutarch that wrote his life acknowledges not) making him their
Patronimick, who was by Birth a Bastard, and no otherwise a King than by
Treachery; having laid the foundation of his greatness in the Blood of his
Brother, and slain his Uncle to make way for his Grandfather. Thus these
Romans that would be esteemed the most glorious People in the World, had this
in Common with the most Barbarous and obscure Nations, that they came from such
Springs as (running under ground) were not discoverable in many Ages after
their first Rice; insomuch that they who would trace their Originals as far as
they themselves could wish, or their Poets Feign, must stop at last at the Non
ultra of the utmost bounds of Nature, where the rest of the Universe stands
equal with them in all points.

Now as Rome had its Sacred Name, so had it also its Sacred Number comp^ehended
in that name, which answering to the Influences of those Constellations with
which the Genius of their Nation kept Intelligence, actuated all their great
designs and undertakings. For as the Britains were principally, if not wholly
swaid by the Number Six (as all Nations in the World by some one number or
another) so were they by that of Seven, which being of all other most like the
Geometrical Square, may be said to be the most proper figure of Regulation.
Seven Letters in the Anthusa.
Mystical or Sacred name of their City before mentioned, as many in that of
Romulus their supposed Founder, who (as Livy tells us) altered his mind seven
times touching the place where he would have it Founded, and at last placed it
upon seven Hills; afterward he divided his Principality into seven Tribes,
four Local, and three National; and when he came to distinguish betwixt the
Nobility, and the Populacy, he differenced them by seven distinct Privileges.

1. Jure Sen^c. de benefic. lib. 3. Cap. 28. Eut. lib. 10.
formali, by the distinction of Habit, of which they had seven Sorts, 1 Saga, 2
Pretextae, 3 Angusticlavia, 4 Laticlavia, 5 Paludamenta, 6 Trabea, and 7
Chlamys; of these the Common People wore only the first Sort, which were Coats
without Sleeves, the rest were worn only by Gentlemen and Noblemen, differenced
according to their respective Dignities.

2. Jure A^l. G^ll. lib. 3. Cap. 16.
Petitionis, by the right of their Offices; for those that were Senators (as
afterward all Noblemen) had their Curules or blew Chariots, with a Chair
placed in it to ride through the Streets; the Consuls being differenced by
sitting in an Ivory Chair, whereas the rest were wood only.

3. Jure Senec. de benef. lib. 3. Cap. 18.
Imaginum, by the use of Images, which were the same things to them in point of
honor and Ornament, as Eschocheons and Arms of Families are to us.

4. Jure Gentilitiarum, by having names that were hereditary; for from the very
time of the first League with the Sabins, it was agreed that the Romans should
praefix Sabin Names, and the Sabins Roman, before that of their families names;
which Prenomina being hereditary, were therefore called Gentilitia (whence came
our word Gentlemen, for at that time no part of the World had taken up that
Custom) now Tully tells us that these Gentiles were those Qui eodem inter se
sunt nomine, i. e. Men of the same name; for the Common People were not
permitted to call their Posterity by their own names, but were obliged to give
their Children always new uncouth and unheard of names; which brought them
under such contempt as if they had no names, but were (as Livy calls them) Sine
nomine turba, a nameless Rabble. The original Gentiles or Leaguers of the Latin
Stock, were the Fabii, descended from the Kings of the Aborigines, the Romuli,
Julii, Junii, Surgii, Aurelii, Curatii, Horatii, Servitii Priscorum, who were
of the Trojan Race, that came in with Aeneas at the Conquest of Italy: those of
the Sabin Race were the Tatii, the Issue of King Tatius; the Pompilii (whereof
the Pinarii, the Aemuli Mamurcenorum were younger branches) the Ancimartii,
Claudii, Regilenses; the Tarquinii, Publicolae, Emilii, Aenobarbi; the Quintii
Capitolinorum, and Cincinatorum; the Cornelii Scipiorum, and Lentulorum, these
were all the ancient Leaguers: The Families of most note that sprung from them
after they united and mixed together, were the Posthumii, Cossii, Survii,
Sulpicii, Sempronii (of which the Gracchi were but a younger branch) the
Fulvii, Flacci, Octavii, Mutii, Pompeii, etc. These I instance amongst many,
because it was Vt pat. per rescript. Dioclesian.
forbid the Common People under a great penalty to name their Children by any
of these names, or indeed by any other name that had but a Sound like them, or
like any name of a Gentleman.

5. Jure Suffragii, by the difference of Places in all Public Conventions and
Assemblies; where they had by the Law of Fulvia a very formal precedence given
them, as we may see at large in Lip. de Amphith. c. 14.
Lipsius and Senec. de benef. lib. 3. cap. 28.
Seneca.

6. Jure Connubii, for by the Law of the Twelve Tables it was forbid under the
pain of Degradation for any of the Gentiles to match with a Plebeian.

7. Lastly, they were distinguished, Jure Ordinis, according to their Titles of
Honor, wherein they had also Seven gradations of different Styles; the lowest
whereof was that of, Egregii, which were such as we properly call Gentlemen or
Esquires; next them were the 2 Perfectissimi, which were those of the
Equestrian Order, as our Knights; then came the 3 Clarissimi, these were the
Correctores or Praestas of Provinces much like to our Lord Lieutenants of
Counties; the next above these were the 4 Spectabiles, a title proper only to
Dukes and Counts Provincial; the 5 Illustres, such were all that had any voice
in Senate, all Praefects, Magistri Equitum and Peditum, the Questores Palatii,
the Comites Maritimi, which were as our Lord Admirals, and all Generals and
Lieutenant Generals of Armies had the same Style; C. Tit. de Feriis Epigr. L.
quoniam.
6 Nobilissimi, which some barbarous Lawyers of late (says Alciate dispunct.
lib. 3. Com. 4.
Alciate) have changed (and as they think Elegantly) into Super-Illustres,
which the modern more refinedly have rendered Serenissimi; this was
appropriated only to Princes by birth, as were the Seld. Tit. Hon. p. 285.
Caesar's, or heirs apparent of the Empire, who were written Principes
Juventutis; the Emperors took to themselves that of Divi, or 7 Augusti, which
we at this day term Sacred. It is further observable that as Romulus was the
first of seven Kings, so Kingship was the first of seven Orders of Government
in that Commonwealth; for there were 1 Reges, 2 Patricii, 3 Tribuni, 4
Decemviri, 5 Dictatores, 6 Triumviri, 7 Imperatores; the Last of which Titles
cost no less than the Lives of seven times seven thousand Citizens; a Purchase
so dear, that it had been impossible for any person to have persuaded them to
submit to it, but such an one as had first slaughtered seven times seventy
thousand Enemies, and subdued seven times seven Nations, as Caesar did (if they
that writ his life say truth) before he offered this Violence to his Country
and Friends. Again it is noted, that there was just seven hundred years spent
betwixt Romulus the first King and Founder, and this Caesar the first Emperor
and Confounder of the Commonwealth; and they that have taken the pairs to
compute the years altogether from the time of the Birth to that of the
Obsequies of this great State, have pointed out just seven Periods, which as
the seven Ages of man, they have measured by the 1 Beginning, 2 Increase, 3
Confirmation, 4 Continuation, 5 Declination, 6 Degeneration, 7 Dissolution.
From the Foundation to the Consulship of Brutus and Tarquinius Colatinus, is
reckoned the first Age, consisting of two hundred and twenty years, or
thereabouts, which we may call its 1 Infancy: the time from thence to the
beginning of the second Carthaginian War, which took up two hundred and fifty
years more, may be call d its 2 Adolescence: the time from that War (which
happened in the Consulship of Ap. Claudius the Bold) to the Dictatorship of
Caesar, being two hundred and twenty years more, we may call its 3 Youth;
Augustus's his Reign passes for its Prime or 4 Full Age, continuing so near
three hundred years; from the time of Gallenus the thirty third Emperor was a
sensible 5 Declination, unto the time of Arcadius and Honorius, which was about
two hundred and thirteen years more; the time from theirs to the Death of
Maximus, who slew Valentinian the Third, looked like its 6 Dote Age; in which
it labored with many infirmities, and grew burdensome to its self,
languishing so fast, that it was much it could hold out after so many
Convulsion fits as it had, unto to Augustulus, in whose time it may be said to
give up the Ghost and 7 Dissolve.

Thus lived and died this mighty State, that once was Empress of the World,
having brought under its obedience most of the Great and known Nations, forcing
them to write the Indentures of their Vassalage in their own Blood: amongst the
many whereof that were so unfortunately fortunate as to be at the same time
subdued and Civilized, was this of Britain (if so be it may not rather be said
to be won than overcome, neither submitting to the Roman People, nor their
Laws, as other Provinces that fell under the superintendency of the Senate)
which being taken by particular Capitulation, Inter sacra Patrimonia, to be
under the dictation of the Emperor himself, they sent for the most part none
but Caesar's to keep the Possession of it; which Possession was yet very
uncertain, from the time of the Death of Lucius, till the Birth of Constantine
(therefore surnamed the Great, because the Britains Voluntarily submitted to
him as their Native Prince) whose Father by his gentle carriage prevailed with
the People to stand still (like beasts stroak'd) till he put that Yoke about
their necks, which kept them down, without any possibility of Resistance after;
before whose time the Government was rudely divided into Dion. Cass. lib. 55.
two parts, i. e. Partem Maritimam discovered by Caesar, and Partem Interiorem
subdued by Claudius: these two Constantine divided into Vt pat. notitia.
three parts, or as Burt. Ant. I^^n. Brit. page 11.
Burton (who affirms Cambden to be mistaken by a false Copy of Sextus Rufus)
would have us to believe into four, contrary to the Constat of the Notitia,
which reckons but three; to each of which he appointed a Rector, under the
Superintendency of one Vicar General, which was the Marcelin. lib. 28.
Provost of Gaul; two of these Rectors were Consular, the third Presidial, to
whom was committed the care of Civil affairs: the Martial were managed by three
Vt Pat. per breviar. Theodos.
Lieutenants Generals, the one entitled Comes Britannicus, who had the Guard
of the Northern part of the Isle, against the Picts; the second was Comes
Maritimi Tractus, he had the charge of the Sea Ports and Stores, not much
unlike Our Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports; or rather as some think Lord
Admiral, against the Northern Rovers, that began to be very troublesome about
that time: The middle and Western parts were under the Command of one that was
styled Dux Britanniae, being indeed Generalissimo over the whole. The
Ecclesiastical Polity was suited to that of the Civil, and Military; there
being as many Archbishops as Consular Deputies, each having under his
Jurisdiction a Competent number of Suffragans or Provincials: and for the
better order, the Lawyers were under one President, the Soldiers under one
Provost, the Clergy under one Patriarch; this form held near a hundred and
fifty years, till the Dukes of Britain (who as I observed before had the
General Charge of the whole, under the Emperor) casting off their Allegiance,
provoked Flav. Valentinian (who by the care and diligence of his Lieutenant
Flav. Theodotius had got the Reins into his own hands) to make some Alteration
suitable to his own humor, who cutting one part into two, made five parts of
the whole, and new named them 1 Britannia prima, 2 Britannia secunda, 3 Max.
Caesariensis, 4 Valentia, and 5 Flavia. This divident continued as long as the
Romans had any thing to do here, whose Domination holding not above thirty
years after, we may account the whole date of their Government to have lasted
about four hundred sixty two years, reckoning from the time of J. Cesar's first
landing, to the time Honorius by his mandatory letters cleared the land. In
which tract of time, it is incredible how much they beautified this little spot
of Earth, with rare Structures and buildings, not inferior (says Cambden) to
any of those in Italy, France or Spain; Bid lib. 1 Cap. 1.
Decorata bis denis bisque quaternis Civitatibus (by which must be understood
Gildas so calls them.
(...) Cities of principal note) praeter Castella innumera, quae and ipsa
muris, turribus, portis, ac Seris erant instructa firmissimis (says Bid.) Add
to this, that they repaired those ruinate Causeys, built by the Ancient
Britains, cross the whole Isle, laying the Lines of new Roads in other places
through the most fruitful and habitable part of the Country to all the great
Towns of Trade, and Cities, avoiding such places as were pestered with savage
beasts, or men more dangerous than they; neither spared they any cost in wanton
as well as necessary works, building magnificent Thermes, pleasant Aquaducts,
Grotts, Tesselated pavements, entire Columns, hierogliphical Obelisks,
Pyramids, and structures of all Sorts, that might conduce to ease, ornamen^,
grea^ness or pleasure; witness the stupendous Ruins of many of those
monuments of theirs, not less the wonder than the delight of the beholders to
this day; by all which it appears to have been both the Glory and Security of
the Britains, to have had so many Roman Colonies planted amongst them; not only
in that it is more than probable (by what followed after) that they had been
wholly unpeop^ed, had a ruder and less noble Enemy broke in upon them, but in
respect to the advantage of being brought into the Society of a Civil
Conversation, by nearer ways, and such as had been impossible for them to have
found out: whereby they were led to an affecta^ion of glory, the natural
incentive to all virtue, which however some that would be thought Politicians
interpret an Effect of their Bondage, and Servitude, was so much the more
grateful a loss, by how much the Liberty they exchanged for it, was the worst
sort of Licentiousness: but that which Counterpoizes the parting from Life,
Liberty, Estate, Reputation, or what ever else might be dear or desirable, was
that inestimable Treasure of Christianity (for which they principally, if not
only stood indebted to the Romans) which singly and alone weighs down the
consideration of any natural, civil or mo^al sufferings; and that which gives
us cause to believe that they themselves who lived at that time, were of this
op^nion, is the reciprocality of affection betwixt the Conquerours and the
Conquered, being such, that they who had but a little before mingled blood in
the Field, did not long after do the same in their Families, mixing names
almost as soon as they had mixed Nat^ons, the Romans glorying more in their
British Cognomens then in those more glorious ones of their own, some being
pleased to denominate themselves from the places where they lived, others from
the places where they had fought, most from the Charges they had born here;
every one taking occasion from some one cause or another to let hi^ friends at
home know what value he had for his friends here: To say truth, this was the
darling Plantation, and that which therefore they would have called Prosper.
Aquitan.
Romania i. e. (...), the Roman Island, as the Spaniards since have had their
nova Hispania, the French their nova Francia, and We Our new England; neither
were the Britains so sullen as not to join in this Sympathy of respect, their
Princes changing their uncouth names of Guineath, Arviradoc, Meuriadoc or
Meurig, and Levermawr, into Guiderius, Arviragus, Marius, Lucius, etc. And as
the Princes, so each great man (Regis ad exemplum) putting himself into the
Roman Fashion, Latiniz'd his name to advance the Sound, as appears by the names
of many Noble Families yet extant amongst us, possibly derived from those
times, as Carry, Lucy, Savill, Constantine, Martin, Pyndar, Crispin, Corbet,
Cecil, Gorges, Clode, Flavell, etc. The Britains generally complying so far,
that as if they had really designed to be one Nation with them, they equally
engaged in all their unequal Fendes, fighting for them abroad till they had
wasted more Blood, than they had lost in fighting before against them at home,
whereby they were left so weak, after the Romans left them to themselves, that
it is no marvel they were so soon overcome by an Enemy seemingly less Puissant
than themselves, falling under a second Conquest, so much worse than the
former, by how much those that overcame them, fought not (as the Romans) for
Domination, but for their Dominions, thrusting them out as they overthrew them
till the mischief became incurable.

Woodcut headpiece with a decorative pattern of archers and hunting dogs. I.
CLASS OF ROMANS. Caesar, I. An. M. 3928. Claudius, A. C. An. M. 43. Adrianus,
An. M. 123. Pertinax, An. Chapter 184. Severus, An. Chapter 211. Bassianus, An. Chapter 214.

CAESAR I.
Attributed coat of arms of Julis Caesar: an eagle displayed. THE First of all
the Romans, that cherished so high a thought, as the Conquest of Britain, was
this J. Caesar, whom Plutarch compares to Alexander the Great; and not unfitly,
if the Character be true, which In his Minepo^a Cesarum.
Julian gives of them both; who said that the one did affect To conquer all.
(...), the other To rule all.
(...); but how like soever they were in point of Majesty, they differed much
in point of Modesty: Caesar not thinking himself worthy to be esteemed the
others equal, till he appeared his Superior, by finding out (what Alexander
only desired) another Vincendos alio quaesivit in Orb Britannos. Luc.
World to conquer, and which was yet more, conquering it in less time, than he
could possibly have found it out; for it was no more to him but veni, vidi,
vici, as himself expressed it; wherein if we oppose the greatness of his mind,
to that of the design, we shall find the glory of his Undertaking so much
greater, by how much he had taken before the true measure of those difficulties
he was to expect here, by comparing them with those he found in Gallia: neither
do I think it any diminution of the Esteem we ought to have of his courage,
that it admitted some Allay of caution, his wisdom prompting him to sound the
depth of the danger, as his Magnanimity did that of the Seas; for by sending C.
Volusenus before him, like Lightning before the Thunderclap, to prepare his Way
wi^h a Terror suitable to the Greatness of the Action; he deceived every body
but himself, and gained that glory by the surprise which perhaps had been none
if he had made use of force: so that it may be said in some sense, he overcame
before he came over, the amazed Britains tempting him with the profer of a
Tribute, to forbear making them Tributary: but as great Bodies though they move
slowly, are not suddenly stopped in their motion, so neither was he to be put
besides his great purposes, by any Overtures; which looked (as that) more like a
Subjection to the Roman State, than a Submission to him, his Genius (which
always pursued Victory, as he did his Enemies, following it even through
seeming impossibilities) urging him to Try the favor of his great Mistress
Fortune, by such a bold Temptation, as none had ever given her before, to stand
Spectatrix, whiles he put Fetters upon the Senec. Trag^^d. in O^^av. Act. 1. --
Paruit liber diu Oceanus, and recepit innitus rates.
Ocean, as well as the Britains: Whom therefore after his Landing he charged
with that Fury, as if he had intended his first onset should have been his
last, chasing them through Woods rather like Beasts than Men, without regard to
either age or Sex, till his cruelty offended even Heaven itself; who by a
dreadful Wreck requited him at Sea, for all the wrongs he had done by Land, a
Storm rising upon a Spring Tide, that destroyed the greatest number of his
Ships, and rendered the rest unserviceable. This Rebellion of the Ocean
encouraged the Britains to Revolt also, who disdaining to have peace with one,
upon whom the very Elements seemed to make War, withdrew their profer'd
submission during the time they were engaged in a Treaty with him, and attach't
his Camp with a resolution so much beyond their reason, that he whose courage
never failed him before, seeming now to be lost unto himself, confessed this
was the only time in all his Life, he found it easier to offend others than
defend himself, being not ashamed to draw off with that secrecy, as made his
Retreat look like a Flight; wherein however he seemed to have forgot his
honor, Fortune yet forgot not him, but made that Victory over him, the
occasion of a greater Victory for him, whiles the too forward Britains drawn
out beyond any possibility of recess (an Error found out by him before they
themselves took notice of it) were incompast by his horse that wheeled round
about them, and so forced to yield to his wisdom, that scorned to submit to his
power; which double beating cost them a double tribute, and that being ^ell
secured by good Hostages, he timely withdrew again into Gallia, to avoid the
Flaws of the approaching Winter.

No sooner was he departed from their Coast, but the Britains departed from
their Faith, probably believing they had so baffled his Expectation, in the
meanness of the Spoils he carried hence, that the empty consideration of Glory,
would not have been sufficient incitation to have tempted him to repeat the
danger of the Seas he had so lately past: But they found themselves deceived in
the measure they took of his Ambition: For the next Spring he returned upon
them, with a Countenance of having perfectly recovered his Strength; and by his
Presence only, struck such a terror into them, that however Heaven seemed to
take part with them, as formerly, and charged him the second time in his Rear,
while they stood ready to charge him in the front; notwithstanding, I say, this
Encouragement given them by Divine assistance, they had not the Faith (I am
loath to say not the Courage) to strike one stroke: But showing their Fears to
be as wide dispersed as their Forces, submitted to a perpetual Tribute, which I
take to be the first Foundation of his perpetual Dictatorship, the highest
honor the Roman State could give him, although the most fatal, in that there
was nothing beyond it, but what was immortal, to which the Senate not long
after made his great Soul a passage by twenty three wounds: rendering him more
glorious (if possible) in death, then life; whilst all the World stood amazed,
to see the Fall of the first Emperor, like the fall of the first King of the
Romans, given by the hands of those that supported him; herein only had Caesar
the better of Romulus, as well as of his Parallel Alexander, that he left his
Name to his Successors, which neither of them two did.

CLAUDIUS.
Attributed coat of arms of the Emperor Claudius: an eagle displayed.THE Second
Emperor that made a personal Journey into Britain, moved by his Emulation of
the great Julius, as he by his Envy to the Gods, was this Claudius, the fifth
in Succession to the Empire, who, though he were so notorious a Coward whilst
he was a private Person, that out of fear of death he buried himself alive,
being plucked by the heels out of a Hole, to be set upon the Throne; yet as
soon as he was saluted Caesar, his thoughts mounting to a Level with his
Fortune, he took the Resolution (possibly from the apprehensions he had of the
danger of having been so near sent into another World) to force his way into
this little World of ours: giving himself thereby Title to that Glory, which
the Romans esteemed next that of Immortality; being indeed so seemingly full of
horror, that the Dion.
Legions refused to attend him; adding hap'ly more to his Fame by their fears,
then otherwise he himself could have contributed by his forwardness, whilst the
distance of the danger proclaimed the praises of his cunning, as loudly as the
difficulty of the design did that of his courage; it being easily forseen, that
the noise of his most extravagant preparations would so affright the long
alarmed Britains, that there would need no other Force then that of their own
Apprehensions, to make them submit before they were subdued: In order whereunto
he pretermitted not any circumstance of Terror, clearing his way by two
Lieutenants, who though of different Tempers, yet were either so qualified,
that he needed no further Security then what the proof of eithers Virtue gave
him: The Aulus Plautius.
first was a Senator and a Soldier, one that could handle his Tongue (if we
may so say) as well as his Sword, being equally provided to push or persuade;
who finding he had to do with a People that had rather give up their freedoms,
then have them taken from them, chose to treat rather then fight, hoping by
making their Subjection voluntary, to make it lasting: but his Masters Patience
being no way adequate to his Prudence, the P. Ostorius Scapula.
other was sent to second him; who, as he was of a smarter temper, and a more
active Age, so by the severity of his Executions, and the suddenness of his
Resolutions, it appeared he better understood the nature of the Service he was
engaged in, and the disposition of the Person he was engaged by; for being to
fight against a barbarous Enemy, for a more barbarous Master, the one
implacable without conquest, the other not enduring to be conquered, he
actuated Plautius's colder temper with his heat, whilst Plautius with his
Gravity preponderated his Rashness. However, neither could the activity of the
one, not the authority of the other, so prevail (the Britains being too
suspicious to be beguiled, too numerous to be compelled, and too obstinate to
yield) but that they were fain to demand aid out of Gallia; where the Legions
(as I said before) declaring that they would not make War in another World,
Claudius took that occasion to upbraid their Cowardice, by his own Example,
showing the World what he durst do, by undertaking what they durst not; the
flattery of the Angures being the ground of his confidence, who made him
believe they had read the Title of Britannicus in his Stars; which forwardness
of his so stimulated the courage of his Soldiers, that in sixteen days after
his arrival, there was more done toward the conquest of Britain, then in
sixteen years before: A good beginning if it had had a good ending. But the
same Destiny that exalted him, with intention to make his fall more notorious,
permitted him not to tarry to perfect this great Work, hurrying him from the
conquest of so many brave men, to sink most ignominiously, under the resistless
malice of an Imperious Woman, who found a way to unravel all his Glory, and
give Posterity occasion to use him worse (if possible) after he he was dead,
then she did while he was living; putting this indelible Remark upon his
weakness, That as no man did greater things with less hazard, so no man arrived
at greater honor with less worth.

ADRIANUS.
Attributed coat of arms of the Emperor Hadrian: an eagle displayed.THough the
honor of conquering Britain, be by common Tradition given to the last
Emperor, for that his Lieutenants were the first that pierced through the Body
of the Isle, making their way to the very furthermost parts Northward and
Westward; yet the good old Emperor Vespatian (who numbered his years by his
dangers) and his most excellent Son Titus, who had their share of the peril,
ought to have had their part in the glory: But certainly the true Britannicus
was that incomparable Agricola (worthily so called, for that he planted the
most Desert parts of the Isle, and made them habitable for men, where even
Beasts refrained to live before) who by the power of his Tongue, rather then
that of his Sword (both being alike sharp) overcame them with Reason, after
others in vain had attempted it by Rage; his Conquest being so much more
excellent then that of any before him, by how much it is harder to civilize then
subdue. Pity 'twas, that when the Britains thought him invincible, they found
him yielding to the Envy of his Savage Master, which, like Lightning that melts
the Blade, without so much as seinging the Scabbord, blasted his Glory, whilst
his Power remained entire; putting such discouragements upon his Virtue, that
during the reign of the two next Emperors, Nerva and Trajan (however men of
order and rule) none were found so hardy to desire, much less to dare to dwell
here: By which means the Britains being once more left to themselves, and
happily (as they thought) delivered from a condition of Slavery to their
Enemies, fell under the Curse of a more fatal War with their Friends the Picts.
These were that indomitable part of themselves, that thought themselves better
secured by the Mountains of Scotland, then the Faith of the Romans, and
disdaining the baseness of their civilized Countrymen, took advantage of the
Romans retiring, prosecuting their disdain with that cruelty and hardiness,
that Adrian, upon an address made to him after he became Emperor, thought it a
Glory worthy the hazard of his own Person to relieve them: And having first
sent over his Lieutenant Severus to prepare the way, came himself after; who
finding upon the Retreat of the Picts into their Fastness, it would prove a War
against Woods and Mountains, rather then Men, wherein they had the advantage to
fight him when they pleased, without any other great hazard, then what they
were sufficiently prepared to sustain, went a new way to work with them, and
raised that Posterity amazing Work, called the Picts Wall; a Rampire of Earth
of a prodigious height, environed with a double Fosse, per octoginta millia
passuum (says Lampridius) but without doubt 'twas of much more Extent; for it
reached from Solwey Frith in Scotland, to the mouth of Tyne by Newcastle: This,
though it were perhaps a Monument of his Patience rather then his Prowess,
wrought so good an effect to the Security of the very farthest, as well as of
that part of the Isle, that the Britains adored him as The Restorer of their
Country, with which Title (sufficiently rewarded for his pains, as he thought)
he returned home Triumphant, with the Veneration of being the most accomplished
Person at that time for Conduct and Counsel: Virtues so eminent, that if they
had not been sower'd with that severity which most men call Cruelty, he might
have died with the same honor he lived, and not have been censured (as after
he was) to have been (however a good Prince) scarce a good man.

PERTINAX.
IT has been a Question, Whether Fortune be not born with a man as other
Qualities; since, like an Inchantation, it overrules his Actions by something,
which what it is, is not known unto himself; and there seems to be some Resolve
of it in the unexpected greatness of this Emperor, the next that came over in
person hither; who was raised out of nothing, to become nothing almost as soon
as he was raised: A Person inferior to many in blood, equaled by as many in
parts, backed with little or no alliance, qualified but with an ordinary
Education; first a Pedagogue, then a Pety fogger; naturally so dull and
stubborn that his Father gave him thereupon this Surname of Pertinax, which we
may English Blockhead. Yet being called from the Courts where he used to plead,
to the Camp, he discovered so extraordinary a Courage, acquitting himself so
well in all, but especially the Parthian Wars, that he was sent over as Admiral
into Britain; and afterward called into the Senate by Commodus, then made
Governor of Assyria and Asia: And lastly, when the Legions here in Britain
began to Mutiny, he was the only man pitched upon by the Tyrant to curb their
Insolence; wherein as he proceeded more like a Pedant then a Prater, causing
diverse of the Principal Officers to be whipped, as if they had been his Boy's,
and he their Schoolmaster, so he incenc'd them to that degree, that they fell
upon him (as Boy's often do upon those unreasonable Corregidores) and without
any reverence had to his Authority or Age, knocked him down dead (as they
supposed) from his Horse; whence recovering again by a strange Resurrection
(Fortune having reserved him for more honorable Adventures) he prevailed so
far over most of the men that would have taken away his, as to bring them to
lay down their lives, against the Common Enemy, making them instrumental,
whiles they became their own Executioners, to put into his hands a notable
Victory over the Picts, who had by this time broke down part of the great Wall,
and entering at the Breach, Sacked the Country round about: The Defeat he gave
then, got him the Title of Britannicus, and made him so Popular ever after,
that the Conspirators, who plucked his Master from the Throne, designing to
defend that bad action by a better choice, set him up in the room. However, he
either not trusting their groundless kindness, or distrusting rather the Power
of those that were to come next after him, made it his first work to break down
the stairs by which he ascended: But by the same way he thought to preserve, he
lost his Life and Empire; for they whom he intended to fling down, laying hold
(as I may say) on him, plucked him down with them, and so perished all together.

SEVERUS
Attributed coat of arms of the Empreror Septimus Severus: an eagle
displayed.AFter the death of Pertinax, and during the short Reign of the short
lived Did. Julianus, Clodius Albinus, that had been by Commodus declared
Caesar, continued Lieutenant of Britain; and upon the Election of this Severus,
he was declared his Associate in the Empire: But Severus, whose Ambition began
where his years ended, finding his Age as much over-match't by his Youth, as
the merit of his Sons (whom he designed to make his Successors) were by his
Fortune, he resolved to remove him further off, in order to bring in them
nearer the Throne: However, this being only in Intention, might possibly have
lost its effects, by lying long in his cold Breast, had not those two Sparks of
Ambition (born to set the World on fire) thawed his frozen blood, and turned
all his Phlegm into Choler, by urging him with continual occasions of distrust:
But those Fears and Jealousies concluding not long after with the life of
Albinus, slain in France, at the head of twelve thousand Britains, his two Sons
and he came over hither. The younger he left under the Tuition of Papinian the
then great Minister of State; the Eldest he took with him against the Picts:
And to make him appear the more considerable amongst the Soldiers, caused him
to be declared Cod. lib. 3.
Augustus, and his Colleague in the Empire: But this proved an unfortunate
undertaking to enter a young General; the Picts having got so much the better
of the Romans, that they were forced, after the loss of near fifty thousand
men, to admit a Treaty, and conclude a Peace, that did rather suspend then end
the War; gaining only so much advantage at present, as to prevent all
disadvantages for the future, by repairing the broken Wall, or rather building
of a new one of Stone, upon the old Earth work: This, as it was Maximum Imperii
decus and tutamen, as Spartianus expresses it, so was it the only Monument that
has continued the honor of this Emperors Name to this Day, under the
glorious Title of Britannicus Maximus: However, he lived not to see the
completing of the Work, being forced to yield to the Infirmities of his Age,
before he could bring the Enemy to yield to the dread of his Power, finishing
the Course of Nature so abruptly and untimely, that the World was in suspense
to determine, whether it had been better he had never been born to Empire, or
being Emperor, had never died; having in much Cruelty laid a Ground work to
great Glory, but left no Body behind that knew how to lay the Super-structure
upon that Foundation.

BASSIANUS.
Attributed coat of arms of the Emperor Caracalla (Bassianus): an eagle
displayed.THE next in order, I cannot say in Succession after Severus (for he
was jointly possessed of the Empire with him in his Life time, and not solely
possessed after his Death, having indeed too little worth to fill up the Throne
single) was his dissorderly Son Bassianus (if so be we may honor him so far as
to call him a Son, who after he had attempted the murder of his Father, slew
his Brother in the arms of his Mother) the beginning of whose Government, like
that of his Ambition, appeared black and fatal, making his Friends more afraid
of him then his Enemies, in respect his delight was rather in Blood then War:
Who, notwithstanding the Picts had murdered so many of his Countrymen, that
there were scarce enough left to secure those that were not destroyed, yet he
was so far from vindicating his Nations honor or right, that he clap't up a
Peace with them upon Conditions no less unsafe then dishonorable; and as if he
had had no other way to show Posterity that he once reigned here, but by
leaving such Monuments of Desolation as might deter any one from ever
undertaking the Government after him: He withdrew himself first and the most
considerable of his Officers, and afterward the whole Nation of the Romans, and
left the Natives in so miserable a Condition, that from his time to the Reign
of Constantius Chlorus (which was above sixty years) during the Succession of
no less then twenty Emperors, the Britains were laboring (as men taken with
fainting fits) to preserve themselves a People. For however we read that there
was one Nonnius Philippus here, under the Title of Prator, in the time of
Gordianus the younger, and after that Lollianus Victorinus Posthumus; after
whom succeed the two Tetrici and Marius, who seem to have had some Marks of
Sovereignty about the Reign of Gallienus (as appears by some old Coyns that
have been found with scarce legible Inscriptions of their Names) yet I take
these to be only such as touched here, with no other design, but to plunder or
squeeze some Tribute out of the Impoverish't Islanders; as did the drunken
Bonosus, Admiral to Aurelian, and Caurausius, Admiral to Dioclesian (whom I
know not for what reason some would have thought to be Natives, whereas Eumenes
Rhetor calls the last Terrae Bataviae Alumnus) or peradventure took Sanctuary
here, as in the remotest and most secure place to shelter themselves in, after
they rebelled against their Masters, like as did Alectus, when pursued by
Constantius the next Emperor in Succession.

Woodcut headpiece with a decorative pattern of archers and hunting dogs. II.
CLASS OF ROMANS. Constantius Chlorus, An. Chapter 304. Constantinus Mag. An. Chapter
308. Constantinus II. An. Chapter 381. Clemens Max. An. Chapter 401. Gratianus, An. Chapter
401. Constantinus III. An. Chapter 401.

CONSTANTIUS CHLORUS
Attributed coat of arms of the Emperor Constantius Chlorus: an eagle
displayed.THIS Constantius, first sent over into Britain by Aurelian, having by
the report of his good fortune against the Picts, and quiet government of the
Britains, made himself so considerable, as to be Elected Caesar, by Maximilian,
Colleague to Dioclesian, who resigned up to him France and Italy, with some
part of Africa: he gave up all to his Son Constantine, reserving only Britain
to himself, whether out of affection to his Son, or to the place, as (being the
Zosim. lib. 2 Suid. in Constant.
Province where he had spent his youth before he came to be Caesar) is
uncertain. There are who say he was by birth a Britain, at least by the Hanibal
apud ^ithe^. lib. de orig. Franc. Theoph. Cer. Chron. Plunt. in Mar.
Mothers side. Others again suppose that it was rather the birthplace of his
Honor, it being the employment he had here, that made him first known to the
World. Several of the British Historians ascribe this choice of his, to the
affection he had for his Wife Helena, the Famed Daughter to King Coel (whom the
Romans called Caelius) but most probable it is, that he prefer d the Britains
above any other People, out of gratitude to the great instances of affection
they had given him, many of them quitting their Country to follow his fortune.
However it was, we find he fixed his Residence at York, which being conveniently
situate to regard either the Picts or Britains, he built him there a Palace,
whereof, it is said, there are some Remains to this day.

During his Government (whether we may ascribe it as a good effect of a bad
cause, to the continued troubles for so many years before, that had quite tired
out both sides; or to the more peaceable inclinations of the Picts, become less
turbulent, since they became Christians; or to the universal contentment of the
Britains, who were well pleased to see one appointed to rule over them, that
had some of their own blood in his veins, I know not) it so fell out, that
there was no great occasion of Action: so that those that write his Life, have
chose rather to transmit to us a Character of his Person, than set down any
Constat of his Government, leaving us by the excellency of his temper, to guess
at that of the times, who though he was himself no Christian, and which was
more, Colleague with one that was a great persecutor of them, did not only this
good, that he did them no hurt, but was so far a positive benefactor to them,
as to permit, if not encourage, the open profession of their Faith: Testified
by many notable works of piety, that were reared under his permission, giving
the World a true measure of his own, by what he took of others virtue, in that
excellent Apothegm of his, That whosoever was false to his God, could not be
true to his Prince. This benign clemency of his being crowned with this
blessing, above all the Emperors that were before him, that he only died a dry
death, and with this, above all that came after him to be so superlatively
beloved, that he seemed to live even after he was dead, the Britains
endeavoring to eternize his memory, by preserving his ashes in a Cell, that
was for many hundred years after famed for a burning Lamp, made (as some think)
of liquid Gold, artificially dissolved into an unctious substance, which (not
without great wonder, or perhaps a miracle) continued its light even to latter
Ages, to denote to posterity to whom they were first beholding for that sacred
light, which has continued ever since, whereof his own Son was the first
professed adorer.

CONSTANTINUS MAG.
Attributed coat of arms of the Emperor Constantine the Great: a double-headed
eagle displayed, a Chi-Rho on an escutcheon.UPON the death of Constantius, the
Empire fell under the Government of four Caesar's. Galerius held most of the
East; Maxentius both the Iberia's; this Constantine, Son of the last
Constantius, succeeded in Britain and France; and Licinius (declared Caesar by
Galerius) held Hungary. The Ball lying thus even betwixt the four, most of them
of like age, but certainly of not unlike ambition and courage, it could not be
expected but that they would fight for it, and over it, the World being not
wide enough to keep them long asunder, without justling each other. The first
that moved out of his Station, was this Constantine, who set upon Maxentius,
whilst Licinius attach't Galerius, the two Casars against the two Emperors.
And either Aggressor proving victorious, they returned back to try their
Fortunes, as they had before their Forces, upon each other, that so it might be
known for whom the Conquest of the whole was reserved by providence. Neither
wanted they sufficient ground of quarrel, not from their ambition only, but
Religion, this being a Christian, that a Pagan, this the first open Professor,
as the other the fiercest Persecutor of Christianity, the one fighting to
proclaim his piety, the other to defend his cruelty. The different Nations
engaged by different interests on either side, made it a tumultuary War,
wherein glory and despair had a like effect in the expense of their blood and
treasure. Neither for a while was it to be judged by their alternate successes,
to whom fortune inclined, till Constantine strengthened by the help of those
Legions he brought out of Britain, gave him his deaths wound, and forced him to
reel rather than retreat into the East, being weakened more by the loss of his
reputation, than the sense of his loss. Upon which beginning his own where
to others greatness ended, he fixed his Imperial Seat there where he might seem
to rise with the Sun, and have a full days journey through his own Dominions,
setting at last in Britain, the then supposed uttermost part of the habitable
World.

Being now Lord of no less than one hundred and twenty Provinces, each large
enough to make a Kingdom, he reduced them into fourteen Diocesses (as he called
them) seven of which were in the East, seven in the West. These were under the
Government of four particular Presidents; the first intitul'd, Praefectus
Pratorio Italia, who had under him Rome, Italy, and Africa: The second called,
Praefectus Praetorio Galliarum, had under him France, Spain, and Britain: The
third styled, Praefectus Praetorio Orientis, had Egypt the Orient, properly so
called, Asia, Pontus, and Thrace: The fourth was, Praefectus Praetorio
Illyrici, who had Illyricum, Macedon, and Dacia. Every one of these Praeiects
had particular Governors of Cities under them, which were styled, Defensores
Civitatum, and in every City where they resided was a Bishop, and answerable to
the Governors of Provinces, or Vicars-General, there were appointed
Metropolitans, and for every Diocese where the Praetor kept his Court, there
was a Primate residing, from whom there could be no Appeal. The Emperor
himself styled himself, Defensor fidei, having in him both the Temporal and
Spiritual Power; his Imperial residence was at Bizantium in Thrace, from him
called Constantinople, which being so remote from the Western Provinces, that
it left them under a sensible declination of their wealth and glory, he neither
could settle the uncertain obedience of those that owned him, nor check the
insolence of those that did not, but was forced to trust all to the fortune and
fortitude of his Lieutenants, who regarding their own interests more than his
honor, so fought against all revolters, as to leave a continued necessity of
fighting, as long as there was any thing left to make War for. But amongst
those that took his absence most to heart, were those of Britain, who finding
themselves unsufferably oppressed by Pacatianus, who was appointed Deputy here to
the Prefect of Gallia beforementioned, set up a Governor of their own,
whereof he had no sooner notice, but to make some show of honoring them with a
particular regard, as the Country to which he was indebted, if not for his
Hen. Hunting. hist. lib. 1. in Cistit. Harding Chron. c. 63. f. 50.
own, yet for the birth of his honor, he sent over to them his eldest Son
Constantine, whom he had declared Caesar, to whom, upon the division he made
afterward of the whole betwixt his three Sons, he bequeathed this Isle, with
the addition of France, Spain, and some part of Germany, as the best
Inheritance he could leave to him.

CONSTANTINUS II.
Attributed coat of arms of the Emperor Constantine II: a double-headed eagle
displayed.ONE would have thought that the last great, but least happy Emperor,
Constantine (for his happiness departed before himself, after it had led him
through most part of the World, with restless motion, and made him believe he
was nearest, when he was farthest off from glory) had led enough to each of his
three Sons, in that Division he made betwixt them, to have prevented any
further Division betwixt themselves, at least enough to have satisfied their
avarice, if not their ambition. But as that which is great in desiring, seems
nothing when enjoyed, (the Abyss of Princes thoughts being deep enough to
swallow up the whole Globe of the Earth) so when this young Eagle came to be
upon the wing, and take his flight, he considered not so much what he had left
him, as what he thought he ought to have had. Whereupon quarrelling with his
Brothers, he took away first their lives, afterward their Dominions, destiny
making him the fatal Instrument to revenge the death of his Innocent Brother
Julius, murdered by their Mother, upon her two innocent Sons, which seemed to
be so horrid and unnatural a War, that to pacify those Provinces, whose blood
was the price of his victories, he shut up the Temple of Janus, in token of
universal peace, a blessing he could not hope for while any of his own Family
were alive. But whatsoever calm there was abroad, there was certainly none in
his own breast, his distrust increasing with his power, which (like the Sun that
draws up vapors as it rises, and lets them down in clouds) exhaled matter
enough from the discontents of the Provinces, to discharge it self in a
dreadful storm of Tyranny, whereof none felt the stroke so much as those of
Britain; from many of whom he took their lives, from all their Liberties,
exposing them to the insolence of those under whose prot ction he left them,
which was more insupportable than the rapines of the common Enemy: so that in
high desperation and rage, they renounced their allegiance to him, and gave it
to one who had no other merit to entitle him to their affections, than the good
omen of his Name.

CLEMENS MAX.
Attributed coat of arms of the Emperor Magnus Maximus: a double-headed eagle
displayed. VAliant men understand no Glory that is without themselves, nor are
they satisfied with any return of honor, but what is the purchase of their own
merit. 'Twas not enough for this Maximus that he was descended from the loins
of the greatest Emperors in the World, without he himself be also an Emperor,
and made so by himself: And as Nature prompted him to this Ambition, so
Education accommodated all things to his Nature; bred from a Boy under the
famous Captain Theodosius, Father to the Emperor Theodosius of the East; by
whom recommended to his Colleague Gratian, then Emperor of the West, he
obtained the command of the Second Called Victrix Augusta.
Legion here in Britain, then residing at Rutupia, now called Richmond, to
prevent the Inroads of those Northern Pickeroons, the Saxons and Danes, that
began to infest the British Seas near about that time: which charge he
performed with so general satisfaction to all the Britains, that they saluted
him with the Title of Augustus; wherein whether they showed more gratitude to
him, in giving, or he more ingratitude to his Master, in accepting the honor,
those that write the History of that time can best resolve. Some make it an act
of Necessity; others say 'twas an Artifice: Some think 'twas the effect of his
Merit; others impute it to the easiness of Gratianus's Nature, that tempted him
to a boldness which otherwise had been as void of reason, as it was of modesty,
in advancing as he did into Germany, not contenting himself with being absolute
Lord of a more remote part, till he had fixed himself so near, as to outface his
Master, and the whole World at once, making Triers his chief Seat, where he
most treacherously contrived the death of that Innocent Emperor when he could
not do it by fair force. So blind is Hatred as well as Love, that it considers
not, that the Arrows of him that takes a Throne by Violence or Treachery, are
often shot back at himself, whilst he is sitting upon the same Seat; there
being a secret rule in the Justice of Fate, which few men observe, till they
feel the effects of it, viz. That Heaven always seconds those that live not to
revenge themselves: And thus it fell out to this Usurper, who delivered up by
his own Soldiers into the hands of Theodosius, was exposed by him to the fury
and scorn of the Rabble, who torturing him with the remembrance of all his
Crimes, made his death more insupportable by their Reproaches, whilst they
upbraided him with want of discretion, as well as of probity, and told him
scoffingly, He might have been longer Maximus, if he had been truly Clemens.

GRATIANUS.
Attributed coat of arms of the Emperor Gratian: a double-headed eagle
displayed.THE miserable Example of the last Usurper sufficiently proves, That
the Government of a State is so slippery a Path, that it is almost impossible to
walk far in it, though never so warily, without catching a Fall. And the
unhappiness of such a mishap is, That if it prove not mortal, yet it so bruises
them, that they scarcely ever rise again. Those therefore that take the measure
of happiness by its greatness, or of honor by its height, consider not how
much the danger exceeds the dignity, whilst all the glory which distinguishes
Princes from the Common People, is no more then what they receive from them,
who like unruly Horses, suffer themselves to be no longer ridden then until
they find their own strength, and if by chance they get their Master out of the
Saddle, they certainly dash out his Brains. But the Infelicity of this Gratian
proved more notorious and singular, in that he tript at the very first step of
the Throne, and was cut off, before the actions of his Life could give any
reason for the suddenness of his death, or the circumstance of that, any ground
for the dislike, which occasioned it, being slain like a Sacrifice as soon as
Elevated: Only thus much may be gathered from the Catastrophe of his Fall, that
the beginnings of his Reglement answered not the ends of his advancement; being
set up by his Fellow Soldiers, rather to defy his Masters, then defend them.
For every Nation at that time designing Liberty, wounded the Eagle with a
Feather plucked from his own Wing; those here in Britain doing it with more
confidence, by how much they seemed to be separated by Nature, for a distinct
Empire, it being no small vanity to be thought the leading Nation to freedom
from the common Yoke; but as it often falls out, that they who are necessitated
to defend what they have done ill, seldom are at leisure to govern well; so it
happened both in this man's Story, and his Predecessors, who conscious to
themselves of the weakness of their Title, reserved those Forces to curb
Insurrections, which had been better employed in preventing Invasions, whereby
the Picts broke in so often upon them, that the enraged Multitude finding
themselves uncertain of Peace, and no way secured in War, turned that Revenge
upon them, which they expected they should have taken upon the Common Enemy.
The only difference in the Fate of these two (of all other most unlucky)
Princes was this, That this last had so much the better of the first, as to
prevent the intended violence upon his Person, by becoming his own Executioner,
whereby he not only prevented the shame which is oftentimes more grievous then
death it self, but made himself Master of that Repute in the other World, which
Fame denied him in this; so that what the Poet said of Otho, may not improperly
be applied to him: A^sonius Vit. Otho.
Et hoc solum fecit nobile quod periit.

CONSTANTINUS III.
Attributed coat of arms of the Emperor Constantine III: a double-headed eagle
displayed.IT is commonly seen that those that have it in their power to make a
King, seldom endure him when he is made; so hard a thing it is for any man to
obey one, who through his own means, commands him. The Britains having set up
two Romans, for no other Reasons, but because they were Romans, not finding
their Expectation answered by either, advance a Britain, and such an one as had
the preferrence in their Election, for the good omen of his Name only:
Constantine being as superstitiously esteemed by them, as the Name of Antonine
heretofore by those. Some Historians place one Marcus betwixt this man and
Maximus: but if there were any such Person, and that he were any thing more
then a General, the Actions of his Government are so obscure, and his Reign so
short, that the same flout Cicero put upon the Consulate of Nativius, may be
put upon his, That it was altogether monstrous, as having in it neither Spring,
Summer, Autumn, nor Winter; for to say truth, it lasted not full two Months.

The hopes conceived of him at his Election were very great, nor was the
beginning of his Undertakings unsuitable to that Expectation: For in the first
place he cleared himself of all his homebred Enemies, the Picts, who though
they gave him rather a trouble then a War, yet were more terrible then a Nobler
Enemy, in that they were not only ravenous, but restless: like Fleas, which
though they sting not as Bees, have yet venom enough to make those insensible
wounds they give very visible: and having secured the Country against them, he
carried the War beyond the Seas, with so good success, that it was not long ere
he spread his Wings from the Rhine to the Mediterranean: And having fixed his
Imperial Seat at Arles (which after his own Name was thereupon called
Constantina) he gave the Government of Spain to his eldest Son Constance, with
the Title of Caesar; making his second Son Julian (styled thereupon
Nobilissimus) Lord Lieutenant of Britain, whilst he kept France in his own
hands. Thus far Fortune seemed to give consent to the Peoples choice of this
man: but as those who arrive at unusual heights grow giddy, and fearful of
falling, not being able to look down the Precipice, over which they stand; so
happened it to him, who, however made great for his courage, was by his Greatness
made so very a Coward, that upon the first report of the Emperor Honorius his
advance against him, he profer'd to submit to Mercy, basely excusing his
Arrogance, by an Apology that betrayed his Ignorance, pretending he was
compelled by his Countrymen to take that honor upon him; by which pretended
innocence, as he showed himself more guilty, so he instructed Honorius what he
ought to do, by showing him what he might do; or rather by what he might do,
betraying what he feared he would do to him: who accordingly first took the
Diadem from his Head, and then his Head from his Shoulders; and having a little
before surpised his Son Constance, in his return from that Court, he sent
Victorinus into Britain to apprehend the other Son Julian, who finding the
Picts had been aforehand, having not only killed the young Springal, but
overrun the Country, beyond any seeming possibility of being beat out again,
did not only retire himself, but by the advice of Gallio, his Lieutenant
General, drew off every one of his Countrymen out of the Isle, not leaving so
much as one Family (if we may credit Gildas) of all the vast numbers that had
been planted here, for the space of near five hundred years, whereby the
Britains were left in so great distress, that for fifty years after they lived
the lives of Beasts, rather then Men, in desert Woods and Mountains, where
tired with flight, or vanquished with Famine, they languisht under the
oppression of their boundless liberty, whilst each preyed upon the other with
such uncontrouled violence, as made every one as terrible to his Neighbor as
his Enemy was to him: This brought them under the necessity of choosing another
King, who proving as careless of the common danger, as he was inapprehensive of
his own, ruined them irrecoverably, by the same means he hoped to have
preserved them, trusting to the assistance of a Foreign Nation, that did them
more mischief by being their Friends, then it had been possible for them to
have done by being (as but a little before they were) their professed Enemies.

Woodcut headpiece with a decorative pattern of archers and hunting dogs. I.
CLASS OF BRITONES. Vortigern, An. Chapter 446. A. Ambrosius, An. Chapter 481. Vter
Pendragon, An. Chapter 498. Arthur, An. Chapter 517. Constantine, An. Chapter 543. Caridic,
An. Chapter 586.

VORTIGERN
Attributed coat of arms of Vortigern: a cross and four lions rampant.FOR near
forty years together after the death of the last Constantine, the Britains
languishing under a continual War, like dying men then fancy change of Beds,
thought they could have no ease but by change of Governors, whose Reigns fell
out to be so short, or so obscure, that there remains no account of any of them
till the Monarchy revived in this VORTIGERN; who being Duke of Cornwall, Devon,
Dorset, and Somerset, Provinces that had not felt the smart of pillage, as
those in the North and Midland Counties, held himself engaged in honor and
honesty, as well as in interest (being descended from the ancient stock of the
British Kings) to take up the Scepter that had so long lain upon the ground,
rustied with blood and dust; who beginning a new Period, and better known, is
worthily esteemed The first absolute Monarch of this Isle, having neither Rival
nor Partner to prevent or interrupt his G^ory, much less to claim any share in
it; whereas all those Reguli, his Predecessors before the Roman conquest (
Lucius the last King only excepted) appeared rather like Generals then Kings,
having Chief, but scarce Sovereign Authority.

Great were the hopes conceived of this Prince his Virtue, greater those of his
Fortune; whilst being both a Christian and a Chieftain of so high note, no man
could doubt his Power that did not distrust his Courage: But standing single
and alone, like a high Tree upon a large Plain, it was not in the power of Fate
to keep him from being blown down. Neither was it so great a wonder that he
should fall (being exposed as he was to such lasting Storms of Hostility) as
that his Son VORTIMER should so overtop him, who rising like a dwarf'd Plant
out of a Thicket of Brambles (for his whole Reign was as one continued Battle
of twelve Years) grew so crooked, in making his way out, that it was not likely
he should attain to any considerable height; having this necessity added to the
rest of his unhappiness, that by the same means he expected to be Great, he was
obliged to be Impious: The regard he pretended to have to his Country, being so
incompatible with that due to his Father, that nothing but his own could have
prevented his Fathers death.

This Vortigern foreseeing by instinct of Majesty (that is, a compound of Fear,
Jea^ousie, and Power) and being naturally prone to fear his Friends more than
his Enemies, he took advantage of the common danger to prevent his own, and
with like rashness, as that which Court flatterers call Resolution in Princes,
he called in Nine thousand Foreigners to his Assistance of the English Nation:
A race of People, at that time grown so terrible even to the Romans themselves,
that their very Name made them way to Victory: with these he pretended to
subdue the Picts, but intended to correct the Insolence and Envy of his
Domestic Foes. Their Leader was one Engist, a politic Prince, who to make his
conquest sure, brought along with him a fair young Daughter to be partaker of
his Glory, by reducing the amorous King under her power, whiles he brought the
clamorous People under his; the weakness of both the one and the other being so
notoriously known, that he concluded him as little able to stand against her,
as they to withstand him; neither was he deceived in the conjecture, the power
of her Charms being so resistless, that it was not long before the fascinated
King repudiated his Christian Wife, to espouse her that was a Pagan.

This, as it aggravated the offense generally taken by his People, so it
particularly provoked his Son Vortimer to lay aside all obligations of
Affection and Duty; who neither respecting him as a Father, not as a King,
punished his sin (seemingly against Nature as well as Reason) by a judgment no
less strange and inhumane, commanding that he should at once be deprived of
life and honor, by putting him into that condition, as made them equally
burdensome to him, whiles he was immured betwixt two Walls within the narrow
confines of such a dismal Dungeon, as seeming like, was yet so much worse then
a Grave, as the present shame and scorn worse then death.

Thus he continued dying all the time of his Sons life, but he being slain by
the Saxons, by a rare accident in the fortune of Princes, he recovered not only
his Liberty, and with it his Understanding, but so far repossest himself of the
affections of the People (who naturally incline to pity men in misery, and much
more their Prince) that believing him thoroughly sensible of his error, and
encouraged by his Example, they set upon the Saxons unanimously, and began a
War that every body believed wou^d have ended even when it began, being so
merciless and bloody on both sides, that it is no little wonder how they found
matter for their cruelty, since equal force meeting with equal courage, neither
Nation yielding, both must be destroyed.

So fierce indeed was the execution on either side, that Victory delighting in
mischief, seemed to hover over both Armies, as not resolved which deserved best
of her. The Britains strove to shut the door of Invasion; the Saxons fought to
keep it open; and as long as they were upon even terms, the Britains grapled
desperately with them: But the Saxons having possessed themselves of several
Ports, by which they received continual recruits out of their own Country, they
not only tired out all those that lived nearest the danger, but (which was yet
more dangerous) by picking one Arrow out of the Sheaf, hazarded the falling out
of all the rest: for the gaining Kent made their way into Sussex, the
possession of that gave them admission into Suffolk and Norfolk; the loss of
those lost the North: And in the end Vortigern too late finding how he was
involved in the misery of his own folly, not more confounded with sorrow then
shame, retired first into Cornwall, after into Wales, where he dyed as unpitied
as he was miserable.

A. AMBROSIUS.
Attributed coat of arms of Ambrosius: an embattled cross and four crowns.AS
there is no mischief more deplorable then that which a man draws upon himself,
so there is no Fate so irresistible as that which is in conjunction with
Nature, whereby drawing back, we tie the knot of Destiny faster, and by turning
aside, or winding about, so tangle the Chain of Causes, that he that is not
strangled, must certainly be bound up so fast, that (like a fly in a Cobweb) he
can no way help himself or avoid destruction: this I take to be the case of the
last King, who being unfortunately illaqueated by his own passions, vainly
strove to avoid the sad effects of his fatal improvidence, when it was too
late: for what could he think that Engist expected for a Dowry for his fair
Daughter, less then half his Kingdom; and to return her back without it, was to
do her that wrong, without which her Father could pretend to no manner of
Right, to do what afterward he did; and to keep her still in his Bed, was to
nourish a Snake in his bosom, which quickened by the heat she received from
him, would in time show the danger of her sting to be mortal: Miserable state
of Princes, whose Errors are as much above others, as they themselves above
other men: and so much more fatal, by how much there can be no satisfaction
given, but what is alike mischievous, as the evil they would avoid.

This extremity beat Vortigern off from his first confidence, and mortified him
so far, that he was content to give up a third part of his Dominions, that he
might quietly enjoy the rest. But as the pouring Water upon Fire, if it do not
utterly quench, raises the flame higher; so what he gave, contributed so little
to the satisfaction of their Avarice, and so much less to that of their
Ambition, that it served only to increase their desire of having more; and to
draw them on from one Proposal to another, till they had so far wasted and
weakened him in Reputation and Power, that another Enemy seemingly less
considerable, was emboldened to put in his claim for the rest. This was the
present King, who being a Prince of the same stock, I cannot say of the same
temper, justled him out of the Throne at the first shock, and finding him
reeling, pressed so hard upon him, that his fall made a greater noise then his
rise.

With this Aurelius Ambrosius came over his Brother Uter, a Prince very early
in action, and for his fierceness surnamed Pendragon: to these the People as
willingly opened their Purses as their Ports; so that like two young Eagles,
being upon the wing, they took their slight several ways, each to prey for
himself, where ere they could find their Quarry. Ambrosius set upon the Saxons,
whiles Uter sought out Vortigern. This brought a fourth pretender into the
list, as forward and fortunate as either of them: who had he been as skilful to
keep, as he was to get a Victory, he might possibly by turning Fortune round,
have made her so giddy, that she could not in a short time have been able to
bear up as after she did, and fix her self upon one side: This was Pascentius
the second Son of Vortigern, who moved with like Zeal to preserve his Father,
as his elder Brother was to preserve his Country, joined with the Saxons, and
set upon Ambrosius, to divert Uter, and if possible, to have contracted the War
into a narrower room, at that place now called Aymesbury, but in the first
place Ambrosebury, in memory of K. Ambrosius his being slain there, where they
met with so like assurance, and not unlike courage, that the hopes on either
side seemed evenly poys'd: But the Battle ending with the lives of the two
great Undertakers, Ambrosius and Pascentius, the one just ready to step into
the Throne, the other not well fixed in it; who went into the other World, with
a sufficient train of Followers to show what rank they held in this. Uter
entered not only without resistance, but without a Rival, which added no less
to his Greatness then to his Security.

UTER PENDRAGON.
Attributed coat of arms of Uther Pendragon: a leopard rampant reguardant.THAT
Love and Arm are as congenial as Honor and Virtue, and as productive of each
other, as light and heat by the Sun; there can be no more pregnant instance,
then in the story of this amorous young King, who was no sooner a Victor over
his Enemies, but he became a Slave to his Passions, and so totally vanquished
by Love and Luxury, that he forfeited the favor of his best Mistress, Fortune;
who finding that he had slighted her to court another, not only slighted him,
but taking a Woman's revenge, watched her opportunity to bring his Enemy upon
him, to take him (as Vulcan did Mars) in the arms of his Venus. However, they
were so hamstring'd, that they could not only not make any further progress in
their intended Conquest, but were scarce able to make a stand to defend what
they had already got (being constrained to break up their Seige at York, and
draw all their Forces into the narrow Circle of their associate Counties) yet
they set upon his triumphant. Army with redoubled confidence, coming upon them
at a time when he was no less sick in body then mind, languishing under the
tyranny of a raging Fever, which held him prisoner in his Bed, and at that
distance from the Camp, that it was thought impossible for him (if well) to
have reached them time enough before they were defeated.

This one would have thought had been sufficient to have unravel'd all his
Glory, and to have rendered him not only lost to all the World, but to himself
too: But as the Palm Tree is therefore figurative of Victory, because the more
it is depressed, the stronger it bears up against the weight is laid upon it;
so he, less sensible of his own, then his Armies weakness, caused himself to be
carried in his Litter to them, and that unexpected conquest of his own
infirmities, so animated their activity, that finding they must either leave
all their Bodies dead upon the place, or his, in case they did not make
themselves Masters of the Day, they tarried not to expect the Assault, but gave
it: whereby turning the surprise upon the other side, they slew Ten thousand of
their best men, and forced the rest to seek safeguard under the protection of
their new landed Forces, who taught by the experience of former Battles lost,
how necessary it is to join to Courage caution, had strongly fortified
themselves within an inaccessable Rampart, which he endeavoring to force, lost
his Victory as unexpectedly as he got it, and with it his own, amongst many
other lives, falling like the fierce Creature from which he took his Name,
whose Image it is thought he bore upon his Shield, to show his descent from the
Roman Emperors, as our Kings since have continued it amongst the Royal Banners
of England, to show their descent from him.

ARTHUR
Attributed coat of arms of King Arthur: a cross bottony.THIS Prince (the only
Son of Uter, begot on the fair Duchess of Cornwall) being very young at the
time of his Fathers death, it is hard to say whether the crack in his birth, or
the imbecility of his Nonage, rendered him more obnoxious to Envy or Injury: the
Emulation of his Friends, being like to prove more dangerous to his Title, then
the opposition of his Enemies could be to his Person. For his Father having
made a League with the Picts, by the marriage of his Sister to their King, it
now became a Question, Whether she as the only Legitimate Heir Female, or he as
the Illegitimate Heir Male, should succeed. The first seemed to be backed by
more right; the last by more affection: For the Britains carried him up and
down with their Army in his Cradle, as they had before his sick Father in his
Litter; believing (or at least willing that it should be so believed) that he
was the moving Genius of their Nation. Instead of Rattles and Whistles, they
enured him only to Drums, Fifes, and Trumpets: Instead of Milk they nourished
him up with Blood: and thus by extraordinary Education, he became a Man, even
while he was a Child, and something more then a Man after he was full grown.
Now whether we measure his Greatness by his Virtues, his Virtues by his
Fortune, or his Fortune by his Fame, we shall find him as much above his Title,
as that was above his Dominions: For the Bards styled him Imperator Britannia,
Gallia, Germania and Dacia: and the Monks extolled him to that degree, as if
they had designed to make his Reputation a Monument for their own. Ninius tells
us, he fought twelve Battles before he was twelve years old. Others tells us
how at fifteen he killed a Danish Giant hand to hand, if they mistake not, for
hand to foot; the overgrown Enemy being so much above him in Stature, that we
must Imagine he begun at his Legs, and hewed him down as they do a Tree, that
suffers nothing to grow near it. After that, he pursued those bold Intruders,
the Picts, into their own Country, and forced a Tribute from them. Thus we find
his Story lessned by those that labor to magnify it: Some not being ashamed
to affirm he sent to Rome to demand a Tribute of the Senate there; whilst
others more modest think it honor enough to assert, that he boldly denied the
Tribute demanded of him here. Doubtless, his Reign lasting so long as it did (I
take it not much less then Twenty six years) and falling out in so active an
Age, could not but administer occasion enough for Glory, had not the Envy of
his Allies eaten like a Canker into the heart of its bud: For his Cousin
Mordred, Son of Lotho King of the Picts, after the death of his Father,
assisted by his Uncle Goran King of Scots, entering at the Postern whilst he w
defending the Fore-gate of the Kingdom against the Saxons, wounded him as it
'twere in the back; yet he fell not presently, but defended himself and his
People both ways, till Cerdick the Potent Saxon united with them, and guided
by some unlucky Star, not less ominous to themselves then to him, gave him his
death, near the place where he first received his life: Fortune being so much
kinder to him in the last place, then Nature was in the first, in that giving
him up into his Power by whom he was slain, she made his Exit out of the World
more honorable then his entrance into it, whilst he dyed unconquered, however
overcome; departing like Alexander the Great (who was a Byslip too) without
noise, and without Issue; whereby his Dominions in this lesser, as to others in
the greater World, came to be left (...), to the Worthiest, which the Britains
supposed to be the Prince who comes next in Succession, till himself undeceived
them.

CONSTANTINE.
Attributed coat of arms of Constantine: 15 bezants in pile.FOrtune, as she
ever took upon her to dispose Diadems, favoring not always the most
deserving, yet seldom any but the most active; so in preferring this Prince
before others, nearer in blood (for he was but by the Mothers side of the Royal
Line) 'twas believed she had set up one that would have commanded as many
hearts, as his Uncle had hands, there being no less hopes conceived from the
greatness of his Name, then from that of his Spirit, bred up in Arms from a
Child, and in the then most glorious Court of the World: So that what was said
of Caius Caesar, may be applied to him: Sueton. Vit. Calig.
In Castris natus, patriis nutritus in Armis,
Jam designati Principis omen erat.
but no sooner was he ascended the Throne, but like the same Emperor to whom
the words before pointed, he over-lookt the love and hatred of his People, and
as if he had imbibed (as well as the other) the poison of that cursed Maxim,
Oderint dum metuant, he swelled and grew arrogant, and seemed in nothing more
to despise his Enemies, then by the contempt he had of his Friends: And as
Gildas observes of him, taking the measure of his Will from that of his Power,
grew so insupportable to the petty Princes his Confederates, that they
conspired against him and slew him: His death proving the more unfortunate, in
that he lived not to reconcile himself to the Church, to which he had given
great offense, by violating the holy Rights of Sanctuary, as well as of his own
Faith, to take his Revenge on the two Innocent Princes his Rivals, the Sons of
the deceased Mordred, whom he murdered before the Altar, in requital of the
trouble their Ancestor had given to his. Upon his death there were three
Pretenders at once; each of which being absolute within the Circle of his own
Territories, could not give place to the other. Aurelius Conanus Prince of
North Wales; Vortiporus Lord of South Wales; and Malgo-C^^nus, who Gildas calls
the Dragon of the Isles: which for a while (each calling himself King of
Britain) made a vain resistance against the Common Enemy, that had by this time
overrun almost all that part of the Isle, which we properly now call England.
But finding themselves endangered by their divided Power, they put themselves
under the protection of this Caridic that succeeds.

CARIDIC.
Attributed coat of arms of Careticus: a leopard rampant reguardant.THIS
Caridic, whom Latin Historians call Careticus, was one of the Eleven Sons (all
famous in the British Annals) of Wledic ap Edern ap Padarne, Lord of the Isles;
who after the Saxons beat them over Seavern, dispossessed the Posterity of
Bethun, the Descendants of Glamhector, the most ancient Lords of South Wales.
He was the last British King that had any thing to do in England, an active
Prince, and one that made many Attacks upon the Saxons with indifferent
success, till at last they confederated with the Danes, and well near
surrounded him; for whilst he was preparing to give Battle to Kenrick the
West Saxon, Gurmund the Dane appeared behind him, being advanced so near to
Worcester, that 'twas feared he might take the Town: this necessitated him to
quit the English, and face about toward him, which, as it was the last, so it
proved the most fatal Battle, that ever the Britains fought, diverse of their
Princes losing their Lives upon the place, the rest losing the Place, which was
dearer to them then their Lives: After which he retreated over Severn and Dee,
and taking the advantages of those inaccessable Streights, seated himself
amongst the desert Mountains of Wales, where he spent the remainder of his
days, in the contemplation, of his lost Glory, having no prospect of any
future happiness, beyond that of ^eing assured, that his unhappiness would end
with himself, in respect he had no Issue to complain of the loss of their
Inheritance, nor no Wife to upbraid him with his want of Issue. However, there
were those that came after him, that appeared right-worthy to have been before
him, who defended so well that little that was left, that it appeared they had
lost nothing of the greatness of their Minds, however it fell short in that of
their Dominions; making continual War upon their Potent Neighbors, for near
two hundred years after: Till in the length, rather worn out then vanquished,
they were contentedly betrayed into such Allyances, as dissolved their Power
insensibly, and brought them at last under the Bondage of an Union, which
making the two Nations one, rendered them no People.

THE THIRD DYNASTY OF ENGLISH.
Woodcut headpiece with an angel against a decorative pattern of grapes, vines
and flowers. OF ENGLISH.
SUccessors to the Romans were the English, a People of so ancient an Extract,
that he that will trace their Original, must follow it (as Berosus does) into
the Flood; for as they were ever famous by Sea, so they deduce their Pedigree
from the Universal Deluge. Whom the ^ermans worshipped for their God of War, as
the Romans Mars.
Woden their Common Ancestor, being descended in a direct Line from From whom
the German Language is called the Tentonick.
Theutones, the Grandchild or Lanquet.
Gambrivius (the first Inventer of good Ale and Beer, which they have loved but
too well ever since) he was the third in descent from From whom they were
called Germans.
Manus, Son of From whom the German Language came to be called the Twich or
Tutch Tongue.
Tuisco, the eldest Son of Gomer, the first Son of Japheth, third Son of Noah,
whom Moses remembers by the name of Aschenaz, from whom the Hebrews call the
Germans, Illust. Poliolb. fol. 70.
Aschenims.

Thus their own Records will have them to be some of the most renowned Relics
of the Old World, however Tacitus (who began to live near about the time Christ
died) by what misunderstanding I know not, makes no mention of them, otherwise
than under the Common Name of Cimbri: But probable it is, that in respect they
possessed that part of Germany, which lies betwixt the Rhene and the River
Albis, over which the Romans never passed, being by Ptol. lib. 5. c. 18.
Ptolomey's Reckoning near a third part of the whole, he had not the good hap
to attain to any near acquaintance with them.

At their first Arrival here, they designed to change the Name of Britain into
Nova Saxonia, or rather Saxonia Transmarina, they themselves passing under the
general Name of Saxons, so called from their Lipsius.
Seai^es, a sort of short Swords, or rather long Knives, that they wore under
their Arming Coats. So much more remarkable amongst the unadvised Britains, in
that they made a most fatal Proof of the dangerous use of them, by the loss of
no less than three hundred Lives at one Interview, amongst whom were diverse of
the best Quality of their Nation, who were inhumanely butchered at a Parley,
where they met unarmed, in that desert place now called Stonenge in Wiltshire,
by some supposed to be the Monument of that days Treachery, for which there can
be no excuse but that of the Poet, -- Virtus, an dolus, quis in Host requirat?
But after they got the entire possess^on of the whole, they changed their
minds, and as some say, in honor of Engist the first Invader, they turned the
Name of Britain into Engistland, or as others say, complying with the Angles,
(the greatest People amongst them) called it Anglelond, which since we term
England.

They were divided into three distinct Tribes, differing as in Country, so in
Name: The first call d JUTES, or (as Bede calls them) VITES; these before they
came hither, inhabited the Mountains that divide Germany from Italy in the
first place, and afterward fixed themselves in the Cimbrian Cbersoness, since
called Juitland; their portion here was most of the South part of the Isle
(being thereupon termed South-sex) toward that Island which from them was
called the Isle of Vites or Wight. The second Tribe was called ANGLES, who
possessing the South part of the Chersoness, gave name to the Town of Angolen:
These were the greatest Scept both for fame and power, who taking up much of
the East, all the North, and most of the North-west part of this Isle, being
four parts of seven in the whole; the rest took its denomination from them, and
fell under the general appellation of Which in the Ventonick Tongue signif^es
the S^aight or Narrow Land.
Angleland or England. The third Tribe which afterward devorred the other two,
were those most properly called Saxons, and for distinction sake from the rest
of their own Country, A^ Holiz, quod and Silv^^ and Lig^^^ sig^^ficat.
HOLY SAXONS, in respect of their woody Country: Since the Dukedom of
Holstein, in the very neck of the Chersoness, where it joins to Germany: their
Territories here in England were the South and West parts of the Isle,
whereupon they were termed West- Saxons.

Now as they arrived not all at once, so neither all at one place, each General
waiting till Fortune made him way, by which means landing in several parts of
the Isle, they tired out the Natives with frequent slaughters; and to raise the
fame of their Conquest the higher, they so timed their ambition, as if they
would have posterity believe, they had won a Kingdom for every day in the Week,
setting up as many distinct Monarchies, as they had Letters in the SAXONIA.
name of their own Country.

This Heptarchy of theirs was formed after the ancient optimical model of
Government, used by most of the Northern Nations of the World; amongst whom the
right of Sovereignty was not measured by any Line of Descent from Royal
Progenitors, but considered according to the primitive Virtut^ l^^^ a^tio.
Rule of virtue, set up by the Stoics, wherein that of Fortirude had the start
in point of esteem and reputation of all other good Qualities whatsoever, as
being the most useful for those active times, none being admitted to the trust
of Governing, but such whose Swords had made them passage to that honor,
through the bowels of Fame; these therefore they styled Cyning or Koninghz,
each of these titles signifying men of power and spirit, conduct and courage.
And as these good Qualities made the people first in love with them, so it made
them themselves so far in love with the way of their own preserment, as to
prefer it before all other, affecting more adopted than natural Sons, and not
seldom nominating such for their Successors, in case of minority as well as
deficiency, as were nearer them in proficiency of parts, than proximity of
blood.

This however it seemed most unnaturally natural (for that it is observed,
inocculated Grafts prove better than those which spring out of the S^ock)
introduced such a kind of co-equality betwixt the Kings, and those of the first
rank of their Subjects, that they that were nearest to the Throne, often took
the boldness to step in first, till by frequent Usurpations, the power of
Majesty was so checked, that though there were some one or other all the time of
the Heptarchy, who for dignity sake had the Prerogative to be styled Rex
Anglorum, (which was no less than Rex Regum at that time) as much as to say,
King of all the rest of the Kings, yet not any one of these Monarchs were able
to effect any such entire Consociation for the security of the whole, as to
settle any one form or order of Law current amongst them, till Alfrid (more
Majorum) after the custom of his Ancestors, the Germans, did (as Tacitus
testifies of them) Jura per Pagos reddere, every County till his time, holding
their Customs apart, as they had received from those Roytelets, their
particular Founders, without the obligation to any universal Law but what was
Canonical; which was not the least cause they labored so long in vain, under
the various pressures of envy, necessity and chance, being driven to and fro
like the Sea, from whence they first came, (the nature of which restless
Element is to lose ground in one place as it gets in another) and urged with
alternate Revolutions, after they had lost all their Interest in their own
Country, to be in hazard of being irrecoverably lost here, whilst they were
forced to maintain a War against the Britains, their common Foe, the Danes,
their accidental Foe, and themselves, the intestine Foe, and therefore the most
dangerous, by how much they themselves made the breach, at which the other
entered, who watching his time (as the Ichnewmon that creeps into the mouth of
the Crocodile, whilst he is gaping to devour his prey) made a passage through
their bowels, before they could swallow up the Britains, and gain an entire
conquest over them.

This looked like a judgment inflicted upon them, by that Nemesis, that was the
just revenger of the Britains wrongs; to whom they were of all others the most
pernicious enemies; for contrary to the practice and policy of those that were
before them, as well as of those that came after them, they refused all
commerce, communion, or mixture with them, extinguished their Religion totally,
silenced their Laws, rejected their Language, and in conclusion took from them
their very Name, as well as their Country. Neither stopped they here, but
dissolving all regard, rendered Barbarism wholly triumphant, whilst fury and
ignorance met in conjunction. In fine, being irreconcilable to whatever could
be called civil or sacred, they not only took from the Men their Lives, from
the Women their Honor, from both their Liberty, but defaced all Monuments,
devoted to piety or peace; and if they did not wholly demolish them, yet they
profaned the holy things, not seldom sacrificing the Sacrificers upon their
own Altar. And which made the Persecution the more dreadful, was, that it was
not to be pacified by any Offering or prayers, for one hundred and fifty years
together, so far as to have the least regard to Sex, Age, Degree, Quality, or
Relation whatever, till their brutish spirits were quite tired out with
continual slaughters and butcheries.

But after that light which shines in darkness, guided them to the knowledge
of that blessed Truth, whose meekness miraculously allayed their rough natures,
they became so flexible and obedient to the principles of their new Faith, as
men that thought they could never expiate their former inhumanities, but by an
excess of zeal, they did as immoderately wast themselves in repairing the
ruins they had made, raising so many new Structures, that the number as well
as the beauty so far exceeded all those of former times, that it might have
been said of this Isle as once of Rome, that it seemed but one great Monastery;
the piety of their Kings so surmounting their policy, that many of them turned
their Scepters into Crosiers, and exchanged their Crowns for Miters, their
Princes thinking it a greater glory to be made Priests, than their Priests
thought it to be made Princes.

Thus they conquered themselves before they had half conquered the Britains;
and as it is observable how by their contention for Heaven, they were happily
brought to imitate it, in that wonderful work of the Circulation of the Globe,
effected by the power of that truly divine Science, the Art of Navigation,
first reduced into practice by them, whereby they had the honor to be the
first that resolved the Non ultra of the Ancients, into a Plus ultra,
discovering another World, which neither the Greeks nor Romans ever knew: So it
is more than probable, that if they had quietly enjoyed the benefit of their
Conquest here at home, after it came to be entire and absolute, without that
interruption they had from the Dana, (who finding them busi'd in an intestine
War one with another, undermined them by Land, before they could perfect any
great matter by Sea) they had not contented themselves as they did, with an
Insulary glory; having laid so good a foundation to an universal Empire, and so
much more lasting than any that were ever before it, by how much they would
have had it in their power, to have secured the obedience of the rest of the
World by their ignorance, rendering themselves their Masters, by a mystery of
State not to be resisted, because not understood, whereof our Kings their
Successors, now absolute Lords of the Sea, have happily made good proof. For as
a modern Poet has well observed: Where ere our Navy spreads her Canvass Wings,
Homage to the State, and Peace to all she brings.
French, Dutch, and Spaniards, when our Flags appear,
Forget their hatred, and consent to fear.
So Jove from Ida did the Hosts survey,
And when he pleased to thunder, part the Fray.
Waller.
Ships heretofore in Seas like Fishes sped,
The greatest still upon the smallest fed.
We on the Deep impose more equal Laws,
And by that justice do remove the cause
Of those rude Tempests, which for rapine sent,
Did too too often involve the innocent:
Rendering the Ocean (as our Thames is) free
From both those Fates, of Storms and Pitacy.
Thrice happy People, who can fear no force,
But winged Troops, or Pegasean Horse.
But considering (as I said) the difficulties they met with before, without
mentioning the dangers they encountered after they were settled, the checks of
Fortune whilst they were rising and the counterbuffs of Envy after they were
up, and mounted to their height, whereof (as Gildas relates) they were
forewarned by their Gods, who being consulted about the Invasion, gave answer,
that the Land whereto they went, should be held by them 300 years, half the
time to be spent in conquering, the other half in possessing their Conquest,
which agreed with the measure of their Heptarchy. Lastly, Considering the
fierceness of the Britains of the one side, and the fraud of the Danes of the
other, those perhaps doing them more mischief by Treaties, than the other by
admitting no cessation: We may conclude with the Poet, Nec minor est Virtus
quam quarere parta tueri.

THE ORDER OF THE KINGS OF KENT. I.
I. having broken in like a Horse (for so his Name imports) and trampled down
all that withstood him, made himself King of Kent; and by being the first King,
was worthily esteemed the first Monarch of the English: a Title that during the
Heptarchy, was appropriated to some one above all the rest of the Kings. He
reigned 34 years, and left his Glory to descend on his second Son II. under
whose Government the Kentish men thrived so well, that they were contentedly
named from him Eskins. III. had a longer, but less happy Reign, wasting 22
years without any memorable act, that might render him more renowned then his
Successor IV. who after 25 years Reign by Stow 's Account, 29 by Savil's, had
nothing to boast, but that he was the Son of such a Father as Oeske, and the
Father of such a Son, as V. the first Christian King of all this Nation, and
the sixth Monarch of the English men: A Prince who was therefore esteemed
great, because good; but his happiness ended with himself, for his impious Son.
VI. was laid in his Bed as soon as he was laid in his Grave, apostatizing from
his natural Religion, to gratify his unnatural Lust; he had many Sons, but the
Succession fell to the youngest. VII. more like his Grandfather then his
Father, a pious public spirited Prince: he was the first divided Kent into
Parishes, and commanded the observation of Lent. He was not so good, but his
Sons were as bad. VIII. the eldest, made his way to the Crown, by the murder
of his two Cosins, the right Heirs of Ethelbert, and Sons to his Fathers Elder
Brother Ermenred, who being not able to do themselves right, were revenged by
his younger Brother IX. who gave the like measure to his two Sons, putting them
besides the Succession, to admit X. who entered with more Triumph than Joy,
being within two years after, deprived both of honor and life, by his own
Subjects; upon which his Brother XI. assumed the Government, being rather
admitted then chosen; or rather gave himself up to be governed by one Swebard,
who they put over him, by whose advice he ruled not ingloriously 33 years, and
left his Kingdom to his Sons, who alternately succeeded. XII. the Eldest, most
like his Father, both in Person and Fortune, reigned 23 years. XIII. the second
reigned but one year. XIV. the last of the three, and indeed the last of the
Royal Line, did only something that made him more notably unfortunate then the
two former, in being overcome by the great Mercian Offa, whereby the Kingdom
became a prey to whosoever could catch it; the first whereof that got that
advantage was XV. the third, firnamed Pren, who entered in the Vacancy of the
first Occupant, and being disseized by that Wolf, Kenelwolph the thirteenth
King of Mercia, he put in one XVI. who enjoyed an undisturbed possession eight
years, after whom XVII. stepped in, who being little regarded abroad, was less
beloved at home, fearing his People might leave him, he first left them, and
flying over the River Thames, as soon as Egbert the West Saxon entered his
Territories, left all to the Conqueror, who without more trouble made this
Kingdom, and those of the South and East-Sexes, an Appenage for his younger Son
Athelstan.
Attributed coat of arms of the kingdom of Kent: a horse springing.IT is hard
to resolve, Whether Engist that erected this Kingdom, were more beholding to
Fortune or his own foresight; or whether indeed the folly of Vortigern, were
not more advantageous to him then either; who not trusting the uncertain
obedience of his own People, cast himself upon the faith of this Stranger, who
in serving of him, could have no other design, but to serve himself upon him:
Neither did the frowardness of the Natives contribute less to his Greatness,
then the folly of their King, who not consenting to the Ratification of that
little which was promised him, justified him in the larger Demands he made
afterward, when they durst not deny his Experience on the Seas, taught him how
to Laveer from point to point, and shift as he found the wind failing, to steer
in a direct course; but had the Britains kept Faith with him, it is probable he
had not broke as he did with them, taking that advantage by his very first
Treaty, which was not to have been hoped for by any long hostility; which
success, though the execution seemed not considerable, amounted to a kind of
Victory. So that 'twas no wonder he rested not contented with such a
Proportion, as he was before ashamed to wish for; Ambition respecting not so
much whence it comes, as whither it is addressed, pressing still forwards,
without any consideration, but that of the felicity it aims at, on which it
fixes with so intense a look, that it regards no dangers, much less any faith:
being denied the Government of the Isle of Thanet, he insisted upon that of the
whole Province of Kent: meeting with opposition there, he supplied force with
fraud, and both with Fortune, and by the possession of that one only, got the
command of three Provinces more, all lying so convenient for landing Supplies,
that this seemed to be but an Earnest for an entire Conquest: Neither thought
he it sufficient to have the Power, without he had the Title of a King.
Hitherto he had only studied his Security; that being obtained, he begins to
affect Glory; and in respect Kent was his Principal Seat, he gives that the
pre-eminence of giving the Name to his Kingdom, being the first, not to say the
last too of the whole Heptarchy, continuing near four hundred years, supported
by its own proper Forces, before it fell under the common Fate, of being
incorporated into the Universal Monarchy of the English. And as it was the
first Kingdom, so was it the first Christian Kingdom of the Seven, from whom
the East Saxons borrowed their light, and from them the rest, till an universal
brightness oversp ead the whole Hemisphere; which, however it seems to have
been a work of time, as appears by that o^d Adage yet in use amongst us (In
Kent and Christendom) was an occasion of so high regard to the People of that
Province, that all the Counties of England have ever since, consented to allow
them the honor of precedence in the Field, by giving them the right of leading
the Van, as often as the Nation appears to give any Batgel Royal, which
Privilege has been by special Charter confirmed to them from the time of King
Knute the Zealous.

The long Reign of Engist (not less as some say, then fifty years) contributed
much to the Corroboration of his Conquest; which being the Gift of Fortune
rather then Nature, he bestowed it on his youngest Son Oeske, from whom, as I
said before, 'twas called the Kingdom of Eskins; which beginning at the time of
Ambrosius the British King, continued Three hundred seventy two years, an
entire Kingdom: and after the West Saxons reduced it under their Obedience, had
yet the repute of being a distinct Principality, and by that Title was bestowed
upon the younger Sons of those Kings, who defended it against the Danes, till
Ethelbert the second Son of Athelstan, second Son of Egbert, after the death of
his Elder Brother Ethelwald, entering upon the whole Monarchy of England, Anno
860. united it inseparably to his Empire.

THE ORDER OF THE KINGS OF SOUTH-SEXE. II.
I. was the first King of this, and second absolute Monarch of the whole
Kingdom; for which Honor he was more indebted to the length of his Reign, then
the greatness of his Dominions, being indeed the very least of the Seven. II.
his youngest Son (the two elder being slain) succeeded his Father; he reigned
peaceably seventy six years; founded Chichester and Chisbury; the one for the
resort of his People, the other for the repose of himself where dying he left his
Son III. EDELWOLPH to succeed, the first Christian of this House, who refusing
to contribute to the War against the Britains, in respect the West Saxon lay
betwixt him and danger, Ceadwald the Tenth of those Kings, sell upon him, and
slew him, upon whose death IV. BERTHUN and AUTHUN Two Dukes collaterally sprung
out of the Royal Stock of this Kingdom, interposed themselves with equal
merit, in the common Calamity and Defense of their Country; and forcing
Ceadwald to retire, ruled jointly for six years, till the same King returning
upon them, took from the one his Life, from the other his Liberty, whereby this
became a Province to the West-Sexe.
Attributed coat of arms of the kingdom of Sussex: 6 martlets in pile.BY the
setting up of this Kingdom, containing no more but two Counties, Sussex and
Surrey, and those none of the greatest, we may take some measure of the
Ambition of our Ancestors, who had as great respect to their Glory, as their
Security, being not content to have the Power, without they had the Title of
Kings. This Ella was in the first place but a Colonel under Engist, who made
him Governor of Sussex, to which having added Surrey, with the loss of the
lives of his two eldest Sons, Kymen and Plenchin, after the death of his
General, he set up for himself; and being resolved to show the greatness of his
mind, by the narrowness of his Dominions, not only declared himself the first
King of the South-Sexe, but made himself so considerable in the esteem of all
his Countrymen, that they submitted to him, as the second Monarch of the
English; which Glory he held up to the height near thirty years: But that Sun
which began in Kent, the East part of the Isle, and came toward him who was
planted in the South, hasted to set amongst the West-Sexe, to whom his
Successors were forced to become Tributary; or if it may lessen the dishonor
(for these were all of them most deserving Princes) we may say Contributioners
toward the War against the Britains. The West Saxon Kingdom lying betwixt them
and danger, the nonpayment of this Tax (whether it were that the Kings hereof
refused it as being too heavy a Burden upon them, or disdained the manner of
Exaction, or thought themselves not obliged to be longer charged, having
cleared their own Territories, is not certain) was the first and only occasion
of the downfall of this Kingdom, being thereby engaged in a War with too potent
a Neighbor; against whom, though they had no hopes to prevail, yet they
scorned to yield, till their tottering State fell down about their Ears, and
buried them in the common Ruins of their Country, which was so far wasted,
before it submitted to become a Province, that when it was added to the other,
it became rather a Burden then a Strengthening for a great while; so far had
Famine and Plague (the Peacemakers in all Civil Wars) disabled them to all
intents and purposes, before this Curse fell upon them to be devoured by their
Friends, which was so much more dishonorable, then to be conquered by their
Enemies, by how much it was the first unhappiness of this kind.

THE ORDER OF THE KINGS OF WEST-SEXE. III.
I. having conquered Natan-leod the Dragon of the Western Britains, set up the
third Kingdom, which reaching from Hampshire to Cornwall, was called the
Kingdom of West-Sexe; and gave him the repute of being the third Monarch of
the English. II. his Son succeeded him both in the Kingdom and Monarchy. III.
his Son was the fifth Monarch; but his Power being not adaequate to his Fame,
he in 33 years time could not so settle himself, but that he was dispossessed by
his Brother IV. who being not so good at keeping, as in getting the Kingdom
into his hands, was himself deposed in like manner by V. Son of Cuth. fifth Son
of Kenrick, a Prince worthy the Greatness he inherited; who, notwithstanding he
was assaulted by the Picts and Scots and East Angles all at once, kept his
Ground, and left it to his Successor VI. a Prince famous for his piety and
courage, who left his Son VII. to succeed him, whose beginning may be compared
to the worst, his ending to the best of Kings, renouncing first his Faith,
after his Wife; both which though he afterward retained, yet the sin stuck so
close to him, that the first left him without a Kingdom, the last without a
Son, whereby VIII. of the Line of Chelwolph took place, who for six years kept
out the right Heir, IX. younger Son of Ringills, who utterly expuls'd all the
Bri^ains, and forced them to seek their safety in those inaccessable Mountains
of Wales, whereby his Successor X. had so much leisure as to fall upon his
nearest Neighbors, the South-Sexe, and weaken them so far, that they were
forced to yield to his Successor XI. INE, worthily esteemed the greatest Prince
of his time, and the most magnificent, yet withal the most humble; he dyed in a
Pilgrimage to Rome, nominating XII. the Son of Oswald, the Son of Ethelbald,
descended from Kenwa^d, his Successor, who reigned fourteen years, and left the
Scepter to his Brother XIII. whose heart being broken by seeing his Son
murdered, the Crown came to XIV. SIGEBERT, one whose vices were less obscure
than his Parentage, who murdering one of the best of his Friends, was himself
slain by one of the basest of his Enemies, a Swineherd, whereby XV. succeeded,
a person worthy of better sat than he met with, being slain by the hand of an
Outlaw, at a time when he did not expect, and consequently was not prepared for
death, and so XVI. succeeded, the last King of this House, lineally descended
from Cerdick, who being poisoned by his own Queen, this Kingdom came to Egbert
the Son of Ingils, and Brother of Ine, who reduced the whole Heptarchy into a
Monarchy, and therefore worthily led the Van to the absolute Monarchs of
England.
Attributed coat of arms of the kingdom of Wessex: a dragon rampant.THIS was
the third Kingdom of the Heptarchy, and deservedly so called, if we consider
the largeness of its extent, which measured by the Line of Circumvallation,
reached (if some of our modern Geographers say true) above 700 miles in
compass, being commonly called the Kingdom of the West-Sexe by Bid, the
Kingdom of the Genevises by Cambrensis, from Genesius, Grandfather to Cerdick,
who had the honor to be esteemed the first Founder of it, although in truth he
reared but a small part of this stately Fabric, the rest being the work of
Time and Fortune, and came not to perfection in almost 500 years. He was for
his fierceness sirnam'd the Dragon, possibly in imitation of the British Kings,
who had that title; and having beaten The Britain called him, M^^ge Co^^^^^
Natanleod, the Dragon of the Western Britains, forced him to retreat, and
leave 5000 of his people behind him, in possession of no more of their own
ground, than served to make them one common Grave, from whom it is thought he
took this Shield of the Dragon: He was thereupon declared the third Monarch of
the English men, his Son Kenrick was the fourth, and his Grandson Cheulin the
fifth: Each of these shared with him in the honor of being the first raisers
of this Kingdom; the establisher of it was King Kenwin, the ninth Monarch, who
expuls'd all the Britains; the first that enlarged it was Ceadwald, the tenth
King, who having made his way to the Conquest of Kent, by that of the
South-Sexe, left his Successor Ine (worthily therefore sirnam'd the Great) to
give his Neighbors a true estimate of his power, by that of his wealth, and a
measure of his wealth, by that of his munificence; whereof there needs no other
instances, than in the Foundation of the Abbey of Glastenbury, the Furniture of
whose Chapel only took up 2835 pound weight of Silver, and 337 pound weight of
Gold, (a vast sum for those days) which being for the ornamental part only,
could not be comparable to that which was left for the endowment. He Founded
also the Cathedral Church of Wells, the West part whereof is perhaps one of the
most stately Fabrics in the known World. Yet neither of these are more lasting
Monuments than those of his Laws, translated for their excellency by the
learned Lambert into Latin, as being the Foundation of what we are governed by
so long since. This was he that gave the first Eleemosinary Dole of Peter Pence
to the Church of Rome, which was exacted in the next Age as a Tribute. In this
man's Reign this Kingdom was at its height, declining after his death
insensibly, till the time of Egbert, who being the Darling of Fortune as well
as of his own Subjects, and a Prince of great towardliness, after he had
corrected his youth by the experience he had in the Wars under Charles the
Great (being the first of all the Saxon Princes that were educated abroad) he
got so far the advantage of all his homebred Contemporaries, that he easily
soared above the common height of Majesty, and beat up the seven Crowns into
one; which placing on his own head, he not only gave those Laws but that Name
to the whole Isle, which continued till King James his Reign, who uniting
Scotland to the rest of the Terra firma not reduced, altered the style of King
of England, into that which only could make it greater, writing himself, King
of Great Britain, to which August and most Imperial Title we now pay homage,
and may we ever do so.

THE ORDER OF THE KINGS OF EAST-SEXE. IV.
I. the Son of Offa, Great-Grandson of Sneppa, third in descent from Seaxnod,
third Son of Woden the common Progenitor of the Saxons, began this Kingdom with
the happiness of a long Reign, which however it be seldom desired, was
certainly very advantageous to his Successor II. who thought the readiest way
to keep what his Predecessor got, was to add to it what his Successors were not
like to keep, a Peace with the Kings of Kent, his next Neighbors, confirmed by
an Alliance with Ethelbert the Proto-Christian, who converted his Son III.
SIGEBERT, that in honor to his Religion made that League perpetual, which
after his death was broken by his three graceless Sons IV. SEWARD, SIGEBERT,
Who ruled together like Brethren in Iniquity, persecuting all that were
Christians, till Ingill the West Saxon (converted but a little before) revenged
the holy Cause by putting a period to their Triumvirat, upon which V. Son of
the middlemost, took place, he was surnamed The Little probability of his
little Credit, rather then his little Person, being so detested by his People,
that they put by his Son and Brother, to admit another of the same Name, but of
different Temper. VI. the third Son of Sigebald, younger Brother of Sigebert
the first, who declaring for Christianity, was surnamed, The Good; and being
murdered, during the minority of his Son, his Brother VII. succeeded, as if to
taste of Royalty only, falling under the same fate by the same hand, and for
the same cause; by whose death VIII. the Son of Sigebert the Little, assisted
by his Uncle Sebba, got into the Throne: His Successor was IX. the Saint, on
whom Bid fastens that famous Miracle of lengthning the Marble Chest in which
his Body was laid, which he says was too short by a foot for the Corpse, till
the Body was put into it, which, who so believes, must stretch his Faith as
much. Successor to him was X. the Second, one fitter to be a Monk then a
Monarch, giving up his Scepter for a pair of Beads to his Brother XI. who if he
ruled not with him, ruled very little after him; and then came XII. the Son of
Sigehere to succeed, who impoverished himself by enriching the Church, and
having quit his Wife to perform a Pilgrimage to Rome, tempted her to quit the
World, and become a Nun, whereby either lost the other and both the hopes of
any Issue; which made well for XIII. the Son of Sigebert the Good, whose old
Age was crowned with an unexpected Succession, but he took not so much pleasure
in it as to survive it, whereby XIV. filled up his place, who involved in the
Fate of Baldred King of Kent, attacht by the West Saxons, lost this, as the other
did that Kingdom, whereby it became a Province under the Victorious Egbert.
Attributed coat of arms of the kingdom of Essex: three seax in pale.IN the
midst of the Universal Conflagrations that near about this time began to spread
over the Face of the whole Isle, the flames whereof were not otherwise to be
quenched, but by the blood of the miserable Natives; it so ^apned that Essex
(however nearest to those Countries that first felt the sharpness of the Saxon
Swords) had the good Fortune to preserve it self untoucht till about the year
527, when Erchenwin landing in Norfolk, and taking thence a view of the
neighboring Vales, imagined there went no more to the taking possession, then
to enter and make a bo^d claim: But finding the Inhabitants obstinately
resolved to make their Graves in no other place, but where their Bones might
mix with those of their Ancestors; it is hard to say, Whether his Fury or his
Fear prevailed most with him: whilst being engaged beyond the safety of a
Retreat, he made his way into the heart of their Country with that precipitate
Courage, as if he had designed to fly through them into the Provinces beyond;
which they perceiving, like men well acquainted with the violence of such Land
Floods, made him way to pass into Kent; where promising to become a Feodary to
that Prince, he returned him with that additional Strength, as made him not
only Master of this, but by uniting Middlesex and a great part of
Hertfordshire, gave him the honor of setting up a fourth Kingdom, called that
of the East-Sexe: which however it was not very great, was well fortified with
the Ocean on the East, the Thames on the South Side, the River Coln on the
West, and the Stour on the North-side: and being established by the advantage
of a long and peaceable Reign, and the reputation of the Alliance he had with
the potent King of Kent, he was secured so far on that side, as to put him in
condition of securing himself on the other, till such time as the East Angles
and the Mercian, by the Interposition of their Territories betwixt him and the
Common Enemy, left him regardless of any further danger; but withal so
enervated his Successor, that being seldom armed, and never active, Fortune
grew out of Love with them, and never vouchsafed any one of them the honor to
be ranged amongst the Monarchs of the Isle; a favor every other House
alternately enjoyed, according to the variation or vicissitude of their
Successes; but however they attained less, it appears they aimed at greater
Glory then any of their Neighbors, being the second Kingdom that oppenly
professed Christianity, and those that gave it the best entertainment;
Sacrificing to the Church what others spent in War, being repaid with Pardons,
Benedictions, and Indulgences, whilst they lived; and with Shrines, Miracles,
and Canonizations after they were dead: Kings in that Age being no less
ambitious to be Sainted, then Saints in our Age to be made Kings. And to say
truth, they were better Men then Monarchs, taking more care of the business of
Religion, then of State; relying more on the Forces of the Kings of Kent, with
whom they had contracted a perpetual League, having been hatched under their
wings, then on their own proper Strength: whereby it fell out that they were
crushed with to others fall, and at the same time submitted to the same Fate, to
be a Province to the West Saxon: So easy it is to conquer those that
contribute to their own destruction; taking upon them to protect the
unfortunate Baldred, when they were not able to defend themselves: But it is
less strange that they failed now, then that they held out so long; their
Territories being the very least of the whole Heptarchy, and they the laziest
of the whole Nation: their Majesty being preserved by a kind of Antiperistasis,
lying encompassed with three puissant Neighbors, Kent, Mercia, and West-Sexe;
who, like three great Dogs equally matched, kept this Bone untouched betwixt
them for two hundred and eighty years; in which large portion of time they were
preserved as by Miracle, from the fury of either of them, that wanted not
appetites to desire, nor mouths to devour, nor perhaps occasion to urge them to
fall upon them; but restrained by the sense of eithers equal Power, they left
it to Fortune to give the odds; who having declared on the West Saxon side, he
run down all at last.

THE ORDER OF THE KINGS OF MERCIA. V.
I. the tenth in descent from Whethelgeat, the third Son of Woden, was the
last, but by no means the least of the Heptarchs, for he had seventeen entire
Provinces, which shows his head to be as active as his hands. His Son II.
thought he did enough in keeping what his Father got, which he left well
fortified to his Nephew III. Son of Kinemund, younger Brother to Cridda, whose
reign was neither long nor splendid; perhaps overwhelmed by the Glory of his
Successor IV. the Son of Wibba, a minor when his Father dyed, and so put beside
the Crown: but being King, he over-awed all the rest that were Contempora^y
with him; having slain six Kings of the East-Ang^es and two of Northumberland:
But the last requited him blood for blood, and took from him both Life and
Kingdom, which Oswy the Conqueror generously returned to his eldest Son V. who
thereupon became his Son and his Subject, and at once embraced his Daughter and
the Christistian Faith; the last more fatal to him then the first; his Life
being thereupon taken away by her that first gave it, to make way for his Pagan
Brother VI. who from his own Mother learnt to butcher his own Sons, hearing
that they were converted by St. Chad Bishop of Litchfield, which yet could not
prevent a Christian Successor: for VII. came in after him (his Son being under
Age) who as if he had had only intended to show his Nephew what he would have
him do, devoted himself to a Religious Life, to make way to VIII. who after
eight years trial, being no better pleased with the sweet of Dominion,
surrender d to IX. his Son, who proved no less vigilant and valiant then his
Grand father; but being overmatch'd by the West Saxon, his Country lost a great
part of the happiness, and himself of the renown that justly might have been
hoped from the continuance of his life; whereby X. succeeded, who was descended
from a younger Brother of Penday, against whom the villainy of Whodert prevailed
more then the valor of his Enemies could, being treacherously slain to make
way for a stranger; who yet was put beside the succession by XI. another Prince
of the collateral Line, descended from Koppa second son of Wibba, who it seems
was more indebted to Education then Nature, and to Providence then to either;
for being born blind, deaf, and dumb, he became miraculously restored to all
his Senses, and gave so great proofs of his Courage, Prudence, and Piety, that
his Reign is supposed to be the Meridian of the Mercian Kingdoms Glory, for
from his death it visibly fell under the Horizon. XII. his son succeeded, who
was the more famous in that he was made a King before he had a Kingdom; but as
Trees that blossom too soon never bear Fruit, so his too early Honor was
quickly blasted, whereby XIII. took place, who was fifth in descent from
Kenwalch, younger Brother to Penda, who seems to have been happier in himself
then his Posterity, for his Reign was not so long, but XIV. his Sons was as
short, being murthred by his own Sister to make way for her Uncle XV. who was
as barbarously dispatched by one XVI. an Usurper, who proved a better King then
he was a Man: he contested hard with Egbert the West Saxon, and lost so much
blood in the quarrel, that his old Adversary the East-Angle perceiving how he
was weakened, set upon him and slew him. XVII. his successor attempting to
revenge his death, got his own; whereupon XVIII. that came after him, bought
his security with a Tribute, which his successor XIX. was content to continue;
but whiles he looked foreright only, an unexpected Enemy came upon him behind,
to wit, the merciless Dane, and overrun him: but Ethelwulph the last Saxon
recovering back the Kingdom, gave it with his Daughter to one XX. a Person
worthy either, who supported this tottering House, ready to fall about his
Ears, till he was betrayed by his servant XXI. CEOLWULPH, whose treachery was
rewarded by the Danes with the Title of King; but King Edward the Eldest having
slain him, made it a Province of the English Monarchy.
Attributed coat of arms of the kingdom of Mercia: a saltire.THIS, though it
were one of the last, was yet the very largest of all the Heptarchical
Dominions, and fitly settled to give Laws to all the rest, as being in Umbilico
Terrarum, in the very Center or Navel of the Isle. The wonder is how so great a
Kingdom rose out of nothing, with so little noise, the Founder leaving no more
Constat of his Merit, then of the method of his Ambition; it being not yet
known whether he attained that power that rendered him so great, or received
from Fortune the Greatness that rendered him so powerful: Some ascribing it to
his Wisdom; others to his Courage; but most to his Credit: so that we may guess
his Character to be not much unlike that which a foolish Athenian gave of God,
who being asked what he was, answered He was neither Bowman nor Spearman,
Horsman nor Footman, but one that knew well how to command all. So it is as
probable this man was neither Soldier nor Scholar, but (as the Athenian said)
one that knew how to govern either; otherwise he could not have disposed all
things as he did so much to the advantage of his Successors, that in fewer
Months then others took up Years, they spread their Wings over no less then six
of the most goodly Provinces, according to Ptolomey's account, but by that of
their own, when they cantred the whole into Shires, it was no less then
seventeen, which in Alfrids Tripartite Division, made one third part of the
whole Isle: too great a Gripe to have been held long, had not the Reign of his
Successor, who laid the Superstructure as wisely, as he the Foundation,
fortunately confirmed the Fabric till it was settled and past shaking; a happy
beginning, that made those that came after, not only the Terror of their
Enemies, but the Envy of their Neighbors, whereof no less then Four assaulted
his Grandson at once, and those not the meanest; viz. the Northumber, the
East-Angle, the West Saxon, and those of Kent, keeping him at a Bay, as a Lion
in a Toil, till Fate conspiring with his Forces, drove some of them out of
their Confidence, others out of their Kingdoms, and the rest out of the World:
Some compounding by a Tribute, others by Homage, the rest with loss of their
Lives; Prosperity prompting him to scorn all Conditions of Peace, till he gave
them a greater advantage by their despair, then themselves could have hoped
from their natural Fortitude; for not knowing how to overcome, he took from
them all hopes of yielding, and showed them thereby a way to conquer him, which
they could not have found before he wrote himself Universal Monarch; a Title he
designed to rip out of the Womb of Providence, having not patience to expect
the Birth of his Greatness. His Fall so crushed the growth of his Successors,
that they recovered not in many years after; but as backward Springs produce
the best Fruit, so the Glory that came late held the longer, their heads
proving as active as their hands, their hands as bountiful as their hearts, and
their hearts as large as their purses. Whilst they were Pagans, they fortified
themselves by extraordinary Acts of Cruelty; but after they became Christians,
they raised them by as great works of Charity. Once they were closely begirt,
and in so low a Condition, that they were forced to redeem themselves by a
Tribute, from the Power of the Northumbers; but having recovered this, they
stood fair to have taken in the whole Heptarchy under the Government of Offa;
the Series of whose Prosperity, had it not been interrupted by one unlucky
Action (the Guilt whereof not only dampt his own Spirit, but cast a fatal Vale
of Distrust on all his Successors) had probably reached beyond the bounds of an
insulary Glory, as appears by the Emulation of his Contemporary Charlemain, who
much disdained he should have the honor to be styled The Great as well as
himself; but having inhospitably murdered Ethelbert King of the East Saxons,
coming to his Court under the Security of Public Faith, as a Suitor to his
Daughter: His Innocent blood was by Divine Vengeance charged so home upon his
Posterity, that their Greatness declined, as Planet-struck, from that very
time: So that of Nine Descents after him, there was only one that had not a
short, but not any that had not a very sinister and unprosperous Reign, till
Fate drew the Circle of their Royalty to the full Compass, stopping thereby the
hand of Providence from any further motion: So that from that time their
Kingdom, like a great Tree blown down, but not quite rooted up, lay so low,
that some Branches or other were lopt off daily from it, till the West Saxon
seized on the main Body, as a Windfall due to him, after it had stood the shock
of Three hundred forty five Winters.

THE ORDER OF THE KINGS OF EAST ANGLES. VI.
I. seventh in descent from Caesar, second Son of Woden, was the first King of
the East Angles, from him called the Kingdom of the Uffins, whose Reign was
rather happy than long, yet long enough to confirm the Succession to his Son
II. who did nothing to make himself known more than being the Father of III.
REDWALD, who in assisting Edwin the Northumber, lost his eldest Son, and that
broke his heart; so that the second Son IV. took place, the first Christian of
this Race, converted by the aforesaid King Edwin, with so much dislike of his
People, that a base Villain adventured to murder him; and so made a way to his
younger Brother V. whose converse with Learning and Learned men (being bred in
France) rendered him so favorable to both, that the two Universities Oxford and
Cambridge, do to this day contend for the honor of having him their Founder:
He gave up his Royalty to his Kinsman VI. who with himself, and the next in
Succession VII. were all slain by the Pagan Penda, who placed here the younger
Brother VIII. a Traitor to his Country and his own blood, worthily deprived of
Life and Kingdom, by the famous Os^ in the Northumber, that put in IX. Regent
in Trust for his Nephew X. eldest Son of Ethelherd, then a Child, who wasted
nineteen years without any memorable Action, leaving his Brother XI. to deserve
a little of Posterity and his People: Neither did the younger Brother XII.
excel either of them, for he left neither Wise, Issue, or Action, to continue
his memory; whereby XIII. took place, famous for nothing but being the Father
of XIV. the Unfortunate, who was murdered by Offa the Mercian, after whose
death the said Offa broke into this Kingdom of the one side, and the West Saxon
on the other, and the King of Kent on another side, each preying like Vultures
upon the headless Trunk, or like Pikes in a Pond, which devour one another,
till they were beaten off by a Stranger, one XV. the Son of Alkmond, a German-
Prince, made Executor of one Offa, a Prince of this Family, and the next it
seems in blood as well as in right, who dying at Norimberg, in his passage to
the Holy Land, adopted this Edmund his Heir, who defending his Title, was slain
by the Danes, who thereupon placed here a King of their own, as will appear in
its proper place.
Attributed coat of arms of the kingdom of East Anglia: three crowns.THE Saxons
having engaged their whole Nation to an entire Conquest of this Isle, partly
out of desire of glory, but more of gain, ceased not daily to oppress the
dismayed Britains with unequal numbers, who growing base with their Fortune,
lost their Courage as fast as their Country, fighting so faintly at the last,
that when they prevailed they were afraid to pursue, which made Fortune out of
love with them, that she seldom or never took their part. The report hereof
being carried into Germany, every person that had any sense of Honor or
Necessity, emulous of his Neighbors Forwardness, or ashamed of his own Sloth,
transplanted himself hither with whatsoever Forces he could get together. And
amongst the men that took advantage of this common Calamity, was this Uffa; in
the beginning a Viceroy to the Kings of Kent, in the Provinces of Suffolk and
Norfolk; who having overrun all the Country about the Isle of Ely, to the
uttermost parts of Cambridgshire, joined those to these, and made up the sixth
Kingdom, styled the Kingdom of the East Angles, but with respect to him the
Kingdom of the Uffins. It was one of the least in dimensions, but greatest in
dignity of all the Seven; for the Kings being but fifteen in number, were
deservedly esteemed the wisest and valiantest of all this Nation, by how much
though their Title were the worst, (the best part obtained by treachery) their
Advantages the least, their Territories the narrowest, and their Adversaries
the most numerous, not to say the most puissant, that is the haughty
Northumber, the implacable West Saxon, the cruel Mercian, and the victorious
Eskin, the three last assaulting them all at one time; yet they maintained a
defensive War for three hundred years with so good success, that they not only
kept what they called their own, but were for the most part on the winning
side, being once in as fair a probability to have enlarged their Territories,
as any of their Neighborhood, had they not been over-charg'd in the Flank by
an unequal Enemy, and of all others least expected, the Invincible Dane, a
People prepared for mischief, and heightened by the Desolations they had made in
Northumberland, Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, and the Countries thereabouts; the
Fame of whose cruelty having made their way, they broke in upon this tired
Province, wearied and weakened with giving and taking wounds from their own
Countrymen, surprising them ere they had time to recover strength, or means to
recover time to make so good a defense as otherwise they would have done: Yet
they did not submit to the first misfortune, nor fell like Fools or men
affrighted, but strug^ed with all their power near fifty years, without any
other aid than what was maintained by their own proper strength and courage,
being the Bulwark that defended all their Neighbors against the Dane, who the
whilst wasted each other with intestine Feuds, till they fell a Sacrifice to
their private lusts and ambition, and these only to the public safety.

THE ORDER OF THE KINGS OF NORTHUMBERLAND. VII.
I. the fourth Son of Ida, Lord of Bernicia, was the first that styled himself
King of Northumberland, though indeed he had but the half, called Bernicia,
which descended on his Son II. sirnam'd the Wild, a Prince of much fierceness
and insolence, which rendered him so odious to his Subjects, that his Enemies
easily found an opportunity to depose him, and set up one III. the Son of Ella,
Lord of Deira, which was the other part of Northumber^and, who was the first
Christian of this House, and got such repute, that he was acknowledged the
eight Monarch of the Eng^ishmen; he was at last however unhappily overcome, and
slain by the Pagan Penda, King of Mercia. IV. Son of his Uncle Alfrid,
succeeded him, whose Reign was as confused as the time he lived in; he was Lord
of Deira only, which upon his death was united to Bernicia, and so descended on
V. the ninth Monarch, whilst he lived, and dying, esteemed the first Martyr of
all the Englishmen; his Successor was VI. the tenth Monarch of the English, who
left the Succession to his furious Son VII. who making War with the Picts, that
were backed by their Confederates the Irish, he was by them slain, and his
Bastard Brother took place. VIII. a Prince more beholding to Providence than
Nature, for the first gave him the right of a Son, when the last denied him a
Son to enjoy that right; whereby the Crown devolved upon IX. a Child of eight
years old, of a collateral Branch, and as indirect a Disposition, not old
enough to govern himself, nor wise enough to govern others; so that his
Subjects withdrew their Allegiance, to give it to X. the next of the whole
Blood, who conspiring with Osrick, the next of kin to himself, to kill Osred,
the next of kin to the Crown, was undermined by his Confederate, who set up for
himself. XI. OSRICK the second knew better it seems how to get, than to keep a
Kingdom; for he was as easily deposed by XII. younger Brother to Kenred, one of
the most glorious of all the Northumbrian Race; this was he to whom Bid
dedicated his History of England, and one that rendered himself more glorious
by a voluntary obscurity, preferring a Capush before a Crown, whose Example was
a Rule to his Successor XIII. who did the like, being moved by the delusion of
this pious fraud, to surrender to his Son XIV. who lived not long to enjoy the
pleasure of his Royalty, being made away by some of his Domestics, as was his
Successor XV. commonly called Mollo, slain by his own Steward XVI. who had no
better Title than his successful Villainy, which being raised upon the sandy
foundation of the Peoples favor, quickly foundred and fell to the ground; so
that XVII. Son of the aforesaid Mo^^, rec^ver d the thr^ne, who not answering
the expectation, was deposed to make way for XVIII. Brother to Alured, a Prince
worthy of greater Title and better Subjects; for the Northumbrians being flusht
with the blood of their Princes, began to be very tumultuous and disloyal, and
amongst the rest murdered him, to make way for one XIX. a worthless person,
but the Darling of the multitude; he h^ld the Scepter, till it was taken from
him by XX. who lived to revenge his indignity upon the Heirs of his
Adversaries, and being puffed up with that success, and an alliance he
afterward made with the great Mercian Offa, grew cruel, and provoked his
People to fly to Arms, who in one battle took from him both his Life and
Kingdom. XXI. a common Man, was put up in his place for the good Omen of his
Name; but his good Fortune lasted not above thirty days, (so fickle is the
favor of the common People, not unfitly compared to the Sea, whose fluxes and
refluxes are of no long continuation) before XXII. was set up in his stead; he
was a banished Duke, and looked on as their Martyr, for taking part with them
against Ethelred, but his glory was not much longer lived than the others; so
that XXIII. succeeded, who having only showed himself upon the Stage, turned
about, and made his Exit, to give place to another XXIV. a Man of a hated Name,
and not very well belov d, who stepped up to make way for three of his Sons to
come after him, one of which having committed some insolence against a Danish
Lady, gave that cruel People a just occasion to fall into this Country, and
haraze it to that degree, that it became not long after a prey to the
West Saxon.
Attributed coat of arms of the kingdom of Northumbria: paly of six.THIS,
though it were the first entire Province, the Saxons were Masters of, yet it
was the last made a Kingdom, being the only part of the whole that cost them no
blood to get it; for it was by consent delivered up to them by the Britains, to
make a Colony against the Picts: but that of all others cost most to defend it;
for besides those without, they had Enemies within themselves, having cut
themselves into two distinct Principalities, either of which were more
desperately bent against each other, then either Picts or Britains against
both. The whole Continent of their Dominions took up six Counties, as we now
reckon them; viz. Northumberland properly so called, Westmerland, Cumberland,
Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Durham: These falling to the Charge of Otho and
Ebusa, they made an equal Dividend betwixt them, taking three to each; the
first had all betwixt Humber and Tine, and called it the Dukedom of Deira: The
second had all from Tine to the Frith of Edinburgh, which was entitled the
Dukedom of Bernicia: Ninety nine years it continued under the distinct
Government of their Posterity, each independent of other, and each, as often as
the Common Enemy gave them any rest, pecking at the other with equal Enmity,
and not unequal Fortune, till the time of Ella and Ida, two famous Captains,
the one descended from Wealdeag fourth Son of Woden; the other from Bealdeag his
fifth Son; who thinking themselves less in Title then in Power, urged by a
mutual Emulation, elevated their Dignity to the height of their Fortunes, and
styled themselves (as all the rest of their Countrymen) Kings: the last was
the first Monarch; the first the last King: One getting the Start of Priority
in Degree; the other the advantage of Survivorship: by which means it happened
that the Government, which hitherto had been as it were Party per Pale, not
long after became Checquy Fortune according to her Constant Inconstancy,
alternately deposing sometimes one, sometimes the other, disposing the Diadem
like a Ball tossed from one Hazard to another; so that the Spectators knew not
which side to beat on, till those of the House of Ella making a Fault,
Ethelrick won the Set, having got the honor to be the first absolute Lord of
the whole, which he united under the Title of the Kingdom of Northumberland,
banishing the other Names of Distinction: This Malmesbury ascribes more to his
Fortune then his Merit, making him beholding to the bravery of his sprightly
Son Ethelfrid the Wild, for the continuance of any Memory of his Name: which
shows us the Founders themselves are oftentimes as the Foundations they lay
under Ground, unknown and obscure, taking their Honor from the Superstructure
that they rear, not from themselves: But as those of Bernicia claimed the
honor of building the House, so those of Deira boasted they were the first
took the Possession; their Dignity becoming them so much the better, in that
they made their Power known where their Title was not, by the Courage of their
Magnanimous King Edwin, who enlarged his Dominions as far as the Mavian Isles;
but by that Prosperity of his rendered himself rather Glorious then Great,
drawing himself out of his proper Strength by an Extent that weakened him, and
drew on him a more powerful Enemy then that he had subdued, to wit, the
Neighboring Mercian, who by his death and his Sons, made way to let in the
Bernician Line again, which continued uninterrupted ten Descents: after which
followed a Succession of Six Usurpers out of distinct Stocks, who wasted near
Thirty years with so little advantage to themselves or their Country, that at
length it became a Prey to several petty Tyrants of so low Rank, that only One
of Ten had the Confidence to style himself a King; which confusion tempted the
Dane to fall in upon them with so resistless fury, that they were fain to crave
Protection of the West Saxon, who made them a Province unto him, after they had
stood the shock of Two hundred thirty five years, with repute of being an
absolute and entire Kingdom.

THE ORDER OF THE English Kings AFTER THE HEPTARCHY Was reduced into an
Absolute Monarchy. VIII.
I. was the first gave himself the Imperial Style of King of England, differing
therein from his Predecessors, who styled themselves Kings of the Englishmen;
having reduced the Heptarchy into a Monarchy, he gave Kent and Sussex to his
younger Son Athelstan, the rest descending on his eldest Son II. who put off a
Myter to put on a Crown, being Bishop of Winchester at the time of his Fathers
death; and being fitter to be a Monk then a Monarch, he was according^y justled
out of his Right by his ungracious Son III. whose ill got Glory p^ov'd so
transitory, that ^t served him only to perform an act of Infamy outlasted it,
possessing himself of his Fathers Bed, as well as of his Throne, which proved
his Grave; so that his Brother VI. before Lord of a part, as Heir to his Uncle
Athelstan, became now Lord of the whole, and by managing that he learned how to
manage this; the number of his troubles exceeded that of the Months of his
reign, so that not able to bear up under the weight of the burden of the
Government, he died and left his Brother V. to succeed him as Heir, both to his
happiness and unhappiness, who being likewise wearied, rather then vanquished
hy the continual Assaults of the Danes, left the glory with the danger to his
Brother VI. a Prince that in despite of War performed all the noblest Acts of
Peace, making as good use of his Pen as of his Sword, at the same time securing
and civilizing his People. His Son VII. surnamed the Elder, enjoyed thereby
such a happiness, as was only worthy the Son of such a Father as St. Elfrid,
and the Father of such a Son as VIII. who knew no Peace but what he purchased
with his Sword, being more Forward then Fortunate, and therein like his Brother
IX. who escaping all the Storm, perished in a Calm, being killed after he had
escaped so many Battles, in a private Fray betwixt two of his own Servants, in
his own House. X. succeeded, who gave himself the style of King of Great
Britain, a Title too great it seems for his Successor XI. who discontinued it,
showing thereby, that Nature was mistaken in bringing him into the World before
his Brother XII. who reassumed that Title again, yet not before he had made
himself Lord of the whole Continent; but as one surfeited with Glory, he dyed
(as we may so say) before he began to live, leaving his Son XIII. surnamed the
Martyr, to support his memory, who fell as a Sacrifice to the Inhumane Ambition
of a Stepmother, who murdered him to prefer his younger Brother, but her
eldest Son XIV. an excellent Prince, had he not been blasted by the Curse of
his Mothers Guilt, who as an ill-set Plant, withered before he could take firm
Root, being wind-shaken with continual storms all his reign, which his Son XV.
from his continual being in arms, surnamed Iron-sides, was so sensible of, that
he was forced to compound with an Enemy that afterward took from him the
whole, by the same Power he compelled him to let go the half: however, in two
Descents after, the English Line took place again in the Person of XVI.
surnamed the Confessor, who proving regardless of Posterity, tempted Providence
to take no care of him, whereby his Steward thought himself obliged amongst
other things committed to his Charge, to take that of the Crown, which was the
famous XVII. Son of Godwyn, Earl of Kent, who putting the undoubted Heir
besides his Right, taught the Norman how to disseize him, who with his death
put the period to the English Monarchy, that (reckoning from Engist, by all
Historians accounted the first King) had lasted Six hundred and twenty years.
EGBERT.
Attributed coat of arms of King Egbert: a cross flory. THIS was he that may be
said to be the first of all the English whom Fortune declared to be her Heir,
having beaten up the Seven Crowns of his Predecessors into one Diadem, to fit
his Head. To them she gave only Title to part, but to him the Dominion of the
whole Isle; Nature agreeing to fit his Parts to the proportion of his
Preferment: For as he was young and hardy, so he was temperate and discreet;
noble by Birth (descended from Ingill, Brother to Ine the Magnificent) but
nobler by his Bounty, which had purchased him so universal an Affection, that
his Predecessor Bithrick suspecting the danger of his Virtues, made them so far
his Crimes, as to give him a fair pretense to banish him; by which means all
his good Qualities came to be so refined (breathing in a purer Air then that of
his native Soil) as leaves it yet in doubt, Whether he were any whit less
beholding to Providence then Nature; his Afflictions contributing so much to
his Experience, his Experience to his Wisdom, and his Wisdom to his Fame, that
they seemed like so many steps fitly placed together, by which he might ascend
the Throne. He served the Emperor Charles the Great, in that great Expedition
of his into Italy, which took up all the time of his banishment; and there he
so well governed himself, that he returned with a Testimonial of his fitness to
govern others. The Tyrant Bithrick who had expuls'd him, finding (when it was
too late) that by driving him further from his Country, he had brought him
nearer to the Affections of his Countrymen, especially those of the Vulgar
sort, who first pity, then praise men in distress, and not seldom by their
Opinion make up the want in Merit, and where there is no want, add so great a
Weight, that it is not in the power of Humane Policy to turn the Scale: Yet he
did not think fit to return, till after Bithrick's death, as judging it more
danger then honor to serve one, under whom 'twas a Crime to be Victorious, and
Capital to be otherwise. Besides, he thought it greater to let Honor seek him,
then for him to seek it; knowing that Necessity, if not Choice, would move his
Countrymen to call him home, being begirt with potent Neighbors, that wanted
nothing but a Circulation of Intelligence, to subvert them totally: So much
were they discouraged by their Fears from without, and their Discontents
within. Neither missed he of the Invitation he looked for, being received with
so universal Satisfaction, that it appeared he was their Lord, before he became
their Sovereign. In this confidence he took up the Sword before the Scepter, to
the end his Title might be written in the blood of his Enemies; the number
whereof were more then those of his Subjects. The first that wrestled with him
were the sturdy Cornish, who being laid on their backs, by a trick they
understood not; The next that came on were the Welsh their Allies, who though
they rather gave him Trouble then War, yet he thought it worth the going in
Person against them, and p^rsu'd them so fa^, as made it appear it was more
their dishonor then his, that they were not totally subdued by him. The next
that fell under the power of his Arms, was the haughty Northumber; for both he
and the disdainful Mercian, dreading his growing Greatness, burst with
swelling. This gave him leisure to look toward Kent, the only considerable Foe
left, whose King flying into Essex, like a spark of Fire into another man's
House, ruined that, by the same way he had undone his own Kingdom; That Prince
taking a pattern of Cowardice from him to quit that, as the other had done his
Kingdom: so that Egbert whilst he pursued one, conquered two of the Heptarchs.
This success enlarged his Dominions so wide, that he began to bear himself up
with an universal Obedience; being no less Elevated with the prospect of his
Power, then Hercules after he had subdued the many headed Monster, with the
contemplation of his Fortune: to manifest which he turned the Name of BRITAIN,
so venerable for its Age (having been the only Appellation of this Isle for
near 1800 years before) into that of ENGLAND, the Country from whence his
Ancestors came. A Vanity so displeasing to Providence, that it set up the same
Nemesis, which had been so Instrumental to his Countrymen, in the destruction
of the Britains, to face about upon him and his Successors, whose Necks it
broke down the same Stairs by which they ascended; setting up a People to be
the dire Executioners of her Justice, that were of their own Lineage, spoke the
same Language, and had drove them our once before, from those Possessions to
which they had much better right then to any thing here: This was the Dane;
which though they got not much in this Kings reign, yet they so nipt the glory
of his Conquest, by beating down the Blossoms of his Reputation, that he lived
not to see the Fruit he expected; being forced to divide, before he had firmly
united, and cut his own Kingdom into two again: Giving that of Kent to his
younger Son Ethelbert, not without a seeming Injury to his elder Son
Ethelwolph, that being the most fertile, though the lesser; this the most
encumbered, though the greater; yet herein his Wisdom appears to have equaled
his Power, in that he made both Kings, but left but one Sovereign.

ETHELWOLPH.
Attributed coat of arms of King Ethelwulf: a cross crosslet fitched. THIS St.
Ethelwolph, or (as he is vulgarly called) St. Adulph, was at the time of his
Fathers death a Deacon; Hoveden says a Bishop; and so much addicted to Devotion
more then Action, that he accepted the Government rather out of necessity then
choice, refusing to be crowned, as long as he could resist the importunity of
his Friends, or suffer the Insolence of his Enemies; being at last made a King
as it were in his own defense, as well as the Kingdoms. But no sooner had the
loud Acclamations of his over joy'd People awakened his Lyon-like Dullness, but
rouzing up himself he confronted the Common Foe with such a silent Resolution,
as looked like a belief of conquering them without a stroke: for he fought only
one Battle with the Danes, and no more; wherein he pressed upon them with that
inconsideration, as showed that the apprehensions of future danger had made him
altogether contemn the present, the slaughter on their side being so great,
that he thinking it not worth the trouble to bury their Carcasses in several
Graves, caused them to be gathered into congested heaps; and by those dismal
Monuments of their unhappy Courage, left to Posterity so many Landmarks of a
second Conquest. That which made this Victory of his appear more serene (like
the Air after a Thunder storm) was the sudden Calm which followed after it; all
those fierce Infidels being so wholly dispersed and defeated, that having
nothing more to do relating to War, he bethought himself of performing some
notable Act of Peace: And accordingly made a Pilgrimage to Rome; where it
appears how welcome he was, by the magnificent Reception he had of Pope Leo the
Fourth, who not only entertained him a whole year upon his own Charge, but
anointed his darling Son Elfrid (who accompanied him thither) to the
expectation of his Kingdom after him: wherein whether his Holiness intended an
Obligation to the Father, in honoring the Son, that was thought most like him,
and certainly most beloved of him; or whether it were that being his God-son,
he could not bestow upon him any cheaper Blessing, then an Airy Title, which
yet seemed to be a Prophetical Designation to the Crown; or what other Cause
moved him to prop up the old, with setting up a young King, is not known: But
in the Consequence it proved a fatal Complement to them both: For Ethelbald the
elder Brother, apprehending that he was rejected, being a Prince of a furious
and vindictive Spirit, attempted to do himself right by such an unnatural Wrong
as never any Son offered to a Father before, taking his exception from the most
unreasonable, and one would have thought the most frivolous Ground that could
be imaginable. For the Father having given the Complement of Majesty to his
young Queen, the fair Daughter of the Emperor Charles the Bald (whom he had
married in his return through France) contrary (as his Son urged) to a Law made
by the West-Sexe, who (after Bithrick was poisoned by his Queen) ordained that
no English Queen ever after should be allowed the Title, place, or Privilege
of Majesty; he took that Occasion from the respect showed to his Mother in Law
to justify himself so far in his disrespect to his Father, that without more
ado he seized the Crown, and kept out both Father and Brother: the People (who
are apt to adore the rising Sun) declaring their readiness to stand by him, as
he by the Laws: The shame and horror of which unexpected Repulse, broke the
heart of the good old King, who dying, seemed to bemoan more the loss of his
Subjects duty, then that of his own Honor. But that blessing which Providence
denied to himself, it gave to his four Sons; each of which was King after him,
and all of them (this Ethelbald only excepted) so eminently virtuous, that
however we cannot rank Ethelwolph amongst the Fortunate, we may yet number him
amongst the happy Princes of this Isle.

ETHELBALD.
Attributed coat of arms of King Ethelbald: a cross crosslet fitched. AS we may
presume that the Impudence and Impiety of this graceless Usurper did
sufficiently amaze the present, so it remained as a Riddle to those of future
Times, who were left to seek how it could come to pass, that so bad a Son could
so easily supplant so good a Father: And which was yet more, the Father of his
Country, as well as his own. For however, it is evident that he took the first
advantage of his weakness, by the rigor of that petulant Law before mentioned,
which was no less unreasonable for the matter of it, then himself appeared to
be by the Execution, making the People believe that his Father, who had broken
a Fundamental Law, intended also to violate their Fundamental Privileges,
whereof no Nation in the World is more jealous then the English: Yet had not
this single Ingratitude of his been double edged, it could never have pierced
to the heart of so wise a Prince: but the hatred to the Father being bottomed
upon a love to the Mother, whose Beauty, Pride, and Lust had prepared the first
temptation for his Youth and Power: The good old King could not resist that
double Injury, there being so good an Understanding betwixt the two Serpents,
that they engendered, whilst they were hissing at one another: And which is yet
more strange, the Incestuous Parricide, after he had possessed the Bed as well
as the Throne (so blind is Passion) out-did his Father as much in that very
point of respect to her, for which he undid him, as he out-did a^l other men in
point of Inhumanity; allowing her not only the style of Queen, but designing to
make her by the formal pomp of a solemn Coronation, alike Partner with him in
his Royalty, as she was in his Luxury, had not Death and the Danes happily
parted them: After which she was forced to return home, and by the way fell, it
seems, into the hands of Baldwyn the Forrester of Arden, by whom being taken
Prisoner, he entered at the Breach he found already made, and took the Pleasure
of her Beauty as lawful Prize.

ETHELBERT.
Attributed coat of arms of King Ethelbert: a cross flory. SO monstrously
rebellious was Ethelbald against his Father, that Providence vouchsafed him not
the honor of being a Father himself: So that dying Childless, his second
Brother Ethelbert became his Heir and Successor; a Prince fitted by the
Government of part, for the Sovereignty of the whole: who having happily ruled
the Kentish, South, and East Saxons, for five years together, was admitted by
common Consent, as well as by particular Right, to the honor of being Fourth
absolute Monarch of England. However his Government was much disturbed before
he could settle upon the Lees of his Power, by the increasing rage of the
Danes, who landing at Southampton, sacked all the Country to the Walls of
Winchester; and having afterward buried that Loyal old Town in its own Ashes,
came on as far as Berkshire, with intent to visit London it self: but being
stopped by the united Forces of that Country, they were compelled to repay the
price of their Cruelties to those they had before harassed, falling under the
Fury of Osrick Earl of Southampton, whose People, provoked with the sense of
their Sufferings, forced in upon them, and slew Osbeeck and Crans their Chief
Leaders, exposing the rest to all the miseries that usually befall a routed
Enemy in a strange Country; and so great was the slaughter of them, that the
very Fame of it encouraged the Kentish men to turn head upon another Party,
that had bridled, and was about to saddle them. Some have doubted the Courage
of this King, for that they find him not personally engaged all this while; not
considering, that all Motions were actuated by his Command and Countenance, who
could not be idle at the Stem, whilst his Subjects were so busy in the middle
part of the Weatherbeaten Vessel: and perhaps 'twas not without great Reason
(as things then stood) that he reserved himself for Victories of a deeper Dye:
the Oppositions he had hitherto met with, being like flying Clouds, that rather
portended a Storm then made one, Nature and Providence conspiring to make him
happy by a kind of unhappiness, whilst by the shortness of his Reign (not
exceeding five years) they took from him those greater Occasions of danger,
which carried with them so much Glory to his Successor.

ETHELRED.
Attributed coat of arms of King Ethelred: a cross flory. EThelberts Sun being
set in a Cloud, behold a more refulgent rising in his room, the heat of whose
Rays kindled new Courage and Affection in each English Breast: This was
perhaps that only Prince that seemed to have been as well fitted for the Times
he lived in, as the People he lived with: at least he was the first that taught
them the right use of Necessity, which is a Virtue (if well improved) that
(like Powder imprisoned in the womb of a Rock, which makes its way as soon as
fired) quickens its execution by resistance. Harder it was for him to get up an
Army together, then being up, to lay down his Arms: this appears by those Nine
set Battles he sought in One year, with so various success, that while the
Enemy routed him, he pursued them, keeping his Circulation like a hunted Hare,
which follows the Dogs upon the same Trail that they pursue her. The first
Volley discharged upon him, was by the two furious Danes, Hungar and Hubba; men
of that Ambition, that to be equaled to him in Title, as they were in Force,
they styled themselves Kings as well as he: and as Fortune was not wanting to
them, so neither were they to her; attending her motions with such undaunted
Resolution, and improving her Favors with such incredible diligence, that they
neither stooped at petty Victories, nor stopped at petty Repulses, but pressing
forward with obstinate boldness, pierced through the Bowels of Mercia, as far
as Nottingham: here King Ethelred fell upon them, and forced them to Retreat;
but it was so slowly, as if they had designedly gone back to seek a more
convenient place to fight, as afterward they did: getting this Reputation by
not being beaten, though they did not beat him, that the Stake still remained
undispos'd betwixt them. The next year they came over Humber, whose red Banks
looked as if they had been died with the blood of those that we^e slain in
opposing their Passage; thence directing their Course towa^ds East-Anglia the
Country that lay most convenient to receive their Recruits) they there made a
grand Holocaust to their Idol Gods (delighted it seems with humane Sacrifices)
and amongst the rest of their abominable Offerings, presented the Crowned Head
of that holy Martyr St. Edmond, then King of that Province; whose fall so shook
the whole Isle, that it made every English heart tremble with fear, or desire
of Revenge. Religion being now at stake as well as Liberty, each side prepared
for slaughter; success swelled the number of the Pagans, as despair increased
that of the Christians: both Armies oppressed as it were with their Multitudes
divided into two Battalions; but having so little room to fight in that they
were forced to charge through each other, the right Wings of both were routed;
those that pursued, returned; and led by equal Courage and like Destiny, began
(which has rarely been seen) another Battle upon the same day, and that so
much more dreadful then the former, by how much it lasted till either side were
so weakened or wearied, that neither could fly away. Here Ethelred performed
Wonders worthy the admiration of a greater part of the World, then he could
ever hope to be Master of; gaining indeed the Victory, but at a price more
valuable then any gain, the loss of his own life: however, he departed into the
other World with the same Majesty he ruled in this, being attended by no less
then two Kings, one on each side of him, and at his feet lay dead nine Earls,
and two hundred Barons, and round about them at further distance, such a
Mountain of common Carcasses, as if designed by Destiny for a Monument, to
which no other Kings could pretend, but such as sell like him, his Countries
Sacrifice and his own.

ELFRID.
Attributed coat of arms of King Alfred: chequy, in chief a lion passant
guardant. NO sooner was Ethelred fallen, but Elfrid stepped in to take up his
Sword and Scepter, as one alike entitled to his Trouble as his Glory: who,
however he was the last in Succession, was first in Ordination of all King
Ethelwolphs Children, being anointed King by Pope Leo, before he had a Kingdom;
and which was more, in the presence of his Father, in the life time of two
elder Brothers, and in his own Minority. A strange Riddle to Ambition, which
knows no greater punishment, then to be so near a Crown in Title, and so far
distant in point of Right as he was. But the same Providence that made him a
King before he had a Kingdom, resolved it seems after he had the Kingdom, to
make him no King again: for he was no sooner in the Throne, ere he was laid
upon the Ground, and forced, after the fighting seven almost equal Battles, to
give up a part, to secure the rest of his Dominions, and at last to retire
almost out of his Kingdom, but wholly out of himself: being reduced to such
extremity, that for self preservation he was necessitated to personate a common
Minstrel, and under that disguise was lost, till he found the opportunity to
recover that from Fame, which Fortune had denied him, by sending so many of his
Enemies to the dead, who believed him not alive, that there were not enough
left to defend that Sacred Called the Reafan.
Banner, in which they fondly supposed the Fate of their Nation to be wrapped up.

And now having all that became him as a Soldier, after twenty seven years War
(in all which time he seemed to fight rather for Life then Honor) he resolved
to lose no opportunity of performing such Noble acts of Peace, as might draw
his Subjects by his own example to the study of Arts as well as Arms: In order
whereunto he took the whole Frame of his Government asunder, which he made up
again like a Master-workman better then it was before, thereby preventing all
those Insolences and Disorders which are the natural effects of turbulent
Times (the Commotions of War, like those of the Sea, which rouls and runs high
a long time after the Storm is over, being such as commonly end in Ryots and
Rapine) giving security to the whole, by fixing every individual Person
throughout his Kingdom, within such known Limits of Shires, Hundreds, and
Tythings, is made them answerable to the Law in case of breach of Faith of
Peace, by mutual obligations each for other: wherein his Clemency so interposed
betwixt his Wisdom and his Power, that it is hard to judge whether he ruled
more by Awe, Art, or Affection, tying them to no Rule or Order which he did not
with more severity impose upon himself: So that what Martia^ says of Fronto,
may be applied to him, That he was Clarum Militiae Tog^que decus, there being
that harmony in his natural Constitution, as inclined him to that gentle
Science of Music, which as it served him to good purpose in his utmost
extremity, so it brought him to such a strict habit in keeping of Time, that to
make himself sure of every moment of his whole life, he divided the Day into
three equal spaces, allowing the first to the business of Devotion; the second
to the care of Nature; and the third to that of his State; of each of which he
was so excellent a manager, that he is not undeservedly placed in the first
rank of the Conditores of this Nation. And if he were not the first Founder of
Oxford, which cannot be conceived without apparent injury to the memory of his
Grandfather, whom the Annals of Winchester commemorate as the greatest Patron
that ever the Muses had there, yet we cannot deny him the glory of being one of
those great Patrons or Foster-fathers (whereof there were many almost in all
Ages from the very time of the Britains, whose beneficence Alexander Necam
celebrates with much gratitude) who nourisht up Learning and learned Men, and
gave Encouragement to all those who studied knowledge: And this he did in such
unsettled and disorderly Times, when he had much ado to bear up himself with all
the helps he had from the Wisdom and Courage of all about him: the Troubles of
his Reign being so incessant (like one continued Storm) that he was (as is said
before) once forced to quit the Stearn, another time to cut the Cable, and
never enjoyed so much tranquillity as to be able to put out all his Sayls; so
that it was esteemed a great good luck that he was not wreckt, since he could
not reach his Port, which doubtless he owed to the Faith of his People, the
universality of whose Affections supplied the defects of his Power, being as
superstitious in the confidence of his good Fortunes, as Caesar's Soldiers are
said to have been of his, who never thought themselves in danger, while he was
safe, nor ever thought him the less safe, for being in the midst of danger.

Who would not follow him into the Field,
Who cannot choose but conquer, though he yield,
Whose Sword cut deep, yet was his wit more keen;
Some Fence against that, but this did wound unseen.
To thee is due (great Elfrid) double praise,
To thee we bring the Laurel and the Bays,
Master of Arts and Arms. Apollo so
Sometimes did use his Harp, sometimes his Bow.
And from the other Gods got this Renown,
To reconcile the Gauntlet to the Gown.
But who did e're with the same Sword, like thee,
Execute Justice, and the Enemy:
Keep up at once the Law of Arms and Peace,
And from the Camp, issue out Writs of Ease.
EDWARD THE ELDER.
Attributed coat of arms of King Edward 'The Elder': a cross flory between four
martlets. AS Elfrid was thought to be dead, long after he was living, so long
after he was dead, he seemed to live still in the Person of this his Son
Edward, who was so like him that he might rather have been called Elfrid the
Younger, then Edward the Elder, being so immediate a Successor to his Virtues,
as well as his Titles, that 'twas not discernable whether the Peoples grief or
joy was greater, out of the apprehensions they had of the loss of the one, or
the hopes conceived by the fruition of the other. In Learning he was his
Fathers Inferior, in Courage his Equal, but in Fortune his Superior. For
however he was attached on all sides by tumultuary Troops of Danes (who by this
time were grown very numerous, and were a People of that stomach and patience,
that they grew greater by being lessned, and (which is strange to tell)
prosper'd by being beaten) yet he acquitted himself so well of them, that they
got no more Ground from him than what might be allowed them for their Graves,
which they purchased at the price of their blood, and measured out by the
length of their Swords. However, the first provocation he had to arm was from
his own flesh and blood, an Enemy so much more dangerous, for that he had
something of his own Nature in him; this was Ethelward, the Son of Ethelbert,
his Fathers second Brother, who having been declared Clyto (which amongst the
Saxons was as much as Caesar amongst the Romans, that is to say the Heir
Apparent) he thought it not so much an Injury to be put besides the Right of
Succession by his two Uncles, as an Indignity to be disappointed by a Cousin,
who, however surnamed the Elder, was in truth the Younger of the two; and
perhaps, according to the Rule of those times, had the weaker-Title: This spark
of Indignation being kindled in his Breast, was quickly blown into a Flame, and
wanting not matter to nourish it, was easily kept up at its height by other
men's discontents, as well as his own, who urging him to arm, without due
consideration of King Edwards Possession, Power and Reputation (all great
Check-mates to Rebellion) brought him and themselves under a necessity of
craving help from the common Enemy, who having no other way but by this
division, to preserve themselves entire, readily accorded to acknowledge him
King. Upon this the two Rivals meeting at a place called St. Edmunds-Ditch,
gave Battle to each other, where King Edward got the Victory, but lost the day;
the Battle being so equally poys'd, that it not being known which had the
better, either side was supposed to have the worst of it. King Edward lost the
greater number of men; King Ethelward the most considerable: for both himself,
and the Danish General his Colleague, were slain, their Bodies lying concealed
under such vast heaps of the English, that their dishonor seems to be
cancelled by those that conquered them. Upon this there was a Truce concluded
with the Dane, I cannot call it a Peace, since the shortness of it made it seem
no more then a Repose to take breath to fight again: during this Cessation,
Fame (partial to the English) had so divu^g'd the loss of the Enemy, that the
Countess of Mercia, Sister to King Edward, and as nearly related to him in
Fortune as in Blood, armed her self, like another Zenobia, and fell upon those
that were nearest her Country, who, by the death of two great Princes, Cowilph
and Healidine, gave her Brother time to refresh his tired Forces: But he, as
doubting his Sword might rust if it were put up into the Sheath bloody, pursued
his Successes with so indefatigable a Rage, that all those of East-Anglia
dreading the Consequences of being conquered, compounded for their own Lives,
by giving up that of their King, choosing rather to be disloyal than miserable,
but lost them their Freedom by the same way they hoped to preserve it: For K.
Edward was so incensed at the sight of their Butchery, that however the
Paracide made for him to the recovery of that whole Kingdom, yet he determined
to give the Traitors no Conditions. Upon which they fled into Northumberland,
where he thought not fit to pursue, but left the Glory of clearing that
Province to his Successor, who neither deceived his nor the Kingdoms
expectation.

ATHELSTAN.
Attributed coat of arms of King Athelstan: per saltire a globus cruciger. THEY
that will take the height of this King, must begin near about the time his
Reign began to end; his rising being like that of the Sun in a Cloud, which
being not discernable at first, after looks red and bloody, but at last
recovers its wonted luster and brightness. The inequality of his Mothers
condition to that of his Fathers, (being but a private Gentlewoman, contracted
to him in the life of the Grandfather) so obscured his Birth, that there were
great doubts whether he were not illegitimate; and that which gave the
suspicion of it, was his Fathers not owning of him after he came to be King;
who caused his second Brother to be Crowned in his own lifetime, to entitle
him the nearer to the Succession, in order to the putting this man by: By which
frowardness of Fate, or rather of his own Friends, he was so over-shadow'd at
the time of his Fathers death, that had he not showed himself to be the true
Son as well as the eldest, and the undoubted Heir of his Courage, if not to his
Crown, fitted for Government by parts as well as by years, it is probable he had
been wholly set aside, it being scarce possible for him to have penetrated so
thick a cloud of malice, as his merit had exhaled, much less to have sustained
the shock of his Fathers envy alone, who malign'd him upon no other account,
but that of his Grandfathers Indulgence, who was so fond of him, that 'twas
thought he would have given him a share of the Government with himself whilst
he lived, as an earnest of the rest when he was dead, to the hazard of setting
aside his Son Edward. Thus the kindness of his Grandfather and the unkindness
of his Father, being alike unfortunate to him, it is no marvel the melancholy
he had contracted, thickened his blood, and corrupted his good nature, inclining
him to frowardness and cruelty, after he recovered the Zenith of his Power,
taking a president of unnaturalness from his Father, to fall upon his innocent
Brother; jealousy, the canker of Majesty, having so far eaten out the coar of
his virtues, that he could entertain no other thoughts, but what were rank with
revenge, being so far transported, that when death had removed the Brother that
was his Rival, he was not satisfied, till himself had removed the other that
was not, whom (resolved it seems to have no body stand near his Throne) he
exposed to the rage and fury of the Sea, in a Bark without Sails, or any kind
of Tackle, where the helpless Youth believing that rude Element more merciful
than his Brother, cast himself into its bosom, and so put a speedy end to his
unhappiness and fear. This was so crying a crime, that it needed not a second
to weigh down all his virtues, and would questionless have condemned him to all
eternity, had he not timely condemn d himself for it, and by a suitable Penance
(which ended not but with his own life) pacified the Ghost of his murdered
Brother, and the horror of his own guilty Conscience, that came to be as
strangely awakened, as it was at first abused, by the very same person who put
him upon that execrable action: who (as the Story goes) stumbling accidentally
in his presence, as he was bringing up a Dish of meat to his Table, having
recovered himself without falling, said, (as he thought pleasantly, but
unwittingly) See Sir, how one Brother (meaning one Leg, helps another; which
unexpected Jest gave so sudden a touch to the Kings Conscience, that in as
sudden a passion he replied, Villain, it was thou that did cause me to
murder my innocent Brother, and so commanded him to be strangled in his
presence. This was tho^ght to be an effect of rage rather than remorse, till it
appeared otherwise by those voluntary punishments he afterward laid upon his
own Person, and more upon his Purse, the expiating of this one sin costing him
no less Treasure than all his Wars, though he knew no Peace all his Reign; and
had it not been for this blood in the beginning of his Story, no King had left
his Name to Posterity under a fairer Character, for being just in his promises,
resolved in his purposes, constant in his resolutions, and (as his Father
before him) fortunate in that constancy, having ruled well, lived better, and
at last died desired; which could not have been, had he not been as much Lord
of himself as others, and rightly tempered, to maintain by his Courage what be
got by his Wisdom; of both which Qualifications he gave so signal proof, that
the memory of his Magnanimity has outlived himself; it being agreed by all
Historians, that he once opposed himself single to the force of a whole Army,
and notwithstanding the odds of number, kept them at a stand, till he was
relieved by his own People, who turned the Duel into a Battle, but could not
part the Enemy and he, till he had made his way through them to their King,
with whom he fought hand to hand; he yielded himself Prisoner: after which, (as
if he were not satisfied with conquering him but once) he dismissed him again
with a generous scorn, saying, 'Twas greater to make a King than be one. Pity
'twas that Nature was not so kind to him as Fortune, for this made his way to
the Crown, but the other denied him Issue to enjoy it; so that for want of Heirs
of his own Body, he was forced to leave the Succession to his younger Brother,
the first Son of his Father by a second Venture.

EDMOND,
Attributed coat of arms of King Edmund I: a cross formy. THIS Prince being but
three years old at the death of his Father, and not full fifteen at the death
of his Brother, lost all those Advantages he might have hoped for, by observing
the Virtues of the one, or the Vices of the other; however the loss of the
Example of his Father was so well supplied by the Care and Providence of his
Mother, (who gave him an Education fit for those active times) that he may
worthily be said to have been fitted for Majesty, before Majesty was fitted for
him; shooting up to that unexpected height, that the Danes finding they could
not keep down his growth by open Hostility, endeavored to supplant him by
unperceived Hypocrisy, casting themselves under the Sanctuary of Religion, as
professed Proselytes to the two great Prelates that then ruled him and his
Kingdom, the Archbishops of Canterbury and York: By the solemnity of which holy
Cheat, (ratified with the Seal of Baptism, and new promises given at the taking
their new Names, to be true to the old League of their Predecessors) they
obtained a Truce, so like a Peace, that it wanted only age to make it so, and
therewithal an opportunity of recovering fresh strength, as well as malice;
after which, like Snakes that had felt the heat of the Sun, they began to hiss,
and show, that the Water poured out upon their heads, had not power to quench
the Fire in their hearts; which breach of Faith, urged the young King to take a
voyage into the North: where finding that they had fortified themselves with
the Alliance of the Prince of Cumberland, he prepared to give them Pattle upon
the Forder of Northumberland; in which dispute having got the better of them,
he pursued his Victory, till he overtook the two treacherous Sons of Dunmale
their Confederate, to whom he cruelly gave their lives, but on such a condition
as was worse than death it self; for at the same time he took from them both
their Eyes and their Inheritance, the first never to be recovered, the last
almost as desperate; for he bestowed it on Milcolmb, King of Scots, to be held
of him in grand Serjeanty, by the service of bearing the Sword before him, as
often as he came into those parts; the two Renegado's Anlaff and Reignold made
their escape into the Isles, and thence into Ireland, thinking themselves
scarce secure at that distance. Thus satiated with Victory and Triumph, the
fruits of vigilance and fortitude, he returned back to fortify himself by the
most noble actions of Peace, binding his Subjects to him by the Ponds of so
good Laws, that the memory of some of them are continued to this day, savouring
of a wisdom rarely to be found in so green years; which as it made him revear'd
in his lifetime, so much more pitied in his death, when he fell by the hands
of an Outlaw, who thrust him through the Body, as he was endeavoring to part
two of his domestic Servants, that were so insolent to begin a Fray in his own
house and presence; which fatal Accident was not more unlucky to himself than
to his Children, the eldest whereof being but four, the youngest scarcely two
years old at his death, were without any great difficulty, put besides the
Succession, by their Uncle Eadred.

EADRED
Attributed coat of arms of King Edred: a cross formy between four martlets.
THE Activity of the Danes, after they came to get Footing, enforced the English
to make many Ruptures out of course, in the Succession of their Kings, breaking
off their Lines where at any time it seemed weak, and uniting it together again
in the strongest place, doubting lest the Imbecility of one that had been
either a Fool or a Child, might be an occasion of letting the common Enemy in
upon them: Upon which account this King was preferred before his Nephews, the
right Heirs, he being of age, and they not; his Title of Election out-weighing
theirs of Succession, as being more agreeable to the necessity of those rough
and boisterous Times; however there were always some found, that durst oppose
the common Choice, moved by particular Interests, giving their Kings so
continued Alarums, that they were not seldom forced to lay aside their Royal
Robes, and cloth themselves in Steel. And this I take to be the Case of this
particular King, who was put to a greater expense of Treasure than Blood, by
the frequent Revolts (for they were not worthy the name of Rebellions) of such,
who upon the account of discontent and faction, gave him more trouble than
danger, baffling his Courage by long Marches to reduce them, when indeed they
were subdued by their own fears, before he could reach them. Now as that which
yields, deads the force of violent motions, and causes them to lose their
execution; so he by not being resisted, returned still a Conqueror without a
Conquest, till involved in the common Fate of all Victors, (who weakened by
often overcoming, are at last overcome by themselves) his Fury spent it self
like Thunder after much Lightning, without any great harm done; all his Glory
being by this means turned into a kind of Mockery, the Danes as well as the
Rebels, playing fast and loose with him at that rate, that betwixt War and
Peace, he was neither safe nor quiet, finding continual matter of Indignation
or Scorn, till Fortune by bringing him so often on to fight with Air, made him
secure, and by that means left the Enemy an opportunity to steal a Victory,
that they durst not try to force from him: After which, death stole behind him,
and broke the Glass of his Sovereignty before it had run out full ten years:
too short a space to secure the Liberties of his People, much less to allay
their Fears; who terrified with the various Ensigns of an Implacable Enemy,
basely declined all noble Occasions of Revenge, and shamefully lost all that
they possessed, by the same way they first got it.

EDWIN.
Attributed coat of arms of King Edwin: a cross formy. IT has been observed,
that the self-same Weapons Time uses to overcome the Body, are by the
Understanding used to subdue Time. And by this means it prevails with Fame to
allow that Glory to Patience, which Fortune not seldom denies to Fortitude:
but this seems to be a secret which this young King either did not know, or not
regard: by which Animadversion his Memory became obnoxious to much Obloquy and
Scandal, which his Youth might otherwise have excused, or the Age he lived in
pardoned: For not caring to humor those that then would be esteemed the best
of men (I mean the Clergy) for that Cause only he fell under the Reproach of
being himself one of the worst of Kings. The truth is, he was very severe
toward the Priesthood upon account of their Laziness; which provoked them by
way of Recrimination, to declaim as much against him for his Lasciviousness;
their Revenge appearing to be like themselves, truly Spiritual, in that it
survived the Occasion, and proved so immortal a Defamation, as is like to
continue as long as there is any mention made of him in any Story, his Vices
being represented in such a Magnifying Glass as dilated them to a degree of
Deformity, more suitable to a Monster then a Man. For they accused him to have
ravished a Young Lady the same hour that he was anointed King; and (to make it
yet more horrid) avowed that he did it in the sight of all the People, and
particularly of her own Husband, whom, after he had tortured with the shame of
so unparalled an indignity, he afterward murdered: But how improbable this
is, each Reader may judge. And those that consider how Venial a sin Venery was
in those times, will conclude his greatest Crime to be the taking of Abbot
Dunstan by the Nose in like manner as it is said he did the Devil, who having
cheated his Predecessor of a vast Treasure, delivered to him under secret
Trust, to which he had most merito^iously entitled the Church; he not only
compelled him to vomit up his Sacrilege, but to make the punishment as
notorious as his guilt, compelled him to depart the Realm: This lost him the
hearts of the Clergy; and long it was not ere they found an artifice to bereave
him so far of the affections of the Laity, that they withdrew their Allegiance
too upon the account of his Nonage, being then but sixteen years old: Neither
took they from him his Crown on^y, but what was more dear to him than his life,
his beautiful young Wife, upon pretense of too near Consanguinity; which
Divorce cast him into a fit of despair, and that into so high a Fever as
completed the Separation by his death: being dead they denied him Burial, and
to show that something worse than the poison of Asps (which works no longer
than while it finds heat) was under their Tongues, they most uncharitably
reported the same Evil Spirits, whom they would have thought in possession of
his Soul, to have carried away his Body; presuming that they might without any
great difficulty gain Credit from after-ages, having so easily abused the
present: but those that give us the most Impartial Account of his unhappiness,
backed with circumstances that prove themselves, delineate such an active
generosity in his Nature, as by the Advantage of his Youth, might have been
rendered very useful if it had met with a loyal Nobility, or an untainted
Clergy; but the first being led like Sheep by the last, they to show posterity
how all the weight of Government hung upon the Lines of their hate or love, set
up his Brother Edgar as very a Child as himself, giving no other reason why
they thought him fitter to Rule, but that they judged him easier to be ruled.

EDGAR
Attributed coat of arms of King Edgar: a cross formy between four martlets.
THIS King growing up like a young tree, planted under the shelter of the walls
of the Sanctuary, could not choose but flourish, and being happy, who would not
allow him to be wise, valiant, and just; but these good qualities were not it
seems without some mixture of those dregs in his Brothers Nature, which were
heightened as much by the Corruption of the Times, as that of their youth,
either affording sufficient Temptation to men of so great Power, with so little
experience. He began his Reign before his Brother ended his, and shooting up so
soon, it is no marvail his top withered before he was full grown. That which
gave him the great advantage of his Brother, was that which casts a great
disadvantage upon most other men, in the like case, the point of minority; for
coming to the Crown in so very tender years (being as I take it scarce seven
years old) they that set him up, Judged him incapable of making those obstinate
Disputes, which Flatterers (of all Friends the worst Enemies) make Princes
believe their Majesty will bear them out in; So that they who would take
Exceptions to his Government, were first to Quarrel with the wisdom of St.
Dunstan, who ruling him, as he would have him rule them, stood a long time
betwixt him and Envy, making him by that distance appear in his Ascendent so
much above any of his Predecessors, that he was not unworthily reputed the
most, not to say the first absolute Monarch of the whole Isle: for however
Egbert was the first Monarch of all the Heptarchs, as Elfrid the first absolute
of all the Monarchs, yet neither of these had any more than two parts of the
whole; whereas he enlarged his Dominions over all the Sea his style in his
Charter to the Abbey of Malmesbury.
Circumjacent Territories, and took in all those Petty Princes his Neighbors
(who yet called themselves Kings) together with the King of Scotland himself,
to be his Vassals, who submitted to him in so humble (not to say servile) a
manner, that Florentius and Hoveden record it as one of the highest remarks of
Majesty, that ever any King of England could glory in; that passing over the
River Dee, Seven of them rowed his Barge; that is to say, the King of Scots,
the King of Cumberland, the King of Northumberland, the King of Man and the
Isles, and the three Kings of Wales. Neither is it strange, that he should be
so much above any Kings that were before him, since he took a different way
from them all to enlarge his Empire; for they only busied themselves to
Fortify so by Land, as to keep themselves in an uncertain Condition of
defense, like men rolling a stone up a Hill, that is ready to tumble down again
upon their heads, if they do not c^ntinually support it with main strength;
whereas he made the Ocean, as Nature first intended it, the Bulwark of his
Dominions; and was indeed the very first that made it so, by providing such a
Fleet, as met with danger before it could approach too near him, whereby he had
this double advantage, not only to take off the Fears of his own People, which
had so long abused their Courage, but added so much to the Terror of his
Neighbors, that they submitted to him without being conquered; and having
never seen him, paid him Tribute on condition they never might: Fame as it
were, so out-sayling his Navy, that they who before made it their business to
invade his Territories, counted it happiness enough now that he did not invade
theirs. Hence it was that there was not the least noise of War all his Time,
nor scarce a whisper of Rebellion; Except some little Demurrers of discontent,
put in by the Welsh Princes, presuming upon their Poverty; for that which is
the weakness of other Princes, was their only Ground of Confidence; but that
little Inflammation ceased by the letting out of a very little blood; the Danes
who were then esteemed the only, as the nearest Enemy, lying still like
Silkworms in Winter, without the least motion or appearance of Life: in Fine,
the peace attended his Government was so universal, that to signalize the Calm,
he added to the Arms of his Ancestors four Martlets, Birds that much delight to
be about Water, and most if not wholly in clear and still Seasons, for such
indeed was his Reign (as a Calm between Storms) which had it been as long as
'twas prosperous, he had not only passed for the most August Prince of this
Nation, but this for the most Auspicate Kingdom perhaps on this side the World;
he as keeping the Keys, and that as being the Storehouse to all other Nations.
But he being (as I observed before) like a Plant abounding with too much
moisture shut up too soon, and being made wanton with ease and plenty, grew so
over Prodigal of that vital heat which should have cherished Nature, that it
was not in the power of Art to preserve his Life beyond the thirty sixth year
of his Age, which was too short a space to close up the dissevered joints of so
mixed a Kingdom, whereof the Danes kept yet a fourth share; much less to
establish an universal Empire, which being weakened by being so distended, could
no longer hold out than while it was preserved by the Courage of such active
Princes, as those that appeared upon the Throne the four last Descents
following, who spite of Fate made good their Ground for an hundred years
without any Interruption to the course of honor, save by the Interposition of
Edwin, whom yet the hatred of the Clergy is supposed to have made worse than he
was.

EDWARD the Martyr
Attributed coat of arms of King Edward II 'The Martyr': a cross flory between
four crowns. THE Globe of Sovereignty, like that of the Earth, is so placed,
that it never stands still; but as the Ocean (the Emblem of human frailty) has
its Ebbs and Flows, its Falls and Swellings, so has it its Turnings,
Tumblings, and Revolutions. No sooner were Edgar's Halcyonian days done, but
there appeared new Signs of the old Troubles, and Commotions, which like the
meeting of contrary Tides, pressed in each upon other with dreadful noise and
Tumult; the Laiety opposing the Clergy, the Nobility scorning the Populacy, and
they again dividing from one another: But amongst the rest, no Feud seemed so
fatal, as that betwixt the two Unhappy Sons of this so happy Father; the one
trusting to his Primogeniture, the other standing upon his Legitimacy; the right
of either being so equally balanced, that there wanted only the affections of
the Multitude to turn the Scale either way, whilst the Clergy favored the
Eldest, the Temporal Lords the younger. The head of the Church-Faction was the
A. B. Dunstan, then, and all the time of the last King, chief Minister of
State: Principal of the Lay Faction, was Ordgar the great Earl of Devon, backed
by the Queen Mothers Party. So equal was the power, so pressing the necessity
on either side, that both Consented to stand to the determination of a Public
Convention of all the States at London: Accordingly a Parliament was held at
Westminster, where the bold St. Dunstan, not tarrying for the result of any
Debate upon the point De Jure, set the Crown upon the head of Edward the Elder
Brother, and so presented him De Facto, to the Assembly, as their lawful
Sovereign; which confident Act of his, either satisfying or surprising those of
the opposite Party, met with an universal submission; every Body acquiescing,
and dissembling their discontent, except the Queen only, who being his
Stepmother, could not forget, much less forgive, an injury so grievous to the
Son of her own Body: turning therefore her passion of Ambition into that of
Revenge, she broke over all the bounds of Nature and Right, to find the nearest
way to the Throne: nor wanted she a dismal opportunity, however taken from a
pretense of humanity and kindness, to set up her Darling by the murder of this
guiltless Prince, who coming alone estray'd from Hunting, and altogether
unattended, to visit her at her Castle of Corffe in the Isle of Purbeck, was by
her Command slain by an Assassme, that took the advantage to stab him in the
Reins of the Back, as he was drinking her Health at the gate on Horseback: the
helpless Youth finding himself wounded, clapped spurs to his Horse, in hopes to
have out-rid her malice, but his Spirits failing, he fell out of his Saddle,
and so unfortunately, that his Foot fastened in the Stirrup; at which his poor
Beast affrighted, became alike accessory, though not alike guilty of his death,
by dashing our his Brains, before that Life had got its passage through his
wounds. So perished this harmless Prince in the infancy of his Royalty as well
as of his Age, being rather sacrificed than slain, by a kind of double Death,
without so much as a single Crime laid to his charge: the same malice that
envied him the honor of being a King, becoming instrumental thereby to the
dignifying him with the glory of being a Martyr; the Charity of those times, or
rather the Affection of the Clergy, leaving him enshrined in the Calendar of
Saints. Which shows how deplorable his death was, wherein the whole Nation were
so much more sufferers than himself, that it may be truly said, that the Same
stroke which took away his Life, gave the Deaths wound to the English Monarchy,
bringing upon them the misery of being in Bondage to a Stranger Nation, of all
other the most cruel and insolent; who owed their Rise next the immediate
determination of Providence to nothing more than the unexpected Fall of this
hopeful Prince, with whose blood they may be said to have mixed the Mortar of
that Foundation they after laid; taking the same advantage of the Sins of the
English, as they before of those of the Britains, and breaking in upon them, as
they upon the other, with a Resolution not so much to conquer, as to confound
them; which may be some Excuse for the cruelty of the next King, that massacred
so many of them in cold blood, whilst who like Sampson in the midst of his
Enemies, thought there was no way left, but removing the Pillars of the house,
and perishing together with them.

ETHELRED
Attributed coat of arms of King Ethelred II: a cross flory between four
martlets. IT IS easy to imagine by the Title of Martyr given to the last King,
what Reflex his Death had upon this, who like an ill-set plant, unhappily
placed in the same Room, from which the other was taken, never could recover
any firm rooting, and consequently never thrived, being continually wind-shaken
from the very first moment that he was set up, and vexed with uncessant
troubles; the Sword never departing from his House (as it is reported St.
Dunstan preaching at his Coronation boldly foretold) till the common Enemy
became Master of his ill-got Glory, repaying him with the misery of loss, and
that infelicity which always attends it, shame and reproach. For it is observed,
that notwithstanding there were scarcely any King that ever settled the
constitutions of his Government upon firmer principles, that fought his Battles
with braver Resolution, that encountered all Emergencies of State with like
indifferency and temperance; yet neither could his vigilance or valor, his
prudence, fortitude, or patience so prevail against Destiny, but that all his
designs were stifled in the birth, or frustrated at the very point of dispatch;
as if Heaven had decreed to lay such a curse upon the wickedness of his Parent,
as should weigh down all the merit of his Virtues, and ^^ast the hopes
conceived from them. One while Famine was his Foe, another time Pestilence, and
it was not rare for the very Elements themselves to fight against him; it being
more than once or twice that he had a kind of Battle with Heaven it self, for
his Fleets were in danger of being fired by unexpected Lightning and
Thunder-Storms; neither was it for a little time that he thus strugled with the
perverseness of his Stars, hoping the malignity of their Influences might spend
it self in due season but finding they gave him no opportunity or encouragement
to perform any worthy Action, for several years together, having placed all
Glory so far above the reach of his Sword, that 'twas impossible he could at
the same time appear to be valiant and wise, he despaired by sensible degrees:
and as one grown weary of Greatness, became less concerned, as he found Fortune
more froward; till at length he fell under the lowest Reproach that could
befall an active Prince, to be styled The Unready (for so was he mis-call'd)
the apprehensions of which indignity so wholly relaxed his Spirits, that he
resolved to purchase what he could not win, a little rest (I cannot call it
peace, being rather like a Submission than a Cessation) which yet he paid an
incredible price for, indeed no less than 10000 pounds; a vast Sum for those
times, and so much the dearer pennyworth to his poor people, in as much as it
was the occasion of a Tax, which not only was the very first they ever knew,
but was executed with so much rigor, that the shame and indignation he
conceived thereupon, put him upon washing off the Stain of his dishonor with a
deluge of innocent blood: exasperating him to the hazard of the worst of
remedies, a general Massacre throughout his Territories; which afterward, was
executed upon the Danes with so much secrecy, and so little compassion, that
very few, if any of them, escaped. 'Twas thought this one Act, however cruel,
would have freed him from all future fears of the like necessity for the time
to come; but that weight which would have fixed the pillars of his Government
upon their Bases, had they continued upright; leaning on one side, overcharged
and cracked them: for the bold Executioners of his rage, upon the first
preparation the Enemy made for Revenge, finding themselves disappointed in the
main ends of their Cruelty, turned Cowards, and by a strange infatuation quit
his Protection, to seek refuge from those whom yet they believed implacable:
who having no color of right, till this wrong was done to them, had now so
fair a Pretense to do what e're was foul, that King Swain himself thought it
obligatory upon him, to cross the Sea to see right done to the incensed ghosts
of his People: The terror of whose first approach made such impressions upon
the very wisest of the English, that they thought it better to give him the
possession of their Country, than hazard his undertaking it from them, yielding
up most of the great Towns and Cities, to disappoint his Fury by unexpected
submission. Only London stood firm to King Ethelred in this extremity, and left
him not till he left them; who having before the Storm came, sent away his Wife
and Children into Normandy, followed them himself not long after; leaving Swain
in the sole possession of the Kingdom: who from thence forward had nothing more
to do, but to bind those he had thus conquered with chains of Allegiance. But
see the mockery of human greatness: whilst he thought himself above all
Enemies, having one foot upon the step to mount into the Throne, death the
common Enemy of mankind, struck him to the ground: the winged news of which
unexpected Event, taking its flight into Normandy, so imboldned Ethelred, that
he believing himself now reconciled to Fortune, immediately returned, and
showed his People, he was not that Unready man the World misnam'd him to be:
but behold, instead of an aged Enemy, who had more to do to contest with his
own infirmity than with his Forces, there appeared a Successor more youthful
and vigorous than himself, one that was equal to him in conduct, but surpassed
him in Ambition: this was Knute the Son of Swain, who finding the only way to
be great at Land, was to be Master at Sea, made it his first business to
corrupt the Fleet, and by that advantage gave so fatal a blow to Ethelred's
power, that he could no longer resist the force of Desperation; but languishing
in mind as before in Body, left the justice of his Title to be disputed with
more equality by his Son Edmond, who hoping to Overcome by yielding, lost the
whole by giving up a part only.

EDMOND Iron-sides.
Attributed coat of arms of King Edmund II: a cross flory.THE unexpected Death
of the last King, surcharged with misfortunes rather than years, as it made way
for his Son to the Throne, so happening before he was sufficiently prepared for
so important a Charge, it was was not the least occasion of the total overthrow
of the English Monarchy: However we may call this rather his Fate than his
Fault, being a Prince worthy a happier Father, and a nobler Destiny; who, had
Providence been pleased to have post-dated the birth of his glory, till time
had purged away the guilt of his Family, and left him no more Enemies to
grapple with, than what his Sword could have reached; might possibly by his
personal Gallantry, have recovered his languishing power, at least prevented
those dire disputes, which afterward cost his Posterity more blood, than the
Dominions they Contended for could supply. But the same hand that wrote his
name in this period of Succession, and as 'twas thought, ingrav'd his Destiny
in that Edmond signifying in the old Saxon Blessed Peace.
Name, contrary both to the literal sense of it, and the hopes conceived by
them that gave it him; turned that of Blessed and Peaceable, into that of
Iron-sides; an Adjunct which carried horror in the sound, and perhaps more
proper for him, who was condemned to fight three set Battles in the space of
three Months; on the success of each of which, depended no less than half a
Kingdom, which yet was his all; the rest being in possession of his Foe, who
fought him with his own Weapons, bringing Subject against Subject, English
against English. King Edmond's General was the Earl of Essex; the Earl of
Northumberland was the Danes, both men of great Conduct and Courage: Not far
distant from these appeared the Earl of Merkland, with another Body; by his
Father of English Descent, by his Mothers side a Dane, who pretending to affect
both sides, could by no means be drawn to declare for either; having secretly
however supported each, till he had so far weakened them both by his
Encouragements, that neither was in Condition to punish his Treachery, much
less to refuse his Courtesy: And now being drawn up in Battle to decide the
great question of right, he showed, seeing him hovering at a distance with such
a neutral party, as gave them just apprehensions of both his Force and Fraud,
trusting to no Sword but their own, they mutually accorded to decide the
Justice of their quarrel by Combat rather than Battle, obliging their
respective Armies to submit to the success of him that conquered; upon which
entering singly into an Island on the Severn, they charged each other with so
much fury, and so little Caution, as if the desire of assaulting had wholly
taken away the care of defense; but being equal in Stomach and strength, the
Fight continued poised in the uncertainty of any advantage on either side, till
at length both being tired, neither vanquished, either hoping to win, both
scorning to yield, with like desire, though not with like reason, they agreed
to divide the Kingdom between them. And to make the atonement appear as
acceptable to their Armies as to themselves, they transacted their Persons, by
exchange of Clothes and Arms: Edmond appearing to the Danes in dress like
Knute, Knute like K. Edmond to the English: a fatal exchange for this poor
Prince, who whilst they seemed thus to become each other, he only remained not
himself, falling by degrees from being half a King, to be very shortly after
none: betrayed by false g^ounds of security, into an unpittied Ruin, whilst he
preferred a bad Peace before a good War, and neglected those means for the
preservation of life, which he might have learned from the continual
expectation of death: and that which made his end more deplorable was, that
with him perished the English Monarchy. For however it seemed to have recovered
it self again in the same age, yet it proved like a plant new set after it had
been long out of ground, which whiles there remains any sap in the root, will
send forth fresh Sprouts, but those so weak and tender, that the least bruise
makes them wither and die: the mistaken Majesty of the Kings that succeeded
him, being no less crazed and infirm than they themselves, who fainted away
upon the first wounds given them, and bled themselves to death in one single
Battle.

THE FOURTH DYNASTY OF DANES.
Woodcut headpiece with a decorative pattern of archers and hunting dogs. OF
DANES.
THE Danes were a People, whose Original, Tradition, has with much ado traced
through the Dusky Foggs of the Euxine Sea, unto the Fens of Meotis; which being
the first place they were ever known to Inhabit, they lived there under the
obscure name of the Cymeri, till they were expuls'd thence by the Scythians,
who (as Orosius, Olaus Magnus, and others affirm) have continued there ever
since. Vellius will have it that they were drove out thence by a sudden
Inundation of the Country, upon which they petitioned the Romans (then Lords of
almost all the World) for the assignation of some vacant place in their
Dominions: But the meanness of their Condition inclining the Romans to slight,
if not deny their request, they were necessitated to rove up and down in an
unsettled Condition for some years: At last ('it is said) they fixed in Scandia,
where possessing themselves of the strongest Part of those cold Islands in the
Baltic Ocean, they found an opportunity to justle out diverse Roman Colonies.
This begat a quarrel, and that at last a War, in which the Romans lost several
of their Generals before they could reduce them to any Terms of Submission. A
little after this (which was yet before the Incarnation) they began to
undermine their next Neighbors the Jutes, who (as Munster relates) dwelt right
over against them, on the Chersoness, that jets out into the Aoust Sea. By that
Contest they gave the World so good an account of their skill in Naval Fights,
that the Jutes weary of their Vicinity, left them the possession of that
Promontory, and came themselves over into this Isle of ours.

Thus by commanding the Sea, they made themselves first Lords at Land, and with
their new Seats they got a new Name; the broad-mouth'd Northern People about
those parts, calling them the DANS: whether from Dan their King, as some, too
ancient to be refuted, fancy; or from Dom, the abbreviation of Dominus (as the
Spaniards got the Style of Don amongst them) being of that haughty humor, that
they would be called by no other name after they came hither, but Lordanes; or
whether from DAN, which (as Junius tells us) signified a Firr-tree (whereof
they had there such abundance, that it continues yet their Staple Commodity) I
will not take upon me to determine. Certain it is, that most Writers reckon
them amongst the Minores Gentes; but if their own Records speak Truth, we must
look on them as the offspring of the Scythians, the noblest Race of People in
the World; from whom all the Northern Nations were as ambitious to derive
themselves, as those in the East from the Medians, those in the South from the
Aethiopians, or those in the West from our Ancestors the Germans. There are who
reasonably enough conclude them to be a branch of these last: For the Pos^erity
of Gomer planting in Italy, disburthen'd part of their numbers into Germany,
and part into Gaul: From those in Germany sprung two Branches, the Francks, and
the Danes (as Fuag. 8. lib. Goth.
Procopius tells us) both promiscuously at that time called Normans: From those
in Gaul sprung our Ancestors the Britains, and those of Belgia: by which it is
evident, We that at this day are called English, were originally all of one
Stock. Neither has the change of Names or Nations much altered our Natures,
but that we continue to be still the same in humor, as we were ever in point
of Constitution.

They were (as indeed most of the Inhabitants of the Septentrional part of the
world) a hardy and bold (I cannot say brave) People: for their behavior was
plain and rude, and they so affected their own manners, that however they were
led by Providence into Countries where they pertook more of Civility and the
Sun, yet they would not be moved to change any of their ancient Customs,
having but little sense of honor, and less of danger, aiming more at gain then
glory: Insomuch, that they were altogether strangers to such gay distinctions
of Honor as are since in fashion, and wherewith those now in Denmark have been
but very lately acquainted: the reason was, for that all their Dignities were
Personal, and not Hereditary, held by no other Charter but that of their
Virtue: So that their wise Kings observing that old Adage, Virtutis Laus Actio,
never suffered them to want fresh Occasions of Action, whereby they sold them
the honor they pretended to give them, by parting with it not so much as a
Reward of past, as an earnest of future Services. Neither did this a little
inhance the value of their Nobility, which being for term of life only, as it
fell sooner into the Kings hands, to be remunerated again with better
improvement and advantage, so the Persons dignified were not apt to be infected
with those haughty conceits, which most usually puff up the minds of such as
are born Noble, who believing something to be in their Blood, that differences
them from the common Rank of Subjects (the Obligation whereof they have either
forgotten, or hold to be discharged by their Ancestors) grow insolent and
factious, and by their disloyalty not seldom disturb both their own Families,
and the Kingdoms peace: Of this Knute had so sad a proof, that as soon as he
came to be King of England, he endeavored to discharge all his Grandees, that
might any way pretend to have any share in his Conquest, crushing the two great
Paladines, Irtus and Turkill, the one Earl of Northumberland, the other of
Merkland; each of whose Principalities were so independent, and governed by
such distinct Laws as made them so absolute, that the Monarchy till then looked
like a Tetrarchy; but he was forced at the same time to banish Ten thousand of
his other Countrymen, only to be rid of them two: putting himself by an
unusual Confidence, upon the Faith of the English, whom to oblige the more, he
taught the knowledge of their own Strength (which till then they seemed
ignorant of) showing them the way to Victory in other Countries; where while
they became Conquerours under him, they forgot the hate conceived for being
conquered by him: Neither was he less careful in Peace, to heal the wounds
received in War, by applying the Balsome of wholesome Laws, in the making
whereof he had a particular Art to meet with the Distempers of the Times;
wisely providing against such as were likely to have become Epidemical: But
more particularly severe was he against that sottish sin of Drinking, then so
much in fashion, not without some secret instinct perhaps, or presage of what
did happen after, that it would prove fatal to the Glory of his own House, and
not only cut off every Branch thereof, but be the occasion of rooting out his
Nation so full and wholly, that in two Successions after him, there should not
be found scarce one Family in the whole Isle, that could so trace their broken
Pedigrees, through the obscure windings and deviations of their so often
interrupted History, as to prove himself of Danish Extract, both by Father and
Mother.

But as it was too great an Undertaking to subdue the Vices of that indomitable
Age, where if they had not thirsted for wine, they would perhaps for blood: So
much less was he able to contest with Heaven, which had put them a period for a
Penalty, and bound them up by an invisible Chain of Causes, beyond the length
of which they could not make one step forward: The Links whereof were
peradventure no more (and therefore the heavier) then what was proper for the
mystical number of their three Lettered Name of DAN: for as their Monarchy held
only three Descents, so the whole Systeme of their Conquest, with every Action,
Accident, and Achievement therein, seems to be circumscribed within the Circle
of that hree cornered square, with like Fatality as the Britains were ruled by
the Number of Six, and the Romans by that of Seven: For as they were originally
divided into three Tribes, so each Tribe had as many Kingdoms, and thereupon
they gave for their ancient Arms three times three Olao Worms Monument. Dan.
431.
Hearts, which makes up Nine, the great Square of the Number Three, their
Dominions then containing just so many Islands (as we learn from Casp. F. Epist.
Tho. Bartolinus) to which they have added since Three Lions. So when they
began their Invasion here, it is observable they had but only Three Ships, which
yet landed not all at once, but in three several places, and that
inconsiderable Party they brought over, were conducted by three Generals, each
equal in Trust and Honor; these were Gurmo, Byorn, and Sytherick, who began
that cruel war that followed: upon their Departure came over Ingar, Ivor, and
Hubbo, three fierce Brothers, which were seconded by Gurmo the younger, Eskell
and Amond, as they again backed by Cockric, Hastang, and Rollo. The three great
Triumviri in the height of the war were Edric, Stroeg, and Halidine: after them
succeeded Sytherick the Second, Godfred, and Anlaff: after whom were Eric the
Second, Anlaff the Second, and Swain: not to mention, Fran, Frithegist, and
Frothoe, whose names were overwhelmed by Irtus, Turkill, and Knute, who were
the bringers up of the Rear, and ended the war; the last of whom was the first
had the good fortune to shake off his right and left hand-men in the
Government. The like Order they observed in invading Ireland; where the first
Undertakers were Turges, and the two Gurmo's, Father and Son; the second
Expedition being managed by Thor, Raglobert, and Sytherick; the same Sytherick,
I take it, came after into England: And as they had always three Generals, so
all their Battalion's were divided into Tertia's; and as diverse Historians
relate, they never quit the Field how much soever over-press'd by their
Enemies, till they had been thrice broken. Lastly, as they had a Succession of
three times three Kings here, before they could get the entire Domination over
the whole (that is to say, three in East-Anglia, and twice three in
Northumberland) so they had three, and but three Kings, that continued the
Succession after they became absolute: And as their Monarchy held out but three
Descents, so it continued but three times nine years at longest: Too short a
space to compensate the loss of so much blood, as the recovery of their
short-lived Glory cost them; much less to repair the Naufrages of the
Commonwealth, wasted by continual Storms, whilst Fortune appeared so
indifferent which side to favor, that there could be no measure taken of her
Inclinations, from the Success, there being scarce any Battle fought, in which
the Conqueror had so much the better on it to keep the Field long; or the
conquered so beaten, as not to be able in very short time to take the Field
again, with confidence of getting the day next, rising like Game-cocks after
they were laid for dead, to crow over them that had the better of them; those
that died, intailing their Ambition on those that survived, infecting them (if
I may so say) with their Courage. So that that Character is very applicable to
them which we find elsewhere, -- Quos nulla fatigant
Praelia; nec Victi, possunt absistere Ferro.


THE Order and Succession OF THEIR KINGS Before and after they got The Entire
and Absolute Government OF ENGLAND.
I. HUNGAR was the first Danish King in this Isle, who assisted by his Brother
Beorn, that had married the Lady of Northumberland, found Interest enough to
give him admittance there: whence marching directly into East-Anglia, he
sacrificed King Edmund to the Ghost of his murdered Father, and possessing
himself of that Kingdom, left it to II. GURMO, a younger Brother of the Royal
House of Denmark; who, to ingratiate himself to the English, became a
Christian, and with his new Title took a new Name, being by his Godfather King
Elfred, worthily called Athelstan: that is to say (as Verstegan interprets it)
the Noble; he left his Title to his Brother III. ERIC, the first that had this
name, and last that had this honor; who meeting with a Competitor that
overmatch'd him both in the dignity of his Person, and the designation of his
Power, was betrayed by his own Subjects, who put themselves under King Edward,
surnamed the Elder: the Northumbers and Mercians submitting to IV. ERIC the
Second, or (as some call him) Sytherick a Norwegian: who contracting an
Alliance with King Athelstan, and after the Example of Gurmo, turning
Christian, was poisoned by his own two Sons: the eldest whereof V. ANLAFF the
First possessed himself of Northumberland: Godfrid his younger Brother held
Mercia: but King Athelstan fell upon both, and took from the last his Life,
from the first his Kingdom; which was recovered again not long after, by his
Son VI. ANLAFF the Second, thereupon esteemed the third King of the
Northumbers: His reign was not long; for his Subjects weary of continual wars,
set him besides the Saddle, to make way for VII. ERIC the Third, or as some
call him IRING, Son of Harold, the Grandson of Gurmo King of Denmark,
recommended to them by Milcolmb King of Scots: but he being elected King of
Sweden, the Northumbers submitted to Edgar the younger Brother, or next in
succession to Edwyn, and from that time, it continued a Member of the English
Crown, till about the year 980, when VIII. ANLAFF the Third, understanding they
were affected to his Nation, arrived with a fresh Supply, and making his Claim,
was admitted King; but being over pressed, the Title came to IX. SWAIN, King of
Denmark, who made this his first step to the Eng^ish Throne: into which as he
was mounting, death seized on him, and kept the Room empty for his Son Knute.
DANES Absolute Kings OF ENGLAND.
I. was deservedly surnamed the Great, as being the very greatest, and most
absolute King that ever England or Denmark knew (those of the Roman Line only
excepted) for he was King of England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, Norway,
Sweden, and Lord of a great part of Poland, all Saxony, some part, and not a
little, of Brandenburgh, Bremen, Pomerania, and the adjacent Countries; most of
them, not to say all (besides Denmark and Norway) reduced under his Obedience,
by the valor of the English only: upon his death Denmark and Norway fell to
his Son Hardycanute; the rest, as Sweden, etc. devolved upon the right Heirs,
whilst England was usurped by his Natural Son II. surnamed Harfager, or Golden
Locks; who being the Elder, and having the advantage to be upon the place,
entered as the first Occupant, thereby disappointing his legitimate Brother III.
surnamed the Hardy; designed by his Father to be the next Successor to him, as
bearing his Name, though upon trial it appeared he had the least part of his
Nature: for he had not the Courage to come over and make any claim, as long as
Harold lived; and after his death, he drowned himself in a Land-flood of Wine,
losing all the Glory his Predecessors had gotten, by wading through a sea of
blood; which made the way to his Throne so slippery, that those English that
came after him, could never find firm footing: But upon the very first
Encounter with the Norman, caught such a Fall, that could never recover
themselves again.
HUNGAR
Attributed coat of arms of King Hungar: a rook close. THE Danes observing the
intestine feuds amongst the Saxons, as they before had taken notice of those
amongst the Britains, urged with the same Emulation, and led by the same
Providence, they invaded the Invaders; resolving, if possible, to dispossess
them of their new, as they had before of their ancient Seats. Now because the
prosperity of all Usurpations depends on the Success of the first Undertaking,
as that on the pretended Justice of the Cause (a handsome Gloss to the Vulgar
being as good as the Text) they fortified themselves (as Tradition tells us)
with a show of punishing two notable Crimes, Murder and Rape: The first
charged to be most inhospitably committed upon the person of Reignor King of
Norway, Father of this Hungar, coming Guest-wise here into England, or (as the
Legend says) being brought in by foul weather in a Cock-boat, that he had taken
for a present shift, to follow a Hawk of his that pursued her Quarry into the
Sea. The second was a Rape pretended to be committed upon the Body of the Lady
Frea, Sister to their King Gotheric, the Wife of an English Nobleman, by the
Brother of her own own Husband. Fancies of Melancholy Monks, not more
ignorantly written then maliciously mistaken; the Truth being thus: Harold King
of Denmark quarrelling with that Reigner, beat him out of his Dominions; who
thereupon turned Pirate, and infesting the North-east parts of this Isle, that
lay nearest to his Country, was after sundry Inroads made upon them, drove into
Norfolk by the violence of foul weather; where the Rabble, accustomed always
to Cruelty, but then most barbarous, when a noted Enemy is given up to their
Mercy, fell upon him and slew him: and to show that it was not in the power of
Death to give them a full Revenge, they abused his Carcass, by dragging it up
and down in derision, calling him in scorn Lothbroc, which was as much as to
say, Leather-breach. He leaving behind him a numerous Issue by several Wives,
three of the younger Sons, to wit, Ivor, afterward Prince of Denmark; this
Hungar, or as he is sometimes called Agenor, Lord of the Isles, both by Thora
his second Wife, the daughter of Here a Swedish Prince, and Hubbo the only Son
of his third Wife, daughter of Esler Duke of Pomerania, came unto England, with
purpose (as they pretended) to revenge the Ghost of their murdered Father, but
rather to provide for their own ^ivelyhood being banished according to the
Custom of their Country, which always forced their younger Children to prey
for themselves abroad; wherein being like young Rooks drove from their nest,
they took that Bird for their Cognizance; which being imbroyder'd by their
Vestal Sisters, in a Banner consecrated after the horrid Rites of their
Paganish Superstition, with many Charms and Curses, which rendered it (as the
Vulgar believed) impossible to be taken, they set it up as the Royal Standard:
calling it by the Name of the That is to say, The Raven.
Reafan. Whether they intended it for the Portraicture of that happy presaging
Swet. Vit. Domit.
Raven, that spoke in the Capitol at Rome, and told them (...), All shall be
well: Or whether it were the Ensign of the ancient Danish Kings, is not
certain; but this we know, that it drew great numbers to them, who supposing
the Genius of the Nation was wrapped up in that Flagg, thought themselves
sufficiently protected under the shadow of it, against all dangers whatsoever:
and accordingly exposed themselves to all desperate Attempts, with so little
Caution, that the English, daunted with their more then humane Courage, gave
Ground, till Fortune was pleased to undermine them by that unexpected Success
at Kinworth in Devonshire; where the Reason was taken, and Hubbo slain: from
whom the place is since called Hubbleston. However, such was the good hap of
Hungar and Ivor before that black day, that they made themselves Lords of
Northumberland, by the death of Earl Osbright the supposed Ravisher of Frea,
whom they besieged in York; where firing the City, they consumed him in the
Flames which his own Lust had kindled. Thence they marched into Norfolk,
advancing as far as Thetford, then reputed a City, and the Royal Seat of Edmond
King of East-Anglia, whom they besieged in his Castle, and after taking him,
cut off his Head, placing his Crown upon the Head of this Hungar, who from
thence forward was styled by all his People, King of East-Anglia: a Title that
continued in his Successors about fifty years after, but with so great a Curse
intall'd upon it, that as neither himself, so few or none of them died dry
deaths; the cry of King Edmunds blood being not stopped till Canute's time, who
endeavored to compound with his injured Ghost, and as much as in him lay, to
get of the Guilt of his Ancestors by large Donatives to the Church where he was
interred, offering up his own Crown at the Royal Martyrs Tomb, as a
Peace Offering for the Usurpation of his.

GURMO.
Attributed coat of arms of King Gurmo: 9 hearts. IVOR being called back into
the place from whence he came, and Hubbo sent to the place whither all must go,
the Kingdom of East-Anglia, after the death of Hungar fell to Gurmo; who (as
Saxo-Pontanus and Kransius set forth his Pedigree) was the Son of Harold the
Hardy.
Harold Klack, who was the Son of Frotho, the Grandson of Little Knute.
Laan Knute, Son of Eric Beorn, by the Daughter and Heir of Guthorn, Son of
Harold Klack (who therefore is by Albertus Stadensis mistaken for Gurmo's
Father) who was Great Grandson to Gotherick, the first absolute Monarch of
Denmark, whose Father was the famous Sigward King of Norwey, surnamed Or the
Snakes-head.
Snogojie, Brother to Healidine, afterward slain here in England.

This Gurmo came out of Ireland, I take it in the second year of King Elfrid,
not without a confident hope of making good his Predecessors Conquest, which
had cost already so much blood, as made his desire of Rule look like a
necessity of Revenge: the Monarchy of Denmark it self being put (if I may so
say) into a Palsy, or trembling Fit, by the loss of the Spirits it had wasted
here. So that he came with this advantage, which those before him had not, That
the Cause seemed now to be his Countries, more then his own; who therefore bore
him up with two notable props, Esketel and Amon, men of great Conduct and known
Courage; the one of which he placed as Viceroy in Northumberland; the other in
Mercia: And having before expelled Burthred the Saxon, he fixed himself in
East-Anglia, as being nearer to correspond with Denmark, and most commodious to
receive Re^ruits. Upon his first advance against King Elfrid, Fortune appeared
so much a Neuter, that either seemed afraid of other, and striking under line,
preferred a dissembled Friendship before downright Hostility: And to show how
much the edge of their Courage was rebated, they mutually accorded to divide
the Land betwixt them: Gurmo was to be Lord of the North and East: Elfrid to
hold the South and West part of the Isle. The politic Dane after this,
suffered himself to become what the English would have him to be (a Christian)
to the intent that he might be what he would have himself to be (absolute)
changing his Pagan name of Gurmo, into that of Athelstan; which being of all
others the most grateful to the Saxons, he rendered himself by that
Condescension so acceptable to the whole Nation, that they consented to his
Marriage with the famed Princess Thyra, King Elfrids virtuous Sister, by whom
he had Issue Harold Blaatand, that lived to be King of Denmark after himself;
and another Knute, whom he left in Ireland, to make good the Acquests of the
first Gurmo there: a Prince of so great hopes, and so beloved by him, that the
knowledge of his death (being slain at the Siege of Dublin) gave him his own:
for he no sooner apprehended the tidings thereof, by the sight of his Queens
being in mourning, but he fell into such a violent fit of Grief, as left him
not till he left the World, whereby the Crown of Denmark fell to his Son
Harold; the Title and Possession of East-Anglia, with its Appurtenances, he
bequeathed to his Brother Eric, who having performed the first Act of Security
to himself, in having taken an Oath of Allegiance of all his Subjects, suffered
them to perform the last Act of Piety toward him, in giving him all the Rites
of an honorable Interment at Haddon in Suffolk: which place it seems he
purposed to make the Burial place of all the East-Anglian Kings. But this
Ambition of his beginning where it should have ended, with a design of assuring
to himself more honor after he was dead, then he was able to make good, whiles
he was living, ended as soon as it began, as will appear by his Story following.

ERIC.
Attributed coat of arms of King Eric: 9 hearts in pile, chief a lion passant
guardant. ERIC finding himself overmatch'd by his Contemporary King Edward, who
as he was surnamed the Elder, was questionless the Wiser, if not the Valianter
Prince of the two; thought it necessary to spring a Mine, before he made an
Assault, that so entering in smoke (as we say) he might by the assistance of a
few, accomplish that which was not to be hoped for by any open hostility, from
the force of many more then he could spare: hereupon he made it his first care
to tamper with Ethelbald, the Son of the late King Ethelbert, and Uncle to the
present King Edward, who having been disappointed of the Succession by reason
of his Minority, at the time of his Fathers death, coming now to Age, thought
himself sufficiently qualified for, and as well intitu ed to the Government, as
King Edward himself. Nor wanted he matter to kindle such a Fire within the
Breast of this young Phaeton, as being blown into a Flame, might endanger the
whole State of the English; for he insinuated to him, that it was not his but
Natures Fault, that he was not a King: urging further, that the way to recover
that Right, was to show the World how sensible he was of the wrong: adding,
that what he lost by being a Child, must be recovered by doing something which
might now speak him Man; wherein to wait an Opportunity from the help of Time
or Chance, would prove an Error of Sloth not to be discerned, till it were
too late, and would by Wise men be interpreted Folly, and by Valiant men
Cowardice. So pleasing was the Argument, that there needed no Rhetoric to
prevail with this aspiring Prince to accept Assistance from him, in the
recovery of his imaginary Right: and as green wood, after it is thoroughly
fired, burns more fervently then that which is dry; so Ambition meeting with
his Youth, incens d his Passions to that degree, that he presently flew to
Arms, declaring himself as much an Enemy to his Country as his Competitor, by
the commitment of several Outrages, that spoke him less sensible of shame then
danger: And that he might yet appear more an Enemy to himself then either, he
as rashly quit his Religion as his Loyalty, drawing many infamo^s Persons after
him by the fame of his Apostasy. Eric publicly joined with him, and declared
against the Peace made by his Predecessors. King Edward that had been
sufficiently alarmed by the noise of this Conspiracy, before it came to its
height, waited not their coming toward him, but met them half way, and at a
place called St. Edmunds Ditch, famous for a Victory obtained by the English
not long before, resolved to try his Title with them, dividing his Armies into
two Battalions; the first lead by himself, the other by Prince Athelstan his
Son: Against which Eric (who had the marshalling the other side) drew up his
Army; but divided not as King Edward expected, into two great Wings, one to be
commanded by himself, the other by Ethelbald; but after the manner of his
Ancestors, made up three Bodies, two whereof were all English, the third all
Danes: And resolving to cut the Diamond with a Diamond, set the English against
the English, and kept himself for the Reserve: The right Wing he left to be
commanded by Ethelbald, who advanced against Prince Athelstan that had the left
Wing of his Fathers Forces, and against King Edward that had the right Wing, he
appointed one Cowulph, a Person of as desperate Fortune as disloyal Principles,
descended by his Mothers side from the Earls of Chester, by the Fathers side
from a bastard Dane, upon which account they afterward made him Titular King of
Mercia: Eric with his Body of Danes stood to view the Field, and witness to the
gallant Madness of the English; whilst each man fell upon his Fellow, his
Brother, his Father, or his Uncle: not fighting Foe against Foe, but Friend
against Friend; each wound that each man gave to other, letting out some of the
same blood that run in his own Veins: wherein Fortune disposed the Battle, even
as himself could wish, for Ethelbald lost his life, and King Edward the day:
whose Forces being totally routed, Eric suffered not his men to wipe off the
blood from their Swords, till they brandished them in the Faces of the
Mercians, where King Edward appeared at the head of them as boldly, as if he
had received no defeat before. Here the Interest of both Nations came the
second time to the stake: For on the English side were engaged Ethelred,
surnamed Michill, or the great Duke of Mercia, Brother in law to King Edward,
Sigeline Earl of Kent his Father in Law, Prince Athelstan his Son, Ethelmere
Earl of Chester, Wolnoth Earl of Devon and Dorset, Seaward the potent Earl of
Somerset, and diverse others of the greatest note amongst the English. On Eric's
side appeared Cowulph, Titular King of Mercia, Healidine the victorious
Viceroy of Northumberland, Stroeg Duke of Cumberland, Godfride Earl of
Westmerland, Colberne Earl of Yorkshire, a man of so great strength, that they
called him the Giant; these were reinforced by new Supplies out of Denmark,
under the Conduct of three famous Commanders, Uter, Iring, and Scurfa. The
hopes conceived on either side was equal, as was their Courage; neither were
their Forces disproportionate to their Hopes. The advantage of the Danes was
the reputation of the last Victory, that of the English rested in their
despair. Either side alike concerned in the thoughts of Greatness or a Grave.
But whilst they were fatally disputing the Ground they stood on, Fortune that
for a while had turned her back upon King Edward, declared for him, and by
withdrawing her Presence out of the Danish Camp, left such an impression of
Fear upon them, that one half quit the Field, the other that stayed did yet
worse: For laying hold of their own King (who out of Indignation of the
approaching Repulse, had turned his Fury upon those that fled) they bought
their own Peace, with the price of his Head: whereby the English recovered back
all Mercia, and the greatest part of East-Anglia, which were thenceforth
preserved as inseparable Members of the English Empire, till the Reduction of
the whole under Knute: The Danes that fled thinking it enough to be able to
make good Northumberland, and the parts about it; and being afterward backed by
the Scotch and Welsh, whose business it was to hold up the War, they set up
another King of the same Name, though not of the same Race.

ERIC II.
Attributed coat of arms of King Eric II: a fish. ERIC the Second, by some
Writers called Sytherick, and by his Countrymen Sygefrid, is vulgarly supposed
to be one of the Sons of Lothebrock, by his fruitful Wife Thora. But I rather
take him to be that Eric the Son of Olave, mentioned by Kransius, who was the
Nephew of King Rayner, and after the death of Hungar made Lord of the Isles.
The first appearance he made in our History, is in the Company of his two
Brothers Ivor and Rathbarth; whose way being made into Ireland, by the
reputation of their Predecessors Turgesius, and the two Gurmo's, they all three
continued there till the death of Hubbo, slain at the Battle of Kenwish in
Devonshire: upon the report whereof, Rathbarth went into the Hebrides, Ingar
into Northumberland, and this Sytherick besieged Exeter: but the place being
too warm to stay there long (for it was in the heart of the associated
Counties) he took shipping, and parted for Chester, burned all that City, and
by putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword, struck such a dread into all the
Country round about, that he found an easy passage into the Land: and though
the most People fled before him, with all the speed they could make, yet his
Sword overtook so many, that the very Air was infected with the blood he shed;
the Pestilence devouring more afterward, then his Fury before. The purpose of
his Brother Hungar was to have met him, and joined Forces; which design was
carried on by Gurmo and Eric, his Successors in East-Anglia: But neither of
them being able to effect it, upon the death of Eric, the Northumbers sent to
him, to come and take the protection of that Remnant that was left of the
routed Army: who upon the first sight saluted him their King. This fell out in
such a Juncture of Time, that it was more advantageous for him to make a bad
Peace, then continue any kind of War: Whereupon he happily closed with King
Athelstan, who succeeding his Father King Edward, thought it best to sheath the
Sword, before it was quite blunted; having this unhappiness peculiar to
himself, That he had more cause to fear his Friends than his Foes. This Paction
of theirs was afterward confirmed by an Alliance, that they hoped might unite
their Families, either side being willing to be at rest; (to wit) a marriage
betwixt Sytherick, and the Princess Edith, Sister to King Athelstan; which
Union begat an unity of Religion, Sytherick readily yielding to be openly
baptized: But whilst he thought thereby to oblige his Wifes Friends, he did so
far disoblige his own, that those to whom himself had given life, were the
first attempted to take away his: For his two Sons by his former Wife, Anlaff
and Gotherick, believing it a Sacrifice acceptable to their abused Country, but
more to their incensed Gods, butchered him as he was asleep in his Garden.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum? Upon which, his Queen frighted with the
horror of their Inhumanity, fled back to her Brother Athelstan, to seek from
his Power, Justice, Protection, and Revenge; whiles Anlaff took upon him to be
King.

ANLAFF I.
Attributed coat of arms of King Anlaff I: a snake between 10 hearts. RELIGION,
as it is above the consideration of any thing besides its self, so being
mistaken, it does as easily infatuate as inspire the two unnatural Paregicides
(who dreaded not to do an Act, which could not but render them unprosperous, to
the end they might have the glory to be thought Zealous) considered not that
the Cruel^y to their Father would so aggravate the wrong done to their Mother,
as to draw upon them an Enemy, who having the advantage in Power, as well as in
Repute, and the Justice of the Cause, would be obliged by the same motives to
justify, as provoked them to defy the Truth of Christianity: For no sooner
was Anlaff declared King, but he was forced to quit his abortive Glory, and
leave his Country, to be consumed in the Flames his own mad Zeal had kindled,
whilst his Brother Gotherick pressed by the same necessity, to a degree of
misery scarce to be distinguished from despair, sought an obscure livelihood in
Ireland, as he in Scotland: both being scattered beyond all hope of recovery,
had not Howel Prince of Wales (an unreconcileable Enemy to the English)
diverted Athelstans Fury, by obliging him to look back to that part of the
Kingdom, which he had infested, whereby they gained time (like Vipers cut in
pieces) to recollect their scattered Limbs, and unite again; with which they
followed close after him, in hope to charge him in the Rear, whilst the Welsh
gave him battle in the Front. But as too much haste is as much before time, as
too much delay out of time; so overtaking him, before he had overtaken the
Welsh, they put into his hand an unexpected Victory, from which they could make
no retreat, and were forced to submit to a double Conquest; first by his
Courage, then by his Courtesy: Who finding Anlaff so humble as to submit to
the Faith, as well as to him, generously dismissed him without Ransom, I
cannot say without some vain glory, having declared at the same instant, that
he thought 'twas a greater thing to make a King, then to be one. Gotherick
broke both his Faith and Prison, and escaping to Dunmail, who called himself
King of Cumberland, confederated with him, and with Milcolme King of Scots, and
Donald Lord of the High-lands, and the abovenam'd Howell to begin the War
again, into which League he afterward brought his Brother Anlaff, which
thereupon being called the League of the Five Kings, made such a noise as
alarmed all England, and startled Athelstan himse^f so far, that he thought it
necessary to set up his Royal Standard, and call in to his Assistance all the
Friends he could make: Those of most note that appeared in Arms with him, yet
rather for their Countries sake then his, were his Brother Elsward Prince of
East-Sexe, Edwald Duke of the West-Sexe, Burfrid the great Earl of Kent, Segar
the valiant Duke of the South-Sexe, and (who was yet greater then either of
them, and much more terrible) Guy Earl of Warwick, whose Courage has rendered
him so famous among the Common People to this day, who came attended with his
hopeful Son Earl Reyborne, the Mirror of Chivalry; and with them were most of
the great Men of that time: The fatal place chosen to decide the glory of this
day, was Brimsbury in Yorkshire; where Anlaff himself resolving to take a
personal view of the English Army, with no less Circumspection then Courage,
entered their Camp (as King Elfrid had formerly into that of the Danes) in the
dress of a common Fiddler; and having by that disguise satisfied himself in all
the Particulars of their Discipline and Order, retreated again, without being
discovered or known to any, but one private Soldier, who, it seems, had such a
mixture in his Nature of Honesty and Honor, that having formerly served him,
he would not be so base as to betray him, and being gone, would not be so false
as not to discover him to King Athelstan, who easily guessing at the end of his
Design, secretly and suddenly altered the place of his own Tent, and doubled
his Guards: whereupon Anlaff returning, was engaged in a fatal mistake, for
where he expected the King to be lodged, he found a Bishop, that upon his
Removal had taken up the place: A Priest, that better prepared, it seems, to
live then to dye, who (like an old Rat in a Cheese) animated with desparation,
made a shift to defend himself till the Army took an Alarm from his
Resistance; and so the Battle began with so good Success on the English side,
that King Athelstan having before put all things in a readiness, contrary to
the expectation of the Danes, after a sharp, but short Dispute, put them to
flight, leaving three of the five Kings dead behind, with diverse of their
Princes, and particularly Gotherick; but Anlaff escaped that was least likely
to have done it, carrying off with him a considerable Party, reserved by
Destiny to give the English new troubles, as often as they happened to have new
Wars.

ANLAFF II.
Attributed coat of arms of King Anlaff II: a lymphad. AFTER the Battle of
Brimsbury (of all others the most fatal to the Danes, as having lost (as most
of the Writers of those times agree) no less then three, if not four Kings, six
Dukes, and more then double as many Earls, besides ten thousand of the Rascal
herd; and being in jeopardy of a total Extirpation, had the Conqueror lived to
have improved the advantage of that days success) there being several back
doors still open to receive all the Enemies to England, it is no marvel Anlaff
made his escape; who passing through Scotland, got over into Ireland, where he
tarried till he had news of the death of Holstein King of Sweden: upon which he
crossed the Seas again to make his claim to that Crown, in right of Ulisda the
only Daughter and Heir of the said Holstein: But Animander, one of the Princes
of the Blood of Collateral Descent, having got the start of primier Seizen, and
backed by a pretended Law, which all the Nobility favored, for that it
excluded all Pretenders to that Scepter, but such as were Natives of the
Country; he was forced to compound for his Departure, and please himself with
the Air of a Title, that upon his death descended upon his Son Anlaff, who
having some reputation amongst the barbarous People of the High-lands, got up a
ragged Recruit, with which, by the help of the King of Scots, his Fathers fast
Friend, he not long after put him into possession of the Kingdom of
Northumberland: and finding that his great Adversary King Edmund the Fifth,
Brother and Successor of King Athelstan, was upon the matter a Child at least,
very young and unexperienced, he adventured without any great hazard, to
overrun Darby, Lincoln, Leicester, Stafford, Nottingham, and the most part of
Yorkshire; which yet did not so provoke the English Nobility (being either less
forward at that time, or less faithful then they ought to be) but that they
neglected the Common Defense, till the young King himself, taking Encouragement
from that discouraged them, (to wit, the ready submission of those Provinces to
the Enemy) went himself in Person against him, conducting his Army through the
aforesaid Counties, with that Resolution and Majesty, as if he had designed to
punish an Insolence, rather then to recover a Loss: with which Confidence
Fortune seems to have been so well pleased, that she never forsook him till he
had so far straightened the bold Intruder, that he was fain to submit, and fly
to the old religious shift of washing off the guilt of that Innocent blood he
had shed, in the Laver of Baptism: upon which occasion there never wanted some
g^od meaning men to be Sureties for their Faith, though none durst undertake
for their Truth. But as there is no washing of a Blackmore, so he appeared in
his proper colors as soon as King Edmund returned back, betraying the early
Courage of two young Princes his Neighbors, Sons of Dunmaile the Titular King
of Cumberland, into an Engagement that cost them that which was dearer to them
then Life it self, their Eyes; which King Edmund putting out, showed therein an
example of Cruelty rarely to be found in any History, and the first in our own,
forfeiting thereby that which was dearer to him then either to them, to wit,
his Glory: which by this one Instance of Inhumanity was so blasted, that no Act
of Generosity, how extensive soever, could ever recover its luster; the World
having grounded on that single Action so fixed an Opinion of his ill Nature,
that his Subjects wou^d no more trust him then his Enemies: whereby Anlaff
proved to have the better, by having the worst on it, his Extremity being the
principal Occasion of Edmund's Cruelty, as that of the Infelicity which
attended it: The poor unfortunate Prince being afterward slain by the hand of
one of his own Domestics, not seeing who he hurt, as neither he who hurt him;
whilst this Christian Pagan survived to baffle his Successor, as he had done
him, putting himself in a fair capacity by the benefit of time and his own
patience, to have been a great Master, if he could have submitted to a
Mistress; for he was profer'd the Kingdom of Cumberland (as it was then styled)
by Milcolme King of Scots, with a Concubine of his; but refusing her, he was
rejected by the said King, and his Nephew Eric set up in his place.

ERIC III.
Attributed coat of arms of King Eric III: 9 hearts in pile, chief a lion
passant guardant. THIS Eric or Iring, by Latin Authors called Irtus, was the
Son of Harold Blaatand, Grandson of Gurmo, bred up under his Martial Uncle Eric
Blodoxe King of Norwey, whose Wife was Gunild, Sister to the said King Harold,
and by him employed in the Conquest of the High-lands; from whence King
Malcolme his Mothers Brother, upon the displacing of Anlaff, got him to be
admitted King of Northumberland; a Title which he gave as great reputation to,
as he had from it: For he so disposed his Government, that he was surnamed the
Wise, and might as well have been called Happy, by that Rule of the Gospel,
Beati Pacifici: For contrary to the humor of all his Predecessors, who were
inclined to War, and had fed more upon Blood then Milk, he made it his business
to Overcome by Peace; and finding that he had an inconstant People of his own
to deal with, neither patient in War, nor pleased without it, he resolved to
make the best of so cras'd a Condition, by diverting those virulent humors,
which he found he had not power to correct. This Pacifick Spirit, as it was
rarely to be found in any of his Country men, being naturally of a proud,
rough, and fierce disposition; so he seems to be inclined thereto, by the mild
Influences of some gentle Stars, that at the time of his Birth were as well
predominant over the Affections of his Contemporaries, as over his; the
Tranquillity of King Edgar's Government being very agreeable to the Serenity of
his Mind, whereby he got a Name so much above any of his Ancestors, who yet
were apt enough to close with any Overtures that might give them rest; possibly
out of hopes to beguile the Dane, but visibly cozening themselves, whilst they
perceived not that the Tree fastened by being unshaken, it having been as easy
and more secure to have dug up their Roots at first, then to have lop'd off
the Branches, as they did at last, which sprouting up with fresh Succors, not
only increased as they rose, but enlarged their Tops to such a degree, as in
few years after over-shadowed the greatest part of the Isle, and in time the
whole: But as the best Fruits do soonest perish, so this excellent King lived
not to perfect the Glory he designed; however long enough to make his People so
in love with Peace, that they thought it not dear bought, by submitting so far
as to become a Province again to the English Empire, continuing a Member of the
Crown of England, till the reign of Ethelred, who being forced to quit all,
this part, with the rest, returned to do homage to Knute.

ANLAFF III.
Attributed coat of arms of King Anlaff II: a lymphad.THE Fortune and Vigilance
of those four active Princes, Edward the Elder, Athelstan, Edmund, and Eadred,
had so disappointed the Preparations of the Indefatigable Danes, and rendered
their Courage so often fatal to themselves, that they durst not adventure to
break that well grounded Peace made by the last Eric, for near twenty two years
after his death; that is to say, from the disliked reign of Edwy, till the year
980: time enough to have rusted their Swords in the Scabards (put up so bloody
as they were) and sheathed them for ever, had not a more then Humane hand drawn
them forth again to punish that Planetstruck Prince King Ethelred the Unready;
a Person ordained to maintain a War against Heaven, as well as against them: In
the second year of whose Reign this Anlaff came into Northumberland, and caused
himself to be proclaimed King, being second Son of Harold Harfager, the Fourth
King of Norwey, and Father of that great Anlaff, whose Son Sytherick in the
Irish Annals is entitled, The King of Dublin, whose Son Godred was the first
King of Man of the Norwegian Race. This Anlaff being a great Pirate, and
always used to the Seas, took a new Course for the establishment of his
Kingdom, contrary to all his Predecessors; beginning a War that gave his People
the advantage of infesting their Neighbors, without any fear of being invaded
themselves: For he manned out a small Fleet of Seven Ships only, with which he
went in Person, and haraz'd Kent; whither King Ethelred drawing down all the
Force he had in readiness to oppose him, he got aboard again and sailed for
Essex, where he had the good Fortune in a Skirmish (which from the Consequences
of it had the repute of a Battle) to kill Earl Brightwold, the Lord Lieutenant
of that County: and taking confidence from that days Success, advanced toward
London, where King Ethelred tarried to expect him, having sent his Admiral
Edric, Duke of Mercia, to set upon his Fleet: but all things falling out
unluckily to that poor King, how well soever designed, it happened that Edric,
having a Dane to his Mother, had sucked so much of her Milk, as inclined him
more to that Nation then his own, so that he fell in (as it is commonly said)
with the Danish Fleet, but it was as a Friend, not as a Foe, joining with them
to block up the Thames on the one side, whilst Anlaff distressed the City on
the other, reducing Ethelred to that low Condition, that he was forced to buy
his Peace at the price of 10000 l. which proved the dearer penny worth in this
respect, for that he was not sure of his Bargain longer then the Contractor (I
might as well say the Conqueror) would; who having found the benefit of such a
Market, would in all probability raise the Price every year, as it fell out
afterward. For from a Composition they came to lay a Tax, which however not
great, was so much the more grievous, in that it eat into the Liberty of the
poor Subject, beyond all probability of being ever made whole again, continuing
many Ages after the Occassion was extinct: So that at last it became by custom
the usual Supplement to the necessity of the Princes, as well as to the danger
of the Times, being the Foundation of that decry'd Tax of Shipmony, which in
this last Age of ours cost more blood to justify it, then was lost in the
first setting it up.

SWAIN.
Attributed coat of arms of King Swain: two lions passant guardant in pale, 3
hearts in chief, 3 hearts in fess, 3 hearts in base. BY this time the Danes
were grown so numerous, and bold, that the first Article they made upon the
last Peace with the English, was to secure a Cohabitation amongst them, whereby
they increased their Repute, not to say their Rule, so far, that having matched
with most of the greatest Families in almost every County, they not only seemed
to be, but were indeed a very considerable part of the Commonwealth; the
distracted Condition of a young friendless and unsettled Prince, giving them
great Temptations to increase their numbers, so that the Harvest seemed ripe
for the Sickle. Swain King of Denmark, after the death of the last Anlaff
(deservedly surnamed the unfortunate) thought it an Expedition worthy the
hazard of his own Person, to come over and take Livery and Seisin of the
Kingdom, which he let out again under a Feefarm Rent of 48000 l. and having it
ratified by consent of all the States in Parliament, returned home with the
repute of having subdued the Kingdom; whereof there needed no further Manifesto
then this Paction of Servitude (for I can call it no less) confirmed by the
delivery of such Hostages to him, as was no less then Sureties for the keeping
them to their good behavior (the breach whereof being as Capital as that of
their Allegiance) he pressed the People with new Taxes as often as he had
occasion for new Sums. This as it was a Reproach of so deep a dye, that nothing
but blood could wash off the stain it left upon the Name of King Ethelred; so
his immoderate desire of Rule made his desire of Revenge so unreasonable, that
resolving to maintain his Sovereignty with no less horror then he got it, he
put all the Danes to the Sword that he could surprise in cold blood; which
dismal News being brought to Swain, he was not long behind hand in requiting
the Cruelty: For landing first at Chester, he made that whole City one common
Urn for the Ashes of its Citizens; then taking Sea again, he did the like by
Southampton: From thence marching to Winchester, he compelled the Inhabitants
there to drink as deep Healths in their own blood, as if it had been Wine, by
which they fell down dead drunk in the Streets beyond all recovery, as after
other deboises: so passing thence he besieged the two Universities, wherein he
so far complied with the design of their Founders, as to make them truly the
two great Lights of the Nation, by fiting a^l their goodly Fabrics, and
desolating all the places round about them: The last, but not the least
Tragical Scene, was that of Canterbury, whose ^ight Reverend Bishop he
sacrificed to the incensed Genius of his Nation, and in scorn to his Sacred
Function, slew nine hundred Religious Persons to attend his Ghost into
Purgatory: In fine, he spent all the stock of his Mercy so far, as to spare no
more but the Tenth man of all sorts of People of what Age or Sex soever that
fell under his Mercy; those that could escape flying to London, as the Spirits
to the Heart, to guard the last Stake that was left: Where they made such brave
resistance, as showed they contemned the Fate they fled from, scorning to quit
their Allegiance, till their King, to whom it was due, quit them; who making
his escape into the Isle of Wight, went from thence into Normandy (whither he
had sent his Wife and Children before) upon which they gave up their Keys, and
with them the forsaken Crown, to the Victor, who sunk so suddenly under the
weight of it, that he had no time to fix the Succession on his Son Knute; but
as one surfeited with Blood and Revenge, left him to try his Chance with the
advantage of the Possession against Ethelred, who every one expected should
have taken new life from his old Enemies death; but he, tired with Age and
Arms, dyed not long after himself, leaving his Son Edmond Ironsides (a fitter
Match for so young a Rival) to enter the List with him, who hoping for that
help from Time, which Fortune allowed not his Father, consented to divide the
Stake; not considering, that by the same Power he was compelled to let go the
half, he would be (as he was afterward) necessitated to part with the whole,
having made Knute his Superior, from the very time he admitted him to be his
Equal.

KNUTE.
Attributed coat of arms of King Cnut: 9 hearts in pile, chief a lion passant
guardant. KNUTE the Second of Denmark, and First of England of that Name, was
Lord of as many Kingdoms, as there were days in the Week, to wit, one for
every day: having attained to that point of Glory and Felicity, which never any
of this Nation could before, to be Sovereign Lord of the whole Isle; the Scots
King (such is the power of Conquest) submitting to the Fortune of his Title,
and the English Nobility preferring it before the Right of all the Princes of
their own Blood, whereof there were no less then five Pretenders living, three
Brothers, and two Sons to the unfortunate King Edmund; the last whereof were
removed by their Father to his hand, and kept in the Court of their Uncle,
Richard Duke of Normandy; the rest were in his Custody, to remove when he
pleased: whom accordingly he sent to his half Brother, Olave King of Norwey,
with intent (as 'twas thought) that he should send them into another World: But
he conveying them to Solomon King of Hungary, who married his Wife's youngest
Sister to the eldest of them, left Knute to secure himself by the same way he
was endangered, who thereupon marrying their Mother, got with her the Peoples
affections, setting the young Pretenders as far out of hope, as they were
before out of distance. Yet he thought it not sufficient to fence himself
against all storms from abroad, till he had fixed himself in quietness at home,
wherein he took such an odd course, as is very rarely to be found in any
History, and till then never in ours, securing himself against his Enemies, by
discharging himself of all his Friends: for he banished all his Countrymen (as
the King of the Bees does the Drones) leaving not one Lordane (as they called
them) in any one Hive throughout the whole Isle; and thereby not only took off
all the exasperation of those that were disposed to be desperately malicious,
but outwitted the Fears of those that were innocently Jealous: By which Policy
he had a double benefit, or as we proverbially say, had the hap to kill two
Birds with the same bolt; for by making the disobligation to his Countrymen so
universal, he not only seemed himself resolved to become an Englishman, but
happily acquitted himself of a debt, which though he had paid, he could never
have cleared to them that assisted him in the Conquest, who being apt to be
always more intent upon their own merit, then any remuneration he could make
them, would never have been satisfied with any share of Honor or Treasure, but
what would have been too great a lessening to his own. However 'twas not enough
to deliver the People from the terror of his Party, without he took off all
their fear of himself too. And therefore he took the best course to make
himself known to them, by giving them new Laws, which however they seemed to be
as so many new Bonds, were yet so smoothly filed, that they could scarcely
gall; and that which made them seem lighter to them, was that he suffered
himself to be as fast bound by them as they. Having thus far secured his
Interest here on Earth, he made it his next business to make even with Heaven,
expiating the immanities of the War by such Penances, as made the Peace he
intended more acceptable both to God and Men: wherein it is worthy the noting,
how he did even un-king himself to keep up his Majesty: For besides the
particular care he took, to provide for those whom his Countrymen had made
Widows or Fatherless, which showed his Charity, and the repairing many Noble
Delapidations with advantage, to show his magnificence; he Dedicated several
rich Offerings at several Shrines of offended Saints, to testify his Piety;
some of them of incredible value, as was that Crucifix given to the Church of
Winchester (not to mention the rest) valued at one years Revenue of the whole
Kingdom, on which he afterward placed his Crown, taking an extraordinary, or
(as it was at first thought) extravagant occasion to do it: For it being told
him that some of his Sycophantical Courtiers, had been very elegantly
blasphemous, in giving him the Style of a God, it is said that he did thereupon
command them to attend him to the Seaside; where setting himself upon the
Sands in great State, Royally Robbed, and his Crown on his Head, the Tide being
then coming in, he called aloud to the Sea, that all might hear, injoyning it
not to dare to approach so near as to wet his Feet, upon pain of being dried
up: but the deaf Element continuing its rebellious Fluctuations, till it dashed
upon his Robes, he gravely rose up, and turning to those impious Wretches, told
them with a Majestic indignation, that there was no God but him whom the Sea
obeys, and therefore since they had so profanely ascribed to him the Title
only due to the Almighty, he would from thenceforth no more wear that Crown on
his Head which had so dazzled their eyes, but offer it up to him that gave it;
and accordingly he caused it to be placed upon the head of the Image that was
fixed to the Crucifix before mentioned: Thus by letting his Root run lower then
ordinary, it is not to be imagined to what a height he rose, and yet kept
himself so firmly fastened in the point of Opinion and Esteem, that he may be
said to have got a double Conquest over the affections, as well as over the
persons of the People, with whom his credit prevailed so far as to make them do
that which they never but once before could be brought to do, viz. to partake
with him in the dangers of a new War beyond the Sea, whereof he was only to
have the benefit, they the peril: For Intelligence being given him, that the
Vandals had taken the advantage of his absence, to fall into Norway, and had
there done much spoil, deposing his Viceroy Olave, who was his own half
Brother by the Mothers side, so many of the English Nobility proffered their
service to him, as made up an Army not less considerable for their number then
their force, who as they were the first that ever went out of this Isle, since
the Romans left it, so by their particular Courage, without the help of any of
his natural Subjects there, they made his way to conquer the Kingdom of Sweden,
and Dukedoms of Saxony, Pomerania, and Bremen: and taking Ulfus and Anlaff, two
of the principal Vandal Princes Prisoners, made him so much more formidable by
that Conquest, to all his Neighbors, then he was before, that upon his return
back, Milcolme the second King of Scots, Jeomare the Wild, and Mackbeth, two
great Lords of the Isles, came all to do him homage, putting their Dominions
under his protection, and themselves under his Allegiance; and not long after
the barbarous Kings of Ireland, vanquished by the Fame of their Submission,
hastened to do the like. Being thus arrived at the Meridian of his Glory, there
wanted nothing to complete his Felicity but an assurance that it should set
with the same splendour it rose; wherein as Nature had obliged him, with a
sufficient stock to have maintained the Succession, by the lives of three
healthful Sons, all Kings after him; so by his care and providence he
sufficiently obliged them, had they either had the wit to have understood his
Precepts, or the Courage to have followed his Example; but Destiny it seems had
bound up all his happiness with the thread of his own life, which was no sooner
cut in two, but all his Mightiness unravelled in less time then it was winding
up; an Evil not to be prevented by humane Policy, which therefore may most
properly be called the Kings Evil, as being a Malady which no Touch can cure,
unless it be by that Hand which is invisible, and by that Power which only can
make Virtue as inheritable as Kingdoms, and by a Metempsycosis in the Descents
of Princes, supply those defects which commonly, if not naturally, are incident
to the Children of Wise men; whose Spirits being too fine and subtle to be
transmitted to their Posterity, by that gross way of Seminal Traduction, they
are left for the most part indigent of those ordinary qualifications, wherewith
the Children of less knowing Parents are not seldom blessed.

HAROLD
Attributed coat of arms of King Harold I: a cross formy and lion rampant
guardant. THE fall of Knute not only shuck, but so disjoynted the whole frame
of that great work begun by him, that it stood but a very little time after:
for however he lived to make a Will, appointing thereby that Son to bear his
honor, who had the honor to bear his Name; yet as Kings Testaments are for
the most part less binding then those of private men, so it happened to his;
which was boldly waved by this Harold (the second Son by a former venture) that
took the advantage of his elder Brother Knute's absence (left by the wise
Father in possession of Denmark, to the intent he might be in the better
condition to make good his Right and Title to England) and like a nimble
Gentleman (worthy indeed that Surname which he had of Hairfoot) stepped up into
the empty Throne, thinking it enough to make himself King de Facto, whilst he
had the good liking of the Londoners to back him: however his Stepmother, and
Goodwin Earl of Kent, his Fathers sole Executor, boldly opposed him, declaring
his Usurpation to be so much the more insupportable, by how much it was not
certain (at least they took on them so to publish) whether he were the true Son
of Knute or no: common Fame having so far debased him, as to make him a
spurious Imposter changed at Nurse, which was a point of disparagement below
the degree of Bastard.

The Equality of Power, as well as of Ambition, ripened the Factions on both
sides very fast, by the heat of their Contest: But before they came to
Maturity, there was a Parliament convened at Oxford, that took the matter into
consideration; where the Lords fearing that the Question (if delayed) might be
decided by Swords, and not by Words, out of a deep sense of the lingering
Calamities of a new War (all the wounds of the old being not yet cured, or at
least not so well, but that the Scars were yet fresh in many of their Faces)
they declared for the King in possession, but with such a wary form of
Submission, as showed they did it rather out of regard to themselves, then him:
whereupon Goodwin produced the deceased Kings Will in opposition to theirs: but
the regard they had to the living, being more prevalent then that of the dead,
the Queen urged her Articles of Marriage, by which it was covenanted that her
Children should Inherit, to which their Lordships had all subscribed: which
being acknow^edged by the Archbishop of Canterbury (the principal Verb in the
Sentence) his Authority led the sense of the whole Clergy, and having (as he
was Legate) the Scepter and Crown in his hand, he laid them down on the Altar,
challenging the Usurper to take them up thence if he durst: whereupon King
Harold, as quick of Apprehension as he was nimble of Foot, allai'd this
Thunderclap with a shower of Go den Promises, vowing to defend the Churches
Rights with his Blood; for which, as he gave some Pledges in public, but many
more, as it is thought, in private, so he carried the Cause with more Facility
then Applause.

And now being fixed, I cannot say settled, not without the suspi^ion of some
foul play on Earl Goodwin's part, whose unexpected Subm^ssion she^d that he had
either quit his Wisdom or his Honesty; he began he ple^sure of his Reign with
that of Revenge: and as he dreaded those Sons of the Queen she stood not for
(to wit, those of the English Line, Edward and Alfred) more then him she did;
so he found out a Bait accor^ingl^ to draw the youngest of them (who was the
on^y man of Spirit and (o^rage) within his reach, by the temptation of a
feigned Letter, as from his Mother, that invited him over into England, to head
an Army against the Usurper (for so he was pleased to call himself, when it
served his own turn) assuring him there wanted neither hearts nor hands to
serve him. The Person who was to give him the first Reception after landing,
was the unsuspected Goodwin, who pretending to conduct him privately to his
Mother, betrayed him into the Vulture's power, who immediately put out his
eyes, manifesting to the World the necessity those have to be cruel, that dare
be unjust: For as Ambition is that illustrious sin that claims Kindred with
every great Vice, so it has this Prerogative above them all, in respect of its
noble Extract, that the deeper it is dyed, the better color it takes, and of
all Colors, so none so natural to it as that Crymson.

Si jus violandum est, regnandi causa violandum. For he that cannot rule
himself well, may yet rule others better, and make satisfaction for being an
ill man, by becoming a good King. But this was not Harold's intention; the Ills
that he seard could not be secured but by those he did, and therefore he
provided for greater; first banishing the innocent Queen, after consiscating
all her Estate to his own use; and having little apprehensions of any danger,
from that dull Rival the elder Brother, who seemed to affect a Myter rather
then a Crown, he turned his thoughts toward his own Brother Knute, resolving to
reach h m by poison under a gilded Pill, which he believed he could not want
hands to administer, whilst the Furies were in Confederacy with him to secure
the ill-got Greatness they had bestowed upon him. Several persons were
corrupted with golden promises of great Preferments in case they could effect
the black deed: but Providence being more kind to him, then he to himself,
prevented his further guilt, by putting an end to his loathed life, which yet
had concluded happily enough, if either his infamy had ended with himself, or
himself had been at rest when he ended: But being the Peoples terror whiles he
was alive, the King, his Adversary that succeeded him, took that advantage to
make him their scorn after he was dead, raking up his Ashes out of the Dust
where it was laid, to expose it to another Element, as restless as was himself:
whereby, though in effect he did no more but rob the Worms, to gratify the
Fishes, yet the Common sort judging there was something more of Inhumanity in
the manner, then perhaps of Injustice in the matter of the Revenge, it melted
down their hate into a kind of pity; and as their spite for the most part ends
with their fears, so forgetting their own, they became so sensible of his
wrong, that from that time they withdrew their affections from that King, and
had doubtless exposed him (had he not prevented it by exposing himself) to some
danger as great as that he met with.

HARDY CANUTE
Attributed coat of arms of King Hardicanute: quarterly, a cross voided; on an
escutcheon, three crowns; in first and fourth quarters two lions passant
guardant between 8 hearts, in second and third quarters a lion rampant bearing
a lochbar axe. HAROLD being dead without Issue, the English Nobility hearing
that Knute had made great preparations by Sea, to meet his exiled Mother at
Bruges, or rather to visit them here; sent Ambassadors, to prevent the ill
effects of his Impatience, by the early Tender of their Allegiance, not without
hope that grafting him in the Royalty by a free Election, they might have
better Fruit of his, then they had of his Predecessors Government, who sprung
up from the wild Stock of his own power: but it was not long ere they sound by
the like inflammation in eithers blood, that the same blood run in both their
Veins; and as this shot up faster then they expected, so they were not a little
surpised to find in his Nature a sowerness of Disposition, that showed as
great Inclinations to Revenge, as the other had to Cruelty, whereof there could
scarce be a more degenerate instance then in the taking up of his dead Enemies
Corpse, after it had been buried for some time, to fling it with no less scorn
then malice into the Thames. This so alarmed all those of Harold's party, that
most of them flew to Arms: some there were that chose rather to trust to
Flattery then Force; amongst whom was the politic Earl Goodwin himself, who,
though he lay under a weight great enough to have crushed any man else, at that
time (when perhaps it was the same thing to be guilty, and to be only thought
so to be) being more then suspected to have had a hand in the death of Prince
Alfred, yet having this justification, that he was the only person that took
the Lion by the beard, and boldly denied King Harold to be any son of Canute's,
when under that color he first began his Usurpation; he concluded from the
certainty of his merit, and the uncertainty of proving his offense, that there
was more ground of hope then fear in addressing himself to a Prince that had
more need of his assistance, then he of his favor: however, he thought it
necessary to indear him to him, by a rare and rich devised Present, besitting
any King but more particularly this, whose sottish humor had rendered him most
infamously famous. It was a Cup of Gold in the form of a Pinnace, carrying in
it diverse Soldiers all in Danish habits, of the same Metal, the least of them
weighing more then his Innocence, who by the help of some unseen motions,
changed their stations, and seemed to act the part of Mariners: with this
queint bribe, and the pretense of being a better Good Fellow then indeed he
was, forcing himself to drink all night with him, and his deboist Parasites; he
so prevailed over both, that he not only reconciled himself to his good favor,
but made himself so totally Master of it, that 'twas a doubt amongst the weaker
sort (though none amongst the wiser) which ruled the Kingdom, the King or he:
And Queen Emma, that for a while influenced all the Councels, appeared now but
as the Moon that borrowed her light from his Orb. To say truth, he arrived at
such an unexpected height that his head turned giddy with looking down at what
he was before, and his eyes were so dazzled with the luster of the Crown, to
which he was placed so near, that it seemed to him to totter on his head that
wore it. This apprehension begat no less change in his mind, then that which he
foresaw he might make in the State, having no Check-mate but a Woman, and no
Superior, but one who was weaker then she. Now as Ambition is a restless
passion, which makes a man (like a sealed Dove) never leave mounting till he
fall down dead; so it fermented in his hot Brain to that degree, that he
thought the happiness of ruling a King not to be enough, without he had the
Glory to be one himself. The power he had, he conceived to be a sufficient
Foundation without a Title, to make him so; and yet perhaps he had Title enough
too, to make a Groundwork for a higher Superstructure. Some Right he pretended
to by his first Wife Thyra, Sister to the great Knute; but more by his second
Wife Gytha, this present Kings Niece, and (as he called her) his Heir: These
perhaps of themselves were slender Twines to bind the Peoples Faith, much less
their affections to him: but twisting them up together with his present
Interest, being an Englishman, and (which was more) a very sub^il man, might
prove strong enough to strangle such an unweildy Prince as this, half choked
up before with Phlegm and Ale, and so dozed that all men expected he would go
out of the World with as little sense as he came into it. But see the
uncertainty of human Policy; whilst Goodwin projected to raise himself by the
Kings fall, the King dies before he was prepared to rise. Great men, like great
Birds, cannot suddenly take wing, but must have time and space to run a while,
before they can mount. Fortune or Time (for they were both of the Plot) mistook
their Measures, and struck as much too soon for him, as it would have been
perhaps too late for his Son (that enjoyed the Glory he aimed at) had they
tarried longer: it being possible, not to say probable, that the domination of
the Dane (which ended with this King) might have been continued by as rare
Accidents as it began, and yet without any violence to the English Line, which
now crossing his design, and being too strong to be broken off, was to be cut
into two: but this being by Providence appointed for his Son to do, who lived
to reap the Fruit of his Fathers patience (I cannot say power) it will not much
trespass upon the Readers patience to expect (as he himself was forced to do)
the expiration of one King more (as sottish perhaps, though not so deboist as
this last) before he see what the event was.

Woodcut headpiece with a decorative pattern of archers and hunting dogs.
ENGLISH.
EDWARD the Confessor.
Attributed coat of arms of King Edward the Confessor: a cross flory between 5
martlets.THE Danish Line being broken off before the ambitious Goodwin could
fasten his Hook to it, and all claim on that side made void, by the immediate
Revolt of Norwey, and their dissentions at home; he had only this advantage
(and it was a great one) to make his own choice out of all the English, that
pretended to the right of Succession, and to take whomsoever he thought would
be the fittest mold for him to cast the Model of his own designed Greatness in.
The first in right to the Crown, were Prince Edward and Edmond, the Sons of
Ironsides: but the remoteness of their Persons, being of greater consideration
then the nearness of their Titles, having ever since the death of their Father,
continued as Outlaws in Hungary (to which Crown they were so nearly allied,
that he was put beside all hope of tampering with them) he preferred their Uncle
Edward, one of the younger Sons of Ethelred; a Prince so soft and plyant, that
he seemed to be framed by Nature for every Impression that was to be put upon
him: to him therefore he gave up the Crown, and with it (as a Bribe) a Jewel
(perhaps of greater value, if it had been rightly used or understood) his
virtuous Daughter Edith; a Lady of so incomparable person and parts, that he
might be very well confident he had made all cock-sure (as we vulgarly say)
knowing that whenever he came within the Circle of her Arms, he must be so
charmed (if he had any thing of man in him) as never to be able to get loose
again: This assurance made our Politician very bold with his Son in Law; that
boldness quickly turned to Arrogance, that Arrogance attracted great Envy, and
that Envy raised great Opposition: Those of the Nobility that were men of
Action, became his Rivals in Glory, performing as great things against the
Scots, as he and his Sons could do against the Welsh; whilst those that were
men of Counsel, made it their business to counter plot his Intreagues, wherein
they likewise prevailed so far, as to prefer Gemensis Bishop of London (the
very greatest Enemy he had) to be Archbishop of Canterbury; but he being a
Norman (which crossed a wise Ordinance made at the coming in of the King, that
no stranger should be admitted into any place of Profit or Trust) Goodwin made
it the Kingdoms grievance more then his own: and rather then want an Occasion
to puzzle the short sighted Multitude, he took a very slight one, from an
accidental Fray at Canterbury, between the Townsmen and some of the Followers
of the Earl of Bolloigne, the Kings Brother in law, whose Harbingers being
killed in the Scuffle, the King commanded Goodwin as Lord Lieutenant of that
County, to do Justice on the Offenders: but he denied, returning this popular
Answer, That it was against his Conscience to execute his Countrymen unheard,
upon the complaint of Strangers. This coldness of his raised such a sudden heat
in the Common People, that there wanted nothing to set the whole Kingdom in a
Flame, but to tell them their Liberties were in danger, and that there was no
body durst assert them but the Earl Goodwin. King Edward perceiving his design,
and doubting least it might bring him himself into suspicion with his People,
being upon the matter a Stranger (as having been always brought up in
Normandy) he resolved to question him in open Parliament: and accordingly he
summoned him and his Sons to give their attendance: but they refusing to
appear, both sides armed. London was divided in the Quarrel; for the King
possessed all on this side the Thames, the Earl all on the other side next
Kent: But such is the terror of Guilt, that the Night before the Battle was to
be fought, the Rebels quit their General, and by that commendable Treachery,
forced him to quit the Realm, who taking shipping at Greenwich, fled away as
fast by water, as his Accomplices did by Land. The King upon this turn was so
changed in his humor (incensed at this their gross contumacy) that he grew
extremely choleric and peevish, discharging his Anger with that violence upon
all the Earls Friends, that it recoiled back upon the spotless Queen her self;
whom, in the transport of his Passion he accused of a Incontinency
Crime, which if she had been guilty of, himself could not have been Innocent:
having (as he was not ashamed afterward to confess) never performed the Duty
of a Husband to her; under which pretended Jealousy she was forced to suffer a
years Imprisonment in a Cloister, partaking patiently the Penance of those,
who were under a Vow never to know any man, only to satisfy him, who had
before vowed never to know any woman. This Indignity offered to the Innocent
Daughter (in whom (says Ingulphus) there was no fault but that she was a Rose
of that prickly stock) did so stimulate the guilty Father, for whose sake she
suffered, that he meditated nothing but the extremest Revenge, and by frequent
Piracies so disturbed all Trade, that the King finding that the popular were on
his side, was glad to compound with him for his quiet, upon his own terms,
yielding to the banishment of all Strangers; which Concession did his business,
but undid the Kingdoms: For as it made way for his Son to be (as he designed
him) a King, so it was the fatal occasion of that unexpected Invasion of the
Normans, (abetted by the Earl of Bolloigne, that had the first affront given
him) which not long after not only overwhelmed the particular honor of his own
Family, but the glory of the whole English Nation, by a Conquest so universal
and sudden, as if the Strangers they banished had gone out of the Country for
no other end, but to fetch in more: However, Heaven suffered not him to see
either the fruit or punishment of his dark purposes; it so falling out, that
whilst he designed to have devoured the whole Kingdom, he was himself choked
with a small morsel of Bread, that went the wrong way down, and by his death
put such a full point to all great Actions, as shows that either he did all
that was done then, or the King did not long survive him; whose Reign being
nothing else but a Commentary upon that Earl's Ambition, it is no marvel that
his Fame began where to others ended, being sounded upon Opinion rather then
Action; whilst his Magnanimity was interpreted Patience, and his Patience
judged the Effect of Wisdom: But they that duly examine the whole course of his
life, will find that the active part of it declared him scarce a good man, the
passive certainly not a good King: and however the Clergy (who were well
bribed) extolled his Chastity and Piety, yet it is evident that the first was
not without manifest wrong to his Wife (whom not to use was the highest abuse)
the last with no less Ingratitude toward his Mother, whom upon like suspicion,
he put to such a kind of Purgation, as might have condemned the greatest
Innocence, causing her to pass the To go over 9 red hot Houghshares barefooted
and blinded, laid at uncertain distances, either of which if she touched, she
was hold guilty.
Ordeale, or Fiery Trial then in fashion: But this unkindness to them is the
less, when compared with that to himself, in the total disregard of all
Posterity; affecting more to be a Benefactor to, then a Father of his Country,
as believing Religious Houses more lasting Monuments then Religious Children;
whereby it came to pass that for want of Issue of his own Body, he was fain to
leave the Succession to one that was both a Child and a Stranger, little
knowing, and less known to the English, as not having so much of the Language,
as might serve to demand or declare his Right when he was to recover it, nor so
much Spirit or Judgment, as to show himself sensible of the Injury when he was
afterward put besides it. A fit adopted Successor for such a Sacerdoting King,
of whom if I should give an impartial Character, I must say, that he was rather
cold then chaste, rather superstitious then religious, fitter to be a Monk then
a Monarch; indeed so sottish, that (as it is reported of Vitellius) he would
have forgotten he was born a Prince, if others had not put him in mind of it.
So that it is no marvel, considering either his own weakness, or his that was to
have come after him, that his Steward Harold, by having only the rule of his
Household, should take upon him (as he did) to rule the Kingdom, and he thought
the fittest man (however half a Dane) to support the English Monarchy.

HAROLD
Attributed coat of arms of King Harold I: two bars and 6 bear's heads afronty.
AS there is no temptation so powerful as that which arises from the knowledge
of a man's Power, so there is no Consideration of that force as to make a man
quit his Ambition, that thinks he has merited a Crown. Harold having resolved
to be a King, tarries not till the People made him so; but to take the charge
of Injustice off from them, boldly steps into the Throne, the better to outface
his Rivals from thence; who being no less then three, two on a pretended, and
one with a real Right, he conceived they must justle one another before they
could come at him. The pretenders were Swain King of Denmark, whose claim was
as the undoubted Heir of the last Knute; and William Duke of Normandy, that set
up a Title by Gift and Conveyance from the last King Edward: But of these, the
first was engaged in a War with the Swede, the last imbroyl'd in a dispute with
the French, and so neither at leisure (as he thought) to disturb him. The
third, who claimed as the right Heir by descent, as well as by the Will of his
Uncle, was Edgar Atheling, Son of Prince Edward, eldest Son of Edmond
Ironsides; but he being a Child, and having no Friends nearer then Hungary, he
opposed to him the good Omen of his own Harold in old Saxon signified, Love of
the Army.
Name only, that is to say, concluded to overcome Right by Might; having
besides the advantage of his Years and Experience, two great Supporters to
participate of the danger with him, in case the other two should join with
Edgar; that was Morcar Earl of York, and Edwin Earl of Chester, both Brothers
to his Wife: who being the Relict of Llewellin Prince of Wales, seemed to be a
Pledge given by Fortune, to secure to him the affections of that People also.
Neither wanted he something like a gilded Title to dazzle the Common Peoples
eyes; for besides that he was Heir to the Fame and Fortune of the great
Goodwin, the Champion of their Liberties, descended from the Kings of the
West-Sexe, which gave him the preferrence of the Norman, so by the Mothers side
he had in him the Royal Blood of Denmark, which by the advantage of his present
possession, gave him the Superiority of those Kings too. Thus fortified and
adorned, he undertook to make the People as happy, as they had made him Great:
and because Trisles please Children as well as greater matters, he called
himself Prince Edgar's Protector; fooling those of his Party into a belief,
that he intended something toward him, that might amount to a Surrender in
convenient time, or at least to a Confirmation of the Succession after him,
which they were well contented with. Thus having by many Lines drawn to himself
an universal Consent, that made his Right of Desert equivalent with to others
Right of Descent, he hung like a Spider by the slender thread spun out of his
own Bowels, which, how weak soever it seemed, was strong enough to bear him up,
till he had put his Affairs into as good a Posture of Security as the present
necessity would permit. And it so fell out, that the first that questioned him,
was the last that assaulted him, his next Neighbor the Norman, who pretending
to a Conveyance of King Edwards Right to him, to which (as he said) Harold
himself was Witness, and (which was more) sworn by Oath to defend, he taxed him
upon his Allegiance to make good the same; to which Harold returned a short
Answer, That Oaths exacted par Duresse, were not binding (for taking his
pleasure (as it is said) one day at Sea, he was by contrary winds drove into
Normandy, and there detained till he took that Oath). 2. He said that his
private compact with the Norman was of no validity, without the consent of the
whole State of England. 3. That no Act of King Edward's could pass the Crown
away, being himself entitled to it but by Election, and so holding only in
Trust. Lastly, that the Kingdom of England, and Dukedom of Normandy, were
enough for two Persons, and too much to be ruled by one, and therefore Nature
had well placed a Sea betwixt them: which Sea, because he thought the Norman
could not pass, he concluded he would not divest himself of the Dignity
Providence had given him with the consent of the People.

By this Duke William finding that Arms, not Arguments, must decide the
Controversy, resolved to drive out one wedge with another; and accordingly
working upon the Revenge and Ambition of Toustan, Harold's younger Brother,
then in his Court, who was tainted with an irreconcilable Enmity both to his
Brother and Country: to him for a Box of the Ear given him in the presence of
King Edward; to it, for a worse blow, in deposing him from his Government in
Northumberland, and forcing him into Exile, whereby he was necessitated to
appear rather like a Pirate then a Prince; he prevailed with him to make the
first Invasion: who assisted by the King of Scots, and the King of Norwey,
(then engaged in taking in the Northern Isles) landed in his own Province, and
thence pierced into the very Bowels of the Kingdom, forcing his Brother Harold
(though with apparent hazard) to leave London to make what speed he could to
check their forwardness; who accordingly advanced as far as Stamford, where he
put an end to the troubles of his Brother and the Norweygian, but not to his
own: For as he was allaying this Storm in the North, he had notice of a more
dreadful one in the South; the Norman having so timed his business, that he
landed that very day that his Confederates were fighting; with whom came over
the Great Earl of Flanders, Father in Law to Toustan, as well as to himself,
accompanied with the Earl of Bulloigne, who had been so inhospitably treated at
Canterbury by Harold's Father. Harold tarried not to sheath his blood-stained
Swords, lest rusting in their Scabards, they should be hardly drawn forth
again: But leading his men on, weary as they were, to complete the first by a
second Victory, in less time then could be thought possible to have marched so
far, he faced the Invaders with so much confidence, that Duke William loath to
venture all at one stake, sent him the offer of referring it to the Pope, or
putting the trial upon a single Combat betwixt them two. But Harold deaf to all
Conditions of Peace, having in his memory the fatal Success of that dispute
between Knute and Ironsides, on the like Occasion, returned him this Answer,
That none but that Power which gave it him, should judge his Right, and that he
would support it with more then sing^e Courage (superstitiously believing that
that day would prove auspic^ous to him, because it was his Birthday.) Neither
was he worse then his word; for that single Battle cost the English near Seven
thousand Lives (besides what were lost on the Norman side, the just number
whereof their Historians have not thought fit to let us know) Men worthy to be
as they were then made, Immortal; who bravely strove with Destiny to save their
Country from the Ca amity of Foreign Servitude: but finding that they could
not do it, as scorning to out live their Liberties, they fell round the Body of
their vanquished King (which lay wrapped up in his Royal Standard, instead of a
Winding sheet, with more wounds upon him, then he had reigned Months) in such
congested heaps, as showed the Normans that they had with him subdued the
Kingdom: there being scarce so much Noble blood ^eft unspilt as to keep the
State alive (if he had quit them) much less to make a second Resistance. From
which Catastrophe we may conclude, that the advantage which the English got
over the Britains in the first place, was no more then what the Normans got
over them in the last; not by an inequali^y of Courage, but partiality of
Fortune, which like a Bowl once put besides its Bias, goes the further from
its Mark the more it is enforced.

THE FIFTH DYNASTY OF NORMANS.

Woodcut headpiece with an angel against a decorative pattern of grapes, vines
and flowers. OF NORMANS.
THE Normans (so called by the French, in respect of the Northern Clime from
whence they came, heretofore called Dionis. Patav. l. 8. c. 4.
Scandia, since Norwey) were another Branch of the ancient Cimbri, seated near
the frozen Sea, whose Country being too barren to nourish so fruitful a People,
they disonerated their Multitudes, wheresoever force could make way for them:
Some straggling as far as the Mediterranian; others farther Southward: some few
lost in the Frozen Sea, attempting the Desert Isles far Northward; but most
following the Sun, infested their Southern Neighbors. About the time of
Charles the Great they began to grow very troublesome by their frequent
Pyracies, making several Inroads into England, but especially into France,
pressing so hard upon Lewis the Holy, that he was fain to empty all his
frontier Garrisons, and quitting the Maritime, draw them into the interior and
more considerable parts of his Empire, as the Spirits are drawn to the heart
upon all Commotions to preserve life: Their Successes in Germany, England,
Scotland, and Holland, having made them so bold, that they doubted not to
advance as far as Paris; where after diverse disputes with Charles the Bald,
Charles le Gross, and Charles the Simple (which concluded with an honorable
Composition) they six'd their two Chiefs, Hastang and Rollo in the most fertile
and best parts of that goodly Country; the first being made Earl of Charters,
the last Duke of Neustria (from him called afterward Normandy) the seventh in
descent from whom was Duke William, better known to us here by the Name of The
Conqueror, who with like confidence, and not unlike Injustice, invaded
England, as his Ancestors did France, pretending a Donation of the Sovereignty
from his near Kinsman King Edward the Confessor, confirmed, as he alleged, by
his last Will and Testament, in the presence of most of the English Nobility: a
pretense that could have been of no validity, had it not been backed by more
then humane Power, to disinherit Edgar Atheling, who (as being of the whole
English Blood) was rather Heir to the Kingdom then to the King, and so by no
Law could have his Right collated to a Stranger; but the use he made of it was
to convince the World, that he had more Reason, not to say Right, to demand,
than Harold to detain the Crown, who having put Prince Edgar besides the
Succession, desied the Justice of all Mankind as he was an Usurper, and so it
was a design worthy his Sword, who had so fortunately vanquished (even before
he wrote Man) those great difficulties at home given by the Opposition of
Domestic Rivals, no less puissant and populous then Harold, to put him at
least out of Possession: But that which seems strange, and was questionless a
great surprise upon Harold, was the conjunction of the Peers of France in an
Action that was so apparently hazardous to the greatness of their own State;
every addition to so near and dangerous a Neighbor, grown long before too
powerful, being a kind of diminution unto them, whereof there can be no
probable Cause assigned, beyond their natural affectation of Glory, and
wantonness of Courage, but that Influence which the Conquerors Father in Law,
Baldwin Earl of Flanders had, by being then Governor of the King and Kingdom
of France, who not only engaged most of the grtatest Persons there, as the Duke
of Orleance, the Earls of Champaigne, Blois, Britain, Ponthieue, Maine,
Nevers, Poictiers, Aumale, and Anjou, but drew in the Henry IV.
Emperor himself, and many of the German Princes to side with him.

This Preparation being such as it was, it cannot be thought that the English
lost any honor, by mingling blood with men of that Quality and Condition; the
sound of whose Names, was perhaps little less terrible then that of their Arms:
much less takes it from the reputation of their Courage, to have he^d up the
dispute but for one day only, having fought it out as they did, till the number
of the slain so far exceeded that of the living, as made the Conqueror doubt
there would not be enough left to be conquered. Who knows not that Fate made
way for the Normans, where their Swords could not, guiding them by a Series of
Successes (near about the same time) to the expectation of an universal Empire,
having but a little before made themselves Lords of Apulia, Calabria, Scicily,
and Greece, and enlarged their Conquests as far as Palestine.

But what we allow to the Courage, we must take from the Wisdom of the English;
that being subdued, they continued Nescia vinci, vexing the Conqueror after
they had submitted to him, by such continual Revolts, as suffered him not to
sheath his Sword all his Reign; or if he did, urged him to continue still so
suspicious of their Loyalty, that he was sorc'd always to keep his hand upon the
hilt, ready to draw it forth, having not leisure to intend what was before
established, much less to establish what he before intended; So that they put
upon him a kind of necessity of being a Tyrant, to make good his being a King:
Yet such was the moderation of his mind, that he chose rather to bind them
stricter to him by the old Laws, then to gall them with any new, guarding his
Prerogative within that Citadel of the Borough Law (as they called it) from
whence as often as they began to mutiny, he battered them with their own
Ordnance, and so made them Parties to their own wrong; and however some that
designed to pre-occupate the grace of Servitude, gave him the ungrateful Title
of Conqueror (which he esteemed the greatest misfortune his good Fortune had
brought upon him) thereby to proclaim his Power to be as boundless as his Will,
which they took to be above all Limitation or Contradiction: yet we find he
suffered himself to be so far conquered by them, that instead of giving to, he
took the Law from them, and contentedly bound himself up by those which they
called St. Edward's Laws, which being an Abbreviation of the great triple Code
of Danique, Merke, and West-Sexe Laws, was such a form of Combination, as he
himself could not desire to introduce a better; and if any thing looked like
absolute, 'twas his disarming them when he found them thus Law-bound hand and
foot: After which he erected diverse Fortresses where he thought fit, disposed
all Offices of Command and Judicature, to such as he could best confide in; and
by that Law of Cover feu, obliging them to the observation of better hours of
Repose, then they had formerly been used to, gave himself more rest, as well as
them. As for his putting the Law into a Language they understood not, whereby
they were made more learned, or less litigious then they were before; it was
that the Lawyers only had cause to complain of, whose practice at the first
perhaps was a little disordered by it; but those since, who have found the
benefit of having the Laws mysterious and less intelligible, have little cause
to decry him for it, unless for this cause, that they are never pleased with
any fighting King.

In fine, he strained not the Prerogative so high, but his Son Henry the First,
let it down again as low, when he restored to the People their ancient freedom
of General Assemblies: or rather permitted them a kind of share with himself in
the Government, by instituting a form of Convention, so much nobler then any
thing they had been acquainted with in elder timety, in that the Peerage sat
as so many Kings parting stakes with Sovereigns, if what Who was Lord Chief
Justice to his Grandson Hen. 3.
Bracton tells us be true, who says, there were many things which by law, the
King could not do without them, and some things which legally they might do
without him: which those that have read upon the Statute of Magna Charta can
best explain. This was not therefore improperly called the Parliament, in
respect of the Freedom of parlying after another fashion then had been
permitted to their Ancestors in former Meetings; which being Ex more, or (as
they were wont to phrase it) of Custom Grace, during all the time of the Saxon
Kings, we cannot imagine their Debates to be much less restrained then
themselves, who attending in the Kings Palace (like the Lords of the Council at
this day) having had the honor to give their Opinions in any point of State,
submitted the final Judgment and determination to the Kings will and pleasure.
And whereas then the Commoners were wholly left out of all Consultations
(unless with the Learned Lambert, we may think them included in the word
Barons, which seems to have been as equivocal a term heretofore in England, as
that of Lord yet in Scotland) they now were made partakers of the like
privilege of voting as the Lords; so that in Henry the Third his time (to look
no further backward) we find them called by the yet continued style of Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, to consult together with the Lords, pro Pace
asseveranda and firmanda, etc. (as the lib. St. Alban f. 207. 4 H. 3.
Record expresses it) neither sat they when they met, as Ciphers to those
great Figures: For when Pope Alexander the Fourth would have revoked the
Sentence of Banishment past upon his proud Legate Adomare Bishop of Winchester,
for that he was not (as he alleged) subject to lay Censure, they took upon
them to give their Answer by themselves (and it was a bold one). That though
the King and Lords should be willing to revoke it, Vt pat. Chart. or^g. sub
sigil. de Mountford. Vic. tot. Communitat. Rot. Parl. 42 Hen. 3.
Communitas tamen ipsius ingressum in Angliam nullatenus sustineret. How far
their Privileges were afterward confirmed and enlarged by several Kings
successively, but more particularly by that most excellent Prince Henry the
Fifth (who first allowed 2 Hen. 5.
The Petition of Right, and permitted it to be entered in their Journals as the
Great Standard of Liberty) is not unknown: from which time it has been
esteemed the second Great Charter of England, whereby we were manumitted into
that degree of Freedom, as no Subjects in the world enjoy the like, with like
security from the fear of future bondage: For as no man can be made liable to
the payment of any more or other Taxes then what himself lays upon himself, by
his representatives in that great Pan-Anglio, called the Parliament; so all the
Kings of England since that time, have been pleased to accept the Aids given by
them, even for the necessary support of the Government, as so many
Freewill-Offerings: And well it is that they esteem them free, since they are
not obtained without a kind of Composition, I might say obligation, to give
good Laws for good money, wherein the performance on the Princes part always
precedes that on the Peoples.

But there is yet something further then all this that renders the Norman
Conquest so much more considerable then either that of the Romans, Saxons, or
Danes; by how much it spread its wings over the Seas, into those goodly
Provinces of the South, never known to the English before: thereby not only
giving them Title to keep their Swords from rusting, as long as they had any
Arms to draw them forth, but the Advantage therewithal of a mutual Conversation
with a civilized People, who introduced so happy a Change in Laws and Language,
in Habits and Humors, in Manners and Temperature, that not only their rough, I
might say rude Natures (no way inclined before to any kind of Gaiety) admitted
of smoother Fashions and quicker Motions, but their dull Phlegmatic
Complexions (pale and wan by the continued use of dozing dreggy Liquor, Ale)
became as ruddy as the Wine they drank, which having more of Spirit and Fire
then that other heavy composition, sublimated their Courage and Wit, and
rendered them more lofty and eloquent, both in Action and Language; the last
being before so asperous, harsh, and gutteral, that an hours discourse together
would have endangered the skin of their throats, but being softened by the
French and Latin Accents, it became so gentle and smooth, that as a Modern
Master of Elocution has observed, it is now so soft and pleasing, that Lord
Faulkland Prefat. to Sands his Translation of the Psalms.
-- those
From whom the unknown Tongue conceals the Sense,
Even in the sound must find an Eloquence.


From the Normans likewise we had that honorable distinction of Sirnames,
which however they borrowed in the first place from the French, (who, as Du
Tillet tells us, were about the year 1000 much delighted with the humor of
Soubriquets, Vid Buck. Vit. Rich. 3.
or giving one another Nic-names (as we commonly call them) insomuch that two
of the very chiefest Houses amongst them, the Capets and the Plantaginets, had
no other rise for their Names) were continued no where with that certainty and
order as amongst us here, to the great renown and honor of our Families, whose
Nobility, if it exceed not the date of the Norman Conquest, may yet without any
disparagement, compare with any of those who call themselves the unconquered
Nations of the World. It being space long enough, considering the vicissitude
of time, and power of Chance, to antiquate the glory of great States, much more
of private Families, and few there are that have attained to that Age. For
however Honor (like old Age) magnifies its reverence by multiplying its years,
yet it is to be considered, that there are visible decays attend Veneration,
and it may so fall out, that Names as well as Men may outlive themselves,
while the glory of a Family, by over-length of time, being less known, may be
the more suspected to have been but imaginary; as some, who exceeding the
common bounds of certainty, do pretend to justify their Gentility by Charters
from St. Edward, and others from King Edgar, whose Pedigrees do yet fall short
of many of the Welsh by many Descents.

In fine, from the Normans we first learned how to appear like a People
completely civilized being, as more elegant in our Fashions, so more sumptuous
in our Dwellings, more magnifick in our Retinue, not to say choicer in our
Pleasures, yet withal more frugal in our Expenses: For the English being
accustomed to bury all their Rents in the Draught, knowing no other way to
outvie one another, but (as a Jaq. Praslin Progmat.
French Writer expresses it) by a kind of greasy Riot, which under the
specious Name of Hospitality, turned their Glory into Shame, began after the
Conquest to consume the Superfluity of their Estates, in more lasting Excesses;
turning their Hamlets into Villes, their Villages into Towns, and their Towns
into Cities, adorning those Cities with goodly Castles, Palaces, and Churches,
which being before made up of that we call Flemmish Work (which is only Wood
and Clay) were by the Normans converted into Brick and Stone; which till their
coming, was so rarely used, that Mauritius Bishop of London, being about to
re-edifie Paul's Church, burned in the Year 1086. was, either for want of
Workmen, Materials, or both, necessitated not only to fetch all his Stone out
of Normandy, but to form it there. So that we may conclude, if the Conqueror
had not (as he did) obliged the English to a grateful continuance of his
Memory, by personal and particular Immunities, yet he deserved to be Eternized
for this, that he elevated their minds to a higher point of Grandeur and
Magnificence, and rendered the Nation capable of greater Undertakings, whereby
they suddenly became the most opulent and flourishing People of the World,
advanced in Shipping, Mariners, and Trade, in Power External as well as
Internal; witness no less then two Kings made Prisoners here at one time; one
of them the very greatest of Europe: whereby they increased their public
Revenues, as well as their private Wealth, even to the double recompensing the
loss sustained by his Entry, whilst himself, however supposed by that big
sounding Title of Conqueror, to have been one of the most absolute Princes we
had, got not so much ground while he was living, as to bury him here when he
was dead, but with much ado obtained a homely Monument in his Native Soil.

THE ORDER AND SUCCESSION OF THE Norman Kings.
I. known by that terrible Name of the Conqueror, gave the English by one
single Battle, so sad experience of their own weakness, and his power, that
they universally submitted to him; whereby becoming the first King of England
of the Norman Race, he left that Glory to be inherited by his second Son II.
surnamed Rufus, who being the eldest born after he was a King, and a Native of
this Country, succeeded with as much satisfaction to the English, as to
himself, but dying without Issue, left his younger Brother III. surnamed
Beauclark, to succeed, in whose Fortune all his Friends were as much deceived
as in his Parts (his Father only excepted) who foretold he would be a King,
when he scarce left him enough to support the dignity of being a Prince. As he
set aside his elder Brother, Robert Duke of Normandy, so he was requited by a
like Judgment upon his Grandson, the Son of his Daughter Maud, who was set
aside by IV. Earl of Blois, his Cousin; but she being such a woman as could
indeed match any man, disputed her Right so well with him, that however she
could not regain the Possession to her self, she got the Inheritance fixed upon
her Son V. the first of that Name and Race, and the very greatest King that
ever England knew, but withal the most unfortunate: and that which made his
misfortunes more notorious, was, that they rose out of his own Bowels; his
Death being imputed to those only to whom himself had given life, his
ungracious Sons, the eldest whereof that survived him, succeeded by the Name of
VI. whose undutifulness to his Father was so far retorted by his Brother, that
looking on it as a just Judgment upon him, when he dyed he desired to be buried
as near his Father as might be possible, in hopes to meet the sooner, and ask
forgiveness of him in the other World: his Brother VII. surnamed Lackland, had
so much more lack of Grace, that he had no manner of sense of his Offense,
though alike guilty; who after all his troubling the World, and being troubled
with it, neither could keep the Crown with honor, nor leave it in peace, which
made it a kind of Miracle, that so passionate a Prince as his Son VIII. should
bear up so long as he did, who made a shift to shuffle away fifty six years
doing nothing, or which was worse; time enough to have overthrown the tottering
Monarchy, had it not been supported by such a Noble Pillar as was his Son and
Successor IX. a Prince worthy of greater Empire then he left him; who being a
strict Observer of Opportunity (the infallible sign of Wisdom) composed all the
differences that had infested his Fathers, Grandfathers, and
Great-Grand-fathers Governments; and had questionless dyed as happy as he was
glorious, had his Son X. answered expectation, who had nothing to glory in, but
that he was the Son of such a Father, and the Father of such a Son as XI. who
was no less fortunate then valiant, and his Fortune the greater by a kind of
Antiperistasis, as coming between two unfortunate Princes, Successor to his
Father, and Predecessor to his Grandson XII. the most unfortunate Son of that
most fortunate Father Edward, commonly call d the Black Prince; who not having
the Judgment to distinguish betwixt Flatterers and Friends, fell (like his
Great-Grand-father) the miserable example of Credulity, being deposed by his
Cousin XIII. the first King of the House of Lancaster, descended from a fourth
Son of Edward the Third, who being so much a greater Subject then he was a
King, 'twas thought he took the Crown out of Compassion rather then Ambition,
to relieve his oppressed Country, rather then to raise his own House; and
accordingly Providence was pleased to rivat him so fast in the Opinion of the
People, that his Race have continued (though not without great Interruption)
ever since: His Son XIV. was in that repute with the People, that they swore
Allegiance to him before he was crowned; an honor never done to any of his
Predecessors: neither was he less singular in his Fortune then his Glory:
having united the Lilies of France to the Roses of England, and made of both
one Diadem, to place on the Head of his Son XV. who whilst he was a Child could
have no sense of the honor or happiness he was born to; and when he came to be
a Man so despised it, that every Body thought him fitter to be a Priest then a
King: only those of the House of York thought him fitter to be made a Sacrifice
then a Priest; and accordingly crook-back'd Richard murdered him to make way
for his elder Brother XVI. the first King of the House of York, descended from
the fifth Son of Edward the Third, who made the White Rose to flourish as long
as Henry the fourth did the Red; and had kept it flourishing much longer, had
he not been more unfortunate, by the Ambition of those of his own, then those
of his Enemies Faction: his two Sons XVII. that should have succeeded him, with
his innocent Brother, being both murdered by their unnatural Uncle (who yet
called himself their Protector) XVIII. Duke of Gloucester, who having killed
one King before to make way for their Father, killed them afterward to make way
for himself; but his Usurpation lasted a very little while, both Nature and
Providence agreeing to deny him any Children of his own, for that he had so ill
treated those of his nearest Relation, so that for want of Issue, rather then
want of Success, the Crown came to the House of Lancaster in the Person of XIX.
a Prince that was observed to be no great Lover of Women, and yet all his
Greatness came by that Sex, that is to say, his title to, his Confirmation in,
and his Transmission of the Crown to his Posterity, whose Advent to the Crown
being foretold by no less then two Kings, Cadwallader and Henry the Sixth, the
one prophesying his union of the Britains and Normans, the other his joining of
the two Roses together, it is no marvel his Son XX. Heir by his Fathers side to
the House of Lancaster; by his Mothers side to the House of York, entered with
so general a satisfaction to all at home, and with so great a terror to all
abroad, that they submitted to make him great Arbiter of Christendom: his Son
XXI. being very young when he dyed, and dying before he was sixteen years old,
had not time to lay a suitable Superstructure upon his Foundation, whereby the
glory of his Family past away to his Sister XXII. who wasted as much blood to
show her self to be Defender of the Faith, as her Father before to make good
his being Head of the Church; her Successor XXIII. worthily entitled her self
to both, declining the being a Mother of Children, to the end she might be a
Nursing Mother of the Church, which having defended with great honor and
success for forty six years together, dying she bequeathed a Peace to her
Kingdoms, and her Kingdoms to that pacifick Prince, James the Sixth of
Scotland, who began the next Dynasty.
WILLIAM I.
Attributed coat of arms of King William I: gules, two lions passant guardant
in pale or. THIS William, the Seventh Duke, and first King of all the Normans,
having laid the Life and Ambition of Harold in one Grave, so terrified the
English with the apprehensions of his Fortune, as well as his Power, that they
began to be of the same opinion with his own People, that the Dirt he took up
in his hands, when he fell down at his first landing upon the slimy Shore of
Sussex, was a Livery and Seisin given him of the whole Land by Providence; and
accordingly they submitted to his Success, before they could come to submit to
him, declaring themselves his Subjects, before he thought fit to declare
himself their Sovereign: who (as scorning to take advantage of their fears) did
not march up immediately to the chief City and make that usual haste most
Conquerors do (who commonly follow Fame close upon the heels, that so they may
enter the Gates with her) but made his approaches so slowly and leisurely, that
his march looked more like a Progress then a Pursuit: whereby seeming to have
no distrust, he at once tried and assured their affections to him, having the
good hap to be received rather like a Guest then an Enemy, not as an Alien
(however a Stranger) but as one that had the same blood running in his Veins,
and as they hoped, something of the same good Nature in that Blood, as their
beloved King Edward had, by whose Will he chose to make his Title, rather then
by his own Sword; and by that modesty of his took off much of the rancor and
inflammation from the wounds he had given the common sort, though he took off
but little from the fears of the wiser sort, who knowing his Power to be as
wide as his Will, did not irrationally conclude that to be as boundless as his
Ambition.

The only Province refused to swim down the common stream of Servitude were
those of Kent (the first Invaders when the English came in, the last Invaded at
the coming in of these Normans) who yet only made a Pause as it were, to file
their Fetters smoother, and make them easy by such Conditions, which pleasing
themselves, might not be distastful to him. After this there were some attempts
to set up Edgar by some of the discontented Nobility, who though they appeared
to be but like Drones, which make a great noise without being able to sting,
yet they provoked him so far, that every Body expected he would take that
occasion to make himself a real, instead of an imaginary Conqueror, nothing so
much advancing Sovereignty as unsuccessful Rebellions: but as the Lion disdains
to fall upon those Beasts that crouch and prostrate themselves at his feet; so
he, scorning that any who submitted to him, should have so much the better of
him, as not to be pardoned, prevented their Fears by a general Indemnity, in
which he did not except against his very Rival Edgar; who, however he had in
respect to his Title of Athelin (which was as much as to say the Darling) some
place in his Caution, was it seems, so much below his Jealousy, that when he
came to render himself (as after he did) with all humility upon his knee, he
received him with that magnanimous declaration, Petits se vengent je pardonne;
his Generosity so far vying with his Magnanimity, that as he pitied, so he
preferred him, making up in happiness what he denied him in greatness, whilst
he allowed him a competent support, to maintain the respects due to his Birth,
secured from the danger of suspicion.

But it was not in the power of his Clemency, Courage, or Wisdom, so to oblige,
overawe, or satisfy the common People, but that Envy, Ignorance, or Malice,
found out frequent occasions of complaint and murmur; some repining at the new
Laws they understood not; others at the continuation of the old they understood
but too well: amongst which that of the Burrough-Law seemed to be no small
grievance, in respect they were so bound for each other, or rather one to the
other, that like tedder'd Horses, they could not break out of their bounds: all
thinking it grievous (so hard of digestion is every thing that savours of
Conquest) to be wrested from their present usages and forms of S^ate, though
the change was much for the better: as when he confined the Bishops to the rule
of Souls only, who before assisted with the Greve or Alderman (as he was then
called) that is, the Earl of every County, were absolute Judges in all Cases,
and over all Persons; and when in the room of the Greve he constituted Judges
of Oyer and Terminer by special Commission, to decide all matters of Law,
assisted by vid. Holinshed 8 but some Lawyers are of opinion, Justices of Peace
came not in till the time of Edw. 1. neither is the name of Justices of the
Peace to be found in Terminis, till the Stat 36. of Ed. 3. c. 12. till when
they were named Justices Itinerant, or Justices in Air.
Justices of the Peace (as he called them) taken out of the Minores Nobiles of
every County, who were made Judges of Record, and from henceforth had the power
de Vita and de Membro (as the Lawyers express it) the mighty Current of the
Earl's Power that had overborn whomever he had a mind to destroy, was on the
sudden sunk so low, by the running down of Justice and Judgment in so many
lesser streams, that every man, how mean soever, could wade through a Suit
without fear of being overwhelmed, it being impossible to suffer but by
Judgment of his Inquest (as it was then, and has been ever since called) which
consisting of twelve men, could not have continued thus long, after so many
strivings and struglings for Liberty, as have been since that time, had not the
wisdom of so many Ages judged it to be the greatest privilege the Subject
could be capable of, being that indeed which no less Circumscribes the
Sovereigns Power, then the Subjects Obedience; so that doubtless he hoped to
naturalize himself by it into their good opinion and liking: But that which
frighted them most, was the black Censual Roll (therefore called by that dismal
Name of the Doomsday Book) which discovering the secrets of their Estates, left
them under strange apprehensions of ensuing Oppression and Tyranny; however, it
was no otherwise intended, then as an Instrument to confirm his own, by
establishing their Rights and Proprieties, which having been before under a
very uncertain Title, and very odly qualified (the Tenures of That is, by
Charter or Writing.
Bokeland, which they called Freehold, belonging only to the Nobility, being
perchance no better then the ancient Fifes that depended on the Will of the
first Donors) he made absolute and hereditary. The Tenure of Or the Land of the
common Fo^k.
Folkland (which was without Writing, and so much worse then Tenants at Will at
this day, that we need not doubt to call it Villenage) he changed into Estates
for Life, which have since showed us the way to those in Tail: neither did he
clog their Estates with many Taxes (however reputed very avaricious) but found
out many witty sleights to avoid the necessity of Land Taxes, as knowing how
clamorous and burdensome they are, laying only that of Escuage upon them,
which yet was done by way of composition rather then imposition; in lieu of
which he took off that of Danegelt, which was sufficient, one would have
thought, to have abated the Grievance.

Yet such was their Obstinacy, Ingratitude, or Disdain, that they never ceased
to plot or practice Treason against him, giving him renewed Jealousies from
their successive, and like to prove successful Conspiracies, which as great
Waves, came thick upon the back of one another, never breaking, but with so
apparent danger, as threatened him with a wreck in Port, after his escape of all
the storms at Sea: First Edric the Forrester encouraged by the Welsh; after
Edwin and Morcar, Brothers to the late Queen, encouraged by the Scots, thinking
their splendour eclipsed by the interposition of so many stranger Princes, as
waited daily in his Court, flew to Arms, and drew many after them of the Lay
Nobility; whilst the two Archbishops who followed them, were attended by as
strong a Party of the Clergy; the first pretended to make the war legal, the
last to render it meritorious: and whiles he set himself to suppress this
danger in the North, a new Rebellion presented it self in the West: The
Citizens of Exeter and those of Oxford, encouraged by the report of new Forces
brought out of Ireland by the Sons of Harold, not only shut up their Gates, but
persuaded the Countries also round about to expostulate their Liberties, with
Swords in their hands: and whilst he turns to these, they of the North are
reinforced again by the arrival of two Sons of Swain King of Denmark, with a
Fleet of no less then 300 Sail: and whilst he sent another Party to confront
these, there rose a storm behind them out of the Isle of Ely: and after all
this, the wide distent of these Tumors (fed from many secret Veins) swelled up
into a general Combination of all the Neighbor Princes together: so that no
less then six Kings drew upon him at once; the King of France, who had 100000
men in readiness to invade him in Normandy; the King of Denmark, who had
prepared a Navy of 1600 Sail to invade him by Sea; the King of Ireland, who
appeared with 65 Sail more to second him; and the Kings of Scotland and Wales
opening their Ports to let them in: This, though it made the danger seem so
much the more considerable, by how much it was scarce to be prevented, without
such a vast Expense of Treasure and Blood, as might hazard an irrecoverable
Consumption, if not put him again to the winning of England; yet the
resolutions of his great Mind being prae-ordain'd for the great work he had
undertaken, he showed no manner of Consternation at all: till at last a way was
found to bring himself against himself, by setting up his eldest Son Robert, to
disseize him of the Duchy of Normandy without any color of Right. This
Rebellion indeed was so much the more grievous to him, because unnatural, and
therefore the only one he thought fit to repress by the Authority of his own
Presence: wherein he proceeded not as one that went to take revenge upon an
Enemy, or reduce a Rebel, but as he ought to chastize an undutiful Son,
proceeding however with that calmness, as if he designed to defeat his
Enterprise, and not him; or in truth rather to surprise then subdue him,
casting about how he might make him more ashamed then afraid, not doubting, but
(like Caesar) to overcome him as soon as he came over to him; but such was the
malignity of his Stars, as to make his Son a double Conqueror over him: first
in commanding his life, which showed his Power, then in giving it back again to
him, which showed his Piety: but this, as it was too great a Gift to be
acknowledged or forgotten; so he received it with such inward indignation as
showed he only pardoned what he could not punish: But it appeared afterward
that it was not in the young Rebels power to give back the life he had
proceeded so near taking away, for the wound in his Spirit was so much deeper
then any of those on his Body, that it could never be cured, however skinned
over, bleeding inwardly unperceived till he died; which however it were not
long after, yet he out lived most of those great men that were Actors with him
in his Undertakings, and left not the world till he had sufficiently requited
the King of France for this unpardonable injury of seducing his Son, taking a
slight occasion from a Jest, to show how much he was in Earnest in his Revenge.
For that King having scoffed at his great Belly, saying, That he lay in when he
was sick at Roan; he returned him word, That he should have notice of his
Upsitting by the many Bonefires he would make in the heart of his Country.
Neither was he worse then his Promise, for he depopulated all the Towns of note
that lay in his way, till he came to Mants; in the destruction of which goodly
City he got his own, the Ream of his Belly being broke (as it is thought) by a
sudden leap of his Horse, frighted at the sight of the Conflagrations) as he
passed by the burning Ruins. Thus ended this great Conqueror, and with him all
his Greatness, being left by all the World almost as soon as he left it; not
only by those to whom he had given a livelihood, but by those to whom he had
given life, every one of them forsaking him, to scramble for what he left: his
eldest Son hastened away to take possession of his Duchy of Normandy; his
second Son to Invest himself in his Kingdom of England; only he to whom
providentially he had left no home, was the man stayed to bring him to his long
home; which yet could not be done without much disaster and interruption: for
as 'twas three days before his Body was moved from the place where he dyed, so
'twas twice three before his Son Henry could get any to undertake the conveying
it to Cane, where 'twas to be buried: after it came there, 'twas left the
second time alone in the street by those that carried it, who took occasion, it
seems, to run all away to quench a Fire that broke out of a House by which they
were to pass; and being with all this ado brought afterward to his Grave, one
stepped forth and forbid the Interment, till they compounded for the Ground he
was to be buried in. Thus like that great Conqueror, who thought the World too
little to contain him whilst he lived, but being dead could scarce obtain so
much Earth as to cover his naked Corpse; it was accounted no small part of his,
as of the others happiness, that he met with a Grave at last.

Sufficit and magno parva Domus Domino. A little Dormitory, it seems, sufficed;
and well had it been if it had not proved too little: for being straightened so
much that they were fain to compress his Body in letting it in, they thereby
let out such a stanch, as made every Body leave him again the third time: so
that it was not known who covered the Corpse with Earth, at least it was better
known who uncovered it: the frowardness of his Destiny being such, that it
would not permit this to be the last indignity offered to him, but as if it had
been decreed in Heaven, that he who disturbed so many living, should himself
have no rest in death; his Bones, 100 years after he was buried, were taken up
and cast into the Streets, by certain dissolute Soldiers, that in the year
1562. rifled his Tomb, in hopes of finding Treasure, with like Avarice as he
before had rifled all his Neighbors Countries, in hopes of finding Glory.

WILLIAM II.
Attributed coat of arms of King William II: gules, two lions passant guardant
in pale or. THE Conqueror having three Sons, and but two Principalities, took
such care in framing his Will, that each might have cause to acknowledge his
Bounty, if not confess his Justice: To Robert, the firstborn, whilst he was a
Duke, he left his Duchy: To this William the second (who yet was the third
Son) but eldest born after he was King, he gave his Kingdom, thinking it most
fit to join the honor of his Conquest to that of his Name: to Henry the
youngest, he gave a good Sword and a good Purse; with the first to defend
himself against his Enemies, with the last against his Friends; either of them
good Earnests for a Scepter, expectant upon the death of either of his
Brothers, and of good use to him whilst they were living; for with the first he
might cut all the knots that he found at any time to be entangled beyond hope
of untying; and with the last turn the Scale, as often as he perceived Might to
overcome Right: And to say truth, he did so well manage either, keeping the
unequal Interests of his two potent Brothers evenly poised, that neither being
able to get much the better of other, himself got the better of both; and
without a Title to eithers, became at last Lord (as his Father prophesied) of
both their Estates.

These three brave Sons standing thus, as it were in a Triangle, at the death
of their Father, equidistant one from the other, without any visible
disproportion in Power, Parts, or Reputation: the first representing him as he
was a King, the other as Duke, and the third as Conqueror, which made them
alike Obstinate, Ambitious, and Emulous of each others Glory, it is no marvel
that the Feuds betwixt themselves only took up all the action of their time,
and left no room for any other Competitors to come in betwixt them: But that
which seems more rare, is the vicissitude of their love and hate, each of them,
as his squint-eyed interest moved him to change his ground, retaining still the
affections of a Brother, even whilst he acted as an Enemy. For first the
younger assisted the elder against the middle Brother; then the middle
compounded with the elder, to be revenged on the younger Brother; after this
again the younger reconciles himself to his middle Brother in order to
obtaining satisfaction from the elder, who after this agreed with the middle
(as he before with him) to fall both upon the younger Brother; in the last
place they all united and agreed but upon such terms, that their Union set them
worse at variance then before; so that every one of them stood off, and acted
singly for himself, each against other, and each against two: In conclusion,
the elder was dispossessed by the middle Brother, and he forced by death to
yield up all to the younger; and so they inherited their Fathers Lands, he only
his Fortune; but all were alike Inheritors of his Troubles, who has this Remark
upon him, That he never had rest living or dead; his Bones being divided, as
well as his Children; each part of his Dominions claiming a share of them, as
each of his Sons of these.

Having viewed them thus together, let us look upon this King single; who,
however he is drawn but with an half face, like one of the Caesar's, appears to
have been the most like his Father of all the Brothers, there being no other
difference betwixt them but this, that the one was always a Conqueror, the other
never conquered: For as he had his Fathers Courage to encounter Dangers, so he
had his wisdom and readiness of mind to extricate himself out of them, and ever
fell like a Cube upon his bottom, let Fortune hurl him whither she would,
making his Enemies glad to be his Friends, when all the Friends he had, almost
were become his Enemies; standing so firmly, even whiles he was forced to take
in the points of as many Swords as had been before drawn upon his Father, that
nothing could move him. The first that set upon him was his Brother Robert, who
(as if afraid to look him in the face) tampered with those nearest in Trust
about him, to wound him in the back, before he came to close grapple with him;
or rather tried, if possible, to spring a Mine under his Throne, whilst he
began his Battery at farther distance: Principal Engineer in this Plot was his
discontented Uncle Odo Bishop of Bayeulx, who designing to oblige both Normans
and English to conspire with him, took in the first by declaring to set up
their beloved Duke Robert for life; and deceived the last by promising to
settle the Reversion of the Sovereignty on their Darling Prince Edgar, whom
therefore he put into the hands of Duke Robert, for the Security (as he
pretended) of both: Robert receiving him as his Homager, and Edgar looking on
him as his Protector; whilst Odo pleased himself with having both within his
own reach, whenever he saw cause to declare for himself.

This Storm spread it self very wide; for Odo fortified in Kent, where he might
be assisted by the King of France if need were: William Bishop of Durham
engaged all the Northern Countries, where they might expect help from the King
of Scots: others secured Herefordshire, Shropshire, and Worcestershire, where
they might readily have aid from the Welsh; whilst Roger Mountgomery raised up
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire, and Hugh de Grandmenill led up those of
Leicestershire and Northamptonshire to face him. This as it was the best
formed, so it was the most formidable Rebellion we meet with in all our Story,
founded on such sure grounds, and managed by such sure men, that King Williams
Council could not tell where to begin, nor whither to turn them: but he himself
being as quick of apprehension as of action, takes the measure of his hopes
from that of their fears, and whilst they judged it hard to repress them,
because they were thus divided, he took that advantage to break them like
single sticks, as he found them lie scattered one from the other; who, had they
been united under one Bond, could not have been so easily confounded. After
which he healed the wounds he gave them, by gentle Lenitives, relaxing their
Tributes, remitting their Privileges, and indulging them to that degree, as
never any King before him did; by which means he prevailed with the very same
men to carry the War into Normandy, whereby wounding his Brother Robert with
the very Arrows taken out of his own Quiver, and the same which he had directed
against him, it appears how much he had the better of him in point of
Understanding, as well as of Power. This breach with the elder, gave him the
first occasion of breaking with his younger Brother; for having a strong Army
on foot, Duke Robert after his having concluded a dishonorable Peace with him,
desired his aid in reducing the Castle of Mount St. Michael, detained from him
by Prince Henry, who being not paid the money he had lent him to carry on the
War against King William (for Robert had pawned to him the Country of
Constantine, but afterward took it away again) seized upon this Castle, in
hope, by the help of some Britains he had hired to serve him for his Money, to
have done himself right: but Robert made this advantage of the dis-advantage
King William had brought upon him, to engage him in reducing the other unhappy
Prince, that doing a kindness to one, lost both his Brothers; the one taking
offense at his demand, the other at the Occasion; whereby both set upon him at
once, and besieging him forty days, brought him to the point of yiedling: but
the same evil Spirit that first divided them to do more mischief, did this good
to unite them again, working upon the good Nature of Duke Robert, and the ill
Nature of King William, the same effect: for upon his Submission, William to be
revenged on Robert, for having entertained his Competitor Atheling, judged
Henry to be satisfied his Debt by a day certain, out of those very Lands which
the other had assigned to Atheling for a Pension; upon which Robert's pity
turned immediately into spite, and when Henry came for his Money, he clapped
him up in Prison, and kept him in Duress till he released the Debt.

Henry complaining of this Injustice to the King of France (his Brother William
being then returned into England) was by him put into Arms again; and by the
surprising the Castle of Damfront, recovered back most of his Security, with
all the Country of Passais besides. Robert hereupon pleads that King William
had failed of paying him in certain Sums of Money, due by promise to satisfy
Henry, and that by reason of this failure he could not perform with him; and to
satisfy himself for the Damages done him by this pretended breach of Williams,
he fell upon King William's Castles: This drew him over the second time,
whether to right Prince Henry or himself, was not declared; who putting on a
Vizard of Indignation to afright Duke Robert, as if he had intended nothing
less then the Conquest of all Normandy, sends back into England for an Army of
30000 to join with those Forces he had there; by the fame whereof having done
more then perhaps any body could with the men themselves, if they had arrived,
he sent private Orders to his General, being then at the Waterside, to dismiss
every man that would lay down ten shillings: by which queint trick of State,
never practiced before, he raised so great a Sum, as not only served to pay the
King of France his Bribe, for not assisting his Brother Robert, and to defray
his own present charge, but in effect to purchase all Normandy, which thereupon
was Mortgaged to him by Robert, to furnish himself for that great Expedition of
recovering the Holy Land from the Infidels: An Undertaking politickly
recommended by Urban the Second, to all such Princes as he feared, or had a
mind to fool, as so meritorious a work, that it was indeed (as he represented
the matter) a kind of taking Heaven by Violence, whereby he so wrought upon the
easy Faith of that Active and Ignorant Age, that without any great difficulty
he prevailed with them to cast themselves under a voluntary Ostracisme, whilst
himself, and those that were Parties in that holy Cheat (imbarazed in a Contest
with the Emperor about Superiority) were delivered from the men of Power and
Credit they most suspected to take part with him; and by the purchase of their
Estates and Seigniories, greatly enriched the Church af erward.

King William thus happily rid of his elder Brother (who as I said before had
pawned his own Land, to recover that for the Church) was at leisure to return
home to make even all reckonings with his elder Enemy the King of Scots, by
whose death and his Sons (both killed in the act of Invasion) he made himself
so far Master of their Country, as to compel them to accept a King from him,
who having served him in his Wars, and being for that Service preferred by him,
they durst not yet refuse, though they might reasonably expect he would be
always at his Devotion. This made the King of France so jealous of his growing
Greatness, that to prevent his coming over Sea again, he tampered with the
discontented Norman Nobility to set up Stephen E. of Albemarle, his Fathers
Sisters Son, upon what pretense of Right appears not, but he whose manner 'twas
to meet danger, and not tarry till it found him out, prevented the Conspiracy
by seizing on the chief Conspirators, Mowbray, d'Ou, and d'Alveric, who being
the first Examples of his Severity, were so cruelly treated, that if any men
could be said to be murdered by the Sword of Justice they were; but the Ill of
this Severity had that good effect, that this first Instance of his Cruelty
made it the last occasion to him to show it, so that from that time all War
ceasing, he betook himself to the pleasures of Peace.

And now deeming himself most secure, he met with an unavoidable (I cannot say
unexpected) Fate, for, like Caesar his Parallel, he had sufficient warning of
it both by his own and his Friends Dreams the night before; the Nature whereof
was such as he could not but contemn it, because he could not understand it;
and having never been daunted by his Enemies, he was ashamed to seem now afraid
of himself: however, the perplexity of his thoughts disordered him so far, that
in despite of his natural Courage (which was perhaps as great as ever any man's
was) he could not find in his heart to go out all the morning of that day he
was killed: and at Dinner (which argued some failure of his Spirits) he drank
more freely then his usual custom was, that accelerated his Fate by taking off
his Caution: so that after Dinner he would needs go hunt in the New Forest,
and taking his Bow to shoot a Deer in that ominous place, where before a His
Brother Richard.
Brother and a The Son of Robert Duke of Normandy his elder Broth r.
Brothers Son of his had both met with violent Deaths; Tyrel his Bow-bearer
being placed right against him, as the best Marks-man, let fly an Arrow, that
glancing against a Bough, missed the Deer, and found out him; -- and Pectus dum
perforat ingens,
Ille rapit calidum frustra de Vulnere Telum,
Una eademque via Sanguisque Animusque sequuntur.


HENRY I.
Attributed coat of arms of King Henry I: gules, two lions passant guardant in
pale or. IT was observed, that there was something in the Fate of this King, as
well as in his Education, that had fitted him for Majesty, long before Majesty
was fitted for him: For besides that he had the reputation of being a good
Scholar, and a good Sword-man, which spoke his Wit and his Courage, and made
every body conclude he would be as fortunate as forward, he had no small
advantage, by that which is commonly a loss to other Princes, to wit, his
Juniority; whilst being born after his Father was King in England, he not only
entitled himself to the possession of the Soil, as his Native Country, but to
the affections of the People, as their Countryman, who therefore was to be
preferred before a Stranger: and being fortunately upon the place, at the time
of the unfortunate death of his Brother William, could not but be more
acceptable then one so far distant out of sight as his Brother Robert: Neither
was he slow in taking his advantage, finding his way made plain, and prepared
by a more then ordinary respect of the superstitious Rabble, upon the account
of a Prophecy his Father uttered on his Deathbed (the time when men are most
inspired, and their words (as being their last) the most regarded) who
observing him discontented; because his Portion was much less than that of
either of his Brothers, and that only a transitory Estate in Money, without
House or Land; said to him, Harry be content, Robert must have Normandy, and
Will England, but thou in due time wilt have both. Which considered, as it
prae-occupated the Op^nion of the Vulgar, so the Judicious were so apt to
believe it, that the bare possession of England sufficiently entitled him to
Normandy of course: and to confirm their Expectations, he caused it to be
bruited abroad that Duke Robert had no intention to return out of Palestine,
but tarried to be made King of Jerusalem.

Being thus quietly stated, he sweetened his Government by taking off all Taxes,
to show his Beneficence; and some of the principal Taxers, to show his Justice:
By the first he pleased the Multitude, in point of Relief; by the other the
better sort, in point of Envy and Revenge; gratifying their Spleen, by
sacrificing the griping Bishop of Durham; a man, who being raised from a base
Condition by baser means, had attained to the honor of being Chief Minister to
his Brother King William, and was grown learned in the Science of selling
Justice; by the distribution of whose Bribes, he bribed those whom he thought
fit to make his own Ministers: neither thought it he enough to be an English
man himself, without assuring the State that he intended all his Posterity
should be so too: and therefore, to the end to make sure the wise men, that
were as apt to be jealous, as the weaker sort to be querulous, he married Maud,
Sister to the Scotch King, and Daughter to Margaret, Sister to Edgar Atheling,
the right Heir of the English Blood: a Lady that brought him an Inheritance of
Goodness from her Mother, and a good Title of Inheritance from her Uncle.

Thus firmly did he entrench himself before his Brother (whom he had made a
King in fame only, that he might the easier make himself a real one) returned
home; who arriving unlooked for, was welcomed by the Nobility of Normandy with
more then ordinary Joy: by whom being informed of what was done in England, he
made it the business of the first year, to provide an Army, and in the second
landed it at Portsmouth, in order to the recovery of his lost Right: whereof he
was the more assured, in respect of those of the Norman Nobility here, as he
thought inclined to him, who moved with revenge or discontent, would be glad of
any Occasion to Revolt: This, as it was a storm King Henry saw at a distance,
so he provided so well for it, by cutting off all Assistances, that Duke Robert
and those with him, doubting the success, and seeing themselves certainly lost,
if they prevailed not (it being in his power to fight them where he pleased,
and when) upon his desire to save the effusion of Christian Blood, yielded to
Articles of Peace; the Substance whereof was this, That Henry being born after
his Father was rightfully King, and being now invested in the Crown by act of
the Kingdom, should enjoy the same during life, and pay Robert 3000 Marks per
Annum, as an Earnest of the Reversion after his Death, in case Robert outlived
him.

With these Conditions Robert rather blinded then satisfied, returns back again
into his own Country; and it had been well if he had never been blinded
otherwise: But such is the frenzy of Ambition, that it suffers not unhappy
Princes to consider either what they ought to do, or what to suffer, whilst
like the Superior Orbs, they are hurried with restless Motion, without
understanding by what Intelligences they are actuated. Finding himself fallen
from the height of his Expectation, into some degree of Contempt with his own
Subjects, he assai'd by Profusion (which some call Liberality) to raise his
Reputation, at least to disguise his Impotency, spending so freely, that the
Nobility fearing the Revenues of the Duchy would not suffice to support his
vanity, complained thereof to King Henry; who, to show his own power and
to others weakness, sent for him over to chide him, and indeed reprehended him
so sharply, as if he had been his Father, and not his Brother; and as if he
would have him to know, he rather expected the Reversion of the Dukedom after
his death, then to be accomptable to him for the Kingdom after his own: and
whether it were that he threatened him with a Detention of his Pension, or drew
him, being of a yielding Nature (as most indigent men are) to give him a
release for some inconsiderable Sum of ready Money, is not certain: but so it
was, that upon his return, he could no longer conceal the indignation he had
conceived at it, but took the very first Occasion to show it by joining himself
with some mutinous Lords, who having before begun an unsuccessful Combustion in
England, had fled over thither, to commit what Outrages they could there.

King Henry for a while pretended himself touched in Conscience with the
foulness of a Fraternal War, but was indeed apprehensive that such trivial
Injuries, as the taking a few Castles, was not worthy the trouble of drawing
him over in Person, at least not worth the charge of entering into such a War as
might justify the requiring his Dukedom for a satisfaction; but having let
them alone till he believed his sufferance had elevated them beyond the temper
of harkening to any conditions, he then took his time to chastise their folly,
and by one single Battle, upon the very same day, and in the very same manner
(as it is reported) that his Father just forty years before won England, he won
Normandy: and having made his brother prisoner, deprived him first of his
liberty, after of his country, and lastly of that which was dearer than either,
the light of his Eyes; requiting his attempt (which was but natural) to escape
out of prison, with a punishment that was of all other most unnatural, and as
much beyond death, as it was short of it; which inhumanity to his brother,
though it was perhaps but a just judgment from Heaven upon him for his
inhumanity to his Father, whose life he had twice attempted, being wilfully
blinded by the King of France; yet 'twas such as was altogether undeserved, as
from him: for the other had him fast enough within his power, circumscribed by
all the rules of Hostility, besieged within a Fort, and half starved; he was so
far from pressing upon him, that he pitied him, and broke with his brother
Friend to save his brother Enemy.

Poor Prince Robert, how was he betrayed by the goodness of his own Nature, and
tempted like a Child to save the bird which was to pick out his Eyes? How did
he live to see himself buried before he was dead? invelop'd in dark and dismal
thoughts, whilst he contemplated his Sons loss with more affliction than his
own: a forward Prince born to two Crowns, but now reduced to that necessity to
borrow one to buy him bread. So long as it served the King of France his turn
to serve him, he entertained him in that Court (adversity knows no other
Friends, nor upon other Terms:) But King Henry by his money quickly took him
off; and Heaven to requite the good turn not long after took off him, for whom
all this was done; punishing his unjust detaining the livelihood of his
innocent Nephew William, with taking away the life of his own innocent Son
William, the only hope of his Family, who being shipwrackt in his return out of
Normandy with a hundred and fifty Passengers more, amongst whom was his beloved
Sister the Countess of Perch, endeavoring to save her, lost himself.

This Clap of Judgment coming in a Calm of glory, when all the busling of his
Ambition seemed to be passed over, so overwhelmed the Joys of his past
successes, that as if his Conscience had shrunk at the horror of seeing his
oppression and supplantation so repaid, with the extinction of that for which
he drew all this guilt upon himself; it is said that from that time he never was
seen to laugh more: and however he strugled with Destiny for more Issue Male,
marrying not long after a most virtuous and beautiful young Lady, yet all was
in vain: The envenomed Arrow stuck still in his Liver, and for want of other
Heirs, he was forced to fasten the succession on his Daughter Maud, who being
entangled in his fate, and as apparently Planet-struck as himself, could never
attain to be a Queen, however a Duchess, and an Empress; being disappointed by
one, that had less right, and not so good pretense, as her own Father. And as
the main Line of Normandy failed in him, that was but the third Inheritor, so
the succession ever since proved so brittle, that it never held to the third
Heir in a right descent, without being put by, or receiving some alteration by
usurpation, or extinction of the Male blood, which (says mine Author) may
teach Princes to let men alone with their Rights, and God with his Providence.

But such is the unhappiness of Kings that they either understand not Destiny
so well as private Men, or cannot so readily submit to it, and as Ambition is a
restless passion, which however it may be sometimes weary, never tires; so it
urges them to be still pressing upon Fortune with hopes to compel or corrupt
her; hoping that if she will not be serviceable to them, she may at least not
oppose them. He found that this rent at home had cracked all the chain of his
courses in France (whose King took part with his Nephew William) whilst his two
great Friends, Foulk Earl of Anjou, and Robert Earl of Mellent declared against
him. Yet urged by his natural diligence or desire of Rule he could not but
still push on, till by the death of that unfortunate youth before mentioned,
all the hopes of his Brother Robert perished, and came to be entirely his: yet
neither then could he take any Rest, though he had no body to give him any
disquiet, his Conscience keeping him waking with continual Alarums, without any
kind of sleep but what was so disturbed and disorderly, as declared to the
whole World all was not well within. Often did he rise out of his Bed in the
Night, and catching up his Sword put himself into a Posture of Defense as
against some Personal assault: and sometimes in company he would catch hold of
his Servants hands, as apprehending they were about to draw upon him. Thus was
he dogged with continued fears, and those such as perhaps were Prophetical of
what followed: that some body should start up (as immediately after there did)
who taking Example from himself, should Spurn his ashes, and usurp as much upon
his Innocent Daughter and her Son, as he himself had done upon his innocent
Brother and his Son.

STEPHEN
Attributed coat of arms of King Stephen: gules, a sagittarius or shooting with
a bow and arrow. SUCH is the Curse of Usurpation that the boldness of one
commonly makes way for another Intruder. No sooner has Henry (who took place
of his elder Brother) quit the Throne, but this Stephen his Sisters Son,
without Consideration of his Elder Brother, Theobald Earl of Blois the supposed
Heir, or the Empress Maud the declared Heir, the first before him by a natural,
the last by a Judicial Right, and that to which himself had sworn; slept up to
fill the place as Heir to the People: and it happened so, that boldness in this
Case gave him a better Title than blood; the Contest being betwixt him, who
being a stranger was become a native, and her who being a native was become a
stranger: for to say truth the People did not so much elect him as reject her,
and that for diverse Reasons. 1. For the defect of her Sex, the English being no
more willing to tie their Crown to a Distaff than the French, though it were
not forbid by any pretended Law. 2. For the change of her Interest, being twice
married to Aliens, to whom she was so subject as to become her self one. 3. Out
of dislike of her Temper, being very proud and implacable, and which spoke her
to be King Henry's own Daughter, very covetous and griping; and had there not
been such objections against her, yet there were Reasons enough to justify the
wisdom of the State in the preference of this Stephen. 1. In respect of his
Person, as being nobly descended, rich, bold, wise, and magnificent: 2. In
respect to his Allies, as being Brother to two Princes, the eldest a Man of so
great possessions and power abroad, that he thought the Crown here scarce worth
the fetching, at least not worth the contesting for; the younger very popular
and potent here at home, who being Bishop of Winchester, and the Pope's Legate
was ready to undertake betwixt God and the people; for whatever his Brother
Stephen engaged to either by his Coronation Oath. 3. 'Twas not the least reason
that if they took not him they knew not where to find another of the Blood, so
fit for the Trust of his elder Brother (as I observed before) being so
indifferent in the point, that he chose rather to accept a Pension which looked
more like a New-years-gift than the price of a Scepter. 4. And lastly, the
obligation laid on him was thought to be so much the stronger, by how much his
Title was the weaker; there being a Debitum Beneficentiae, or particular Tie of
Gratitude to bind him to them, which those that presume on hereditary
succession seldom or never own; wherein they were not deceived, for his
performances exceeded his promises so much, that he may be said to purchase
what they gave, buying then Love and fidelity by the Relaxation of his Taxes,
and the Grant of many Privileges and Immunities, which none of his Predecessors
could be brought to part with; this Bounty of his being joined with that
Moderation, that not only his Friends, but many his Adversaries were persuaded
to acknowledge him: insomuch that the King of France his greatest, David King of
Scots his nearest, and even Geoffry Earl of Anjus his most inveterate Enemy;
the first being Cousin German, the second Uncle, and the third Husband to her
that had the competition with him, came all in, and closed upon such Terms with
him, that they quit all their former pretensions, and left the unfortunate Lady
to try for her self; who though she had no other ground to hope she might get
the better of him in public, but that she had (if she were not belied) worsted
him oftentimes before in private, yet her resolutions were so well fixed, that
she set upon him single. However guarded as well as Power, Policy, and a great
Purse could do it, having not above a hundred and fifty Persons in her Train at
her first landing, and believing she had matter enough prepared to see their
whole Kingdom in a flame (the Castles of Bristow, Hereford, Ludlow, Shrewsbury
etc. declaring for her) in that Confidence she began a War, which for the
variety of success, revolts, surprizings, and recourrings is not less pleasant
in the relation than it was perplexed in the Action.

The Breach at which she first entered was made by King Stephen himself, who
foreseeing the approaching mischief, drew on the evil he would avoid by the
same way he thought to prevent it: for suspecting the Castles he had permitted
to be new built, with purpose to have broken the force of any overrunning
Invasion, might now as well become receptacles to the adverse Party; he
commanded them to be delivered up into his hands for securing the public
Peace. This begat a general murmr, that a dispute among the proprietors,
whereof those of most note being Clergymen, and Lords of great power and
stomach, presuming upon the Obligation he had to the Church, which (as they
said) advanced him to the Crown without any military help, refused so give up
their Keys into the hands of Laymen, upon whom as they thought he had not the
like tie of honor nor honesty as upon themselves. Hereupon the Legate
interposed, who holding himself nearer allied to his Brother Prelates than to
his Brother King, urged the question of privilege so far, that 'twas thought
there wanted nothing but an opportunity to show they could more willingly quit
their Allegiance (as they had done their Liberty) than their possessions: for
King Stephen upon their refusal to obey his Order, clapped up several of them in
prison. This opportunity Maud by her arrival rather gave than took, when she
made up the Cry, and joined her claim with theirs, and thereby made the War to
be felt before it was perceived: which spread it self like a burning Fever
through all the veins of the body politic, but raged by Fits only; it so
happening that they were not seldom parted by the said new built Castles they
contested for; many of which standing neuter give stops to their Fury, as if
intended by Providence to allay their heat till it were temperate enough to
admit of some Parley: but that proving ineffectual, like Game-cocks,
aftertaking breath they fell to it afresh with equal force and equal
confidence, the whole Nation being divided betwixt them according to their
several interest for affections, some taking part with her, others with him;
these to discharge their Consciences, those their honor, some to advance their
fortunes, others to secure their advancements.

King Stephen gave every where proof of his courage; she of her wisdom; both of
their diligence; either perhaps worthy a greater Empire than they contended
for; but whilst the Body politic thus miserably tormented with the convulsions
of Might and Right languish'd under the growing distemper, behold a sudden
change which seemed the more mortal, for that the grief seized upon the head:
The King is taken prisoner, with whose liberty one would have thought all the
hopes of that side had been lost; but it so happened that the Feminine Victor
found herself engaged in a more equal Contest with one of her own Sex, and as
of the same spirit, so of the same name. King Stephen's Wife takes up the Sword
whilst her husband continues a prisoner, who not looking that Fortune should
fall into her lap, was so industrious to catch it, and heading her husbands
Forces, she brought the Title to a second trial with so much better success
than he, that the victorious Empress was forced to give place to the more
victorious Queen, and so hardly escaped that to save her life she was content
to be reckoned amongst the dead, being carried off in a Coffin as if she had
been killed, and so forced to leave him a prisoner behind, that was indeed the
life of her Cause, the Earl of Gloucester her Brother, and her General, whose
liberty being set against that of the Kings, both sides became even again in
the list of their fatal Contention.

And now the Kings Party labors to recover what they had lost: those of the
Empress her Faction strove only to keep what they had gained, till both having
tired out and almost baffled the Courage of their partakers at home sought for
recruits abroad: Maud sends into Normandy, the King into Flanders; each side
seems to fright from this time forward, not so much for Victory as Revenge. But
whilst they fright the people with a noise of their great preparations the
bubble of expectation (swollen to its full height) broak, and the hopes of
either side sunk so low by the death of Prince Eustace Son and Heir to the
King, and that of the Earl of Gloucester the only pillar which supported the
Empress; this the party by whom, that the party for whom the War was first
begun, not to say miantain'd, that they concluded a Peace for want of strength
rather than of stomach, all things ending as they began, by determination of
the free vote of the people; who in an open Parliament at Winchester parted the
Stakes as evenly as they could, giving to King Stephen the Crown during life,
to Henry Son of Maud (and as some think by him) the reversion expectant after
his death, who if he were not his Natural was thereupon made his adopted Son:
and so ended the troubles of this King, which seem to have been so agreeable to
his nature that as soon as they ceased, he ceased to live; surviving the War no
longer than just to take leave of his Friends, being evicted by an Ejectione
firma brought against him by Fate to let in the Son of his Enemy, after he had
held the possession (notwitstanding the continual Interruption given him)
nineteen years with great prosperity though little or no peace: witness those
many works of Piety done by himsel or others in his time, there being more
Instances of that Nature during his short Reign, than had been in many years
before.

HENRY II.
coat of arms of King Henry II: gules, three lions passant guardant in pale or.
KING Stephen being dead who was the worthi'st, this Henry succeeded who was the
greatest King this Nation ever knew: for he was in the Right of his Father Earl
of Anjou, in Right of his Mother Duke of Normandy and Britain, in the Right of
his Wife Duke of Guien and Acquitaine, Earl of Touraine, Tholosse and Poictou,
and now in his own Right King of England, and not long after by Right of
Conquest, absolute Lord of Ireland. He was a Prince whose Dominions were so
equally divided by the Sea, that it may be said to have run as a great River
betwixt them; his Possessions on the other side of the Water being so great,
that the State here doubted nothing so much as that he might prove too mighty a
Master at home, and the next Scruple was which side he would make his home; it
being in his own choice whether he would carry England thither, or bring those
mighty States hither: wherein he carried himself so indifferently, that
receiving the News of King Stephen's death, at the Siege of a Castle the French
had taken from him, he declared he would not move away till he had recovered it
back again; neither was he worse than his word though they tried him Six weeks,
before they yielded it up: a longer time than might have been convenient to
have deferred his Claim here, had he not been (as he was) high and presuming
that King Stephen had tired out all the stirring and turbulent spirits, and
that he was neither unexpected nor undesir'd.

He was the first King of the Plantaginets, and began his Reign, as the Great
Solomon (who was near about his Age) did his, with the choice of wise
Counselors, to take off all objections against his youth; with the expulsion
of all Strangers, to take off all objections against his being a forrainer;
with the resumption of all aliened Crown Lands, to take of the fear as well as
the necessity of Taxes: which as it increased his reputation no less than his
revenue, so he pleased many with disgusting but a few. After this he plucked
down all those Castles which being erected by King Stephen's permission, had
proved the nurseries of the late rebellion, and he did it with the less
clamor, in respect the people thought it contributed as much to their quiet,
as to his own. Lastly by expelling those false Lords, that contrary to their
oath given to his Mother, took part with the Usurper Stephen, he at once
satisfied his Revenge, and confirmed the opinion conceived of his Justice and
Piety.

Thus having got the start in point of honor, as well as of Riches, of all the
neighbor Princes his Contemporaries; one would have thought so prosperous a
beginning must have concluded with as prosperous an ending: but it sell out
quite otherwise; for to the rest of his Greatness was added that of having
great troubles, and troubles of that durance as ended not but with his life.
Nor could it well be otherwise, for he was of a restless spirit, seldom
without an Army, seldomer without an Enemy, but never without an Occasion to
provoke one; for he was a great ingrosser of glory, whereby being necessitated
to set himself against every one, every one set themselves against him: and the
confederations against him were so well timed that in one day they invaded him
in England, Normandy, Acquitain, and Britain: but that which made his
unhappiness seem singular was, that the greatest part of his Enemies were those
of his greatest Friends; I mean not such as were of remoter relations, as
subjects, servants, confederates, or allies, etc. but those of nearest
propinquity; his brother, his wife, his own children, such as were flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone: so that he could not possibly sight for himself
without fighting against himself; like those who to preserve life are
constrained to dismember themselves: wherein the malice of his Fate seemed to
exceed that of his Foes, whiles it drew more cross lines over his Actions than
Nature had drawn over his Face; rendering all his undertakings so disasterous,
that even when he had the best on it, he seemed yet to have the worst on it, and
lost his honor though he got his enterprise. Thus when he recovered the
Earldome of Northumberland from David King of Scots, and the Dukedom of Anjou
from his brother Geoffry, the first by the power of his Wisdom, the last by the
wise management of his power (both which contests ended not without giving to
each of them full satisfaction for their pretentions) yet one brought upon him
the clamor of injustice, the other the scandal of Avarice: two vices ill
beseeming any man, worse a King. So in the dispute he had with the Earl of St.
Giles about the County of Tholosse, which was his Right, though to others
Possession, he was fain to ask peace of one that he knew was unable to carry on
the War; and after he brought him to his own terms, was himself so hampered
with the same Fetters he put upon him, that in conclusion he suffered no less
in the opinion of his wisdom than he had before in that of his power. So when
he married his Son Henry to the daughter of his great Enemy, the King of
France, with a prudent design of being reconciled to him in a nearer
combination, he found that instead of keeping him out of his Territories (which
was all he had to care for before the Match) he had now let him into his House,
to do him more mischief with less difficulty (there being more danger by his
undermining than battering) whiles himself permitted the pit to be made in
which the foundation of his Sons greatness was to be laid; to whom having given
too early an expectation of his Kingdom (by allowing him the title of King)
without being able to give him the Grace to tarry for his death, he found (when
'twas too late) that a Crown was no estate to be made over in Trust: yet this
he did not by chance, neither as one transported by any Fatherly fondness, but
out of a provident care to settle the Succession, and as reasonably to fix his
Sons Ambition. Neither was his severity to his younger Sons less fatal to him
than his indulgence to his Elder; whilst thinking to recover the power he lost
there, by keeping a stricter hand over those here, he was bereft of them too by
the same way he thought to make them more surer to him: for as the eldest by
having so much, was easily persuaded there was more due to him; so the younger
brothers believing they ought to have had something more than they had, because
their elder brother had so much more than he should, pressed him out of
necessity, as much as the other out of wantonness. This looking so like a
judgment from heaven, gave both the world and himself so full a view of his
fate and his failings, that from this time he began sensibly to languish under
the grief and shame of being so affronted; the rancor of his thoughts so
festring inwardly, that though he assuaged it by all the Lenitives imaginable,
yet the wound broke out as fast as it was healed, till the Cause was taken away
by the death of those that were the two most unnatural Sons (whose ends proved
to be as violent as their natures) after which yet he was no less afflicted by
the no less unnatural obstinacy, of the two surviving Brothers Richard and John.

But that which made the troubles of his own house more insupportable, was the
meeting with as great troubles in Gods house; where the disobedience of his
Children was out-vied by the contempt of a servant: who advanced by destiny to
make a mock of Majesty, finding a purpose in him to curtail the growing
greatness of the Clergy (that was arrived to that height, that they were able
to make a King without a Title, and might (as he suspected) by tampering with
Posterity be able in time to set up a Title without a King) resolved to wrestle
both single, and to compare authority: and however he knew the design to be so
well backed by the envy of the Laiety, that the Pope himself and all the
Conclave despaired of weathering it; yet such was his obstinacy, having got the
help of opinion, and the belief of Integrity on his side, that he stood the
breach of this unhappy Kings Indignation, and defied his Thunderbolt, till the
very minute it blasted him; by whose death every one thought the King had got
the better of it, in that he had the satisfaction of a full Revenge, without
being touched with the guilt (since those that murdered him however they did
it to please the King, did it yet without his knowledge or privity.) But such
was the Tyranny of Fate, that he who in his life time only made him how, being
dead brought him upon his knees, and forced him to acknowledge him as much above
his faith afterward, as he was above his will before: and (then which nothing
could be more unfortunate) for the very same cause he prosecuted him in his
life time as a Traitor, being dead, he adored him as a Saint.

It were too troublesome to tell of all the troubles of this great Prince, much
more to bring them into any method, which coming from himself, and not ending
(as I said before) but with himself, however they seemed to vary in the Lines,
kept still in the circle of his Family, moved by the same Causes though not by
the same Persons: for as his Son Henry before, so his Son Richard afterward,
was tempted to capitulate with him, and to show the world he was his Brothers
successor, in point of disobedience as well as of right, he did with as great
ambition, but greater passion, require an assurance of the same Kingdom and the
same Wife: both equally dear to the Father, both alike fatal to the Sons;
wherein meeting with a denial, the present fit of Love that was upon him
heightened into an extreme of hatred; with the contagion whereof (for it ran in
a blood) his brother John was not long after infected: and so joining together,
they made the last Effort upon their now almost tired fathers patience,
besieging him in the beloved Town where his Father was buried and himself born;
which he not long after took from him, and in it her that was dearer to him
than his life, the fair Lady Adela (now become the old Kings avowed Mistress,
however affianc'd before to his Son Richard.) This as it was an indignity that
flaw'd his great heart at one single stroke, and wounded his spirit beyond all
recovery, so the loss of the City provoked him to blaspheme God, and the loss
of the Lady to curse all his posterity, and what sense nature retained of the
loss of his life (that took away the sense of all other losses) appears by the
intelligence it held with his revenge after death: which over-acting its part
(if I may so say) to charge the guilt upon the unnatural offender, forced the
blood out of his nostrils as he lay barefaced upon his hearse, as soon as his
Son Richard (the murderer) approached with dissembled reverence to kiss his
hand. Thus

Thus as he had constant troubles whilst he lived; so it seems he had no great
rest when he was dead, being ordained by Destiny to be an Example of
unparalleld Desolation; and which made this unhappiness a kind of Riddle, that
which renders all other men happy undid him, viz. great Wisdom, great Power,
and great Possessions, either of which makes great Friends, at least great
numbers of those that profess themselves to be so; whiles he lived to see
himself forsaken of Wife, Children, Family, Friends, and (if he were not
himself, as in Charity we ought to think, when he blasphemed God for the loss
of Mentz) we may say forsaken of himself too, then which there could be no
sadder Epilogue to humane Glory.

RICHARD I.
coat of arms of King Richard I: gules, three lions passant guardant in pale
or. THIS King, as he was the first, so I take him to be the worst of all the
Richards we had; and however Posterity has forbore to blur his Memory out of
the partiality and affection this Nation has always born to their fighting
Princes (wherein he had not the better of any of his name, for they were all
valiant as well as himself) yet the present Age had no such cause to admire
him; considering the unevenness of his temper, being never well full nor
fasting, as we say, and the unsteadiness of his Judgment, making his Government
very uneasy and distastful to almost all sorts of men. That he was an ill Son,
needs no other proof then the preternatural Resentment of his dead Father,
whose Corpse so abhorred his presence, that (as I said before) the blood gushed
out of his Nostrils when he came near it, as by the touch of its Murderer.
That he was an ill Father, appears by the disposal he made of his three
Imaginary Daughters, Pride, Covetousness, and Leachery, which a scoffing Priest
of France upbraided him with. That he was an ill Brother, is manifest by the
ill usage of his Brothers John and Jeoffry; the first of whom, without any just
cause of suspicion, he would have forced to have abjured the Realm; the last to
quit his Bishopric: and whether his unkindness or his injustice was the
greater, I know not. What kind of Husband he was like to prove appeared by his
deportment to her that should have been his Wife, the fair Lady Adela before
mentioned, Sister to the French King, whom he did not more desire when he could
not have her, then he slighted her when he could, sending her home so
unexpectedly, that it is hard to say whether he more disparaged her, his Father,
(who was her Paramour) or himself, making the business the worse by the same
way he thought to make it better: for giving her many Jewels, seemingly to do
her honor, he dishonored her the most that might be, giving the World cause
to think it a recompense of that one Jewel she had left behind: whereupon 'twas
reported, and perhaps as tru^y as maliciously, that the Father had his pleasure
on her, and the Son paid the Charges. Lastly, as he was an ill man, so he was a
worse King, behaving himself more like a Projector then a Prince: for after he
had raked up as much Money preparatory to his Voyage into the Holy Land, as if
he had intended to have spent all his own Dommons in recovering those, he found
out so many tricks to cozen and cheat the People of more, that at length in
deceiving them, he deceived himself too. For those whom he compelled to make
new Fines for the Lands they had bought of him, upon pretense of having lost
his old Seal, slipped in such new Conditions unperceived into their new Patents,
as made them gainers by the loss, whilst his Covetousness suffered him not to
perceive, or his Necessity to prevent the Inconvenience: but that which renders
him most unworthy the affections of his Subjects was the not only making
himself a Stranger to them, as he was (for during his whole Reign, which lasted
nine years and nine months, he was not above eight months in all with them) but
leaving them to be governed by a Stranger, who, however a man of the Church
(for serving the Church, he was so wise as to serve himself by it) had so
little regard to Justice, Honor, or Religion, that he observed no other Law
but that of his own Will: but to make his Injustice yet more insupportable,
after he returned home he resumed all the Crown Lands he had aliened for the
carrying on his holy design, without giving the least satisfaction to those who
had furnished him with Money upon them, which nothing could have excused, had
any body else suffered by it but the Clergymen that put him first upon the
Project. Lastly, to show he had as little sense of Honor as of Equity, he
pitifully and meanly did depose himself, and deliver up his Kingdom into the
hands of the Emperor, after he was taken Prisoner in Germany, being not ashamed
to attempt to make his People slaves on condition he might be free himself.

And wherefore was all this toil and charge, imbarasing himself and his
Subjects, but only to hold up the vainglorious reputation of his Courage, and
make good that Bestial Adjunct of Coeur de Leon which was not improperly given
to him, if we consider that the same Creature is as much noted for his Voracity
as Courage; yet was the excess of his Valor mostly spent in private quarrels;
the King of France, who was engaged with like Devotion, and he falling together
by the Ears as soon as they met in Scicily; and after he came into the Holy
Land he had the like quarrel with the Archduke of Austria, with both upon the
same point of Precedence, though not with like reason; the other having
out-brav'd him in the common Cause, and planted his Colors upon the Walls of
Acon before him, which he plucking down in scorn, the other made him vail Bonnet
to it, that is, surrender up his Cap of Maintenance (as 'twas then called) as a
Pledge of his Homage to the Emperor when he acknowledged him his Supreme Lord.
And what was the end of this great Enterprise, after having tarried above a
year there, but the taking only one Town, and besieging another, which upon
notice of the Disorders at home (that a wise man might easily have foreseen and
prevented) he quit with no less disorder, leaving the whole Action with as much
precipitation as he took it up; insomuch that his Wife and Sister that
accompanied him, and all their Attendants and Officers were forced to shift for
themselves, and get home as they could; which Inconsideration of his met with
that pitiful Event before mentioned, to redeem him from which, his People were
fain to strain themselves beyond their abilities, Laymen and Clergy parting
with a fourth part of their Real, and a tenth of their Personal Estate, all not
being sufficient to make up his Ransom, till they pawned and sold their very
Chalices and Church Ornaments.

Being thus as it were un-king'd, and exposed naked to the Vulgar, stripped of
his Honor as well as Treasure, he thought himself not secure of the fai h and
reverence due to his birth by any other way but a Recoronation, which being as
extraordinary as the rest of his Actions (for he is the first we meet with twice
crowned) was notwithstanding the poverty of the Nation, that had paid in two
years time no less then jj hundred thousand Marks of Silver (the vastness of
which Sum may be guessed at by the Standard of those Times, when twenty pence
was more then a Crown now) performed with that solemnity, as showed he had the
same mind, though not the same purse, as when he began his great Adventures.
After this he fitted out a Fleet of 100 Sail of Ships to carry him into
Normandy, to chastize the Rebellions of his Brother John, who encouraged by the
King of France (the constant Enemy of England) had, during his absence, deposed
his Viceroy Long-champ, and forced him to lay down his Legatine Cross, to take
up that of the holy War, and had put himself in so good forwardness to depose
him too (having brought the People to swear a Conditional Fealty to him) that
there wanted nothing to give him possession of the Crown which was before
secured in Reversion but the consent of the Emperor, to whom there was offered
a Bribe of 150 thousand Marks to detain him, or 1000 pounds a Month, as long as
he kept him Prisoner. But such was the power of the Mother, who was always a
fast Friend to the younger Brother, and had indeed a greater share in the
Government of the elder, then consisted with the weakness of her own, or the
dignity of his Sex, that she made them Friends, and obtained an Indemnity for
all the Faults committed during Longchamp's Reign (who indeed was more a King
then his Master) so that his Indignation being wholly diverted upon the French
King, he began a new War that was like to prove more chargeable then the old,
which he had so lately ended. To maintain which he had new Projections for
raising Money; but Providence having determined to put an end to his Ambition
and Avarice, offered a fatal Occasion by the discovery of some Treasure-trove,
out of which the Discoverer, the Viscount Lymoges, voluntarily tendering him a
part, tempted him to claim the whole; and so eager was he of the Prey, that
being denied, he besieged the Castle of Challons, where he conceived 'twas hid,
from whence by a fatal Arrow shot from the hand of one whose Father and two
Brothers he had killed with his own hand, he was unexpectedly slain, leaving no
Issue either of his Body or Mind that the World took notice off, excepting his
three Daughters before mentioned, fathered on him by the Priest, by the
disposal of which, though it were but in jest, we may see what he was in
earnest: For he bestowed his daughter Pride on the Knights Templars; his
daughter Drunkenness on the Cestercian Monks, and his Daughter Leachery he left
to the Clergy in general, which quickness of his, as it savored of Irreligion,
so it made good that in him, which makes all things else ill, the comprehensive
Vice of Ingratitude, the Clergy being the only men to whom he was indebted for
his Honor, Wealth, and Liberty; but the unkindness he showed to them living,
was sufficiently requited to him dead by one of the same function, who
reflecting upon the Place where he received his fatal wound, shot an Arrow at
him that pierced deeper then that which slew him.

Christ tui Calicis Praedo fit praeda Calucis. JOHN
coat of arms of King John: gules, three lions passant guardant in pale or.
KING Richard being dead, who was the third Son and Successor to his Father
Henry, his fifth and only Brother living, Prince John became his Successor,
though he were not his Heir; the legal Right vesting in Arthur the only Son of
Jeoffry the fourth Brother; of whom, as he had the start in Age and Interest,
in point of Power as well as pretensions, being the Son and Brother of a King,
whereas the other was neither, better known to the English Nobility, and which
was more then all, in possession of his Brother Richards Army and Treasure at
the time of his Death, so he easily supplanted the Friendless Youth; however he
could not so draw the consent or obedience of the People to him, but that it
was easy to perceive their coldness to be such, that it might be said they did
rather not reject then neglect him to be King, the solemnity of his
Inauguration so much exceeding the measures of their joy, that he himself
taking notice of it, had so great a distrust of their Faith, that he held
himself necessitated to suffer all the affronts given him by the French King
for a long time, who being his great Enemy, by pretense of doing Prince Arthur
Right, did him all imaginable wrong, but could not draw him out of the Circle
of his Power to any kind of Engagement, till provoked by his own wantonness
(having usurped a Wife as well as a Crown) he was put upon that for the
vindication of his Honor, which he would not have done for the Justification
of his Right, to answer a more unequal Adversary, the Earl of March, who being
the person to whom she was first affianced, and stung with the apprehension of
the Indignity, to have her ravished from him (a wrong of the most sensible
touch in Nature) conspired with the discontented Barons of Poyctou and Britain
to set up Arthur against him, whom to make their Party the stronger, they
married up to the youngest Daughter of the French King, who joining with them,
they pressed upon him all at once; but the attempt being performed with more
heat then consideration, instead of foiling him they put a notable Victory into
his hands, and such an one as made him Master of his two great Enemies, the
Earl of March, and Arthur himself; the one the Person by whom, and the other
the person for whom the War was begun, so that there needed not a Second to
settle his Mind or State.

This mounted him on the wings of Fame, but that unexpected height was attended
with a fatal Giddiness, which turned to such a kind of Frenzy as rendered him
incapable of all advice: So that intoxicated with the fumes of his Power, he
committed many outrages, not sparing his own Brother Jeoffry Archbishop of
York, who using the freedom of a Brother in reprehending his Exorbitances, had
all his Estate taken from him and confiscated a whole year, before he could
recover it again by the help of all his Friends: The Earl of Chester fair'd yet
worse, who was banished upon the like account of being too faithful a
Counselor: Neither did the Lord Fitz-Walter suffer less then either, because
he would not consent to prostitute his fair Daughter Matilda to his Lust: And
whether he showed any foul play to his Nephew Arthur, after he was his
Prisoner, is not certain, who surviving his Imprisonment but a few days, gave
the World cause to think he was not treated as so near a Kinsman, but as a
Competitor; and that which confirmed this Opinion was the Judgment from Heaven
that attended it, for from that time he grew very visibly unprosperous, loosing
not only his ancient Patrimony, the Duchy of Which his Ancestors had h^ld in
despite of all the power ^f France, and the rest of their potent Neighbors
above 300 years
Normandy, and that as strangely as the other did his life, but with it all the
rest of his Possessions on that side the Water, all taken from him in less then
a years space, not so much by force of Arms as by process of Law, whiles the
King of France proceeded against him as an Offender, rather then as an Enemy:
And to aggravate that by other Losses seeming less, but perhaps greater, he
near about the same time not only lost his two great Supporters, Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Fitz-Peter his Lord Chief Justice (as wise and
faithful Counselors as any Prince ever had) but her that was the Bridle of his
Intemperance, his Indulgent Mother Elinor, a prudent Woman, of a high and
waking Spirit, and therefore a most affectionate Promoter of his, because it
tended to the supporting of her own Greatness.

These stays being gone, he proved like a mounted Paper Kite when the string
breaks which holds it down; for taking an extravagant flight, he fell
afterward (as that usually does) for want of due weight to keep it steady: and
being no less sensible of the shame then the loss, instead of taking revenge on
his Foes, he fell upon his Friends, charging all his misfortunes upon
disloyalty of the Earls and Barons that refused him aid, whom therefore he
fined first the seventh part of their Goods, after that the thirteenth part of
all their Movables; and not content with the aid of their Purses, forced them
at last with the hazard of their Persons, to attend him in the prosecution of a
no less chargeable then disadvantageous War, where the recovery of part of his
own endangered the total loss of their own Estates. This, as it was grievous to
the Subject in general, so more particularly to the Nobility (being most of
them descended out of Normandy, and by his ill management shut out of their
ancient Inheritances there, had no other satisfaction for their Losses but by
improving what was left here) who finding themselves thus doubly damnified,
were enraged to that degree, that using a Martial freedom suitable to the
necessity of that stimulation by which they were urged, they began to recollect
all the wrongs done them by his Grandfather, Father, and Brother, and to show
they were in earnest, insisted upon renewing the great Charter of their
Liberties, neither were they unprovided of Arguments or Arms; this contumacy of
theirs being countenanced by the sullen Retirement of his own Brother Jeoffry
the Archbishop, who chose rather to cast himself into voluntary Exilement, then
submit any longer to his Tyranny: In vain now demands he Pledges of their
Faith, whilst they believed him himself to have none. Sending to the Lord Bruce
for his Son to be delivered as an Hostage to him, he received an answer from
the Mother, which it seems expressed the affections, if not the sense of the
Father, That they would not commit their Son to his keeping, who was so ill a
keeper of his own Brothers Son; which rash return cost him afterward his
Estate, her her life, with the loss of two for the saving one only Child; a
Revenge so fully executed, that it could meet with no counterbuff but what must
come from Heaven.

Here began the breach that disjoynted the whole frame of his Government; the
King resolving to keep what by advantage of time and s^fferance he had got; the
Barons continuing as obstinately bent to recover what their Predecessors had so
tamely lost. Both sides prepare for War; and whilst they face and parle like
men loath to engage, yet scorning to quit their Cause, either alike confident
to hope the best, and not unlike active to prevent the worst, a new accident
parted them by presenting a new Enemy, which made the War give place as it were
to a single Combat. The Pope not allowing the King the Privilege of Nominating
a Successor to the deceased Archbishop of Canterbury, he makes a Truce (I
cannot call it a Peace) with his Domestic Adversaries, to try his Fortune with
his Foreign Foe. The Contest was not like that of Jacob and Esau, who should
be born first, but like that of Caesar and Pompey, who should be uppermost. Now
as desire of Rule brought these two great Champions into the List, so the
confidence each other had in his strength and skill to handle his Weapon, made
them unreconcileable: The Pope made the first Pass, who threatening to interdict
the Kingdom, was answered with a Menace of confiscating all the Lands of the
Clergy, and banishing their Persons: The second Thrust given by his Holiness
was a Threat of Excommunication of the Kings Person: To this he returned that
he would utterly disavow his Authority. Thus far they were upon the even Terms,
and as it were hit for hit: upon the next Pass they closed, and as men
desperately bent, either maked good his Charge. The Pope shuts up the Church
doors; the King those of the Cloisters: the first took away all the Sacraments,
leaving the dead to bury the dead, without Priest, Prayer, or Procession: The
last seized on all the Ecclesiastical Revenues, and disposed them into
Lay-hands. Whilst they were thus in close grapple, the King of France appeared
as second to the Triple Crown: Had the Barons then stepped in as second to their
King, they had not only made good their own Honor, as well as his, but
probably had secured the Liberties they contended for without any force, there
being more to be hoped for from this Kings Generosity then his Justice; but
(which was most degenerous, and leaves a stain upon their memory never to be
washed off) they finding him thus overlaid, turned all their points upon his
back, poisoned with the venom of the most opprobrious Calumnies that ever
Majesty suffered under, the Infamy of being not only a Tyrant, but an Infidel,
all which he was fain to bear with more Constancy of Mind then Fortune: But as
we see a wild Boar, when beaten out of breath, chooses rather to dye upon the
Spears of the Hunters, then to be wearied by the Dogs; so his Rancor turning
into disdain, he yielded to his Nobler Enemies, and chose rather then not have
his Revenge upon them, whom he thought God and Nature had put under his
dispose, to humble himself to the Church, hoping, as it is thought, by their
Keys to unlock the Rebels Power; but over-acting his Revenge, he stooped so low
that the Crown fell from his Head, which the Popes Legate taking up, kept three
days before he thought fit to restore it, verifying thereby the Prediction of
a poor innocent Hermit, who foretold that there should be no King of England;
which however it was true, yet being in some sense untrue too, 'twas in the
Prerogative of him who never spared where he could shed Blood, to make his own
Interpretation, which cost the poor Prophet his Life.

The Barons finding him thus incensed, and seeing how to make good his Revenge,
he had quit his Sovereignty, they resolved to quit their Allegiance to make
good their Security, intending to call in the Dolphin of France, and swear
Fealty to him, whilst the Common People were left to their Election, whether to
take the wrong King that promised to do them Right, or the right King that
persisted to do them so much wrong; who as little understanding the Principles
of Religion as the dictates of Reason, the Bonds of Command and Obedience that
should hold them together seemed so wholly slackned, that there was upon the
Matter no other Tie on them then that of their Interest, which swayed them
variously, according to the diverse Measures they took of it. But as there are
many Ligaments in a State that bind it so fast together, that it is a hard thing
to dissolve them altogether, unless by an universal concurrence of Causes, that
produce a general alteration thereof (it being seldom seen of what temper
soever Kings are, but that they find under the greatest desertion imaginable a
very considerable Party to stand by them upon the account of Affection or
Ambition, Honor or Conscience) so this King (the first of England we find put
to this straight) had yet many Members of Note and Power besides his chief
Officers (whom their places confirmed) that stuck close to him, and served him
to the last; by whose Assistance he not only recovered Ireland, reduced Wales,
and kept those of Scotland to their good behavior, but notwithstanding all the
Troubles he had at home, forced the Chief men of either Place to give him (as
the manner was in those days) their Children to be pledges of their future
Subjection: by which may be guest how far he had gone in the Recovery of his
Transmarime Dominions, had not the cross-grained Barons stood it out as they
did, who refusing to aid or attend him, until he was absolved by the Pope, and
after he was absolved, stopped until he had ratified their Privileges, and after
they had the Grant of their Privileges, declined him yet, until they had back
the Castles he had taken from them; resolved it seems to have both Livery and
Seisin of their ancient Rights: but whilst they thus over-bent the Bow, they
made it weak and unserviceable: the visible force used upon him in bringing him
to that Concession, unloosing the Deed, and taking so much from the validity of
so solemn an Act by the bare illegality of their Coertion, that his new Friend
the Pope (to whom themselves forced him to reconcile himself) thought it but a
reasonable recompense of his Humility toward him, to discharge him from all
his Condiscentions toward them, dispensing with his Oath by which all the
Agreement was bound, and by definitive Sentence declaring the whole Compact
null, which was confirmed by the Excommunication of the Barons till they
submitted to the Sentence.

Here the Scene changed again: and now the Pope being engaged on the Kings
side, the French King on the Rebels, behold the whole Kingdom in Arms; but
because there were so few to be trusted at home, the King sends for Forces
abroad, whereof he had so great Supplies, that had there not been (which is
almost incredible to relate) no less then forty thousand Men, Women, and
Children drowned, coming over Sea out of Flanders, he had even eat his way out
to a Conquest of his own People as universal, but more miserable then that of
the Norman; for with those he had left he marched over most of the Kingdom in
less then half a years space, reduced all the Barons Castles to the very
Borders of Scotland, and made himself once more absolute Master of all the
Cities of note, London only excepted, which in regard of their united Power,
being so desperate as they were, he thought not safe to attack. This Extremity
of the Barons drew over the French King in person to their relief, who making
incredible speed to land at Sandwich, as quickly became Master of all Kent,
Dover only excepted (which never would yield) through which marching up to
London, he was there received with such universal joy, that several great Lords
quitting King John, came to render themselves to him: In the mean time the Pope
pursued him with an Excommunication to please King John, who all this while
acted the part of a General so well beyond that of a King, that many who never
obeyed him in Peace, were content to follow him through the War.

It was near a year that this unhappy Kingdom continued thus the Theater of
Rapine and Cruelty, enduring the oppression and horror of two great Armies,
headed by two great Kings; each chasing the other with alternate Successes
through the most fertile parts of the Isle, till it pleased Providence in Mercy
to the innocent People, to take off this Indomitable Prince, whose heart (long
flaw'd with continual Crosses) broke at last by the slight stroke of a small
loss, the miscarriage of some few of his Carriages, which in passing the Washes
betwixt Lynn and Boston, were it seems overtaken by the Tide: a misfortune,
which though of no great Consideration, yet falling out in such a juncture of
time, when the Indisposition of his Body added not a little to that of his
Mind, carried him out of the World with no less Violence then he forced into
it; who, however born to make himself Enemies, had yet perhaps been happy
enough, had not himself been the very greatest Enemy himself had.

HEN. III:
coat of arms of King Henry III: gules, three lions passant guardant in pale
or. KING John though he were Naturally dead, did yet Morally survive in his Son
Henry, in whose dispositions there was much less difference then in their
Fortunes, yet perhaps less in their Fortunes then in their Fortitude; this
having more of Craft, the other more of Courage: however he were the Son and
Father of as Valiant Kings as any we had. That which to other Princes commonly
proves most fatal (their Nonage) was to him most fortunate; for by reason of
his tender years, being left under the protection of his Uncle William
Earl-Marshal, who was so famous for Counsel and Conduct, the most considerable
part of the Barons were thereby drawn to quit the French Party, and submit to
him: whereby the Monsieur was forced, after almost two years possession, to
sell a better hope of Conquest then ever the Norman had, departing with little
more Treasure (notwithstanding the great Rapine of his People) then would serve
to defray his Charge home again: after whose Return the Feverish State
recovered it self again out of the fatal Calenture under which it had so long
languished, and enjoyed some peace, though little quiet; but that Felicity
determined with the life of that great man, who having delivered the Son from
the curse of his Fathers Violations, and the People from the desperation that
attended it, as one that had done all which his Loyalty and the Love to his
Country obliged him to, gave up his Charge with his Breath.

Upon his Death, the King was crowned (as his unfortunate Father and Uncle
before him) the second time, being willing the World should know he was now
arrived at a degree of understanding to rule by himself: which occasion the
jealous Barons took hold of, to press again for the Confirmation of their
Liberties, the Denial whereof had cost his Father so dear. This put him to a
pause, and that discovered his inclination, though not his intent; for by not
denying, he hoped to be thought willing to grant, and yet not granting, he had
the vanity to be thought not to yield. But this cunctation of his, which showed
him to be his Fathers own Son, plunged him into such a Gulf of mistrust before
he was aware of it, that it was nothing less then a Miracle he had not perished
in it: for as he could never get clear out of it all his Reign (the longest
that ever any King of England had) so he was necessitated, as all shifting men
are that entertain little designs they are ashamed or afraid to own, to make
use from that time, of such Ministers only, as in serving him, would be sure
to serve their own turns upon him: which reduced him to that indigence, that
had he not found out a way to prey upon them, as they upon the People, he had
undoubtedly perished as never King did; being at one time come so near to
Beggary that for want of Provisions at his own, he was forced to invite himself
shamefully to other men's Tables, his Cred^t being brought so low, that he could
not take up an hundred Marks; and his Spirit so much lower, that he told one
that denied him that Sum, that it was more Alms to give him, then to a Beggar
that went from Door to Door: A speech betraying so strange abjection, that it
takes off the wonder of those affronts put upon him afterward, when a weak
Woman durst tax him to his face with breach of faith and honor, and a pitiful
Priest threaten him with being no King, when a private Lord durst give him the
Lie publicly, and tell him he was no Christian: and (which is undecent to tell
had it not been so well known) one of his Hubert de B^ugh^ was charged to have
said thus.
own servants called him Squint-eyed Fool and Leaper.

The first great action he was engaged in was the recovery of the Ground his
Father lost in France, into which he was drawn not so much out of affectation
of Glory, as by the Solicitation of his Father in Law Hugh Earl of March; who
having a quarrel with the Queen Dowager of France, upon the account of some
dispute that had passed between her and his Wife, the Queen Dowager of England,
called in the King her Son to take advantage of the present discontent; Diverse
of the great men of Poictou, Britain, and Normandy, being offended that the
Regency of the young King should be committed to a Woman, and a Spaniard: But
this design ending with like precipitation, as it was begun, after the Expense
of some Blood and more Treasure (neither of which he could well spare) he
returned home, attended with a petty Army of those Poictovins and Britains; who
by taking his part, had forfeited their own Estates at home. These therefore he
conceived himself obliged in point of honor to provide for, and which way to
do it, but by displacing such of his principal Officers, who were in places of
greatest benefit he knew not. These were his Cheif-Justiciary, his High
Treasurer, and the Marshal of his Household; upon whom therefore he permitted
the envious Rabble to discharge a volly of accusations, to the end that driving
them out with shame and loss, he might fill up their places with those
strangers. These great Pillars (for they were men whose wisdom he had more need
of, then they of his favor) being thus thrown down, and broken to pieces by
their fall, so shook the whole frame of his Throne, that every body expected
when he would have fallen himself too, diverse of the Nobility that were nearest
to him, removing themselves for fear of the worst. Amongst the rest was that
famous Richard, who after the death of his brother William, was Earl Marshal: a
man questionless of great honor and Probity, who finding his violences to
increase, being heightened by the ill advice of the two Peter's, De Rupibus, and
De Rivallis, the one a Britain the other a Poictovin, now become the two great
Ministers of State, combined with the rest of the English Nobility to fetch him
off from these Rocks; first entreating and after threatening him, that unless he
would put these and all other strangers from him, they would remove both him
and them, and choose another King. Upon this bold menace, the plainest and
boldest that Subjects could give a Prince, De Rupibus advised him to require
pledges for their Allegiance; which they refusing to give, without any Process
of Law, he causes them to be Proclaym'd Outlaws, and Seizes on all their
Lands, with the profits whereof he rewards the Poictovins. This brought both
Parties to Arm again, with like animosity, but more Cruelty, then in his
Fathers time. So that for two years together, there was no cessation from all
the violences, and depredations that usually attend a civil War, till the
Bishops finding by the much blood had been shed, that the heat on either side
was much abated, interposed with the King to do the Barons reason, and forced
him to yield, though he could not consent, to a restoration of their Lands and
Liberties, and to the banishment of all strangers. This however proved to be
but a temporary shift, which the present necessity of his affairs drove him
to: for not long after the two great Incendiaries were admitted again to Grace;
and so near came he to the example of his Father, as to endeavor a revocation
of his Grants by the Popes Authority, being done, as he alleged, beyond his
Power, and without consent of the Church; by which harsh Intention (though it
took not effect) it is scarce imaginable how much he added to the conceived
displeasure of the People, to whom however he had no regard, till he had wasted
himself so far by his profusion and supine Stupidity, that he was reduced
through extremity of want, to truckle under his Parliaments: who knowing their
own Power, and his dependence on them for money (for as a modern Sir R. Bake^
Vit. H. 3.
writer observes, his taxations were so many they may be reckoned amongst his
annual revenues, scarce any year passing without a Parliament, but no
Parliament breaking up without a Tax) as so many Tyrants pressed no less upon
him one way, then he upon them the other, till at last he became as weary of
asking, as they of giving him supplies; and having no other means to maintain
his Riot, after he had canvass'd his Officers, by chopping and changing of
places, and raised what he could without right or reason, he fell to selling
his Lands, mortgaged Gascoin, pawned his Jewels, and after his Crown: and when
he had neither Credit nor pawns of his own left, he exposed the Jewels and
Ornaments of Saint Edwards Shrine, to whoever would lay down most for them.
After this he preyd upon the Jews (the People that always felt the weight of
his necessities.) Neither were his Christian Subjects so free, but that he
found means to squeeze them by Loans, Benevolences, and New Years gifts: all
which not sufficing, he fell at last to downright Beggary, and sent to the
Clergy men for several Sums to be given him as Alms. And being reduced to
this incredible lowness, when he found he could not prevail upon their Charity,
he tried how far he could work upon their piety, by pretending to undertake the
Cross: but that Project failing him too, the last and most fatal shift he had,
was to resign to the King of France whatever right he had in the Duchy of
Normandy, the Earldoms of Anjou, Poictou, Tourene, and Main, and all for no
more then three hundred Crowns, and that of Anjovin money too: a pitiful Sum
to redeem a half lost Crown. The Prince likewise, unfortunately participating
in the wants of his Father, was driven to Mortgage several pieces of his Lands
too, to supply his Particular Necessities.

And now all things being gone that were valuable or vendible, the Barons
finding him naked and disarmed thought not fit to delay the matter longer; but
being called to that fatal Parliament at Oxford, in a hot season of the year,
when all their bloods were boiling, and out of temper, without more debate they
first secured London, the only Magazine to begin a Rebellion, by shutting up
the Gates, and after secured the Kingdom, by shutting up the Ports, to prevent
the inlet of Strangers; appointing twenty four Conservators (as they called
them) to manage the Government, whereof twelve were to be named by the King,
twelve by themselves. But he thinking it too great a Diminution of his Majesty,
to consent to any nomination of his own, left their twelve, called the Douze
Peers, to take the Re^ormation into their hands; who displacing a^l whom they
pleased to call Evil Counselors, left none about him that were able, or
perhaps willing to give him advice, and grew so insolent at last, as to banish
(amongst other Strangers) some of his nearest Relations. Out of these (as it
happens upon all Changes, where the People are to be amused with Novelty) there
was chosen afterward a Triumvirate, to be Super-intendent over the Twelve.
These were the Earl of Leicester, the Earl of Gloucester, and the Lord Spencer,
to whom the three great Ministers of State, the Chancellor, the High-Treasurer,
and the Chief Justiciar were appointed humble assistants. And because 'twas
believed that the Liberty of the People depended on the maintenance of their
Authority, the King himself was compelled by Oath (as he was a Man, a
Christian, a Knight, a King Crowned and anointed) to uphold them, and acquit
them of their Legal Obedience, whenever he went about to infringe the great
Charter by which they held this Prerogative.

Here they had him bound up hand and foot, with that Curse upon him which his
Father of all others most dreaded, and with which his Flatterers most terrified
him whenever the Dispute of Liberty came in question, of being a King without a
Kingdom, a Lord without a Dominion, a Subject to his Subjects (for they had
invaded his Majesty, usurped his Authority, and made themselves so far Masters
of his Person, that they might seize it, whenever they pleased to declare for a
Commonwealth.) And now to make the Affront more notable, as if they had
forgotten what was the Fundamental Grievance, on which their Usurpation was
grounded (the Entertainment of Strangers) they take a Stranger to head them,
making Monford (who was a French man by Birth and Descent) their Chief, who
having designs of his own different from theirs (as the Earl of Gloucester his
Compeer found when 'twas too late) endeavored so to widen all Differences
betwixt King and People, that if possible there might never be a right
Understanding betwixt them.

The King therefore well knowing his Malice, and not being ignorant of his
Ambition, fell first upon him, causing the Lord Mortimer to break in amongst
his Tenants, who quickly righted himself upon those of Mortimer's, with whom
the Prince thereupon took part, as Llewellin Prince of Wales with the other. The
Prince takes Brecknock-Castle; Monford that of Gloucester, and after that,
those of Worcester and Shrewsbury; from whence he marched directly to the Isle
of Ely without Resistance. The King fearing his approach to London (like those,
who to save their Lives in a Storm, are content to sling their Goods overboard)
demanded a Peace, and willingly yielded up all his Castles into the hands of
the Barons, to the intent they might be as a public Security for the
inviolable Observation of the Provisions of Oxford, conceding to the banishment
of all the Strangers that were left: This Condescension of his however
occasioned rather a Truce then a Peace, of which he had this benefit, to gain
time till he could be better provided. A Parliament being hereupon called at
London, the freedom of Debate there renewed the Quarrel, and each side
confident of the Justice of their Arms, at Northampton they came to Battle,
which however it was well fought, yet the worst Cause had the worst Success.
The Barons were beaten, and amongst other Prisoners of note that were then
taken was the young Monford, the Heir and Hope of his Father Leicester; and
Fortune thus uniting with Authority, made the Barons stoop, though they could
not submit, to beg the Peace they had before refused, wherein being rejected
with scorn, they became desperate, who were before but doubtful: which
Leicester perceiving, and being a man skilful in such advantages, took that
opportunity to bring them to a second Battle, in which he supplied his want of
Hands with a Stratagem that showed he had no want of Wit, placing certain
Ensigns without Men on the side of a Hill, not far from the place where he gave
the onset; whereby he so fortunately amuz'd the Enemy, that he easily obtained
a Victory, and such an one as seemed to turn the Scale beyond all possibility
of Recovery: For in it were taken the King himself, his Brother the late King
of the Romans, the Prince, and most of the principal Lords, and by killing Five
thousand of the common People on the place, he so terrified all the rest of the
Royal Party, that for a year and an half afterward no body durst look him in
the Face: all which time he spent in reducing the Kingdom under his own
dispose, putting in and out whom he pleased, and filling up all places Military
and Civil with Creatures of his own, carrying the King about with him (as a
skilful Rebel) to countenance the Surrender of Towns and Castles to him;
continuing thus the insolence of his Triumph, till it swelled to that
disproportionate Greatness, that his Confederate Gloucester began to be
jealous, if not afraid of it; and out of that Distrust quarreled with him, upon
pretense of not having made equal distribution of the Spoil nor Prisoners,
charging him to have released whom he pleased, and at what rate, without the
consent of the rest of the Confederacy; urging further, that he did not suffer
a Parliament to be convened, as was agreed betwixt them, to the end himself
might be Arbitrary: Lastly, objected that his Sons were grown Insolent by his
Example, and had affronted several of the adhering Barons, who would have
satisfaction of him.

During this Dispute, the Prince (by connivance of some of the discontented
Faction) broke Prison, to whom Gloucester joined himself; and rallying together
the scattered Parties that had long attended the advantage of such a turn, they
made themselves so considerable, that in short time they were able to bring the
business to a poise. Leicester put it to the Decision of another Battle, but
not without apparent dispondency, as appears by what he said, when they were
going to give the first Charge, for he told those Lords that were nearest him,
That they would do well to commit their Souls to God, for that their Bodies
were the Enemies. However he omitted nothing that might speak him (as he was) a
brave and valiant General, till his Son first, and after himself were slain; at
the instant of whose fall there happened such a Clap of Thunder, as if Heaven
it self had fought against him, and that none could have given him his death,
but that power to which he owed his life. And so the King was rid of him, whom
he once declared to have been more afraid of then of Lightning and Thunder: a
Person too great for a Subject, and something too little to be a King. But had
he (as he was descended from the stock of His Father was Simon, youngest Son of
Simon Earl of Fureux, descended from Almerick base Son of Robert (sirnam'd the
Holy) King of France.
Kings) mastered the Fate of this day, he had undoubtedly made himself one, and
broke off the Norman Line to begin a new Race not less noble.

This happy Victory gave the King some ease, but 'twas not in the power of any
Force to give him perfect rest, whilst the distemperature of the Time was such,
that the Wound which seemed perfectly healed, broke out afresh. Gloucester
himself, though he had deserted his old Competitor Leicester, would not yet
quit the good old Cause, but embracing the very first Occasion of Discontent he
met with, retired three years after from Court, and having got new Forces,
sinds out new Evil Counselors to remove. Mortimer, the great Man of merit with
the King, is now become the Object of his Envy, and rather then not have his
Head, he resolves once more to venture his own. In the mean time those of the
Isle of Ely, the remainder of Leicester's Party, that had held out from the
time of his death, with incredible courage and patience, taking new life and
hope from this Revolt, make many excursions and spoils, to the great charge and
vexation of the King and the Public. Neither could the Pope 's Legate prevail
with him to come in, though upon terms safe and honorable, tendering the
Public Faith of the Kingdom, and which was then thought greater, that of the
Church to them: So much were they transported with the Opinion of their Cause,
or by the falsehood of their hopes, till this stubbornness of theirs provoked
the King to raise a new Army, the Command whereof was given to his Son Edward,
that prosperous Prince, whose Fortune then being not able to resist, he had the
honor to conclude that War, and consequently to put a Period to all his
Fathers turmo^ls, who being shaken at the Root, did not long survive the
happiness of that tranquillity; the end of whose Troubles were the beginning of
his own, engaging upon the conclusion of that, in a War so much more dangerous,
by how much more distant, the benefit whereof was to be expected only in the
other World: this was that Undertaking in the Holy Land, which separating him
from his Father, beyond all hope of ever seeing him again, gave some occasion
to question the old Kings Understanding, others his good Nature. But as the
great concerns of Religion are as much above Reason, as that is beyond Sense,
so we must impute that to the resolute Zeal of the Son, which we cannot allow
for Devotion in the Father; who, had he had any thoughts of going into the
other World (as his great Age might have prompted him to) would rather have
taken care for a Grave for himself, then for so hopeful a Successor, who only
by seeking Death escaped it.

EDW. I.
coat of arms of King Edward I: gules, three lions passant guardant in pale or.
HOW much this Prince Edward (the first in order of that name, and excel^ing all
of them, as much as they did all the rest of any other name) being ripened by
years and experience for Government beyond any of his predecessors got the
start in point of honor and estimation of all his Successors, may appear by
the choice made of him after his Father was dead, before it was certainly known
whether himself was alive (being if not out of the World) yet buried as it were
in the remotest parts of it, under a design so fatal to all the Princes that
were engaged in it, that few of them ever returned but such as quit their Glory
before they got half way at it, his absence (for five years) being continued so
long beyond what was thought safe that had not his claim been rivetted by a
double Title (that is to say of virtue as well as of blood) the irregularities
of his Father (so fresh in every ones mind) might have been a sufficient Bar
betwixt him and any that would have usurped the Throne with but indifferent
Merit. But he had this happiness beyond all expectation, to wear out during
that space of time, the greatest part of those who had opposed his Father,
Heaven having fought for him, whilst he was fighting for it, rewarding his
unparalleled resolution in taking up the Cross, when he was so near the
possession of a Crown (his Father having then one foot in the Grave, as we may
say, when he left him) with that rare blessing of disposing the unsettled minds
of his people to a firmer obedience, then probably he had found, if he had
continued at home, to have given them the opportunity of capitulating with him:
for it was not long after he returned, before that some heat appeared to remain
in those embers, that had so long been raked up; and though the fire burst not
out, yet there were not wanting some Botefeues both of the Spiritual and
temporal Nobility, who blew the coal of dissension, and took all occasion to
renew those disputes, which were previous to another Civil War. Now whether it
were that they had been so rung, that they could not endure the Saddle, or were
grown so wresty, that they would not endure the Spur, I know not: But so it was
that they were ever mutinous, and maintained their pretended liberties with so
much pertinacy, not to say perverseness (the one refusing to serve them with
their Persons, the other with their Purses) that had he not been as wise as he
was Valiant, and no less patient then Prudent, taking them off, whilst he was
in the exaltation of his Opinion and Repute, he might have met with the same
measure that his unfortunate son did, who (all things considered) may perhaps
be said to have bled for his Fathers sins, rather then for his own.

Now whether the ingratitude of the Clergy, or the Ambition of the temporal
Lords were a greater trial of his wisdom or Power, I know not: but the course
he took to reduce either to terms of modesty and submission shows the world he
had no want of understanding, however he was forced to put up the front of his
Lay-peers in order to the facillitating his Revenge upon the other, whom he
mortified by a strain of State which none of his Ancestors durst venture upon:
Whilst he not only put them out of his Protection, but all men out of theirs;
denying them not only his favor, but his Justice, not only the benefit of his
ordinary Courts, but the privilege of sitting in that higher Court of
Parliament. A severity (not to give any worse name to it) of so acrimonious a
nature, that it not only exposed them to all the injuries and affronts,
triumphant malice and scorn could put upon them, but was made more intolerable
and grievous by his docking their Revenues, as after he did by several Stat. 3
Edw. 1. cap. 19.33. Stat. cont. formum collation.
Statute Laws: amongst which I cannot but take notice (though by the By) of the
particular contempt expressed in that odd Statute aginst Stat. de Asportatis
Religiosorum, etc. An. 3 cap. 34.
ravishment, where it is declared Felony to use force to any Lay-Woman, and
only a trespass to ravish a Nun. Neither was it thought enough to make what
abscission he thought fit, without their greatness were rendered incapable of
any further growth: to which intent he cauteriz'd (if I may so say) the wounds
he had given them by that Statute of An. 3. C. 32.
Mort-main; which as it was the most fatal of all others to them, so it might
have proved so to himself, had he not at the same time he thus disobliged them,
obliged the Laity by another supposed to be the wisest Law that ever was made,
to wit that of Westminster the second, entitled De Donis Conditionalibus;
which tending so much to the preservation of particular Families, and adding to
their greatness no less then their continuance, is by some Historians called
Gentilitium Municipale; and had this good effect, that it brought the temporal
Nobility firmly to adhere to him against the Pope, when amongst many others,
that entitled themselves to the Sovereignty of Scotland (a Kingdom too near to
be lost for want of putting a claim) his Holiness became his Rival, and thought
to carry it as part of St. Peter's Patrimony.

This Victory at home (which brought the proud Prelates to purchase his Justice
at a dearer rate, then probably they might have paid for his mercy, had their
submission been as early as it was afterward earnest) I take to be much
greater then all those he had got abroad, by how much fortune had no share in
it; and fame was the least part of his gains, extending to give him not long
after, as great an advantage over the Lay Nobility; whom having first discerned
of their Patronage wholly, and of their other privileges in a very great part,
he did as it were cudgel them into Submission, by the authority of his vid.
lib. Assis. fol. 141.57.
Trail Baston; a commission, which however it were directed to the Majors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Escheators, etc. and so seemed to have been aimed at those
of the lower rank only, which were guilty of those Enormities of Champorty,
Extortion, Bribery, and intrusion (crimes much in fashion in those days) yet by
a back blow it knocked down several of the great Men, who either countenanced or
complied with the offenders; and which was more terrible, this writ was kept as
a Weapon in the Kings hands, to use as he saw occasion. And to say truth, he
was so expert at it, and indeed at all other points of skill, that brought him
in any profit, that he was too hard at last for the Lawyers themselves, those
great masters of defense, Canvasing his Judges, as well as his Bishops, when he
found both alike rich, both alike corrupt. Beyond these he could not descend to
the consideration of any Criminal, save the Jews only, for whom perhaps it had
been no great Injustice to have taken their Estates, if at least he could have
been prevailed with to have spared their Lives: but as so great Courage as he
had, would not be without some mixture of Cruelty, so it is the less wonder to
see, that Cruelty heightened by Covetousness, as that Avarice by Ambition; the
adding to his Treasure by these Exactions being in order to the adding to his
Dominions, which were not yet so entire as consistent with his safety, much
less the Glory he aimed at: Wales being then as a Canton of the same Piece,
divided by a small seam, which yet had a Prince of their own blood, descended
from the ancient Stock of the Unconquered Britains, who it seems had so little
sense of the inequality of Power betwixt them, that he had given this King
great provocations, as often as any advantage was offered to him, during the
Barons War, playing fast and loose sometimes as an Enemy, otherwhile as a
Friend, as it made for his turn; and having it always in his Power by being in
Conjunction with Scotland (without which he had been inconsiderable) to disturb
the Peace of England at his pleasure, never neglected any occasion, where he
might gain Repute to himself, or booty for his People. Upon him therefore he
fastened the first Domestic War he had, entering his Country like Jove in a
storm, with Lightning and Thunder: the Terror whereof was so resistless, that
that poor Prince was forced to accept whatsoever terms he would put upon him,
to obtain a temporary Peace, without any other hope or comfort, then what he
derived from the mental reservation he had of breaking it again as soon as he
returned; whereunto he was not long after tempted by the delusion of a mistaken
Prophecy of that false Prophet Merlin, who having foretold that he should be
crowned with the Diadem of Brute, fatally heightened his Ambition to the utter
destruction both of himself and Country; with whom, his innocent Brother, the
last of that Race, partaking in life and death, concluded the Glory of the
ancient British Empire, which by a kind of Miracle had held out so many hundred
years without the help of Shipping, Alliance, or Confederation with any
Foreign Princes, by the side of so many potent Kings their next Neighbors,
who from the time of the first entrance of the English, suffered them not to
enjoy any quiet, though they vouchsafed them sometimes Peace.

Wales being thus totally reduced by the irrecoverable fall of Llewellen and
David, the last of their Princes, that were ever able to make resistance, and
those ignorant People made thereby happier then they wished themselves to be,
by being partakers of the same Law and Liberty with those that conquered them:
he settled that Title on his eldest Son, and so passed over into France to spend
as many years abroad in Peace as he had done before in War; in which time he
renewed his League with that Crown, accommodated the Differences betwixt the
Crowns of Scicily and Arragon, and showed himself so excellent an Arbitrator,
that when the right of the Crown of Scotland, upon his return home, came to be
disputed with Six, some say Ten Competitors, after the death of Alexander the
Third, the Umpirage was given to him: who ordered the matter so wisely, that he
kept off the final Decision of the main Question, as many years as there were
Rivals put in for it, deferring Judgment till all, but two only, were disputed
out of their Pretensions. These were Baliol and Bruce; the first descended from
the elder Daughter of the right Heir, the last from the Son of the younger, who
having as 'twas thought the weaker Title, but the most Friends, King Edward
privately offered him the Crown, upon Condition of doing Homage and Fealty to
him for it; the greatness of his Mind (which bespoke him to be a King before he
was one) suffered him not to accept the terms; whereupon King Edward makes the
same Proposition to Baliol, who better content it seems with the outside of
Majesty, accepted the Condition. But see the Curse of ill-got Glory: showing
himself satisfied with so little, he was thought unworthy of any, being so
abhorred of his People for it, that upon the first occasion they had to quarrel
with his Justice (as who should say, they would wound him with his own Weapon)
they appealed to King Edward, who thereupon summoned him to appear in England,
and was so rigid to him upon his appearance, he would permit none else to plead
his Cause, but compelled him in open Parliament to answer for himself as well
as he could. This being an Indignity so much beneath the sufferance of any
private Person, much more a King, sunk so deep into his Breast, that meditating
nothing after but Revenge, as soon as he returned home (securing himself first
by a League and Alliance with the King of France, to whose Brothers Daughter he
married his Son) he renounced his Allegiance, and defied King Edward's Power,
no less then he did his Justice. This begat a War betwixt the two Nations, that
continued much longer then themselves, being held up by alternate Successes
near three hundred years; a longer dated difference perhaps then is to be found
in any other Story of the World, that Rancor which the Sword bred increasing
continually by the desire of Revenge, till the one side was almost wholly
wasted, the other wholly wearied. Baliol, the same time King Edward required him
to do Homage for Scotland here, prevailed with the French King to require the
like from him for his Territories there: this began the Quarrel, that the
Division, by which King Edward, which may seem strange, parting his Greatness,
made it appear much greater, whilst himself advanced against Baliol, and sent
his Brother the Earl of Lancaster to answer the King of France. Baliol finding
himself overmatch'd, as well as over-reached, renewed his Homage, in hopes to
preserve his Honor. But King Edward resolving to bind him with stronger
Fetters then Oaths, sent him Prisoner into England: whereby those of that
Country wanting not only a Head, but a Heart, to make any further resistance,
he turned his Fury upon the King of France, hastening over what Forces he could
to continue that War, till himself could follow after. But Fortune being
preingaged on the other side, disposed that whole Affair to so many mistakes,
that nothing answered Expectation; and which was worse, the Fame of his
Male-Adventures spirited a private person (worthy a greater Wallis.
Name then he had) to rise in Scotland, who rallying together as many as durst
by scorning Misery adventure upon it, defied all the Forces of England so
fortunately, that he was once very near the redeeming his despairing
Countrymen; and had he had less Virtue, might possibly have had more success:
For scorning to take the Crown when he had won it (a Modesty not less fatal to
the whole Nation then himself) by leaving room for Ambition he made way for
King Edward to Re-enter the second time, who by one single Battle (but fought
with redoubled Courage) made himself once more Lord of that miserable Kingdom;
all the principal Opposers ( Wallis only excepted) crowding in upon Summons, to
swear Fealty the third time to him. This had been an easy Penance, had they
not; together with their Faith, resigned up their Laws and Liberties, and that
so servilely, that King Edward himself judging them unworthy to be continued
any longer a Nation, was persuaded to take from them all the Records and
Monuments, whereby their Ancestors had recommended any of Glory to their
Imitation. Amongst other of the Regalia's then lost, was that famous Marble
Stone (now lodged in Westminster-Abby) wherein their Kings were crowned, in
which (as the Vulgar were persuaded) the Fate of their Country lay, for that
there was an ancient Prophecy Engraven on it, which denoted that wherever that
Stone shou d be placed, there should the Scotch Dominion take place; a
Prediction verisied in our days in the Person of King James the Sixth, the
first of their Kings ever crowned here. With this he took away likewise all
their Books and Bookmen, as if resolved to rob them of all sense of Liberty as
well as of Liberty it self: only the brave Wallis continued yet Lord of
himself, and being free, kept up their Spirits by the Elixir of his Personal
Courage, mixed with an Invincible Constancy and Patience, till being betrayed by
one of his Companions (a Villain sit to be canonized in Hell) he was forced to
yield (though he would never submit) first to the King, after to the Laws of
England, which judging him to dye as a Traitor, eternized the Memory of his
Fidelity and Fortitude, and made him (what he could never have made himself)
the most glorious Martyr that Country ever had. No sooner was he dead but
Robert Bruce, Son to that Robert Earl of Carric, who was Competitor with
Baliol, appeared as a new Vindictor, who escaping out of the English Court
(where he had long lived unsuspected) headed the confused Body, which wanted
only a King to unite them in Counsel, Power, and Affection; but unfortunately
laying the Foundation of his Security in Blood, murdering his Cousin Cumin, who
had been one of the Competitors, upon pretense he held correspondence with King
Edward (the horror of which fact was aggravated by the manner and place, for he
took him whilst he was at his Prayers in the Church) it cost him no less blood
to wipe off that single stain then to defend his Title; the Partakers with the
Family of Cumin, who were many, mighty and eager of Revenge, joining thereupon
with the English against him.

This drew King Edward the fourth time personally into Scotland, who had he
suffered his Revenge to have given place so far to his Justice, as to have
pursued Bruce as an Offender, rather then as an Enemy, he might possibly have
done more in doing less then he did, but he not only sacrificed the two
innocent Brothers of Bruce, making them, after they became his Prisoners,
answer with their lives the penalty of their Brother's Guilt, but declared he
would give no Quarter to any of his Party, whereby he not only drove them
closer together, but armed them with Desperation; which as it has a keeper
edge then hope, so it wounded so deep, and enraged them to that degree of
Courage, as not only to give the greatest Overthrow to the greatest Army that
ever the English brought thither, but to repay the measure of Blood in as full
manner as it was given, or intended, and in the end broke the great Chain of
his well laid Design, which was to have in^arged his Power, by reducing the
whole Isle ( Wales being taken in a little before) under one Scepter, with no
less respect to the quiet then the greatness of England: but maugre all his
Power or Policy they let in a Race of Kings there, that found a way to conquer
his Successors here without a stroke, of which he seems to have had some
Prophetic knowledge upon his Deathbed, when he took so much care to make his
Revenge outlive himself, by commanding his Son Edward to carry his Bones round
about that Country (having just begun his fifth Expedition as he ended his
life) and not suffer them to be buried till he had vanquished it wholly.

Thus this great King, who spent most of his time in shedding others Blood, was
taken off by the excessive shedding of his own (for he dyed of a Dissentery)
and, like Caesar (who terrified his Enemies with his Ghost) seemed not willing
to make an end with the World after he had done with it; but (which never came
into any Kings thoughts before or since) resolved to Reign after his Dominion
was determined, being confident that his very Name (like a Loadstone which
attracts Iron to it) would draw all the English Swords to follow its fate, till
they had made good that Union, which he with so much harshness and horror had
accelerated: but as Providence, which more respects the unity of Affections,
then the Unity of Nations, did by the Borough on the Sands in the Bishopric
of Durham.
Place where he dyed, show the frailty of that Foundation he laid whilst he
lived (all his Glory expiring with himself) so Nature (as in abhorrence to the
violation of her Laws, by the effusion of so much blood as he had shed, the
most that any Christian King of this Isle ever did) turned the Blessing she
gave him into a Curse, whilst she took from him before his Eyes, three of his
four Sons, and the only worthy to have survived him, and left him only to
survive, who only was worthy never to have been born.

EDW. II.
coat of arms of King Edward II: gules, three lions passant guardant in pale
or. GREAT were the hopes conceived of this Prince, not only from the good Omen
of his Fathers Name and Courage, by both which he was entitled to his
Reputation, but from the advantage of his Experience and Years, now aged twenty
three, having seen many Parliaments, and some Battles, and by several great
Actions both in Peace and War, sufficiently instructed to make good whatever
the Virtue or Ambition of his Ancestors had entailed upon him: but as great
Heights make weak Heads giddy, and unable to look downward, so fell it out in
this crasie Kings Story, whose Reputation lessened as he rose: Notwithstanding
(which is strange to tell) the greatest Crime ever objected against him, was
that which one would have thought might have past for the greatest Virtue, his
excess of kindness to those he thought worthy to be his Friends; a real effect
of good Nature, and perhaps all circumstances considered, not otherwise ill,
then as it met with ill-natured Interpreters: now whether it were that Opinion
which had mounted above his Greatness, as it rose before it, broke like a
Bubble when it came to its height, leaving him so much more a Bankrupt in his
Credit with the People, by how much the estimation of his worth and parts had
in his younger years soared above the usual pitch of Expectation; or what else
may be the Cause, is not certain: but so it was, that like the Emperor Galba
(of whom it is said that he was Omnium Consensu Capax Imperii nisi Imperasset)
he lost himself so much, that many who had allowed him to be a brave Man before
he was a King, being so, would not allow him worthy to be a Prince. And
possibly it might be a Judgment from Heaven upon him, to be put beside the
Reverence due to him as the Father of his Country, for the disrespect he showed
to him that was his own Father, whose last Commands he broke in the first
place, beginning his Government with a double dyed Sacrilege, whiles he robbed
him not only of the honor he had reserved to himself, but of the Treasure
which he had dedicated to God: for as he neither carried his Bones through the
Country of his Christian Enemies, nor his Heart through that of his Pagan, both
which were his dying desires, so neither did he dispose the Money appointed for
pious uses as he was directed, but bestowed it upon the very same Person, who
for debauching him was by the same Will condemned to perpetual Banishment; a
fatal Boon both to the Giver and Taker: to him, as being the Occasion of such
an Affront to himself, as was never put upon any King before, all the Nobility
refusing to attend the Solemnity of his Coronation, till he had promised to
make good the Will: to the other much more, in that it eat through the Bowels
of his Fortune, and stopped not till it came to his Heart.

And now whether it was his Fault or his Fate, to dote thus upon Gaveston, who
being only a Minister to his Wantonness, could not have gained that Power he
had over him to make himself so great by lessening him, without something like
an Infatuation, the matter of Fact must declare. For before his Coronation he
made him Earl of Cornwall* and Lord of Man, both Honors belonging to the Crown:
at his Coronation (notwithstanding the Exceptions taken against him by all the
Nobility) he gave him the honor to carry King Edward's Crown before him, which
of right belonged to a Prince of the Blood to have done: and after the
Coronation, he married him up to his own Niece, the Daughter of his second
Sister Jone de Acres, by Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester: having indeed raised
him to this pitch of Greatness, as tempted him to raise himself higher, being
not content with the Power, without he might also share in the Glory of
Sovereignty, most vainly affecting the Title of KING; and if he were not King
of Man (as he desired) he was at least King in Man, ruling both there and in
Ireland like an absolute Prince, not without hopes of a fair possibility of
being (if the Kings Issue had failed) King of England after him; which Hope
made him Insolent, and that Insolence Insupportable, so that the Lords finding
it bootless to expect Justice from the King against him, resolved to do
themselves right, and without more ado let fly a whole volley of Accusations at
him. This first forced him to part from the King, and being separated, they
found it easy to make him part from himself; for it was not long before he
fell into their hands, being taken Prisoner by the Earl of Pembroke, who chopped
of his Head: a death however esteemed to be the most honorable of any other,
was to him questionless the most grievous, in that it made him stoop, who never
could endure to submit.

This violent proceeding of the Lords, as it showed a roughness of the Times
suitable to that of their own Natures, so it was the first occasion of the
second Civil War of England, which broke out like a Fire, that being long
smothered, was all in a Flame as soon almost as it was perceived; and however
Fate for some time seemed to make a Pause, whether she should begin the Tragedy
which she could not end, turning the Storm another way, by several Invasions
from Scotland, which held long enough to have diverted the virulent humor, and
let out blood enough to have cooled all their heat, allaying it so far, that
easy Intercessions prevailed to keep them asunder for some years; yet nothing
could so stop the Course of Nature, but that the monstrous Issue, when it was
come to its birth, forced its way: the Discontents that had been so long
ripening (even from the time of this Kings Great-grand-father) breaking out
like a Boil, surcharged with Anguish and Corruption, which was no sooner
emptied by the death of one, but it was filled with Rancor and Envy, by the
Entertainment of New Favorites. As Gaveston before, so the two Spencers
afterward, the Farher and the Son, took upon them to Monopolize his Grace, and
were thereupon generally charged with the odious design of bringing in an
Arbitrary Government, with imbezeling the Treasure of the Nation, and doing
several ill Offices betwixt the King and Queen, maintaining their own by
apparent wrong to the Estates of other Lords, particularly of the Earls of
Hereford and Mortimer; out of whose hands it seems they had bought some Lands,
which lying convenient to their Estates, was in the first place offered to
them: These, though they were such Objections as relating but to particular
Persons, perhaps not without particular Reasons, might be excused, if not
justified; yet being heaped up together, made a general grievance, and the Earl
of Lancaster the Bell-weather of Rebellion at that time, thought it worthy the
Barons taking up of Arms to punish them. The King answered for them, and
undertook they should come and answer for themselves; the Father, he said, was
employed by him beyond the Seas, and the Son was guarding the Cinque Ports
according to his Duty, and therefore he thought it was against Law and Custom
to condemn them unheard. But nothing would satisfy their Accusers without a
Declaration of Banishment, and though the President was such as might as well
affect themselves as their Posterity, yet Hatred being no less blind then Love,
they preser'd their present Revenge before the Fears of a future inconvenience.

All differences being thus composed, I cannot say calmed, an accidental
affront given to the Queen by one that was over-wise in his Office, put all
again out of order beyond recovery. A Castelan of the Lord Badlismers at Leeds
(denying her Majesty Lodging there as she was passing by in her Progress, out
of a Distrust she might possess her self of the Castle, and keep it for the
King) she exasperated the King to that degree, that he besieged the place, took
it, and in it the politic Governor, whom without legal Process he hanged up
presently, and seizing all the Goods and Treasure of his Lord, sent his Wife
and Children to the Tower. This was taken for so great a violation of the
Liberty of the Subject, that being done by the King himself, nothing could
determine the Right, but the Sword; and accordingly they met the second time in
Arms, where Fortune was pleased to confirm the Sentence given by the King, by
giving up into his hands many more considerable Lives, then that for which they
were hazarded; amongst the rest was that of the Earl of Lancaster himself (the
first Prince of the Blood that ever was brought to the Block here in England)
and with him fourteen of the Principal Barons, none of which were spared, but
forced to give up their Lives and Estates as a Reward to the Victors. And not
long after the Spencers were recalled and re-stated, who finding the public
Treasure wholly exhausted, and a chargeable War yet continued with Scotland,
thought it but necessary to make such Retrenchments as might enable his Majesty
to carry on that great Work, wherein he had been so unlucky, without oppressing
the People: amongst the rest, they presumed unfortunately to abridge the Queen,
lessening hers, as they had done the Kings Houshold-Train, by which Improvident
Providence they so irritated her (being a Woman of a proud vindictive Spirit)
that she privately complained thereof to the King of France her Brother, who
took that occasion to quarrel with the King about his Homage for Gascoigne, and
upon his Refusal, possessed himself of several Pieces there: and
notwithstanding all that Edmond Earl of Kent could do, whom his Brother the
King sent over with sufficient Strength, as 'twas thought, to repel him by
force, continued his Depredations there; this bringing a Necessity that either
the King must go over himself, or the Queen; the first to compel, or the other
(being his beloved Sister) to mediate with him for a Truce, each equally
inconvenient to the Spencers, who thought not sit that the King should go in
respect of the general, and were as loath the Queen should, in respect of her
particular discontent. They chose the least of the Evils, as they judged, and
sent over her, who having a great Stomach, and but a small Train, meditated
more upon her own, then her Husbands Vindication, and accordingly put an end to
the difference betwixt her Brother and him, but on such terms, as afterward
made a wider difference betwixt him and her self. The Conditions were these;
that King Edward should give to the Prince his Son the Duchy of Acquitain and
Earldom of Ponthein, and send him over to do the King of France Homage for the
same, which was to excuse that Homage before demanded from himself; and thus
she pretended to have found out an expedient to save the honor of both Kings,
in allowing each his end: But having by this sineness got her Son into her own
power, she gave her self so wholly up to her Revenge, that she suffered her
self to be led by a hand she saw not, through the dark Paths of dangerous
Intreagues, managed by those, who having other ends then hers, did work beyond,
though under her Authority. Principal in her Council, as being so in her
Affections, was young Mortimer, a Servant fit for such a Mistress, and such a
Master, as this Queen and her Husband; who having escaped out of the Tower
where he had been long a Prisoner (and as he thought very injuriously, in
respect he rendered himself to Mercy before the great Battle with the Barons,
and by his Submission contributed much to the Kings gaining that Victory)
contrived with her how to set up the Prince, and with him himself; and because
the Earl of Kent was upon the place, they made it their first business to work
off him to the Party.

Here began that fatal breach from whence the World concluded that this unhappy
King having lost one half of himself, could not long hold out before he lost
the whole, it not being reasonable to expect that his Subjects should be truer
to him then his Wife, especially since the right Heir took the wrong side. Upon
the first apprehension he recalled them home, but upon second thoughts he
forbids their Return: at first he seemed impatient of their absence, as the
only Friends he could conside in; but on a sudden he dreads their approach as
the most Mortal Enemies he had, forbids their landing by Proclamation, and sets
out no less then three Admirals to prevent it: they in like manner, whilst he
pressed for their Company, delayed their Recess; but when they found themselves
banished, grew as impatient of being kept out. The King of France not owning so
vile a design, so as to give any ready assistance to it, they withdrew into
Holland, whose Earl being a rich and politic Prince, upon the contracting
Prince Edward to his Daughter he furnished them with Money and Shipping to
transport them.

Landing at Harwich, they were so welcomed by the discontented Nobility, that
the poor King foreseeing the ensuing danger, and not finding that Faith in the
Londoners which he expected, withdrew into the West, in order to passing over
into Ireland; but meeting with a Storm at Sea that threatened as eminent danger
as that by Land, he was forced to comply with the contrary Winds, and direct
his Course toward Wales, where destitute of Council as well as Courage, he lay
obscurely, till his Majesty extinguished like a Torch held downwards.

His Son (though he was as yet under Wardship himself) was made Guardian of the
Kingdom, a Title so much greater then that of King, by how much he had the
Superiority over both: readily was he prevailed with to take away the lives of
the two fatal Favorites, the Spencers; so that 'twas thought he would not be
over-modest in taking the Crown after: it being so easy a Temptation to
consent to depose him, who had already upon the matter deposed himself.
However, Nature prevailed so much over Ambition, contrary to all their
Expectations, or Grace rather over Nature, that he refused to accept it, till
his Father might be prevailed with to give it him as a Blessing; who thereupon
resigned it, but with such a moving Meekness, as for the present time melted
the very Queen her self, and seemingly touched her with so much Regret at the
Renuntiation, that the Bishop of Hereford (the great Engineer of this
prosperous Treason) doubting her Constancy in point of Malice, to be as
uncertain as her Faith in point of Affection; or perhaps rather dreading the
young Kings Piety, backed with the old Kings power, hastened his Death by all
means possible: but finding himself for some time disappointed by the force of
Providence, or the strength of his Nature, which neither ill Air, ill Diet, nor
want of Rest could impair, he put him into the hands of two Miscreants, sit to
be employed in so black a Purpose; to whom he enclosed in a Letter one only
Line, which was so twist up, as might serve to strangle any Prince whatever,
comprehending a double sense to warrant them, and excuse himself if need were:
the words were these, Edvardum regem occidere nolite timere bonum est.

This being not pointed, the Devil who invented it, instructed them in the true
meaning of the damnable Oracle, which accordingly they put in execution with so
much cruelty and horror, that never King died as this poor Planet-struck Prince
did, having a Pipe thrust up into his Fundament (to the intent that the Marks
of their Violence might not be perceived outwardly) and through that, with a
red hot Iron they penetrated his Bowels to his Heart: yet was not this Death
possibly more miserable or grievous to him then his Life, after he became
forsaken of all his Subjects, Friends, and Allies in general, and particularly
of his own Wife, Son, and Brother, not to say of himself too (if so be we do
not reckon them a part of himself) considering with what strange abjection he
resigned first his Crown, after his Life: For to say truth, never was King
turned out of a Kingdom, or out of the World, as he was. Many Kingdoms have
been lost by the chance of War, but this Kingdom (as one observes) was lost
before any Die was cast for it: no blow struck, no Battle fought, lost before it
was taken from him, whilst by betraying himself first, he taught others to do
it after: strange Riddle of State, that a Crown should be gained forcibly, yet
without force; violently, yet with consent; both Parties agreed, yet neither
pleased; for he was not willing to leave his Kingdom, and he that was to have
it as unwilling to take it without he gave it him; the Queen was not pleased he
should part with it without he parted with his Life too, judging that by having
a part he might recover the whole; or that her self having parted with the
whole, could not entitle her self to any part, but by his Death, and therefore
having taken the Kingdom from him openly, there was a kind of necessity of
taking away his Life secretly.

Poor Prince, how unkindly was he treated upon no other account but that of his
own overgreat kindness. Other Princes are blamed for not being ruled by their
Counselors, he for being so: who whilst he lived they would have thought to be
a Sot, but being dead, they could have found in their hearts to have made him a
Saint. How far he wronged his People does not appear, there being very few or
no Taxations laid upon them all his time: but how rude and unjust they were
toward him, is but too manifest. But their Violence was severely repaid by
Divine Vengeance, not only upon the whole Kingdom, when every Vein in the Body
Politic was afterward opened to the endangering the letting out of the
Lifeblood of the Monarchy in the Age following; but upon every particular
Person consenting to, or concerned in his Death. For as the Throne of his Son
that was thus set in blood (though without his own guilt) continued to be
imbrued all his Reign, which lasted above fifty years, with frequent
Executions, Battles, or Slaughters; the Sword of Justice, or his own, being
hardly ever sheathed all his time: So it is said that the Queen her self dyed
mad upon the apprehension of her own in Mortimer's disgrace, who was executed
at Tyburn, and hung there two days to be a spectacle of Scorn. His Brother
Edmond had this punishment of his Disloyalty to be condemned to lose his Head
for his Loyalty, it being suggested (and happy it had been for him if it had
been proved) that he endeavored the Restoration of his Brother; his death
being embittered by the mockery of Fortune, whilst by keeping him upon the
Scaffold five hours together before any Body could be found that would execute
him, he was deluded with a vain hope of being saved. The Fiend Tarlton, Bishop
of Hereford, who invented the cursed Oracle that justified the murder, died
with the very same Torture as if the hot Iron that feared his Conscience had
been thrust into his Bowels. Of the two Murderers one was taken and butchered
at Sea, the other dyed in Exile perhaps more miserable: And for the Nobility in
general that were Actors in the Tragedy, they had this Curse upon them, that
most of their Race were cut off by those Civil Discords of their divided
Families, to which this strange violation gave the first beginning not long
after.

EDW. III.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

coat of arms of King Edward III: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure semy of fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion crowned and
sinister a falcon crowned. THE Minority of this Prince (being but fourteen
years old when he was crowned) however it may palliate, cannot so take off the
scandal of not preventing his death who gave him life, but that there remains a
greater blemish upon his Memory, then in Charity we can think there was in his
Conscience, and such as could not be purged away by any thing he did after he
came to be himself: For however he was at the time of committing that horrid
fact (the most unnatural we find in any Story, and not less odious for the
Circumstance, then the boldness of the Cruelty) under the Government of his
Mother, as she under that of her Minion Mortimer; yet being Master of so much
reason as to pause as he did, upon the first motion, it cannot be presumed but
he was Master of so much power, as to have prevented the have of the Execution,
especially since it was a violation of the Law of Nature, that besides other
mischiefs that attended it, taught the People by the ill Example what to do to
himself, in case he outlived (as after he did) their Affections, or his own
discretion. The best construction can be made of his Piety, rises from the
early Revenge he took upon Mortimer, which truly looked more like a piece of
Revenge then Justice; but being performed with the hazard of his own Person in
apprehending him, it shows he either was really Innocent, or abhorred that the
World should think otherwise: and he so far reconciled himself thereby to the
Opinion of the Vulgar, that he seldom wanted Friends during his long Reign, as
never an Occasion to make use of them.

He was a Prince of that admirable composure of Body and Mind, that Fortune
seemed to have fallen in Love with him; and as she contributed much to the
making him a King, and yet more to the preserving him so, so she eleva^ed him
so far above the reach of Envy or Treachery, that all the Neighbor Princes,
dazzled with the splendour of his Glory, gave place to him, not so much out of
any sense of their own defects, as of his power, whereof they could not but
have some glimpse as well as himse^f, who from his very first Ascent unto the
Throne, had a prospect of two Crowns more then he was born to; the one placed
within his reach (which was that of Scotland) to which there needed no more but
an imaginary Right to gain him the Possession; the other more remote (which was
that of France) but better secured in respect of a reputative Title, which
however opposed, could not be denied. To the attaining the first, there was a
fair opportunity offered by the unreconcileable contest of two well-match'd
Rivals, whose Right and Interest were so evenly poys'd, that the least grain of
his Power might turn the Scale either way: to the Recovery of the other, there
was yet a fairer Opportunity given him by the Revolt of Philip of Artois, one
of the first Princes of the Blood of that Kingdom, and Brother in Law to the
present King Philip de Valois; who being incensed by a Judgment given against
him for the County of Artois, recovered by his Aunt the Duchess of Burgoigne,
came over into England, with a Resolution to set aside his Title who had before
set aside his: Neither wanted he a Power suitable to his desired Revenge; for
being well acquainted with the secrets of that Kings Council, all which he
revealed to King Edward, and being able to give him good security for the
affections of several of the chief Governors there that depended on him, it is
no marvel he so quickly blew that spark of Glory which he found wrapped up in the
Embers of King Edward's ambitious Thoughts, into such a Flame, as threatening
the Destruction of that goodly Country, made all Christendom afraid of the
Consequence.

The great Question of Right betwixt the two greatest Kings of Europe being
thus set up, which in effect was no more then this, Whether the French King
should take place as Heir Male of the Collateral, and more remote Line, or the
English King as Heir of the Female, but direct Line, and one degree nearer.
Those of the other side the Water obstinately refused to tie their Crown (as
they said) to a Distaff: to which King Edward replied, he would then tie it to
his Sword. Upon this they joined Issue, and both sides prepared for the
decision by Arms. King Philip had a double advantage of the English; first in
the Loyalty and Affections of the French, as being their Natural Prince;
secondly by the authority of the Salique Law, which however it was not so
clear, but that it might admit of much dispute, yet being backed with a
Possession, which made up eleven of the twelve Points controvertable (there
having been a Succession of three Sons of Philip le Bell (Queen Isabels Father,
by whom King Edward claimed) each inheriting Successively as the next Heir
Male, notwithstanding each of them left Daughters by which the present King
Philip came now in as Heir Masculine) it seemed so like an adjudged Case, that
King Edward thinking it better to cut the Knot, then lose time in trying to
untie it, resolved to put it to the Determination of a Battle. This Resolution
of his was so lowdly proclaimed every where abroad, as well as at home, that
like Thunder before a Storm, the very noise of his Preparations made all
Christendom shake, and so shake, that it fell into Parties: the Princes of each
Country round about, like Herdsmen before a Tempest, flying some to one side,
some to another; all seeking rather to shelter themselves, then to add any
thing to the Party they flew to.

With the English King took part the Emperor, and all the Princes of Germany of
the first Rank; (the Archduke of Austria, and the Earl of Flanders only
excepted, whose People yet were on this side for their Trades sake) the Earl of
Holland, the Dukes of Brabant and Gelders, the Marquess of Juliers, the
Archbishop of Cologne, and Valeran his Brother, and diverse of the more
Northern Princes: With the French were the King of Bohemia, the two Dukes of
Austria, and the Earl of Flanders before mentioned, the Bishop of Metz, the
Marquess of Montferrat, the Earl of Geneva, the Duke of Savoy, and diverse of
the Princes of Italy, to the number (says Du Hailan) of 10000 Persons; and
which perhaps was more considerable, by how much he was nearer then all the
rest, was his enraged Brother in Law David Bruce King of Scots, a weak, but a
restless Enemy; who had reason to take part with the other side, for that he,
as the other fought against a Competitor too; King Edward having set up Baliol to
vie with him. What the number of the English Forces were is not certain, unless
we may guess at them by the Charges of their Entertainment, which (as
Walsingham tells us) cost us not so little as One hundred thousand pounds
Sterling in less then a years time; a vast Sum for those days, but very well
repaid with the Glory of the two Confederate Kings Ransoms, who being both
taken Prisoners and brought into England; the first, to wit, the King of Scots
redeemed himself for 10000 Marks; the last, to wit, the King of France, paid
for his Liberty Three millions of Crowns of Gold, whereof Six hundred thousand
were laid down presently, and Four hundred thousand more the Year after, and
the Remainder the next two years following.

The Captivity of these two Kings at one time, shows at once the Power and
Glory of this great King, who riding triumphant on the wings of Fortune, never
wanted the means to make or continue himself Victorious, and prevailing no less
over his own Subjects then over his Enemies, these subdued by his Wisdom, as
those by his Courage: Some have made it a doubt whether he got more by his
Scepter or his Sword; the benefit of Ransoms abroad (notwithstanding the many
Princes taken Prisoners) being much short of the Aids given him at home; so
that they that have taken the pains to state his Accounts, reckon that out of
that one single Imposition upon Wool (which continued Six years) he was able to
dispend a thousand Marks a day; which I have the rather noted, to show how the
Kingdom flourished as well as the King, gaining (as all wise States do) by
their layings out: for the whole Revenues of the Crown in his Grandfathers
days were esteemed to be not much above a hundred thousand Marks a year.

Five years the French King continued Prisoner here in England, time enough to
have determined the Fortune of that great Kingdom, and dissolved their Cantoned
Government into parts, had it not been a Body consisting of so many strong
Limbs, and so abounding with Spirits, that it never fainted notwithstanding all
its loss of Blood, but scorned to yield though King Edward came very near their
heart, having wounded them in the most mortal part, their Head. The Scotch King
could not recover his Liberty in double the time, being the less able to redeem
himself, for that he was upon the matter but half a King, the other half being
in the possession of Baliol, who to secure a Moiety to himself, surrendered the
whole to King Edward, whose Magnificence vying with his Justice, he gave it
back again upon Terms more befitting a Brother then a Conqueror, showing
therein a Wantonness, that no King perhaps besides himself would have been
guilty of, nor probably he neither, had either his People been less bountiful
to him, or Fortune less constant, which, to say truth, never forsook him, till
he (like his Father) forsook himself, leaving all Action, and bidding adieu to
the World ten years before he went out of it, declining so fast from the
fortieth year of his Government, that it may rather be said, his famous Son
Prince Edward (commonly called the Black Prince) reigned then he; and happy
'twas for him that when his own Understanding failed him, he had so good a
Supporter, who having it in his power to dispose of Kingdoms whilst he lived,
ought not to be denied, after he dyed, the honor of being esteemed equal to
Kings in the Prerogative of a distinct Character.

Begin we then the Date of his Government from the Battle of Crassy, which
happening in the Sixteenth year of his Age, makes the Computation of his Glory
to commence near about the same time his Fathers did (who however he was King
at fourteen, ruled not till after Mortimer's death) by which Battle he so topt
the Fortune of France (as his Father had that of England) that he may be said
to have taken thereby Livery in order to the Seisin of that Kingdom: And after
the Recovery of Calais, it may be said the Keys of the Kingdom, rather then of
that Town, were delivered into his hand; for that he therewith opened all the
Gates of almost every Town he came to, till the King of France encompassed him
like a Lion in a Toil, with no less then 60000 of the best Men of France, and
brought him to that straight, that it seemed alike disadvantageous to sight or
yield, and (which made the danger more considerable as things then stood)
England it self was in some hazard of being lost with him: here he seemed to
have been as well accomptable to his Country, as to his Father for his Courage
and Discretion; and how well he acquitted himself appears by the Sequel: when
forcing Hope out of Despair (like fire out of a Flint) he necessitated his Men
to try for Conquest, by showing them how impossible 'twas for him to yield; and
by that incomparable Obstinacy of his, made Fortune so enamored of his
Courage, that she followed him wherever he went, while his Sword made its way
to Victory, and his Courtesy to the Affections of the Conquered, whom he
treated with that regard and generosity, that many of them were gainers by the
loss, being dismissed with honorable Presents, that made his second Conquest
over them greater then the first; the King of France himself being so well
pleased with his Bondage, that he returned voluntarily into England after he
was redeemed, to meet two Kings more that might be Witness of his Respect and
Gratitude: In short, he was as King of England on the other side the Water, as
his Father was on this side, keeping so splendid a Court in Acquitaine, that no
less then three Kings came to visit him too all at once; these were the King of
Majorque, Navar, and Castile: the last of which craving Aid of him against an
Usurper, who was backed by an Army consisting of no less then One hundred
thousand men (if the Writers of those times say true) was re-instated
accordingly by his single power, to show the World that he could as well make
Kings as unmake them. His second Brother, who had the Title of King by marrying
with the King of Castile's Daughter and Heir, being principally indebted to him
for the honor of that Title, and it proved a fatal Debt both to him and his
Son Richard the Second, costing the one his Life, the other both Life and
Kingdom too: for as himself never recovered the health he lost in undertaking
that Expedition, so his Son never recovered the disadvantage put upon him
afterward by his Uncle Lancaster, who by that means having got the Regency of
his drooping Father King Edward, who tired with Action rather then Age, fatally
submitted to the loss of more years of his Government, then he got by his
unnatural Anticipation from his own Father, and suffered himself to be buried
alive (as we may say) under his Cradle, put fair for setting his Nephew aside,
but wanting a Color for so apparent an Injustice (his jealous Father the Black
Prince, having declared him his Successor in his life time, to prevent all
tricks) he thought it enough to make way for his Son to do it, and accordingly
put such an impression of dislike upon the innocent Youth at his very first
Edition, as proved Indelible in his riper years: for the very same day he was
presented to take his Grandfathers Seat in Parliament, as Heir apparent to the
Crown (being then but eleven years old) he taught him to demand a Subsidy,
purposely to turn the Peoples blood, who were then big with their Complaint of
Taxes. But possibly he is made more splenetick, as well as more politic, then
he was; for it was scarce possible to make the Youth more odious then he had
made himself before, by disgusting those two potent Factions of the Church and
the City of London, who, to show how weary they were of his governing the old
Child his Father, would not after his Death let him longer Rule the young Child
his Nephew, but purposely deposed him, to the end (as they said) that he might
not depose the other.

Thus this great King ended as ingloriously as he began, who having stepped into
the Throne a little before he should, it is the less wonder he left it a little
before it was expected he would: especially if we consider, that in out-living
the best Wife, and the best Son in the World, he had a little outlived
himself; being so unfortunate, notwithstanding his great good Fortunes, as to
see his Glory unravel'd, as well as his Happiness, in great part: there being
nothing left him of all his great Gettings abroad, purchased with so much
Travel, Expense, and Bloodshed, but only the poor Town of Calais, which
signified no more then a Gate of a City left open, when all the rest is possessed
by too potent an Enemy. But we must look on it as a Curse that he inherited with
his Crown, not to be permitted to dye till he saw himself (as his Father was)
forsaken of every Body, but a poor Priest, that only tarried to torment him
with the remembrance of his Sins, and left him at last as he left the World, in
such a state of uncertainty, that our Historians are yet to seek whether to
place him amongst the rank of our fortunate or unfortunate Princes; the fatal
divisions of his Posterity (which took their first rise from his weakness)
being so pernicious to the whole Kingdom, as well as to themselves, that if the
Dead know any thing of what is done amongst the Living, he needed no other Hell
to torture his guilty Spirit then the vision of those murdered Princes of his
own Blood, whose Ghosts just led one another where ere they met.

RICH. II.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

coat of arms of King Richard II: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure semy of fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion or crowned and
sinister a heart argent. THE Black Prince, this Kings Father (whose Wisdom
doubtless was no way short of his Courage) knowing how apt they are who stand
nearest to a Throne to step first into it, was so intent to prevent any
disorder of that kind, that might be feared from the well-known Ambition of his
aspiring Brothers (the eldest of which having the Title of King, but without
any Kingdom, in the right of his Wife, might reasonably be suspected to affect
one so much the more, in his own Right, and probably to take the same advantage
(if he could) of his Nephew Richard's weakness, as King John his Ancestor had
heretofore done of that of his Nephew Prince Arthur) made it his dying Request
to his declining Father, to inaugurate his Son whiles he was yet alive, that by
being committed to the Parliaments care, he might have public Security against
all private Supplantations, and without further dispute enjoy all those
Prerogatives which either his own Right or his Fathers Merit entitled him to:
whereupon (as I noted before) he was set upon the Throne at Eleven years old,
and in the life time of his Grandfather, began his Reign with this Happiness,
that at the same time he took upon him to govern them, the Parliament entered
into Consultation about the Persons fittest to govern him: And because the
safety of the Kingdom, as well as of the King consisted in the Multitude of
Counselors, they were of Opinion to add to his Uncle Lancaster (who put in to
be Protector) the two other Brothers, Edmond Earl of Cambridge, and Thomas of
Woodstock, afterward Duke of Gloucester, with whom they conjoined several
Temporal and Spiritual Lords of known Wisdom and Integrity. This so offended
the Duke, as thinking it a dangerous reflex on his Ambition, not to be trusted
solely, he refused the Charge, and retiring into the Country, so played the King
at his own House, that a poor well-meaning Friar thought himself obliged in
point of Allegiance, to accuse him of an intention to Usurp the Kingdom, and
consequently to destroy the King: neither wanted he matter enough (as it is
thought) to make out that Charge; but what he wanted of Innocence was so made
up by Power; the unseconded Accusation was easi^y turned upon the Friendless
Accuser, who being thereupon cast into Prison, was afterward inhumanly made
away by those that had him in Custody, who tying one end of a Cord about his
Neck, the other to his Privy Members, hung him upon a Pin, and with the weight
of a Stone laid upon his Belly, burst his back, and so all further Crimination
deceased with him. The Impunity of this Treason derogated so much from the
Kings Justice and Wisdom, that it lessened him apparently in the Opinion of the
People, who not being able to distinguish betwixt his want of skill or power to
punish, began from thenceforth to worship the Duke (as the Indians does the
Devil) out of fear, whiles he in the mean time omitted no occasion to propagate
Tumults and encourage Faction, and in a little time, by seeming to make the
Peoples Discontents the ground of his own (who goaded and vexed with needless
Taxes, were like mad Oxen, ready to break the Yoke of Authority from off their
Necks) got the opinion of being their great Patriot.

Now as it is easy to kindle a great Fire with very little blowing, when the
matter is fitly disposed to burn, so it happened very unluckily, that from the
casual Rudeness of an inconsiderable Tax-gatherer, that came into the House of
a poor Tiler of Deptford, and would have turned up the Coats of his young
Daughter, to see whether she were of Age to pay her Poll-mony, there was
occasioned so overgrown a Riot, as bearing down all respect of Laws, Order, or
Government, was not to be appeased with the Blood of three of the principal'st
Ministers of State, that is to say, the Chancellor (although he were
Archbishop of Canterbury) the Treasurer, and the Lord Chief Justice, and came
at last so near to Majesty it self (for some of the Rebels were little less
rude with the Kings own Mother, then his Officer had been with their Captains
Daughter) that 'twas thought nothing could deliver the King himself from the
approaching Danger, but meeting it half way: which he did with so well tempered
a Courage, as never King before him showed, except Caesar, and he but once; or
his own Father at the Battle of Poctiers, when begirt with as many perhaps, but
not so insolent nor unworthy Foes. This being as much beyond the expectation of
his Years, as of his Enemies, charmed them into a Submission for a while; but
the Distemper being universal and raging, and the Contagion spread insensibly
through so many parts of the Kingdom, it was not possible to heal the Evil with
a Touch only. However, one would have thought so hopeful a Prince as this was,
the Son of so brave a Father, and fortified with so unpregnable a Title, could
not likely have miscarried, but must have stood firm as a Mountain, whose top
was above all Storms; but the same Stars ruling at his Birth that governed his
Great-grand-fathers Nativity, it is no marvail, being of the same temper, he
should fall under the same fate, to be kept by Flatterers from the knowledge of
himself, till being not himself, he too late saw his Error in the experience of
their Falsehood.

The first ten years of his Government (which were the better, though not the
longer part of it) he reigned with great splendour, if so be we may properly say
he reigned whiles he was under the dispose of others, taking all occasions to
let those that attempted to disturb him both at home and abroad, especially his
right and left hand Enemies, the French and Scots, feel the sharpness of his
Sword, and the weight of his Power, forcing the first to quit their chief
Design, having prepared a Navy of 1287 Ships to invade him; the other to quit
their chief City, which he thereupon reduced into Ashes, to make a Bonefire
that might give the whole Kingdom notice of his Victory. But after he came to
be of Age to do all himself, he began very visibly to undo himself, hastening
the slow pace of his De^^iny, by quarrelling with his Parliaments; who being
actuated by the subtilty of his emulous Uncles, gathered strength by the
discovery of his weakness, and taking all advantages against him in point of
Right or Reputation, urged their Privileges so far in derogation of his
Prerogative, that he could not forbear telling them the very next Sessions
after, he was out of his Wardship (as he was wont to call it) that he perceived
they had a mind to rebel, and therefore thought he could do no better then to
ask Aid of his Cousin the King of France, into whose hands (he said) he had
rather fall, being a Prince, then submit to his own Subjects. A rash and
unadvised Reply: which however it seemed to be the Result of a proud and
vindictive Stomach, was in truth so abject and low, so unlike himself, and so
like his little Great-Grandsire Henry the Third, that they taking Example from
the Nobility of that time, as he from that King, immediately put the Government
into the hands of thirteen Lords, of whom his turbulent Uncle Gloucester was
the Chief, who having Divisum Imperium, looked like a great Wen upon the Face of
the State, that drew all the ill humors of the Body Politic to it. The Duke
of Ireland, that was the principal Councellor of his party, and his Uncle by
Marriage, was so amazed at the sudden birth of this Oligarchy, that not daring
to give any Opinion of his own in the Case (although he were a man of
sufficient Courage and Authority) he put him upon advising with all the Judges,
possibly that what himself should think fit, might pass for Law out of their
mouths: and accordingly Questions were framed to be proposed to them, by which
it was easier understood what the King would have to be Law, then what in truth
was so. To all which having received positive Resolves on the Kings side, the
next Consultation was how to frame such a House of Commons as might be brought
to take part with the King against the Lords: and forthwith Letters were
directed to all the Sheriffs and Justices of Peace in every County, to
interpose their Credit and Authority, for the choosing of such Persons, Knights
and Burgesses for the next Sessions, as the King and his Council had named in a
List sent to them.

This looked like so dangerous an Industry, that the Regency took the Alarm at
it, and trusting to no other remedy, flew to Arms. The King thereupon demanded
Aid of the City of London; but they failing his Expectation, the Lords grew so
bold as to send to him to deliver up his ill Counselors, whom they called
Traitors and Seducers. Upon this there were very great and grave Deliberations,
each man being to advise at the price of his own Head: the Arch bishop of York,
like a man of great Faith, was of Opinion to sight them with such present
Strength as the King had, trusting to the Justice of the Cause: the Dukes of
Ireland and Suffolk, men of Action, but wanting the means, were for delivering
up Calais to the French King, to purchase his Assistance. But the Majority of
Voices coming from such men, whose Fears made them rather wise then honest,
were for appeasing the Enemy with fair promises, till there were a fit
opportunity to suppress them: the first Proposal was thought very hazardous;
the second much more: besides, there was such a bitterness in the Pill, that no
preparation could make the King to swallow it, who not knowing what effect it
might have when it was done, utterly rejected it: upon which they secretly
withdrew that gave the Counsel, and left him to himself. Whereupon the Lords
Regent found an opportunity to be admitted to a Parley with him; who producing
to him Letters from the King of France, which they had intercepted, pursuant to
the Design of bringing in a Foreign Enemy, they moved him no less by shame
then dread of the Consequence, to consent to the calling another Parliament.

Upon the day of the Convention, the King came not to the House, being
infinitely troubled in his mind at News he had just then received of the Earl
of Derby's Intercepting the Duke of Ireland (who being gone as far as Chester,
in order to his passing into that Kingdom, was set upon by the said Earl, and
totally defeated, who hardly escaping fled into the Low Countries, where not
long after he dyed.) The Lords heightened with this Success, sent a very harsh
Message to him, letting him know that they attended him there, and if he would
not come to the House according to promise, they would choose another King that
should hearken to their faithful advice. This though it were in effect no
other, but to tell him they would depose him without his consent, if he would
not come and consent to be deposed; yet having no Retreat from it, but down a
steep Precipice, he chose rather to comp^y, and put himself under the mercy of
Providence, then under the uncertainty of their Mercy. Upon his first
appearance they presented him with a black Roll of those whom he called his
Friends, they his Enemies, some to be prescribed, some to be imprisoned, and
others banished; and in this last List there were not only Lords but Ladies
found Delinquents: Some were accused of imbeziling his Treasure; others of
purloyning his Affection; all for robbing him of his Honor: whereupon some
were to be tried for their Lives, others for their Fortunes, and all for their
Liberties: but in respect of their other great Affairs which were in order to
what followed, they referred it to the succeeding Parliament, not unfitly
called the Parliament that wrought wonders; which contrary to all other
Parliaments that used to swear Obedience to the King, required an Oath of him
himself, to observe such Rules and Orders as they should prescribe to him.

Here now we have this unfortunate Prince brought to the last year of his Rule,
though not of his Reign, beginning then to enter into his Wardship (as he
called it) when he thought he was just got out of it. All power was put into
the hands of the Dukes of Lancaster and Gloucester, who managed all Treaties
abroad, concluded War and Peace as they thought fit, and were indeed absolute
in every point, but the Command of their own Passions, and uncontrollable by
any but themselves. The Duke of Lancaster having now digested the Kingdom in
his thoughts, procures the Duchy of Acquitaine to be settled on him, as an
earnest of what was to follow, being the Inheritance of the Crown, and
descended on the King from Prince Edward his Father: and having married up the
King to a Child of eight years old, by whom 'twas impossible he could have
Issue, with a Portion that scarce defraid the Charge of the Solemnity, he
secured his own Pretensions, by Legitimating three of his Bastard Sons, in case
his lawful Issue should fail. The Duke of Gloucester had the same Ambition in
his heart, as well as the same Blood in his Veins, but Nature having put a
disadvantage upon him by placing him so far behind (being the sixth Son of King
Edward the Third) he was forced to gratify his Envy, instead of his Ambition,
and rest content with the hopes of doing his Brother a Mischief when time
served, without any great probability of doing himself good. Accordingly he
made a Faction, who conspired with him to seize the King, his two Brothers
Lancaster and York, and to put them all up in Prison, and after to execute
diverse Lords whom he thought to be more his Enemies, then their Friends; but
the end of his Treason being to be himself betrayed by those he made use of.
Lancaster came thereby to stand single, like a great Tree, which being at its
full height, spread his Limbs the wider, and grew to be so conspicuous, that
the succeeding Parliament desired to shelter themselves under the shadow of his
power: hereupon he reduced the number of the thirteen Regents to seven only,
which being all his Confidents, he with them concluded aforehand all Affairs of
moment, and directed how they should pass in Parliament: An Example not less
mischievous to the Kingdom then the King: so that now there wanted no more to
make him the Sovereign but the putting on the Crown.

But see the uncertainty of humane Glory: Having just finished the great work
of his Usurpation, an unexpected blow from that invisible hand that turns about
the great Wheel of Causes, broke the frame of his projection in pieces. His Son
Henry Duke of Hereford accused by the Duke of Norfolk of Treason, was forced to
purge himself by the Trial of Combat: a Law that might condemn, but never
acquit him, since it was only possible to discharge himself of the danger, but
never of the suspicion of the Crime. This being urged so far, that they were
both brought into the List, there was no way left to avoid the uncertainty of
the Fight, but banishment of both; wherein though the Duke of Lancaster got the
favor to make the Exile of his Son but temporary, when the others was
perpetual, yet the affront that Fortune seemed to give him by this accidental
Disgrace, came so near his heart, that his Son had no sooner taken leave of his
Country, but he bid adieu to the World, and so left the King once more Horse de
page.

Thus Time and Fortune seem to have conspired in vindicating the wrongs of this
abused Prince, ridding him at once of those two great Corrivals in Power, whose
Authority had so far outweighed his, that they kept him in the condition of a
Minor, till they had made the People believe him insufficient for Government;
the one being removed beyond all possibility, the other beyond all probability
of Return: whereby he became so much at ease in his own thoughts, that being
upon the wing again, he thought himself not only Master of himself, but of
every body else; and now despising all after-claps, he seized upon all the
Dukes Estate to his own use, which as it looked like a Revenge now he was dead,
that might have past for a piece of Justice if he had been living, so it gave
many cause to pity the Duke his Son, who otherwise could have been well enough
content never to have seen him more. Neither was this the worst on it, but
apprehending from what the King did to him, what possibly he might do to any of
them, they made his particular suffering the ground of their Public
Resentment, which Hereford took upon the first bound, and made that good use of
it, that when he came after to claim the Crown, that it appeared the best
color of Right he had was from this wrong, whereof yet the King was no way
sensible, who (as I said before) despising all dangers at home, directed all
his Caution to those abroad only, taking with him young Henry of Monmouth, the
Duke of Hereford's, and since his Fathers Death, Duke of Lancaster's Son and
Heir, into Ireland, whither he went to suppress some Rebels. This, however it
seemed to be an occasion of Glory which the Bravery of his Youth could not
suffer him to pretermit, whilst those petty Kings, who were eye witnesses of
his disproportionate Power, taught their undisciplined People Obedience, by the
Example of their own Submission; yet it proved an empty Affectation, and so
much more fatal in the Consequence, by how much it was scarce possible to
conceal, much less recover his Error, till the Exiled Duke of Lancaster took
his advantage of it, who finding him out of his Circle, returned into England
with that speed, as if he had been afraid lest Fortune should change her mind
before he could change his condition.

Great was the concourse of People that congratulated his Arrival, neither was
their confluence less considerable for Quality then Number: the Archbishop of
Canterbury (banished for being one of the Confederates with the Duke of
Gloucester) the Earls of Northumberland, Westmoreland, Darby, and Warwick, the
Lords Willoughby, Ross, Darcy, Beaumont, and diverse others, besides Knights and
Esquires of great Repute in their Countries, who offered to serve him with
their Lives and Fortunes: and as they moved they increased so fast, that the
Duke of York (left Regent during the Kings absence) thought it convenient to
attend him at Berclay Castle, and from thence to Bristow, where the first
Tragedy began; for there finding the Earl of Wiltshire the Lord High Treasurer,
with Sir Henry Ewin, Sir Henry Bussy, both men of great note of the Kings
party, they arraigned them there for misgoverning of the King, and having smote
off their Heads, proceeded to imprison the Bishop of Norwich, Sir William
Elmeham, Sir Walter Burleigh, and diverse others upon the same account, setting
up a direct Tyranny, which continued six Weeks before the King (by reason of
contrary winds) heard any thing of it.

Upon the first notice given him, he made a show of being so little concerned
at it, that he declared he would not stir out of Dublin, till all things
fitting for his Royal Equipage were made ready: but understanding afterward
that they had seized several of his Castles, he sent over the Earl of Salisbury
to make ready an Army against his landing, promising to follow him in six days
after; but the Wind, or rather his Mind, changing, the Earls Forces (believing
he might be dead) disbanded again, and left their unfortunate General to
himself. Eighteen days after this the King arrived, who finding how things
stood, for they had taken off the Heads of several of his chief Counselors,
imprisoned the principallest of his Friends, and gotten the possession of many
of his strong Forts and Castles, his Heart so failed him on the sudden, that he
immediately gave Command to the Army that was with him to Disband: and so
degenerate were his Fears, that when he could not prevail with them to quit him
(for they all resolved to dye in his Defense, and being moved with no less Pity
then Duty to see him so dejected, solemnly vowed never to leave him) he most
wretchedly gave them the Temptation to break their Faith, by leaving them
first, withdrawing himself by night unknown to Conway Castle, where he
understood the Earl of Salisbury was. But as a King can no more hide himself
then the Sun, which however eclipsed, cannot be lost, so it was not long ere
the Duke of Hereford found him out, and drawing his Forces to Chester, sent
from thence the Earl of Northumberland to assure him of his Faith and Homage,
upon Condition he would call a free Parliament, and there permit Justice to be
done to him.

Here Fortune seems to have made one stand more, to give him time, if possible,
to recover himself; but he instead of giving an Answer worthy the Dignity of a
King, did what was indeed unworthy a Private man, begging of the Earl to
interpose with the Duke for him, that he might only have an honorable Allowance
to lead a private life, deposing himself unexpectedly before the other could have
the time and opportunity, however he might have the thought to do it solemnly.
The notice hereof did not a little surprise the Duke, when he heard of it, who
doubting least there was something more in it then he perceived, wisely kept
himself within the bounds of seeming Obedience, and treated his Majesty with
all imaginable respect, till they arrived at London: then under pretense of
securing him, he lodged him in the Tower, where he made him the Instrument of
his own destruction, by calling a Parliament that had no other business but to
arraign his Government, and impeach him; and accordingly Articles were drawn up
against him, which show how small a matter turns the Scale when Power is put
into the Balance against Justice. The chief of them were as follows; 1. That
he had been very profuse [a very grievous Crime in a King so young.] 2. That he
had put some to death [that conspired to depose him.] 3. That he had borrowed
more money then he was well able to pay [the first King that ever lost his
Crown for being in Debt, and yet was not to be said he was altogether a
Bankrupt, that had in his Coffers when he dyed the value of Seven hundred
thousand pounds.] 4. That he said the Law was in his Breast and Head [and
perhaps the Lawyers would have made it good if they durst, who have given it
for an Axiom of the Law, that the King is Caput, Principium, and Finis
Justitiae.] 5. That he changed Knights and Burgesses of Parliament at his
pleasure [by making those Peers of the Realm whom he thought worthy the
honor.] 6. That he said the Lives and Goods of his Subjects were under his
power] [which shows what confidence he had in their Loyalty and good
Affections.] 7. That he ordered an Impeachment against those Lords that took
upon them the Government by Authority of Parliament [Indeavouring to reduce
those under the Law that had so apparently broken through all Law.] 8. That in
the management of that Affair he consulted with all the Judges [Whereas it had
been fitter perhaps to have consulted with all the Swordmen of his Kingdom.]
9. That he caused his Uncle Gloucester to be made away privately at Calais
[When he found he had not power to take him off publicly at home.] 10. That he
took off the Earl of Arundel 's Head, notwithstanding a Charter of Pardon given
him but a little before [Finding that he continued to abuse his Favor by
carrying on the old Conspiracy.] 11. That he defended himself with Force [When
the Lords assailed him with Force.] 12. That though he had made Proclamation
that the Lords whom he Arrested, were not Arrested for any Crime of Treason,
yet [when he was better informed by his Councel] he laid Treason to their
Charge [and proved it.] 13. That he grievously Fined those that took part with
the Lords against him [Which being paid out of the Estates forfeited to him,
was a great Discouragement to all honest men that should ever have a mind to
turn Rebels afterward.] 14. That when he went over into Ireland, he carried
with him the Plate and Jewels of the Kingdom [Without asking any body leave,
that he might appear as like a King there as he did here, which could not but
be very displeasing to them that would have him like one no where.]


Upon these scarce grievous Articles he was deposed, or rather he deposed
himself (for the Duke who had laid the Foundation of his Hypocrisy lower then
to fear any under-mining, refusing (by the Example of his Grandfather) to
accept the Crown, unless he would tender it to him) he became so humble, not
only to do so, but which was yet viler, made it his Suit to the Usurper to
accept of it from his hand, and as it were bribed him with the Signet on his
own Finger, which he delivered as a Seal, to ratify his voluntary Resignation.

Strange Metamorphosis! When the Lion, instead of endeavoring to take that
noble Revenge, which makes all the Herd to tremble, as often as they see him
offended, crouches and fawns like a Dog on him that beat him. Who was not
tempted to quit his Allegiance, that saw their King thus turn Traitor to
himself, making good the dismal Presage of that River, which but a little
before, to the amazement of all men, turned its natural Course, and left the
Channel dry; forgetting the miserable Example of his Great-grandfather, who
hoping to save his Life by not struggling for it, lost it with more horror, and
less pity.

Who knows not that the Prisons of Princes are their Graves, from whence they
never return, till the general Resurrection. The Usurper could not sleep at all
after the Resignation, till the deposed King slept his last, the Wrong that he
had done him beating a continual Alarm upon his Conscience: neither could he
eat his meat with alacrity, but sighing as he sat at Table, bemoaned his
having no Friend so faithful, or rather so faithless, as to deliver him from
his Fears, leaving those about him to guess what he meant. And no sooner did
these Thoughts of his take vent, but a ready Paracide taking his Cue to be the
Executioner of his black purpose, hasted unbidden to the place where the
Captive King was, and timed his Treason so near to that of his Order, as to
take him off just as he was at meat, assailing him with eight Ruffians armed
with Holberts, four of which this wretched King killed before he sunk, and
possibly had delivered himself from the rest, had not their Captain Paracide,
Sir Pierce Exon (whose Name for Infamy sake must never be forgotten) come
behind him and beat out his Brains with a Pole-Axe.

Thus fell Richard the Second as his Great-grand-father Edward the Second, and
both as unhappily as their Ancestors William and Henry the Second long before:
neither of whom dyed a dry death; the first being killed by his own Servant,
the other by his own Sons. And whether there was any thing fatal in that Number,
I know not, but so it was that the Seconds of those Kings amongst the Danes
were not much more fortunate. Eric the Second, Anlaff the Second, and Canute
the Second, all came, as well as those amongst the Normans, to untimely Ends:
the first being butchered by the hands of his own Sons; the second killed upon
a mistake by one of his own Domestics; and the last made as it were Felo de
se, having drunk himself so dead, that he fell down with the Cup at his Nose.
And as amongst the Normans and Danes, so it is observable amongst the English
Monarchs, that Edward the Second, thereupon surnamed the Martyr, was murdered
by his Mother in Law; and Ethelred the Second, though he dyed not a violent,
scarce dyed a timely death, being perfectly worn out with continual Troubles,
whilst he found himself unable to recover the Consumption either of his Body or
his Estate.

However, none of these were yet so unfortunate as this King, who being so
unwilling and unfit to dye, yet contributed most to his own Death.

HEN. IV.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

coat of arms of King Henry IV: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure semy of fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter an heraldic antelope
argent, armed, crined and collared and sinister a swan argent crowned and
collared. IT has been observed of Usurpers in General, that most of them have
endeavored, but all desired, to lay the Foundation of their Greatness in
Religion. But we have no particular Example more remarkable then that of this
King, who though he were so confessed an Usurper, that those that speak most
for him, make it rather a matter of Convenience than Right, that he was
admitted to the Crown, and that for his Countries sake (as they say) rather
then his own; not being able to serve it so well, being a Subject, as when he
was a King: Yet, as if Heaven it self had declared for him, as the only King
that came in by Predestination, he rose up in Parliament, and Crossing himself
with great show of Devotion, began to make his Claim In Nomine Domini, etc. as
if he had been about to Conjure, saying, In the Name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, I Henry of Lancaster Claim the Crown of England, as
descended by the Right Line from Henry the Third.

And it is observable that he claimed in the name of the Father, not of his
Father; for thereby hung a Tale, his own Father being but the fourth Son,
whereas King Richard's Father was the first Son of Edward the Third. Secondly,
he claimed in the name of the Son, forgetting whose Son he put by (for King
Richard derived himself from Edward the First, the eldest Son of Henry the
Third, he but from Edmond Earl of Lancaster, the second Son of that Henry the
Third.) Lastly, he claimed in the Name of the Holy Ghost, smothering that check
of Conscience which he was afterward forced to reveal, when he came to give up
the Ghost. But this we may the less wonder at, if we consider that 'twas in a
time when the Devil was seen in the likeness of a Friar (as our Histories tells
us) and therefore an Usurper might as well appear in the likeness of a Saint,
although he had no more Morality, then what Lib. 1.
Tacitus observed in the Emperor Galba, whom he describes to be Magis extra
vitia quam cum virtutibus.

Such was his power that no man contradicted him, Heaven having decreed that he
should contradict himself: for at the same time he made out his Title by
Descent, he acknowledged that he came in by Conquest, assuring the People that
every one should enjoy his own, as freely as in times of Lawful Succession
(they are his own words) but when he came to treat with Foreign Princes, that
were as well versed in the nature of Politic Treacheries as himself, he
pretended then to be chosen by the unanimous Consent and Election of the
People; to whom, that he might appear restored as by Divine Providence, he
appointed the day of his Coronation to be upon the very same day, wherein the
year before he had been Banished: and to hold up the Cheat, he was anointed
with an Oil, which (as 'twas pretended) was delivered to his Father, together
with this Prophecy, That all the Kings that received their Chrisme from it
should be Champions of the Church; which (as the Legend holds forth) coming by
chance to the hands of King Richard, as he was going for Ireland, he would have
been anointed therewith, had not the Archbishop of Canterbury dissuaded him
from it, as not being lawful to be anointed twice; however he was resolved to
entitle himself self so far to the virtue of it, as to style himself Defensor
Fidei.

The only man that withstood this Kings Usurpation, and would not be persuaded
to swim down the Stream with the rest of the Time-serving Nobility, was the
bold Bishop of Carlisle, who having so frankly discharged himself upon the
occasion of Debating in Parliament, what should be done with King Richard (for
as yet they had not taken away his Life, though they had taken his Crown) and
by a Speech as eloquent as pious, showed what was the Complexion and Face of
those Juggling Times, and what was expected, from what was done, and what was
done upon the found of the present Expectations. I have thought it a respect
due to the honor of his singular Merit, to set it down expressly as he spoke
it, to the end the Reader may judge whether he had not Reason enough to
justify his Passion (and pity 'twas he had not power enough to justify that
Reason) when combining with others of the same Judgment to Restore his true
Sovereign, he gloriously lost himself in the Attempt, and with himself the
unfortunate King he would have saved: The words of his Speech were as
follows; My Lords,
THE matter now propounded is of mavelous weight and consequence, wherein
there are two Points chiefly to be considered: the first, Whether King Richard
be sufficiently put out of his Throne: the second, Whether the Duke of
Lancaster be lawfully taken in. For the first; How can that be sufficiently
done, when there is no Power sufficient to do it? The Parliament cannot do it,
for the King is Head of the Parliament: and can the Body pull down the Head.
You will say, but the Head may bow it self down, and so may the King resign. It
is true: but of what Force is that that is done by Force; and who knows not
that King Richard's Resignation was no other. But suppose he be lawfully out,
yet how comes the Duke of Lancaster to be lawfully in? If you say by Conquest,
you speak Treason: for what Conquest without Arms; and can a Subject take Arms
against his lawful Sovereign, and not be Treason: if so, then whoever Arms
against him successfully, does it rightfully; and what hope of Peace at this
rate. If you say by Election of State, you speak not Reason: For what power
has the State to Elect, while any is living that has Right to succeed? but
such a Successor is not the Earl of Lancaster, as descended from Edmund
Crouchback, the elder Son of Henry the Third, put by the Crown for deformity of
Body; for who knows not the falseness of this Allegation, seeing it is a thing
notorious that this Edmund was neither the elder Son, nor yet Crook-backt
(though called so for some other Reason) but a goodly Personage, and without
any Deformity; and your selves cannot forget a thing so lately done, The Earl
of March.
who it was that in the fourth year of King Richard was declared by Parliament
to be Heir of the Crown, in case King Richard should die without Issue: but why
then is not that Claim made good? because that Inter Arma silent Leges; what
disputing of Titles against the stream of Power. But howsoever, it is extreme
Injustice that King Richard should be condemned without being heard, or once
allowed to make his Defense: and what can we Subjects expect when our King is
thus abused. My Lords, I have spoken this at this time, that you may consider
of it before it is too late, for as yet it is in your power to undo that justly,
which you have unjustly done.



Those last words expressed a Zeal that seemed to have something of the same
effect as that of Lightning, which is said to melt the Sword without so much as
singeing the Scabard: For however no body that heard him, appeard to be warm by
what he said, yet a secret Fire was shot into many of their Breasts, that after
it came to be thoroughly kindled in their Consciences, could not be extinguished,
no not with Blood: so that they continued their Resentments not for their own
Lives only, but entailed the Quarrel upon their Posterity, even until the
House of Clarence recovered their Right in the third Generation after.

Now as a Clergyman first declared against this King, so a Clergyman first
Engaged against him, without considering his holy Unction, which made him the
great Champion of the Church (for however the Churchmen are willing that
others should belive their Miracles, themselves do not) this was the politic
Abbot of Westminster, a great Book-states-man, who invited several of the Chief
Nobility into a Combination to take away his Life (so that Killing no Murder,
is no Modern Tenet) and admitting what he suspected only, there might be some
reason for it; for who would not dispatch an Enemy to God, the King, and the
Church, one that therefore had unduly made himself King, that he might rob the
great King of Kings of his due: the ground of this Jealousy was upon certain
words uttered in the Abbots hearing, whilst he was Duke of Hereford; viz. That
Princes had too little, and Clergymen too much: upon which he concluded he
would be a Persecutor of the Church, rather then a Patron. Neither it seems was
the Abbot only of that Opinion, but the Nation in general; otherwise the House
of Commons would not (as they did afterward) frame a Bill for settling the
Church Lands in the Crown, as believing it would be an acceptable Oblation to
him: Upon which this Abbot, and the Bishop before named, and five Temporal
Lords, to wit, the Dukes of Exeter, Surry, and Albemarle, and the two Earls of
Salisbury and Gloucester, with many Knights and Gentlemen their Friends,
complotted to dispatch him at a public Just or Tournament to be held at
Oxford, where they hoped, coming armed (as the fashion was upon such Occasions)
they might as easily take him off, as the Roman Senate did Caesar: neither
indeed was the Plot ill laid, had not the same Power that set him up, protected
him against all their Machinations, diverting the Destiny upon themselves by
such a strange and unexpected discovery, as shows that Secrecy in Treason
signifies nothing, unless it could be hid from the All-seeing Eye of
Providence. The Duke of Albemarle in his way to Oxford, gave a needless visit
to his Father the Duke of York, who sitting at the Table, chanced to spy
something like a Scrole or Parchment in his Sons Breast, whereupon he demanded
what it was, and being not satisfied, suddenly he snatched it out with some
passion: and upon view, finding it to be a Counterpart of the Indenture of
Confederacy, he ordered his Horses to be immediately made ready, with intention
to go to the King, then at Windsor, to discover the Plot to him: but Youth
being more active then Age, the Son got before him, and being himself the first
Accuser of himself, obtained his Pardon before his Father could come to prove
him Guilty. The rest of the Lords suspecting by his not keeping time with them,
that all was discovered, fly to Arms, and setting up a Counterfeit Richard, who
they pretended was escaped out of Prison, they advanced to Windsor, where not
finding the King (for he distrusting his Cause no less then his Power, had
posted before to London) they sell upon desperate Counsels: Some were of
Opinion to march to Leeds in Kent, where King Richard till then was, and rescue
him out of Prison, before their Property was found out: Others thought it best
to march directly up to London, and set upon the Usurper before he were ready
for his Defense: Some again advised to make a defensive War, till they might
have Aid from the King of France; which last Proposal took place, as being most
agreeable to that Irresolution which their Guilt had brought upon them: and
accordingly they retreated to Reading, and from thence marched down to
Leicester, led by the hand of Destiny to receive there their fatal Doom,
accelerated by an Accident not less unexpected then the former: For it so
happened that the Grand Conspirators coming out of their Camp to repose
themselves in the Town, the Duke of Surrey and Earl of Salisbury lying in one
Inn, the Duke of Exeter and the Earl of Gloucester in another, the Bailiff of
the Town (by what occasion provoked, or by what Spirit directed is not known)
with a Party of his Fellow Townes-men, set upon the two first, and stormed them
in their Quarters, and without consideration that their Army was so near,
pressed so hard upon them, as to kill diverse of their Retinue that defended the
place, and endangered their Persons so far, that the other two Lords, to divert
their Fury, fired the Town in several places; but this not prevailing to give
any Relief, they retired to bring their Army to rescue them: but when they came
there, they found the same means by which they designed to save them, was the
occasion of their loss; for those in the Camp hearing the Noise of the Onset,
and seeing the Town in Flames, believing it could be nothing less then the
Kings Forces that had done it, fled every one their several ways, and so left
the distressed Duke and Earl to mercy, who, like two Lions in a Toil baited
with Dogs, dyed fighting, being rather wearied then vanquished. And so King
Henry, that never could get their Hearts living, had the good Fortune to
recover their Heads being dead; and not long after found a way to reduce the
other two under the same Fate, the Abbot suddenly dying upon the apprehension
of their being dissipated.

This last Insurrection cost so much of the best English Blood, that those of
the Welsh Blood thought the State so much weakened by it, that they might
venture to wrestle a Fall with them; and accordingly they put in for the
recovery of their ancient Liberties, being encouraged by one Owen Glendour, a
private Gentleman of more then ordinary Reputation amongst them, who moved with
the sense of a particular Grudge of his own, incited them to a general Defiance
of the English: And first setting upon the Lord Gray of Ruthin, who had
recovered certain Lands from him at Law, took him Prisoner, and repossess'd
himself of them: after this storming the Castle of Wigmore, he took the great
Earl of Ma^ch Prisoner (the true Heir of the Crown after the death of King
Richard) and prevailed so far, that had he been as skilful in keeping, as he
was in getting of Victories, he might have made himself Master of that
Greatness, as would have been as much above his Enemies Prevention as his own
Ambition.

King Henry hearing that Mortimer was taken, caused it to be bruted abroad that
it was done with his own Consent, and thereupon refused to redeem him: which so
incensed Henry, surnamed Hotspur, Son of the first Earl of Northumberland of
the Family of the Peircy's, who had married his Daughter, that he, together
with his Uncle the Earl of Worcester went over to Glendour, and entering into a
Tripartite League with him, agreed to Depose the Deposer, and divide the whole
Kingdom betwixt them. Wales (that is, all the Land beyond Severn Westward) was
to be the Principality of Glendour. The Countries from Trent Northward, was the
Lot of the Peircy's; in memory whereof (the same being in the Geographical Form
of a half Moon) they have since given the Crescent for the Cognizance. All the
rest betwixt Severn and Trent Eastward and Southward, was consigned to Mortimer
as his Portion. Thus the Dragon, the Lion, and the Wolf conspired against the
Antelope, as he before against the Heart, his Sovereign; and taught by himself,
they assaulted him with Arms and Articles; the last perhaps more dangerous then
the first, by how much they fought him at his own Weapons. The first Article
was, That he had by his Letters procured Burgesses and Knights of Parliament to
be chosen unduly: which being one of the Arrows out of his own Quiver, with
which he had wounded King Richard before, troubled him not a little to see it
returned back upon himself. The second Article was, That he had falsified the
Oath made at his first landing, when he swore he came over for no other end but
to recover his Inheritance. The third was, That he had not only taken Arms
against his Sovereign, but having imprisoned him, took first his Crown away,
and after his Life. And lastly, That ever since his death, he had detained the
Crown from the true Heir, Edmund Earl of March their Allie; for which Causes
they defied him, and vowed his Destruction.

This was the second Earthquake in this Kings Reign, and so much more terrible
then the former, in that it shuck the very Foundation of all his Greatness, by
the noise of their Calumniations, wherewith as they battered him several ways,
so they left him the prospect of nothing but dismal Confusion to ensue. The
Welsh goaded him on the one side, the Scots on the other, those English of
Mortimer's party, alarmed him every way. But he that wanted not Confidence
(whilst he wanted a Title) to aspire to the Crown, when it was uncertain
whether he should ever get it or no; having got it, could not want Courage to
keep it: and if he were able (being but a private man) to get it from a King,
why should he not believe himself more able (being now a King) to keep it from
private men, especially since he that had the Right in the first place had
resigned it up to him; and he that had it in the second place, had so far
joined in the final recovery of it, as to swear Allegiance to him, at the time
of that Resignation.

These Considerations were of that weight, that taking warning by King Richard,
never to tempt any to forsake him, by forsaking himself, he resolved to fall
upon them before they united. At Shrewsbury the Peircy's and he met, they being
backed by diverse Scots, he by as many English: himself lead up that Wing which
was against the Earl of Worcester; his Son Henry, the Prince of Wales, that
against Hotspur: this, as it was the first Battle the Prince was ever in, so
here his Father taught him how to Rule, by showing him how to fight. In either
of which noble qualities there was never any Prince proud to be an apter
Scholar then he, for he slew no less then thirty six men that day with his own
hand, as those who followed him observed; and as one that resolved to be
anointed with Blood before he came to be anointed with Oil, he pressed into the
midst of the Battle, where he received several wounds, but one more remarkable
then the rest, by an Arrow in his Face, which either he had not time or
patience to pluck out, till he had dispatched his Rival Hotspur, who was the
only Enemy that vyed with him for hear of Youth and Courage. After this
Worcester and the Douglas submitted to be his Prisoners; the Day being so
clearly gained by his single Conduct, that Fortune seems to have given it to
him as an earnest of those greater Victories he was to have afterward. The fame
of this signal overthrow made all Glendour's Forces scatter ere the King could
arrive upon the place to fight them, leaving him so much more a Victor, by
having no Victory: For that in truth to have beaten him upon a fair dispute,
might have been understood to have been the effect of unequal Power; whereas
the making him fly before he came near him, shows what apprehension the other had
of his invincible Courage. After this there was some trouble, but no great
disturbance given this King, by the French, the Attempts they made being either
so faint or successless, that they rather gave his Successor an Invitation then
a Provocation to invade them afterward. The Resentments the Earl of
Northumberland had of the death of his Son and Brother, put him upon renewing
the Rebellion, being backed by the Archbishop of York, Mowbray Earl-Marshal,
and others: but their Forces being disbanded by a trick, the two last were
taken, and having justly forfeited their Heads, for that they had no more
Brains in them then to believe the King would send a General against them of
their own Faction; they were executed accordingly: but Northumberland himself
escaped into Scotland, being reserved it seems by Destiny for a Nobler Death,
he and the Lord Bardolph being both slain afterward at Branham Moor, the last
Battle that was fought in this Kings time; who being born to live no longer
then whiles he was in Turmoyls, and being inclined to make some expiation for
all the Noble Blood he had shed to make good his Usurpation, designed at last
to join Valor and Devotion in one Action together, which before he had used
but singly, and accordingly took upon him the Crusado, intending to submit to
the Decree of Destiny, which had appointed (as he was told by a Figure-Caster)
that he should dye in Jerusalem. Neither could he want a sufficient Train of
Volunteers, there being so many in that Ignorant Age who were of the same
Opinion with him that it was happier to perish in that Holy War, then escape.
This made the Prince his Son, who till this time had given himself the Liberty
to commit such Extravagancies as ill became any man, but least a Prince,
dishonouring himself no less by the dissolute Company he kept, then by the
Debaucheries they engaged him in, begin to take up, in expectation of the
Succession, and submitting to his Father and the Laws, so governed himself,
that the People might perceive he was at length become fit to govern them: but
whiles preparations were making for the Kings great Voyage to his long home at
Jerusalem, as he thought, the Journey proved neither so long nor chargeable as
was expected; an Apoplectick fit seizing him whiles he was at his Devotion in
the Abbey of Westminster, whereupon he was carried in immediately into the
Abbots House, and there unwittingly put to Bed in that Chamber which they
called Jerusalem; which, as soon as he understood, and came thereby to unriddle
the place of his Death, he was so wounded with the context, that he never
recovered it, but languishing, dyed not long after; having first had a taste of
Divine vengeance, in seeing himself deposed in a manner by his own Son, before
he was dead; who finding him in one of his Fits, and (as 'twas thought)
breathless, took the Crown from off his Pillow (where he kept it all his
Sickness, as that the very sight whereof was a kind of restorative to him)
which however it was returned again with unfeigned humility, yet the miss of it
but for that moment only, gave such a check to his Conscience, that before he
could bequeath it to his Son for good and all, as we say, he could not but
acknowledge how little Right he had to it; and dying, submitted his Title to
him that is the only Judge of injured Kings.

HEN. V.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

VNE AN PLUS

coat of arms of King Henry V: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure semy of fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion crowned or and
sinister an heraldic antelope argent. THOSE that have taken the Height of this
King, have paralleled with no less then three of the Nine Worthies of the
World, comparing him with David the Prophet for Piety, being therefore called
the Prince of Priests: with Caesar the Invincible, for affectation of Glory:
and with Alexander the Great, for Magnanimity. But those that place him side by
side with them, will see he was much above them all: for as he was not so
Lascivious as David, having never had any other Mistress besides her he made
his Wife (although Fortune being his Handmaid, gave him greater temptations
that way then ever the other had) So neither was he so vainglorious as Caesar,
or so intemperate as Alexander, who were indeed great Conquerors, but short of
him in this, that conquering others, they could not conquer themselves, but
even when they were Lords of the World became Slaves to their own Passions. And
as he had the better of them in his parts, so he fell not short of any of them
in his Fortune: for neither was he so mortified as David; nor so much envied as
Caesar; much less so much feared as Alexander; it being his good hap never to
be distressed, distrusted, or despised. Two Instances remain upon Record of the
Respect the scop^e showed to him beyond any of his Predecessors: the first
given by the Nobi^ity, who swore Allegiance to him before he was crowned, I
cannot say before he had the Crown (for as I said before, he took it from his
Fathers Pillow as soon as he thought him dead, but restored it again as soon as
he appeared alive;) the other from the Commonalty, who gave him a Subsidy
before ever he asked it: a President as rare as the other, and more to be
wondered at, since the first might be an Act of Security, or perhaps Fear, but
this last could be nothing but a pure effect of Duty and Affection.

The only men that were jealous of him, as of his Father before him, were the
Clergy, who suspecting he had a mind to turn Priest, that is, to assume all
Spiritual Power into his own hands (as questionless his Father designed) and
become (as Henry the Eighth afterward) Papa Patriae; or that at least he would
take some of the choicest Jewels out of their Miters to place in his Crown
(there being a Bill then depending in Parliament for devesting them of their
Temporalities) they consulted how they might divert so impendent a mischief,
which seemed easier to prevent then resist: and knowing by the Temperament of
their own Constitutions, that there was no more powerful a Temptation then that
which at once gratifies a man's Ambition, Avarice, and Revenge, they found a way
to divert him from the wrong they feared to be done to them by engaging him in
a projection that was to do himself right: The principal mannager of this
commendable Projection was the politic Archbishop of Canterbury, who held the
Rudder of State at that time, and could turn the Vessel as he pleased; he
taking occasion in the very first Parliament that was called by this King, to
start the Right of England to the Crown of France, set forth his own Eloquence
and the Kings Title so well, deducing his Descent in a direct Line from the
Lady Isabel, Daughter to Philip the Fourth, and Wife to his Grandfather Edward
the Second, and refuting all the old beaten Arguments brought from the Salique
Law to oppose it (as being neither consistent with Divinity, Reason, or
Example) he at once pleased and convinced all his Hearers, but most especially
the King himself, who seemed to be inspired with a Prophetic confidence of
that success, which after he had: but scorning to steal any Advantage, or wrong
the Justice of his Title so much, as to seem to doubt 'twould be denied, before
he would make any kind of preparation for the Conquest, he sent Ambassadors to
Charles the Sixth, to demand a peaceable surrender of the Crown to him,
offering to accept his Daughter with the Kingdom, and to expect no other pawn
for his Possession till after his death. This Message as it was the highest
that ever was sent to any free Prince, so he entrusted it to those of highest
Credit and Trust about him: these were his Uncle the Duke of Exeter, a man of
great esteem as well as of great Name, the Archbishop of Dublin, a very
politic Prelate, the Lord Gray, a man at Arms, the Lord High Admiral, and the
Bishop of Norwich; the first as much renowned for his Courage, as the last for
his Contrivances, to whom for the greater state there was appointed a Guard of
five hundred Horse to attend them.

The Report of this great Embassy as it arrived before them, so it made such a
Report throughout all this side of the World, that all the Neighbor Princes,
like lissening Deer when they hear the noise of Huntsmen in the Woods, began to
take the Alarm, and consider which side to sly to; it being so that England and
France never made any long War upon one another, but they engaged all
Christendom with them: However, the Court of France pretending themselves
ignorant of the Occasion of their coming, dissembled their disdain, and treated
them with that magnificence, as if they had designed to Complement them out of
their business: but after the Message was delivered with that faithful boldness
that became so great an Affair, they were all in that confusion, that it was
hard to judge whether they were more ashamed, incensed, or afraid; giving such
a return as seemed neither compatible with the honor, wisdom, or courage of so
renowned a People as they are: For first, as they did neither deny nor allow
the Kings Title, but said they would make Answer by Ambassadors of their own:
So in the next place they were so hasty in their Counsels, and the dispatch of
their Ambassadors hither, that they arrived in England almost as soon as those
sent hence. And lastly, at the same time they desired Peace, and offered to buy
it with the tender of some Towns, they gave the King an Affront which was a
greater Provocation then the denial of ten such Kingdoms: for the Daulphin, who
in respect of the King his Fathers sickness (I might rather say weakness)
managed the State, affecting the honor to give the first Box, or perhaps
desiring to make any other Quarrel the ground of the approaching War, which he
foresaw was not to be prevented, rather then that of the Title which had been
already so fatally bandi'd, scornfully sent the King a Present of Tenis-balls,
which being of no value, nor reckoning, worthy so great a Princes acceptance,
or his recommendation, could have no other meaning or interpretation, but, as
one should say, he knew better how to use them then Bullets. The King, whose
Wit was as keen as to others Sword, returned him this Answer, That in requital
of his fine Present of Tenis-balls, he would send him such Balls, as he should
not dare to hold up his Racket against them. Neither was he worse then his
word, however his preparations seemed very disproportionable for so great a
Work. For the Army he landed was no more but six thousand Horse and twenty four
thousand Foot: a Train so inconsiderable, and by the Daulphin judged to be so
despicable, that he thought not fit to come down himself in Person to take any
view of them, for fear he should fright them out of the Country too soon, but
sent some rude Peasants to attend their Motion, who, encouraged by some of the
Troops of the nearest Garrisons, as little understanding the danger they were
engaged in, as they did the language of the Enemy they were engaged with, fell
in upon the Rear of his Camp: but as Village Curs, which fiercely set upon all
Strangers, having the least Rebuke with a Stone or a Cudgel, retreat home
whining with their Tails betwixt their Legs, so they having a Repulse given
them ran away, and made such Outcries as disheartened the Soldiers that were
to second them so much, that after that he marched without any Resistance as
far as Callice: Neither indeed saw he any Enemy till he came to give Battle to
the united Forces of France at that famous Field of Agencourt, where,
notwithstanding he was out-numbred by the French above five for one, he fought
them with that Resolution, as made himself Master of more Prisoners then he had
men in his Camp to keep them; an Occasion Fortune gave him to show at once her
Cruelty and his Mercy: who, whilst he might have killed did not; but when he
should not, was forced to be cruel, beyond almost all Example: for as he gave
Quarter in the beginning of the Battle to all that asked it, his Clemency and
Gentleness being such that (as he was then pleased to declare) he considered
them as his Subjects, not as his Captives. So being overcharged with their
Prisoners Numbers, upon a sudden and unexpected accident (however of no great
Consequence, if it had been rightfully understood) he was forced to write the
dismal Fate of France in cold Blood, and in order to the saving life, destroy
it. For as he was seeing his wounded men dressed, having gotten an entire
Victory, as he thought, and as afterward it proved, a sudden outcry alarmed
his Camp, occasioned by a new Assault of some French Troops, who being the
first had quit the Field, were the first returned into it again, in hopes by
fighting with Boys, to regain the honor they lost in refusing to fight with
men: these under the Leading of the Captain of Agencourt, set upon the Pages,
Sutlers, and Laundresses, following the pursuit with that wonted noise, as if
they would have the English think the whole Army was rallied again, and chasing
them: Upon this the King caused all the scattered Arms and Arrows to be
recollected, and his stakes to be new pitched, and put himself into a posture
of Defense: neither were the English only deceived by the Shreiks and Cries of
those miserable People that fell into these men's hands, but all those of the
French likewise that were within hearing; insomuch that the Earls of Marle and
Falconbridge, who with six hundred men at Arms had all the while stood
concealed to take the first advantage offered them, advanced upon the same
mistake, to reinforce the Battle, who seeming in the Night more then they were
(for indeed the English supposed it the whole Body of the French Army returned
again upon them) the King not knowing how to disperse them, commanded all the
Prisoners to be forthwith slain, save some few Persons of Note, who for common
security were bound back to back.

This made it a bloody Victory indeed, that looked more like a Miracle before,
there being ten thousand of the Enemy slain, and (if we may believe Caxton) not
above twenty six of the English side. P. Aemilius, their own Historian, says
not above ten private Soldiers, two Knights, and two Lords, which were the
Duke of York and the Duke of Suffolk, that bore no proportion to the five
hundred Knights and twenty six Lords lost on the other side, amongst whom the
Daulphin himself may be reckoned for one, though he died not on the place; for
struck with the apprehensions of this loss, he survived it a very little time
after. However, the English got only the glory of being Victors, but not a foot
of ground more then they had before; Providence having so ordained that King
Henry should only gain a Name in Arms by his first Expedition, that upon his
next Arrival they might the more contentedly give him up the Crown, and with
it, her that dazzled his Eyes more then all the Jewels he found there, the
incomparable Lady Katherine, to whose Excellency of Beauty was added that of
Innocence, which made her yet more desirable for a Wife, then the other made
her for a Mistress.

Not long after this Battle he returned home, as if to give and take breath;
and during the time of his stay here, the Emperor Sigismund, attended by the
Archbishop of Rheimes, gave him a personal Visit, in hope to have made a Peace
betwixt the two Kings, at least 'twas so pretended: but time that is the best
Expositor of all great Actions, shows his coming to have had some further
design in it; otherwise his Mediation had not ended (as it did) in a League
Offensive and Defensive, leaving King Henry to follow Providence in the pursuit
of his predestined Conquest, who, upon his second Expedition invaded Normandy,
and having in a short time taken in the City of Caen, with most of the lesser
Villes, came at last to that proud Town of Roan, which spent him some time
longer then he expected in taking it: But it proved not time lost; for the
Essay they made of their own Strength and Courage (being at the beginning of
the Seige no less then two thousand Persons in it, most able to make Defense)
gave the World such proof of his, that he gained much more in Interest then he
lost, in recovering the Principal, there being surrendered to him upon the Fame
of taking in that great City, Hunflew, Munster, Devilliers, Ewe, New Castle,
Vernon, Mant, La Roch, Gwyon, and indeed the best, if not the most part of that
rich Province, the ancient Inheritance of his Progenitors.

That which contributed much to his Success, was the difference betwixt the new
Daulphin, and the old Duke of Burgundy. The first, as much disdaining that the
other should have the Government of the King, who was taken with a frenzy that
made him incapable of Business, as the other that he should have the Government
of the Kingdom, either thinking himself immediately concerned in the danger of
the others Power, neglected the Public to abet their Private Factions. The
Queen Mother, who could not be a Neuter, took part with the Duke, into whose
hands she put the King, purposely to curb the Daulphins pride, (that had most
insolently seized and detained her Jewels, Plate and Money) contesting for the
Superiority without regard to him that put fair for subduing both. But the
noise of King Henry's unexpected Success in subduing almost all Normandy,
awakened them; and now, when 'twas too late, they reconciled to each other in
hopes to drive back the English: But finding that they had taken rooting in too
many places to be suddenly over-turn'd, the Duke of Burgundy proposes a
Personal Treaty betwixt the two Kings: whither came King Henry, attended by his
Brothers the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, his Cousin the Duke of Exeter,
his Uncle the Cardinal Beauford, the Earls of March and Salisbury, and a
thousand Men at Arms; being met by the Queen Regent and her Governor, the Duke
of Burgundy, the Earl of St. Paul, and several other Persons of the greatest
Quality, as well Ladies as Lords, who were obliged to attend her. Amongst the
rest (and therefore indeed did the rest come that they might be as Foyls to
her) appeared the Princess Katherine, designed (as it fell out after) to
conquer the Conqueror: A Lady of that Perfection both of Body and Mind, that
had she not been the Daughter of a King, she had yet been fit to be the Wife of
one. No sooner did King Henry look upon her, but his Heart seemed to melt
within his Breast, no Arms being proof against the Darts she shot; yet his
Wisdom had so much the better of his Affection, that he concealed his Passion
both from her, and the Observation of the French Lords, till the Duke of
Burgundy trifling with him, upon presumption of her Charms, provoked him to
give a Reply more like an English then a French King, and created such a
Distaste as broke off the present Treaty.

Happy had it been for that Duke if he had closed with him, although his Enemy,
rather then agree (as he did) with his Friend the Daulphin, who finding his
turn served by him in breaking off the Treaty, having no further use of his
Authority, rewarded his Service with a Poniard; which Butchery being performed
in the view of all the Peers of France, was looked on like a piece of Justice
rather then of Tyranny, in respect the Duke himself had but a little before
caused Lewis Duke of Orleance to be taken off in the like barbarous manner.
Successor to this slain Duke both in his Estate and Authority was his Son
Philip Earl of Carolois: a Politic Prince and Temperate, who finding it would
be an unequal Contest between him and the Daulphin, if he should avowedly
endeavor to revenge his Fathers blood; wisely promoted Overtures of Peace
betwixt the two Crowns, in order to the doing that Execution by another Hand,
which his own was too weak to perform. Ambassadors were thereupon sent to King
Henry, who having been all this while a Martyr to Love, was no longer able to
endure the Flames within his Breast, but giving it vent, told the Ambassadors
he would not credit their Propositions, unless the Lady Katherine would join
with them, whose Innocence he knew would never abuse him. Notice hereof being
given to the Queen, the Bishop of Arras was dispatched away to signify to him,
that if he would come to Troyes, she should be there, to be espoused to him;
and with her, he should have the Assurance of the Crown of France, after the
Decease of her Father: and to gain the more Credit, the Bishop secretly
delivered him a Letter from the Princess her own hand; which contained in it so
much sweetness, as had been enough to have made any other man but himself have
surfeited with Joy, his happiness being now so full and complete, that he had
nothing beyond what he enjoyed to hope for.

Upon his Marriage with her, he was published Regent of the Kingdom, and Heir
apparent to the Crown, the Articles being published in both Realms, and the two
Kings and all their Nobility Sworn to the observance of them; only the Daulphin
stood out in utter Defiance both of his Right and Power. Against him therefore
the two Kings, his Father and Brother, together with the King of Scots (who was
newly arrived) the young Duke of Burgundy, and the Prince of Orange, the Dukes
of Clarence, Gloucester, and Bedford, and twenty one Earls, forty five Barons,
and Knights and Esquires sans nombre, advanced with an Army of French, English,
Scotch and Irish, to the number of six hundred thousand, if the Historians of
that time may be credited; and having taken in all the Towns and Places that
denied to yield, they returned to Paris, where King Henry (the Articles being
ratified the second time, and a Counterpart sent into England) began to
exercise his Regency, by Coining of Money with the Arms of England and France
on it; placing and displacing of Officers; making new Laws and Edicts; and
lastly, awarding Process against the Daulphin to appear at the Marble Table, to
answer for the Murder of the Duke of Burgundy. But being willing to show his
Queen how great a King he was before she brought him that Kingdom, he left his
Brother Clarence his Lieutenant General there, and brought her over into
England, where he spent some time in the Administration of Justice, and
performing such Acts of Peace, as spoke him no less expert in the knowledge of
governing, then in that of getting a Kingdom.

But he had not been long here, before he received the sad News of the death of
his Brother Clarence, who betrayed by the Duke of Alansons Contrivance into an
Ambuscade, was slain, together with the Earls of Tankervile, Somerset, Suffolk,
and Perch, and about two thousand Common Soldiers: whereupon he deputed the
Earl of Mortaine in his room, and not long after went back again himself with
his Brother Bedford, to reinforce the War, taking in all the Fortresses in the
Isle of France, in Lovaine, Bry, and Champagne: during which time the Daulphin
was not idle, but industrious to regain Fortunes savor, if it were possible,
made many bold Attempts upon several places in possession of the English. But
finding the Genius of our Nation to have the Predominancy over that of his own,
he diverted his Fury upon the Duke of Burgundy; betwixt whom and King Henry he
put this difference, That as he dreaded the one, so he hated the other.
Accordingly he laid Seige to Cosney, a Place not very considerable in it self;
but as it was a Town of the Duke of Burgundy's. King Henry was so concerned to
relieve it, beyond any of his own, that he marched Night and Day to get up to
the Enemy, and making overhasty Journeys, over-heat himself with unusual
Travel, and fell so sick, that he was fain to rest himself at Senlis, and trust
to the Care of his Brother the Duke of Bedford to prosecute the Design, who
relieved the Town, and forced the Daulphin to retreat, as he thought a great
Looser by the Seige, but it proved quite otherwise: For the loss of the Town
was nothing in comparison of the loss of King Henry, who died not long after;
and which made his Death the more deplorable was, That he no sooner left the
World, but Fortune left the English, whereof having some Prophetic Revelation,
it is thought the knowledge thereof might not be the least reason of shortning
his Days, by adding to the violence of his Distemper: For it is credibly
reported, that at the News of the Birth of his Son Henry, born at Windsor,
himself being then in France, even wearied with continual Victories, he cried
out in a Prophetic Rapture, Good Lord, Henry of Monmouth shall small time
Reign and get much, and Henry of Windsor shall long time Reign and lose all;
but Gods will be done. Which saying has given occasion to some to magnify his
Memory above all the Kings that were before him, not to say all that came after
him, in that he was in some sense both King, Priest, and Prophet.

HEN. VI.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
coat of arms of King Henry VI: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure three fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter an heraldic antelope
argent armed and tufted, ducally collared, sinister a leopard. FOR the three
last Generations, England was so happy in a Race of Valiant and Wise Princes,
as none of the Neighbor Nations had ever the like good Fortune: All the Sons
of King Edward the Third, and in truth the Sons of their Sons (though one, and
he the Chief, miscarried) being men of an extraordinary Strain. Henry the
Fourth had four Sons all so valiant, that, as a Modern Historian observes, each
might have been known to be his Son, and Henry the Fifth to have been the
Eldest. But now (as if Nature had quite wasted it self, and spent all its
Spirits, or rather as if it had been tired in following Providence, that called
still for a Supply of the bravest men) it shrunk on the sudden into such a
Degeneracy, that had it not been that the Virtues of his Mother were so well
known as they were, the Virtues of his Father would have rendered this King
justly suspected not to have been his Son: but as Philosophers tell us that
Women oftentimes conceive by the strength of their own Inclinations, with a
very little help of man; so we may conclude that his Mother begat him of her
self by her self, being a Woman so devout, that if ever any one may be said to
be the Child of Prayer, he was: and she being the Daughter of so crazy a Prince
as Charles the Sixth of France, it is the less wonder she should bring forth
such a crazy Son as this Henry the Sixth of England.

A Prince of excellent Parts in their kind, though not of kindly Parts for a
Prince; being such as were neither sit for the Warlike Age he was born in, nor
agreeable to the Glory he was born to, but such rather as better became a
Priest then a Prince: So that the Title which was sometimes given to his Father
with relation to his Piety, might better have been applied to the Son with
reference to his, that he was the Prince of Priests: Herein only was the
difference betwixt them, That the Religion of the one made him bold as a Lion,
that of the other made him as meek as a Lamb. A temper neither happy for the
times nor himself; for had he had less Phlegm and more Cholar, less of the
Dove-like Innocence, and more of the Serpentine subtilty, it is probable he had
not only been happier whilst he lived, but more respected after he was dead:
whereas now, notwithstanding all his Indulgence to the Church and Churchmen,
there was none of them so grateful as to give him after he was murdered)
Christian Burial, but left him to be interred without Priest or Prayer, without
Torch or Taper, Mass or Mourner; indeed so without any regard to his Person and
Pre-eminence, that if his Obsequies were any whit better then that which holy
Writ calls the Burial of an Ass, yet were they such, that his very Competitor
Edward the Fourth, who denied him the Rights of Majesty living, thought him too
much wronged being dead, that to him (some kind of satisfaction) he was himself
at the charge of building him a Monument.

The beginning of his Reign, which every Body expected to have been the worst,
and like to prove the most unsuccessful part in respect of his Minority (being
but Nine Months old when he was crowned) happened to be the best and most
prosperous, there being a plentiful stock of brave men left to spend upon, who
behaved themselves so uprightly and carefully, that it appeared the Trust
reposed in them by the Father, had made a strong Impression of Love and Loyalty
to the Son. The Duke of Bedford had the Regency of France; the Duke of
Gloucester the Government of England; the Duke of Exeter and the Cardinal
Beauford had the Charge of his Person: and each of these, whilst they stood as
free Agents, and counterpoiz'd each others Greatness, kept the Scale ^even,
maintaining by the Sword what was got by the Sword. But after the King came to
be declared Major, and at his own dispose, having not the Judgment to conceal
his own Weakness, much less to control their Potency, Faction and Ambition
broke in upon the Government, and made such a Rupture in the Reputation of
their former Successes, that the French King backed by many Seconds (who yet
were not so much his Friends, as Enemies to the English) took that advantage to
reinforce his Credit, and pressed so hard upon them, that all the well built
Frame of their Fortune cracked from top to bottom.

However there were three fatal Breaches made in it before all fell to pieces:
The first Flaw was occasioned by the Rupture betwixt the Duke of Bedford and
the Duke of Burgundy, who divided about a mere Punctillio of Honor, who should
first come to the place where they had appointed to treat of the Differences
betwixt them. The Duke of Bedford thought the other ought to attend his coming,
in respect he was Regent of France; the other thought he ought rather to expect
him, it being in his own Dominions where he was absolute Sovereign: upon which
they parted, the Duke of Burgundy lest the English, and the Duke of Bedford not
long after the World. And this unhappy King became so much the greater
Sufferer, by how much the reparation of that loss proved more fatal then the
loss it self; for as it was as difficult, as necessary, to find out a good
Successor to that great Trust, so he was not a little oppressed by the
Importunity of two Competitors, who being men of like Anger and Ambition,
caused a more fatal Breach then the former. These were the Dukes of Somerset
and York: the first Grandson to John of Gaunt, and Grandfather to Henry the
Seventh; the last, yet greater, in respect of his Descent from Lyonel Duke of
Clarence, being Head of the White-rose Faction; both equal in Blood and Merit,
either too Great to be displeased, much more too Ambitious to be pleased.

In this Contest the Duke of York got the Ball, and from his Success concluded
'twas possible (as he did afterward) to get the Scepter too, being by the
Mothers side the right Heir to Richard the Second: but the Duke of Somerset
resolving to revenge his loss by the hazard of loosing the whole, gave him so
many Interruptions in his Dispatch of that great Charge, that before he could
arrive in France, the Parisians had shuck off their Yoke, and by their Example,
the Revolt became so general, that even the Normans themselves (ever before
firm to the English) were upon the point also of changing their Allegiance.

The third and most fatal Breach, was that betwixt the Uncle and Nephew, the
Cardinal Beauford and the Duke of Gloucester. The Duke charged the Cardinal
with Affectation of Pre-eminence, even to the Derogation of the Kings
Prerogative and Contempt of his Laws: the Cardinal not finding Matter to
recriminate so Personally upon him himself, accused his other self, to wit, his
Wife, to be a Sorceress, and one that by Witchcraft attempted to take away the
Kings Life: Which whether it were true or no, was so well managed, that her
pretended Crime was in effect made his; for by the help of the Queen (to whom
the King had been espoused by advice of the Cardinal, and the Marquess, after
made Duke of Suffolk, his Creature, against the advice of this good Duke (for
so the People called him) they prevailed with the weak King, first to exclude
him the Council, after to deprive him of all Commands, and lastly to take away
his Life too; not foreseeing (so improvident was their Malice) that as long as
he lived, his Primogeniture (being descended from the Fourth Son of Edward the
Third) would have kept back the Duke of York's Claim, that came from the Fifth
Son. For his Death gave the first Occasion of beginning that desperate War
betwixt the two alike cruel Houses of York and Lancaster, who so wasted
themselves by Alternate Successes, like Plants which cut in the Spring, bleed
themselves to death, that they left no Issue to inherit their dear-bought
Titles, and were thereby necessitated for the same Reason to unite in the last,
as they divided in the first place, to wit, to entail that fatal Glory upon
their Posterity, which they found to wither (do what they could) as the Roses
they gave for their Cognizances, which by being so often cut down, came at last
to be over-topt by the Thistle of Scotland.

The Dukes of Somerset and Suffolk being the two principal Counselors that
governed the Queen, who governed the King, and managed the whole Prosecution of
the Duke of Gloucester. The People after the Death of the Cardinal, who did not
long Survive the Execution of that good Duke, for so they commonly called him,
fixed their Mark of Evil Counselors, and pressed so hard for their amoval from
the King, that the Queen was forced, as commonly it falls out in such Cases, to
let go her hold, and leave them to shift for themselves. The last was the first
fell into their Hands, who attempting to fly their Fury, being Impeached in
Parliament, was taken at Sea and Executed according to the Popular way of
Justice, without Ceremony or Sentence, by chopping off his Head on the side of
a Boat. The Duke of Somerset being more above their reach, one Mortimer (whom
for that end the Duke of York allowed the honor to be reputed of his kindred)
better known by the name of Jack Cade alias Captain Mend-all, undertakes to
bring him to a Bay, and backed with a multitude enraged with the sense of their
just Complaints, arrived to that power as to possess himself of London, where
he took off the head of the Kings Chamberlain, and grew so terrible that the
King himself was constra^ned to retire and give place: but before he could
reach the Duke of Somerset, he fell himself. Whereupon the Duke of York was
forced to take off his Vizard, and own the Justice of his Complaint barefaced,
who having an Army ready to second them, prevailed so far with the Parliament
as to get the Duke twice arrested, but finding him to be still released as soon
as they were up, who therefore were dissolved to the end that he might be
discharged; he advanced toward London to do himself, as he said, and the
Kingdom Right: But before he could pass St. Albans the King met him and gave
him Battle, wherein the unfortunate Duke of Somerset gave the last Testimony of
his Loyalty to the King, in the loss of his Life, and the unhappy King the last
Test of his Affection to him, by the loss of his Liberty, being forced to
render himself a Prisoner to the Victor, who was so modest as not to declare
his Title to the Crown, but contented himself to be by the good favor of the
next Parliament, declared Protector only; and so moderate as to permit his two
great Supporters, the Earl of Salisbury then Lord Chancellor, and the Earl of
Warwick, Captain of Callice, to share with him for a while in the power, who
making up a kind of Triumvirate for the time being, placed and displaced whom
they pleased. Upon which, the King foreseeing the evil Consequences, was moved
with a condescension beneath his Majesty, to offer an Accommodation, which not
taking effect, both sides prepared to begin the War afresh, which ended not
with themselves.

The principal Persons for Quality, Power, and Interest that stuck to the King,
were the young Duke of Somerset, the Dukes of Exeter and Buckingham, the Earls
of Oxford, Northumberland, Shrewsbury, Pembroke, Ormond and Wiltshire, the
Lords Clifford, Gray, Egremount, Dacres, Beaumont, Scales, Awdley, Wells, etc.
who having mustered all the Forces they could make, encamped near Northampton:
Thither came the Earl of March, Son and Heir to the Duke of York (his Father
being then in Ireland) to give them Battle, assisted by the Duke of Norfolk,
the Earls of Warwick, Salisbury, Huntington, Devon, Essex, Kent, Lincoln, etc.
all men of great Name and Power, with whom were the Lords Faulconbridge,
Scroop, Stamford, Stanley, etc. and so fierce was the Encounter betwixt them,
that in less then two hours above ten thousand men lost their Lives: amongst
whom the principal on the Kings side were the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of
Shrewsbury, the Lords Egremount and Beaumont; the unfortunate King being made
Prisoner the second time, who by the Earl of Warwick was conveyed to the
Tower. Upon which the Queen, taking with her the Prince and the young Duke of
Somerset, fled: The rumor of which Victory brought the Duke of York over, who
laying aside all disguises, in the next Parliament (called for that purpose)
p^aced himself on the Throne, and with great Assurance laid open his claim to
the Crown, as Son and Heir to the Lady Anne, Daughter and Heir to Roger
Mortimer, Earl of March, Son and Heir of Philippa, sole Daughter and Heir of
Lyonel Duke of Clarence, third Son of Edward the Third, and elder Brother to
John of Gaunt, Father of Henry the Fourth, who was Grandfather to him that (as
he said) now untruly styled himself King by the Name of Henry the Sixth: This,
though it was no feigned Title, but known to all the Lords, yet such was their
prudence, that they left the King de facto to enjoy his Royalty during his
Life, and declared the other only Heir apparent, with this Caution for the Peace
of the Kingdom, That if King Henry 's Friends should attempt the disanulling of
that, that then the Duke should have the present Possession. But this nothing
daunted the Queen, who having raised eighteen thousand men in Scotland,
resolved to urge Fortune once more, and accordingly they met the Yorkists at
Wakefield, where to mock her with a present Victory, Fortune gave her the Duke
of York's Life, who vainly had styled himself Protector of the Kingdom, being
not able it seems to protect himself; but pity it was he could not save his
innocent Son, the Earl of Rutland, a hopeful Youth of not above Twelve years
old, who being brought into the Army only to see fashions, was inhumanly
murdered by the Lord Clifford, kneeling upon his knees, and begging for his
life; that angry Lord making him a Sacrifice (as he said) to appease the
injured Ghost of his Father, murdered by to others Father, which Cruelty was
fully and suddenly repaid by the Earl of March, who in the Battle at Mortimer's
Cross slew three thousand eight hundred of the Lancastrian Forces, and having
put the Earl of Ormond to slight, cut off the head of Owen Tuthor, who had
married King Henry's Mother; which it seems did not so weaken or dishearten
them, but that they recovered themselves, and took their full revenge at the
Battle of Barnet-heath, where the Queen was again Victorious. But such was the
activity of the Earl of March, that before she could recover London, he came up
to her, and passing by, entered the City in Triumph before her, whereby he had
so far the Start in point of Opinion, that he was forthwith elected King by the
Name of Edward the Fourth, leaving King Henry so much more miserable, in that
he lost not his Life with his Majesty. But herein consisted his happiness, That
he was the only Prince perhaps of the World that never distinguished betwixt
Adversity and Prosperity, being so intent upon his Devotion, as to think
nothing Adversity that did not interrupt that: Nature having rather fitted him
for a Priest then a King, and perhaps rather for a Sacrifice then a Priest,
that he might not otherwise dye, then as a Martyr, that had lived all his time
so like a Confessor.

EDW. IV.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
coat of arms of King Edward IV: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure three fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion crowned,
sinister a bull. THE rare unhappiness of the last King (surviving his Royalty
so long as he did) made the happiness of this no less rare and singular: for as
he by only deposing King Henry, was instrumental after to the deposing himself
too, so by showing the World such an Example of the instability of humane
Greatness, he had this advantage to leave some matter of hope to his Friends,
after he was forced to retire, upon which to expect his Restoration, who
reserved their Faith, though they were forced to withdraw their Allegiance, and
returned to him almost as soon as he returned to them. Neither had it an ill
effect upon his very Enemies, to whose affection it may be reasonable to impute
that in the last place, which in the first place was to be ascribed to their
Fear: For as the terror of that great slaughter by which he made his way to the
Crown, with the loss of no less then thirty eight thousand Lives at the Battle
of Towton, had prompted them to a dread that his Will might be as boundless as
his Power: So the happy disappointment of that Jealousy (after they saw his
inclinations to quit all partialities, coming constantly in Person to his
Council Board to see Justice done, and not seldom to his Courts at Westminster
to prevent the doing Injustice) drew them not only to a Submission to his Laws,
but indeed to so affectionate a subjection to him, that it rests a Question,
Whether the Men at last were more in Love with his Government, or the Women at
first with his Person; having such a Majesty in both, that he seemed to become
the Crown as well as it became him. To say truth, Nature did as much for him as
Fortune, in refining the temperament of his Mind, no less then that of his
Body, taking away all the dregs and corrupted part, to place with his Brother
Richard Duke of Gloucester. So that never were two Brothers so unlike: the other
having such a disproportionate mixture of Spleen with his Valor, as made his
Courage degenerate into Cruelty, such a compound of Falsehood with his Wisdom,
as made him no less apt to flatter then deceive; whereas King Edward was no
less haughty, but more Majestic, every whit as magnificent, but less proud; of
a Complexion more Sanguine, but not so Bloody: In sine, as he was one of the
handsomest men in the World, so he affected above all things handsome Women.
And it stood him in good stead; for as the City of London had the greatest
stroke in disposing of the Scepter all the time of that unhappy War, so had he
the greatest stroke in governing those that governed it, keeping the Citizens
true to him, by making their Wives false to them: which Providence afterward
punished severely, when he came to take a Wife for himself; directing his Fancy
to the choice of a Lady, who, however she was rich in Virtues (as having
Goodness enough to be a Wife for any Prince) was yet so unfit for him in many
respects, and indeed so inferior to her in all that was at the same time
offered to him for a Wife, to wit, the Lady Bona, Daughter of the King of
France; the one being a Princess, the other a private Subject; the one a Virgin,
the other a Widow; the one in possibility of intitling him to a Kingdom he had
not, the other like to hazard the Title to that he had; that it gave occasion to
the World to pass some hard Censures upon his Understanding, and to deem his
Codpiss more prevalent then his Headpiece: having thereby so crossed all
public Reasons of State and Interest, not to say some private ones too, given
him by his own Mother (to which he answered rather wittily then wisely) That it
was no marvel his great Friend the Earl of Warwick, who was made the Stale to
negotiate the French match, should not only fall so off from him, but draw off
also (as after he did) his two Brothers the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Marquess of Montague, and with them his own Brother the Duke of Clarence, with
whom afterward he so prevailed, as to make him instrumental by another
Marriage, to requite the affront put upon him by this, marrying him up to one
of his Daughters, whereby they became so strictly united, that without
consideration of being against his own Family, the Duke afterward joined with
him to set upon the King his Brother; the Matter being so subtly managed,
that they took him prisoner before he was aware of them; and had they been as
careful to keep him, as they were skilful to get him into their hands, he had
doubtless paid dear for his Liberty. But Fortune blinded with the Love of him,
as he with the Brightness of Love, assisted him so far, as to help him up upon
his Wing, after which he mounted to that height, that the Earl of Warwick
fearing the same, took water presently, and so escaped into France; where he
continued not long, before Fortune gilded his Adversity with one of the most
glorious Proposals that could be made to him; to wit, a Marriage of his Second
Daughter to Prince Edward, Son and Heir to Henry the Sixth, which by the
prudence of the Queen Mother took effect; upon the concluding whereof he fixed
the Red-rose (the Badg of the House of Lancaster) upon his white Saltyre, as
resolving to be their homager for ever after. Six Months he continued there, in
all which time he was treated as a King, because they knew 'twas in his power
to make Kings, and returning home, he was received with that Applause of the
People, that King Edward with his Brother the Duke of Gloucester, and his
Chamberlain the Lord Hastings (who continued true to him, notwithstanding his
Wife was Warwicks own Sister) not thinking it safe to abide the trial of his
Forces, quit London; and taking Shipping, with much ado recovered Burgundy. No
sooner came he to London, but he set King Henry at Liberty, proclaimed Edward
an Usurper, and to confirm his Brother Clarence, which unnaturally took part
against his own House, they settled the Duchy of York by Act of Parliament on
him, and his Heirs for ever, notwithstanding the primogeniture of Edward, with
an Entail of the Crown, in case that the Heirs Male failed of the Body of King
Henry. Here again the Lancastrians took their turn to Reign for near five
Months, under the protection of this Duke and Earl. At the beginning of the
Spring following, King Edward appeared like the Sun (that he gave for his
Badge) which at that time of the Year, we know, is of no great height, but
mounts apace: so he being so low both in his own hopes, and the opinion of the
World, that he was fain to dissemble his design with an Oath, swearing he came
not to disturb King Henry, but only to recover his Inheritance, which whether
it were the Kingdom he meant, or his Duchy only, he durst not explain; finding
that the common People were willing to take all things in the best sense, got
to that height of Reputation insensibly, that it was not long ere he was put
into a Condition to speak plainer at last; and having made his way to London,
was there received with that universal submission, as if all the time of his
absence had been but spent in a Progress only. King Henry, without further
consideration of his Readeption, being delivered up into his hands, to be made
the mockery of Majesty, whom wisely he detein'd in Prison without any show of
Cruelty or Revenge, till he had subdued Warwick and the Queen, both then out of
his reach, preparing to reinforce the Lancastrian Interest: but no sooner had
he cut off the first, and got the last into his possession, with the hopeful
Prince her Son, but he took timely care to secure himself for the future, by
taking away the Lives both of the unfortunate Father and Son; of both which
Innocent Princes his bloody Brother Gloucester became the cruel Executioner, by
the same hand and the same Dagger, being so just in his Revenge upon all the
Enemies of the White-rose, that he spared not his own Brother Clarence, when he
got him into his Power, but took him off by a death as singular as was his
crime, causing him to be drowned in a Butt of Malmesey.

The sudden end of these his Competitors gave K. Edward as sudden an end to all
his Troubles, though not to his Wars. For having settled peace at home, he was
provoked to take Revenge upon his Enemies abroad, falling first upon the King
of France, after upon the King of Scots; but they thinking themselves as unable
to grapple with him, as two Foxes with the Lion, bought their Peace, and
avoided the ill Consequences of his Fury: till Death (the common Foe of
Mankind) made him turn another way, forcing him to end the Race of his Fortune
as he began it, like the Great Augustus Caesar, who at the same Age succeeded
his slaughtered Predecessor, and by a like Fate was disappointed of his
intended Successor.

EDW. V.
HON ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
coat of arms of King Edward V: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure three fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion crowned,
sinister a bull. IT was a rare felicity, and not to have been hoped for by any
(if by himself) that the last King, who was raised by Rebellion, and maintained
his Grandeur by Tumults, and had been the Cause of so many private and public
Butcheries, should set at last in peace, and after the effusion of so much
Christian Blood as was shed in defense of his Title, should himself dye a dry
death. But dissatisfied Heaven reserved it seems its Vengeance to fall with
double Horror upon the heads of his two Innocent Sons, this present King and
the Prince his Brother, two proper Lambs for such a Sacrifice: and that which
made it appear to be a Judgment, was, that as they were not to be offered up by
the hand of an Enemy, but by one of their own House, so neither was it to be by
way of Expiation for any of the Offenses past, but rather for the aggravation
of those to come; that by so signal and extraordinary a punishment of Ambition
by Ambition, the World might see as well as feel, the vanity and impiety of
that Civil Discord which had distracted so many Minds, confounded so many
Estates, and by the various mischiefs that attended it, so sullied the
Chronicles of this Nation, that none can read the History of those times with
delight, few without horror, whiles Fortune, like an inconstant Mistress, is
reported to have disposed her favors with that indifferency to either House,
that standers by (if any there were) could not reasonably Judge which had the
better on it (the Globe of Majesty being tossed and tumbled up and down like a
Football, from one side to the other, without any kind of fixation, till it
came to be lodged at last in a Bush) much less determine which side to take:
whilst they saw the red Rose of Lancaster blushing with a deeper Crimson then
ordinary, as if it were double died with the Blood they had shed; and the white
Rose of York grown so pale and wann, partly by the Blood they had lost, but
chiefly by their desire of Revenge, the prickles of either Rose being so sharp
and piercing, that as often as they mixed, they gave one another wound for wound:
but now on the sudden wheeling about, she declared for those of this Family, by
the almost total destruction of those of the House of Lancaster; to whom,
having left no Heir Male alive of the whole blood (after the death of King
Henry and his Son) to dispute the Right of this present King, he seem d doub y
r^vited by Descent and Conquest, and made his Entry so much the more desirable,
in that it brought such great probability of an universal Peace, no man
suspecting the least occasion of inquietude but his own Father, who foreseeing
the evil, that was to others invisible, and doubting perhaps his security more
then his title, he thought it convenient to place him at such a distance from
all danger, as being seemingly out of the World, he might at once hide his
defects, and take off all occasions of Defections. And accordingly he left in
Wales, with such a Guard of his Mothers Friends about him, as being nearest in
Blood, but remotest in Title, might probably endeavor to keep off all others
from ascending the Throne themselves had no pretense to.

This was as much as Humane Policy could do, but in vain does he strive to
preserve what Heaven had decreed to overthrow. Having by his Will declared his
ambitious Brother Gloucester Protector of both the Children, he was resolved to
let this act the part of King and no King no longer, then till his Tyranny
could support it self by its own Authority: who having to do with the Mother, a
weak Woman (for to her from whom they received their Lives, was these helpless
Princes to owe their Deaths) he had that respect to her Frailty, as to keep
time with her slow paced fears, in deferring his intended Paracide, till she
that was their Nurse thought it fit time to bring them to bed.

Unhappy Youths to whom the Tenderness of their Mother must prove no less
fatal, than the Cruelty of their Uncle! Had she, in the first place, Insisted
upon the keeping them herself (as what fitter Guardian then their own Mother)
or had she not, in the last place, Rashly consented to the taking off that
Guard, which her Husband had so providently placed about them; or had, at
least, suffered the King to have continued for a while longer, at that distance
he was, when his Father dyed, where by his Education and Acquaintance he might
have as well secured the Peoples Faith, as he was secured by it; or had she
kept the Second Son, which she had in her own hands, after she saw what was
like to become of the eldest, that was in his; it is possible the one might have
been a security for the other, since without taking both, the Treason had not
been worth the hazard, much less the guilt of destroying the other; and it is more
than probable, she might have stopped him upon the very last step to the Throne:
But yet it is hard to call that the Mothers fault, which might be the Sons
fate; designed by Destiny, for ought we know, to a Death as private as his
Birth (who was born whilst she was in a Cloister, and his Father in
Banishment.) Fain she would have recovered her Error, when it was too late,
craving Protection for her self, and the younger Children in a Sanctuary; but
in vain seek they Refuge from The Treachery of others, who have been of the
Plot to betray themselves* the Protector resolved to have them all into his
hands, to effect which he makes the Effect become a Cause: for finding the
young King more than usually melancholy with the Apprehensions he had of the
danger of his present condition, he made that Melancholy an important reason,
for his brother to be brought to keep him company; and because, this could not
be done, without the Queens consent, but by offering some Violation to the
rights of Sanctuary; it being reasonably to be supposed, that she would never
let the Child go without apparent force upon her; he singled out a Clergyman
to be the Picklock of Privilege, a grave State-drudge, and by his degree no
worse a man then an Arch bishop, who having only so much Divinity as to know
that Obedience was better then Sacrifice, so far persuaded, or rather terrified
the disconsolate Queen into a Compliance, that she (consulting with her Fears
only) gave up the innocent Infant to his Grace, who thereby had the honor to
be the third great Instrument in that great Treason that followed.

The Monster having thus got his desired Prey within his own Denn, did not yet
think fit to devour them immediately, but before he entered upon so solemn an
act of horror, as the plunging himself into that fathomless Gulf of Cruelty,
he thought fit to wade in blood by degrees, that sounding the depth of the
danger as well as of the guilt he was to enter into, he might at the same time
harden and secure himself. First then he cut off all their Friends, beheading
the Lord Rivers, Sir Anthony Woodvill, and the principal persons of the Queens
Relations, upon pretense of treachery against his Person and Government, which
being in some sense true (for doubtless they meant to oppose his intended
Usurpation) he thought it a reasonable Justification for taking their Lives. In
the next place he charged the Queen her self with Sorcery, making the poor
Innocent Jane Shore to be her Hand-mate in the Inchantation; with whom the Lord
Hastings having had a known Familiarity from the time of the death of King
Edward, he most maliciously designed him to be their Accuser, who scorning to
assist him in such dark purposes, was himself made a Conspirator with them,
being deservedly executed as a Traitor, because he refused to be one: his
Execution following so close upon his Sentence, and the Proclamation of his
Treason so close upon that, that at the reading of it in the Street, a stander
by observing how fairly they had drawn the foul Charge against him, being
engrossed at large in Parchment, he cried out aloud, That it was written by
Prophecy.

Thus having cleared the Foundation, and sufficiently tampered his Mortar with
blood, to make it more strong and binding, he laid the Groundwork of his
Usurpation upon the Illegitimacy of the two young Princes; pretending that the
King their Father was never lawfully married to the Queen their Mother, but was
before God, Husband to the Lady Elizabeth Lucy. This, as it had something of
Truth in point of Fact (for it is said he was betrothed to her) so being matter
of Divinity in point of Right, it was agreed that a Chaplain to the Duke of
Buckingham (who was his great Confident, and bound to him by the stipulation of
a Match betwixt their Children, and a promise of equal partition of the
Treasure of the Kingdom) should open the Case at large in a Sermon at Paul's
Cross; who taking his Text from that place, where it is said, that Bastard
Plants shall not Inherit, so over-acted his part, that he not only made King
Edward's Children, but he himself a Bastard too, and all the Children of his
Father the Duke of York, the Protector only excepted, who he said was the
express Image of his Father, and pre-ordained by God to the great Charge of the
Kingly Office. But all this was delivered with so apparent flattery and
dissimulation, that not believing himself, it is no wonder the People gave so
little credit to him, who instead of crying out thereupon (as 'twas expected
they should) God save King Richard, cried out, the Devil take the shameless
Preacher.

This scorn put upon the Priest, or rather upon him, did not yet so deter him,
but that two days after he sent the Duke himself into the City, to see whether
his Authority might move any thing more then the Doctors Eloquence, who
confidently affirmed to the Citizens at Guild Hall, That all the Nobility
judging the Issue of King Edward spurious, had chosen him to succeed, and only
expected a Declaration of their Consents: But as it was not likely, that they
who but two days before, could not be moved when they were told, the Lord from
Heaven had made choice of him, should now concur in the Election with any Lords
on Earth, so neither could the Rhetoric of his Greatness prevail for any other
confirmation then what was couched sub alto silentio. This gave little
satisfaction to his Lordship, for that he knew it would give none to his
Master; and therefore rather then depart without something like a Vote, he
secretly ordered some few of his own Servants at the lower end of the Hall to
cast up their Caps, and cry, King Richard, King Richard: which impudence of
theirs, though it apparently abasht the greatest part of the Company there, yet
his graceless Grace taking it up at the first bound for an unanimous consent,
said it was a goodly Cry, and such as showed their universal approbation;
requiring thereupon the Mayor and his Fraternity to meet him the next day at
the Protectors Court in Baynard's Castle, in order to Petition him to accept
their freely offered Subjection.

And here I cannot but think it worth the notice (although we that have lived
in these latter times have seen perhaps more exquisite Scenes of Hypocrisy) to
observe the instability and levity of the common Peoples Faith, who (like the
Sea to which they are compared) have their fluxes and refluxes of Loyalty. It
was not two days since they showed as great Affections to the Son, as ever
their Wives had to the Father, in attempting to beat down the Pulpit about that
Stone-Priests ears, that assaid to beat down his Title; answering his potent
Patron, the Duke of Buckingham, with a Sullenness that showed no less contempt
of his Dignity, then of the others Divinity. Yet after all this honest
obstinacy, the very next day after they Apostatized into that Compliance, as to
suffer themselves to be made mere Properties in that most ridiculous Pageantry
of State, when the aforesaid Duke made it a thing of such great difficulty to
get the Protector to show himself to them out of a high Gallery, for nearer he
was not to come, not knowing (as it was to be supposed) what the intent of
their Address was, until his Grace saluted his Highness with the tender of
their Allegiance; and in a long Oration (by which speaking for them, he rather
spoke to them) declared that they were abundantly satisfied, not only in the
Justice, but Necessity of his taking the Royal Authority upon him. At which the
Usurper started, being struck dumb with passion for a while, but after he had
conquered his Anger and Amazement, he, good Man, returned to his wonted
Clemency, and gently reproached the Duke his Cousin of Unkindness, telling him
he little thought that he of all men would have moved him to the thing, that he
knew of all things in the World he most declined, protesting it was far from
him to do such wrong to his deceased Brother, and his sweet Children, and to
his own upright Conscience: this he spoke trembling, as doubting the Multitude
might close with him, and cry Amen. But scarce were the words out of his Mouth,
before the Duke, seemingly out of his Senses, transported with a just
indignation to see their profer'd Love scorned, replied like a truly Loyal
Traitor; Sir, I must further add, that since it is so well known that your
Brothers Children are Bastards, they shall never be admitted to the Crown of
England; and therefore if your Highness shall neither regard your self nor us,
so much, as to accept the Trust, We are directly determined to confer it upon
some one of the House of Lancaster, that will have respect to the general Good.
This made the Crocodile weep; and now acknowledging he was not born for
himself, he so far denied himself, as to accept the honor thrust upon him by
the giddy Multitude, who ecchoing to the Duke their Speaker, cried out all (as
if it had been with one voice) God save King Richard, God save King Richard.
This made him descend (the only way to ascend) and like that Raven at Rome,
which flying over the Marketplace when a great shout was given, fell down
amongst the People, he condescended, and very formally to salute all the Rout;
becoming on the sudden so gracious, so debonair, so obliging a Prince, that
they forgot all their former Exceptions; their discontent vanishing in an
instant, like a Fogg upon the Suns Rising, dispelled by the rays of the
present Grace he did them.

And now being King, who would not but have him so: It was high time (as the
Vulgar Proverb has it) to put the Children to bed, and lay the Goose to the
fire: For after having seen them thus undrest and stripped naked, there remains
no more but to draw the Curtains, and leave them to their rest, like Lambs in
the Lions Den, who could not sleep at all, till he was ascertained they had
slept their last. For which black purpose he called a bloody Villain out of his
Bed to smother them in theirs, who performed that horrid deed of Darkness with
so much secrecy, that the truth of his falsehood could not be detected, till
within these very few weeks, when some occasionally digging in the Tower, at
the place where it seems that poor Priest buried them, who afterward dyed for
his Piety, they found the Coffin, and in it the Bones of both the Princes, as
well his whom Perkin Werbeck personated, as the King his Brother; which (I take
it) are yet to be seen, or were very lately, in the Custody of Sir Thomas
Chicheley the Master of the Ordnance, to whom his Majesty has entrusted the
making a fitting Monument for them in the Abbey of Westminster.

RICH. III.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

LOVALTO MELIE

coat of arms of King Richard III: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure three fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion or crowned,
sinister a boar argent armed and bristled. THE Imaginary Reign of the last King
(if so be we may call him properly a King, who was in so much subjection all
his life) lasted not many Weeks, before this Usurper his Uncle, as I showed
before, not content to have the Government, without he had the Rule of the
Kingdom, quit his abhorred Style of PROTECTOR, to take upon him, contrary to
his dissembled Motto of Lovalto Melie, the better known Title of KING, to which
(finding it guarded by the Law) he made his way as a wild Boar (which)
therefore he gave not improperly for his Cognizance) breaks through a Fence,
bearing down all regard of Allegiance, Affinity, Friendship, Honor, Humanity,
or any respect Moral, Civil, or Divine, excited by Cruelty (as other men by
Ambition) to seize on the Crown, to the intent he might have the Power as well
as the Pleasure to kill whom he pleased: The Butcheries he was guilty of before
he could fix himself in the Throne (not to mention those afterward) being so
many, that we may conclude, as other Kings were anointed with Oil, he was
besmeared with Blood. His Sovereign and the Prince his Son, his Brother, and
his Brothers Children, his Friend, his Servant, nay the very best of his
Friends and Servants, her that was part of himself, fell all by his own hand,
or at least by his own contrivance, and all sacrificed to the short-lived Glory
of being a King, which proved as transitory almost as his from whom he took it:
For the one reigned two months and two weeks, and the other not longer then
two years and two months: too short a time to make even that great Account he
was to give of his Usurpation. Neither could there better be hoped from him,
who having a continued Fever in his Conscience, was ever so blood-thirsty,
that every little provocation quickened his Cruelty; in so much that we find
one Collingborn, a harmless Country Gentleman, hanged, drawn and quartered, for
only reproaching the ill Natures of his ill Ministers, with a silly Quibble
upon their bestial Names, in that pitiful Rhyme, The Cat, the Rat, and Lovel
the Dog,
Rule all England under the Hogg.
Neither suffered he more then Sir Thomas Saintleger did, for breaking a Jest
only, whose Wit forfeited his Head, notwithstanding he had married his own
Sister: which made him appear so sordid as well as so savage to all Foreign
Princes, that they refused to have any Commerce with him. Lewis the French King
(to whom he sent to conclude a League) so abhorred his Amity, that he would by
no means see or hear his Ambassadors, but sent them away with disgrace. The
King of Scots who had so lately submitted to his Brother, defied him and all
his power, as a Beast. What scorn the Duke of Britain put upon him, needs no
other proof then the hanging his chief Minister for holding Intelligence with
him. Neither does it appear that he was in much better esteem at home then
abroad. However, he has the repute of having been an excellent Lawmakers: For
it is said, never any King made better Ordinances then he. Amongst the rest,
those that favor his Memory, cry up that popular Law, whereby it was Enacted,
That the Commonalty of the Realm should in no wise be charged with any
Imposition, called the Benevolence: but as that seemed to be an Act fitted to
the time he lived in, as well as to the persons he lived with; so it is more
then probable it had never passed, had not he known himself to be so generally
hated, that he despar'd of ever having any Freewill Offerings. It Is possible
he, as most Usurpers, might endeavor to fortify himself with good
Constitutions, being as much afraid of the People, as they were of him; but
it is not likely so wicked a man could make so good a King: and whether it were
that the people found he made those good Laws of his, more for his own sake,
then theirs; or whether it were that he took no further care, then only to have
them made, not observed; or what other cause it were I know not: but certain it
is, the Subjects held not themselves so obliged by any of his good Acts, as to
make him any Return of Gratitude or Affection, but taking example from himself
to be disloyal, many of them revolted to the Earl of Richmond; others
pretending to stay with him, did not yet assist him; and such as durst not
defy him by an open Hostility, did him more mischief by their concealed piety,
praying against him as heartily as the rest fought against him; in so much that
his Competitor Prince Henry, when he came to close dispute with him, found
little or no difficulty to conquer him, notwithstanding his Army wanted not
Conduct, nor himself Courage. But that which contributed most to his ruin, was
the Self-condemnation which appeared within his own Conscience, which as he
could not smother or conceal, so the terror of it being so manifest, as well
by the causless Jealousies he conceived of those of nearest Trust about him,
making the Duke of Buckingham, and the Lord Stanley his two greatest Friends
his Enemies, by only suspecting them to be so, as by the poor shifts he made to
support his tottering Title, first marrying the Widow of Prince Edward, the
Son of Henry the Sixth (both whom he had murdered) to gain the Earl of Warwick
on his side, and after making her away in hopes to marry his Niece Elizabeth,
eldest Daughter to his Brother King Edward, and strengthen himself with her
Title (notwithstanding he had but a little before caused her and all her
Fathers Children to be declared Illegitimate) stooping to dishonorable Truces
to keep his crazy Frame unshaken as long as he could; sending most base and
dishonorable Conditions to the Duke of Britain, in hope the young Earl his
Competitor (then under his protection) might be betrayed by him; I say, these
vile and low shusslings, as they showed him rather politic then wise, so they
gave his own Party such an Umbrage, and so shockt their Confidence, that as if
they had foreseen his downfall by instinct, ere there were any visible Symptoms
of decay in his power, every man seemed Crest-fall'n in his Court, a long time
before they had any Allarm from abroad: but after they heard of the arrival of
the Earl of Richmond, he himself saw the presages of his Destiny in their
Countenances, and found that they followed him as a Tyrant rather then a King,
drawn by a principle of Fear, not Affection, which so stung him within, that
instead of being courageous, he grew desperate; and to show he trusted no body
but himself, after the Armies came to join Battle, he acted things even beyond
himself, adventuring his person without any reasonable provocation given him,
against whole Troops, to make himself Master (if possible) of his Competitors
life, but in the Attempt he lost his own; gaining only this point of Glory by
it, That he dyed more honorably then he lived, and by his early Death, secured
those that remained alive, who having not stained their Swords with innocent
blood, did confidently, because timely, submit to the mercy of the gentle
Conqueror.

HEN. VII.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
coat of arms of King Henry VII: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure three fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a dragon gules
garnished and armed, sinister a greyhound argent collared. NO sooner had
Fortune, by the late fatal Victory, declared for the Antiquated Stock of the
Tuthors, against the illustrious Name and Progeny of Plantaginet, that had
continued near four hundred years, but to show her partiality to the parts of
this Prince, she offered the Crown to him before he was ready to offer any
Title to it. For being by his Fathers side a Stranger to both the Royal Houses
of York and Lancaster, and by his She was a Daughter of France.
Mothers side descended out of that Line, which by the same Law it was made
capable of Inheriting any Estate, was made incapable of the Succession to the
Crown: 'twas not enough to be declared by himself King de Facto, without the
Law declared him so de Jure. To the intent therefore to dazzle the Eyes of those
who looked too intensly upon his Title, he made his first Appearance to the
People with a trine aspect of Descent, Consent, and Conquest, setting forth a
Proclamation, by which he declared himself King, Jure Divino, Humano, and
Militari. The first (which was proved by the Union of the two Nations, the
Britains and Normans) was said to have been written in the Stars, and revealed
from Heaven (if we may credit Tradition) near eight hundred years before, to
his great Ancestor Cadwallader, the last of the British Kings, who having lost
almost all that little was left him, is reported to have rejoiced in this
Assurance, That one of his Posterity should recover back the Imperial Diadem of
the Isle. Which Prophecy King Henry the Sixth (who had the repute of being an
illuminated man too) applied to this King, being then but a Child, fifty years
at least before 'twas accomplished, saying to some Lords that were present when
the Youth was playing by him, This is he that shall quietly enjoy what we now
contest for: which saying of his, as it was not much unlike that Prediction of
Augustus, -- hic Vir, hic est tibi quem promitti Saepius audis, himself having
then a hopeful Heir alive, and those of the other House several; so that being
justified by no less then two so notable Predictions of two Kings, 'twas not to
be doubted, but that he was Rex, Jure Divino. The second was confirmed by the
Union of the two Houses: himself, that was Heir of the House of Lancaster,
marrying the eldest Daughter of Edward the Fourth, the undoubted Heir of those
of York; whereby he brought all Hearts to bow to his Title, as before all knees
to his Fortune; the People generally believing, that the Roses which sprang
from this happy Conjunction, would never more have any Prickles; so that there
remained no further Scruple De Jure Humano. And now having stifled all secret
Murmurings, as well as all open Contradictions, having conquered all
Difficulties and Perplexities of State, charmed all opposite Inclinations, and
made his way with his Sword, over the Head of one of equal Stars and Parts with
himself, having conquered Force with Force, and backed Right with Might, having
taken possession of the Crown of Thorns, or rather of the Crown amongst the
Thorns, receiving it as a Trophy in conspectu Militum, who durst deny him to be
King de Jure Belli: especially since there was nothing wanting to make up the
glory of his Triumph, but what himself denied himself; who rather affecting
Power then Pomp, despised those outward Formalities of State, which draw most
Reverence from the gaping Multitude, applying himself only to the sixation of
that real part of Majesty, which consisted in making good his Safety, his
Honor, and his Wealth, which were to give him his Reputation with those of the
Wiser sort. In order whereunto he passed two notable Acts (and they were the
very first he passed) either respecting the public no less then his private
good; to wit, The Act of Repeal of the Attainder against his Party and himself;
whereby the Adversary had cast so much blood and dirt upon them, as left an
eternal blemish upon Record to fully their Memory, as well a invalidate their
Interest: For however the Lawyers had assured him, that the possession of the
Crown took of all Defects, yet in respect they were not able to give him like
assurance of the continuing that possession, his Jealousy of the worst
prompted him to provide for the best, by obliterating the reproach as well as
taking off the force of the Statute. The second was the Law in favor of
Possession, whereby it was ordained, That no person assisting the King for the
time being, by Arms or otherwise, should ever after be impeached for it, or
attainted, either by Course of Law, or by Act of Parliament; and that if any
such Act of Attainder did happen to be made, it should be void in it self, and
of no effect: which Law, though it were like a two edged Weapon, that (if not
wisely managed) might as well wound him in whose hand it was, as those against
whom it was directed; yet it serving his turn for that present, and securing
the Subject no less then the Prince, ever since it had the repute of a wise
Ordinance, and so has continued ever since. Another Act there was, if so be we
may call it his, or rather the Act of Pope Alexander the Sixth, obtained by his
procurement; to wit, A Prohibition of the benefit of Sanctuary to all such as
fled thither for any offense of Treason, as Enemies to the Christian Faith, as
well as to the Crown; with a Prohibition likewise of all Privilege to any that
came a second time to ask the benefit of Sanctuary for any Offense whatsoever.
This made him so much more a King then any of his Predecessors, by how much he
had rendered it impossible almost for any of his Subjects to start out of their
Allegiance, well knowing, Quod aliud est Regem esse, aliud Regnare.

Yet after all this great care of his to secure his Greatness, he run a risk of
losing it the very same way he got it; his antipathy to the House of York being
such (for though he were but of the half blood of Lancaster, he retained their
whole hatred) even after the consummation of his Nuptials, that the other
Faction perceiving his Marriage to be an act of Necessity rather then Choice,
wherein his Nature strove with his Interest, and his Ambition with his
Affection, which should justle the other out; they took that umbrage at his
coldness, that doubting their own, they invaded his Security, countering his
Greatness with something that so amazed the Common People, that not being well
able to judge whom they ought to oppose (like those at Barnet-Field that
fatally mistook the Earl of Oxford's Stars for King Edward the Fourth his Suns)
they knew not whom to obey, blinding their Eyes by continual false Lights.
Amongst which there were no Apparitions terrified them more then those Aerie
Typhons, Lambert, Perkin, and Wilford; the two first of which adventured on
such Personations, as wanted only Belief, to have charmed all his Forces
without further Inchantation, and would doubtless have unravel'd his felicity,
had not the parts which were found in his Virtue, as well as those in his
Fortune, been such, as were no less matchless then their Villainy: But there are
some, who conclude from their being so silently vanquished as they were, that
all (except only those two walking Ghosts of Edward Plantaginet Earl of
Warwick, and Richard Duke of York) were Spirits of his own raising, and
nourished by himself, because he would have the more reason not to reign in the
Right of his Wife, the Glory of whose House he purposed to extinguish as they
do Torches, which being held downward, are put out by the superfluity of their
own matter. But this, as all other his great Acts of State, is rather guest at
then understood, as it was his desire it should; giving therefore (and not
improperly) the Percullis, the Emblem of Fastness for his Device, to forbid all
approaches to his Secrets, no less then to his Power; it being natural to him
to keep himself at such a distance, and his Heart (as that of Kings ought to
be) so inscrutable, that he might render himself thereby more awful to his
Counselors at home, and more revear'd of his Confederates abroad: to whom he
appeared like one with a dark Lanthorn, keeping them always in the Light,
toward him, whilst he himself was not perceived by them. In which great point
of Glory the great King of France would have been his Corrival, but
notwithstanding he was the wise Son of a wiser Father, and had had as many
Tutors in the Art of Government (that is of Dissimulation) as any Prince
whatever, yet he fell short of him, and was therefore forced to be still on the
Desensive side, both he, and the King of Scots his Colleague, being like two
great Irish Greyhounds worried by an English Mastiff, which fighting by snaps,
run as soon as they could get loose of him. To say truth, he not only brought
the War they raised upon him home to their own Doors, but brought them to
attend at his, departing content with such Conditions as he would put upon
them: and however they both seemed to have had the better of him, the first by
getting away his Mistress; the last by getting his Daughter; yet it appears
that he gained the point from them, which was to him most important, and which
indeed he valued above all things else, a Peace with Money. That Match of the
King of France with the Heir of Britain, may rather be said to be a wrong to
Maximilian King of the Romans, which had been espoused to her before, then any
assront to him afterward; notwithstanding he had that Sentiment of the baffle,
that he would not be pacified, till the King of France laid him down Seven
thousand four hundred and fifty Ducats in present to defray the Charge he had
been at in vindicating his Honor, and Two thousand five hundred Crowns yearly,
as a price for his Amity, which being duly paid all his Reign, and all the time
of his Son after him, this did so far exceed any computation of Charge that
could be pretended, that considering his Title to France, was by particular
Agreement reserved to him, at the same time, we may rather call it (as the
English did then) a Tribute, then (as the French did) a Pension, since being
always demanded as a Tribute, it was never denied for the Names sake.

The King of Scots his Case, as it was different from that of the King of
France, so he went a different way to compass his satisfaction from him,
choosing to be the Giver rather then the Taker, to buy rather then sell Peace.
And to say truth, he gave him such a Jewel for it, as (her Birth, Beauty, and
Parts considered) 'twas not in the World besides, viz. the Princess Margaret
his eldest Daughter: but herein he dealt like a wise Purchasor, who was
resolved not to let go an Estate that lay so near and convenient to his own,
for want of a little out-bidding the ordinary rate, foreseeing (as he told his
Council at the match-making) that the lesser Kingdom, if ever it came to be
united to the greater, as in all probability it would (unless, which was a
blessing scarce to be hoped for, that the Issue of his own Body should never
fail) must insensibly be reduced without a Conquest (as since we have seen it
has been) if not under the same Laws, yet under the same Allegiance; which, he
said, would be a tie sufficient to bind them to the observation of the same
Interest, without the same advantage by it, and to bring them, who never could
be subdued by Arms, though often overcome, to submit willingly to the good
pleasure of Providence, when they should find themselves (like Ivy that grows
up by some great Oak) raised up to a height they could never have attained to
by themselves, and partaking the benefit of our strength, with the comfort of
our heat, without contributing any thing to our Nourishment.

The only Enemy indeed that ever matched this great King, was one of the
Feminine Gender, if so be we may not rather call her his Superior then Equal,
as having the Malice of a Woman joined to the Spirit of a Man, and both
elevated by the greatness of her Fortune, no less then of her Force. This was
the Lady Margaret, second Wife to that famous Charles the Hardy, Duke of
Burgundy, and second Sister to King Edward the Fourth, who was so surcharged
with Envy to the House of Lancaster, that she even hated her own Niece, for
consenting to marry him: but after she found the same aversion in him to the
House of York (who in all Probability, if he could have had the Heir of
Britain, had contemned all the grave Considerations of the Union) and that it
was predominant not only over his Wars and Councels, but took place even in his
Chamber and Bed; so that however he had made her his Wife, he still refused her
to be his Queen, denying her the Rites of Majesty by Coronation, as other
Queens usually had, though she had bore him a Son to be a pledge of her Faith
and Affection to him: I say, when she saw that Marriage, which makes all
persons equal, had subjected her Niece to this inequality, the indignation she
conceived at it, did so rankle within her Breast, that she never could have any
rest within her thoughts, as long as he had any within his Dominions: and
therefore she made it the whole labor of her thoughts to contrive all the
ways and means imaginable to dethrone him, becoming the avowed Foster-mother
of almost all the Rebellions during his Reign; conjuring up so many Spirits as
could not possibly have been allayed by the Magic of any Prince less wise or
cautious then himself; who not only countermin'd all her Plots, but happily
beat her at her own Weapon, by placing so many Flies and Familiars about her,
that by frequent varying of their shapes and disguises, rigled themselves into
the knowledge of all her Secrets, and by turning picklocks to so many of her
Plots, to the overthrow of all those that were engaged in the Conspiracy with
her, that at last the very Fame and suspicion of them prevented all her
designs, no man daring to adventure himself, for fear of being blown up by he
knew not whom, whiles he himself continued still and quiet (like those that
catch Moles) till he saw the manner of their working, and then he took them
without striking a stroke, overcoming so easily as well as so wisely, that
Caesar's VENI, VIDI, VICI, was not more terrible nor sudden in its execution
then his. And herein he was more particularly like that great Emperor, in that
he still opposed his own Person to all those dangers which were visible
(especially Domestic) which however some (taking from the Reputation of his
Fortitude to add to that of his Wisdom) ascribe not to his natural
forwardness, so much as to the distrust he had of his Lieutenants; yet by how
much it rendered him victorious, we ought to understand it in the best sense,
and believe him very bold, if not very valiant, in that he chose rather to see
then to hear of danger. In fine, look what description an Athenian once gave of
God, may be given of him that was his Lieutenant, That he was neither Bowman
nor Horsman, Pikeman nor Footman, but one that knew well how to command all
these, perhaps no man better.

Neither was he less fortunate then forward in Peace, as well as in War. So
that as upon the one side he looked like Caesar, or Augustus rather, both of
whom as they were armed with Lightning, so their Pardons went ever before and
after their Swords: so on the other side he was not unlike those two famous
Legislators, Solon and Licurgus, who principally regarding the People, were yet
so wise for themselves, as with the public safety to secure their own
Authority: for he was an excellent Judge of times and seasons, and knew when to
strain up the Laws to his Prerogative, and when to let down his Prerogative to
the Test of the Law. And though 'twas observed never any man loved his own way
nor his own will better then he, nor perhaps ever had so much Reason to do it,
being as another Solomon, wiser then his Counselors (and yet they perhaps as
well chose as ever any Kings Counselors were) yet we find he was sometimes
content to part with both, for the more orderly administration of Justice,
leaving the disposition of his Mint, his Wars, and his Martial Justice (things
of absolute power) not to say the Concerns of his unsettled Title, which was yet
of higher and tenderer consideration, to the wisdom of his Parliaments. And
least the thing called Propriety (which is the same to the Subject, as the
Prerogative to Majesty) should be thought to suffer in the least, he gave
himself the trouble of hearing many Causes at his Councel-board, where sitting
at the Fountain of Justice, assisted by the most learned, as well as the most
reverend Professors of Law and Conscience, it was not to be supposed that any
Cause could lose any thing of its due weight and allowance: yet it seems the
Common Lawyers, unwilling the determination of Meum and Tuum should go besides
their own Courts, traduced him with distrusting his Judges in matters of Common
Right, as the Soldiers complained of his not trusting his Generals in point of
common Security: And some there were who would have aggravated it to a
Grievance; however 'twas apparent to be rather their own then the Peoples, who
are apter to complain of the chargeableness, then the due Administration of the
Laws. But these Causes being for the most part heard in the Vacation time, it is
possible he had in his Thoughts something beyond their reach, with respect to
the splendour of his Court, and the profit of the City: to which as he was
always a Friend, so by this dispatch of Justice, while there was no other
Courts sitting, he drew such a concourse of Clyents to Town, as kept up a kind
of Term all the Year round, and so quickened Trade, that by adding to theirs, it
increased his own Wealth to that degree, that amongst other Reasons given of
his neglecting the benefit of the Discovery of the Indies (first offered to him
by Columbus) 'twas not the least that he had no want of Money; and having made
himself a Member of the City, that by the benefit of that Community he might
find his account as well in their Chamber as his own Exchequer, and prove (as
after he did) the only Dragon that kept their Golden Fleece, sharing with
Solomon himself in those two great points of Glory, to be reputed the wisest
and richest King of his time: it is no wonder he should by Works Immortal (as he
did) make his way to Immortality, leaving his Son Henry nothing to do but to
inherit his envied Felicity.

HEN. VIII.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
coat of arms of King Henry VIII: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure three fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion or crowned,
sinister a dragon gules garnished and armed. THOSE that take a view of this
Prince and his Father, will find no other difference betwixt them, then what is
betwixt Youth and Age, the one affecting Contemplation, the other Action: which
may be the Cause perhaps why he preferred Martial Men to be of his Council,
rather then those of any other Profession; as loving them best, who having
given him good advice, were in capacity to put it in Execution. The Father is
celebrated for his Wisdom, the Son for his Wit; either alike Magnisicent,
though perhaps not alike Majestic: the difference consisting in this, That the
Father always appeared as a King, the Son but sometimes: the one hating any
thing that looked like Ostentation, as knowing that Majesty makes the People
bow, but Vainglory bows to them; the other affecting Pomp and Gaiety, as
young Men and Soldiers do light Colors and Feathers; wherein he was the more
to be excused, in that it became him, and he it. In the last place, the Father
had little or no Appetite to Pleasure, unless it were to do as great Princes
usually do, when they come to Banquets, look on a while, and so depart without
scarce tasting: but the Son was so inclined to gratify his Sense, as well as
his Intellect, that he still sweetened the sowerness of Business with some
reflection of delight, refreshing himself by Dances, Revels, Tiltings, etc. his
Court being marshaled like a Camp, and his Camp set out like his Court; so that
Mars and Venus seemed to be in Conjunction all his Reign, and Honor and Love
still in fashion. Neither needed there any other Lodestone then that of his
own Example to draw all the young Nobility after him, who were not less
considerable at that time for their Number, then their Quality; so that France
was afraid, Spain jealous, and all the other Ne^ghbour Princes envious at his
growing Greatness.

Now as he began his Reign at the time when every thing begins to grow and
blossom (it being in the Spring of the Year, as well as of his Age) so the
Season complying with his Constitution, made it hard for him to resist the heat
of his blood: yet we do not find that he engaged in any War abroad, till he had
secured Peace at home; making his Justice as renowned amongst his People by
revenging their wrongs, as he made his power afterward, when he came to revenge
his own, executing Empson and Dudley as a terror to all Promoters, to show he
did not esteem them faithful Servants to his Father, that had so betrayed their
Country. Which Act of Justice being closed with another of Universal Grace, in
restraining his Prerogative, to enlarge the Subjects Confidence and Affection,
made him so clear a Conquest over all Discontents, arising by the Oppression of
his Predecessor; that having nothing more to do at home, he bethought himself
of what was to be done abroad: Providence offering him a Projection suitable to
the greatness of his mind, to render the esteem of his Piety no less famous
then that of his Justice, by undertaking to rescue the Pope out of the hands of
the King of France, as a Dove delivered out of the Talons of a Vulture, who
having already drove him to Covert, as we say, (that is, besieged him in his
City of Bononia) and having his Confederates, the Emperor and King of Spain,
ready at hand to make a retreive, doubted not but to devour him in a very short
time. This, as it was a Design of Super-errogating Merit, so it carried in it
no less of Advantage then Glory, giving him a fit occasion to show at once his
Zeal and Power, and in serving him to serve himself upon him, in the promotion
of his Title to France; it being no small addition of Credit to his Claim, that
his Ho^iness, as an Earnest of his Spiritual Benediction, had bestowed upon his
Majesty the forfeited Style of Christianissimus. However, before he would move
himself in Person out of England, he thought it necessary to prevent any Motion
of the King of Scots into England, who he knew would be ready to bruise his
Heel, as soon as he advanced to break the Serpents Head: and accordingly he got
not only a confirmation of that Excommunication which Julius the Second had
formerly granted against the said Scotch King, in case he broke his League with
him (the Curse whereof followed him to his Grave for violating his Faith, he
died in the attempt) but obtained a plenary Indulgence for all that should
assist him. Thus armed as it were with the Sword of God and Gideon, he entered
that goodly Kingdom, and long it was not ere he got the Maidenhead of that
Virgin City Tournay, who having repulsed Caesar, had the Testimony of her
Pucillage written upon its Gates, as the only Town had kept her self
unconquered from that time, but now was forced to yield to him, by the Name and
Title of Roy tres Christien, as appears by the Original Contract yet exta^t.
The same day he received the News of the James the Fourth slain in
Flodden-field.
Scotch Kings death, who attempting (as I said before) to divert the War, lost
his Life, and 'twas happy he lost not his Kingdom too: a Victory so seasonable
and super-successful, that Fortune, as enamored of him, seemed to prostitute
her self to him, and raised the Expectations of his future Successes to that
height, that the Emperor Maximilian, who had before submitted (though Lord of
no less then eight Kingdoms) to serve him in the condition of a private
Soldier for the wages of One hundred Crowns a day, now (as some report)
profer'd to surrender his Empire and Duchy of Milan to him: and the King of
France resolving to purchase his Friendship at any rate, conditioned to pay
yearly to him, and his Successors Kings of England, for ever, Forty six
thousand Crowns de Soleile, and twenty four Sols Turnois, with One thousand
five hundred Crowns more as a Tribute, out of the Salt of Brovage, as may
appear by the Agreement Anno 1527. the confirmation of which Treaty cost his
Son Charles, after the death of his Father (who did not long survive the
Composition) a Million of Crowns more. Now if his Enemies had such dread of
him, what esteem must we imagine the Pope had, who owed his Deliverance to him.
Silver and Gold he had none to tender, but such as he had, Glorious and
Grateful Titles he was very prodigal of: For besides that of Liberator Urbis,
and Orbis (the Style of his Ancestor Constantine the Great, and therefore
though only fit for Henry the Great) it being occasional and temporary; the
Conclave had under consideration such as might be perpetuated to all Ages. Some
moved to have him called Defensor Romanae Ecclesiae: others proposed Protector
Sedis Apostolicae: others again liked better to have him styled Rex
Apostolicus, as some Rex Orthodoxus: but at last all agreed in that of Defensor
Fidei. After this he was made Head of the Holy League, out of belief That there
could no Authority Superior to his, be interposed either for the Conservation
of good men in Peace, or repressing those that are ill by War (for so are the
words of the Fourteenth Article of the League.) This shows that he was so much
greater then any of the Kings were before him, by how much they only gave Laws
at home, but he throughout all Christendom, disposing War and Peace as made
most to the advantage of his own People, who were thereupon so well satisfied
with the Conduct of his Government, that his Will seems to have been the
Supreme Law. For as he needed to have said no more to his Parliaments, then as
one of the Roman Emperors (cited by Suetonius) was used to say to the Senate,
Scitis quid velim and quibus Opus habeo: So they could say no more to him, nor
indeed any Parliament to any King, then was declared by their giving up
themselves and their Liberties wholly to him, in that Act of highest Trust and
Confidence, that ever Subjects passed, when they consented that he should (in
case he had no Issue of his own) dispose the Imperial Diadem of this Realm as
his Highness pleased, by Will or Patent.

Thus great was this King whiles he continued to be himself, keeping the Rains
of Government in his own hands: but after he suffered himself to be governed by
others (who took advantage of his to serve their own Lusts) like one drawn from
his Center, his motions were so irregular, and the intreagues of State so
perplexed, that we cannot wonder at those Disorders which followed, to the great
interruption of his Peoples peace and prosperity, but much more of his own,
whilst that which private men esteem their greatest happiness, fell out to be
his greatest curse, the enjoyment of a most virtuous, discreet, and loving
Wise; who being a Lady of that quick-sight, that she looked thorough all his
great Ministers Ambitions, and occasionally detected their Designs, was undone
by the same way she hoped to preserve her self and him. For the jealous
Cardinal Wolsey, his great Minister, doubting that she might interpose her self
betwixt the King and him, as the Moon betwixt the Sun and the Earth, and
thereby deprive him of those warm influences of Grace from whence his power
took life, he designed to blast her as it were by Lightning from Heaven, or
rather by a Spark from Hell, casting a Scruple into the Kings Conscience, which
quickly set it on fire, upon the apprehension of being guilty of the incestuous
Sin of knowing his Brothers Wife. This was so craftily managed, that it was not
known for a while out of what Quiver the Arrow came: but a Treaty being had
about a Marriage of the King of France with the Lady Mary, the Kings Daughter
by her, it was so ordered that the Bishop of Tarbe (the principal Commissioner
on that side) should make some doubt of the Legitimacy of the Princess, thereby
to bring on the Question of Incest. This though it was urged with somewhat more
then usual vehemence, yet his Authority not being such as to move the King much
at that time. The Cardinal secretly engaged the Bishop of Lincoln his Majesty's
Confessor, to press him farther upon it, knowing well (as he acknowledged
afterward) that whatever was once put into the Kings head, would hardly ever be
got out again; nothing doubting withal, but that it was in his power at any
time to conjure the Devil down again as soon as he had done his Service; and
after be had tumbled the Queen down (or at least) brought her into a necessity
of making use of his Friendship, wherein he had two great ends. First, to
flatter his great Patron the French King, with the hopes (in case of a Divorce)
of marrying his fair Sister the Duchess of Alanson to the King, whose Al^yance
was then of great Importance to that Crown. Secondly, to perform a very real
Service to his distressed Chief the Pope, who being now more persecuted by the
Emperor, then before by the King of France, and at that p^esent in Duress,
might possibly be released by the very menace of such a Divorce as this; the
Emperor, both as Uncle to the Queen, and as Competitor with the French King for
the Universal Monarchy, being moved by Affection and Interest to prevent so
violent a breach in his Alliance.

But as a Mine when it is sprung, does oftentimes other kind of Execution then
they who fire it intended it should, so happened it in this Case: For instead
of making a small breach upon the Kings Peace, that might amount to no more but
the causing a temporary abstinence from the Queens Bed de praesenti only (to
which 'twas hoped she her self might give occasion, by a voluntary Retirement
into some Cloister, where she might remain civilly dead, till his Excellency
the Cardinal made up the breach again) it begat such a rupture in his Thoughts,
that he could have no rest: and as one sick at heart, thought himself not safe
in the hands of any one Physician, neither indeed of all those that he had at
home, till he had the Opinions of those in all the Universities abroad; which
made the business so public, that Luther (who had a little before set up for
himself) finding there might be a good Conclusion from so bad a Beginning, by
making way for some Protestant Lady of that Country, that might advance the
Reformation begun by him there, he vexed the Question a long while: and finding
that the Pope, over-awed by the Emperor, durst not consent to a Divorce, he to
scandalize him the more, set forth, by many learned Arguments, the unlawfulness
of the Marriage; and so nettled King Henry, that the Pope doubting the effects
of his Impatience, proposed by way of Expedient (though but faintly) to Gregory
Cassalis the English Resident, then at Rome, that he would permit him ut aliam
duceret Uxorem, which in plain English was, That if the King pleased, he would
allow him to have two Wives at once. Now whether it were that the King doubted
his power, and thought he could not make good what he promised, for that he
could not make that Marriage out, which he had already, to be either lawful or
unlawful, so as to relieve him or dismiss it: Or whether he had (as is more
probable) a clear Sentiment of the Popes slight Opinion of him, in making so
unusual, not to say unlawful a Proposal to him, is not certain; but certain it
is, he never forgave the Affront, till by virtue of his own proper power he had
divorced himself from his Authority: which the Cardinal laboring to uphold by
his Legatine power, out of hope of being himself Pope, nor only lost himself in
the attempt, but drew all he Clergy who took part with him into a Praemunire: Of
whose Error his wise Servant Cromwell took the advantage, making his Masters
fall the occasion of his own rising, by whom the thoroughly humbled Convocation
we^e persuaded to petition the King for their pardon, under the Title and Style
of Ecclesiae and Cleri Anglicani Protector, and supremum Caput; which raised a
greater dispute upon the Supremacy not long after, then was before upon the
point of Divorce. For the Bishop of Rochester, who by reason of his great
learning and sanctity of Life, was a leading man, refusing to subscribe the
aforesaid Petition, unless some words might be added by way of explanation of
the Kings Supremacy; Cromwell took the Defense thereof upon himself, and by
advice with Bishop Cranmer, there were many Arguments brought to justify the
same, both from the Authority of Kingship in general, de Communi Jure, by
virtue of that Divine Law that has given the style of a Royal Priesthood to all
anointed Kings (and to which by a parallel Case the Pope himself did not long
after give more then a seeming allowance:) For Clement the Seventh, at the
interview of Marselles, when he was urged by some that desired Reformation, and
pressed for the liberty of receiving the Sacrament in both kinds, by an Argument
taken from the custom of the Kings of France, who always received both
Elements; he answered, That it was a peculiar privilege by which Kings were
differenced from other men, as being anointed with the Unction of Priesthood,
as likewise from the particular Prerogative of the Kings of this Isle, de
proprio Jure, or by the Common Law of this Land, which was of ancienter date
then any Prescription made by the Pope, having been ratified by the Sanction of
several Acts of Parliament, that had declared all Spiritual Jurisdiction to be
inherent in the Crown. This Doctrine of his wanted not its Use, for the King
had this immediate benefit of the Dispute, to be restored to the Annates and
First Fruits of the Bishoprics: and now the Bond of his Holiness 's Authority
being thus loosed, one privilege dropped out after another, till at length they
not only divested him of the profit, but of the honor of his Fatherhood,
forbidding any to call him any more Anciently written Pa. Pa. i. e. Pater
Patriarcharum
Papa or Pater, for that there could be but one Lord and Father, but only
Bishop of Rome.

These Annates, as they were some of the principal Flowers of the Triple Crown,
and could not well be plucked off without defacing the Sacred Tyara, so the
whole Conclave took such an alarm at the loss of them, that apprehending no
less then a total defection to follow, they most peremptorily cited the King
himself to appear at Rome under pain of Excommunication. This was thought to be
so unreasonable an Indignity offered to his Majesty (in respect it was neither
convenient for him to abandon his Kingdom, by going so far in Person, nor any
way decent to trust the Secrets of his Conscience to a pragmatical Proctor)
that the Parliament, who were convened to consider of the matter, thought it
but necessary to put a stop to all Appeals to be made out of the Realm, under
the penalty of Praemunire; and prayed his Majesty without more ado to appoint a
Court of Delegates here at home, to determine the Cause. Upon which the
Marriage being not long after declared void, Cromwell hastened on the Match with
the Lady Anne Bulloigne; but the Court of Rome judging the first Marriage good,
and the last void, anathematized all that were assistant in the Divorce: and to
show how much they were incensed by the precipitation of their Sentence, they
concluded it in one only, which by the usual Form could not be finished in less
then three Consistories. This began that Fiery trial which followed not long
after, wherein we may say his Holiness himself proved to be the very first
Martyr, dying immediately after the pronunciation of that great Curse, as one
blasted by the Lightning of his own Thunder, whereby the Church Universal being
without a Head. The Reformists here took that opportunity to provide for their
own, by declaring the King Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England: for
the support of which Dignity, they vested in the Crown the First Fruits of all
Benefices (as they had before of all Bishoprics) Dignities: and Offices
whatever spiritual. Setting forth in what manner Bishops Suffragans should be
nominated and appointed, and what their Privileges and Authorities should be.
In defense of which their proceedings, the King himself wrote an excellent Book
(or at least it passed for his) De Potestate Christianorum Regum in suis
Ecclesiis, contra Pontificis Tyrannidem, etc. But there were many however, and
those of no small note, who continued so obstinate in their Popish Principles,
that they could neither be moved by his Pen nor his Penalties to submit,
choosing rather to part with their Blood then their Blessing: And whether they
were real or mistaken Martyrs, or not rather Sufferers then Martyrs, I will not
take upon me to say, it being as hard for others to judge them, as for
themselves to judge the thing they died for; Truth and Treason being in those
days Qualities, so like one another, that they were scarcely to be discerned,
as appears by the nice Cases of those two, I think the most eminent persons of
all that were so unhappy as to suffer for setting up the Papal above the Regal
Authority, the Learned Bishop of Rochester, and the Judicious Chancellor Sir
Thomas Moore; whose Contradiction could no way determine the Point, though it
was the occasion of determining their Lives; their Cases being made worse by
the same way they thought to have made their Causes better: The first being
found Guilty of saying too much for himself; the other of saying too little. The
Bishop desiring to add to his Oath those words by way of Explanation, Quantum
per Christi Legem liceret, had this interpretation by the Lawyers, upon his
Interpretation, that the addition amounted to a flat denial and depriving the
King of his Title and Dignity, within the Statute of 26. being in effect, that
per Christi Legem non liceret. The wise Chancellor (admonished as he thought
sufficiently by the Bishops error) to avoid the danger of any Interpretation,
ran into a worse: for answering nothing when the Kings Council asked his
Opinion of the Supremacy, his Silence was interpreted Misprision of Treason
within the Statute aforesaid, for that (as the Indictment run) Malitiose
Silebat.

Paul the third being in the Chair at the time when these two eminent men
suffered, hearing the King had sealed his new Title in Blood, thought it in
vain to expect longer his Return to the Apostolic Obedience (as he called it)
and therefore peremptorily summoned him by a terrible Bull to appear within
Ninety days, and make his submission, otherwise he and all that assisted him,
should be given up to utter Damnation, as judged Heretics. The King deprived
of his Realm, the Realm deprived of his Benediction, all the Issue by the last
Match declared Illegitimate, all Ties of Allegiance discharged, all Commerce
with other States forbidden, the Leagues made by other Princes with him
nullified, the Nobility commanded to take up Arms against him, and the Clergy
to depart the Kingdom: Now because this last seemed to be the greatest Menace,
at least the Pope would have it thought so, both in respect of his power over
them, and theirs over the Conscience: the King took the first advantage of it
and sent away many of them against their wills, dissolving no less then Six
hundred forty five of their Societies, which much forwarded his Designs with
the Confederate Princes of Germany, whose Friendship now he seemed to have some
need of, they believing by this he would wholly renounce all Papistry: to which
his late Queen was highly disaffected, and against which his great Minister
Cromwell was deeply engaged, and from which himself was sufficiently discharged
by the Popes declaring him (as he did) a Heretic: for now could he be no
further bound to Paul the Third, then his Ancestor Henry the Second was to
Alexander the Third (the first Pope that was ever acknowledged here) to whom he
made only a Conditional Oath, Quod ab Alexandro summo Pontifice, and ab
Catholicis ejus Successoribus non recederet, quamdiu ipsum sicut Regem
Catholicum habuerint. Gern. Dowbern. Col. 1422. 18. then thereupon dispatched
an Ambassador to him to desire him to accept the Title of Patron and Defender
of their League. But the News of Queen Anne's Execution, which for the
suddenness and severity of it, not to say any thing of the Injustice (because
some were of Opinion that the least Cause of Jealousy in Queens is equivalent
to guilt in private Women) begat such an abhorrence of his dire Inconstancy
(for she was flourishing, accused, condemned, beheaded, and another placed in
her room at Bed and Board, and all within a Months space) that they fell off
again from the Treaty they had entertained, almost as soon as they began it,
believing it a Scandal to their Cause (as some of them said) to need the
protection of the Devil: However the great Ministers here gave it out that the
Discrepancy of Interest was the only cause of the Breach, they requiring Money
of him, without being able to answer the Reciproc on their part. But the true
State-Reason was, that some of the wiser sort conceived they could not safely
admit his Supremacy, for fear they should be obliged by the same rule to set up
a Title for their own Sovereign the Emperor, in his Dominions, which would be
more inconvenient then to leave it where it was in the Pope, who being at
further distance, could not so easily reach them. But long it was not ere the
unexpected cause of that Innocent Queens sufferings was made manifest by the
unexpected Labor of Queen Jane her Successor, who made so good speed to bring
the King a Son and Heir (which was the thing he desired above all things in the
World) that being married on the Twentieth of May she fell in Labor the
Twelfth of October following. But Providence that had decreed she should only
Conceive, but not bring forth, to signalize the Revenge of Queen Anne's Death,
by that of hers, put it into the Kings heart to turn himself Man-Midwife,
rather then lose the hopes of a Kingdom; who accordingly commanded the Child to
be ripped untimely out of her Womb: an act of great horror, and so much more
unwillingly performed, for that he was unprovided of another Wife for the
present. In this Condition Bishop Gardner found him at his Return out of
Germany, who putting him out of all hopes of any Closure with the Protestant
Princes, unless he would come under the Standard of their Faith, and allow of
the Augustan Confession; easily persuaded him to purge himself of the scandal
of Heresy, by showing the World he had only shook off the Pope, but not the
Religion. Here the Scene changed again, and the first thing appeared was that
bloody Statute containing the Six Articles, which being discharged as a
Murdering Piece amongst the new Reformists, cut off most of those who stood in
its way: the Report whereof was so loud and terrible, that the two great
Prelates, Latimer Bishop of Worcester, and Shaxston Bishop of Salisbury, were
frightened out of their Bishoprics; who not being willing to have any hand in
the approbation or execution of them, suffered as patiently under his Title of
Defender of the Faith, as the Bishop of Rochester and Sir Thomas Moore had
before under that of his Supremacy. And now Conscience being revolted from its
ancient way of resolving Doubts, to an abrupt Decision of the Common Law, that
did not instruct but force the Offender^, it is not so much a wonder how so many
came to suffer death under his Reign, as how so many survived it; all Papists
being in danger to be hanged, and all Anti-papists to be burned. Yet in this
great Storm Cromwell behaved himself like a wise Pilot, who finding he could
not prevent the running of the Vessel in a contrary Course to his mind, thought
it enough that he kept it from being quite over-set* and accordingly with great
dexterity he brought on the Treaty once more with the Confederate Princes, who
were it seems alarmed by the Counter-League which the Roman Catholics set up
under the Title of The Holy League; the consequences of which being justly to
be suspected, he made use of their present apprehensions to renew the Treaty,
and by his contrivance there came a Letter to the King from Melancthon (to whom
the King seemed always to have great regard) exhorting him to perfect the
Reformation begun, as well in the Doctrinal as the Ceremonial part of Worship.
To which the King, by advice of Gardener, gave this Answer, That he would make
a League with them in honest Causes, as he had done with the Duke of Juliers,
and after that he would treat of an Accord in Religion. This being no way
satisfactory to them, much less to Cromwell, who had slatter'd them with hopes
of a better Accommodation, he cast about another way to compass his end, and
knowing very well that the King did always prefer his Pleasure before his
Revenge (as those that mean to take great Fishes bait their Hooks with flesh)
so he held up the Treaty with the Proposal of a new Match, that he believed
could not but be very acceptable, not only in respect of the Kings having been
near three Years a Widower, but for that it was such as (he said) would at once
anger and curb the Emperor, the Popes only Executioner, to make good his late
Fulmination: This was a Daughter to the Duke of Cleve, who being a Protestant,
and Father in Law to the Duke of Saxony, and next Neighbor to the Emperors
Dominions in the Low Countries: there seemed to be in the Proposal great
considerations of State, besides that of Riches and Beauty; the last being the
first thing in the Kings Thoughts, wherein Hans Holbin the famous Painter
contributed much to the deceiving him, which whether it proved more unfortunate
to her, or Cromwell, I cannot say: but it so fell out, that the King disgusting
her after he saw her, was easily prevailed with to repudiate her, and
consequently to reject the Match-maker, who having it in his Fate to be undone
(as he was at first set up) by the Smock, was sacrificed to the Envy of the
People rather then his Masters Displeasure, who let them lay the load of his
Faults upon him, and being a Prince that drew upon all his great Ministers more
blame then either they could bear, or durst answer, he left him to perish under
the weight of it. And which made his Case more deplorable perhaps then that of
most others that felt the weight of his Iron Rod, and therefore looked more
like a Judgment from Heaven then Earth, was, First, that he suffered him to be
condemned, at the same time all other men, by a general and free pardon, were
indempnified from the same Crimes, of which he stood accused. Secondly, in that
he died like Phalaris, by an Instrument (as some say) of his own inventing.
Thirdly and lastly, that after having been Vicegerent to the Defender of the
Faith, he should dye as an Heretic for opposing the Faith, after having had
the repute of a faithful Servant, indeed so faithful, that (as Cranmer's Letter
to the King, yet to be seen, testifies) he cared not whom he displeased to
serve his Majesty, he should dye like one that had merited no favor from him.
That he who was so vigilant to detect all Treasons in their Embrio, should dye
like a Traitor himself. That he that had no bounds set to his Authority, should
dye for exceeding his Commission. Lastly, That he who was the only Master of
Requests, and gave an answer to all men that made any Addresses to the King,
should himself dye unheard as well as unpitied. But when we consider all this,
we must conclude the end of some men's Rise is to keep others from Falling;
Providence oftentimes upholding Justice even by Injustice, that so by
correcting some men causlesly, she may certainly teach all men Caution.

The King having thus rid himself of his new Wife, and his old Servant, both
submitting to his Will; the first with the loss of her Estate and Dignity (for
instead of being his Queen, she was adopted his Sister) the last with the loss
of both his Estate and Life; he found the means to repair the want of the one
(though he could not of the other) by taking to his Bed (perhaps with no
disparity to his Greatness, if there had been none betwixt her own Virtue and
Beauty) the fair Lady Katherine Howard, Niece to the Duke of Norfolk, who seems
to be born to be a Scourge of the Injustice showed to his former Wives, whilst
her Incontinence, under the veil of a clear and most modest behavior appeared
so notorious, that being confessed by her self, he himself was forced to suffer
in the shame with her: which he was so sensible of, that we find by a Law ex
post facto, he labored to prevent the like for the future. And now being as it
were weary of Pleasures of that kind, this being his fifth Wife that was
executed, or suffered worse, his Love gave place once more to his Ambition,
which he gratified with a new Title, or rather the Superfoetation of an old
one, causing himself to be styled King of Ireland, whereas none of his
Predecessors were otherwise styled then Lords thereof: which, as it was in the
first place intended by him as an additional honor to that Nation, rather then
to himself, so in the last place he did it to prevent James the Fifth of
Scotland, who had an Invitation from some of the discontented Nobility there,
to have taken it on him, having before affronted him by assuming the Title of
Defender of the Faith, with the addition only of the word (Christian) as if
there were any other Faith but what was in truth so: and because he was
resolved to quarrel him upon it, he sent to require Homage to be paid him for
that Kingdom, urging that the Kings of that Nation had for many Ages submitted
themselves in a qualified Condition of Vassalage under the Kings his Ancestors,
both before and since the Conquest.

This begat a War which ended not with the Life of that King, being struck to
the heart with the melancholy apprehensions of being overmatch'd: who dying,
left a young Daughter to succeed, whom King Henry thought a fitting Wife for
his Son Prince Edward; and accordingly afterward, in despite of all the tricks
of the French Party, that then ruled there, he brought it to such a Treaty, as
amounted to a Contract, being under Hands and Seals of both sides. But the
Scots showing themselves by their wonted breach of Faith, to be true Scots, all
ended in War, wherein though he were victorious, yet the main business was
nothing advanced by the Success, there being more done then became a Suitor for
Alliance, and too little for one pretending to Conquest. Hereupon he was forced
to try the Fortune of another Treaty with the discontented Earl of Lenox, who
having formerly been set up by the French, to be Governor of the young Queen
and the Kingdom, but deserted by them when he had most need of their aid, he
was thought the fittest Person to be tampered with for regaining the Point, or
at least to keep all quiet there: whilst the King, assisted by the Emperor,
with whom he had newly entered into a strict League, sought more considerable
Glory in the Invasion of France, whither he resolved to go again in Person:
where, notwithstanding that King out of dread of his power, had summoned all
his Feises, and brought together his Arrereban (as they call them) to oppose
him; he took the Town of Bulloigne, and had undoubtedly enlarged his Conquests
to the very Walls of Paris, had not the Emperor privately patched up a Peace
without him. Upon notice whereof he thought fit to return home to reinforce the
War in Scotland: where, though he did not much, yet 'twas more perhaps then was
expected at that time. For notwithstanding their conjunction with the French,
who entered upon one side, whiles they pressed in on the other, both setting upon
him, like two Mastiffs upon a Lion, yet he only rowsing himself, shook them off
again, and pursuing them home to their own doors, did them so much more
mischief then they were able to do to him, that they called for quarter,
choosing rather to treat then fight: upon which there ensued a Peace, the
Conditions whereof whoever examines, will find that he knew how to yield, as
well as how to conquer, giving them the reputation of having back their good
Town of Bulloigne, but they were to pay him for it Eight hundred thousand
Crowns, and the possession was to be his till the last payment were made.

And now having as it were tired himself with Victory, it was time to retire
into the consideration of taking his eternal rest, having seen many of his
brave men go before him; as the valiant Lord Poynings, the Hardy Duke of
Suffolk, his constant Favorite, the Noble Lord Ferrers of Chartley, the brave
Lord Gray, etc. And it being now the Eight and thirtieth year of his Reign, and
the Six and fiftieth of his Age, laboring under an unusual heaviness of Body,
and perhaps a greater of Mind, having made Peace with all Enemies, but the
Scots and Pope, having dis-joynted the Frame of Religion, and drove away most
of those that should put it in frame again, having by the Severity of his
Justice taken off two Queens, two Cardinals (for Pool stood condemned, though
not apprehended) three Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, and Earls Sons twelve, Barons
and Knights eighteen, which could not but irritate much the Temporal Nobility;
and of Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Monks, Priests (which as much incenst the
Clergy) no less then Seventy seven, having offended his Roman Catholic
Subjects, by disowning the Sea of Rome, and his Protestant Subjects, by
rejecting the Reformation; he was brought at last to that unhappy period, to
leave the Crown to a Child, whose condition was like to prove as uncertain,
under the Government of a Protector, as the Kingdom under his; which in case of
want of Issue of his Body, was to descend to his two Sisters successively; of
whose Legitimacy, Religion, and Title, there were as many scruples before they
parted from the Sovereignty, as ever their Father conceived in point of State,
Conscience, or Honor, before he parted from their Mothers. So from the
Catastrophe of his whole Story we may bring this remark, That as no man could
measure his Happiness by his Greatness, so neither can they take any scantling
of his Greatness by any thing that the World calls Happiness: it being very
true which the Marquess of Dorset told him very plainly, and not unpleasantly,
at a time when he was ill disposed to hear a Jest, and not well prepared to be
serious, to wit, That no man could be truly merry that had above one Wife in
his Bed, one Friend in his Bosom, and one Faith in his Heart.

EDW. VI.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

coat of arms of King Edward VI: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure three fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion or crowned,
sinister a dragon gules garnished and armed. THE Complexion of the Government
of these three last Kings, Grandfather, Father, and Son, seems to have been as
different as that of themselves. The first whereof may be said to have been
Melancholy, the next Choleric, and this last (inclining to Phlegm) the weakest
Constitution of all. His Fathers Reign was like that under the Law, which being
violent, fierce, and terrible, was typified under the form or figure of a Lion:
His like that under the Gospel, being gentle, soft, and mild, was not unfitly
compared to a Lamb; which in respect of the proportion of time it held, was as
little in Stature, in comparison of the other, as a Lamb to a Lion, and not
without as apparent imbecility, and that upon a threefold Account: First, in
respect of the tenderness of his own Age, being upon the matter a Child when he
came to the Crown; and such an one, as was so much the weaker, by how much he
received his Life by the Death of her that gave it him: which the Malcontents
of that Age, interpreted a portent of his beginning, with the destruction of
his Mother the Church. Secondly, in respect of the Nonage of the Reformation,
which at the time of his Fathers Decease, was scarce old enough to speak its
Mothers Tongue, at least not to be understood but by very few; there being no
more permitted to be in English, but the Ave-Mary, the Paternoster, the Creed,
and the Ten Commandments. Thirdly and lastly, in respect to the unnatural
Division betwixt his two nearest Relations by his Mothers side, the Duke of
Somerset, and the Lord Sudley his Uncles; the one Protector of his Person, and
so absolute Lord by Land; the other Lord High Admiral, and so absolute Lord by
Sea: which Quarrel, as it took up most of the time of his Reign, so it ended
not till they ended themselves, and by their own, did in effect make way to his
destruction. The Contest betwixt them being not much unlike that betwixt a
Pilot and a Captain of a Ship in a storm, who disputing one another Authority,
the Weather-beaten Vessel driving upon the Sand, by first parting it self,
parts them. The Protector seemed to have a visible advantage of the Admiral in
Years, Dignity, and Authority: however, all he could do, could not bring him
(though the younger Brother) to stoop; but as he wrestled hard before he fell,
so falling, he plucked the other down with him: which shows there was something
more in the Quarrel, then what is generally reported to have been the ground of
it. For however it be imputed to the Emulation of their two proud Wives, whose
Animosities (not much unlike that of Chrispina the Wife of Commodus, and
Lucilia the Relict of Lucius Verus) mixing with the Cause of Religion (the one
being a Protestant, the other a Papist) did at last divide the whole Kingdom, as
well as their own Families: yet 'twas not in the power of Envy or Pride to have
so divided them, had not Nature had its share in the Fewd, as well as
Providence; that giving them different Constitutions, as the other had created
them different Interests* for the Protector was mild, affable, open, and
well-meaning, and had he been as free from Covetousness as he was from
Jealousy, must needs have had the better of his younger Brother: the other was
fierce, turbulent, and ambitious, but withal very generous and Magnificent; and
had not his resolution tended to rashness, he must needs have had the better of
his elder Brother. The one's Spirit was fitted to the King, to others more
agreeable to the Time: both were active and stirring; both alike valiant; but
not alike bold. The Duke had the odds in point of Dignity; the Admiral the
advantage in point of Fortune. The first valued himself at the rate as he was
set over a King; the other looked on himself as he was in some sense the
Superior of a Queen: for he had married the Lady Katherine Parr, the last of
King Henry's Wives, who challenging Precedence before the Protectors Wife, gave
occasion to that Dispute, which after heightened the difference betwixt them.
The elder Brother's Wife claiming the place in right of her Husband, the better
man every way; the younger's Wife insisting on her own Right, as being as
undoubtedly the better Woman. The first was a Lady of the higher Spirit; the
last a Lady of the higher Place. This had been a Queen, but was in the wain of
her Glory; the other was the present Wife of one that then represented a King,
and was in the ascendent of his Glory. In this Feminine Quarrel (wherein for
the most part the Dignity of the Man gives the rule of respect to that of the
Woman) the Authority of the elder Brother so overwhelmed the younger, that he
finding he could not be his Equal, till he became his Superior, resolved to
attempt to pluck him down, and vault into the empty Saddle; to seize on the
King, and by having him, to get likewise the Power of the Kingdom. Neither
wanted he Courage, Money, or Friends, to accomplish the Design: all the Roman
Catholic Nobility being well-wishers to him; but particularly he had engaged
the Earl of Warwick (after Duke of Northumberland) the greatest man of Power,
and the Marquess of Dorset, after Duke of Suffolk, the greatest Man of
Interest; the one drawn in by the hopes of advancing his Son, the other his
Daughter. For the Admiral was so insolent as to promise them, that the first
should marry one of the Kings Sisters, and the other the King himself. Whereby
'twas apparent he intended to make the Consequences of his Success no less
fatal to the whole Kingdom, then to his Brother.

Now whether his Lady, that had been the Wife of a King before, did (while she
was alive) put him upon any hopes of being so now (for ambitious Men, like
sealed Doves, mount the higher for being blinded) is not certain; but certain
it is, that as soon as she died (which was not long after) he resumed the
confidence to approach so near the Throne, as to Court the Lady Elizabeth the
second time, now grown a little riper for consent, then when he first moved the
Question to her. Neither was it carried so secretly, but that his Brother had
an insight into the whole practice, and at last discovered the whole Plot; but
concealed his knowledge of it, either out of pity or prudence, as loath to ruin
him with the hazard of losing himself; or as doubting perhaps that the Sword of
Justice was not long enough to reach him, at least not sharp enough to cut
thorough the knot of the whole Conspiracy. But as Fate never fails undoing the
man she has determined to destroy, and when she falls upon him, makes the first
stroke at his head: so happened it in this unhappy Lords case, who being
unexpectedly undermined, was blown up by a Train that seems to have taken fire
as it were by Lightning from Heaven, his Treason being first detected out of
the Pulpit; and the Protector his Brother so pressed, by an eloquent Sermon of
Bishop Latimer, to Impeach him, that he being not able to clear him, was in
some sense obliged to clear himself by a Speech which proved as ominous as it
was obvious, saying at the same time he caused him to be apprehended, That he
would do and suffer Justice. And so he did, when he signed the Warrant for his
Execution (after the Parliament found him Guilty) with his own Hand. A singular
piece of Self-denial, and such as is rarely found in Story (there being very
few that so much prefer the public before their own private Interest, as not
to spare their own flesh and blood.) However, looking so like Revenge, it was
by most men judged unnatural, and taking no less from the honor of his
Justice, then the other intended to have taken from the Prerogative of his
Honor, so shuck the frame of his Authority, that it broke in pieces presently
after; and both Factions of Papists and Protestants falling off from him, he
was exposed to the cunning of Warwick, and the scorn of the Marquess of Dorset,
his most unreconcileable Enemies. The Papists quit him as believing the
Obligation ceased by which, when he ceased by whom they were held in, having
been true to him no otherwise, but for his Brothers sake only. The Protestants
failed him, because they doubted he might fail them: for how could they think
he would give them any Assistance, that had given to his own Brother so little.
Thus when two great Trees grow up together out of one and the same Stock, we
see that the cutting down of the one commonly indangers the blowing down of the
other; which remaining single and exposed to every storm, cannot stand unless
it have a firm ground, as well as a spreading Root. Neither was it long that
the Protector bore up after his Brothers Fall: the great care he took to build
his From his Tittle called Somerset House
House, being no less fatal to him, then the little care he had to support his
Family, whiles the Stones of those Churches, Chapels, and other Religious
Houses that he demolished for it, made the cry out of the Walls so loud, that
himself was not able to endure the noise; the People ecchoing to the
defamation, and charging him with the guilt of Sacrilege so furiously, that he
was forced to quit the place, and retire with the King to Windsor, leaving his
Enemies in possession of the strength of the City, as well as the affections of
the Citizens, who by the reputation of their power, rather then the power of
their repute, prevailed with the King as easily to give him up to public
Justice, as he was before prevailed with to give up his Brother: it being no
small temptation to the young King to forsake him, when he forsook himself so
far, as to submit to the acknowledgement of that Guilt he was not conscious of.
The Lawyers charged him with removing Westminster Hall to Somerset House. The
Soldiers with detaining their Pay, and betraying their Garrisons. The
Statesmen with engrossing all Power, and endeavoring to alter the Fundamental
Laws, and the ancient Religion. But he himself charged himself with all these
Crimes, when he humbled himself so far, as to ask the Kings pardon publicly,
which his Adversaries were content he should have, having first stripped him of
his Protectorship, Treasurership, Marshalship, and Two thousand pound a year
Land of Inheritance. But that which made his Fate yet harder was, that after
having acquitted himself from all Treason against his Prince, he should come at
last to be condemned as a Traitor against his Fellow-Subject, whilst the
Innocent King laboring to preserve him, became the principal Instrument of his
Destruction: who by reconciling him to his great Adversaries, made the Enmity
so much the more incompatible; who at the same time he gave the Duke his
Liberty, gave the Earl of Warwick and his Friends the Complement of some new
Titles, which adding to their Greatness, he reasonably judged might take from
their Envy. The Earl himself he created Duke of Northumberland, and Lord High
Admiral of England; and to oblige him yet more, married up his eldest Son the
Lord Dudley, to his own Cousin, the second Daughter of the Duke of Somerset,
whom he gave to him for the more honor with his own hand: and made Sir Robert
Dudley, his fourth and his beloved Son (the same that was after made by Queen
Elizabeth Earl of Leicester) one of the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber. And to
gratify the whole Faction, he made the Marquess of Dorset, Duke of Suffolk,
the Lord St. John, Earl of Wilts, and afterward Marquess of Winchester, Sir
John Russel, who was Northamberland's Confident, he created Earl of Bedford,
Sir William Paget, another of his Tools, he made Lord Paget. This the good
natured King did out of sincere Affection to his Uncle, in hopes to reconcile
him so thoroughly to Northumberland, so that there might be no more room left
for Envy or Suspect betwixt them. But as there is an invisible Erinnis that
attends all Great men, to do the drudgery of their Ambition, in serving their
Revenge, and observing the Dictates of their power and pride; so it was
demonstrable by the most unfortunate issue of this so well intended purpose,
that by the same way the King hoped to please both he pleased neither: Somerset
thinking he had done too much; Northumberland thinking that he had done too
little; who having drunk so deep a Draught of Honor, grew hot and dry, and
like one fallen into a State-Dropsie, swelled so fast, that Somerset perceiving
the Fever that was upon him, resolved to let him blood with his own hand. And
coming one day to his Chamber under the color of a Visit, privately armed, and
well attended with Seconds, that waited him in an outward Chamber, found him
naked in his Bed, and supposing he had him wholly in his power, began to
expostulate his wrongs with him, before he would give him the fatal stroke:
whereby the other perceiving his intent, and being armed with a Weapon that
Somerset had not a ready fence for, (an Eloquent Tongue) he acquitted himself
so well, and string'd upon him with so many indearing protestations, as kept
the point of his Revenge down, till it was too late to make any Thrust at him.
Whereby Northumberland got an advantage he never hoped for, to frame a second
Accusation against him, so much more effectual then the former, by how much he
brought him under the forfeiture of Felony, as being guilty of imagining to
kill a Privy Counselor, for which he was the more worthily condemned to lose
his Head, in that he so unworthily lost his Resolution, at the very instant of
time when he was to vindicate his too much abused Patience, thereby betraying
those of his Friends that came to second him, into the scandal of a Crime,
which (had it succeeded) would have passed for a magnanimous piece of Justice,
in cutting off one, whom however he was content to spare, Providence it seems
was not, reserving him to die a more ignoble death, and by a worse hand.

The sorrow for his ignominious fall, as it much affected the Consumptive King
his Nephew, who was now left as a Lamb in the keeping of the Wolf, the Duke of
Northumberland, having got as high in Power as Title, by ruining the Family of
the Seymours; so his end, which was not long after, put an end to the
Reformation, and made way for the Dudley's to aspire with incredible Ambition,
and not without hope of settling the Succession of the Crown in themselves. For
the Duke finding that the King languish'd under a Hectical Distemper, and
having better assurance, then perhaps any one else could, from his Son that
always attended in his Bedchamber, that it was impossible for him to hold out
long, for Reasons best known to him, he cast about how to introduce the far
fetched Title of his other Son, who had married the Lady Jane Gray, eldest
Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk by the Lady Frances, one of the Daughters and
Heirs of Charles Brandon, by his Wife Mary Queen of France, the second Daughter
of Henry the Seventh. And however this seemed to be a very remote pretention,
yet making way to other great Families to come in by the same Line, in case her
Issue failed (as to the Earl of Cumberland, who had married the other Daughter
of Charles Brandon, and to the Earl of Darby that had married a Daughter of
that Daughter, and to the Earl of Pembroke, that had married the Lady Jane's
second Sister) it was backed with so many well-wishers, that it was become not
only terrible to the Kingdom, but to the King himself. However, there were two
Objections lay in the way, the one the preference that ought to be to the
Duchess Dowager of Suffolk before the Lady Jane her Daughter, in case the
right of Inheritance was set up. The other was that of the two next Heirs
Females, in case the right of Immediate Succession should take place. There was
a third also, but he thought it not worth the consideration, being so far off,
to wit, the Title of the Queen of Scots, from the Lady Margaret eldest Daughter
of Henry the Seventh, which being in the French, seemed to be of less weight
then if it had been in the Scots, to neither of whom he believed the English
would ever be brought to submit: but all these Difficulties were quickly
digested in his ambitious Thoughts. The first, which was the pretention of the
Lady Jane's Mother, he hoped to set aside, by introducing her as the next
Successor, and not as the next Heir, by right of Descent: and because the Kings
Sisters were before her in the Succession, so that nothing could be available
to set aside their Right, but a plain Disseisure, he made use of the Interest
of the one, as a Wedge to drive out the other. And finding that the King their
Brother, by the Equity of a Law made in his Fathers time, had the power to
nominate who he thought fit to come after him; he made it his great business to
work upon his weakness, and to persuade him to set both aside, and admit the
Lady Jane; taking his first Argument from his Piety and Care of the Church,
under the present establishment made by himself: showing him what danger 'twas
like to be in, if so obstinate a Papist as his Sister Mary succeeded, who
having been convict before all the Lords of the Council, had most passionately
justified her Popish Principles, saying, She would never change her Faith, much
less dissemble it: Urging thereupon that Gods Glory ought to be dearer to him
then his own Flesh and Blood, that this was his last and greatest Act, of which
he knew not how soon he might be called to give an Account to the King of
Kings; and therefore desired him for Gods sake, as well as for the Kingdoms and
his own sake, not to let her take place. Then for the Lady Elizabeth, whom he
could not deny to be a Protestant, he said if she should be preferred before her
elder Sister, it might possibly give an occasion to unconceivable Troubles, and
revive the Disputes about their Legitimacy, which had cost too much blood
already: besides the hazard that would be of the Churches, no less then their
own Peace, and the possibility of bringing the whole Nation under the Yoke of
some stranger Prince, to whose Tyranny the People would never submit;
concluding, that as the three Daughters of the Duke of Suffolk were nearest in
Blood, and being married, took off all fears of introducing Foreigners; so
having with their Natural, sucked in the Sincere Milk of the Word, they could
not but maintain the Truth of the Reformed Religion, as well as the Dignity of
the Succession, with universal good liking. And whereas the eldest of them (to
wit, the Lady Jane before mentioned) was his own Sons Wife, he could be content
they should both be bound by Oath to perform whatever his Majesty should
Decree, for that he had no such regard to his own as to the general good. Which
plausible pretenses so prevai^'d over the weak King, whose Zeal had eaten up
his Understanding, that he made his Will, and accordingly excluded both his own
Sisters to let in the other. After doing of which weak act, having nothing more
to do, but to dye, it is thought the Duke was so grateful, as to contribute much
to the delivering him out of his pains, as soon as might be, and with as much
ease: for he slept away with that meekness, that those that could not find in
their hearts to pray for him living, performed that Charity to him when he was
dead. However, some there were who sower'd with a Religious Leaven, took
occasion to raise as great a scandal on the untimeliness of his death, as
others had before upon that of his Birth, putting this remark upon it, to make
it look like a Judgment, that it was in the same Month, and in the very same
day of the same Month that Sir Tho Moor was put to death by his Father.
Wherein whilst they maliciously reflected upon the Evil that was past, they
considered not how (like another Josiah) he was taken from the Evil to come;
departing with this Justification before Men and Angels, That he had done as
much as could be reasonably expected from the tenderness of his Years or his
Power.

MARY 1553.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
coat of arms of Queen Mary I: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure three fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion or crowned,
sinister a dragon gules garnished and armed. TO take that advantage the Duke of
Northumberland did of the imbecility of the late King, and to overreach him
so in the making his Will, having instilled into him as great a dislike of the
Relation of his younger, as of the Religion of his elder Sister, seems not so
strange, as arrogant: but to get that conquest he did over the judgment of his
grave Counselors, and to impose so far upon their honor and honesty, as to
have that Will after ratified, as it was, by a solemn Act of State, and so far
to overawe the Cautious, not to say Cautelous, representatives of the City of
London (which was a kind of Commonwealth within it self) so far as to make
them confirm again the said Act of Counsel by their submission to it, shows not
only his Power but his Policy to have been such, that he had nothing further
for him to hope or fear, since the virtue of his Daughter, the Lady Jane, could
not but be as sufficient a Security for the Affections, as his Wisdom for the
Obedience of the People; she being indeed so like the King who declared her his
Heir, in all the extraordinary, not to say miraculous qualifications of his
Mind, that being the true Inheritrix of his Graces, every one thought her fit
to be so of his Kingdoms. But Heaven having fitted her to be a Saint, rather
then a Queen, made use of her Exaltation, to hasten her ambitious Father in
Laws Fall; and to punish his Treachery to a King that did not suspect him, by
making him too late faithful to a Queen that could not trust him: which shows
that his Courage held no proportion with his Wit, nor either with his Ambition.
For no sooner heard he of the revolt of the Lord Hastings by Land, and only six
great Officers by Sea, but he himself turned about, and was so forward in his
Apostasy, that he basely quit his being General for Queen Jane, to make himself
a Herald to Queen Mary, proclaiming her Title at Cambridge, as soon almost as
the other Lords had done it at London: so apprehensive are those (who have such
an Enemy as Guilt within them) of the terror of those Enemies without them.

And now it appeared how ominous it was for the Innocent Lady Jane to have been
brought as she was in state to the Tower. But as she offered Violence to her
own Inclinations, out of Obedience to those of her Father and Mother, so the
assumption of that temporary was in order to the intituling her to a more
lasting Glory; being taught the vanity of all humane Greatness by the brevity
of that of her own, which lasted not so long as it is reported a Dream of one
did but a little before; (for there is a Story of one Foxley, a Pot-maker to
the Mint in Henry the Eight's time, that slept fourteen days together, and no
body could wake him, no not with pinching or burning) whereas she came to her
self in less then ten days, and then, poor Lady, found herself (where he was
too) in the Tower ready to be translated (as after she was) from a Kingdom to a
Scaffold, and from the Scaffold to a Kingdom again. Happy had it been for her
if it had proved a Dream only: suffering not so much for any Crime of her own
Ambition, as for not resisting that of others; having this aggravation of her
affliction, to see her Husband and the Duke his Father executed before her, who
both died for the same Fault, but not with the same Faith that she did: The
Duke that had therefore importuned King Edward to give her this fatal honor,
to the intent Popery might be utterly abolished, declaring when he came to
suffer, that he himself was a Roman Catholic, which most think he: had not
done, had not some Promises of Life upon condition of turning, deceived him at
the very instant time of his Death; whereby Queen Mary was quit with him at the
last, though she could not deal with him in the first place. For as he was
reputed to have had no Faith whilst he lived, so by this abrupt Apostasy he was
judged to have no Religion when he dyed. There is this further Remark upon him,
That as he suffered under the same Fate, and upon the very same Block, the late
Duke of Somerset did; so 'twas his hap to be laid under the same Stone, in the
same Grave, where they now lie side by side as good Friends, that living were
unreconcilable Enemies: Two headless Dukes, betwixt two headless Queens, The
Lady Anna Buloigne, and the Lady Katherine Howard.
either as far divided in Religion, as they were in their Affections.

Eight days and upwards past between the proclaiming of this Queen and the
calling her first Parliament; during which time the two Religions were
publicly permitted with equal Indulgence. The Divine Service being so blended
with Superstition, that (as one observes) the State of England before her
Persecution, was not much unlike that of the Jews after theirs, who presently
upon the Captivity, took a mid way between Hebrew and Ashdod: on the same day
that Mass was sung in the Quire at Westminster, the English Service was sung in
the Body of the Church. And the two Religions (if divided Opinions may deserve
that Name) being thus brought to confront each other, no marvel if the
Demagogues of each Persuasion, justled for Precedence; the Protestants being
backed by the present Laws, the Papists by the Prerogative: these encouraged by
the Queens Opinion, those by her Promises. But as in the close of Day, light
and darkness contesting for Superiority, seem equally matched, till in the end
the latter prevails: So happened it now upon the death of the late King, whose
Religion being different to that of his Successor, the Question was which must
take place, and become the Religion of the State: She her self being not so
forward to declare after she came to be Queen, as she was before. But to
palliate the matter in discharge of her Obligations to the Loyal Protestant
Gentry of Suffolk and Norfolk, that were the first set her up, she seemed
content to call a Parliament, that might take off the Odium from her, making
way to it by a general pardon, which had so many Exceptions in it, as showed
there would be more found at the Convention.

And now being fearless of any more danger by Rivals, happy in the single
possession of her self and Throne, there wanted nothing to complete her
felicity, save that she knew it not. Whereby it fell out so unluckily, that she
brought upon her self very great hatred and clamor, by that whereby most
Princes secure the love of their People to them: whilst being wholly guided by
those of her Council, she submitted her Reason to their Passions, who under the
pretense of Religion, engaged her in the greatest Persec^tion that ever was
known under any Christian Government, causing her to shed more Blood, although
she reigned only five years, four months, and some odd days, then was spilt by
those two great Tyrants, Richard the Third, and her own Father, putting both
together, there dying for Religion only (not to mention what suffered on Civil
Accounts) no less then Three hundred; whereof there was one Archbishop, four
Bishops, and twenty one Divines of note. But that which made it the more
supportable was, that however she was prodigal of her Subjects Lives, she was
yet more sparing of their Livelyhoods: For she began with a rare Example in
pardoning the very first Subsidy she had, and she never had but one more. So
that putting that which was remitted, against that which was received, she had
upon the matter none at all all her time. And yet we find she was in continual
Action at home or abroad, having always (as her Father before her) occasion to
make use of men at Arms, either to defend or enlarge her Dominions. For as she
was obstinate in the Resolution she had taken of restoring the Popes Authority,
contrary to the promise she made to those who first set her up; being persuaded
by the Priests that ruled there, that she had no such way to manifest her Faith
as by the breach of it: So she cut out so much matter for Rebellion, by the
Violence she offered both to Conscience and Interest, that she had little Rest,
but no Peace all her days.

Now whether it were a natural Distrust of her weakness, as she was a Woman, or
a Feminine Diffidence of her Wisdom, as she was a Maid, or that in truth she
desired a help meet for satisfaction of her Affections, as well as for support
of her Affairs, is not otherwise to be judged, then by the choice she made: But
so it was, that finding she could not stand by her self without a Husband, no
more then an Adjective without a Substantive, she proposed it as the first
thing to her Council, directing them to make choice of such an one for her, as
might be as fit to give Laws to her, as she to them. Three there were in
Proposal for her; Philip Infant of Spain, Son to the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, the old Cardinal Pool, and the young Marquess of Exeter: to each of
which, as there were some Motives to draw her Affections, so there were many
Arguments to dissuade her from them. Those that had respect to the settlement
of the Kingdom, thought Philip the fittest match, as being a Puissant King,
strengthened with many great Allies, and who had as great an Enmity to the
French (the only Enemy England ought to fear) as they themselves. But against
him the first Objection was, That he was a Stranger. The second, That being
Native of Spain, he probably might by this Match bring England into some danger
of Subjection to that Kingdom. And lastly, That there was somewhat of
undecency, not to say inequality, in respect to his Person, for that it seemed
strange that she should be the Wife of the Son now, who thirty years before
should have been Wife to the Father. Those that stood for the Cardinal urged
his Love to his Country, and the Love the Country had for him, in respect of
his great Sanctimony and Wisdom, which rendered him particularly acceptable to
the Queen: then for his Dignity, he was not much inferior to Kings, and by his
Mother descended from Kings; and for his Age, it was more agreeable to that of
the Queens, then that of either of the other two. But the principal end of
Marriage being Procreation, he fell under an exception not to be answered, as
being a Bachelor of near Sixty four years old, and so needed a Nurse rather
then a Wife. The Youth of the Lord Courtney, being a brisk Cavalier, and by
Birth, as well as the best Blood of England and France could make him, gave him
the preferrence above the Cardinal. But some of the Juncto objecting, That he
loved Popularity more then ever he could be brought to love the Queen, and that
he smelled too rank of Lutherism to be her Bedfellow, they carried it by a
general Vote against him, for King Philip: as well to take off all Exceptions
by the Disparagement of marrying a Subject, as for those seasonable and most
Incredible Advantages it brought to England, which were expressed in the
Instrument of Marriage yet extant, whereof there needs no further mention then
the addition of the Netherlands and Burgundy, to be for ever a Member of the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, in case there had been any Issue betwixt them.
All this notwithstanding, such was the unsettledness of the Times, or of men's
Minds rather, whilst some were led by Conscience, others by their Temporal
Concerns; some out of Love to Reformation, and others out of fear of
Superstition; some again out of desire of Change, but most out of dread of
Foreign Servitude, that the Conclusion of this Match gave beginning to a
desperate Rebellion, which, though at first it seemed despicable enough, being
headed by no better a man then Sir Thomas Wyat, a private Knight of Kent (the
Duke of Suffolk, who was in the Conspiracy, being apprehended almost as soon as
he appeared) yet before it could be suppressed, the wise Match-makers found they
had met with their Match in that Rebel, who was so fortunate as to rout the
Queens General, and take all their Ordnance and Ammunition. Upon which he
marched up with full Assurance of taking the chief City; into which though he
brought but sive Ensigns, it is probable he might have carried it, had not
Heaven taken part against him (as usually it does against Rebels, first arming
them with Impudence, and then disarming them with Fear) making the Arch-Traytor
a terrible Example of unparalled Insolence; who, whiles he was at large,
continued bold as a Lion, but being once apprehended, proved so base a Coward,
that bribed with the hopes of Life, he made himself guilty of a greater
Treachery then he was to dye for; accusing Edward Earl of Devon, and the
Princess Elizabeth, the Queens Sister, to have been privy to his Conspiracy:
which gained Credit not so much from the Suspect of any private Affection
betwixt them two (although he alleged they were to be married) as from the
secret disaffection either of them had, he to the King that should be, as being
his Rival; she to the Queen that was, as being her Disseisor (the two Sisters
as little agreeing in point of Right of Succession, as their two Mothers in
point of Right of Marriage) but fain he would have acquitted them, when he
found he could not be acquitted himself by it; for having served their turn of
him, the Statesmen gave the fatal turn to him. However, the malicious
Chancellor Gardner, resolving to take the Truth at the wrong end, and believe
it as he pleased, secured them in several Prisons, till he were at leisure to
examine the matter; being then deeply engaged in providing Fire and Faggots for
those Learned Heretics, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, etc. who were to make a
Holocaust preparatory to the Queens Nuptials: which having been deferred by this
unexpected Rising, was now proposed in Parliament. For the greater
confirmation, the three States of the Kingdom assenting thereto upon the
Conditions following: First, That King Philip should admit no Stranger into any
Office, but only Natives. Secondly, That he should Innovate nothing in the Laws
and Customs of the Realm. Thirdly, That he should not carry the Queen out of
the Realm without her consent, nor any of her Children without consent of the
Council. Fourthly, That surviving the Queen, he should challenge no Right in
the Kingdom, but suffer it to descend to the next Heir. Fifthly, That he should
carry away none of the Crown Jewels, nor remove any Shipping or Ordnance.
Sixthly and lastly, That he should neither directly nor indirectly entangle the
Realm of England with the Wars betwixt Spain and France. Upon which Terms 'twas
hoped by those affected not the Match, that Philip would knock off, there being
neither Youth or Beauty to tempt him. But as the House of Austria did ever
prefer their Ambition before their Love, so designing the universal Monarchy,
he thought he made a great step to it, by being put in possession of England,
and so near entitled to France.

And now the most Catholic King being joined with the Faith defending Queen,
it cannot be imagined, but that they must begin with Religion: In order to the
Regulation whereof, Cardinal Pool (being first restored again in blood and
reputation) was sent for over; who armed with his Legatine Power, and a natural
Force of Eloquence, pressed hard upon the Parliament, and showed them the
danger they were in, by their late Schism; being become (as he said) Exiles
from Heaven, and in no capacity to have been ever readmitted, had he not
brought from Rome the Keys, that opened the gates of Life: and thereupon he
advised them to abrogate those Laws, which lay, as blocks, in their way, urging
them thereto from the Example of their good King and Queen; who (he said) had
resigned their Title of Supreme Head, to show themselves true Members of the
Mystical Body, and had made Restitution of those Lands, which had been
sacrilegiously taken from the Church by their Predecessor. Which Speech of his
being very Methodically digested, and delivered with great gravity, startled
many of the Lords, who reflected upon their Forefathers Devotion to the holy
See: but those of the lower House, having it seems lower thoughts, and deeming
it a rare Felicity, to have shaken off that heavy Yoke, that had so long galled
their Forefathers necks, did not so readily assent to receive his profer'd
Fenediction, at so dear a rate, as to part with their Lands, which having been
divided by the Queens father amongst them, were by several Settlements and
Alienations, so translated from one Family to another, that, without great
Inconvenience, they could not be severed from their Temporal Proprieties.
However, they so far complied, as to agree. That the first Fruits and Tenths
granted, by the Clergy, to King Henry, Anno 1534, should be remitted. But after
they came to consider the Poverty of the Treasure, the reason of the several
Pensions, that had been granted in Lieu thereof, by the said King to diverse
Religious Persons, that were still living, they revoked their Decree again.
Upon which the Legate (not skilful enough to deal with a Multitude, as appeared
afterward by his loosing the papal dignity) desisted; content it seems with the
honor of having prevailed over the more devout Queen, the heat of whose Zeal,
had so softened her heart, that it was fit for any Impression. Now as he had a
better Faculty in Canvassing of the Feminine Sex (which Cardinal Carraffa
afterward Pope Paul IV* upbraided him withal in the open Conclave) so he
prevailed with her, to give up all that she had in her own possession; who to
move others to imitate her piety did it, with that detestation of the Sacriledg
of her Predecessors, that when one of her wise Counselors (yet of the same
Religion) told her it would be a great Diminution to the Revenues of her Crown,
she answered piously, and, as she thought prudently, that she had another Crown
to look after, that she valued a thousand times more then that.

But while she is thus careful for the eternal, King Philip, her Husband, was
no less busy to secure his Temporal Crown. In order to which, he went over to
receive the Blessing of the Emperor, his Father, then in Flanders; who upon
his Arrival delivered up to him the possession of the Low Countries, having
given him the Kingdoms of Naples and Jerusalem before; of the first of which
the Pope (either envying or fearing the Emperor's Greatness) had made the
French King some Assurance, purposely to engage him thereby in a War, that
might weaken them both. Great Preparations were made by either Party, to secure
themselves both with Arms and Alliances; the Emperor leaving all his Dominions
on this side to his Son, whilst himself retires into Spain, to alarm the French
on the other side; and by his Vicinity to Italy, whose petty Princes he
suspected not to be firm to his Interest, makes himself as terrible to his
Neighbors as his Enemies. But whilst this great design was in Prospect only,
King Philip was suddenly called home by a Brute, that his Queen was with Child;
the Joy whereof was so universal, that it is strange to tell how much it
transported the whole Kingdom; raising them by the hopes of a young Prince to a
degree of seeming Infatuation: for they, not only, mocked God Almighty in the
Church, with causeless Thanksgivings, but troubled the King and Queen every
hour in Court, with^s groundless Petitions for Places of Attendance on the
unborn Child; and so far did the Delirium prevail to delude even the Parliament
themselves with extravagant apprehensions of their future happiness by the
enjoyment of such a Prince, who however he were like to be Lord of the greatest
part of Christendom, would yet, in all probability, make England the Seat of
his Empire, that they humbly besought the King, in case the Queen should dye in
Travel, that he would be pleased to take upon him the rule and government of
the Child and Kingdom* such ado have great Princes to be born as well as to
dye in quiet. But this mistaken Embryo proving at length to be nothing else but
a Mis-conception, whereof she could not be delivered so, as to make way for any
better Conception, turning to such a fleshy inform Substance as Physicians call
a Mole, and we vulgarly English a Moon-Calf, it put King Philip so ou^ of
Countenance, that he tarried not a Month here after her time of Reckoning was
our, but passing into Flanders, put it out of his head (since he could not put
it out of her belly) by beginning a War with France: whereto he had a good
ground upon the account of the Five years Truce being broken, that had been
made but a little before. The Queen (to requite him for her late Miscarriage)
broke with her People, and resolving not to stand Neuter whilst her Husband was
engaged, found occasion to make the French Aggressors upon the Crown of
England. Whereupon the Earl of Pembroke was sent over with Ten thousand Horse,
and Four thousand Foot, who joining with the Kings Forces (which were Thirty
five thousand Foot, and Twelve thousand Horse before they came) they all of
them sat down before St Quintins, a Town of great importance, which the French
in vain endeavoring to succor, lost Twenty five thousand upon the place:
Amongst whom were diverse of the greatest Quality, as John of Bourbon Duke of
Anguin, the Dukes of Monpensier and Longevile, the Viscount Turein, etc. the
Lord Chadenier, the Marshall St. Andrew, the Rhinegrave, the Constable Mount
Morency and his Son, Brother to Count Lodowick Gonzaga, Brother to the Duke of
Mantova, the Admiral Coligny and his Brother, with diverse other Lords of no
less eminence, who being all taken with the Town, made it look like the
beginning of a War, which every Body judged could not end till the Rupture
reached to the middle of France. The report of this Victory gave great matter
of rejoicing to every Body, but most especially to the Queen her self: yet
could it not divert that Melancholy occasioned by the conceit of her
Misconception, which brought her into a Distemper that not long after killed
her, by her Physicians mistaking her Malady: who giving her improper Medicines,
without regard to the overcooling of her Liver (which it seems is the mischief
attends those Moles) found not their error till she was so far gone into that
desperate kind of Dropsy which they call Ascites, that there was no help for
her now. That which added to her Distemper was, an over-nice resentment of the
Popes displeasure, who offended at her breach with the French, punished her (as
Princes use to be by whipping their Favorites) with taking away the Legatine
Power from her beloved Minister Cardinal Pool; to whom, as she had ever a great
regard, so she opin'd that the disgrace put upon a Man of so great Authority
and Credit, who had been so active in the Conversion of the Nation, would (as
indeed it did) not only reflect something on her honor, but hazard much the
reputation of the Catholic Cause, whiles the Roman Religion was not so fully
established as she designed it should, and the Enemies of the Church no less
dangerous to that of her State. This gave her great trouble of Mind; and that
trouble being heightened by the absence of her beloved Husband, brought her
into a burning Fever, that foretold a death that might have proved a living
one, had it not been hastened by the news of the revolt of Calais, which being
lost in less then six days time, after it had continued English above Two
hundred years, came so near her heart, that drying up all her Blood, brought
her under such a fixed sadness, as left her not till she left the World. Now to
say truth, she had great reason to resent the loss, for as it was the only Key
left to let her into France, so it was no small oversight to hang it by her
side with so slender a String, as she did, there being not above Five hundred
Soldiers in it when it was attached, which were much too few to defend a place
of that Importance, where there was a kind of necessity to keep the Gates
always open.

ELIZAB.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE
coat of arms of Queen Elizabeth I: quarterly France and England, the first and
fourth quarters azure three fleur-de-lys or, the second and third quarters
gules three lions passant guardant or; supporters, dexter a lion or crowned,
sinister a dragon gules garnished and armed. KING Philip and Queen Mary being
both departed, he out of the Kingdom, she out of the World; this Lady, the only
surviving Child of Henry the Eight, took possession as the next Heir:
Providence having made way to her Exaltation through many troubles, as the Law
had to her Title through many Disputes. And happy it was for her that she was so
unhappy; for by being a Subject, she had learned to Rule, and from the sense of
her own Sufferings, was much inclined to compassionate others. All that were
Swordmen admired her Courage, as having a Spirit too great for any Woman, but
such as was born to rule over Men: All that were Gown-men, as much magnified
her Understanding, as having by her Wisdom, made her way through all the Snares
made by her Sisters Ministers to entangle her. So that they could not hold her
in that common Drag-net which had taken most of the great Fishermen of the
Church before: For when they put her to that puzling Question of the Real
Presence, she avoided it by an Answer every whit as doubtful, yet seemingly
very plain, and comprehensive of the Words, Hoc est Corpus meum.

Christ was the Word that spoke it.
He took the Bread and brake it.
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe and take it.
Which, however it seemed an obscure and uncertain Solution, so baffled all her
Adversaries, that the Priests themselves, who hoped with like Success to have
soiled her, as the First Temptor did the First Woman, upon the First great
Question of Take and Eat, found themselves left in the dark, to grope after her
meaning as well as they could, whilst she shut her self up from further
Pressures, within the Closet of her own private Sense. But as Wisdom is perhaps
the only Virtue that is distrustful of it self, so to show how little
Confidence she had in the strength of her own Abilities, she made it her first
business to fortify her self with able Counselors. In the choice of whom, her
Affections gave place to her Judgment, as her Fears to her Foresight: admitting
diverse of her Sisters great Ministers, who, having been privy to all the
Secrets of State, were like sharp Tools, that are as dangerous as useful, if
not skilfully handled: Whom therefore she counterpoiz'd with as many of her own
Religion, to the end, that holding the Balance in her own hand, she might turn
the Scale as she saw cause.

Neither was it a thing of small Moment that came first to be weighed by her,
to wit, the great Business of Religion: The Materials whereof being prepared to
her hand by her Brother, as the Foundation was laid to his by her Father, she
resolved to proceed in Edification of the Church, as Solomon did in building of
the Temple, with as little noise as might be. And accordingly, as she conformed
to take her Assumption from the hand of a Popish Bishop, who performed all the
Ceremonies of her Inauguration More Romano; so being crowned, she made choice
(as I said) of such a mixed Council, as might put her out of all doubt of
over-setting the Vessel, by loading too much upon any one side, and out of all
danger of Foundring, by steering their Course in too straight a Line cross the
Surges of the swelling Tide; and because she designed to show her Moderation,
as well as her Wisdom, she did not put out the Candlelight of Popery all at
once, but let in the Sunshine of the Gospel by such degrees, that the People
might neither be left altogether in the Dark to grope after new Laws, nor yet
exposed to be dazzled with the two sudden approach of the greater Light;
refining the Mass with such a temperate heat of Zeal, as first took off the
Scum only, that is, the foulest and grossest part of Superstition; then
proceeded to purge out the thinner Dross of scandalous Matter; and in the last
place, she took away what appeared superfluous and unnecessary, retaining only
the sounder part* out of which she made up that Form of Service, which has
ever since continued to be used in the Church of England: Whose ground work she
laid upon the Holy Scriptures, making up the Superstructure of the Doctrine of
the Nicen. Athanasian, and Apostles Creed.
Three Creeds approved and confirmed by those great Masters of Assemblies in
the Four first General Councels, worthily esteemed to be styled Synodi
Firmissimi, and explained by several of the Orthodox Fathers in the several
Ages following, to the intent that co^^aining Ecclesiar^m ^^m^ium Fidem, they
might be a Rule without all Exception. But whiles she proceeded with this great
tendernes^, in hopes to have pleased both Parties, she displeased either: The
first being no less grieved by her Reforming so much, then the last by her
Reforming no more. One would have thought that her Clemency would have silenced
the Papish, for that she might have purged with Fire and Faggot, as her Sister
did: And that her Honesty would have subdued the Protestants, who they found
he^ to continue to be Semper Eadem, notwithstanding the warm Temp^^tions
wherewith the Pope plied her for a long time; offering 1. To take away the Sin
of her Father, notwithstanding the many injuries done to the Church, and
confirming all his Alienations. 2. To take away the reproach of her Mother, by
making Null the Sentence of Divorce, notwithstanding she never reconciled to
the Church. 3. To honor the Memory of her Brother so far, as to allow the use
of the Common Prayer Book in English, recording to his establishment. And
lastly, to indulge this to the hono^^ of her own Memory, that her Realm should
for her sake only (which never was offered before) have the Privilege to
receive the Sacrament in both kinds. A well compounded Bait, and such as if it
had been large enough to have covered the Hook, might probably have taken any
other Woman: but as her Conscience forbid her to close with the one, so Reason
of State permitted not that she should come nearer the other then she did. For
there was newly started up a Generation of Enlightened men, who took upon them
to reform her Reformation, and make it more Suitable (they would not say
Conformable) to Christ's Scepter and Kingdom, by rooting out those
Representatives of Antichrist, the Bishops, who they thought to differ no
otherwise from the Popish Prelates, then Rooks do from Ravens; desiring instead
of the Hierarchy, to set up a Gospel Ministry (so they phras'd it) that was
certain Evangelicks, after the example of those Congregational Pastors of
Geneva, who despising all Order, Habit, or Title, were underpropt or assisted
by two Lay Elders chosen out of the gravest, though not the wisest of the
People, whose Office (as one observes) like that of the Ears, is only to bear
themselves upright and hear what the Praetor says, without any other
Ecclesiastical privilege, pretense, or power. This projection was underhand
carried on by some squint-eyed Lawyers, who having one eye upon the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop, the other upon her Prerogative, took all occasions to
detect the nakedness of her Government, and to bespatter it with scurrilous
Libels: Amongst which there could be nothing more bold and Seditious then those
two notorious Books, the one entitled The Admonition to the Parliament; the
other, The Defense of that Admonition: Not to mention those lewd Pamphlets,
called by the Names of Martyn Mar Prelate; Christ's Scepter and Kingdom;
Englands Gulf, etc. by the Oath Ex Officio was rendered Antichristian; and the
Oath of Supremacy not lawful, but in a qualified sense. This giving her
sufficient warning to secure the State by fortifying the Church, she caused the
Archbishop Whitguift to cast three Cannons, which were so placed, that
Innovation could no way make its approaches to let in any of their Factious
Teachers: For no man was to be admitted to the Cure of Souls that did not first
recognize the Queens Supremacy: Secondly, submit to the use of the Book of
Common Prayer and Ordination of Bishops: and Thirdly, to the Articles passed at
the last Synod at London, 1562. and Lastly, Declare that they believed either
of them consonant and agreeable to the word of God. However it was no small
Interruption that these brainsick men gave to her intended Reformation: and
the Mischiefs that attended it were so much more insupportable, by how much
they proceeded from a Religious Madness, that reigned at that time over all
Christendom; most of the Neighbor Nations, even as far as Italy it self (not
excepting the very Dominions of the Pope) laboring under the same Distemper,
which was a kind of Spiritual Fever, that caused such an Inflammation in their
Consciences, as could be cured no other ways but by Blood-letting, the very
worst of Remedies, whereof the King of France made the first experience, and no
where so much; by whose Example the King of Spain afterward did the like; and
other Princes imitating them, it is since become a common practice. This
troubled her the more, in respect of the advantages taken by the adverse Party,
the Papists; who being more strictly united by these Divisions amongst the
Protestants, and deluded by the belief of certain groundless Predictions, that
her Reign should be but short, were easily drawn into many desperate
Conspiracies, which ending with the Forfeiture of their own, brought her Life
and Government into continual Jeopardy.

The next great thing that fe^l under her Consideration, was the point of
Marriage and Singularity: For it being doubtful in what state the Kingdom would
be left, if the Queen of Scots Title should ever take place (who besides that
she was an avowed Papist, had married the French Kings Son, who in her Right
bore the Arms and Title of England as well as of Scotland) it was told her she
would not show her self a true Mother of her Country, without she consented to
make her self a Mother of Children. Whereunto King Philip of Spain (as soon as
he heard of Queen Mary his Wives death) gave her a fair Invitation by his
Ambassador, the Conde Feria, whom he sent over publicly ^o Congratulate her as
a Queen, but privately to Court her as a Mistress; assuring her that he much
rather desired to have her to be his Wife, then his Sister: and as the Report
of her being Successor to his Queen, had much allayed the grief he conceived
for her death, so he said 'twas his desire she should take place in his Bed, as
well as in his Throne, that so by giving her self to him, she might requite the
kindness showed by him when he gave her to her self, after her Sister left her
exposed to the malice and power of her Enemies. In fine, he omitted no
Arguments to gain his end that might be raised from the Consideration of her
Gratitude, or his own Greatness. But she being naturally Inflexible (not to say
as some have said) Impenetrable, lest it to her Council to return this grave
Answer for her, That she could not consent to have him of all men for a
Husband, without as great reflection on her Mother as her self, since it could
not be more lawful for two Sisters to marry the same Husband, then for two
Brothers to marry the same Wife. Secondly, That she could not consent to a
Match that was like to prove so unfortunate as this would be, if without Issue;
and yet so much more unfortunate with it, in respect her Kingdom of England
must by the same Obligation become subject to Spain, as she to him. Thirdly,
That nothing could more conduce to the Establishing that Authority which had
been so industriously abolished by her Father and Brother of blessed Memory,
and conscientiously rejected by her self. Fourthly, That it could neither be
satisfactory to her self or Subjects, to have such a King to her Husband, whose
greatest Concerns being necessarily abroad, could neither regard her nor them,
as he ought, much less as they desired. This Denial, though it seemed
reasonable enough, yet King Philip inferring that she disliked his Person
rather then his Proposal, very temperately recommended his Suit to his more
youthful Kinsman, Charles Duke of Austria, second Son to the Emperor
Ferdinand, who was Rivaled by Eric, eldest Son of Gustavus King of Sweden, as
he by Adolph Duke of Holst, Uncle to Frederick III. King of Denmark: But
neither of these being more successful then his most Catholic Majesty, the
whole Parliament became Suitors to her to think of Posterity, and to eternize
her Memory not so much by a Successor, like her self, as by one descended from
her self. Which serious address she answered with a Jest, telling them she was
married already: And showing them a Ring on her Finger, the same she had
received at her Coronation, told them it was the Pledge of Love and Faith given
her by her dear Spouse the Kingdom of England: which words she delivered with
such an odd kind of Pleasantness, that all the Wise men amongst them thought
she made Fools of them, and the Fools thought themselves made so much wiser by
it, as to understand her meaning to be that she would not look abroad for a
Husband, but take one of her own Subjects. Amongst the rest thus mistaken, was
Leicester himself; who having the vanity to believe he might be the man,
obstructed his own preferment, when he was proposed as a fitting Husband for
the Queen of Scots.

The Catholic King however he had been rejected, hoping that the Catholic
Religion might find better acceptance, continued his Fr^endship a long time
after his Courtship was ended, being so respectful to the Nation (not to say to
the Queen her self) that he would make no accord with the French at the Treaty
of Cambray, without the restoration of Calais to the English: But when he
understood how far the Queen had proceeded in point of Reformation, how she had
as resolutely refused to be the Popes Daughter, as to be his Wife, how she had
disallowed the Council of Trent, and set up a Synod of her own at London, he
not only left her as slightly as she left him, but made such a Conclusion with
the French, as gave her more cause of Jealousy, being not his Wife, then she
could possibly have had if he had been her Husband. For marrying the Lady
Isabella, eldest Daughter to that King, it was suspected that the two Crowns
might thereupon unite against England, upon the account of the Queen of Scots
her Claim; who being the Daulphins Wife, and the next in Succession after Queen
Elizabeth, or (as some will have it) in Right before her, as being the
undoubted Heir of the Lady Margaret, eldest Daughter of Henry the Seventh, was
therefore the only Person in the World to whom she could never be reconciled:
holding her self obliged by the Impulse of Nature, Honor, and Religion, to
oppose her (as after she did) to the death, wherein perhaps there was no less
of Envy then Reason of State, being as much offended with her Perfections, as
her Pretensions: For that the other was a Lady that equaled her in all,
surmounted her in some, and was inferior to her in no respects but Fortune
only. This as it proved a Feud that puzzled that Age to unriddle the meaning of
it, charging all the Misunderstanding betwixt them, upon the despite of Fate
only (which to speak Impartially, was never more unkind, not to say unjust, all
Circumstances of the Story considered, to any Sovereign Princess in the World,
then to that poor Queen) so it was the wonder of this, till we saw by the no
less fatal Example of that Queens Grandson, our late Sovereign, how the best of
Princes may fall under the power of the worst of men: For it was Flattery and
Feminine Disdain questionless that first divided them beyond what the
difference of Nation, Interest, or Religion could have done, which heightning
their mutual Jealousies insensibly, engaged them before they were aware, in
such a Game of Wit and Faction, as brought all that either had at last to
stake, and made them so wary in their Play on both sides, that the Set ended
not as long as the one lived, or the other reigned.

The Queen of Scots had the advantage of Queen Elizabeth by the Kings in her
Stock, the Kings of France and Spain being her secret Friends and Well-wishers;
not to mention the nearer Obligations of her own Son, being then but young; and
the Pope ever ready to pack the Cards for her as occasion served. The advantage
Queen Elizabeth had, was by the Knaves in her hand, all the factious Demagogues
of Scotland being at her Devotion, and so dependant on her Power, that their
disloyalty stood her in better stead than the Loyalty of her own Subjects,
whereof she made so good use, that her over-match't Rival being never able to
fix their Obedience, much less recover their Affections, was fain to seek for
help abroad. And after she became a Prisoner, finding none she could trust, was
forced to attempt her Freedom singly, proceeding therein, for want of due
intelligence, by such indirect ways and means, as proved very unprosperous;
for the more she stirred the more she entangled herself, fastening the Bonds
beyond all possibility of being shaken off again, which (had she sat still)
might possibly have loosed of themselves. Neither could it prove otherwise,
whiles she was neither able to take right measures of her Adversaries strength,
nor of her own weakness; Queen Elizabeth having more Subjects then she knew of,
for she had got the Ascendant of her Neighbors so far, that like her Father
Henry, where she made not Kings, she gave them Laws. The Protestants, it is
true, the only useful Party to her, were few in comparison of the Papists, who
were all inc ined to the other side. But the Security of Princes rests not so
much in the number, as in the affections of their People of whom, whilst by
extraordinary methods of Love, she testified her self to have so great a care,
they made to her as extraordinary Returns of Loyalty: witness that voluntary
Association (as 'twas called) which the Protestants so solemnly entered into,
as soon as they found her imbarrased by the Queen of Scots Faction, binding
themselves with mutual Oaths and Subscriptions to each other, to prosecute all
those to death, who should attempt any thing against the Queens life. This was
it gave her that high repute, without which she could not have given that
protection she did to those of other Countries, who afterward applied
themselves to her as the only Defender of the Faith: for though it were no more
then what they were before bound to do by their Oath of Allegiance, yet being a
voluntary Recognition resulting out of the Sense they had of their own in her
danger, it made such a noise in all Christendom, that all those who chose
rather to change their Country then their Religion, cast themselves at her
feet, and where they could not come to her, she sent to them: witness the aid
she gave to the persecuted Protestants of France, when they were overwhelmed by
the unholy Confederates of the Holy League (that had set up a Priest to make
way for a Cardinal, by the Murder of a King, and by the Murder of many
Thousands more, afterward made may to set up themselves) to whom, as she sent
no ordinary supply of Men, so she gave so extraordinary a supply of Money, that
Henry the Fourth himself was pleased to acknowledge, he never saw so much Gold
together at any one time in his whole life before. More notable yet was that
aid given to the distrested Protestants of the Netherlands, when Duke D'Alva
falling on them with like Fury as Vespatian upon the Jews, put them in as great
a fear of being drowned in a deluge of Blood, as they were but a little before
of being overwhelmed by that of Water; who, when their Courage was sunk as low
as their hopes, and that lay as low as their Country, for she put them into a
Condition not only to defend their own Liberty, but to assert her Sovereignty,
their gratitude prompting them to swear Allegiance to her, for that she had (as
they said) an indubitable Title to those Provinces by Philippa, Wife of Edward
the Third, who was one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Earl William the Third
of Holland, a right precedent (as they alleged) to that of the King of Spain:
But whether it were so that she rather approved the change of their Principles
then of their Prince, or would have the World believe she rather favored their
Religion then their Rebellion; or judged it would be hard to make good what was
so ill got, or was unwilling to do any thing that might give King Philip cause
to question her Gratitude, no less then her Justice, or what other motives
moderated her Ambition is not known: but so it was, that she laid aside for the
present the consideration of her own Right, and to show she sincerely intended
that Self-denial, she assisted the Spaniard with men at the same time she
supplied the Dutch with Money, thereby giving those cause to extol her
Generosity, whiles these magnified her Bounty; both alike desiring her
Friendship, and admiring her Wisdom, whiles the one could not tell how she
affected Peace, nor the other how far she inclined to War.

Thus she preserved her self by Arts as well as by Arms, which was the less
easy for her to do, in respect of the many cross Designs that were then on
foot in France, Spain, Germany, and Italy, in each of which she was deeply
concerned; not to say in Scotland, which being on the same Continent, was under
her Eye, as their Queen under her keeping. But the King of Spain finding that
whatever was pretended overtly, she did underhand abet the Rebels of the
Netherlands, he set his thoughts upon supporting the Rebels of Ireland; which
how much she dreaded, appears by her ready acceptance of that seign'd
Submission of the Earl of Tyrone, the first that gave her trouble, and the last
that repented him of it: But before he made any Rupture upon her, there
happened a lucky hit, which contributed much to defraying the Charge she
foresaw she must be at, whenever he broke the Peace made with her. A mighty
Mass of Money, which King Philip had taken up from the Genoveses, and other
Italian Merchants, to be sent by Sea to the Duke D'Alva, for carrying on that
War of the Low Countries, was drove into one of her Ports by a French Man of
War, which she seizing to her own use, and justifying her self by necessity of
State (the only reason for all unreasonable actions) thought it enough to give
the Proprietors Security for the Principal, without any consideration of
Interest. This so incensed D'Alva, that he forthwith laid an Imbargo upon all
the English Merchants in the Low Countries: She to requite that, did the like
upon the Dutch Merchants here, upon which Letters of Mart were granted on both
sides, and so that War began which she lived not to see and end of: For the
King of Spain (as is said before) knowing the Irish to be naturally inclined to
break out with the Itch of Rebellion, resolved to inflame their Blood with the
hopes of a new Change, combining with Gregory the Thirteenth to reassume the
Country into his hands, as one of the Kingdoms reputed parcel of St. Peter's
Patrimony, and held of the Church (as he alleged) by the Kings of England,
upon no other Condition but that of Fealty to the Sea of Rome, and therefore
Forfeited by the Heresy of the Queen. His Holiness, who has been ever very
captious of all Advantages of this kind, was easily prevailed with to bestow it
upon his Natural Son the Marquess of Vincula; to whom one Stukely an
Englishman, being therefore dignified with the Title of Marquess of Lempster,
and Earl of Wexford, was appointed General, having Eight hundred Italians under
his Command: Before whom was sent as a Vant-Currier, one Fitz-Morris, with a
Consecrated Banner, two Priests, and three Ships. These dull Rebels were to
join with those more active ones, the Earl of Desmond and his Brothers, and
were to take Livery and Seisin till the rest could come upon the Place. But as
was the Cause so was the Success: and sitter it was that he should meet with a
Cross then a Crown, that being but Christ's Vicar, should be so ambitious of
having a Kingdom in this World, when his Lord had none for himself. Stukely
ended his life before he began his Rebellion; Fitz-Morris was betrayed by his
Fellow-Traytors before his own Treachery could take any effect: San Joseph that
succeeded him (one that was half Jew and half Italian) was glad to secure his
own with the loss of all their Lives that were under him, whiles Desmond the
Great Rebel was forced to yield to lower Conditions then any of them; and the
two Priests that attended the holy Banner were starved upon the Mountains.

But after these there started up yet several others; as the Mac Williams,
since called the Burks, the Mac Connels in Connaught, the Mac Mahons and O
Rorks in Monagan, the O Connors and O Mulloys in Ophaly, and some of the O
Brians and Cavenaghs in Lempster, who did what they could to raise Tumults, but
so faintly, that we may rather call them Riots, then Rebellions, signifying no
more to her, than the bitings of Fleas to a Lion. However, doubting how she
might be pestred with more such Vermin in the heat of the Summer following,
she took timely care to prevent the worst: and having Intelligence given her
that they intended to dispute her Sovereignty at Sea, as they had done her
Right by Land, she mustered up all her Naval Forces, determining to carry the
War as far from home as possibly she could. These were commanded by the famous
Drake, who resolving to fight them in the other World, as well as in this,
advanced to the place where 'twas said the Golden Apples grew, where finding no
Dragon to keep them, so fierce as himself, he made himself Master of as much
Treasure as might have been a sufficient Found for a greater Empire then that
he fought for, had either his Covetousness held any proportion with his
Courage, or his Ambition with his Activity; for he brought home, besides what
was imbezled and concealed, above two thousand pound weight of uncoyn'd Silver,
and twelve Chests of ready coined, and no less then five hundred pound weight
of Gold, besides Jewels of an inestimable value, having several Carcanets of
Diamonds, Rubies, Topazes, Saphires, and Emeralds of an incredible Magnitude,
issued Silks, and other rich Commodities of the growth and manufacture of the
Country, being thought not worth the Portage. This added no less to the Fame,
then to the Wealth of this great Queen, who being before compared to Solomon
for her Wisdom, seemed now not unlike him for her Opulence. But not content
with this single income of Glory, she commanded her Fortunate Admiral back
again the second time, to brave them at Land as before at Sea; where, after
having taken St. Jago, St. Domingo, and Cartagena, three of the most
considerable Towns they had, he returned even surfeited with Victory, his Head
being as giddy with new Contrivances, as his men's were with the Calenture, who,
in the midst of all their Abundance, wanting health only, were forced to take
leave of the place, being troubled that they could bring home no greater a
booty, then what was esteemed at One hundred thousand pounds Sterling, and Two
hundred and forty pieces of brass Cannon to report their Victory.

But because this looked like wounding that King in the hinder parts only, she
was not satisfied till she gave him one blow in the Face: and accordingly sent
to defy him before his own Doors, entering his chief Port of Cales, in which
they took and fired no less then One hundred Ships; and furnishing themselves
with great store of Ammunition and Victuals, made for the Cape of St. Vincent,
where having demolished the Forts, they passed on to the Assores, under the
great Meridian, where they took a great Carack returning from the East Indies,
which having the name of St. Philip, it was by the Superstitious Seamen, looked
on as an ominous Presage of the Future ill Fortune of their King Philip by Sea.
Whilst Drake was thus active to the Southward, Candish was no less busy to the
Westward, who having destroyed several Colonies in Chily, Peru, and Nova
Hispania, returned home Laden with the Spoils of Nineteen rich Ships taken in
his way.

And now King Philip provoked no less by the shame, then the continued loss he
had sustained for above two years together, with redoubled diligence and charge
got ready a mighty Fleet, hoping to perform some wonders suitable to the
Expectation of the Time, as well as of the Importance of the Affair, it being
by Astronomers called The wonderful Year, and being the great Clymacterich of
the World, they concluded it must produce some extraordinary Effects. Neither
indeed was there any thing then in the World so extraordinary and amazing as
the sight of that moving Wood of his, consisting of no less then One hundred
and fifty tall Ships, which carried in them besides all Habiliments of War,
Twenty thousand men, and expected Fifty thousand more to be joined with them,
that the Duke of Parma was to bring out of Flanders: all which were to be
Landed in the Thames mouth, that so by seizing on the Head, they might the more
easily command every Member of the whole Body of the Kingdom.

Well may we imagine that the report of such a Preparation as this (the work of
no less then three years time) was heard further then the noise of their Cannon
could (though it is incredible how far they were heard;) and one would have
thought the Sound of that terrible Name they gave their Fleet, El Invincible
Armado, might have been sufficient to have made an universal Earthquake
throughout Christendom: But it seems the Adamantine hearts of the Neighbor
Princes were so impenetrable, that it did not much move them; for being
satisfied in the Counterpoise of the Queens Power, they stood at Gaze seemingly
unconcerned. The Queen had prepared a double Guard, one for the Land, the other
for the Sea: that by Land was divided into two Armies, the one consisting of
Two and twenty thousand Foot, and One thousand Horse, commanded by the Earl of
Leicester, whose Post was at Tilbury: The other consisting of Four and twenty
thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse, which were the Guard of her Person, were
Commanded by the Lord Hunsden; the Seaports being Garrisoned with Twenty
thousand old Soldiers, who were seconded by the Trained Bands in the
respective Counties where they lay. The Guard by Sea consisted of One hundred
and forty Ships, divided into three Squadrons: The two first consisting of
Fifty, each under the Lord Howard the Admiral, and Sir Francis Drake the
Vice Admiral, waited the coming of the Enemy in Plymouth Road: The last
Squadron of Forty, Commanded by the Rere-Admiral the Lord Henry Seymour, second
Son to the Duke of Somerset, rode between Dunkirk and Callais, to prevent any
Conjunction with the Prince of Parma. With this great Body she designed to show
the World her Grandeur, but when she meant to show her Power, she made use but
of Fifteen of them.

Now as it happens oftentimes, that great Calmes precede great Storms, so the
Catholic King hoping to out-wit the Heretic Queen, a little before his great
Fleet was ready to come forth, dissembling a passionate desire of Peace,
pressed hard for a Treaty; but whilst he thought to deceive her, he was
deceived by her: For she, to return the trick upon him, consented to the
Proposal, and by the sending her Commissioners to Ostend, so possessed him of
the supposed Advantage he had gotten by it, that it is thought it made him
appear a little sooner then he would; for before they could enter into the
business, he was entered into the British Seas, and was no less shocked when he
found her in readiness, then he expected she should have been if he had taken
her unawares. This made them resolve rather to make a Chase fight, then lie
by it, though they had the advantage of the Wind, their honor being preserved
till they came to Callais, for that it was supposed all the haste they made
away, tended only to the Conjunction with the Prince of Parma; but after they
cut their Cables (having not the Courage to stay to weigh Anchor) and made all
the Sail they could to fly from only eight Fireships, it then plainly appeared
they neither understood their own Strength nor hers. But these Ships being the
first of that kind that ever were seen, we may allow them to be The Wonder that
gave Name to that wonderful Year.

In this great Conflict were lost more then half of the Spanish Fleet, of the
English only one Ship, and that of no great Consideration: so that 'twas
believed, having sounded the danger of our Dark Seas, passing round by the
North, they had taken their final Leave of England. However, the Queen was
resolved not to leave them so, but after much mischief done them by several
Privateers, whom she permitted to go forth upon their own Charge, she resolved
to become her self the Aggressor, and repay to him the great dishonor of his
Invasion; it being an Indignity not to be forgiven by Princes, because it
cannot be forgotten by their People, who can never be discharged from the Fears
they have of him who has once set upon them, till there be some Confront given,
that may assure them their own Prince is not so weak, as the Enemy, by seeking
him out, would have the World believe.

The Fleet she set forth consisted of One hundred and fifty Sail, yet was not
called the Invincible, though it proved so, being commanded by the Earl of
Essex, as General at Land, and the Lord Howard, as General at Sea, who setting
upon Cales the second time, took it, and in it, all the Wealth that may be
imagined to be lodged in such a Storehouse as that is; and after having burned
all the Ships they found there (for which they were offered Two Millions of
Ducats if they would spare them) they spoiled the whole Island, and demolished
all the Forts, and did, as it is thought, as much Damage as amounted to Twenty
Millions of Ducats more: To requite which, the King of Spain rigged up another
Navy, and manned it with Irish Runnagado's, but either their Skill or their
Courage failed them, at least the Winds did not so favor them, but that the
Expedition came to naught.

And now when all the Storms at Sea seemed to have been blown over and past,
there rose a Cloud at Land which gave the Queen greater apprehensions of danger
then ever she had before. The French King, who was joined with her in a League
Offensive and Defensive against Spain, and had reaped this good Effect by it,
to recover Amiens, which the Spaniard had surpised by the help of the English
only, yiedling to the Importunities of the Pope and his own People, made his
Peace without her, who quitting his Religion at the same time he quit her
Friendship, 'twas believed they would all join to set upon her at once.
Hereupon there were great Debates in Council upon the point of her closing with
the Spaniard, who seemed much to desire a Peace. Essex, the great Idol of the
Swordmen, was for continuing the War; Burleigh, who was the great Patron of
the Penmen, was for the Peace. And it seems they argued the matter so warmly,
that being scarce able to keep Peace amongst themselves, 'twas not likely they
should obtain it abroad: For Essex could not forbear unseemly Reflections upon
the old man, nor he from retorting them back as sharply, who it is said (being
more witty in his Anger) called for a Bible at the Table, and showing him that
Verse in the Psalms, where it is said The bloody minded man shall not live out
half his days, gave him grave warning by an ominous Presage of that which
followed (for we know how shortly after he swelled and burst.) However the
Queen moved with like Zeal to Religion, as Essex was with hatred to the
Spaniard, inclined to his Opinion; whereupon Cecil submitted to her Judgment,
but prayed to have the Question put first to the States of Holland her
Confederates, Whether they would agree to her making Peace: and knowing it to
be against their Interest so to do, he took the Advantage of their Refusal to
demand an aid toward the carrying on of the War; out of whom, by that trick of
State, he did her this good Service against her will, to screw Eight hundred
thousand pounds, which being to be paid by Thirty thousand pounds yearly, for
which the Queen had Cautionary Towns given as a Security, it looked so like a
Tribute, that after their having offered her the Sovereignty (as they did) it is
hard to prove it was not so.

And now casting up the Account betwixt her and the Spaniard, who was her
greatest, and not to say her only Enemy (for the Pope, however he bore no less
hatred to her, yet being at that distance as he was, he could not come to close
grapple with her, and as his quarrel was chiefly Spiritual, so his Machinations
were for the most part invisible, proceeding by secret underhand Instigations
of such Persons, as having not credit enough for raising War, had recourse only
to such Clancular Contrivances and darker Treasons, which she easily enervated
by the Spell of that Politic Motto of hers, VIDEO and TACEO, which she took up
by the Example of her sage Grandfather Henry the Seventh, who though he was
very wise, affected to seem wiser than he was, by pretending to more
intelligence then really he had, whereby as he, so she left that impression
upon their Guilt who hated her, that many of them durst not attempt the
betraying her, for fear of being betrayed themselves, and perhaps by
themselves; as was that unfortunate Villain Squire, one of the Grooms of her
Stable, who being tempted by an English Jesuit in Spain, to poison the Pommel
of her Saddle, was by the Tempter himself, when he found it took not effect,
discovered and accused, and confessing the Fact, executed for it) casting up
the Account betwixt her and the Spaniard, it does appear at the lowest rate set
upon his Damages in contesting with her, that she consumed him no less then
Five hundred Millions of Ducats, besides what he suffered by the Revolt of the
United Provinces, which he had unquestionably reduced, had not she interposed
with her Power to protect them, for which they paid her well at last. The only
Requital he made her was by upholding the Irish Rebellion, which cost her not
half the money she had of their Hogen-mogen-ships: for however she was induced
to send over a greater Army then ever Ireland had seen before, when Oneil
seized the Fort of Blackwater, and took his first and last Revenge upon the
English there, to wit, Twenty thousand Foot, and One thousand three hundred
Horse to reinforce the Governors there, after the Landing of the Spaniards
under Don Aquila, yet she had a suitable Return in opening several Passages,
till then altogether unknown to the English, whereby she found out convenient
Scituations for several Colonies, that have since Cultivated many thousands of
(before unprofitable) Acres, and made Seats fit for men to dwell in, which till
then were the Receptacles of Beasts only, or Men more Savage then they. So that
what her great Enemy took from her Peace, he added to her Glory, who in
despite of the Love and Hate of all those great Princes that courted or
contemned her, dyed a Virgin and Unconquered; having this happiness by coming
to the Crown so close after the Reign of her busling Father, to be served by a
race of choice Men, that having given him sufficient proof of their Loyalty,
made themselves yet more valuable to her by their Experience, having by the
Gravity and Grandeur of some of them, and by the Courage and Conduct of others,
so well settled the Foundations of Government, that notwithstanding five several
Changes in Religion, and the Interposition of a Woman, a Stranger, and a Child,
they delivered up the Scepter to her in Peace, and standing round the Throne,
with like Constancy defended her, as she defended their Faith, which as it was
not without great difficulty, so perhaps it had not been without an
impossibility of Success, had she not strengthened the Reputation of their
Authority by the Authority of her own Example.

Quid Virtus, and quid Sapientia possit,
Utile preposuit nobis Exemplar.
THE SIXTH DYNASTY OF SCOTS.

Woodcut headpiece with a decorative pattern of archers and hunting dogs. OF
SCOTS.
THE Scots would be thought a Branch of the antique Scythian Stock, as well as
all other cold Countries, and they have this color above many others, that as
their Ancestors are entitled to as ancient Barbarity as those of any other
Nation whatever, so like those rude Scythes, they have always been given to
prey upon their Neighbors, and live without themselves, the very sound of
their Name giving some semblable Testimony to the certainty of their Genealogy;
for the Scythians were heretofore commonly called Herodet. Melpoment.
Scolots, which by contraction (not to say corruption) might easily be turned
into Scots: wherein possibly they do not more abuse themselves, then they are
abused by him, who supposing them to have been anciently part of the Terra
Incognita, would have the word Scoti to be quasi i. e. Obscu^i.
(...): I hope it was not Delus the Grecian, that came next into Ireland after
Menethus the Scythian, that gave them that name. It Is true that few Authentic
Authors (if any) make any mention of them (at least by this Name) before the
Year of Christ 276: however Boys, Buchanan, and some others of their own
Writers would support the credit of the black Book of Pashley, that derives
their Kings from the Royal Line of Egypt by the surerside, It seems the High
lands were never drowned.
boasting of the Conquest of Ireland 800 Years before the Flood, at what time
they would be thought so famous a People, that This Story is by Athenaeus cited
out of Meschion.
Ptolomey Philadelph wrote to King Reuthen to be informed of their State, to
whom Claud. Ptolomey was after beholding for that Information we find in his
Geography.

Whilst their own Archers shoot thus wide, that yet pretend themselves the true
Descendants of the Scythians, who took their Gorepius.
denomination from their Excellency in Archery, it is no marvel that Strangers
came no nearer the Mark: Some thinking them a By-slip of the Orosius.
Germans; others of the Verstegan.
Scandians; some affirming them to be the Outcasts of some Mongrel Nentus.
Spaniards, that were not permitted to live in Ireland; and others, yet
fetching their Descent from the Girald. Cambren.
Vandals, who being by diverse Authors called Scytes, the broad-mouth'd Northern
People called Scots. And some there are, that with no small probability take
them to be a Miscellany of all these Nations, driven by various Fortunes, at
several times, into the Orcades and Hebrides, as the exiled Romans were
heretofore into the desert Isles Scyathus, Serephium, and G^^re.
of the Aegean-Sea, where life was held to be a ciueller Punishment then Death:
from whence, as their number increased, it is thought, they disburthen'd
themselves into the upper part of Albania, now called the High-lands, where
they lived obscurely, unknown indeed to all the World, but those of Whence
Ninn^us thinks they might originally come.
Ireland, who called them in scorn Gayothels, which was as much as to say, The
Flo^^^igus says they were compounded of diverse Nations, as Spain, France,
Britain, Ireland, and Norway.
mixed People; and as the Irish to this day call the Scotch Tongue Gaidelack,
which signifies a Language gathered out of all Tongues. However, the Scotch
Antiquaries would have the Name of Gayothel to be with Relation rather to their
Descent from one Gayothel a noble Giant, who married Scota King Pharaoh's
Daughter, not considering that this is to derive themselves from a Monster by
the Fathers side, and from a Gipsy on the Mothers side: But the name of Scot
bearing the same signification with Gayothel, we may more reasonably conclude,
it was first given them by the Saxons, either for the reason aforesaid, as the
word Scot illud dictum quod ex diversis rebus in unum Acervum aggregatum est.
Camb. ex M. Westminster.
Scot (like the word Alman with them) signified a Body aggregated out of many
Particulars into one, or else by contraction of the word Attacot; for the High
landers making their way into the Borders of the Low-lands inhabited by the
Picts (who were the ancient Britains beat out by the Romans) the Picts
thereupon removed into the West, and left the East part of the Country entire
to them, who sithence, which was near about Aurelian's time, or a little after,
made themselves known to the Romans by the Name before mentioned of Attacots.
The Picts and they made War upon each other for a long time, moved by want, as
other Nations by wantonness; for the great Commodity they fought for was Bread,
the want whereof brought them to accord a Cessation of Arms every Season during
Seed-time, but the Corn being in ground they fought on till Harvest following
after, which every Victor was known by his Garland of several sorts of Grain,
as the Roman Conquerors by theirs of several sorts of Boughs: But when the
Roman Empire began to decline, both of them united in one hope of recovering
that part of the Isle which is since called England: And after the Romans
totally quit it, they pressed so hard upon Vortigern the then Titular King,
that he was forced, the Romans having denied him further assistance, to call in
the Saxons to his aid, who finding them then called by the Name of Attacots,
after their usual manner of abbreviation they termed them Scots.

The first of all their Kings, at least the first worthy that Title, that broke
over the great Clausura or Mound, then called the By the Romans named the
Picts-Wall.
Wiath, was one Fergus, Sirnam'd the Fierce, a Prince descended from the
ancient Kings of Ireland (for I take the first Fergus and his One hundred
thirty seven Successors to be at too great a distance to have their height
truly taken) who not enduring that his Territories should be bounded, when his
Ambition could not, that broke in like a Land-flood, and overrun all the
adjacent Countries, making his Name so terrible, that the Romans themselves
imputing that to his Fortune, which any other Nation would have ascribed to his
Fortitude, made an honorable retreat, and left the poor Britains to defend
themselves, who doubtless had been overrun by him, had not the Picts, emulous
of his Glory, interrupted his Successes, by whose vicinity both he and his
Successors were so much straightened, that they could not much enlarge their
Territories till the Reign of Keneth the First, a wise Prince, who reducing
that Kingdom under him, not so much by Puissance as Policy, made that the
middle which was before but the bounds of his Dominions; deserving therefore to
be esteemed tanquam alter Conditor. About Sixty years after him, another of the
same Name, tenth in descent from him; raised the Throne a step higher, having
got as great a Conquest over the People, as the other did over the Picts, by
turning the Optimacy into a direct Monarchy; for he made the Succession
Hereditary, that till then was but Elective: The fittest and ablest (says
Buchanan) being till that time preferred before the nearest or noblest; since
which time the eldest Son of the King of Scots has been always styled the
Prince of Scots. This King however gained not so much upon the Nobility, in
point of Majesty, but that they gained much more upon his Successors in point
of Power; so that their Superiority was scarce so distinguishable for a long
time from a bare Precedence, but that they might rather be called Regnantes
than Reges, so long as the Thanage lasted, who being a kind of Palatines,
exercised an absolute Power over their particu^ar Tenants and Vassals cum Jure
Furci.

Thus they continued, as it were under their good behavior, absolute Princes,
but bounded with many Restrictions, till the time of James the Fourth, whose
Predecessors having cleared their Title from all Encumbrances by Competitors,
leaving him sole Heir of the Peoples Affections, as well as of his Predecessors
Glory, he married the Lady Margaret, eldest Daughter, and at length Heir to our
Henry the Seventh, by which Match their Thistle being ingrafted into our Rose,
mended both its color and smell: And their Kings, that had been a kind of
Homagers to ours, from the beginning almost of their Monarchy, became as it
were manumitted, by the expectation of their Title Paramount and by the
possibility of being Lords of the Imperial Crown of this Realm: The primier
Seizen of which happiness, after the death of Queen Elizabeth without Issue,
was in James the Sixth, who Sirnam'd himself the Peaceable, to let the World
know he came not in by Conquest, but Consent; having this honor above all that
were before him, and probably beyond what any shall have that come after him,
his way was made before him, not by any humane power, but by Divine Providence,
long since revealed by a written Prophecy ingraved, though not understood, in
that fatal Stone which is placed within the Regal Chair, where the Kings of
Scots anciently, and ours since, have been crowned, brought by them out of
Ireland in the first place, and by our King Edward the First, translated hither
afterward, whose words, now they are fulfilled, seem plain enough: Ni fallat
fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Invenient Lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.


This by the Ancients was called Saxum Jacobi, as for that (as Tradition had
delivered it) they believed this to be the Stone on which the Patriarch Jacob
rested his Head: But we of later times have found it to be Saxum Jacobi, with
relation to him who was to take up his rest here, who being by a Decree from
Heaven declared Head of this Nation, may not improperly be called our Patriarch
Jacob, the first King of that People that ever was crowned in this Kingdom; by
whom the Scots may be said to Reign here, according to another Prophecy as
ancient as the former, recorded by Higden in his Polichronicon, and evidently
fulfilled at his coming in, when he transplanted so many of his Countrymen
into our fat Soil, that they grew up (like Weeds) to that degree of rankness,
as in the Age fol^owing to choke the best Flowers in our Garden; and taking
advantage of us when we were drunk with Prosperity, brought us like drunken men
to quarrel one with another, for what (since we came to our selves) we cannot
find, or are at least ashamed to tell; having by the corrupted Principles we
first received from them, engaged our selves in so groundless a War, that after
Ages will not believe so unreasonable a Story, or not be able to write it so
plainly, as that it may be intelligible: How a King was made a Subject to his
Vassals, and how they were made Slaves to one another: How every man, who had
any honesty was afraid, and every one who had any honor, ashamed to own it:
How they that had any Reason were forced to deny or disguise it, lest their
Wisdom should bring them under Suspect, and that Suspect under Condemnation,
whiles Loyalty was the only proper Subject for a Tragedy, and Religion for a
Farse: God with us being set up against Dieu and mon Droit: For all which we
have no excuse to give to Posterity, but must disclaim with the Poet, and say
to each Reader, Desit in hac tibi part Fides, nec credit Factum.
Ovid. Metam.
Vel si credatis, facti quoque Credit poenam.


But we have this to attenuate our dishonor, if the condemning them can any
whit excuse us, that the Scots were not disunited from us in point of Shame,
more then in point of Guilt, who having the impudence to make their King their
Prisoner, sold him back to their Brethren of the Covenant here, at a dearer
rate then the Jews paid for Christ, or then possibly those here would have
given for him, had they not thought it the price of their own Freedom rather
then his. But as the buyers found themselves not long after miserably
disappointed by the Regicides, who took the Quarrey from them, so those that
sold him to them, lived to see themselves sold at a lower rate then he was, and
bought by those who bought him of them: The Genius of the whole Nation of
Scotland feeling a just reverberation of Divine Vengeance, in being rendered
afterward no Kingdom, I might say no People (if we consider the Akephalisis
that followed) but a miserable subjected Province to the Republicans of
England, without any hope of Redemption, but what they must expect from the
free grace of his Son, against whom they had thus sinned. And however they have
since recovered something of their ancient Glory, by the Merits of some great
Persons amongst them, eminent for their Loyalty, but more particularly by the
merits of the brave Montross, whose incomparable Example alone is enough to
buoy up the dishonor of their lost Nation, as being more lasting; yet it is to
be feared they, as well as we, yet suffer so much in their reputation abroad,
that the very Pagan Princes of the other part of the World, how remote soever,
have been alarmed at the report of so unpresidented an Impiety, and accompting
themselves therefore more secure in the Faith of their Brutish Subjects, then
our King can be in ours, rejoice at the happiness of having no Commerce with
us, exalting himself in the words of the Poet: Ovid. Metam.
Si tamen admissum sinit hoc Natura videri,
Gratulor huic terrae, quod abest Regionibus illis,
Quae tantum fecere nefas --


THE ORDER AND SUCCESSION OF THEIR KINGS.
I. the Sixth of Scotland, and first of England, being after the death of Queen
Elizabeth (the last of the direct Line) the next Heir, as only Son of Mary
Queen of Scots, sole Daughter and Heir of James the Fifth, Son and Heir of
James the Fourth, by Margaret eldest Daughter of Henry the Seventh of England,
was on S. James 's day, 1603. Crowned King of Great Britain; and Prince Henry
his eldest Son dying before him, the Crown descended to his second Son II. the
First, a Prince who deserving the best of any other, was the worst used by his
People that ever any King was, but Heaven has been pleased to recompense him
for the indignities he suffered here on earth, by compelling all those who
would not allow him the honor of a KING, whiles he was alive, to reverence him
as a PROPHET, being dead; themselves being made the instruments in the
accomplishment of his dying Prediction, That God would at last restore his Son
III. the Second, our present Sovereign, who (blessed be Divine Providence for
it) after twelve years rejection by those Sons of Zerviah that were too hard
for him, was brought back triumphant, and placed upon the Throne by an
invisible hand, which having now recorded hu right as it were with the Beams of
the Sun, unworthy are they of that light, who do not willingly submit to him;
being (as he is) the undoubted Heir to his Fathers Virtues, as well as to his
Kingdoms.
JAMES
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

coat of arms of King James I: quarterly, in the first and fourth quarters the
arms of France and England quartered, in the second, or a lion rampant in a
double tresure flory gules, in the the third azure a harp or, stringed argent;
supporters, dexter a lion or crowned, sinister a unicorn argent armed, unglued,
craned, and gorged with a royal coronet or, having a chain affixed thereto and
reflexed over the back all or. THE Male Line of the English Kings having been
spun out to an incredible length, it pleased the fatal Sisters to break it off
at last, whereby the Imperial Right of this Realm vested in this James the
Sixth of Scotland, in whom, by a rare event in the Pedigrees of Princes, all
Titles concentered, having in his Person the Blood of England, both by Fathers
side and Mothers side, and (which some have thought worth the noting) both
conveyed to him by a Margaret; by the first of which (being Sister and Heir to
Edgar Atheling) he was both English and Saxon; by the last (the Daughter of
Henry the Seventh) he was both Britain and Norman. Now as his Title, so was his
Claim double-gilt, by Descent and by Consent; the last declared by the Will of
Queen Elizabeth, which we may call the Will of the People (for living, she and
they breathed but one desire, and being dead, 'twas not like they should
differ:) so that it is no wonder he was esteemed no Stranger, though he were no
Native, being so like her in point of Wisdom, Clemency, Justice, Learning, and
Religion, that there seemed no difference betwixt them, but in Sex only: And
hence it was that the grief conceived for the loss of her, was so wholly
swallowed up with the Joy of having him in her room, that (as one observes)
sorrow was never so disappointed as at this time, all Exclamations being turned
into Acclamations, and the Union with Scotland so extolled, as if beyond all
humane possibility we might have hoped to have gathered Grapes of Thorns, or
Figs of Thistles. Neither wanted there several external Circumstances to give
reputation to his Succession, but more especially for that it was taken to be
the Divine Work of Providence. For as P. de Comm^^es observes of this Nation,
that they were ever much swayed by Prophesies, so it being conceived, that the
notable Prophecy mentioned in the Polychr^nicon, and supposed to have been
written above Six hundred years before, to wit, That the English should be
first subjected by the Danes, next the Normans, and lastly the Scots, was
fulfilled in his coming, so this gave him a Title as from Heaven, and made even
Wise men conclude, he was the man designed by eternal Decree, to take the first
place upon the now Regal Seat of our English, which was heretofore that of the
Scotch Kings (as I before mentioned;) of which Honor no man could have been
put in possession with so universal Satisfaction as he, both in respect of the
ripeness of his years, the dignity of his great Alliances abroad, and the
advantage of his hopeful Issue at home; being a Prince that was at Peace with
all the World, but very eminently with himself, having from his Childhood been
practiced in the Regiment of such a Kingdom, that had not corrupted him with
Affluence and Vainglory, but by variety of Accidents, enabled him to rule
himself as he ought, and consequently his Subjects, as they expected.

Now if it be one of the most desirable points of happiness (because the most
durable) to have such Subjects as wish no other Sovereign but himself, as
himself desired no other Subjects but those he had; so we may believe he had a
large share of Joy with the People, and possibly more transcendent, then most
men conceived, in respect of the Reflections he could not but make upon his
past Troubles, which in some sort may be said to have taken their beginning,
even before he took his; there being such a Sympathy in Nature, that he could
not but have some Convulsion fits in his Mothers Womb, at the time when that
unhappy Prince received his death, to whom he was indebted for his life;
especially since the same men, by the same Principle they were moved to deprive
him of a Father, were obliged to deprive him of his Sovereignty, as after they
attempted to do, when they disputed his Right of Succession. Thus far he
suffered being yet unborn.

Now being born, he seemed to be in no less danger in his Cradle, then that
great Legislator of the Jews was, at the same Age, in his Bull-rush Ark, being
tossed and tumbled by the agitation of several swelling Factions, as the other by
the motion of the troubled Waters, whilst they that made away his Father, began
with no less Audacity to fall upon his Mother: and as they strangled the King
first, and then blew up the House afterward, so now they restrained the Queen
under so straight a Confinement, that she could scarce breath, and blew up her
Power (which we may call her Castle) by a train of Popularity, to which
Buchanan gave Fire by that Invective he wrote against the Monarchy of that
Kingdom, entitled, De Jure Regni apud Scotos: wherein, as much as in him lay,
he subjected Kingship to be trampled underfoot by the Beasts of the People;
affirming that they had the Right to create or depose their Princes as they
pleased: And accordingly they compelled his Mother to resign into their hands
the Crown she had received in her Cradle, to be given to him that was now lying
in his. Thus far he suffered being yet uncrown'd.

Five days after his Mothers Resignation he was Crowned and Anointed, and
being but thirteen Months old, was acknowledged King by the Name of James the
Sixth. But at very same time they agniz'd his Right, they admitted a
Protestation for saving the Right of another James, to wit, the Duke of
Chasteau Herald, who it seems had some Pretensions, in Right of his
Great-Grandmother, the Daughter and Heir of James the Second. So that this was
as yet but to make him a King in Name and show, whilst he must continue under
the Pupilage of Ambitious Regents, that designed rather to give Laws to him,
then advise him how to give Laws to others. It Is true, whilst he was under the
care of those two Patriots of known Honor and Loyalty, his Grandfather Matthew
Earl of Lenox, and the old Earl of Mar; the one his Governor by the right of
Nature, the other by that of Custom, he had some Satisfaction, though no Security
(for how could they be able to protect him, that were not able to defend
themselves, the first of them being murdered, the last heart-broke by the
insupportable Troubles he met with in his short breathed Regency.) But how
melancholy a life he lead under his next Regent the Earl of Morton, who, under
pretense of keeping all Papists and Factious Persons from him, suffered him to
see almost no body, appears by that strict Order of his, by which every Earl
was forbid to approach his Presence with any more then two attending him, every
Baron with any above one, and all of lesser Quality were not to come but
single. Upon this, it is true, the offended Nobility (to affront Morton)
declared him Major, and made some show of leaving him to his own dispose, but
in respect he was but twelve years old, they thought fit to appoint him eleven
Lords more to be assistant in Council to him, three and three by turns, which
in effect was to put twelve Regents over him instead of one, which was designed
by some that intended their own advancement more then his. Thus he suffered
during the Nonage of his years: How he suffered further during the Nonage of
his Power, will appear in the Sequel.

For Morton, notwithstanding the Prescript Form of Government, drew to himself
(being one of the twelve) the Administration of all Affairs, and keeping the
Power still within his own hands, as the King within his own Power, admitted
none to see or speak with him but whom he thought fit; whereby he was now
brought to loose his Liberty wholly, because the other had loss his Authority in
part only. This Tyranny held till the Lords headed by the Earl of Athole, freed
him by force of Arms: After which, believing himself clearly manumitted out of
his Pupillage, to show himself accountable to none but himself, he began to
single out such Friends for his Confidents, as by nearness of Blood, or the
nobleness of their Natures, he judged most worthy to be trusted. Two there were
above the rest, on whom he seemed to cast a disproportionate Grace; these were
Esme Lord Aubigny, Grandson of the Lord John Stuart, his Grandfathers younger
Brother (whom he created first Earl, and after Duke of Lenox) and Charles Earl
of Arran, who being a Hamilton, was his near Kinsman too: but both of them
being suspected to be of the French Faction, it gave fresh occasion of offense
to the chief of the Factions there, and no less umbrage to the jealous Queen
here, who knew the former of the two to be much honored by the Guises. This
new conceived Envy heightened the old Rancor of the mutinous Nobility, and made
them have recourse to the same Remedy for prevention of the same Mischief as
before; whereunto there being a fair opportunity given by the absence of these
Lords (the one being in a Journey, the other at Edinburgh) the Earl of Gowry,
with whom confederated the young Earl of Mar, and the Earl of Lindsey,
finding the King alone at St. Johnstons, invited him over to his Castle of
Reuthen. As soon as they had him there they made him Prisoner, and accusing the
two Lords as Enemies to the Protestant Religion, having first put all his
trusty Servants from him, they forced him by an Instrument under his Hand and
Seal, to banish the Lord Aubigny, and to imprison the Lord Arran; and which was
yet more insupportable, compelled him to approve all that they did by Letters
to Queen Elizabeth. But it was not long ere the death of the Duke of Lenox in
France (who, it is said, however dyed a Protestant) made the Conspirators so
secure in the possession of him, that he found the means to make his escape
from them: And recovering himself now the second time, as one that once more
became Lord of himself, he recalled his trusty Councellor the Lord Arran, by
whose advice he was guided in all his Concerns. This so provoked Gowry beyond
all patience, that in defiance of all Reason as well as of all Right, he made a
second attempt upon him: But as those who are fore-warned are fore-arm'd, so
the King having an eye upon him, defeated his purpose, and made him what he
should himself have been made by him, a Prisoner at Mercy, whilst his Accomplices
escaped into England, to seek Protection from Q. Elizabeth: Who hoping to have
prevented Gowry's Sentence, dispatched away her Secretary Walsingham to the
King, to admonish him to take heed how he was led away by evil Counselors, and
to show him how difficult a thing it was to distinguish betwixt good and bad
Counsel, at his Age, being then but eighteen years old: to which the King
returned a sudden, not to say a sharp Answer, That he was an absolute Prince,
and would not that others should appoint him Counselors whom he liked not.
Wherewith the testy Queen was so offended, that she set her Terriers upon
Encouraging the factious Ministry (whereof there was good store there, and
those fit Tools for her purpose) to say those things which became not her to
own, who clamoring upon his Government, and raising many slanders upon Himself
and Council, tending to the making them Popishly affected, were thereupon cited
to Answer for their Seditious Practices: But they refused to appear, avowing
that the Pulpit was exempt from all Regal Authority, and that no Ecclesiastical
Persons were accomptible for what they preached, to any but to God and their
Consistory. In the mean time the Queen followed the blow, and furnishing the
proscribed Lords with Money, secretly dismissed them home: Who as soon as they
returned, upon the Credit of declaring for the Confirmation of the Truth of the
Gospel, for freeing the King from evil Counselors, and maintaining Amity with
the Protestant Interest of England, raised Eight thousand men in an Instant,
with whom they marched up directly to Court, and so far surpised the King,
that he was forced to render himself* to them, and to engage to give up to
their Mercy all their Adversaries, and who they were, was left to their own
liberty to declare: Next, he was compelled to put into their hands the four
Keys of the Kingdom, Dumbritton, Edinburgh, Tantallon, and Sterling Castles.
After which Glames, one of the principal Rebels, was made Captain of his Guard:
All persons out-lawed for Treason had their Utlaries reversed: all the bad
Subjects were declared good, and some of the best declared Traitors. A Treaty
of Peace was concluded with England, upon Conditions that the Queen Mother
should never be released, and in order to the bringing on her Trial, as after
it fell out: which Trial of the Mother proved yet a greater trial to the King
her Son, who having before lost his Father and Grandfather by a dismal Fate
(both privately murdered) was much more abasht to appear so much a King, and
no King, as to be a helpless Spectator now of his Mothers Tragedy, made away by
such a public Trial, as seemed to proclaim his weakness and shame, more then
her guilt. This seemed to be the very dregs of that bitter Cup whereof he had
drank so largely a little before, but being, as he hoped, the last draught he
was to take of Infelicity, he bore it with suitable patience, as became a
Christian and a King: But his Destinies decreed that there must yet be one
Throw more before the Birth of his Greatness. For however his Majesty cleared
up from the time of his Mothers departure, like the Sun after a stormy Morning,
which becomes brighter and brighter, as it draws nearer its Meridian, yet there
happened after all this an Eclipse, that lasting only half an hour, had like to
have extinguished all his Light and Glory, if a Hand from Heaven had not
rescued him. For the young Gowry, who at the time of his Fathers death, and
long after, continued in Italy (the Country where they are learned in the Art
of Revenge) having found an opportunity to draw him again into that fatal
Castle, where he was before Prisoner to his Father, under pretense of showing
him some Chemical Rarities, got him up into some higher Rooms, whiles his
Servants were retired to eat (it being presently after he had dined himself)
where, by the help of his younger Brother and another appointed to assist them,
they intended to have assassinated him, had not he that was to do the horrid
Deed, not only relented at the very instant when he drew his Sword upon him,
but turned his point upon his Fellow Regicide, and thereby gave him time to
step to a Window and call for help, which came so timely to him, as to rescue
him by the death of the two Gowrys. This, though it was the last of Treasons,
was not yet the last of dangers he met with: For after this, moved by what
Obligations, besides that of Love, I know not (which commonly is not so
domineering a Passion over Princes as private men) he run as much danger at
Sea, as he had before at Land, exposing himself to the mercy of that unruly
Element, at the most dangerous Season of the year, to fetch over his Queen, the
Daughter of Frederick II. King of Denmark, who having attempted several times
to come to him, was drove back (and as it is said by the power of Sorcery) into
Norwey; which hazard being afterward recompensed by the satisfaction he had in
the Virtue of his Wife, and the hopes conceived of the Children he had by her,
two Sons and a Daughter, as he had no further cause to Fear, so he had nothing
further to wish, but that lucky hit that came by the death of the late Queen
Elizabeth, to have the Glory of bringing this Isle, so long divided from all
the World, to be at Unity within it self.

And now to the end he might take the Inclinations of the People at the first
bound (wherein no man was ever more skillful then he) he abrogated the two
names of Distinction, England and Scotland, and reconciled them to each other,
under the comprehensive Appeliation of Great Britain, restoring England to its
old Name, as he from whom he claimed, had restored the Crown to its ancient
stock. Fain he would have brought them under the unity of the same Laws, but
finding neither Nation pleased with the Proposal, either being partial to their
own Constitutions, as fitted with due and different respects, to their
different Tempers, Interests, and Proprieties, he quitted that Design as a
Labor of too hard digestion. But however the Reasons of State varied, he was
resolved to reconcile the Polity of the two Churches, as in an Union of
Possession, so in an Uniformity of Government and Worship: Those of his own
Country having then no other Form, but that imposed upon them by Boanerges Fox,
without taking Counsel of Prince or Prelate, which was not otherwise to be made
good, but by the same Violence with which it was at the first introduced
against the Will of any of the Nobility, but such whose Ancestors were bribed
by the Alienation of the Church Lands. But before he could impose any thing
upon them, understanding there were many here in England that followed that
Classical way, he resolved to have a free Conference with the ablest of their
Demagogues, to the end, that sounding the depth of their Principles, he might,
if possible, fathom that of their Piety, which no man could better do then
himself, being an universal Scholar, as well read in Men as Books, and so
transcendently versed in the last, that he was not improperly styled Rex
Platonicus. How confident he was of his skill in discussing all points
Theological, appears by his entering the List with Pope Pius the Fourth, and
making him give ground. Neither was he a little provoked to this Spiritual
Warfare by a clamorous Petition pretended from a thousand dissatisfied
Ministers, who not having yet matter enough of just Complaint, made up the Cry
by the number of Complainants. To whom, while he was considering what Answer to
give, or rather how to make them answer themselves (as after he did, by taking
each of them apart, and commanding him to set down in Writing, what it was he
singly desired; which when compared altogether, proved so contradictory and
absurd, that like men brought to cudgel one another in the dark, they withdrew
with broken Pates) he was interrupted by the Discovery of a Treason, which
(coming on so early in the Dawn of his Government) could not well be discovered
what it was, nor whereto it tended. For whereas most other Conspiracies are
hatched by men of the same Faction, Interest, and Judgment, this strangely
involved People of all sorts and conditions, without respect to any Repugnancy
of Quality or Concern; Priests and Laymen, Papists and Puritans, Noblemen and
Ignoble, Citizens and Countrymen, were all piec'd up together in the same
Combination; but whether engaged by Faction, Ambition, Covetousness, or Malice,
was not known, or at least by the Kings Wisdom concealed: However by the
well-known Names of the Principal Conspirators, the Lord Cobham, who was
Lord-Warden of the Cinque Ports, the Lord Gray of Wilton, who had a great Post
in the late Queens Government, Sir Walter Rawleigh Lord-Warden of the
Stanneries, Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Griffith
Markham, Sir Edward Parham, and several others, all men of good Families, and
of as good Education, one would have thought it a soberer and deeper design
then it proved to be. Some think their intention was to have seized on the
Persons of the King and Queen, and their Children, and so to have made
Conditions with him for the Kingdom in general, and perhaps for themselves in
particular; being persuaded by some cunning Casuist amongst them, That it could
be no Treason, being entered into before the King was Crowned and Anointed. And
in case they could not bring the King to their terms, 'twas said they resolved
to set up the Title of the Lady Arabella, as the next presumptive Heir to the
Crown, being sole Daughter of Charles Earl of Lenox, younger Brother to the
Kings Grandfather, whom the King, when her Father dyed, put besides that Title
(as by Custom of Scotland he might, being a Donation during his Minority) to
give it to his Cousin Esme Lord Aubigny, the Heir Male of the Lord John, the
other younger Brother. Now that which gave color to this unreasonable
Conjecture of setting up this Lady, was the particular respect Sir Walter
Rawleigh professed to her: but if his enmity to Spain had not been a more
unpardonable sin then his amity with her, the Charge Count Gundamore brought
against him could not have been so much more pressing upon him, then the
Attorney Generals upon his Fellows, to make his much Merit no less criminal
then their much Guilt: and which was more unlucky, to render him a greater
Sufferer by the Kings Mercy, then diverse of them were by his Justice; who,
having freed him after Condemnation, was prevailed with by the Spaniard to
condemn him after that freedom, contrary to the opinion of diverse learned
Gown-men, who held that his Majesty's Pardon lay inclusively in that Commission
he gave him afterward upon his setting out to Sea; it being incongruous that he
should have had the disposing of the lives of others, who was not clearly
Master of his own. But herein those that were his particular Friends and
Relations, were not more surpised then all the World beside: For as they
expected to have been indebted to his Sword for bringing home more Gold then
would have paid the price of his forfeited Head, so every Body e^se hoped to
have been no less indebted to his Pen for finishing that most excellent Piece
of his, The History of the Old World, which ended as untimely as himself, by
attempting a Discovery of The new One.

Now as this Plot seems to have been as dark as the place it self where it was
first hatched, so it was made yet darker by the wisdom of the King, who kept
the Cause unknown, to the intent it might have no Seconds: However, some have
concluded from the appointment of that Conference of Divines, which happened not
long after at Hampton Court, that whatever Reasons of State topt the Plot,
Religion lay at the bottom of it, which being at all times a sure foundation
for any treasonable practices, was at this time so much more seasonably
pretended, by how much the King being as yet a stranger and unsettled, not
knowing whom to suspect, much less whom to trust, would necessarily be
d^stracted with various apprehensions, and not think himself secure in the
Glory of being Defender of the Kingdom, till he appeared to be The True
Defender of the Faith here in England, as well as Defender of the True Faith
(for so run his Title) in Scotland. Neither were they deceived that took this
measure of his Zeal or Fears; it being well known that he was as ambitious to
show the first, as other Princes were careful to conceal the last. Witness the
pleasure he took in wrestling (as I said before) with Pope Pius the Fourth, not
as Jacob wrestled with the Angel to obtain his Blessing, but as he contested
with Esau, to show how little he regarded his Cursing. After which he entered
the List to grapple with that more dreadful Monster the Presbyter, who
professing to hate the pomp of Superstition, disdained to give Obedience to any
kind of Order in the Church; being like the Chymara which the Vid. Ovid. Metam.
lib. 6.
Poets feigned to have breathed out fire, having the head and breast of a Lion
(a bold voracious Creature but very dull) with the belly of a Goat, and
therefore much followed by the Female Sex, and the tail of a Dragon to sting
the Consciences of those that follow him, and make them spiritually mad.
Betwixt him and the Pope, finding Religion to be placed, as his own Arms were
betwixt the Lion and the Unicorn, who trampled under their feet his Beati
Pacifici, with as much scorn as they have since Di^u and Mon Droit: He
thereupon deferred the matter no longer, but calling before him the ablest of
those that took upon them to oppose the Monarchy of the Church, he resolved to
preside himself in the Controversy betwixt them and the Bishops. He that was
the Prolocutor of the Non-conformists, happening to be a man worthy a better
employment then that Religious Drudgery they had engaged him in, was so modest
(notwithstanding it was his business to oppose all Formality) as to offer
nothing that was altogether void of Form, beginning with a General Discourse of
the Necessity of a through Reformation, he brought the Desires of his
dissatisfied Brethren under four Heads, beseeching his Majesty that there might
be, 1. An establishment of true Doctrine in the Church; as if that received
from Christ and his Apostles had not been as yet sufficiently cleared. 2. That
there might be a settlement of true and faithful Pastors; meaning men of known
simplicity and plainness, and if not Fishermen (as were the Apostles) yet of
any other Trade or Occupation. 3. That there might be a sincere Administration
in point of Government; meaning that the Presbyter might he joined in
Commission with the Bishop (as Calves-head and Bacon are better meat together
then either of them alone) that by his letting in as many at the back door as
the Bishop did at the fore door, great might be the multitude of Preachers. 4.
That the Book of Common Prayer might be fitted to a more increase of Piety; by
lengthening the Prayers (which as one of the Fraternity, and doubtless a
Tailor, objected, were like short shreds, or ends of threads, that were too
quickly wrought off) and spiritualizing them with some less intelligible
Phrases, to prevent praying by rote. These Proposals of his being enforced by a
not unlearned Discourse, however more like an Orator then a Divine, he
concluded with sundry Objections: 1. Against Confirmation, as being altogether
needless and unnecessary, because it added nothing (as he said) to the Validity
and Sufficiency of the Sacrament. To which Answer was given, That the Church
held it no essential part of the Sacrament, but judged it a thing most
reasonab^e, that Children, who at their Baptism had made Profession of their
Faith by others, should so soon as they came to years of understanding, do it
by themselves before the Bishop. 2. They deemed it most laudable, as being
warranted by the practice of the Primitive Church, from the very Apostles time.
Lastly, they judged it necessary that the Children should receive Benediction
by the Imposition of Hands, after the Example of Matt. 19.13:
Christ himself. This Answer being so solid, that it could not well admit of
any Reply, he very dexterously grafted a Desire upon it, That every private
Pastor might Confirm as well as the Bishop: But Doctor Andrews challenging him
to show where ever it was done by any but Bishops, he lost the Point for want
of ready proof. After this he objected in the second place against Absolution,
as savouring too much of Popery. To which was answered, That the Commission of
Pardoning Sins was originally given by Christ himself, and allowed of by the
Church of England upon no other but Gospel Terms of sincere Repentance and
amendment of Life, which differenced it sufficiently from the Popes Pardons and
Indulgences granted upon far other and easier respects; and being agreeable to
the practice of other Reformed Churches, particularly that of Geneva (the
pattern which they themselves desired to follow) it was thought not only
immodest and inconvenient, but scarcely justifiable before God or Man to
condemn the practice of it. Which Answer, how it satisfied him at that present
time I know not, but I have been credibly informed, that when he was upon the
point of Death, he earnestly desired the Absolution of a Reverend Divine that
came to pray with him, and taking his hands between his own, kissed them with
all imaginary show of Devotion and Humility. The third Objection was against
the use of the Cross in Baptism; but it appearing to have been used in
Constantine's time, and proved out of several of the Fathers to have been used
in Immortali Lavacro (by which either side understood Baptism) the King judged
it Antiquity enough to justify the continuance of it still: Upon which, waving
any further Objection to the Antiquity, he urged the scandal of it, for that it
had been Superstitiously abused (as he said) in the time of Popery: to which
the King himself gave Answer, That it should be used no otherwise then as it
was before the time of that abuse, the Antiquity thereof being implied in their
own Objection. Hereupon one of the out-lying Objectors sallied forth
impertinently enough, and desired to know how far an Ordinance of the Church
was binding without Impeachment of Christian Liberty: Whom immediately the King
took off with a sharp Reply, telling him, That as the Church taught him Faith,
he would teach him Obedience. Many other Objections there were against the 4.
use of the Surplice; 5. The Ring in Marriage; 6. The Ordination by Bishops; 7.
Baptizing by Women; 8. Predestination; 9. The Oath ex Officio; 10. The High
Commission Court, etc. to all which the King himself gave Answers so like a
Prince in respect of Authority, and yet so like a Priest in point of Divinity,
that not knowing whether they less understood him, or themselves, as men at
once ashamed, afraid, and confounded, they begged to be dismissed, and promised
to Conform for the Future, now they knew it to be his Will to have it so.

However, there were some Gainsayers that rose up afterward, taking upon them
to speak evil of the things they understood not, men of perverse spirits,
puff^d up with pride, rather then pricked in Conscience, who found out an
Enginee^ fi^ for their purpose, a filthy Dreamer, more impudent then can be
imagined (however he was by his Profession a Physician of Bodies, and not of
Souls) took upon him to preach in his sleep: whose Story is not altogether
unpleasant or impertinent, having rendered himself so famous by his counterfeit
Trances, that the King himself, curious to find out the cheer, had a desire to
hear him. His manner was after having passed through a Raps^dy of Prayers, to
take some apt Text for his purpose, to inveigh against Pope, Prince, and
Prelate, which he did so smartly, and yet so methodically, that the King
clearly perceived he was awake, although being called, stirred, or pulled, he
would make no show of having any sense of hearing or feeling: Whereupon he
commanded every Body out of the Room saving two or three persons only, to whom
(drawing near the Bed where the Fellow lay seemingly asleep) he said, I well
perceive this Fellow is an irreconcilable Enemy to Church and State, and I
believe it is the Devil speaks in him whilst he sleeps; now because I know not
what effects his preaching may have amongst the ignorant Rabble, I command you
(making secret Signs to them that he was not in earnest) to strangle him with
the pillows before he awake, which (said he) cannot be perceived to be other
then a natural Death; and I think my self the rather obliged to take away his
life, that I may not be forced to take away the lives of many innocent persons
who will be seduced by his Doctrines: Therefore as soon as I am withdrawn into
the next Room, be sure you stifle him immediately. The Fellow surpised with
the apprehension of this unexpected Judgment so near execution, imagining it
might be too late to call for Mercy when the King was gone away, rose up, and
pitching upon his knees, confessed his Imposture, begging his Majesty's pardon.
Whose Wisdom by this Discovery was magnified to that degree, that all men
looked on him as another Solomon in point of King-craft; and had his bodily
abilities born any proportion to those of his mind, doubtless the Women would
have extolled him no less then the men.

Having now settled all things to his mind in the Church of England, he
proceeded in the next place to the Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland, whither
he sent diverse grave and learned Divines upon an Apostolic Ambassy, to prepare
the way for the establishment of a like Hierarchy there as here. Which Work
proved so successful, that without any great Dispute they admitted as many
Bishops as there had been ancient Sees in that Church, i. e. Thirteen; of which
number there were three that received their Consecration from the Archbishop
of York, who was, it seems, accounted and obeyed as Metropolitan of that
Kingdom till the Year 1478. all the rest being Consecrated at home by their own
Prelates, whose Authority was not long after confirmed both by Synodical Acts,
and Acts of Parliament. After which the Liturgy, and certain Books of Canons,
extracted out of scattered Acts of their old Assemblies were likewise ratified
and confirmed by Parliament: And at the Assembly of Perth (now called St.
Johnstown) there passed two years after (though not without great difficulty)
those five notable Articles for 1. Episcopal Confirmation, 2. Kneeling at the
Communion, 3. Private Baptism, 4. the Celebration of the four great
Anniversary Feasts of the Birth, Passion, and Resurrection of our Savior, and
the Pentecost, and 5. for the settling the Church Habits. All which were
likewise confirmed by Act of Parliament, the great Lords having as yet heard
nothing of any Commission of Surrendries, which was that great Rock of Offense
against which his Successor King Charles the First did so unluckily dash
himself to pieces.

Due care being thus taken for Establishment of Truth and Order in the Church,
the next great Work was to establish quiet in the State, that Righteousness and
Peace might kiss each other, which he judged to be a consideration not less
necessary then prudent: the active Government of his Predecessor Queen
Elizabeth, who led all the brave men in her time to hard duty, having tired out
almost a l the stirring Spirits of the Nation. However, though it did ease, it
did not generally please the People, the humor of Fighting being not so wholly
spent, but that it broke out afterward to worse purpose; it being in our Fate,
as has been observed by some Melancholy Statesmen, that whenever we are long
kept from quarrelling with others, we are apt to quarrel with one another. But
that which discontented the Men of Mars most was, to see the Faction of the
Gown-men pricking up, and wholly predominant.

Upon this lower Orb, as in the Sky, Aleyn Vit. H. 7.

Sol constantly is nearest Mercury.
Neither did he take part with them so much out of the pleasure he had in
Books, as out of an aversness to Arms, whereunto he seemed to have such an
Antipathy, that by his good will he did not care to see any Sword-man within
his Palace; whereby the Court came by degrees to loose two points of its
ancient Luster: one in the Exercise of Tilting, which was an Entertainment that
added much to the Grandeur and Magnificence of the late Queen, and King Henry
her Father: the other in the choice of the Gentlemen Pentioners; an Order which
being set up by the Wisdom of her Grandfather Henry the Seventh (a Prince of
severe Gravity) she was so fond of, and so curious in ordering the state of
their attendance, that none could attain to that honor all her time, but who
were men of very good Quality, and yet more goodly Stature, who by their
graceful Personage might set forth the place, as she designed the place should
set forth them, so that in time it became a kind of Nursery for Officers and
Men of Command, who were sent abroad into France and the Low Countries, to
learn the Art of cutting Throats, if need were, and so returned again. But this
King, it seems, being taken with no such armed Pomp, neglected it so far, that
some of the ruffling Gallants about the Town began to speak of it with more
freedom then became their Duty or Discretion, taxing him downright with
Pusillanimity and causless fears, saying that he trifled away more money in
insignificant Embassies and Negotiations, for a dishonorable Peace, then would
have maintained an honorable War. But he having before shut up the Gates of
Janus, all his talk was (as we commonly say) without Doors, for he esteemed it
honor enough that he had conquered himself, according to that of the Poet:
Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit
Moenia --


Peace he had at home without his seeking for it: O Neil the great Disturber of
his Predecessors quiet being presented to him as a Prisoner by the Lord
Mountjoy, as soon almost as he came in, which gave him the occasion to begin
with the settlement of Ireland first, by giving the possession of the whole
Province of Ulster (O Neil's Country, and the sink of Rebellion) to the
Citizens of London, who thereupon settled two Colonies there, the one at Derry,
every since called Londonderry; the other at Colraine, which they stored with
Four hundred Artizans; whilst the King, for the better supplying them with
Soldiers, erected a new Order of Knighthood, called Baronets, from their
taking place next the Sons of Barons, each of which was engaged to lay down as
much money at the Sealing of his Patent, as would maintain thirty Foot
Soldiers one whole year, at the rate of Eight pence a day a piece, which came
to twenty shillings a day: And the Complement of these Knights being Two
hundred, there was a complete Establishment of Three thousand Soldiers without
any further noise, to be ready for his Service whenever he had occasion to make
use of them.

Now in order to the having Peace abroad, there needed no more but to renew the
Leagues he had made before with the Princes his Neighbors, under another
style. The great Question was, Whether he should accept of the Olive Branch
from the King of Spain, with whom his Predecessor had so long contended for the
Laurel: and upon debating the whole matter, besides the motives of the
Half-peace already made with him, whilst he was King of Scotland, and the whole
benefit of Trade that he was like to have as he was King of England, the
certainty of setting the Catholic and the most Christian Kings together by the
Ears, the uncertainty of being able to raise moneys to maintain a War so easily
as Queen Elizabeth did (who had the knack of borrowing money, which served her
to as good purpose as if it had been given, the Parliament being for the most
part the Pay-masters) there were many Reasons of State, some whereof were not
fit to be published, perhaps not to be understood, which induced him to call in
the Letters of Mart, and conclude that League, which how acceptable it was to
both Kings, may be guessed by the mutual Caressings of each other, with
extraordinary Embassies and Presents, and the more then ordinary Ratification
of the Articles of Peace; but how far the People were content to have any
Friendship with the Catholic King, it is easy to guess, especially after the
discovery of that Catholic Plot, commonly called the Gunpowder Treason, which
as it was contrived in a hotter place then Spain, so it was hatched up in
Darkness, never to partake of the Light, but when it was to be all Light, and
to give such a terrible blow, as was at once to Extinguish the Light, the Hope,
and the Glory of this Nation. This the All-seeing Eye of Providence (which
pierces through the dark Womb of Conspiracy, and blasts the Embrio of Treason
before it can be formed) miraculously detected, to the amazement of all
Mankind; no body imagining there could be such danger by Fire so near unto the
Water: the meaning of it being so little understood, even after it was
discovered, that neither could the Lord Monteagle (who received the first
notice in a Letter writ in an unknown hand) tell to what Friend he owed his
Preservation, nor any one else guess, from what Enemy they were to expect their
destruction, till the King himself by inspiration rather then instinct (yet
admonished perhaps by the subversion of that House wherein his Father was
murdered) apprehended by the word Blow, what the Element must be that was to
be so subtle in its Execution, as that they who were hurt (for so were the
words of the Letter) should not see who hurt them. Which Discovery of his being
a kind of Revelation as elevated the Opini^n conceived of his Wisdom to that
degree, that the Vulgar began to idol^ze his Understanding, and reverence him
as the Jews did Moses, for the shining of his Face, as believing it almost
impossible for any humare Judgment to have sounded the depth of so profound a
Plot. And as this begat a great regard to his Person, a greater to his Parts,
so looking on him as a kind of Illuminated Man, they gave him the Reverence of
a Prophet, which did not a little please him, who having it in his humor to
pretend to a Faculty in Divination, easily prevailed with them to receive his
Conjectures as Oracles; which served him to so good purpose for that (which is
pleasant to tell) whatever almost he desired to have done, he needed no more to
effect it, but to foretell it would so fall out, which (give him his due) he
improved by his King-craft (as himself was wont to call it) to many good uses,
both for the Public benefit, and his own private Security, and not seldom for
his Mirth and Pleasure, as often he was disposed to let down his Majesty, and
play the Good Fellow; at which times he let down no Drink which was not a kind
of Inspiring Liquor, being for the most part strong, sweet Wines, as Canary,
Frontiniack, White Muskadels, High-Country-wines, or Hypocras, which though he
would make it seem otherwise, had contrary Effects upon him, then usually upon
other men, for instead of opening his Heart, they opened his Powels, and not
filling his Head, never provoked him to empty his Mind, but rather to digest
many serious Affairs, by seeming all the while in Jest. And as he loved to
Droll, so he would sometimes please himself by singling out some wise Fool of
the Company, and be very grave with him, in asking his Opinion of something
that never was, nor nere was like to be, and otherwhile giving him some little
State hints, as who should say, A word to the Wise, whereby he not only obliged
them to keep secret the nothing he had entrusted them with, but by that Secrecy
created in him a self-conceipt that made him matter of much Mirth another time:
In fine, he had so excellent a Faculty in seeming to be what he was not, and in
being what he pleased, that if it be true, that Dissimulation is a Virtue in
Kings, though it be not so in private men, he was so great a Master of Art in
that Liberal Science, that he could dissemble without seeming to be a
Dissembler, and vary his shape so naturally, and so easily, that he could cozen
whom he pleased, and when he pleased, though in truth he never cozened any
Body, unless it were himself, and that he did very often, being not seldom
prevailed with by those of his bribed Countrymen about him, to make underhand
Agreements with the Farmers of his Revenue, whilst his Council were contriving
how to raise their Rents to ten times the value. Which easiness of his had been
an oversight not agreeable to the rest of his Understanding, had he not had the
knack of breaking those blind Bargains again, as easily as he made them
hastily; upon the account of being (as 'twas apparent he was) mistaken in his
Grant, whereby he left that Imputation of Folly at their Doors, which otherwise
would have rested at his own, whilst he made them his Creditors with more
advantage then they could have made themselves his Tenants, filling his privy
Purse with a Superfluity of what they had only got out of the Public. But when
he came to have any thing to do with his Parliament, who were to treat with him
upon the Public Faith in the behalf of the People, he always gave them a
pennyworth for their Penny; and as often as they presented him any Aids,
Benevolences, or Subsidies, made them a Return of good and wholesome Laws, which
has been always accounted good payment; and if they were not the best that
ever this Nation had, yet (as Plutarch says by those of Solon) they might have
been so, had not the fault been more theirs then his.

It were too tedious to give further Instances of his Prudence, the wise choice
of his Servants and Favorites, the equal distribution of his Rewards and
Punishments, the solid managery of all the Actions of that time, as well
English as Scotch and Irish, Ecclesiastic or Civil, not suffering any of the
Factions to rise higher then he could reach them, nor to grow stronger then he
could either alter or divert them, keeping a due Temperament, sometimes by
Preventions, sometimes by Lenitives, other while by strict Justice, but
oftenest by unexpected Mercy; testifies his great Abilities and Knowledge in
Men and Manners, in Books and Sciences: and if the Sum of the Accounts betwixt
him and the Subject be rightly placed with Relation to his Justice and
Judgment; we shall find they were more indebted to him for a long Peace and
Prosperity, then he to them for any extraordinary Payments. The Londoners we
know prevailed with him to pay the Debts of his Predecessor, which he was in no
manner obliged to do; yet we find not that they discharged their Gratitude in
any suitable Returns to him, giving down their Milk no longer then they were
stroak'd; insomuch that he was forced to send his Privy Seal often abroad to
particular Friends in the Country, to discharge his immediate Expense of State,
whereof he was so frugal and provident a Manigeer, that notwithstanding the
many Occasions he had for Money (perhaps beyond any of his Predecessors) by
keeping a double Court, by receiving at home, and employing abroad so many
Ordinary and Extraordinary Ambassadors as he did, some to Complement, others to
Expostulate with, but all to have an Eye upon his Neighbors; by being obliged
to stop the mouths of his querulous Countrymen, who presuming on his Goodness
(for as one observes, he was no more troubled at their robbing him, then a
Bridegroom at the loosing his Points or Garters) thought it so much their Right
to share with him in his new Acquests, that they drew many strange Boons from
him: One of them (not to mention any more) having the confidence to beg no less
then Twenty thousand pounds in ready Money at one time, and had obtained his
desire, had not the wise Lord Treasurer, by showing the King the whole Sum in
Silver upon a Table altogether, brought it down to a Composition of Five
hundred pounds only. I say, notwithstanding all these great and pressing
Occasions for Money (for certainly there is no one Virtue in a Prince, so
advantageous to himself, as Bounty, whiles, like the Sun, he nourishes the
whole Creation under him, by letting down the Dew which he shall certainly draw
up again with increase) he found like means, though not by a like way, to
enlarge his Empire, as the great Augustus did his, -- super and Garamantus and
Indos. The first possession we had of New England being principally ascribed to
that of his here in Old England, both that Virginia and Bermudas, three of our
most famous Plantations (however discovered before his time) having in no
measure recovered so much strength as to make good the Ground they laid Title
to, till influenced by his Wisdom. The chief Town therefore of Virginia, the
chief Plantation, being in honor of his Memory called James town; by which
remote Landmark if we take the Dimensions of his Greatness, considering the
Ocean he commanded, betwixt this and that other World, which was no less
properly his Dominion, then the Terra Firma beyond it. We need not wonder at
the Learned Grotius his making him a Rival with Neptune, since his Trident was
nothing so glorious as to others three Scepters.

-- tria Sceptra Profundi Grot. Silvar. lib. 2.

In magnum Coiere Ducem. Licet omnia Casus
Magna suos metuunt, Jacobo Promissa Potestas
Cum Terris Pelagoque manet --
CHARLES I Sirnam'd the Martyr.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

coat of arms of King Charles I: quarterly, in the first and fourth quarters
the arms of France and England quartered, in the second, or a lion rampant in a
double tresure flory gules, in the the third azure a harp or, stringed argent;
supporters, dexter a lion or crowned, sinister a unicorn argent armed, unglued,
craned, and gorged with a royal coronet or, having a chain affixed thereto and
reflexed over the back all or. SUCCESSOR to King James was his Second Son,
Charles the First, a Prince whose height may better be taken by his Character,
then his History; the one very clear and fare, the other so blurred and
defaced, by those cross Lines which Destiny drew over it, that it is scarce
Legible, at least not to be read without trouble, the most part of it being
written in Blood, whereof (to the shame of that Age be it spoken) part was his
own. Yet after all, we may rather call him unfortunate then unhappy, since the
infelicity of his, must be rather imputed to that of his Predecessors
Government, who finding that the People had taken a surfeit of his long Peace,
endeavored, when it was too late, to divert the Distemper he foresaw coming
on; but only moving, and not removing the peccant humor that was then
predominant, he dispersed the Malignity into all parts of the Body Politic,
and so corrupted the whole Mass of Blood, that that which at first seemed to be
only an ordinary Itch of Reformation, turned at last to the Leprosy of
Rebellion, the Contagion whereof spread it self in this Planet-strook Kings
Reign through all his Dominions.

Neither was it the least cause of his Misfortunes, that he had a War devolved
upon him by his peaceable Father, without any means to carry it on: so that to
save a Sister, he in some sort hazarded the loosing himself; the ill beginning
of the Recovery of the Palatinate being the first, if not the principal Cause
of loosing (as after he did) his own Dominions, beyond all Recovery. For as it
was evident that his Parliaments, taking the first Occasion from his
Necessities, to put what price they pleased upon their Supplies, made this the
first Occasion of a breach betwixt them; so it is as evident, That the King of
France taking his measure of his weakness by that of their strength, was
tempted to provoke him to a second, before he had ended the first War, which he
not being able to sustain, was necessitated to stoop to such low Conditions as
proved the Foundation of a more Fatal War at home, then that he declined abroad.

Thus the sower Grapes his Father eat, set his Teeth on edge; and however the
same Fruit is said to have cost his elder Brother his Life, yet when he came to
declare what 'twas he loved best, he preserved the The French before the
Spa^^st. Lady.
Vine before the Pomgranate; whether as judging it more flexible, or certainly
more fruitful, is not known: but it appears by what followed, that he rather
pleased himself in that choice, then his People, who as they ever preferred
Spanish before French Wine, so their aversness to the French Nation, made them
not only pass by many unbeseeming Censures upon the Match (not condering they
denied him that Liberty every private man of them contested for) but
maliciously to charge the Innocent Queen with all the Ills that followed
afterward as often as his Parliaments and he differed, which was as often as they
met, and that was not seldom, for he had no less then five in fifteen years,
who, notwithstanding never any Prince desired more to give them satisfaction,
were all very froward and ill disposed toward him: The very first he called,
showing themselves not willing to understand him; and the second behaved
themselves so, that he was ashamed to own he understood them; and at the third
meeting, either understood one another so well, that they began to quarrel; the
fourth gave him the Justle; and the fif^h made it good by fighting him.

Neither were the States of Holland shorter sighted then the K. of France; who,
as they were false to their own, and naturally hated all Kings, so they took
Occasion to fish in our troubled Waters, breaking in upon his Sovereignty at
Sea, as his own Subjects upon his Prerogative at Land: which, though it were as
great an Affront to the whole Nation as to him, yet the grand Representatives
of that time took so little notice of it, that one would have thought they had
designed to have expressed no less disdain of his, then the Roman Senate did of
the Government of the Decemviri, Qui, nequid eorum Ductu aut Auspicio prospere
gereretur, vinci se Patiebantur (says Tacitus:) for when he came to demand aid
of them, they not only denied him, but left him in a worse Condition then they
found him, making him as great a Sufferer in his Reputation as he was in his
Right. And that which made this Misfortune the more notorious was, That the
same Course he took to make the matter better, made it worse: For having no
ready money to set out a Navy, nor means to get any, he was forced to make use
of a little Treasure-trove (if I may call it) for which he was beholding to his
Attorney General Noy, who encouraged him to lay a Tax upon the People, by the
dubious Authority of an antiquated, and (as it was afterward called) Arbitrary
Law, whereby the Kings of England heretofore had power given them to impose a
Naval Tax, in case of eminent danger by Sea: A Law, which at the first making
was judged to be as reasonable as necessary, being intended to prevent the
frequent Incursions of the Danes before the Norman Conquest: but all Fears of
that Nature having vanished so long since, to revive it now, was looked on like
the drawing forth of an old rusty Sword, which gave such a wound to the Liberty
of the Subject, that though it were not very deep, rankled to that degree, as
notwithstanding the many good applications afterward to heal it, the
inflammation could not be taken off till it turned to a Gangreen. Thus, whilst
he resolved to do nothing but by Law, the legality of his proceedings is taken
for an act of the highest Tyranny. Neither was this the worst on it, to see his
Fleet as it were dry-foundred at Land before it could put to Sea; for the
Parliament, instead of maintaining his, busied themselves wholly in asserting
their own Rights, bringing them to the old Standard of Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right. Which, however it seemed to be bad enough in the Intention,
all Circumstances then considered, proved yet worse in the Explication, being
construed not long after to the prejudice of his Right of Tonnage and Poundage;
in discussing whereof, they committed a Violence upon themselves, which
declared what they intended upon him, by leaving a President that as much
out-lasted their Cause, as the Cause did their Privilege, shutting up the
Doors of their House (as if guilty that they deserved to be disturbed) till
they had fully vented their Passion, in some menacing Vores that urged him to
dissolve them, by such a kind of Force, as was every whit as rare as their
Insolence, the breaking up their Doors (for so he was fain to do before he
could get Entrance, though himself was there in Person to demand it) making so
great a noise, that it was heard not only through every part of the discontented
City, but Kingdom; and the sound became the more terrible by the ominous
Reverberations from Scotland, who ecchoed to those Murmurs here with such a
dismal Concordance, as showed to what Instrument they were tuned.

This drew him into that Kingdom, to correct the growing Distemper before it
because too virulent, wherein he proceeded as wise Physicians do, that draw the
pains from the Head by Applications to the Feet: but as it is hard to discern
the true meaning of any man's Intention (which being the Soul of every Action,
is invisible) and very easy to abuse it with a malicious Interpretation, that
is not only against its own, but against all Sense and Reason; so it happened
to him, who beginning with the Ratification of the Negative Confession
subscribed by his Father and the whole Kingdom, Anno 1580. (which was a
Renuntiation of the Papal Authority, and all the corrupt Principles depending
thereon) he was charged by those that had before felt the smart of the
Commission of Surrendries, and were enforced to disgorge those Sacrilegious
grants they had obtained during his Fathers minority, to have a design of
bringing in Popery; a word that turned every man's Blood into Choler, and gave
the hottest allarm to tender Consciences that ever that cold Clime knew, the
train of whose Calumnies was so laid, that it quickly took fire here in
England, where the Presbyterian (as yet called the Puritan) Party, having, as
they thought, matter enough of Scandal long before, from the unhappy Toleration
of Sports on the Sabbath Day, and the turning of the Communion Table
Altar-wise, began to chackle (as one expresses it) like the Geese in the
Capitol, bespattering the Bishops with that vehemence, that much of their
unbeseeming Froath fell upon the King himself. And for the more entire
Concurrence of Civil and Religious Clamors, the same evil Spirit that furnished
them with meet matters of Complaint, turning Man-Midwife, eased them of many a
Spiritual Throw, by opening the Womb of their Conspiracy before its full time,
making way for the new birth of that long expected Parliament, from whose heat
all the Factions took life, and like quickened Snakes, began to hiss with such
envenomed rage, as showed a manifest contempt of all Authority, pressing now
upon the Kings Conscience, as much as they would have the World to think he had
pressed upon theirs before; not only refusing to admit the use of the Liturgy
(however composed by their own Bishops) in any of their Parochial Churches, but
denying the King himself the privilege of having it read in his own private
Chapel at Edinburgh. And least the World should doubt that their Insolence was
not come to its wished for height, they took upon them the marks of Sovereign
Power, indicting without his License or Knowledge, four principal Tables or
Counsels in the said City; one of the Nobility, another of the Gentry, a third
of the Burgesses, and a fourth of the Ministry. Out of which there was set up a
general Table of select Commissioners, all alike Enemies to Unity and
Uniformity, who were to chalk out the Methods for abolishing Superstition and
Tyranny, by which was meant in their mystical Sense, Episcopacy and Monarchy.
In order to the carrying on of which d^sorderly Proceedings, they seized as
well the Crown as the Church Lands; and notwithstanding their hate of Forms,
began so well a Formed Rebellion, that the unhappy King was provoked beyond his
natural temper to repel Force by Force: But before his Justice could reach
them, they had so firm'd their Faction, by their Solemn League and Covenant
(which was not like that ancient Bond taken in the Year 590. wherein they were
bound to the maintenance of the Kings Person and Authority; for in this they
swore all to the mutual Defense and Assistance of each other, against all
Persons opposing them whatever, not excepting the King himself) that he was
glad to close in a Pacification, which after produced a Cessation, that by the
Artifice of some of their Friends here (working upon his tenderness of shedding
Blood) concluded with a disbanding of his, in order to the letting down their
Army; but after abusing him in this, as well as in all other their Intreagues,
for they determined never to sheath the Sword till they got their ends, he was
forced to reinforce himself by new Leavies, which necessitated the calling
another Parliament here at home.

This proved so much worse then all that had been before it, in that they were
grown more learned in the Discipline of Daring; and being fully instructed by
the Complaints of all that were weary of the Government, or Governors, like
the first Reformers of Germany, they sum'd up their Centum Gravamina in a
general Remonstrance, which was carried on with that unparalled Contumacy,
that every one that was licentiously, inclined, pleased himself with the
Imagination of having the Ball of Sovereignty flung down, to be scambled for by
the Multitude; whose Heads being made giddy by the continual Noise of those
Spiritual Trumpeters, that filled their Ears with the joyful sound of the long
looked for Promises of a new Heaven and a new Earth, and the Description of
such a Kingdom, wherein (as they said) the Saints and Servants of the most High
were to reign, by a Special Commission written in the Stars, which none could
read but these Astronomical Rabbis themselves. They began like men Spiritually
drunk, to defy all Carnal Powers, and having before broke the Windows of the
Royal Palace, resolved in the next place to pluck down the two great Pillars
of the Throne: These were the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of
Strafford, the one presiding in Spiritual, the other in Temporal Matters; both of
whom were Impeached of High Treason, the one to gratify their Malice, the other
to secure their Fears: the last was the first brought to stake, whose Crimes
savouring rather of Injustice to the Subject, then Unfaithfulness to the King,
proving no otherwise Treasonable, but by accumulation of so many lesser
Misdemeanors together as might make up by heap what was wanting in the weight
of his Guilt. The King refused to condemn him till he had first consulted the
Judges in point of Law, and the Bishops in point of Equity; by either of whom
being left in greater doubt (if possible) then before, having a natural
aversion to all State Phlebotomy, as well knowing that this Blood-letting,
though it might stop the Fever for some little time, would so weaken his
Power, that he should not be able to resist any future Distemper; the
consideration whereof brought him into a State Convulsion, that drew his
Judgment several ways before he could determine what to do. Honor and Justice
pressed him on the one side, the Common Interest (as 'twas pretended) on which
hung the weight of the Public, as well as his own private Peace, urged him on
the other side, either grating upon the most tender and sensible part his
Conscience, which (like a Needle betwixt two Loadstones, that trembling with
equal Inclinations to either, at the same time seems to turn to both, yet
neither) was so tortured between the Consideration of what was safe, and what
was Just, that it appeared in bringing the Earl, they had brought him to Trial,
and put him into such an Agony, as shook the very Foundations of the
Government. And this Hesitation of his proved to be the Groundwork of three the
most Important Jealousies that ever troubled any State, the Parliament
thereupon declaring themselves dissatisfied in the Security of their Religion,
Proprieties, and Privileges: to the clearing whereof they made not long after
three as strange Proposals: 1. For the Extirpation of Bishops: 2. The
Establishment of a Triennial Parliament: 3. The Delivery of the Militia into
their Disposal.

This Contumacy of theirs taking its rise from the Confidence they had in their
Brethren the Scots (who all this while continued in Arms upon the Borders for
want of money to disband them, eating like a Fistula Insensibly into the Bowels
of the Kingdom) he made it his first care to cure that Malady; wherein he
proceeded with that great judgment and skill, that in paying them off, the
Parliament gave the Money, but he the Satisfaction, having thereby so far
recovered the good Opinion of those People (however they came to be perverted
afterward) that as soon as he arrived in their Country (whither he went in
Person presently after the Peace was concluded) they gave him two notable
Instances of their Duty and Submission: The first Public, in reviving that
good old Law there, which made it Treason for any to Leavy Arms without the
Kings Leave and Commission: The second Private, in the discovery of the five
Members here that had been the principal Engineers to draw them into England.

But whilst he was busy in quenching the Incendiations of Scotland, behold a
more dreadful Fire breaks out in Ireland, the Matter whereof was so prepa^'d,
that there appeared very little or no smoke of Suspicion, till it was all in a
Flame; and which made it more terrible was, That the Rebels pretended to take
their Rule from the English, as their President from the Scots, in defending
their Religion, Proprieties, and Liberties by Arms, all which being (as they
said) undermined, not knowing how soon the Blow might be given, they thought it
justifiable enough to prevent what they could not withstand. Now to prove that
their Religion was in danger, they urged the Preparatory Votes and Menaces of
the House of Commons in England: and for the proof of the Impairing their
Liberty and Proprieties, they referred to the Remonstrances of those, in
Scotland, who made it the first motive of their rising, that they were like to
be reduced to the slavish Condition of Ireland, in being brought under the Form
of a Province, and subjected to the insupportable Tyranny of a The placing a
President ov r the Council of State being the Ground of that Fear.
Lord Lieutenant. And now to add a Varnish to this Color, they declared for
Preservation of the Kings Rights, as well as their own, swearing to oppose with
Life, Power, and Estate, all such as should directly or indirectly endeavor to
Suppress the Royal Prerogative of the King, his Heirs and Successors, or do any
Referring to the Proceedings of the Parliament in England, who had but a little
before taken away the Tonnage and Poundage, the S^ipmoney, Court of Wards, High
Commission-Court, and were earnestly contesting for the Militia, etc.
Act or Acts contrary to the Royal Government. This Declaration of theirs was
written with a Pen of Iron in Letters of Blood, as believing that no Rebels in
the World had more to say for themselves then they; at least, that they had
much more matter of Justification then either the Scots or English could
pretend to, who justified themselves by seigning only to suspect, what the other
really suffered under. Neither perhaps had the World so condemned them (all
Circumstances considered) had there not appeared a Self-condemnation within
themse^ves, by counterfeiting a Which that it might be the more authent c^,
they take off an old Seal from an Absol^te Patent to Far^ham-Abby, which they
annexed to it.
Commission from the King to justify this their Arming, falsely bragging that
the Queen was with them, and that the King would very shortly come to them:
Which as it was a base and abject piece of Policy, that lost them more Credit
when it was detected, then it got them Repute while it was believed; so it was
malicious toward the King to that degree (with respect to the Condition he was
then in) that it cannot otherwise be thought, but that having murdered so many
of his Protestant Subjects, they had a mind to murder him too: The
Consequences of that great Suspicion it brought upon him being such, as he
could never recover the disadvantages it fastened on him, till he fell finally
under the power of those Sons of Belial, who destroyed him for no other Reason,
but to destroy Monarchy it self. So that he was not much mistaken who
confidently averred, It was the Papists brought him to the block, the
Presbyterians that tucked up his hair, and the Fanatic that cut off his head.
Whereof he himself was so sensible, that the very last words he used (as if to
show he alike abhorred either of them) was to profess, He dyed a Christian
according to the Profession of the Church of England, as he found it left him
by his Father; foreseeing that he should suffer more by Reproach, then by the
Axe. After which he resigned himself to the fatal stroke with that
cheerfulness, as showed he believed by removing that Scandal only, he should
get a greater Victory over his Enemies when he was dead, then ever they got
over him whilst he was alive.

The ill news of Ireland drew him with all imaginable haste out of Scotland.
But before he could come to the Consideration of that great Affair, he was
prevented by the Parliaments renewing their old Complaints, who found a slight
occasion of quarrel to introduce other matters that they knew would widen the
Difference beyond all reconciliation (for his Majesty having taken public
notice of a Bill that was depending in the House, whereby he thought his
Prerogative pinched, to which therefore he offered a Provisional Clause, with a
Salvo Jure to himself and the people, to prevent all Disputes at the passing of
it) they interpreted this to be so high a violation of their Privilege, that
they prayed to have the Informers brought in to condign punishment: Seconding
that Petition with a Remonstrance against all those, whose Affection or
Interest they thought might be serviceable to him, under a new coined name of
Malignants, which they ranged into three Classes, 1. Jesuited Papists, 2.
Corrupted Clergymen and Bishops, 3. Interested Counselors and Courtiers,
concluding thereupon, 1. That no Bishops should have any Votes in Parliament;
2. That no People should be employed about him but such as they could confide
in; 3. That none of the Lands forfeited by the Irish Rebels should be alienated
or disposed otherwise then by their Orders. Which last Request was grounded
upon two Reasons, 1. To render the Irish more desperate by cutting off all
hopes of ever recovering their Estates again. 2. To encourage all that would
take up Arms under their Commission to hope that they might be stated in them,
as many of them since have. And lastly, that none might, under pretense of
arming against the Irish, raise any Forces to allarm them; wherein they were so
cautelous, that they would not consent that the King (who earnestly desired it)
should go himself in Person.

This unexpected breach upon him, gave him the second Provocation to make
another breach upon them: for being well assured that the Five Members were the
great Botefeus that kept in the fire, he caused a Charge of High Treason to be
drawn up against them, upon the Articles following. 1. As having endeavored
the Subversion of the Kingdom and Laws. 2. The depriving him of his Legal to
set up an Arbitrary Power. 3. To have endeavored to alienate his good Peoples
Affections from him, by diverse false Scandals 4. To have attempted to corrupt
his Army. 5. To have invited a Foreign Power to Invade the Kingdom. 6. To have
designed the Subversion of the very Rights and Beings of Parliament. 7. To have
raised and countenanced Tumults, to overawe him and the Parliament. 8. To have
traytero^sly conspired to leavy, and actually had leavy'd War against him. The
next day after these Articles were exhibited, he himself went in Person to the
House of Commons to demand Justice. But this as it was like the breaking into
an Hornets Nest, so the confused buzze that followed him to the Court Gates,
showed how dangerous an Undertaking he had past: The tumultuous Citizens
keeping him awake with continued Complaints of decay of Trade, of the danger of
Popish designs, and the general Fears arising from his Having ^^^^ed ^ome
^^anon to be ^r^ught to prevent the forcing open of his Gates.
Fortifying of Whitehall (as they called it) the Invasion of the House of
Commons, the Restraint of the Five Members, etc. showing by the Insolence of
their Deportment, that there wanted nothing to blow up the Government, but to
give Fire to the Train that was already laid.

What Tempestuous Weather it was like to prove at Westminster (the whole City
being already thus overshadow'd with a Cloud o^ Popular discontent) was easy
to foretell; and accordingly his Majesty thought fit to remove into the clearer
Air of Hampton Court, whence he returned the Parliament a very gracious
Message, assuring them, That if they would digest all the Grievances of the
Kingdom into one Body, he would so far redress them, that (as he said) he would
not only equal, but exceed the most Indulgent Princes that ever this Nation
had. But this Condescension of his contributed much to the increasing their
Insolence (as soft Medicines do cause proud Flesh) for as they found he gave
ground, they pressed the more upon him, sending him word, That the only
Catholicon to cure the growing Distemper, was to deliver up the Militia into
their hands. That of London and the Tower he did not long dispute with them,
and that of the Country he was content to part with, so as their Power were
confined within some limited time, but they having past the bounds of modesty
in asking, could not contain themselves within any moderation of acceptance,
but rejecting all his Concessions, proceeded to take the Power he would have
given, without tarrying for any Confirmation, and resolving to magnify their
own Cause rather then his Grace, they possessed themselves of the Fleet, the
trust whereof they committed to the Earl of Northumberland, a Person that
rather honored their Cause, then was honored by it. But because it was a
preposterous thing to provide for War, before there was any Cause given to fear
a breach of the Peace, much more to fly to Arms before there was any prospect
of an Enemy, they resolved to Treat with him no longer, least he should be too
hard for them, and undeceive the inconstant Multitude, not yet suffic^ently
hardened with Envy or Ignorance. From this time therefore they began downright
to quarrel with him, taking occasion from the late Impeachment of their
Members, the Information against whom, though it were withdrawn and quashed,
and the prosecution wholly declined, yet they would abate nothing of their
Resentment of it, being, as they alleged, a Reflection upon the whole House,
that they required the Informers might be delivered up to them: and at the same
time they would not allow the dishonor of having any of their Members accused,
they sent a personal Accusation against the King himself, Charging him 1. To
have attempted the Incensing the late Northern Army against them; 2. To have
been the Author of all the Troubles of Scotland; 3. To have underhand promoted
the Irish Rebellion; 4. To have sent away the Lord Digby but a little before,
in order to the bringing over Foreign Forces to invade the Kingdom;
maliciously affirming, That the Popes Nuntio had been very earnest with his
privity, in soliciting the Kings of France and Spain, to send over Eight
thousand men to his Assistance. Having thus spit in his Face, it could not be
expected he should not return it with a blow; upon which both sides armed: They
vote him guilty of a breach of the Trust reposed in him by his People, making
it contrary to his Oath to defend himself, and tending (as they said) to the
dissolution of his Government. He to requite them, set forth a general
Declaration, wherein he took notice of all their bold Proceedings, which he
said he expected to break out into all Disloyal practices; and forasmuch as
they had already most preposterously declared for him against himself (as
indeed they did) thereby to betray well-meaning People into Rebellion; he
forbid all his Loving Subjects to be any ways aiding or abetting to them, in
those their traiterous Attempts, to bring on a Civil War, and by no means to
leavy any Forces, or contribute any thing to such Leavies, contrary to the
known 1 Ed. 1. 2 Ed. 3. 11 R. 2.
Laws, without express License from him.

Here the two great Interests, IMPERIUM and LIBERTAS res olim insociabiles
(says Vit. Agricolae. The beginning of the War.
Tacitus) began to Encounter each other, like those two unruly Elements of Fire
and Water, neither of which yielding to one another (whilst the one proscribed
by a Divine, the other by a natural Right) begat so horrible a Confusion, that
the Cause on either side seemed better in the Pretension then the Prosecution.
Those who stood up for the Plebiscitum, professing only to defend their just
Proprieties, made use of all Advantages that time or sufferance had entitled
them to; and as men that at the same time they drew their Swords, had slung
away the Scabards, scorning Pardon as they hated Peace, fo^low'd Providence (as
their expression was) through all Dangers and Discouragements. Whilst those of
the Royal Party, impatient to see the King so much less then he should be,
thought it as necessary as just, to attempt the making him something more then
ever he had been; but straining the Sinew-shrunk Prerogative beyond its wonted
height, disjoynted the whole Frame of Government, and broke those Ligaments of
Command and Obedience, whereby Prince and People are bound up together. Unhappy
King, to whom the love and hatred of his People was alike fatal; who whilst
himself was thus unhappily engaged against himself, was sure to be the Loser,
which side soever was the Gainer; and so much the more miserable, by how much
even Victory it self must at once weary and wast him, but great was his
Prudence as great his Patience.

And next the Power of making Tempests cease, Walleri

Was in this Storm, to have so calm a Peace.
Behold now the great Sovereign of the Seas exposed (as it were upon a small
Raft) to the raging of the People, as a Shipwrackt Pilot to that of the Sea,
without any hope but what was next despair, to recover some desolate Rock or
Isle, where he might rest himself in the melancholy expectation of being
delivered as it were by Miracle. So he being drove first from London to York,
from thence (having in vain tried to touch at Hull) passed on to Nottingham,
where he set up his Standard, but not his rest; from thence he marched to
Leicester, so toward Wales; and having a while refreshed himself at
Shrewsbury, after diverse tossings and deviations, fixed at last at Oxford, the
famous Seat of the Muses; ill Guards to a distressed King, and perhaps no great
Assistants to those about him, who were to live by their Wits. Here he
continued near three years, acting the part of a General rather then a King,
his Prerogative being so pinioned, and his Power so circumscribed, that as none
of his own People paid him Homage, where he could not come to force it; so the
Neighbor States of the United Netherlands, though they disowned not a
Confederation with him, made so little show of having any regard to his Amity,
as if it were Evidence enough of their being his Friends, that they did not
declare themselves his Enemies: Only the Complemental State of France sent over
a glorious Prince liurcourt.
Ambassador, who under the pretense of Mediating a Peace, was really a Spy for
continuing the War. The only fast Friend he had was his helpless Uncle the King
of Denmark, who was so over-match'd by the Swede all that time, that he could
give little or no assistance to him.

During his abode here, he did as much as the necessity of his straightened
Condition would permit, convening another Parliament there, to Counter those at
Westminster, least it should be thought there was a Charm in the name, where
there appeared no less then One hundred and forty Knights and Gentlemen in the
lower House; and in the upper House Twenty four Lords, Nineteen Earls, Two
Marquesses, and Two Dukes, besides the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Keeper, the
Duke of York, and the Prince of Wales, who if they were not equal in number (as
some think they were) were much more considerable in quality then that other
Parliament at London. But being a Body without Sinews, they sat as so many
Images of Authority, or (if with decency we may say it) like Legislators in
Effigy: Those at Westminster having in this the better of them, that they had
got into their hands that pledge of extraordinary Power, the Dominion of the
Sea, which was a sufficient Caution for that by Land, Cic. ad Artic. lib. 10.
Epist. 7.
Nam qui Mare teneat eum necesse est Rerum potiri. This brought in Wealth, that
brought in Men, the Men brought in Towns and Provinces under their Subjection:
so that we find they had an entire Association of diverse whole Counties, when
the King could assure himself of no more, then what he made Title to by his
Sword: Even Yorkshire it self, the first County that he made trial of, entering
almost as soon as he was gone out of it, into Articles of Neutrality. But
notwithstanding all the disadvantages he had by want of Men and Money, of Means
and Credit, yet we see he brought the Balance of the War to that even poise,
that it rested at last upon the Success of one single Battle to turn the Scale
either way: for had they been beaten at Naseby (where they got the day) they
had been as undoubtedly ruined, as he was by loosing it; which Battle being the
last, ended (as Edgehill did that was the first) with that sinister Fortune,
to have the left Wings on each side routed by those of the right: But the
advantage the So those who served the Parliament were called, from the
shortness of their hair, as it was generally worn generally worn amongst those
of the Puritan party.
Roundheads had in this was, that they had not forgot the disadvantage of the
former Fight, but early quitting their pursuit, returned time enough to relieve
their distressed Foot, and so by their Wisdom recovered that fatal advantage,
which the The Kings Party were so called, because those that appeared first on
his side were most of them Gentlemen on Horseback.
Cavaliers lost by their Courage, who pursuing their half-got Victory too far,
lost the whole unexpectedly. In this Battle, as in that, the Royal Standard was
taken, and as the King lost his General then, so he lost himself (acting the
Generals part) now, his Power crumbling away so fast after the loss of this Day
(for in less then four Months time, twenty of his chief Garrisons surrendered:
General Goring was routed at Lamport, the Lord Digby and Sir Marmaduke Langdale
near Sherborn (which we know caused a more unlucky Rout after at Newark) the
Lord Wentworth was surpised ar Bovy-tracy, the Lord Hopton routed at
Torrington, the Lord Ashly at Stow upon the Would) that he was never able to
repair the Breaches made daily upon him, but was forced to quit his faultring
Friends, and cast himself into the hands of his fawning Enemies, the Scots: who
having kept all this while hovering at a distance (like Eagles that follow
Armies for prey) expecting what might be the Issue, whilst the English were so
busy in cutting one another Throats, were resolved to let him know what value
they put upon him; and accordingly gave notice to the Parliament of his being
with them, which begot a hot dispute betwixt them for a while, to whom of right
the Royal Prisoner belonged, till in the end it concluded with redeeming the
good King by a good Sum, who taught them thus to betray him, by first betraying
himself, the failure of their Faith being grounded upon that of his own; who
had he kept upon the Wing (as one observes) whilst his Party was beating in the
Covert, might possibly have retreiv'd the Quarrey, and by retiring into some
place of present safety, recovered himself when he was so seemingly lost, by
the help of the same Invisible Hand, that after led his Son through many greater
dangers, and brought him home safe beyond all hope; but stooping to this low
Pitch, to subject himself to those, who had so much despised all Subjection,
they thought it a Complement to him, to estimate him at so high a rate as that
of their Arrears.

Had he cast himself upon the Parliament in the first place, it is possible by
letting go his hold so unexpectedly as he did, he might have given them the
Fall, when they were so hard tugging with him; it being more then probable that
the long abused People finding how he not only sought Peace, but pursued it,
might have been moved to have endeavored his Restoration, as tumultuously as
they did his Dethronation; restoring his Dignity as disorderly as they took it
from him, which how much the Hogen Mogens of Westminster dreaded, appears by
the surprise upon them, when (a little before his giving himself up to the
Scots) it was bruted that he was concealed in London. But as in great Storms
great Pilots are forced, when they can no longer bear Sail, to let the Vessel
drive, and take its chance, so he being no longer able to Stem the Tide, after
having done all that could be hoped for from Prudence, was fain to commit
himself to Providence, and follow it without Light or Compass, through many dark
Dispensations, and fantastic Changes, the result of their Inconstancy,
Inhumanity, and Impiety, from whom he was afterward to expect his doom.

Trust makes us our own Traitors, nor could he Al^yn. Vit. H. 7.

Be saved by Faith, but Infidelity.
Having now lost his Authority from the time he lost his Liberty, as the last
was the occasion of ending the first Civil War, so the first was the cause of
beginning a second: For now all the Dogs fell together by the Ears over the
Marybone. The Army quarrelled with the Parliament, they with one another, the
Commons differed from the Lords, the Scots divided as much from the English,
the Presbyterians from the Independants: Great was the Dissension amongst the
Brethren, and all for Place, Power, or Profit, for either of which the King
appearing to be the best Pawn, the Army took him from the Parliament
Commissioners, to secure him in their own Custody, which was so ill resented by
the ruling Members, that all their Consultations were about disbanding them.
Upon which the Army drew up a Charge, and disbanded Eleven of them (the first
The now Lord Hollis.
whereof was the first of those Five Members impeached by the King) who were so
little able to trifle with them (as they did with him) that they were fain not
only to quit the House but the Kingdom. After this the Army sent up a The A
mies Representation, An. 1647.
Representation (as they called it) to the two Houses; prop^sing 1. To purge
out all those that ought not to sit there (meaning all the Presbyterian Party.)
2. To disable those who had showed themselves disaffected to the Army, that
they might do no mischief (meaning those who had voted with the Eleven Secluded
Members.) 3. To settle a determinate Period for their Sitting (intending to
have all ruled by the Sword.) 4. To give Account of the vast Sums they had
received during the War (intending the Overplus to be divided amongst
themselves.) This so encouraged the Independent Party, that they voted (in
favor of the Army) to take the Militia of the City of London out of the
Citizens hands, who were for the most part of the Presbyterian Faction. Upon
which a Party of Apprentices came down, and making the grand Representatives
Prisoners in their own House, did (as I may say) ram their Vote down their
Throats, making them not only retract it, but Vote the Militia back again to
the City. Hereupon they called for Aid to the Army; and the apprehensions of
what Effects their coming up might have, divided the Common Counsel of London,
as much as the last Riot had those of Westminster; so that the General easily
entered at the breach, and possessed himself of the Strength of the City. Now as
Maggots are engendered by warmth out of Corruption, so by the heat of these
corrupted Factions, there was kindled a Generation of Vermin, called Agitators,
which were like the Locusts that rose out of the smoke of the bottomless Pit,
mentioned in the Revelations, c. 9. v. 3. to whom (says the Text) was given
power like as the Scorpions of the Earth have power; who not liking that the
King should continue so near as Hampton Court, found an expedient to fright him
from thence, by muttering something like an intended Assassination; the
discovery whereof they knew would quickly be brought to him, and tempt him to
make a private Escape, knowing well that they had him as a Bird in a string,
and could take him again when they pleased; which Counsel if it had been
rejected by him, it is probable he had been murdered in good earnest: but he
flying thereupon to the Isle of Wight, where he was secured by their fast
Friend the Hamen.
Governor there, they thought they might adventure to treat with him at that
distance. Accordingly they consented that the Parliament should tender him
these four modest Propositions following, to be reduced into Acts. 1. That it
should be lawful for the Parliament to order and dispose the Militia as they
pleased for the future, without his consent; and Treason for any to assemble in
Arms above the number of Thirty, without Commission from them. 2. That the
Houses should sit at what time they pleased, and adjourn their sitting to what
place they pleased, and meet at their own pleasure and discretion for ever
after. 3. That all Oaths, Interdictions, and Declarations, set forth in Public
by the King against either House, should be accounted and declared void. 4.
That all whom the King had dignified with any Titles, from the time himself
departed with the Great Seal, should be degraded of their Honor. Which the
Scotch Commissioners (we must remember it to their Honor) thought so
derogatory to that of the Kings, and contrary to former Engagements, that they
followed after the Parliament Commissioners with a kind of State Hue and Cry,
and protested against them. I hope it was not all a Juggle (for they had been
undone doubtless if the King had signed them) but it took effect as they
desired. The King refused them, and thereby gave them (as they would have it
thought) just cause to refuse him. Whereupon they passed that never to be
forgotten Vote of Non-Addresses. After which the Agitators vanished and the
Committee of Darby-house took place, which consisting most of Officers, were
now the Plenipotentiaries of the Kingdom. And near the same time the Power of
England was thus given up to them, they had the Resignation made of that of
Ireland too.

The King being now civilly dead, and one would think buried, the Prisons of
Princes proving (as himself observed) for the most part their Graves, the Vote
of Non-Addresses being as Earth flung upon him; Fortune cruelly brings him to
Life again, by the Cordial of unexpected hopes, heightened by the Zeal of
several Counties declaring for him. Diverse Lords in Arms again at Land, and his
own Son with others at Sea; these encouraged by the Revolt of several Towns,
those by the coming in of several Ships; so that there were no less then Two
thousand in Arms for him at Sea, with Twenty good Ships, and not so litt e as
Ten thousand at Land, with Horses, Arms, and Ammunition suitable. And which was
yet more considerable, the Grand Called The Committee of Danger.
Committee of State in Scotland (whose very name carried Danger in it) alarmed
them, by sending the Propositions following; 1. To bring the King to London, or
some of his Houses near, with Freedom and Safety. 2. To disband the Army. 3. To
punish those that had detained him in Obscurity. 4. To restore the Secluded
Members. 5. To establish the Presbyterian Government, and suppress Sectaries.
And that they might yet appear more like a Committee of Danger, they sent a
formidable Army under the Conduct of Duke Hamilton, to make good their Demands,
and to give their Nation the Honor of being the last, as they were the first
in Arms in this unhappy War.

The terror of these formidable Preparations, encouraged by several Petitions
out of the City and Country, moved the affrighted Parliament to consent to a
Personal Treaty, whilst the Army was busy in disputing the Points with the
Sword: and accordingly they recal^'d the Vote of Non-Addresses, and sent their
Commissioners to wait on the King at the Isle of Wight; where he argued so like
a Divine with the Divines, so like a Lawyer with the Lawyers, so like a
Statesman with their Matchiavillians, that they went all away fully satisfied
in their belief of his Wisdom, Piety, and Justice: and upon the publishing his
Conditions, the Houses voted him to be in Honor, Freedom, and Safety,
according to the Laws. Here seemed to be nothing wanting now but a Sword in his
hand, to have once more disputed it with the Swordmen too, and then possibly
he might have saved himself and the despairing Nation.

But just as every man was making ready to bring in his Peace Offering, in
Confidence that the King and Parliament were fully agreed; the enraged Army,
returning home from the Conquest of all those that had opposed them, doubly
dyed with Blood and Treason, alike Enemies to Peace and Reason, broke down the
great Chain of Order, which binds even the Devils themselves, and first seizing
on him, next on them, sent no less then Forty of their principal Members to
Hell; a Place purposely made their Prison, not so much for any convenience of
Reception, or nearness of Situation, as the Uncoughness of the Name, that by
the conceit of being typically damned, they might bring them into despair, and
tempt some of them (as after they did) to become their own Executioners: Ninety
more they turned quite out of the House, and appointed a day for turning out
all the rest. In the mean time they published a Modification, which (to make
the more acceptable) they termed The Agreement of the People, by which the
number of the Representatives of the Nation was reduced to Three hundred, half
which were to have power to make a Law; and during the Intervals of Sessions, a
Council of State was to govern: This Model was put into the hands of those
Members of their own Faction, who besides the Confirmation thereof, had
Instructions given them for passing six other Votes. 1. For renewing that of
Non-Addresses. 2. For annulling the Treaty and Concessions at the Isle of
Wight. 3. For bringing the King to public Justice, to answer with his own all
the Blood shed in the War. 4. For summoning in his two Sons, the Prince of
Wales and the Duke of York, to render themselves by a day certain, to give
satisfaction on their parts, otherwise to stand exiled as Traitors to their
Country. 5. For doing public Justice upon all the Kings Partakers. 6. For
paying off all their own Arrears forthwith. How obedient Slaves this Rump of a
House were to these their own Servants, who could not find in their Heart to
pay the least respect to their natural Prince, appears by the Sequel: For
immediately they gave them (or rather permitted them to give themselves) above
Sixty thousand pounds, and voted that the General should take care to secure
the King, and the Council of war to draw up a Charge of High Treason against
him.

Lord Faul^land.
Behold the frailty of all humane things,
How soon great Kingdoms fall, much sooner Kings.
This as it was an Insolence beyond all hope of pardon, so nothing could
justify it, but such a Violation of all sacred and humane Rights, as must not
only outdo all Example, but outface all Divinity and Majesty at once, by
erecting that High Court of Justice (as they called it) to try him as a Rebel
against himself: Preparatory whereunto they made Proclamation at
Westminster Hall, Cheapside, and the Old Exchange, that all that had any thing
to say against him, should come in at the prefixed time and be heard. And for
the greater solemnity of their intended Paricide, the Law was silenced, that
is, the Term put off for fourteen days, in order to the better formalizing
the disorder that was to follow.

And now having brought the Royal Prisoner to their Judgment Seat, they proceed
to arraign him with not unlike Impudence and Impiety to that, of the Rascal
Jews, when they brought the King of Kings to Trial, whom as they charged to be
a Perverter, so these charged him with being a Subverter of his People; both
Prisoners being in this alike Guilty, that eithers Crime was the owning himself
to be a King; which as the Jews could not endure then, so neither could these
now: Their King thought not fit to give any Answer to his Accusers; this King
preparing to give sitting Answers, could not be heard. But he had this
satisfaction, to hear Pontius Bradshaw the President, by whom he was to be
condemned, condemn himself first, and all his Fellow Paricides, by a Reply to
him not less absurd then observable: For his Majesty reasoning upon the
unreasonableness of not being suffered to speak for himself, said, Where is
there in all the World that Court in which no Place is left for Reason? to
which the other unwittingly replied, Sir, you shall find that this very Court is
such an one. Nay then (retorted the King) in vain will my Subjects expect
Justice from you, who stop your Ears to your King ready to plead his Cause.

Thus they strangled him before they beheaded him, and designing to murder his
Soul (if possible) as well as his Body, added to their Denial of Justice, so
many Contumelies, Indignities, and Affronts, as were enough to have tempted him
to despair, had not his Faith been as strong as his Reason, and the Greatness
of his Mind much more impregnable then that of his Power; wherein though his
Patience came not so near to that of our Saviors, as his Passion did, or as
their barbarity rather, did to that of those Soldiers employed in that
accursed drudgery of his Execution, yet it appears to have been such, as was as
much above their Expectation, as himself was above their Malice. Witness his
Exit, not like a Lion but a Lamb: For notwithstanding the sight of those Ropes
and Rings which they had provided, in case he had strugled with them, to bind
him down to the Scaffold as a Sacrifice to the Altar, had been enough to have
disordered the Passions of any man, much more a King; yet having a firm belief
that his honor should not suffer with him, but (as his own words are) In his
(...).
Rise again like the Sun (after Owls and Batts had had their freedom in the
night) to recover such luster, as should dazzle the eyes of those feral Birds,
and make them unable to behold him; he was so well fortified with that
assurance, that he despised the shame, and endured the fatal stroke with alike
Magnanimity, as that Great Galba^
Emperor, who stretched forth his neck, and bid the Soldiers strike boldly, if
it were for their Countries good.

Here seemed to be the Consummatum est of all the happiness of this Kingdom, as
well as of the Life of this King: For upon his Death the Vail of the Temple
rent, and the Church was overthrown. An universal Darkness overspread the
State, which lasted not for twelve hours only, but twelve years. The two great
Luminaries of Law and Gospel were put out: Such as could not write supplied the
place of Judges, such as could not read of Bishops. Peace was maintained by
War, Licentiousness by Fasting and Prayer. The Commonalty lost their Propriety,
the Gentry their Liberty, the Nobility their Honor, the Clergy their Authority
and Reverence. The Stream of Government ran down in new-cut Channels, whose
Waters were always shallow and troubled: And new Engines were invented by the
new Statesmen that had the st^erage, to catch all sorts of Fish that came to
their Nets: some were undone by Sequestration, others by Composition, some by
Decimation or Proscription: In sine, it appeared (when too late) that the whole
Kingdom suffered more by his suffering then he himself, who being so humbled as
he was, even unto death, falling beneath the scorn, mounted above the Envy of
his Adversaries, and had this advantage by their Malice, to gain a better Crown
then they took from him; whiles not enduring that he should be their King, they
considered not that they made him their Martyr.

Quando ullum invenient parem? Horat. Ode 24. lib. 1.

Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit.
CHARLES II.
HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

coat of arms of King Charles II: quarterly, in the first and fourth quarters
the arms of France and England quartered, in the second, or a lion rampant in a
double tresure flory gules, in the the third azure a harp or, stringed argent;
supporters, dexter a lion or crowned, sinister a unicorn argent armed, unglued,
craned, and gorged with a royal coronet or, having a chain affixed thereto and
reflexed over the back all or. THE late King being put into a glorious
Condition, as the Covenanters had long before promised him (who like the wicked
Husbandmen in the Gospel, having got the Possession, desired nothing more then
by the death of the Heir, to make the Inheritance their own) instead of one
there rose up forty Kings, or rather Totidem Tyranni, making up A Committee of
State (as they were pleased to call themselves) who took the Charge of the
Executive Part of the Government, ordering the Forces by Sea and Land, etc.
whilst the Juncto of the House of Commons, the more immediate Trustees for the
Liberties of the People, retained in their hands the Judicatory or Legislative
Power; both agreeing to demolish the ancient and most magnificent Structure of
Government, by King, Lords, and Commons, so long settled by Law, Custom, and
Common Consent, (and to erect a new Model of Polity by Commons only, whereupon
having voted Kingship unnecessary and burdensome, and the Peerage useless and
dangerous) they set up a new Platform, that they called The Agreement of the
People, with like Zeal and Resolution, as those that rebuilt the Temple after
the Captivity, where every man wrought with Sword and Trewel. Neither spared
they any Labor, Cost, or Care, to make this Fabric of theirs appear as
beautiful and Majestic as the former, An Allegorical Description of the new
Moddel of Government presently after the late Kings death.
adorning the Frontispiece with diverse goodly Figures (we must not call them
Images) of Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, and Prudence. Over the Portal (for I
must beg leave to describe it by a Trope as fantastical as the design it self)
was presented Righteousness and Peace embracing each other, with this Epigraph
under written (fitted to the Capacity of the Vulgar who were to pay for it) God
with us. Over these, instead of Mercy and Truth (which were Graces they could
never Fancy) were placed Fame and Fortune; the first with a Trumpet in her
hand, to proclaim their good Works; the last with a Laurel to reward them:
betwixt whom was a Pyramid (the proper Signature of their Grandezze, which
lessned as it rose higher) on the Pedestal whereof was engraven the Date of the
Fabric, In the first Year of Freedom by Gods blessing restored, 1648. Just
above this Inscription was placed an Escutcheon or Shield, being the declared
Arms of the Commonwealth, which being St. George his Cross for England, St.
Andrews for Scotland, joined with the Harp for Ireland, a merry Fellow took
occasion to make this sad Contemplation upon it, That there were two Crosses
for one fit of Mirth. This Shield was yet more taken notice of, for being cut
out in the Form of a Gally-pot, and possibly with allusion (for they were
wonderfully conceited, though not superstitious) to that Pot wherein their
Elder Brethren (as they were wont to call the Jews) kept their Manna, the
Prototype of the Covenant, which was in all things like the Manna, save that it
came not from Heaven; for it fitting every man's Palate that took it, and being
apt to stink when kept longer then it should be, every man that took it being
as quickly weary of it.

Now whether the Plot of this imaginary Structure came first from Hell or
Holland, matters not much; but so it was, that (like the New-buildings there)
it cost more to make good the Ground it stood on, then the Superstructure was
worth, which made the People, in a very little time, so weary both of the
Projection and the Projectors, that it was not long ere it fell into visible
decay. Now as ill-built Houses whose Foundations fail, do not suddenly fall,
but cracking, sink by degrees, so the wiser Brethren the Scots, foreseeing what
the end would be, withdrew themselves betimes, whereby they not only avoided
the danger of being crushed under the ruins of so ill-grounded a Democracy, but
did themselves that right, to be the^ first returned to, as they were the first
went from, their Allegiance: and however many then thought they did but like
Foxes, who having once slipped Collar, are hardly ever to be chained up so fast,
but that they will one time or another get loose again; yet this honest
Apostasy of theirs made such a Schism for the present in the Brotherhood, that
had not Cromwell very opportunely stepped into the Gap to stay them, the whole
Flock (like frighted Sheep) had then broke out to follow the right Shepherd.

Non aliud discordantis Patria remedium est, quam ut ab uno regeretur. Tacit.
Annal.
This he very well knew, and resolving to make the advantage to himself, like a
second Antipater that would not wear the Purple outwardly, but was all Purple
within, under an humble habit of Meekness, he so deluded them, that they chose
him for their Supreme Magistrate, under the Title of Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Now least they should discover
his Ambition before he could master their affection, he began his Government
not much unlike Tiberius, who (says Tacitus) would have all things continue at
the manner was in the ancient Meaning under their Consuls.
Free State: for as he was willing to be thought irresolv'd whether to accept
of the Empire or not, and thereupon would not permit any Edict, though it were
but to call the Lords of the Senate to Council, to be proclaimed by the Virtue
and Authority of any other but a Tribune (himself being one:) so Cromwell
retaining still the name of Commonwealth, that his Tyranny might seem to
differ from the former no otherwise then a Wolf does from a Dog, submitted all
to the Authority of the Parliament, whereof himself was a Member. And to assure
the faithful of the Land that the Rule over them, however it were by a single
Person, disser'd much from Antichristian Monarchy, he did so far adventure to
deny himself, as to admit of those Popular Votes which every Body thought were
so incompatible with all Kingly Principles, that it was impossible for any one
ever to cheat them into Allegiance again: As 1. That the People under God are
the Original of all just Power. 2. That the Commons of England in Parliament
assembled, being chosen by, and representing the People, have the Supreme
Authority of this Nation. 3. That whatsoever is enacted by them, and declared
for Law, has the force of Law. 4. That all the People of this Nation were
concluded thereby, although the consent and concurrence of the King and House
of Peers were not had thereto. But long it was not ere he extracted out of the
dreggs of these Votes certain Spirits that made those about him so drunk with
Ambition and Courage, that they forgot all their Republican Resolves; and as
it is said that Caesar encouraged the fearful Pilot that was to waft him over
Sea in a Storm, by only telling him he carried Caesar and his Fortunes: so they
were animated by the confidence they observed in him, who on the sudden was
exalted to that wonderful pitch of boldness, as altered his very Countenance,
and made it not much unlike that of Sutton. Vit. Neron.
Lucius Domitius the great Ancestor of the Aenobarbi, whose face being stroked
by two Cluii or familiar Damons, is said to have been transformed into a kind
of Copper-colour. And having to that brazen face of his such an Iron heart as
deemed nothing too difficult for him to attempt, they were easily persuaded to
join themselves with him, whiles he threw himself upon dangers seemingly
invincible; so seemingly unconcerned, as if he had known, or at least believed,
that he earrled the Fate of the three Nations upon the point of his single
Sword: So that it is no marvel, after a long Series of Successes, both in
Ireland and Scotland, where his very name (like that of Caesar's) made his way
to Victory, having at the last got the better of the King himself, in the fatal
Battle of Worcester (whom yet with a Politic Modesty he denied to have been
defeated by his, but (as he said) by an Arm from Heaven) he should be so hardy
as with the same Club he wrested out of Hercules hand, to dash out the Brains
of the Infant Commonwealth (not then full five years old) making himself the
sole Administrator of all its Goods and Chattels; to wit, the Moneys raised by
sale of Crown and Church Lands, the growing benefit of all Forfeitures,
Confiscations, and Compositions, together with the annual Rent of Ninety
thousand pounds per mensem; over and besides which he had advantage of all the
queint Projections then on foot, as the years rent laid on Houses built upon
new Foundations in and about London, the Contributions for the distressed
Protestants in Savoy, the Collections of the Committee of Propagation (as 'twas
called) who were to take care for the planting the Gospel in the dark Parts of
the World, being no inconsiderable Levies. These I take to have been the
personal Estate of the Commonwealth: To the real Estate of Inheritance (which
he principally aimed at) viz. the Sovereignty and Dominion of the three
Kingdoms by Sea and Land, since he could make no better Title then as the first
Occupant by his Primier Seisin, which in effect was none other but plain
Disseism, so long as the right Heir was alive, against whom there could be no
bar by Fine or Recovery, whilst he continued beyond the Seas; the Learned
Knaves about him advised him to entitle himself to it by Act of Parliament: Now
forasmuch as by the first Instrument of Government, it was Articled that there
should be a Parliament once in three years, two whereof he had already called,
that had neither pleased him, nor were pleased with him (the first being so
bold to question his Authority, the next himself) he resolved now to appear
like the Grand Seignior with his Bashaws about him; and accordingly he chose
several Prefects of Provinces, whom he called by the name of Major Generals,
whose business it was first to keep down the unreconcileable Cavaliers;
secondly, to new mould the Linsey-wolsey Covenanters, many of whom about this
time began to be corrupted with Principles of Honesty; and lastly, to reform
the Elections of Burgesses, so that he might with no less satisfaction then
safety call (as a little after he did) the third Parliament, whom yet he
vouchsafed not the honor of that Name: but to show them how little he feared
any Battery of their Ordinance, permitted them to be nick-nam'd The Convention,
a strange Pack, made up on purpose for the strange Game he was to play, of all
Knaves; but Knaves, as it appeared afterward, of different Complections. These
having framed another Instrument of Government, Endeavors to make the
Protector King.
pressed him by their humble Petition and Advice, as they termed it, with not
unlike flattery and falsehood as M. Anthony did Caesar, to legitimate his
Usurpation by taking upon him the Title of King. The Lawyers that were of his
Common Council, urged him to it, for that (as they said) there was no other way
left for him to guard the Laws, or for the Laws to guard him. The Statesmen
that were of his Privy-Councel, provoked him to it, by the Example of Brutus
the Roman Liberator, whose folly (they said) it was, that having murdered
Caesar, he did not set up himself, or some other, King, though by some other
name: since, as he could not be ignorant, that such abortive Liberty as he had
given life to, must needs prove the Parent of a lasting servitude; so he might
foresee, that Caesar had so ingrafted himself into the Body Politic, that one
could not be separate from the other, without the destruction of both: and as
he had need of Forces, so had they of a Head, and better one crazed then none
at all. His nearest Friends and Relations pressed him upon the point of Honor:
Neither could there be a readier Argument to persuade him to take upon him to
be a Prince, then to tell him he was descended from Princes: For who knew not
that his great Ancestor Cradoc Vraych Vras, Earl of Ferlix, having (as the
Herald said) married the Princess Tegaire, Daughter and Heir of Pelinor King
of Great Britain, many hundred of years before either the Norman or Saxon
Conquerors could pretend to any thing: so that now the Question was not so much
with what right he could make himself King of England, as by what right he had
been so long kept out of it.

In this confusion of Counsels, it came to his own turn at last to advise
himself, and accordingly he weighed all their Arguments, and taking the last
first into consideration, he easily over-pass'd the honor of his Extraction,
for two Reasons: First, for that his was not the chief Family of Wales: and
secondly, for that he was not the Chief of his Family. Besides, common Fame had
debased him, by an odd kind of Disparagement, which (however perhaps mistaken)
took much from the dignity of his Person, as being believed to have been an
ordinary Brewer: though it proved to be (as Daniel observes by Jaques D'
Artevile, the great Stickler of Flanders in Edward the Third his time) a Brewer
of more then of Beer. Neither did he much more regard the point of Law, for
that he knew it to be no otherwise binding then as a silken Cord, which upon
any force used to it, is apt to flip and let go its hold. That which moved him
most was the point of State, raised out of that pinching President of Brutus;
yet there was an unanswerable scruple rested upon that too, to wit, How it
could be reasonable for him to expect to hold them in with a twine thread of
voluntary Submission, who had so lately by his own advice broken the strong
bond of Allegiance; and (which yet he durst not object to any but himself) he
foresaw his Death would make way for some of his Fellow Regicides, to usurp (by
his own Example) as much upon his Successors, to the disseisin of those who
called him Father, as he had done, by disinheriting the Sons of the true Father
of his Country. This showing him, that the thing called Chance would have its
share, in despite of all his wisdom and providence, and that there was unknown
danger attended that unknown Chance, he retreated into his first disguise,
acting over the dissembling part of Who so reads Cromwell's Speech at
dissolving the Convention, Jan. 1657 will find this parallel of Tiberius very
properly applied to him.
Tiberius, boggling with the Convention, as the other with the Senate, and
telling them that from the Experience he had in matters of State, he had by
good proof learned the ill of Sovereignty, how hard and difficult a thing it
was, how subject to change and clamor: and seeing there were so many famous and
worthy Personages (able and confiding men, as he called them) to bear the
burden, better it were and more easy, that many joining their cases and
studies together, should undertake the Charge, then cast all on one man's
shoulders. These words (as the Sea Tiberius his Speech in Tacitus. Suspensa
semper and obscura verba, 1 An.
Author has it) carried greater Majesty then Truth: For Tiberius (says he)
and Cromwell (say we) either by nature, or by custom, spoke those things which
he would have known darkly and doubtfully, but of set purpose endeavoring to
hide his drifts, wrapped himself then, more then ever, in dark Clouds of
Incertainty and Ambiguity, and canted (as our Phrase is) more skilfully then
ever: Our Senate (as theirs) having in the mean time that awe upon their
Spirits, that as he says by them, that they thought it great peril if the
Emperor, I may say by these, that they thought it no less dangerous if the
Protector, should doubt they perceived his Dissimulation; and so they
acquiesced in the final Answer he gave them, that he accepted the Government,
but not by the Title of KING.

To say truth, he was afraid of those only, by whom only he used to make others
afraid, his emulous Bashaws, those mighty men of War before mentioned, who
wheeling about, declared against all Monarchy on Earth, but that of Jesus
Christ, under whom they thought themselves as well entitled to be Major
Generals, as under him. Amongst whom, not to mention the rest, I take Lambert,
Desborow, Whaley, Goffe, Harrison, and Pride, to be six more unruly Beasts,
then those six Oldenburgh Horses, which but a little before disdaining his lash
(however three Nations lay patiently under it) had ominously flung him from his
Seat, when in a frolic he took upon him to drive his own Chariot, and having
got him under their feet, so bruised and battered him, that he was taken up for
dead, which being the only fatal Accident that ever lighted on his Body, by
doing him that hurt, did him this good, to teach him that it was no jesting
matter to take the Reins into his hands: For in case these head strong Beasts
should have taken the Bitt between their Teeth too, as those other did, they
would certainly have flung him down beyond all Recovery, having before that, so
far derided and scorned his mimical Majesty, that they would by no means admit
of his new House of Lords, or vouchsafe them any other name then that of The
Yet after his death they got to be called The Upper House.
other House; whereby he found himself if not only uneasy, but so unfixed in
his Greatness, that the apprehensions thereof put him into such a kind of a
Frenzy for the time being, that he could not forbear in great passion to See
his Speech at the breaking of the Convention, 1657.
tax them with having betrayed him into that great Charge he had, which (as he
said) could not be made secure but by making it greater; and it troubled him
the more for that it looked like a Judgment, to have his Ambition so stifled in
the very birth, after his having endured the Throws and Pangs of so many
anxious thoughts, and sharp contradictions, and the convulsions of a more then
a common guilt: but that which came yet nearer the quick was, that as he was
dash't out of all hopes of being a King, so he began to lose his confidence of
continuing a Tyrant, perceiving a daily defection of many of those in whose
firm disloyalty he most confided. This turned all his Blood into Choler, and
that became more adust, by the grief conceived for the death of his second and
most beloved Daughter, who expiring under the apprehensions of being tormented
for his sins, made it seems that impression upon him, by her Sentiments of his
Cruelty and Injustice, that the disturbance of hers brought such a distraction
into his mind, as meeting with a suitable Distemper of Body, left him not till
he left the World, out of which he departed with no less blustering and noise,
then he continued in it, his Exit being attended with as dreadful a Storm, as
that which happened at the departure of Romulus, to whom therefore a witty
Flatterer of those times took the confidence to compare him, though without any
Testimony given of his (as there was of to others) going to Heaven: his Death
suggesting no less matter of shame then grief to the inspired Party that
depended on him, whilst one of their Seers assured them, that God had given him
his life. His Son Richard succeeded him, but was so daunted with the horror of
that unexpected height he arrived at, that not being able to keep the Reins
long in his hands, he fell like another Phacton, leaving all in Flames about
him.

Then began that Chaos of The Committee of Safety, out of which Fleetwood
started up like the Beast in the Cap. 13.
Revelations, that rose out of the Sea with The seven Commissioners for
Government of the Army made by Act of Parliament, who were to execute the
Office and Power of Lievtenants Geneal from 11 Oct. 59. to 22 F^l^ following.
seven Heads Lambert who was restored after his Commission was taken away.
one whereof was wounded to death and healed again) and The ten Persons chose
by the Chief Officers of the Army at Whitehall, to act as the Supreme Council
for the Commonwealth.
ten Horns, to whom (says the Text) was given a Mouth speaking great things
and Blasphemies, till God (as himself expressed it) spitting in his face
blasted him. This many headed Monster receiving its power from the Dragon (by
which we may either understand the Devil in a mystical, or the Army in a
literal sense) had Instruction 1. To bring all Delinquents to Justice (that was
to murder whom they pleased) 2. To prevent and suppress all Insurrections and
Rebellions (that was to rob, rifie, and imprison whom they thought fit.) 3. To
treat with Foreign States (that was to sell the whole Nation whenever they
could find a fit Chapman for it.) 4 To raise the Militia in every County (that
was to make the People Instruments of their own Servitude.) 5. To fill up all
places of Trust that were void, and to remove such as were scandalous (in order
to the making void of more.) 6. To make sale of all Delinquents Estates (and as
an Appendix to that Power, they might make whom they would Delinquents.)
Neither indeed did they spare any Body, but preyed upon all Interests with so
unsatiable a rage, that no individual Propriety seemed to be safe from their
Rapacity, insomuch that the afflicted Genius of the Nation, like that helpless
Virgin delivered by St. George, stood trembling in expectation of being
devoured by them, till Heaven moved by her Prayers and Tears, sent another St.
George to be her Deliverer, who animated by the benign Influences of that
blessed At His Nativity a Star was seen at noonday.
Star, which appeared at the Birth of our present Sovereign, as a Harold from
Heaven, to proclaim his Right on Earth, cut off the Monsters Head, or rather
its Tail (for like to that Serpent which is called the Amphisbena, its Rump was
its Head) and so dispelled the whole Enchantment of those Sorcerers at
Westminster: Upon which the Mists of Reformation vanishing, the blinded
Multitude came to themselves again, and were so overjoyed to see all their
Troubles end no less strangely then they began, that they offered up an
Holocaust of Rumps, in memory of their Deliverance from the Tyranny of that
Rump Parliament, as they called it: After which it was not in the power of
Novelty, Ambition, or Profit, to stop them in the return to their Allegiance,
till they were blessed with the sight of their natural Sovereign, who appearing
with a trine aspect of Majesty (squared to the Idea of that Divinity to which
he owes his three Kingdoms) that is to say, great in the Energy of his Power,
greater in that of his Justice, but greatest in that of his Mercy, was brought
home triumphant through his chief City, and wellcom'd with like Acclamations and
Prayers, as heretofore his great Sire Charlemain was by those of Rome, to whose
Votes Heaven seemed to Echo Amen, whilst each man loudly cried

Carolo a Deo Coronato Vita and Victoria.
Non rapit Imperium vis tua sed recipit Auson: de severo.
an engraved cartouche, crowned.
THE TABLE.
A. ADrianus 79 Aur. Ambrosius 95 Arthur 98 Athelstan 142 Anlaff I. 168 Anlaff
II. 170 Anlaff III. 172
B. BRute 51 Belin 55 Belinarvirag 64 Bassianus 82
C. CAssibelin 57 Cunobelin 61 Coelibelin 66 Cymbelin 67 Claudius 77 Constant.
Chlorus 84 Constantin. Magnus 86 Constantine II. 88 Constantine III. 91
Constantine IV. 99 Clemens Max. 89 Caredic 100 Charles I. 342 Charles II. 356
Canute 180
D. DYnasty of Britains 41 Dynasty of Romans 69 Dynasty of English 103 Dynasty
of Danes 155 Dynasty of Normans 189 Dynasty of Scots 323
E. EAst-Sexe Kings 116 East-Angle Kings 123 Egbert 132 Ethelwolph 134
Ethelbald 135 Ethelbert 136 Ethelred 137 Elfrid 138 Edmund 144 Endred 145 Edwin
146 Edgar 147 Edward the Martyr 149 Edward the Elder 140 Ethelred the Unready
151 Edmund Ironside 153 Eric I. 164 Eric II. 166 Eric III. 171 Edward the
Confessor 182 Edward I. 229 Edward II. 234 Edward III. 240 Edward IV. 271
Edward V. 274 Edward VI. 298
G. GUithbelin 62 Gratianus 90 Gurmo 163
H. HUngar 161 Harold I. 178 Harold II. 185 Henry I. 205 Henry II. 212 Henry
III. 223 Henry IV. 253 Henry V. 259 Henry VI. 266 Henry VII. 282 Henry VIII. 288
J. JUlius Caesar 75 John 218 James 328
K. KNute 175 Kings of Kent 107 Kings of South-Sexe 111 Kings of West-Sexe 113
Kings of East-Sexe 116 Kings of Mercia 119 Kings of East Angles 123 Kings of
Northumberland 126
L. LUdbelin 56
M. MAlmud 53 Meriobelin 65
O. ORder of the English Kings 130 Order of the Danish Kings 159 Order of the
Norman Kings 194 Order of the Scots Kings 327
P. PErtinas 80
Q. QUeen Mary 304 Queen Elizabeth 311
R. RIchard I. 215 Richard II. 245 Richard III. 279
S. SEverus 81 Swain 174 Stephen 209
T. TUbelin 59
V. VOrtigern 93 Uter Pendragon 97
W. WIlliam I. 197 William II. 201

FINIS.

