THE CITY MATRONS, Or the Three MONEMENTALL MOBBS.

Striving in Vice which should excel,
To gain the Matro^ship of Old Bridewell,
Pleading their high deserts in Speeches witty,
Which Traded best, for to enrich the City.
All Parties heard, with most mature discretion,
She carried it, that did the most transgression.
Printed in the Year of Women's honesty. Nou: 10 MDCLIV.

THE CITY MOBBS.
THere were seen this Week three Matron Polecats at the Committee for the
Election of a Matron Governess of Bridewell, who all of them desired the Place,
as having deserved well of this honorable City; the manner thus,

The Committee being set at the usual place, the Chairman commanded the three
Matrons to be called in, and no sooner was the door open, but two ancient
Beadles presented* Mistress Holland of the Leaguer, who making her coursey took
up her stand; next followed Sarah Salsbury presented by Black Madge of the
Bank-side, did the like and stood; Lastly came Bess Broughton supported by a
Squir of the Body, did her duty also, and stood; Then be spoke the Chairman,
and told them, This present meeting was to know who of them three had deserved
best of this Honorable City, that the party deserving might be rewarded with
the Matron Governship of Bridewell. And then nodding to Mistress Holland, bid
her speak for her self, who lowly courseying, said, May it please your
Worships, It is not unknown that for many years together; before the late great
blood-letting of this Nation, I was a dweller in this Populous City, and had my
Castle well provided, where the hot bloods of all sorts resorted to cool
themselves, Because there was no Wars but a little in the Low-Countrys, which
was only a Refuge for younger Brothers that had nothing to live upon at home,
But those whose fortunes were high swollen, and might enrich this Noble City in
the spending thereof, I drew to my Castle, and showed them hansom Monkeys, fine
Minions, rare Marmosetts, Saint Antholme's Lecturers, sainted Sisters, Country
Girls Cashiered Chambermaids, renegado Wives, Ladies of Pleasure Sporteers and
starc^'d Exchangers, some of all sorts with whom they mingled, and vaulted
their fortunes away in the lapp of this City, which otherwise had sin oaked out
of their Chimneytopps in the Country, and filled the Nation with more people
begotten on their Wives Chamber-maids and Tenants Daughters, then the land
could bear; These Gallants (said she) by my Art inricht all the Tradesmen of
this City, as Tailors, Shooe-makers, Exchange-womens Husbands Cutlers,
Feather-makers, Beavermakers, Lace-makers, Button-sellers, Goldsmiths,
Perfumers, Belt-makers, Spurriers, and Laundresses, who thereby so increased
the making of Soap and Starch, and inhanced the Prices of them, that they
became a Crown Revenue; Besides the Vinteners of my acquaintance grew to be
Aldermens fellows, and the Cooks to be of the Common Council. Some poor
Clergymen fared the better, for by the private Christenings I sent them, they
lived comfortably, which otherwise would have put some whole Parrish to the
Charge of a Lecter to maintain them. And in my flourishing time was built
Covent Garden, Queen Street, Clare-street, Long-Acre, and Bloomsbury, to the
eternal enriching and ennobling of this City, for which reason I conceive
(with your Worships favor) I have deserved this preferrment in my old age, of
you, and this Honorable City; and then stood by.

Presently came forth Sarah Salisbury, who making very humble obeisance, began
as follows: Gentlemen, in this cause, I press the bolder my right of the
Government of of this Society of Bridewell, which is now in your disposing,
Because I came into the World dignified for Government, and have continued so
from my Cradle; for my mother was a Midwife, and my father the Curate of the
Parish; No sooner was I 13. years old, but I was made a Chambermaid, where I
took up my Mistrisse Son, and brought him to London, and here made him spend
himself to his shirt, by which (as the former Gentlewoman said) enriched many a
Tavern, his and my acquaintance being able to make a Tavern rich suddenly, and
break it again when we list; Besides, going for man and Wife; all the best
Lodgings in the Town were the better for us, for we removed commonly every
Week, and gave double rates. If I longed for ought, it must be had, many a
single dish of Fish in Fish-street, between him and I only, has cost him 5. l.
or 6. l. all which reckonings I inflamed, to the great benefit of the
Fishmongers, which the former Gentlewoman noted not, Also the Poulterers Wives
got new Gowns, if I lay but a Barn near them: When for the good of this City I
had utterly undone him, I took up an old rich Usurer, and carried him from
street to street, where I made him spend so profusely, that I was Courted of
all the Neighbors, as if I had the Indies in a Bagg; I made him give to poor
handsome Children where ever I came, Gowns, Coats, Hatts, Dresses, and Money
when I pleased: for it is great weakness in Woman to have any mercy of the Purses
of those who make use of their Bodies; when I had squeezed him dry, I shook him
off, and snatched up a Fiddler that had got store of Money, and quickly put his
Purse out of Tune, threw him off, and then caught up a Yeoman of the Guard, I
lifted him from place to place, to the great benefit of this City, till he fell
down and rose no more; Then I took up a Factor of the East Indies, that had
cozened the Company of much Gold, Jewels, and Druggs, which I made him cast
away freely in the Pleasures of this City, and when 'twas all gone, I sent him
thither again for more. Then I hooked in two Players, one after another, till I
made them pawn their Wives clothes, and sell the stocks of their House. And
when game grew scarce, I flew over sea, and snatched up a Brother of the Sword,
and brought him hither, and made him spend in this City all that he had got in
the two first Northern Exxpeditions, and at last, pawn his ^uff Goat. Last of
all, I caught up a Parson (with a Carret-beard) who had been twenty years a
getter, and in less then two, I made him leave it all in this City, then I
brought him to the Counter-Gate, and there left him, After these, I took up
only for a day or two, or three above a 1000 others, whose Names I know not,
as Atturneys, Solicitors, Lawyers Clerks, and Forreiners, as Lacquies, French
Tailors, Perriwigg-makers and Perfumers of Paris, or indeed any Strangers whom
indeed I never let go from me with a penny in their pockets, or any good
things they had to pawn, all which I caused to be consumed for the benefit of
this Ci^y, in the Recreations thereof, which is very well known to many of my
acquaintance, whose testimony (if need were) I could bring; I shall therefore
des^^e your favors in the business before you, hoping I have deserved this
Government of Bridewel better then the former Gentlewoman; and then making
another low Cursey, stood still.

Then said Bess Broughton, I am before you this day, to show what I have
deserved in this Noble City, that now in my old Age, I may live and dye in some
Worshipful Place thereof; And in Answer to what the two former Gentlewomen
said, I only say, I am Bess Broughton, Alas, what have they said for
themselves? the enriching only of a few Trdesmen, which all of us do of
course, who have money to buy Clothes and Victuals; But knocked down whole
Houses, even of those, whose great Estates made them wallow in the I uxn^ie^ of
this Noble City, for you shall know, when I had gotten (by the Magnet of my
face) all the Gallants to resort to me, I then bethought me how to bestow the
whole course of my life for the good and welfare of this City; And if one of
some Thousands per Annum came to me, It cost him a Hundred Pounds for a Nights
Iodging, and such a Nipp I gave him of my Winchester Goose, that it lasted him
some 30 or 40 Months, so the Scrievener, the Apothecary and the Doctor had a
good Manor of him by that time: If I met with a wanton Gallant, newly married,
the Goose bitt him; he goes home to his Wife, gives it her, she gives it to her
Gentleman Usher, he to the Chambermaid, and she, before her Master was fully
cured, gave it him again; By this time my Gallant is greatly indebted to
Doctors, Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons, the Scrievener is sent for, and his
Dwelling House, with all the Lordship thereto belonging, is new- morgaged, and
never redeemed till all be sold to this Noble City. If I had seen a Country
Gentleman come to Town to defend the payment of his Fathers Debts against some
honest Citizen, I was sure to have his Company, and then I gave him a Nipp with
my Goose, which stuck so close in his bones, that he never went down, till he
had sold the Land that was bound for the Debt, to the honest Citizen. Nay, I
was acquainted with Monopolizers that had Patents from the Court, whose hides I
so Nipt with my Goose, that they were forced to keep their Chambers, and sell
their Patents to honest Citizens, who grew rich by them.

Besides, I gave the taste of my Goose to many Heirs (that had younger
Brothers out at Prentice in the City) so plentifully, that it destroyed them
quite, so that the honest Aprentises became their Heirs before they were out
of their Time, which much advanced the Renown of this Noble City.

If a Country Gentleman carried a Nipp of my Goose a Hundred Miles off into the
Country, before it smarted you might have seen the next Term him, and all the
best of his Neighbors filling up our Neighbors the Appothecaries houses in
Blackfriars or Bucklers Bury, and keeping siege there Four or Five Terms,
till they were known to all the Scrieveners in Town.

Many hundred more of these things I have done, and I grow so famous by it,
that in all England, France, Holland and Flanders, it was a Proverb, No Goose
bitt so sore as Bess Broughtons. Indeed, It did so much service to this Noble
City, that I dare boldly say, this City is Three Hundred thousand Pounds the
better for my service and good will toward it; And therefore I hope I have
deserved better then these Gentlewomen that are but Pedlers to me. But that I
must leave to your Worships Wisdoms.



Then the Chairman commanded the three Gentlewomen to be taken forth, which
done, cousultation was had for an hours space, and then being all called in
again, He first asked Mistress Holland, of what Church she was?

Who answered, A Presbyterian.

Then he asked Sarah Salisbury, of what Church she was?

Who answered, Sir, I am an Independent, for I was never married.

But when he came to Bess Broughton, the Chairman put off his Hat to-her, and
said, Mistress Broughton, I will not question what Church ye are of, But what
did you mean when you talked of the Winchester Goose? Was it a French
Winchester Goose you so used for the service of this Honorable City?

She answered, Yea Sir, it was.

But had not you a Monopoly, or a Patent from the Court for that French
Winchester Goose?

But she answered, Truly Sir, nay,

Nay, said the Chairman, it was lawful enough, so long as it was used for the
good of the City. Therefore to you Mistress Broughton is given the Matron
Government of the Place for your life, as having best deserved it.

Mistress Holland, you shall have, as deserving the second Place, a Tithe paid
you of all the Medlers growing within 15 Miles of Bow-bell.

And for you Mistress Sarah Salisbury, we do obliege one Titt, and two Cowes
grazing on H^nslow-Heath, with which, and the help of much frequenting Sermons
thereabouts, and a little Kitchen Physic, you may borrow up a living amongst
the the Ignorant Country People, till the death of Mistress Holland, and then
you shall have all the Tithe of the Medlers; which said, they were dismissed.

You Pleasure Ladies, that live by sporting,
Your Knocking done, and past your Courting,
Grown old with Age, or so P -- y rotten,
You cannot use the thing you wott-on,
If your deserts, above us Three excel,
You may inherit (after us) Bridwell.

FINIS.

