A CONTINVATION OF THE IRISH REBELS proceedings, with our victories over them.

Declaring the falsehood and perfidiousnesse of those Rogues, in the taking of
Bellturbet and their inhumanities there by Sacking, and Pillaging, throwing
Children into the River with Pitchforkes, striping 1500. stark naked driving
them toward Dublin, the drowning, and killing many of them by the way, Cutting
of Protestant Ministers in Pieces, and searching woman's privites etc.

With a Charm that was found in a Rebels Pocket, and a prayer the Friars do
teach the poor Rebels to our Lady which as they tell them, secures them in
their holy war.

Penned in a Letter by Alderman Cillard of Dublin now chosen Appothecary
General for the army, and sent to Master Keneday his Nephew now resident at
Lincolnes Inn. on Feb. 28.

Printed at London for Geo. Lindsey. 1642.

A Continuation of the Irish Proceedings, sent from Dublin the 28. of Feb. 1641.
THe Rebels under the pretense of saving the English, Phillip of Relley, told
the people of Belturbet that he came to save them from the enemy, and wished
them to see what weapons every man had, and to bring them to him, which the
poor people did, and when he had gotten the weapons, he caused them presently
every man to go into their Houses and not to stir till he called on them,
but as soon as they were in, they caused the doors to be made fast, and a
guard at every door, and then the false villains began to pillage them, but
still promising them fair quarter, and that they should have their goods
again, and carriages to carry them away which he did, but no sooner had they
put up their goods, but presently it was taken from them, and every man woman
and child stripped naked and sent away toward Dublin, where they told them
that they should have but cold entertainment for it was taken, but they lied I
thank God: but when they heard the plott was discovered, the Rogues were ready
to hang themselves, which no good time past I hope they will be hanged or
killed. There did come in one company at least 1500 men, women and children,
and they all were stark naked as my poor Uncle Swamson told me, and no
sooner did they get a ragg to cover their nakedness, but a Rogue of ten years
old would search them, and if it were worth the taking they would have it, and
had their skenes in their hands to kill any that did resist, and were robbed 22
times before they came to the Cavane, and many killed and starved with the
cold, the like damnable and inhumane doing was never heard of before they took
the sucking children, and stripped them and flung them with pitchforkes into the
River, and they took above a hundred of the distressed souls and broke a
wodden bridge that they were to go over, and made them go over the broken
bridge that they were all drowned, and such as could swim, they went on both
sides of the River and killed them with stones and clubs: in that company was
Master Follerton my Lord Primates Chaplain, and he would not sting himself
into the River, but suffered himself to be cut in pieces, and one more with
him, such as they got with them to Mass for fear, the next day they would
tell them, now that we have saved your souls we will hang you, and did one
Master Midleton; they killed my cousin Francis Sullian in his wives arms, and
had almost cut her fingers off because she would not let him go, and after
dragged him in the dirt, they took one, Trafford a Minister at Longford, and
ripped up his belly, this your Uncle John told me, who escaped very narrowly
from them; they got one Sharp a Minister at the Navane, and cut him in pieces,
and his poor wife thinking to gather them again to bury him, the Rogues had
like to have killed (...) did meddle with them, but let the dogs eat him;
they took Master Pullen the Bishop of Derry his brother in law at Cashell and
stripped him, and whipped him about the streets, and after put him in the
stocks, and there he remained stark naked till they were going to Mass, then
they put an old ragg about him, and pricked him behind with their swords and
skenes into Mass, and whether he be dead or alive it is not known, this
Deane Thrope told me: nay there is a more inhumaine thing then all this, the
damned Rogues did search the women's privy parts for money, and would make the
poor good women to dance naked with a bagpipe, and being near a Thatcht
house the poor souls would catch of the straw, and hold it before them, but
the Rogues would catch it from them: again I could send you ten times more of
their damnable wicked doings, but time would not permit me.

Of our proceedings against them.
First Clantaffe was burnt by Sir Charles Coote and most of all the Towns with
in six miles about the City, are burnt, and a boundance of the Rogues slain.

Sir Henry Tuchborne failed out of Tredth five times and he killed seven
hundred of the Rebels and lost but nine of his men.

Sir Charles Coote had a small fight with them at swords, where he killed three
or four score of the Rebels and lost but four besides.

Sir Lawrance Carry, who was short through his head piece,

My Lord of Ormond, Sir Charles Coote, My Lord Cambart and Sir Simon Harecote
went to the Mase on the thirteth of January with two thousand men; and two
hundred horse and sent a hundred horse to Castle Marting who is gone out, and
they bnrned his Town and Kilcollen bridge, and many towns of the enemies, and
brought home five hundred Cowes besides other Cattle, and worth two thousand
pounds of pillage that the Soldiers got, and all this way there was not a
shot, shot, before the bragging rogues thought that we durst not go to
Racoule, but they found it otherwise God be praised that makes our enemies fly
before us; for the name of Sir Charles Coot is as fearful to them as ever
Drake, was to Spain or Tabottro France, we hang them daily here, Alderman
Sances is condemned to be hanged and got eight days to bring in his son,
orelse be hang him self, here are damnable doing with the Gentelmen of the
pale for they are all out and here will be brave possessions for our Commanders
God willing. I thank God all victall are plentiful with us as yet, but now we
are afraid it will be scarce by reason the Rogues got all from us, but it
proves otherwise God be thanked; I am chosen Apothecary general for the
Army; and you shall hear from me shortly God willing, all your friends are
well God bethanked, and you are grown forgetful or lasie, Commend me to my
Cousin Shele and pray him get my Watch mended, for I shall want it in my Journey
to the Camp so I rest, desireing God to pacify these troublesome times, Amen.

Your Uncle Sank^y Sullian.
Your Brother Thomas is a Trooper, and Jonas.



The Charm.
THis Charm was found in the pocket of one of the Rogues, this Oration was
found on the Tomb of our Blessed Lady, and is of such effect, that whosoever
will have the same, or say it daily, or carry it about him, shall be safe from
fire, water, and skirmish of battle, and also from noy some hunting of
spirits: moreover whosoever shall say, a pater, Ave, and Creed daily to the
honor of our holy and miraculous Virgin Mary, she will visibly show her self
unto him three times before his death.

Ths Prayer after.
O Most sweet Lord Jesus Christ only son of the omnipotent Father God of
Angels only son of the most gracious Virgin Mary help me asure and save me
from all present dangers wherein I am, Most excellent and blessed Virgin to be
praised, pray and interceed for me a miserable sinner to thine only beloved
son O Chaste and honorable woman, you are the Mother of Angels and Archangels;
help me from all present evils, and all to come, O Flower of Patriarchs O
shining brightness of the Apostes, O hope of Glory, O beauty of Virgin, O high
thoughts of Angels and Archangels, O most sweet woman I most humbly beseech
the not to forsake me at the trembling time of my death, when my soul shall be
separated from my body, whereby I may see my self everlasting Glory by him, O
flower of all Angels, O foundation of all sweetness, starr of art, O heaven of
health, O Queen of penitent offenders, O hope of the faithful Archangels, thou
whose conversation is the only recreations of the Angels and Archangels O most
honorable Lady of all sweetness and fortitude; you are the most wholesome
medicine of all fores, you are the mabearigh of all virtues, through thee does
ever Angels and Archangells rejoice, O Mother of mercy look on me with thine
own merciful eyes, and I commit to thy blessed arms to inspire my soul and
body, and my thoughts, so that it pleases thee, and thine only beloved Son,
Jesus Christ. Pater Ave and Creed.

Besides these base phopperies which the poor people are deluded by the Friars
and Jesuits, they most falsely tell the people afar off, that Roger Moore
has beseiged the City, and that the King of Spain has sent a great Army to
help them, and all are about Dublin, and that there is three Coaches, and that
the Queen is in one of them, they do not stick to say, and make the people
believe that they should hear Mass at Christchurch on Christmas day, and
feed the poor Rogues with such, lies that the common people begin to
forsake them.

FINIS.

