The Churches COMPLAINT Against SACRILEGE OR Sacrilege truly Dissected and
laid open.

Wherein is briefly shown:

1. The Just Collation, 2. The unjust Ablation of the Riches and Honors of the
CLERGY.

Thou that abhorrest Idols, Do thou commit Sacrilege. LONDON: Printed in
the Year 1643.

OF Sacrilege.
REligion is as the Poles of the World, or that Atlas, The necessity of
Religion in State^.
it stands on Earth and reaches God. It is that which poiseth Societies and
States below; for without the opinion of a Providence, to oversee and reckon
with us, might, craft, and falsehood would sway in the world alike with Men and
Beasts; the conscience of good and evil would be all one. And it is that which
enobleth man, erects his affections, and estates him in a happiness above
nature: and in a word, it procures all blessings upon us. So that whether we
aim at a Spiritual, or (which is more to these times) a civil weal only,
Religion is mainly to be magnified.

Of the priest to Religion.
is he upholds Religion. Religion can neither plant nor sustain it self
alone, and what support soever it have from the Prince, or the laws of a
Nation, the Priest is as the soul of that power; all circumstance and
Ceremonies have their life from him; and it is our consent in his holy Calling,
that keeps us from the singularity of our own imaginations. Though man of
himself be Religious, to make men conspire in one Religion, they must have some
thing singular to hold to. Though there may be Religion, and a Congregation,
there can hardly be a Church, where there is no Precentor.

Of the means to set up the Priest.
Now the gifts whereby the Priest retains our reverence, are either Spiritual
or Supernatural, as of Prophesiing and working Miracles; or Natural
External, as the endowments and gloryes of this World: whereof the former show
where God is, the later where he has been: and the former proceed immediately
from the Spirit, in the later men may concur.

The order of these means in all Religions.
However God deals in truth, he seems not at so much cost for maintaining the
World, as for making it. In nature we see every thing for its Creation requires
a miraculous and divine hand, but planted once, God is not so conspicuous; but
leaves it to the soil, as it were, to stand and grow by it self: and so it
would seem to fare even with Religion it self, which is such a superstruction
above Nature; though it be planted by God, men must conserve it. The Church is
like the Garden of Eden, which God mad^, and set our Parents to dress, and
keep it.

The several forms of Religion which have swayed the world, in their times,
(in pretense at least) have felt his arm, and expected ours; his arm of
Divinity, and ours of munificence; that the riches, and braveries of this
world, whereupon men set greatest price, might adorn their doctrine; and not
only the abstract and studious minds, but sensual affections also thereby be
musd, and caught, and all our lusts there find repose. This is not only the
mystery of Antichrist, and Idolatry, but the right of all Religion. The
Israelites at first had their Tabernacle, and its attendants, by Gods
appointment, glorious, however Aarons inward devotion shone, his Vestments and
retinue too were very specious: but the Temple of Jerusalem, and the riches of
the several orders of the Priests thereof excessive; and yet little enough to
keep the people from Idolatry.

And Christianity, as much as it excels all other Sects, for ought that we
know, can but expect the same lot. In planting of the Gospel (indeed) God
showed himself in signs and wonders; he powered forth his Spirit, and
accommodated it with a kindly soil, the munificent affections of men, whereby
it is grown in state and glory.

But though it was first propagated by such sedulity of the Spirit,, and God
showed himself therein, as much as ever; though Christ has promised the Holy
Ghost, thereby to preserve to himself a Church upon earth, unto the worlds end;
we now want the sense and proof of Gods presence, the Primitive times had; and
may conceive he looks not still to be tempted to miracles: Divine and humane
means must concur.

That interest the Gospel has gotten, these outward worldly braveries, after
the plausiblenesse of the doctrine it self, are the best evidence we have left
for Christianity: the best, at least, we have to show to one another. Riches
and honors now must serve for the Spirit.

The original and right of our Hierarchy.
Those of the Ancient worthys that first propagated Christianity, had neither
Diocese nor Parish, but the wide world before them: they had nothing of their
own, yet such a Familiar had they of the Holy Ghost, they could want nothing.
Then, all planting the same doctrine, every man had a care of all the Churches,
and looked to the watering too of what was planted; and the people, as
conscious of the truth they heard, took special order to preserve the same
amongst them. Heroicke minds not knowing in the world better how to bestow
their estates, in testimony of their affection, erected Churches, and endowed
them with privileges, gave them Tyths and Oblations, unto a competence of
maintenance, they added superfluity, and with riches, gave honor and sway to
the Clergy. Kings as was fore-prophesied, became the Churches nursing Fathers,
and Queens her nursing Mothers. They made Religion the business of States,
which now we make but a State instrument of. They had a care to fortify
Religion against the corruption of nature, and to recommend and seal their
faith unto worse times: as if by a holy kind of Simony, they would purchase
the Holy Ghost, and buy the Prince of darkness out of his dominions. They
privileged Churchmen to their own cognizance, to arm and hearten them
against sin; that they might not only like Musicians play for a benevolence;
but that Magistrates themselves might not with more authority transgress,
than the Priest rebuke them. They held up degrees in the Church, as objects
still for industry in the Priest, and reverence in the people; a reverence,
which in a right way, half performs Religion. They constituted Bishops, and
Archbishops; Churchmen for Church affairs, one of most tried trust, and but
one for expedition: where the Law is agreed upon, a single eye may see Justice;
or most easily answer for it. Bishops for order at home, and Archbishops
further (if we shall not seem to be led by sounds) as arches in metropolisses
over other Bishops, arches unto the King and unto foreign Churches, that
though States differ, the communion of Saints might be preserved, the Church
might keep at unity, and by united force repel heresy.

In no great Council could the man of God be baulked, that they might be sure
to serve God before themselves; as secure, that while the Church prospered, and
they had God amongst them, all was safe: and in Courts of Conscience, where the
Laws reached not, they thought none so fit as the man of conscience, and
ranked Bishops and Archbishops in honor with Dukes and Barons. And these
things were fixed and certain, to avoid the fever of a quotidian canvase, and
that in standing counsel they might the more improve themselves, and profit
others; and the law of Christ and his Church, be sure to receive no detriment;
and for supply of men's mortality, they founded Colleges and Cathedrals. Thus
they kept up men's hopes and Imaginations, making the Priesthood answerably
incomprehensible with their God; and the Crown received luster, in conjunction
with the Miter. According to the rules of that great Architect, they built Ad
usum, ad speciem, and ad firmitatem, an Hierarchy for use, and show, and an
Hierarchy for durance, as firm as laws could make it: as conscious, that if
the Clergy be so thin laid, that the people may look through and round about
it, it will soon fall into contempt, and Religion be exploded.

Thus Christianity grew upon the world, mankind became thoroughly religious,
and the Tempter was well nigh discouraged in his business. This was the
flourishing state of Christ's Church on earth, which we can only hope to have
amended in Heaven. And herein, God be thanked, our Church of England had her
share

Nor was this merely matter of State, but a Religious Policy. The ancient
style of Grants and Charters, for these matters, was Domino Deo nostro
offerimus and dicamus, we give them unto God. And under the Law, God as he
instituted them, took them to himself. For gifts and oblations he says, Thou
shall give them me, Exodus 22.30. For Churches and Oratories, My House, Mat.
21.13. For Tithes, Will a man rob God? Malach. 3.9. For Lands, Ye shall offer
unto the Lord an holy portion, Ezekiel. 4 5.1. For their persons and Honors,
Touch not mine Anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15. And the
same Law, Saint Paul presses under the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. 1. Tim. 5.17,
18. Though we have some difference in the manner of Worship, Sacrifice and
several Ceremonies being abolished; there is the same substance for Guides in
Gods worship, which is the Reason of the Law, as the Prophet Isaiah, in the
name of the Lord foretold, Isaiah 66.21. And I will take of them for Priests
and for Levites, says the Lord: Priests he says, not merely Laymen, nor
merely Priests, but several degrees, Priests and Levites. This is a
principal branch of that honoring God with our Substance, which is enjoined,
Prove. 3.9. what we relieve the poor with, is not so much our Alms, as their
exigence; and as necessity exacts it, it quickly perishes. But these
Donations, as they savor of a more inward and deeper Piety, are of a more
lasting substance. Besides, the eternal Treasures we lay up for our selves, we
provide for the perpetuity of Religion unto after Ages of men, and may be said
to honor God not only in our selves, but in all we gain to honor him.

But for the Hierarchy, because that is most stuck at. First, we must
conceive order and decency long before riches, and the favor of States in the
Church. It was many Ages, and the Gospel had a large spread, before Emperors
were reclaimed to Christianity. And though we have no special rule from
Christ himself, for those rounds of Order, but the Original of our Church
Government, through those Mists of times, be scarce perceptible; If we trace
Episcopacy backwards (however the favors of the World came in by degrees) we
shall resolve it upon the Apostles Age, and find the like presumptions in
Reason for our Priesthood, as for our Sabbath. As the magnificence of the
Jewish Church was commanded by God himself; the same Providence, though in a
secret way, would seem to have introduced our Church Discipline. Our Savior
came rather to plant Piety, than Government; that as absolutely necessary he
provided for, and left-Government for the work of time, and a Testimony of his
Doctrines Approbation.

Though he condemned the Ambition of honor in his Disciples, more than to
glorify God thereby, and make them more beneficent and serviceable unto
others; never was there greater friend to order and government, he stood for
Caesar, and he stood for God, and would have the Scribes and Pharisees
themselves, in Moses Chair, observed. As himself assumed the Title of Lord
and Master, he allowed of a Maximus and a Minimus amongst his Disciples, so the
greatest became as the least, to serve and minister to the rest. At his
departure, he had many things to say unto his Disciples, which then they could
not bear, but the Holy Ghost he promised them should abide with them, and
lead them into all truth: And secondly, bring to their remembrance whatsoever
he had told them. What the many things wanting our Savior meant, might be, is
difficult. Ethicen Christianam, Rules for private life he had laid himself,
they would need only a Remembrancer for them. But Politia Ecclesiastica, this
point of Discipline, for Church government, seems a truth as then untaught;
and being such a maine thing, and requiring time to make the World capable of
it, me thinks we should hold a reverend esteem of what we find so settled;
whether by the Apostles, or their successors. The Holy Ghost was sufficient
warrant for the Apostles, and the abiding of the Holy Ghost, suggests a regard
to their Successors, and hereunto perhaps that speech is to be referred, Matthew.
28.20. Lo, I am with you allway even to the end of the World. Popish
extravagancies as they have not the like necessity, nor the like antiquity,
have not the like plea with government. Humility garnished with miracles, or a
miraculous humility, which our Savior himself practiced, was the likeliest
way in reason, at first for the planting of the Gospel of humility. It was
reverend in it self, and unlike to provoke the jealousy of States: honor
comes kindly est of it self, and shows most glorious when it is rather found
than sought. Yet it is Gods own promise, that he that humbles himself should
be exal^ed. It is the honor of Christianity, that it could deserve honor
while it despised it. As the people would have taken our Savior, and made him
King, it is like they fastened favors upon his followers. And miracles ceasing,
the legal asserting of some Church discipline was in reason worthy of
Acceptance. It cannot be doubted, but the Apostles were the Patriarchs or
Grandfathers of the Church. The number of twelve was not without a Mystery,
and the precise supply of that number, in the Election of Matt^i^s, proves a
precedence in them, above the Seven it Disciples. As they begot sons to God,
they adopted fellow laborers into their Ministry, such (no doubt) as
observed their Fathers while they lived, and so far approved of the benefit
of that order they found under them, that they maintained it after their
dissolutions. As the twelve were called first, the Evangelists make special
mention of their names, and their families, as whom they ought to honor. They
were more conversant with Christ, and more instructed by him, and continued
with him unto the end. And after his Resurrection he applied himself
especially to them. Then he renewed their Commission with a Sicut misit me
Pater, to boot, which may extend to Jurisdiction and Ordination; Ordination of
the Clergy, and Jurisdiction over the whole Church; and to enable them for
such service, he made good his promise of the Holy Ghost, and gave them power
of binding and loosing sins. Saint Paul I am sure assumed this Authority to
himself, he counted himself a Master Builder, whose office is to order the
work, and command inferior Workmen: he exercised a Legislative power; he
excommunicated (for instance) the Incestuous Person, and again restored him;
as may be seen in his Epistles, which all abound with Canons and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical. This power of ordering Church affairs, he
further propagated to Timothy, and Titus; as appears in the Rules and
directions to them. And so (for it would be tedious to name particulars) it
would seem to have been derived to our times. Whether our form of Church
Government came from the light of nature, and the Jewish pattern (for reason
extols it, See B. Andrews Anal.
and * there is a correspondence between the Jewish and the Christian
Hierarchy,) or from a special Illumination and motion of the Spirit of God;
(which the former times excelled in) it is as needless, as hard to distinguish,
perhaps all concurred, however Christ we see, See Archbishop of Armaghs Orig.
Apoc. 1.20. * approves of such Bishops, and honors them with the Title of
Stars, and Angels (as Diabolical as some would make them) and * Calvin and
Luther themselves could not but approve of this Government, See Masons
additions.
and (waveing the name) came as near unto an Episcopal form as the iniquity
of their times would admit. Though we determine not, whether Iure Divino, or
humano, It will suffice us Episcopacy is rightly constituted.

The Primitive assistance of the Spirit to be wished, not expected.
and our Ministry that visible Assistance of Divinity, the first times of the
Church enjoyed; which a Simon Magus could prize above riches, which showed men
nearer favorites with God, than riches make them with Kings; which might
confound, and stop the mouths of all gainesayers, and all men be wholly
convinced and compelled to obedience. But we can no more expect these now, than
they at first could challenge our Privileges.

Such assiduity and open violence of the Spirit, though necessary for times
otherwise anticipated, where Christianity has once advanced its banners and
engaged the world, would render our Faith not worth God have mercy.

That humble temper and exemplary lowliness of Spirit, could our Church
assuredly be furnished with it, has a winning grace, and bravery above State.
Heathens have seen its beauty, and been enamored on it. But its chiefest
efficacy is with minds already pious, which (God knows) is the smallest part
of mankind, and such Ornaments being at no certainty, no not in Churchmen,
such supplements as may be had, for establishing Religion, are to be allowed
it.

It was our Saviors own Precept to his Disciples, Be wise as Serpents, but
innocent as Doves, Christianity and Policy, the wisdom of Serpents, and the
innocence of Doves, may stand together, and while we are but as sheep amongst
wolves, it is but necessary they should. The leaders that are upon such hard
service, had need have the best provision, and the best order, that may be,
the best to preserve themselves, and advance the Church. Foreign plants we
know are choice, and require a special care, and Christianity being such a
supernatural stem, will need; and being so Noble, will deserve our best
fostering.

When God sends Angels Ambassadors to men, he puts them in humane shapes, the
better to comply with human nature. But when men are to act Gods part, they had
need put on all the Divinity that may be. Riches and honors are not opposite
to humility, but make more conspicuous. Though a Divine show more sacred
without either staff, or scrip, as he that has wholly cast off this world,
for his hopes in another; a knap-sacke and sword now is thought no luggage;
whilst we are men, and most part flesh and blood, the Elements we consist of
would find some likely nu^riment, and the supports of this life, not wholly be
neglected. It was a sad, but sage consideration of the Poet,

Quis virtutem amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas? --
We would have a Learned and Religious Clergy, otherwise we have small hopes
they should make others such; but we shall hardly find learning or Piety
flourish without these encouragements. To pass by the improbity of Poverty,
which is far above that of plenty; Though knowledge as the light of the soul,
for it self be desirable, men steare not thitherward, unless their other
desires be otherwise satisfied, or learning seem the means to satisfy them.
Or how forward soever they may be to learn, to make them teach, they must yet
have some further incentive. Or though good natures might so far exalt their
minds, experienced Parents, while it is in their power, will be wary how they
dedicate and breed up a son to a studious beggary. We must expect Priests, with
a curse, of the lowest of the people, or the halt and the maimed out of greater
families, if Divinity and the service of God cannot advance, like the Law, or
the sword, or one of the twenty four companies. The gifts of miracles, of
infallibility, and Prophesiing cease, and expect we the Spirit of
selfe-denyall as fresh as ever? The wisest Lawgivers have been wont to
consider men, In massa corrupta, averse from all good, and only to be reclaimed
by reward, and punishment: and has this last thrifty Age discovered a new way,
to put these accounts upon the world to come? Or only to be liberal in her
punishments? Those that travail to Rome, or Jerusalem, what satisfaction
soever they promise themselves, at their Journies end, are glad to turn in
sometimes by the way, and refresh themselves in other Cities, and meaner Innes;
and by such discreet stays, hasten their course.

Such a Journey have we to that heavenly Canaan, (a Journey I account it, not
an anxious Pilgrimage,) though the rest we promise our selves there, be above
all the repasts of the way, and those especially that convert sinners, have the
assurance to shine like Stars in the Firmament; to support frail nature, and
keep a sense of what we expect, the hospitality of this world is intended us.
Though our devotion lie for Heaven, Riches, Honors, and pleasures, all the
glories of this light may be our bayting places; so we make this world but as
the City we pass through, not inhabit; and these braveries but as vyands to
refresh, not luggage to hinder our journey. This world is an honest Inn, the
inordinate Affections, and dotage of the guests, make a brothell of it. Could
our guides sustain themselves with the hopes of the world to come, it must
needs put mettle into us. Who would not more cheerfully follow such Leaders?
and could our Lawgivers be exemplary herein, it might excite our guides. But
they being of the same mold with us, why should we expect it? why should we
stomach them the repast we allow our selves? and look that they should
forfeite all for us? It argues disproportioned minds, to affect such
disproportion. We must not stand on what we would have, but what is just, and
equal.

The sin of Sacrilege.
now such maine props of Religion; justly has Sacrilege, or the diminution
hereof, been ever accounted the highest, the boldest and the damnablest sin in
the world. Supplant Religion, and we dissolve all the ties betwixt God and men;
we weigh anchor, and fall to Sea again, the Sea of vulgar passions. Other
mischiefs have their limits, they hurt but one or other, and there is an end.
But this strikes at goodness it self, it sets the world besides its hinges, and
sweeps our peace from off the earth God, the King, and all of us, are thereby
damnified. He has a heart of Iron, a salvage, and Cyclopike breast, that can
invade Heaven and rob God, that can pull down the Prerogative of the King, and
his Crown too, and spoil mankind of their safety. Heathens themselves have
always had more reverence to things dedicated unto their gods, and to violate
but the Religion of other Countries, though much more vain than their own,
looked so monstrous, that it was ever accounted inauspicious; and the wrongs
done to a false Deity, carried an horror with it, and was usually revenged by
the true one. Histories abound with such monuments, and it was long ere this
crime was known in Christendom.

The colors for Sacrilege dispelled.
Revenge, conscience, convenience, and covetousness; which together, and a
part, threaten havocke.

First, (for our angry Passions usually lead in these tumultuary courses) men
cry out upon the insolence of the Bishops, that they have several times
endangered the liberty of the State; and now they have them in their power,
they will root out them. Rome, the truth is, Rome the place of the Imperial
seat, has given ground for such reasoning. When it enjoyed all the happiness
this life is capable of, it grew exorbitant. That state which seemed above
foreign casualty, labored with its own happiness, and from its height
(which is the course of worldy things) found way to ebb again.

The Bishops there too conscious of their own greatness, and the influence
they had upon the State, not content with their Primacy, abused Religion into
Policy; and casting off all moderation, the Pope devoured the Emperor. Thus
the Head of the Church degenerated into a monster, and drew the whole world
after him. In reaching at Temporal Sovereignty, he broke the Spiritual unity,
and the wound got the obduration to become incurable; he disdaining once to
come to the bar as a delinquent, having power to his wickedness.

I defend not Rome, nor shall I excuse our own late Bishops. Liberty is our
common birthright, which ought to be dear unto us next our Faith. But their
malice, whatsoever we conceive it, has not been so contagious, I hope, as to
pollute all they touched, so that Episcopacie, the office it self, cannot
again be hallowed. Though Bishops have abused their power to oppression
(oppression, which is the proper sin of Power) this world is no state of
perfection, other men will do as much; the abuse of things must not take away
their use. By that Rule we shall neither have Magistrate, nor people, in that
all have sinned. To decry an Office, an office (as has been shown) rightly
instituted, for some men in it, is an Act for mad men, not for Legislators;
wisemen cannot be in earnest. It were a course to deal with an enemy, when we
have him in our Power, to make sure work. But God and our selves are herein
interest. Offices are Gods, though men are in them, and God catches not
advantages against us. Lastly, our revenge will light upon our own pates, we
shall pull out our own eyes, and dash out our own brains. We shall soon find
and rue the loss of such order. If we fear the Tyranny of Bishops
themselves, we consider not we have a Gracious King, and shall have Parliaments
to do Justice. If we fear their drawing toward Rome, we forget our
Praemunire. If we fear their setting up the King, their will be more fear of
more active Instruments. Something must be left to God, and the goodness of
Princes.

Secondly, some from our Saviors words, Mat. 23.8 But be not ye called Rabbi,
etc. damn all superintendencie in men in holy orders, as unlawful and
Antichristian. But all the world may see, it is the Pharisaicall vainglorious
Affectation to be magnified of men, ver. 5.6. not the Authority, or the title
and pre-eminence to Godward, is here forbidden. And otherwise, the Precept
(being given to the people and the Disciples, v. 1.) will serve to pull down
temporal Lords, and the Presbyterians too as well as Bishops. Nor is there any
reason the rule, vos autem non sic, when it is laid betwixt the Princes of the
Gentiles, and the Disciples alone, Chapter 20.27. (as here betwixt the Pharisees
and the multitude) should carry a harder interpretation.

Though the Disciples only happened to be present, when mother Zebede gave the
occasion of the words, they were men by nature, how ever Disciples by calling;
and when we extend prohibitions to them beyond their persons, they usually
represent not Ministers alone but all Christians whatsoever: vice may be more
unseemly in Clergy men, but it is as unlawful in all Christians. But against
the power and authority of Divines in Temporal affairs, they further press
the practice of the Apostles Acts 6.2. and Reason from thence, That it is too
much for Divines to be knowing men in business of estate, and to understand the
Rules and Laws of government. But first, the provision for the poor, about
which the question is, was laid at the Apostles feet, to be distributed by
them, Acts 4.35. Secondly, though the Apostles thought not meet to leave the
word of God wherewith the world, as yet was not acquainted, to wait on Tables,
which was below their ministry; It shows their understanding, and authority,
in that they gave order for fit Stewards and Overseers. Thirdly, these men make
Divines men of too narrow capacities, and set Gods Law and man's at too great
distance, If Statesmen have souls to be saved, whereunto the Ministry may
contribute. If the heathen Orator must be seen in all the arts, and nooks of
learning, the Christian Doctor had need be bard no field of knowledge, for the
soul he is to look to, is thrice more worth than the goods of Fortune. Our
Brethren of Scotland and all it seems are out, who take their Churchmen along
in their weightyest affairs, and their Sermons here in England they say
savoured of some thing more than pure preaching of the Gospel.

The Clergy are men, men of liberal education, they wade through the Arts,
ere they come at divinity, whereby (me thinks) they should be capable of human
affairs with other men. And Divinity can be no hinderance. Perhaps they are
better seen in Ecclesiastical matters, and therefore may arrogate them as
their peculiar, but for us to exclude them our Counsels, as an abject
generation, who have the deepest share in Gods promise of assistance, and give
the best Authority to resolutions, coming in the Name of God, cannot proceed
either from good policy or Religion. The Priesthood amongst the Jews had a
hand in all Temporal affairs, and in matters merely of order and
government, and no way Typical, Jews (as has been said) may be Presidents
for Christians. The Apostles perhaps at first exercised none other Authority
but the Spiritual power of excommunication, to withhold the Ordinances, and
forbid Communion which delinquents, and left further censures to the Secular
Magistrate. But when Princes received the Gospel, they requited the Ministers
thereof with a share of their power, and magnified their authority with the
glory of these Ministers.

Perhaps it had been sin in them at first not to have honored the Gospel:
but for us to divest it, is more out of question.

Their Voices in Parliament, etc, may seem matters of small moment, for the
public peace. But besides the dishonor to Religion, they are of dangerous
consequence, for the same reason that shall invalid them, may as well overthrow
the whole Fabric of the Church. And it is to be feared it is some men's aim to
effect that by degrees, which at once they find not feasible. The Prelate spoke
not by rote, who said they would serve them as Highway men do honest
Travelers, first gag, and bind, then rifle them.

Thirdly, they pretend a convenience in pulling down Order and Government in
the Church, to buy in Impropriations, and set up preaching. Preaching in deed
and laboring in the Word have high Attributes in Scripture, as of introducing
grace, and working faith, etc. and the Gospel at first being committed to the
bosoms of men, the only way then of propagating thereof was Sermon-wise, by a
kind of Preaching, Christ thus taught the people, and instituted his Disciples
to this Annunciation. But their preaching was not the same in use with us,
theirs had its Authority from the Spirit, they spoke by, which we borrow from
their writings. Any way of publishing and promoting the Gospel, is preaching
in the Scriptures sense, as well as our exposition of Scripture, the word (...)
involves them all, nor can the foresaid Attributes, be appropriated to that
which we call preaching. Saint Paul labored in the Gospel, before there was a
Gospel written; he labored by word and writing, by constituting Canons, and
in seeing them observed: and now not only extemporary Expositions, but all
effectual means for the propagation of the Tenor thereof, is the Ordinance of
God, and no doubt his free Spirit accordingly conferreth grace and faith by
them: Whether they be Doctrinall, by word, and writing, by catechism to young
beginners, by reading of the Scriptures, Apochryphall Books, divine Homilies,
or other profitable discourses: or after institution magisteriall by enacting
and establishing good laws, as Kings and Emperors (we know) being converted,
by their Edicts, in an instant, more advanced the Gospel, than private
Preachers with many Sermons in many ages, though otherwise they had
extraordinary assistance of the Spirit. The Gospel may and must be preached in
every Court, that is, Christ's law must be there preserved; and though that be
not the proper place for teaching, there may happen to be as effectual
Sermons, for the promotion of the Gospel, from the Bench, as from the Pulpit,
where men of power meet and draw things to a point, there, there is preaching
powerful. Thus some particular Bishops have had the opportunity to do more
good, than all the Clergy in their Diocese again. Neither in words alone,
but in works of piety, and business of State, Christ may be advanced,
Laymen may, but Ministers more especially must, thus Evangelize. Our preaching
and practicing, and writing, and Government, are all twines of that Mother
preaching in Scripture: Let preaching be the eldest and the fairest sister;
their dowties and their virtues may be alike, we must not set too great a price
on one, to disparage the rest; or because preaching was first of all, reduce
Christianity to its principles, and hold there. This were, as if because
Writing was before Printing, and then had high elogies amongst the ancients, we
should renounce the benefit of Printing, to hold to Writing only, or prefer it
before Printing. This is the grand imposture and illusion of the Age. Preaching
is cried up, naught but Preaching, God knows a sorry kind of Preacding, when
nobler helps should share. Its to be feared they would serve the Clergy, as
the Fox in the fable did the Crow, commend their voices, till they let go
their morsells: where we hear knowledge is confined, we cannot think
libertas Prophetandi, shall have its scope. As in Reason we excel beasts:
Elocution, whereby we readilyest conveigh our conceit to others, exalts us
amongst men. Sermons may be most apposite to the maladies of the hearers; and
best fit for their affections, they most readily catch, and transport furthest.
The Preacher, like as skillfull Physician, can vary his recipe according to
the exigence of the patient: he can cast his discourse into what mould or
form he please: he can insinuate, and creep upon particulars, how ever
prepossessed, and as occasion serves, invade or surp^ise the Affections: he can
give food to healthy, and physic to diseased minds. And the very act of
Preaching, the countenance and gesture, add life to words, and have a singular
energie over bare reading; for thus they make all they deliver new, as it were,
and their own; when the other way it seems but flat, and borrowed; they set
forth Christ and his Doctrine with more pomp unto our souls: and in pressing
Scripture make it like bruised Spices, more ravishing. Yet its long of us, and
our corrupt affections, if Sermons carry it; we are more for sauce than meat,
more tickled with the momentany dress, and relish of the workman, than the
meat which endures. As diseases are commonly alike in different men, the same
remedies were we attentive might serve our several souls, as do our bodies.
God no doubt was both able and willing to prescribe Catholic Remedies, for all
our Maladies in his Word: and Men usually more sufficiently express themselves
by writing, than by word of mouth; upon deliberation, than on the sudden;
nay, extemporary discourses, like our actions, are subject to extravagancy, and
often times derogate from the Majesty of Scripture, and the evidence of the
Spirit therein: So that Government, and good laws, had need to order all; and
the Scripture is that all must be ordered by. It is bare Text alone that gives
the mind repose, and grounds belief. As we confine not our selves only to set
forms of doctrine, to stint the Spirit; It is good we should have some things
set and fixed to stint humane extravagancies: lest Religion become merely
matter of Phansy, and the Church be converted into a Babel. It were ingratitude
against the Spirit, to slight such grounds as he has laid us; and presumption
still wholly to rely on him: but the middle way, to hold some thing certain,
and attend his further motions is safe. Preaching, and practice, and writing,
and government, are all useful in the Church toward others, yet where we
have but the Gospel it self read, none of them is absolutely necessary to
salvation. But if we must compare them, though they are best together,
government to us now, is no less necessary than that which we call preaching.
It extends it self to a larger form, and it is that must keep preaching and
all in order. Preaching may be more necessary for the planting of a Church,
but government, as it is more noble* is more necessary where a Church is
planted. The Church of Christ is never so settled, but it is militant here on
earth, and had need of the best marshalling in rank and fyle: The enemy will
find a gap, or where to make one, if there be not some General to overlooke,
some Commander to ride the round, and see the watch set, one that for place,
and power, need not fear the face of man. Unless we dislike our Religion,
there is no reason we should find fault with our Government. If Religion have
not much of the image of justice in it, a sword sometimes to determine us,
as well as a balance to weigh truth, her balance will be despised. As I have
no faith in charms, I am not wholly for preaching, that bare talking way,
without the Spirit, is not like government, to settle men in an habituate
course of piety. It rather puzzels the belief, than actuates our obedience.
But with degrees of promotion, industry and learning, and so preaching it
self, must necessarily fall. And the more ordinate Church Government, and the
more concentrate to unity it is, it agrees better with Monarchy, and holds
better harmony with its head, which is Christ. In the office of a Bishop, an
Archbishop, or a Patriarch, as strange as it may sound, Calvin himself could
see no hurt, while they were subject unto Christ, an Emperor, and a general
Council. Inst. 4.4 4.
And how far the like were not again to be endeavored, were a disqu^tision
becoming states truly Christian, for by this means, as the promise of Christ to
the Clergy should have its regard, states might enjoy the delibera^ions of the
whole Church, though they retain the liberty of admitting or rejecting their
Counsels. It is seen in all estates, Quae communiter possidentur communiter
negliguntur, the very dividing is the destruction of power; what can an
ordinary man do? or who will care for showing himself in commotions, when the
danger shall be his own, and many must share in the honor? Let not men
flatter themselves too much in their project of changing the use of riches
without taking them from the Church, though things perhaps may be better
carried both amongst Bishops, and down to the inferior Clergy, there may be
rapine in honors as well as in riches, If we take them from God and Religion,
though we cannot convert them to our-secular uses: If there be less of private
advantage, there may be more of malic^ in it: but there may be of advantage, in
pulling down others, to get into their places. Absalon himself had other
pretenses, when in his heart he said, O that I were made judge in the Land. But
it concerns them that but alter things consecrate, to be sure it be to the
better; for the scandal of innovation goes further than the thing reformed.
Mutato Sacerdotio mutatur etiam and Lex, says the Apostle, and the
dishonouring of the Priest hood will expose it to contempt, and in the end, its
to be feared, prove the bane of Religion. I condemn not Chu^che, which have
not, or cannot arrive at our happiness; for there is great odds, inter
Ecclesiam constituendam, and constitutam. Piety is the principal, and as we
condemn no Church that holds but that unum necessarium of Piety, so me
thinks none should condemn us for asserting of Piety, by so regular
government. But it is fitter they aspire to our state, than think of reducing
us to their condition: with us that of Peter to Ananias must take place, Act.
5.4. While it remained was it not thine own? but now thou have deceived not
men but God. It is a fearful sentence of God to Samuel, upon the Israelites,
Sam. 8.7. Hearken unto the voice of the People -- for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should reign over them. If Nemo
potest mutare concessum in alterius praejudicium, shall we without license
from God, take away what was truly given him? This breach how small soever at a
part, will open a gap to all the Churches patrimony: And though it be but
matter of Discipline we talk of; I pray God such dishonor to the discipline,
entrench not soon upon the Doctrine it self, and bring that in question.
Though our neighbors of Scotland and the Low Countries, though the emulation
of adversaries, as yet keep upright; with their form of government; When in
cold blood we shall feel the inconveniences even of the reformed discipline,
as they call it; and consider how much we have been out; I pray God we come not
to begin again at Rome, or Palestine, or Palestine, as now it is, so find the
way to us. For who shall animate Princes for Religion, when the Priest must
keep at distance? This question in England will be of dangerous consequence in
Christendom.

Lastly, such profane ones as spoil for the booty, how ever they please
themselves in their fury, will one day find a curse go along with their prey,
which like Achans execrable thing, will ruin themselves, and their families.
They forfeit their confidence in a providence, and that comfort in their
brethren and their own breasts, which should be their life and stay, in time of
trouble. They usually dye forlorn of God, and men, miserable, disconsolate,
and detested: and yet have more to answer for in the world to come.

IX. The Conclusion.
The Church of England (God be thanked) yet retains the face of a Church. How
ever for riches and honors, she comes short of her self in former times, she
comes behind few Churches in Christendom. We have tithes and oblations,
Bishops and governors, rich Colleges and Cathedrals, large privileges and
endowments; such as might make men that like not our Doctrine, fall in love
with our discipline, and in admiring these glories, adore the Divinity that
provoked them. She is like the Vine of God in the 80. Psalm. O let not the wild
Bore out of the Forest break down her branches, nor the little Foxes devour
her grapes. If we have neither so much Piety nor Policy as to contribute to the
propagation of our order abroad, nor the promoting of Religion at home; nor to
make satisfaction to the Church (as the Lord Bacon would have it) for the
wrongs of our forefathers. Let us not be guilty of so much Atheism, as to
withdraw its maintenance. Let us not let go our anchorage, and cast our selves
upon the fluctuations of people. If the Clergy in its height have abused these
blessings to their worldly ends (as all estates on earth are subject to abuse)
If their happiness have made them wanton. If to the keys and their spiritual
sword, they be catching at the Temporal, and there be something in their
honors, which may occasion them to look to Rome-ward: Let the curb of Law
hold them to their way, and the Trienniall Review look as austere on them as on
Projectors. What restivenesse soever they have contracted, let provision be
made by wholesome discipline to reclaim them, but withhold not their provender
to abate their service. Let us not pursue Vices or Persons so far as to violate
offices, offices which have not contracted such guilt, but they may be
regenerated. Let us not defeat the charity of our pious Predecessors. Let us
not dishonor our State, and the Age we live in. Let us not rob Religion of its
Ornaments, the Priest of his Reverence, and God of his Glory. In a word, let us
not so fly from Rome, as to fall into the mouth of Hell, and rob God, to
enrich the Devil again.

FINIS.

