The Five Days DEBATE AT Cicero's House IN TUSCULUM. Upon 1. Comforts against
Death. 2. Patience under Pain. 3. The Cure of Discontent. 4. The Government of
the Passions. 5. The Chief End of Man.
Between Master and Sophister.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Swalle, at the sign of the Unicorn at the West End of
St. Paul's, 1683.

TO THE READER.
IT may seem advisable to give some short account of the ensuing Work to
obviate such Exceptions as are likely to be made against it in this censorious
Age. That it is a Translation, is owned, which infers no more, than that all
the World speak not the same Language; but if Sense be common, and Wisdom not
engrossed by any Age or Place, then must it withal be concluded, that
Interpretation is beneficial. This Book was never hitherto made English, yet in
its own Tongue has been still reputed among the choicest Pieces of Humane
Learning; and sure in Discourses of this Nature, the intelligent Reader does
not value Tully by the elegancy of his Style, but soundness of Judgment, and
orderly deduction of Arguments. True Philosophy being a ray of right Reason,
shines equall^ in all Languages; yet is more effectual, when managed by a
Master of Eloquution in earnest, as concerned in the very Cases which he
Debates. The Author of this Treatise, famous for admirable Parts, had, by his
industry and success in pleading Causes, attained to great Wealth and Honor;
but upon alteration of the Government, was obliged to retire to his Seat at
Tusculum; where the Scene of his Five Days Debate is laid. The Subject, matter
of highest Importance, suitable to the gravity of his Person, and occasion of
the times. Cicero aged sixty years, and beset with many State-Enemies, put
himself on this guard, against the approaches of Natural Death, or surprises of
an Assassinate. These Consolations supported him under the affliction of his
Daughter Tullia lately deceased in Childbed. He that had formerly ruled the
Bar by the Power of his Eloquence, and sat Prince in the Roman Senate, having
withdrawn himself from the Insolence of a Victorious Army, diverts his
Melancholy upon these nobler Studies. Thus disengaged from Noise and Business;
from the vain Pomp of numerous, but specious. Friends; he attends to his better
part; enquires after a State of true Happiness: Here advises with the Ancient
Sages, and grave Philosophers of Greece. These for the most part, especially
Socrates, determine it to consist in a Peace of mind, through the Exercise of
Virtue, ranging the Affections under the Obedience of Reason. To assert the
Dignity of Humane Nature in its Primitive Institution; the excellency of the
Soul, as to its Original, sistence; Operations and Duration; to settle the
Empire of Reason; a Liberty which no external Force can control; and that
braves the atmost malice of Fortune: These are steps by which the Spirit
raises it self up to Object, adequate to its Faculties; contemplates the
Beauties of the Universe, wonderful order of the Celestial Motions, and by the
Chain of Causes, ascends up to that all wise Power, which at first disposed,
and always governs them. An Idea of Wisdom did in some measure appear to the
diligent searchers after Truth; but in practice occurred insufficiency of
Knowledge, and frailty of Resolution. Whereupon Cicero puts himself upon
enquiry after the Causes of our early Depravation. Mankind must be governed by
Conscience, true; but that must be informed by a Law antecedent to positive
Constitutions, which being in different Countries diverse, would leave the
Boundaries of Good and Evil, as litigious as those of Empire. We are ordained
for Honor; but there is a vain applause, the counterfeit of true Glory.
Besides, Judgment often renders to Passion or Interest; so that he was sensible
how short the Best are of Perfection: Indeed he follows the Probable Doctors,
rather than the Positive; for, to say the truth, as to the Particulars of a
future State, what can frail man, unassisted by Divine Revelation, comprehend
or deliver for certain? Our Senses make no faithful report of Things beyond
their narrow Sphere: Our most quick-sighted Mind hardly penetrates the surface
of objects lying in our way. Nor can we recover things past, as the order of
the Creation, beyond the help of Records, without Divine Tradition.

This uncertainty of Natural Knowledge in the highest Points, whilst it
contributes to a conviction of its own present insufficiency for recovering the
end to which it was once ordained; demonstrates the need we have of a safer
guidance than that of our own Wisdom, and inhances the Benefit of Supernatural
Truths. From this doubtful apprehension, as to a future condition, and frailty
of Nature, our Author is moved to resolve all his care into an affiance in the
paternal goodness of God; upon this he suspends comfortable hopes, and seems
already to breath after a Blessed Eternity. Philosophy had no mean design, to
repair our decai'd Natures; and advance us to the persuasion of a certain
Immortality. This glorious purpose a Covenant of Grace in the Sacred Indentures
engrossed, does more amply effect. Be nothing of this understood, to arraign at
the Bar of the written Law, those Nations whom God, through his unsearchable
Counsels, had for some time left to the enquiring out his Being and Will by the
dim Light of Nature, and their impaired Reason. Only suffice it that we know
there is no other way to Happiness, than by complying with those easy and
honorable terms of Reconciliation offered. A Royal Pardon, however full, has
been revoked, when not received with thankfulness. Again, that we mistake not
Privilege for Performance; nor exalt our selves by looking down with scorn and
censure upon others under unlike Circumstances; but rather, as in truth we
ought, place our selves with them upon the same level, at the more competent
Tribunal of Natural Conscience, common to us both; and there take an impartial
Trial, whether their seize from Reason, do not aggravate our
improficiency under Grace, and consign us over to a less tolerable doom. Can we
read that Socrates by Arguments drawn from the visible World, and the reflex
acts of his own mind, could collect the Souls Immortality, a future Judgment,
Rewards and Punishments, hear him declare, that in Contemplation hereof, he
prepared himself so to live, as that his Apology might find acceptance in that
day; nay, further maintain, that we ought rather to submit to the most infamous
Death, than quit the profession of an honest Principle. Lastly, can we see him
refusing unwarrantable delivery from Prison; seal this Doctrine with his Blood
(avenged in the signal and speedy Destruction of his Capital Enemies?) Can we
read these eminent Instances of improvement in Morals, and not be provoked to
call our selves to account; with what ready submission have we received Truths
delivered us upon Divine Testimony? Do we give them that Obedience which their
Authority challenges? Are we prepared to contend for them, if Providence order
the Trial at the price of our Lives? If in this Scale any of us prove light,
then shall we be found both in Judgment and Practice to come short of those
whom we must exceed, if we pretend to an equal Retribution. Pardon, courteous
Reader, this descant upon the matter of the present Treatise; though you
perhaps may need no Cautions in conversing with Humane Authors, yet we stand
upon the defensive against such as will seek specious Pretenses for not reading
them. We do not advance the Perfections of Nature to the superseding Grace. We
are not able to lay down the Penalty to an infinite Justice offended;
sufficient to repair the Ruins of a lapsed Nature. That Glory be reserved to
the mighty Restorer of Mankind; but we must act in subserviency to him, as
standing accomptable, not only for infused Habits, but also natural Faculties.
Therefore do not dis-regard the ardent endeavors of the Gentile World, in
searching after the Deity; much less presume, without Commission, to pass hard
Censure upon their Persons; fearing lest their humble Sense of Ignorance, and
diligent pursuit of Wisdom, that is, the knowledge of their Duty to God and
Man, rise up in Judgment, and condemn our empty confidence in external
Privileges, and title of Professors.

But I am aware that this Lecture may be thought dull and prolix. Philosophy
and Divinity require strict intention of mind, which soon tires; therefore I
fear the Gravity of the Subject may, with some, prejudge the choice of the
Work. Histories, I acknowledge, are delightful and beneficial. But if a brave
Action so much affect the Reader, surely that Principle of Honor and
Conscience, which informed the Actor, must needs create greater admiration in
him, when set forth in lively colors. These Exercises have somewhat in them,
strangely suited to the Temper of the Gentry. A Sophister comes, possessed
with some mean and vulgar persuasion. His Professor debates the Question
calmly. Joins to solid Argument, all the Powers of Moral Swasion; enforces
Precepts with Example. Here you have the different Opinions of Philosophers
examined; Characters and Passions quickened with Poetical Descriptions. Lastly
the connate Notions of Good and Evil, so openly displayed and narrowly applied,
that the modest Youth, upon better Information, espouses the more generous
Principle, and goes a way for ever after rectified in judgment. Tully would
have no Ornament omitted, that might embellish this Discourse; it was intended
for a Masterpiece.

Book I.
Comforts against Death. The Prologue, Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4.
SECT. I. That the Greeks were inferior to the Romans in most Points of useful
knowledge.
BEING at length wholly or in great part, eased of the toil of Pleading, and
State Affairs. I have, chiefly upon your advice, most worthy Brutus, turned my
thoughts to those Studies which I had indeed retained in mind, but after long
dis-continuance upon incursion of business, and the late Troubles I have
resumed. Now whereas the Systems and Circle of all those Arts which relate to
direction in the way of well-living, are comprised in the Study of Wisdom, so
called Philosophy; this I have thought expedient to illustrate in Latin. Not
but that Philosophy may be learned from Greek Treatises and Tutors. But I have
still been of the Judgment that my Countrymen have either invented all things
more wisely than the Greeks, or improved whatever they received from them,
which they counted worth the bestowing their time and pains upon. For as to
personal deportment, and ordering Family Concerns, we support them with much
more Splendour and Discretion. But as to the public, our Ancestors settled the
State upon unquestionably better Laws and Customs. What need I mention the
Military part, wherein my Countrymen have excelled as in Valor, so much more
in Discipline? Now for those Advantages which are the Products of Nature, not
acquists of Study, neither Greeks nor any other Nation under Heaven may compare
with them. For what Gravity, what Constancy of mind, what Resolution, Honor,
Conscience, what so universal excellency of Virtue, has been any where to be
found, as might match the old Roman? Greece indeed had better Scholars and more
Books, wherein the Victory was easily gained over them that made no Resistance.
For whereas the ancientest sort of learned men among the Greeks were their
Poets, (if it be true that Homer and Hesiod were before the building of Rome,
and A^chilochus in the Reign of Romidus) Poetry came later among us, for about
CCCCX. after the building of Rome, Livy put out the first Play, in the
Consulship of C. Claudius Son of Appius the blind, and M. Tuditanus the year
before Ennius was born, who was elder than Plautus and Naevius. *

* Those Arts that relate to direction in the way of well-living] As Logic, to
find out the true end of Life, and Scope of all our Actions. Ethics to mark
out the Bounds of Good and Evil; with Oeconomicks and Politics for relative
Duties Public and Private: Natural Philosophy to understand the Nature of God,
the Universe, and our own Souls; this is that Circle of Arts which more
immediately refer to the ordering our Life.

My Countrymen have either invented all things more wisely] He repayes the
Greeks that disdain which they had for the rest of Mankind, whom they called
Barbarians.

SECT. II. However Superior in Poetry, Pictures, Music and Geometry.
THerefore was it late before Poets were either understood or countenanced
among us. Although it be Recorded in the Antiquities, that the Romans were wont
in their solemn Festivals to sing to the sound of the Pipe, Commemorations of
men of Renown. Yet that this sort of Bards were in no credit, is evident from
the Oration of the same Cato, wherein he objects it by way of reproach against
M. Nobilior, that he had carried Poets into the Country where his Government
lay. Now when he was Consul, he had taken Ennius along with him into Aetolia,
as is well known. The less Reputation therefore Poets found, the less did men
addict themselves to Poetry. And yet if any great Wits have appeared, whose
Genius led them that way, these have equalliz'd the Character of the most famed
Greeks. Can we imagine if Painting had been judged a Commendation to that noble
Personage, Fabius, there would not have been among the Romans too, many a
Polyclete and Parrhasius? Honor cherishes Arts, and we are all inflamed by
Glory, to the more industrious pursuit of our Studies: Whereas all things that
are unfashionable in any People, lie disregarded. The Grecians thought a high
prize of skill placed in understanding Vocal and Instrumental Music. Therefore
Epaminondas, in my Judgment, the greatest man of Greece, is reported to have
played singularly well on the Lute. Whereas Themistocles some years before, for
having refused the Harp, coming to him at a Feast, was censured for want of
Breeding. This was the reason that Greece flourished with Musicians; all
learned to Play, and he that was not Musical, was judged deficient in gentile
Education. Geometry was among them in great request, therefore nothing was more
famous than their Mathematicians. But we have restrained the compass of this
Art, within the necessary uses of surveying and casting up Accounts.

Although it be Recorded in the Antiquities] Cato the Elder surnamed the
Censor, wrote seven Books of Origin's or Antiquities, wherein he recounted the
Foundations of the Principal Cities of Italy; and Pedigrees of the Roman
Nobility.

The Oration of the same Cato] The abovementioned Cato wrote above 150
Orations, this against M. Fulvius Nobilior was, I suppose, to impeach him of
high Misdemeanors, for plundering the Ambracians of their Statues and Pictures,
with other public and private Ornaments during his Government of Aetolia.

If Painting had been counted a Commendation to that noble Personage Fabius] A
Branch of the Fabian Family was surnamed Painters; because the first of that
Denomination had painted the Temple of Safety; they seem to have been Cadets of
the Fabii Maximi or eldest House.

Honor cherishes Arts] That is, Credit and Reward.

SECT. III. Have overtaken them in Rhetoric, which is encouragement to set
upon Philosophy.
WHen on the contrary we soon closed with the Orator, at first no Scholar, but
of a popular Eloquence, though plain; afterward Scholar too, for Galba,
Africanus, Laelius, are reported to have been learned; and Cato who lived
before them to have studied after these, Lepidus, Carbo, the Gracchi; since
whom down to our Age, men so every ways acomplish'd, that we come not much if
any thing at all, behind the Greeks. Philosophy to this Age has lain
neglected, nor received any luster from the Latin Tongue, which is our present
attempt to raise up and illustrate that so, if, when employed, we were any way
serviceable to our Countrymen, we may further serve them in our retirements,
wherein we are obliged to use the more diligence, because many Books are said
to be already written in Latin unadvisedly by well-meaning but insufficient
men. Now it is possible, that one may have true Conceptions, and yet not be
able to express his Notions in proper Terms; but for a man to commit his
thoughts to writing for the public, who can neither put them in due method,
nor illustrate them with clear Proofs, nor by any delightful Ornaments
entertain his Reader, is the part of one that at no rate abuses his own time,
and the benefit of Writing. Hereupon they read their own Books among
themselves, nor does any one else meddle with them, but they that expect
allowance to write after the same loose fashion. Whereupon if we have brought
Oratory any credit by our Industry, we shall much more earnestly discover the
Springs of Philosophy, from whence those other Rivulets issued. *

* We soon closed with the Orator] Tulley has done his Pro^^^^ that Honor, as
to draw up an accurate List of the (...) Roman Advocates, with their Character,
in a Trea^^^^ (...) to the same Brutus, and thence styled Brutus, (...) the
famous Orators.

(...) Books are said to be already written in Latin] He in^^ (...) Epicurean
Pieces crudely done into Latin, by (...) and Amafinius known to him only by
hearsay, but (...) as he would not give himself the trouble to read (...).

SECT. IV. Philosophy joined with Oratory is more beneficial.
BUT as Aristotle a man of an incomparable Wit, and great variety of knowledge,
being moved with the glory of Isocrates the Rhetorician, begun himself to make
Orations, and to teach his Pupils so to do, and to join Prudence with
Eloquence; in like manner are we resolved both not to disuse our ancient
Practice of Oratory, and withal to exercise our selves in this more sublime
and copious Art. For I ever judged that to be perfect Philosophy, an ability to
discourse at large and floridly upon the most important Points. To which
exercise we have so diligently applied our selves, that we have already
presumed after the Greek Mode, to hold formal Disputations, and oppose what
question should be Problematically maintained; as of late since your departure,
having many of my Acquaintance with me in my Country House at Tusoulum, I made
trial of my Abilities that way. For as heretofore I was used to declaim upon
Law-Cases, which no man continued to do longer than I; so now this serves for
my Declamation in old Age. I bid one propound such Subjects as he was willing
to hear controverted; upon this I disputed either as I sat or walked. So I
have cast the days Acts as they call them into so many Books. The manner of
which was, that when the Learner had proposed his Judgment, I opposed. For this
is the old and Socratick way to dispute against another Opinion; by which
means Socrates thought it might be most easily discovered, what carried along
with it the greatest Probability. But that our Disputations may be more clearly
comprehended, I shall lay them down, so as if they were upon the place kept,
not barely reported. Thus therefore shall the entrance upon the present Debate
naturally arise. *

* In my Country House at Tusculum] Tully had a Summer House near Tusculum, 12.
Miles from Rome, formerly the Palace of Sulla, whose Ruins are at this day to
be seen, called Sancta Maria di grotta ferrata: It is a Monastery. When the
Learner had proposed his Judgment, I oppos'd] The order of disputing among the
ancient Greeks, somewhat differs from our present Manner. He that proposed the
Subject to be controverted, I mean, in the Affirmative or Negative, is with
them called the Auditor, resembling in part our Respondent. The Professor is
the Opponent, upon him lies the whole weight of the Discourse. He scans the
Terms of the Question, Distinguishes, Restrains, Defines, which make up our
Thesis. He presses the Proponent with the Antecedent of an Enthymeme; or
scattered Particulars of an Induction. This gained, he makes out the
Consequent Propositions, either in short or apt Interrogatories, or a continued
Discourse; till the Evidence be so plain, that it extort Confession. The
calmness of the Teacher, and ingenuity of the Auditor, where Truth not Glory is
the Prize, cut off all occasion for a Moderator. The whole is free Conference
and friendly Debate: upon the sole Design of undeceiving the Auditor,
prepossessed with some popular, but erroneous Persuasion.

SECT. V. The Position.
Sophister. I Am of the Judgment that [Death] is evil.


Master, Whether to them that are dead, or to them that must dye?


S. To both.


M. It is therefore miserable because evil.


S. True.


M. Therefore they who are already dead, and they who must hereafter dye, are
both miserable.


S. That is my opinion.


M. There is none therefore but who is miserable.


S. No not one.


M. Nay further, if you will be true to what you hold, all that ever were or
shall be born, are not only miserable, but also for ever miserable. For had you
only held them miserable who must dye, you had excepted none of them who are
alive; for all must dye; yet death would have been the end of misery; but
because they who be dead are also miserable, a we are born to everlasting
Misery. For of necessity they are miserable who were dead a 100000 years ago,
or rather all that ever were born.


S. I am clearly of that Persuasion.


M. Prithee tell me, do these Advises from under ground scare you? The black
Mastiff with three Heads, the howling River, the Ferry over the Stygian Lake,
Tantalus chin-deep in Water choked with thirst? Does

-- Sisyphus his ponderous Stone,
Tug'd up with sweat, still rolling down alone?
Perhaps too those inexorable Justicers Minos and Rhadamanthus, before whom you
can have neither Lucius Crassus, nor Mark Antony to plead your Cause; nor,
because the Matter is to be tried before Greek Judges, can you have Demosthenes
for Counsel; your self must make your own defense in the greatest of all
Assemblies. These things perhaps you dread, and therefore apprehend death as an
eternal Evil.


(a) We are born to everlasting Misery] It is horrible to imagine that the
Author of Nature should ordain the whole Race of Mankind, so highly by him
advanced to a State of endless Misery. But the Heathen did not understand death
as a Punishment, superinduced through the defection of our first Parent. This
is brought against Death's being Evil, that is, miserable to both living and
dead. The third Member of the Dis-junction.

SECT. VI. The Local Hell, described by Poets is fictitious.
S DO you take me to be so destitute of Reason, as to believe these Legends?


M. What do not you verily believe them?


S. Not I at all.


M. You tell me ill news.


S. How so? I beseech you.


M. Because I could have past for a Wit in confuting them.


S. And who might not on such a Subject? or what difficulty is it to prove
these to be mere extravagancies of Poets and Painters?


M. Why? there are whole Book-fulls in the Philosophers, of Disputations, to
overthrow these Supposititions.


S. To much purpose indeed; for who is so senseless as to be concerned at them?


M. If therefore there be none miserable under ground, neither are there any
Persons under ground.


S. I am clear of your mind in that.


M. Where then are those that you call miserable? or what place do they
inhabit? for, if they be, they cannot be no where.


S. Yes, I think them to be no where.


M. Therefore neither to be.


S. Well, as you say, and yet miserable for that very reason, because they be
not.


M. Nay, now had I rather you were afraid of Cerberus, than to use such
inconsiderate Discourse.


S. How so?


M. You say that the same is not, and yet is. Where is your Subtilty? for when
you say he is miserable, you then say that he who is not, yet is.


S. I am not so stupid as to say that.


M. What is it then that you say?


S. That M. Crassus, for instance, is miserable, who by death was taken from
that Estate. Cn. Pompey miserable, who was deprived of so great Glory; in a
word, that all are miserable who lack this cheerful light.


M. You come round thither where you were before; for they needs must be, if
they are miserable, but you lately denied that the Dead are; if therefore they
are not, they cannot be any thing, and by consequence not miserable.


S. Perchance I do not yet speak out my meaning, for I take that very thing to
be most miserable for him not to be that has been.


M. What? more miserable than for one never to have been at all? by the same
reason they that are yet unborn, are already miserable, because they are not.
And we our selves, if we shall be miserable after we are dead, were so before
we were born; but I do not remember that I was miserable before I was born:
you, if you have a better Memory, I would fain know whether you remember any
such thing of your self? *


* To prove these to be mere Extravagancies of Poets and Painters.] The Body in
a State of Separation in insensible: nor did they expect a Resurrection of the
Body, only by Faith in the sacred Testimonies apprehended: therefore to place
Hell in bodily Sufferings, seemed to them repugnant both to Sense and Reason.
Yet they owned the Souls of the deceased to enter into a State of Happiness or
Misery according to their Actions in this Life.

SECT. VII. They who are not, are not miserable.
S. YOU make a Droll of it, as if I said they are miserable who are not born,
and not those that are dead.


M. You say then that these are.


S. Nay, but because they have been, and are not, that they are miserable.


M. Do not you perceive that you speak Contradictions? for what is so opposite,
as that he should be not only miserable, but any thing, who is not at all? (b)
As you go out at the Capuan Gate, and see there the Sepulchers of Calatinus,
the Scipio's, the Servilii. and Marcelli, can you judge them miserable?


S. Because you pinch me with cavilling at a word, I shall hereafter forbear to
say they are miserable, but only term them miserable for that very reason
because they are not.


M. You do not say then M. Crassus is miserable, but miserable M. Crassus.


S. Right.


M. As though whatsoever is pronounced of any one, were not of necessity either
so, or not so; have you not so much as learned the Rudiments of Logic? for
this is a fundamental Maxim there, that every Proposition must be either true
or false; when therefore you say miserable M. Crassus, either you say M.
Crassus is miserable, that it may be brought to trial whether it be true or
false; or you say nothing at all.


S. Well then, I grant that they are not miserable who are dead, because you
have wracked out of me the Confession, that (a) they who have no being, cannot
be so much as miserable; what say you of us that are alive, can we be other
than miserable, since we must dye? for what enjoyment can there be in life,
when we are to think day and night that dye we must of a certain, and it is
uncertain whether this or the next Moment?


(a) They who have no being, cannot be so much as miserable] Nothing is more
certain; as the Action at Law dies with the Person, so if the Subject cease to
be, all the Accidents depending on it fall together. Death is a Dissolution of
the whole compound: but this Argument is intended to reprove the Vulgar, who
foolishly pitied the dead only for their loss of these worldly Advantages, to
which indeed the dead are utterly lost; but he afterward retrieves the Soul.
The drift of these two Sections is, to disprove Death's being evil or miserable
to them that are already dead, which was the second Member of the disjunctive.

(b) As ye go out at the Capuan Gate.] It was a Law among the Romans (taken
from the Attick) to bury none within the City: but without the several Gates by
the High-wayside. Monuments erected for the dead, were admonitions to the
Passengers, and Ornaments of the Public.

SECT. VIII. Nor is dying a miserable thing, it is assayed, to prove it rather
good.
M. DO you come then to understand of how much evil you have discharged humane
Condition?


S. Which way?


M. Because, if dying had been miserable to them that are dead, we should have
had an endless and everlasting evil in Life. Now I see the Goal, whether when I
have finished my course nothing further is to be feared. But you seem to me to
be of Epicharmus's mind, an acute man, and not unfacetious, as being a Sicilian.


S. What was his mind? for I do not know it.


M. I will tell you if I can translate it, for you know I no more use to bring
in ends of Greek in a Latin Discourse, than when I am speaking Greek to come in
with Latin Sentences.


S. In that you are right: but what, I pray, is that saying of Epicharmus?


M. To dye I Am loath, but weigh not to be dead.


S. Now I find the Greek by his subtlety, but since you have forced me to
yield, that they who are dead, are not miserable; persuade me, if you can, that
it is not a miserable thing that we must dye.


M. There is now no great difficulty in that, but I aim at higher Matters.


S. How no great difficulty in that? or what can be those higher Matters?


M. Because if there be no evil after death, neither can death it self be evil,
for the time which immediately follows it is after death, wherein you allow
that there is no evil, upon which follows, that neither is it evil that we must
dye; which is, we must arrive thither, where we confess is no evil.


S. Speak to that I pray more largely; for these captious questions sooner gain
of me a Confession than a Conviction. But what are those higher Matters that
you say you aim at?


M. To make out, if I am able, that death is so far from being evil, that it is
good.


S. I do not require that from you, but would gladly hear it; for though you
should not demonstrate what you attempt, yet you will gain the question that
death is not evil. Proceed then, I shall not interrupt you. I had rather hear
it in a continued Speech.


M. What if I should ask you any thing, would you not answer me?


S. That were an uncivil part, but unless there be a necessity, I had rather
you would for bear it. *


* If there be no evil after death, neither can death it self be evil.] Death
as a passage to a State of insensibility can have no very formidable aspect:
and this is offered to overthrow the first Branch in the disjunctive
Syllogism, as if death were evil to them that are to dye. But the Heathen
World knew not the universal calpableness of mankind: the rigorous Sanction of
a just Law, and Power of the Lawgiver to put his Sentence in Execution,
wherein the Terrors of Death does consist.

SECT. IX. What is death, what the Soul, in vulgar Opinion.
M. I Will comply with you, and to my best Ability declare what you desire; yet
not so as if inspired by Pythian Apollo, I should speak nothing that were no
Oracle and Infallible; but as a weak man of like frailty with the rest of
Mankind, pursuing what has greatest appearance of Truth; for beyond
probabilities, I am not able to advance. Let (a) them deliver Certainties, who
both affirm these Matters to be comprehensible, and profess themselves to have
arrived at Perfection.


S. In that, as you please, we are prepared to give attention.


M. Death then however universally it may seem to be known, must first be
inquired what it is. Some hold death to be a Separation of the Body from the
Soul. Others think there is no Separation, but that both Soul and Body
determine at once, and that the Soul is extinguished with the Carcass. Of those
who judge that the Soul departs, some hold that it presently scatters; some
again, after a long space; others maintain that it endures for ever. Now what
it is, where seated, or whence it comes, is matter of great Controversy. Some
take it to be the heart; whence men are said to be without Heart, of a bad
Heart, or of one Heart. And that great Statesman Nasica, who was twice Consul,
had the Surname of Wise-heart.

And the old Poet terms,

Wise Aelius Sextus of an heart Profound. Empedocles thinks the Soul to be the
Bloodshed through the Heart. Others judge that a part of the Brain is the
Principle of Sense and Understanding. Another Party cannot agree, either the
one or other to be the Soul, but these lodge it in the Heart, those in the
Brain as its Seat or Palace. Others, and among them we in our own Language use
the name Soul and Spirit promiscuously; for we say to gasp and expire, or give
up the Ghost; also men of a gallant Spirit, of a sound Spirit and the like. As
for Spirit it is, being interpreted, Breath. Zeno the Stoic holds the Soul to
be a Fire.


(a) Let them deliver Certainties.] He reflects upon the Stoics, who were very
positive, and Pretenders to perfect Wisdom.

SECT. X. What it is in the Judgment of diverse Philosophers.
BUT these which I have recited, that the Soul should be Heart, Brains, Breath,
Fire are vulgar Opinions; the remaining private Doctors have held, and some of
the Ancient ones. Of later date Aristoxenus, Musician and Philosopher too,
maintained it was a certain Key to which the body was strained, as in the
tuning of an Instrument; so by the nature and posture of the Body, variety of
Motions were raised, and as Notes in Music. He kept to his Art, yet somewhat
he said, which somewhat such as it was, had been long before both said and
explained by Plato. Xenocrates denied that the Soul has any corporeal Figure,
but said it was a number, whose Power, as Pythagoras had before held, was of
great Efficacy in Nature. His Master Plato divided the Soul into three Parts.
The Principal of these, which is Reason, he placed in the Head as in its
Citadel, and separated into two, Anger and Lust, which he lodged in different
Apartments, placing Anger in the Stomach, and Lust under the Entrails. But
Dicaearchus in that Discourse which he held at Corinth, and put out in three
Books in the Person of learned men, in the first Books brings in many
Disputants; in the two latter introduces one Pherecrates an old man of Phthia,
whom he alleges as descended of Deucalion, and there to argue that there is
no such being as a Soul; that it is a mere Name without a Notion, and that we
speak improperly in saying, that Creatures have a living Soul; whereas in truth
there is neither in Man nor Beast, any such thing as Soul or Spirit, but all
that Power which produces in us Actions of the Mind, or Senses is an equal
Complexion of the Elements, nor can subsist in a separate Estate, as being no
substance, but plain body, which under such a Figure, is by its natural Temper
disposed to Vegetation and Sense. Aristotle who far surpasses all others
(Plato always excepted) both in Parts and Industry, after he had computed the
four Elements which furnish material cause of existence to all compound Bodies,
pitches upon a fifth Essence, of which the rational Soul should consist; for to
think and forecast, to learn and teach, to invent, with so many other Abilities
of Memory, Love, Hatred, Desire, Fear, Anxiety, Joy, he does not conceive these
and the like, can be inherent in any of those four Elements. Hereupon he adds a
fifth nameless Nature, and so calls the Soul by the new name of a pure Act,
being in continued and perpetual Motion.

SECT. XI. Inferences from these diverse Opinions.
THese are almost all the Opinions about the Soul, as far as I can recollect;
for let us wave Democritus, a brave man indeed and excellent Scholar, but who
framed the Soul upon a casual rencounter of smooth and globular Moths, for
among those Gentlemen there is no feat so strange, but what omnipotent Atoms
can perform. Of these Opinions which is true, God alone knows; which has the
greatest appearance of truth, is much to be questioned. Had we best therefore
discuss these different Opinions, or return to the enquiry at first proposed?

S. I would fain both might be, if it were possible; but it is hard to confound
them: Wherefore, if without scanning them at large, we may be delivered from
the Terrors of death, let that be our business; but if that cannot be obtained
till this question of the Souls nature be decided, let us now dispatch this,
and that another time.


M. I judge that more convenient, which I find you like better; for it will be
concluded with good Reason, that whatsoever of those Opinions which I have
alleged, prove true, death must be either not evil, or rather good. For if the
Soul be Heart, or Blood, or Brains, of a certain, because it is Corporal, it
will dye with the other Body. If it be breath, perhaps it will scatter into
thin Air: If Fire, it will be quenched: If it be the Harmony of Aristoxenus, it
will be discomposed. What need I mention Dicaearchus, who allows not the Soul
to be any Substance? according to all these Opinions, none has any concern
after Death; for Life and Sense are extinguished together. But what is
insensible, has neither interest in good or evil. The Judgments of the rest
open some door of Hope, if this may chance to please you, that our Souls, when
they have escaped out of our Bodies, may arrive at Heaven, as at their own Home.


S. That is well pleasing to me, and I could principally wish that it were so.
But next, however it is, could be contented with the persuasion that it were so.


M. What need have you of our pains to that purpose? can we surpass Plato in
Eloquence? Read over diligently his Book about the Soul, you will need no
further Information.


S. I have in truth done so, and that many times; but, I know not how, whilst I
am in reading I yield my assent; when I have laid down the Book, and begin to
meditate with my self upon the Soul's Immortality, all my former Assent slips
out of my mind.


M. What think you of this? do you grant that Souls do either subsist after
death, or determine upon death?


S. I readily grant it.


M. (b) What if they survive?


S. I allow they are blessed.


M. If they dye?


S. That they are not miserable, because they have no being; for that Point
upon compulsion from you, we a little before granted.


M. How then, or wherefore do you say death in your judgment to be an evil,
which either renders us blessed in case the Soul survive, or not miserable, as
being without all Sense?


(b) What if they survive? I allow they are blessed.] An intellectual Life is a
Blessing compared with Annihilation; but to this must be added; Reconciliation
to God, on such Terms as he has declared consistent with the Honor of his
Justice and Truth.

SECT. XII. Arguments that the Soul subsists after Death, from immemorial
Tradition, from Funeral Rites, and from the Veneration of ancient Heroes.
S. BE pleased therefore to declare in the first place, if you are able, that
the Soul subsists after Death; if you cannot evince that (for it is a hard
matter to make out clearly) inform us that Death carries no evil along with
it; for I fear least that be evil, I say not, to be insensible, but that we
must lose our Senses.


M. We can produce the best Authority for that Sentence which you would gain;
now this both ought, and is wont to be of greatest moment in deciding all
Causes; as first the consent of all Antiquity, who the less distance they were
removed from their original and divine Extraction, did perhaps discern truth
more clearly. Therefore this one Principle was deeply engrasted in those old
Sires, who lived in the nonage of time, that there was Sense after Death; nor
would man by departure out of Life, be so raised up from the Foundations, as to
perish totally. And this may be collected, as from many other Instances, so in
particular from the Pontifical Sanctions about Ceremonies at the places of
burial, which they would never have observed with so much Devotion, nor avenged
the breach of them under such inexpiable Penalties, had it not been imprinted
in their minds, that death was not an Annihilation, but a removal and change
only of Life, which used to conduct Men and Women of good Fame up to Heaven;
and which continued in others, but was depressed to the grosser Regions
investing the Earth. After this Ritual, and the Opinion of our Ancestors,

In Heaven lives Romulus with the Gods in bliss; as Ennius, compliant with
Fame, sweetly sings. In like manner among the Greeks, and from them derived to
us, and as far as the Western Ocean is Hercules esteemed, a God so powerful and
propitious. From hence Bacchus born of Sem^le, and in like renown Castor and
Pollux Brethren, Sons of Tynearus, who are delivered to have been in the
Battles of the Roman People, not only assistants of Victory, (c) but also
Messengers there of express: What is not Ino, Cadmus's Daughter, who was named
by the Greeks Leucothea, termed by the Romans, Matuta? What? is not almost all
Heaven, not to instance in more, peopled with Inhabitants of humane Race?


(c) But also Messengers thereof] In the War with the Latins at the Regillan
Lake, two Knights on white Horses were seen to lead up the Roman Battalia, and
after the Victory, the same night to wash their Houses at the Fountain of
Juiurna, where having brought Post to Rome, the News of the day won, they
vanished. The like divine Express is said to have brought the word to Domitius
Aenobarbus, the day that Perses King of Macedon was beaten by Paulus Aemilius.

SECT. XIII. From this that the Superior Gods are received to have been Men
deceased.
BUT if I should go about to ransack old Monuments, and discover out of them
what the Greek Writers have disclosed; those very Gods which are reputed of the
higher Rank, will be found to have passed from us here to Heaven. Enquire whose
Sepulchers are showed in Greece. Call to mind, because you have been admitted
to the Vision of the secret Ceremonies, what passages are delivered in those
Mysteries; so will you come to understand of how large extent this Suggestion
is. But those plain-hearted Ancients, who had never learned these Systems of
natural Theology, which many years after came to be formed, believed no more
than the bare objects of their Senses, comprehended not the Reasons and Causes
of them; were often moved by some Apparitions, and those most commonly in the
night, to conceive that those who had departed this World, were still alive.
Now allowing this to pass for a most conclusive Argument, why we should believe
the being of a God, because there is no People so Savage, no Person so
Barbarous, but has some Notion of a Deity impressed on his mind. Many have
unworthy Conceptions of God, for that arises from corrupt Custom; yet all
concur in this Faith, that there is a divine Nature and Power, nor is this
opinion wrought by the Conferring or Combination of men together, nor is it
built upon Customs or Laws. Now the consent of all Nations in any thing, is to
be esteemed the Law of Nature. Who therefore is there who does not mourn for
the loss of his Friends, upon the account that he thinks them deprived of the
Comforts of Life? Take away this Opinion, and you will take away Mourning, for
no body bemoans his own loss. Perhaps they grieve or are in anguish for it.
That same pitiful Lamentation, weeping and wailing, springs from the
Consideration, that we judge him whom we loved, despoiled of the Conveniences
of Life, and sensible that he is so. And this judgment we bear from the
Impressions of Nature, without any Conclusions of Reason, or Instructions of
Learning.

SECT. XIV. From an innate care of Posterity, and zeal for the State.
FUrther it is a strong Argument, that Nature has in her self secret
Convictions about the Souls Immortality, from that Providence which all have,
and especially in those things which are to take place after our Death.

He raises Plants, whose Fruit next Age must gather. As says Statius in the
Comedy of the young Twins; upon what Contemplation but only this, that he is
interess'd in succeeding Generations? Shall then a careful Husbandman Plant
Trees, whereof he is never likely to see one Berry, and shall not a good
Patriot plant Laws, Customs for the Commonwealth. What means the breeding of
Children; what the propagating our Name; what the Adoptions of Sons; what the
formality of Wills; what the Monuments of Tombs; what Epitaphs, but what we
reckon upon future times. What say we to this? Do you make any question, but
that a Pattern of our Nature ought to be taken from the very best of Natures?
Now what Nature is better in Mankind, than that of those who esteem themselves
born for the Succor, Defense, and Preservation of men. Hercules is gone to the
Gods; he had never gone, had he not, while he lived among men, secured his
passage thither.

SECT. XV. And thirst after Glory.
THese Instances are of old Date, and consecrated by the Religion of all
People. By what Principles do we suppose so many brave Persons acted in our own
State, who laid down their Lives for the Commonwealth? was it their Judgment,
that their name should be confined within the same compass as their Lives? No
man without great hopes of immortality would ever offer up himself in the
Service of his Country. Themistocles might have lived at ease; so might
Epaminondas, and (not to look abroad or backward for Examples) so might I. But
there is in our minds a kind of secret sally-port, whereby we make excursion
into future Ages. This is most forward and observable in the most pregnant Wits
and gallant Spirits. Take away this, who would be so senseless as to live in
perpetual toil and hazard? I speak for Statesmen, but as to Poets, have they
no regard to Fame after Death, whence then came this Inscription?

Here, Roman, stands old Ennius crowned with Bays,
Who sung your Fathers in immortal Lays.
He expects the Wages of Glory from those whose Parents he had immortalized.
Then further on the same occasion,

None mourn for me, nor cruel Destiues blame,
I draw the breath of never-dying Fame.
But why do I insist on Poets? Artisans strive to be ennobled by their
Masterpieces after Death. For why else should Phidias work an Image like
himself in the Shield of Minerva, where he might not inscribe his Name? Nay our
own Philosophers, do they not set their Names to those very Books which they
write upon contemning Glory? Now if the consent of all men be the voice of
Nature; and all men every where do accord, that they who are departed this
Life, have some interest here; we then must needs be of the same Sense: and if
any who excel in Parts and Virtue, we suppose them as being best natured, to
see farthest into the Power of Nature; it is likely, since the best men are
most serviceable to Posterity, that there is somewhat whereof they shall be
sensible after Death.

SECT. XVI. That Dead men's Souls abide in Caves under earth, is the groundless
Fiction of Poets, or Imposture of Magicians.
BUT as We conceive the Being of God by natural Instinct, but gather his Nature
and Attributes by rational Deductions; so that Souls do subsist in a separate
State, we judge by the consent of all Nations; what Mansions they inhabit, and
what be their essential Qualities we must learn; by reason the ignorance of
which has feigned a Hell in the Center of the Earth, and those bugbears which
you did seem not without just Cause to despise. For when Bodies fell into the
Earth, and were covered within the ground, from whence they are said to be
inhum'd, they fancied that the dead led the rest of their Life under the Earth.
Upon which opinion of theirs, great errors ensued; these the Poets improved.
For the crammed Seats of the Theater, in which be Women and Children, are moved
when they hear such a lofty Verse:

I come mith woeful pains from under ground,
A steep and headlong way which Cliff's surround,
Huge, pointed, pendant; where gross darkness dwells.
And so far did the error prevail, which seems to me now taken quite away, that
though they knew Corpses to have been burnt, yet they feigned such Acts done
below, as could neither be performed without corporeal Organs, nor understood.
For they could not comprehend the Soul's subsisting in a separate condition,
but required it to have some shape and figure. Upon this conceit depends all
Homer's Descent into Hell. Upon the same, that Necromancy, which my Friend
Appius practiced. Upon this the Avernian Lake in our Neighborhood.

Whence raised are Night-Ghosts, Images of the dead,
Deep Acheron 's Gates flung open by salt bloodshed.
Yet they will have these Images speak; which is impossible without a Tongue,
without a Palate, without the force and figure of Throat, Sides and Lungs. They
could not see any thing by the mind, but terminated all sight in the Eyes. Now
it is the part of a noble Wit, to call the Mind off from the Senses, and take
it out of the common Road. Therefore I suppose that in so many Ages, some have
before done so; but of all whose Opinions are Recorded, (a) Pherecydes the
Syrese first maintained that Humane Souls are immortal. An Author of great
Antiquity, (b) for he lived in the Reign of my Kinsman. This opinion his
Scholar Pythagoras greatly confirmed, who being come into Italy in the Reign of
Tarquin the proud swayed Greece the Great, with honor to his Person, multitude
of Auditors, and Authority of his Doctrine: so that for many years after, the
Pythagorean Name so flour sh'd, that none were reputed Scholars who were not of
his Sect.

(a) Pherecydes the Syrese] From Syres one of the Islands, in the Aegean called
Cyclades, he was the Master of Pythagoras.

(b) For he lived in the Reign of my Kinsman] Tully claim kindred with Servius
Tullius the sixth Roman King upon names-sake.

SECT. XVII. That it is more likely they ascend.
BUT I return to the Ancients; they were hardly wont to give any reason of
their Opinion, unless in matters demonstrable by Lines and Numbers. Plato is
reported to have traveled into Italy, that he might be acquainted with the
Pythagoreans; and when he was there, to have had intimacy with Architas and
Timaeus, so that he became expert in all the Pythogorean Learning; and was the
first that not only held the same concerning the Immortality of the Soul, as
Pythagoras did; but further brought his reason to prove it; which reason,
unless you otherwise require, let us blanch, and so abandon this whole hope of
Immortality.

S. Do you offer, now you have raised my expectations to the height, to
disappoint me? had rather, I assure you, be mistaken with Plato, whom I know
how much you magnify, and am wont, upon your Commendation, to admire, than to
be of their opinion in the right.


M. Bravely resolved! for I my self could be contented with so good Company, to
be in the wrong. Do we then question this, as many other passages? although
there be least ground to doubt this; Mathematicians persuade us, that the
Earth, situated in the middle of the Universe, bears the proportion of a
Point, which they call the Center, in comparison with the vast Orb of the
Starry Heavens: and further, that such is the nature of the four Elements, that
their Motions are divided by opposite terms; so that terrene and humid Bodies
of their own bent and sway, tend perpendicularly to the Earth and Sea; the two
remaining parts, the one of Fire, the other of Air, as the former by their
heaviness, sink down into the middle of the World; so these sore up at right
Angles to the heavenly Regions; whether it be their own nature to aspire
upward; (c) or that the lighter parts are naturally lifted up by the descent of
the more heavy. These things being on all hands agreed, it ought to be alike
evident that Souls, when they depart the Body, whether they be of a spiritous
or fiery substance, mount toward Heaven; but if the Soul be a number, which is
said with more subtlety than plainness; or if it be of that fifth Nature, which
however nameless, is not so very difficult to be understood; then are they much
more abstract from matter, and of greater purity, and will consequently ascend
to the greatest distance from the Earth. Now some of these Natures the Soul
must needs be of; not to fancy so quick and sprightly an Intelligence, lying
plunged in the Heart, or Brains, or after Empedocles, in the Blood.


(c) Or that the lighter parts are naturally lifted up by the descent of the
heavier.] The opinion that Gravity and Levity are not positive but comparative,
thought to be Modern, and Cartesian, appears to have been ancient.

SECT. VIII. Nor vanish.
AS for Dicaearchus, with Aristoxenus his Contemporary and Fellow-Pupil, let
them pass for great Scholars, the one of which seems never to have had
compassion, or he would have been sensible that he had a Soul; the other is so
transported with his Tunes, that he would forcibly apply them to the Matters in
hand. Now we can collect Harmony from the distance of sounds; the setting of
which notes in due proportion produces also variety of Tunes: But, what Music
the posture of the Limbs, and the shape of the Body destitute of a Soul, can
produce, I comprehend not. He would do well therefore, Scholar as he is, to
leave these Matters to his Master Aristotle, and content himself with teaching
to Fiddle. For that is good direction which is given in the Greek Proverb.

Let each man practice the Art in which he is skilled. But turn we quite out of
doors that casual concourse of smooth and round Bodies; which yet Democritus
would have to conceive heat and become spiritous, that is, having Life. Now the
Soul in this case, (which if it consists of any of the four Elements, whereof
all things are said to be compounded, has for its ingredients inflamed Air, to
which opinion Panaetius was most inclinable) must mount upwards; for these two
Elements have nothing in them tending downward, but always ascend so, whether
they scatter in the Air; it must be far from falling to the Earth; or, whether
they continue, and subsist in a separate Estate, they must of more necessity
mount up to Heaven, forcing their passage through this gross and impure Air,
which is nearest the Earth; for the Soul is hotter, or rather more fiery than
is this Air, which I just now called gross and impure.

SECT. XIX. But ascend the Sky.
AND that it is so, is demonstrable from this, that our Bodies compounded of
the terrene sort of Principles, do yet conceive warmth from the heat of the
Soul. The probability is further improved of our Souls breaking thorough, and
surmounting this aerie Region with the more ease, because nothing is swifter
then thought. No speed may compare with the speed of the Soul; which if it
continue entire and like it self, must of necessity pass with such a quick
motion, as to pierce and divide all these lower Regions of Heaven, wherein
Clouds, Rains, and Winds are engendered, which is moist and dark, with
Exhalations from the Earth; which Atmosphear, when the Soul has transcended,
and finds that she is arrived at a nature like her self, consisting of a
refined Air, and gentle heat of the Sun, she fixes in the Empirean Orb, and
stays her further ascent; for having now gotten a lightness and heat agreeable
to her self, as hanging balanced in an equal counterpoise, she moves neither
way, but this is her natural home, when she has arrived at her own likeness;
where she shall want nothing but be nourished and sustained with the same Food,
wherewith the Stars are nourished and sustained: and whereas we are here wont
through the Lusts of our flesh, to be enflamed to almost all sorts of
concupiscence, and to be so much the more fired, because we emulate those who
are in possession of those Goods which we pursue. Doubtless, blessed shall we
be, when divested of these Bodies, we shall with them have put off their
craving desires, and fond Emulations. Now as it fares with us here, when
released from cares, we love to recreate our selves in beholding some moral
Divertisements, or other pleasing sights; we shall have then much more liberty
to attend to it (d) and shall lay out our selves wholly in contemplating the
wonderful Effects of Nature, and discerning their Causes; both because our
minds have naturally unplanted in them, an insatiable longing to come at the
sight of Truth: And because the very Borders of those heavenly places, at which
we shall have arrived, as by their proximity they will furnish greater
advantages, as the discovery of the celestial Bodies, with their motions; so
will they accordingly excite in us a more ardent desire, to enquire after them.
For it was this beautiful order which put our Fathers and Grandfathers even
here on Earth (as Theophrastus says) upon Philosophy, and inflamed them with a
desire of Knowledge; but they shall with more enlarged Faculties and
satisfaction, comprehend them; who while here upon Earth, however they were
invelopped in thick mists of Obscurity; yet by the piercing sight of a clear
mind, endeavored to descry them.

(d) And shall lay out our selves wholly in contemplating the wonderful Effects
of Nature, and discerning their Causes.] To behold natural Causes, is
delightful to the Understanding. God is said to look down upon his Works, and
rejoice. But our greatest satisfaction is by them, as in a Mirror, to behold
the infinite Wisdom and Power of him who has disposed them. And since the
Creature must pass away in the general Conflagration; there remains no other
beatifical Vision, but to behold the face of the Creator, reconciled to us
through a gracious Redeemer, to which only purity of heart can prepare.

SECT. XX. And thence contemplate Nature.
NOW if they fancy themselves to have got some advantage, who have seen the
Mouth of the Black-Sea, and those Streights, through which the Galley entered,
which was named

Argo, because in her the Flower of Greece,
From Argos rowed, to fetch the Golden Fleece.
And those also who have seen the Streights mouth, where the swift current
Libya and Europe parts.

What a rare sight do we think it will be, when we may see the whole Earth at
one view? and as its Situation, Form, Circuit; so both its Country's habitable;
and those again utterly uninhabitable, through excess of cold or heat? For we
do not at present behold with our eyes the things we do see. Since there is no
sense in the Body; but, as not only Naturalists inform, but also Physicians,
who in Dissections have seen and examined the several parts, there are certain
open passages bored from the Seat of the Soul, to the Eyes, to the Ears, and to
the Nostrils; whence oftentimes either being deep in Meditation, or seized with
some violent Distemper, though our eyes and ears be both sound and open, we
can neither see nor hear with them. So that it is very apparent, that it is the
Soul which both sees and hears, and not those parts which are but as it were
the Casements of the Soul; with which yet it can perceive nothing, unless it be
mindful and attentive. It is further observable, that with the same mind we
comprehend objects of a most different Nature, as color, taste, heat, scent,
and sound; which the Soul could never distinguish from the report of five
Messengers, unless all were committed to her, that she alone might be judge of
all. And in truth those things will be seen much more clearly and
transparently, when the Soul shall get free to the place whither Nature is
bound; for at present, however Nature has framed those overtures, which are a
thorough-fair from the Body to the Soul, after a most curious and artificial
manner; yet are they in a sort, obstructed by gross and impure Matter; but,
when the Soul shall he by her self, nothing shall interpose to hinder her from
discerning every object, according to its proper Nature.

SECT. XXI. That the Epicureans who plead for Annihilation, have no such reason
to triumph in their Scheme of natural Knowledge improved.
WE could sufficiently dilate upon this Subject, if the Matter required it, how
many, how different, how great entertainments of the Sight, the Soul should
find in the heavenly places. The Consideration of which, makes me often admire
at the strange Vanity of some Philosophers, who magnify their knowledge of
Nature, and in great Ecstasies of Joy, offer up thanks to him that first
invented and revealed it, worshipping him as a God: For by his means they
pretend themselves freed from the most insupportable Lords, everlasting Terror,
and apprehension day and night. What Terror? What Apprehension? Is there any
old Good-wife so doting, as to fear those things which you see now, had you not
learned the Scheme of natural Philosophy, you should have feared?

Acheron 's low Regions which pale shades frequent,
Where Clouds o're-spread the gloomy Firmament.
Is it not a shame for a Philosopher to glory, that he is got above these
fears, and that he knows them to be but Fables? By which it appears what
profound natural Parts these men have, who should have believed such Stories,
if they had not been bred up to Learning. A great prize too, they have got by
this Learning; that when they come to dye, they are to perish Soul and Body.
Which admit to be true (for I am not contentious) what great matter of joy or
boasting does the Doctrine afford? Though, to speak truth, I cannot find any
considerable Objection against the opinion of Pythagoras and Plato; for had
Plato alleged no reason for it (see what deference I have to his Person) he
would have dashed me with his bare Authority; but now he has backed his
Judgment with so many Reasons, that he seems to me, to have endeavored to make
others to be so, but himself truly to have been of the persuasion.

SECT. XXII. An immaterial Substance, though invisible, may subsist of it self,
as God, so the Soul.
YET many stubborn Opponents there are, who pass Sentence of Death upon Souls,
as Capital Malefactors. Nor have they other ground, upon which they derogate
credit from the Eternity of Souls, but only this, that they cannot fancy nor
comprehend what should be the nature of a Soul separate from the Body; as if
they understood what were the nature of it, when united to it; what fashion,
what size, what place it takes up. So that were man a Creature, who might be
looked into, and all his inward Parts discovered, whether would the Soul be
visible, or for its extraordinary subtilty escape the sight. These things they
would do well to consider, who say, they cannot conceive what a Soul should be
without a Body; they will find what Conception they have of it, now it is in
the Body. For my part, when I look closely into the nature of the Soul, it
seems a far more difficult and obscure Speculation, what the Soul should be,
when confined to this Body, as in a strange House, then what it should be, when
it is escaped and arrived at the open Heaven, as its own home; For unless we
can conceive the nature of a thing which we never saw, neither can we apprehend
the Being of God, who is an incorporeal Spirit. Dicaearchus and Aristoxenus,
because the Nature and likeness of a So^^ were hard to be understood, plainly
denied the ^^ry being of it. Indeed it is one of the hardest Operations, for
the Soul, by a reflex act, to behold the Soul. And this was the true meaning of
Apollo, in that Precept, wherein he enjoins man to know himself. For I do not
take, that he means we should know our Limbs, how tall we are, or of what
shape; nor indeed are our Bodies our selves, and what I now speak to you, I do
not address to your Body. When therefore, he says, know your self, he means,
know your Soul; for the Body is but the Case and Cabinet of the Soul. Whatever
Actions are performed by your Soul, are your Actions. Therefore to know thee,
unless it had been of some Divine Import, it would not so far have passed for
the Invention of some profound Wit, so as to have been fathered upon a God,
requiring no greater Ability, than to know ones self. But though the Soul
should not attain to know what is the Nature of the Soul; pray satisfy me, can
it not know its Being? can it not be sensible of its Motion? from whence arose
that Argument of Plato, pressed by Socrates in the Dialogue styled Phaedrus,
and quoted by me in my sixth Book of Politics.

SECT. XXIII. Arguments for the Immortality of the Soul, from its inward Motion.
WHat always moves, is eternal; but what imparts motion to another, and what
is acted by another, when it comes to an end of motion, must also come to an
end of life. That only therefore which moves it self, because it is never
deserted of it self, neither does it ever cease moving; nay, this is the
Spring, this the Principle of Motion, to other things which are moved. Now a
Principle has no precedent source of being, for all things arise from their
Principle, but it can spring from no other thing; for so it would cease to be a
Principle, if it were begotten of any thing else; but if it be never generated,
neither will it ever corrupt; for a Principle abolished, can neither arise
again from another, nor can it produce any other thing from it self; for all
things must necessarily arise from their Principle; so comes it about, that
the Principle of Motion, must be at that which moves it self; now that can
neither be born, nor dye; or else all Heaven would tumble down, and the whole
frame of Nature stop its course; nor have any Mover, by whose first impression
it should be set on Motion. It being therefore plain, that what moves it self,
is eternal, who can deny the Nature of Souls to be such; for whatsoever is
stirred by a foreign Impression, is inanimate; but every Animal is quickened by
an inward Motion, and of its own; for that is the proper Nature and Power of
the Soul; which if it be the only of all Substances, that always moves it
self; neither was it in truth ever born, and is eternal.

Let all the petty Philosophers (for so should they be called, in my opinion,
who differ from Plato and Socrates, and that Family) let them come in to assist
one another; they will not only never express any thing so neatly, but also
never be able to discern where the stress of the Argument lies. (e) The Soul
therefore is sensible that it moves, and is withal sensible that it moves by
its own, and no foreign Impulse; and that it can never be, that it should fail
it self, from whence its Eternity is concluded, unless you have any reply to
offer.

S. I indeed, am well contented, to admit into my thought, no matter of
questioning it, I have such a favor for that Opinion.

(e) The Soul therefore is sensible that it moves.] The former Argument of
Self-motion, being common to all living Creatures; might seem to conclude for
the like Privilege to the Souls of brute Beasts which go downward, and return
into the Power of that Matter, from whence they were educed: But Cicero
restrains it to a reflex Act, of the understanding which properly flows from
the rational Soul.

SECT. XXIV. From the capaciousness of its memory.
WHat do you think of these other Instances? Take you them to be of less
moment? which manifest that there is somewhat Divine in the Souls of men; which
could I perceive how they could have been born, I might also comprehend how
they should dye. For as to the Blood, Choler, Phlegm, Bones, Sinews, Veins, in
a word, all the mould of the Limbs, and of the whole Body, methinks I could
account for them, whereof they are compounded, and how they were formed from
the Soul it self, if there accru'd no other advantage, but that we lived by it;
I should think the Life of man as much supported by Nature, as that of a Vine
or other Plant; for we say, that they also live. Again, if the Soul of man had
no other, Faculties, than those of desiring and avoiding; that too it would
have in common with the Beasts. For the first instance, it has memory, and
that infinite, of innumerable things; (f) so that Plato would have it to be the
recalling to mind what was known in a former Life. For in that Book which is
entitled Menon, Socrates asks a certain Youngster some Geometrical questions,
about the content of a Square: He answers them, as a Child; and yet the
Interrogatories are so easy, that the answer proceeding, step by step, comes
at length to that pass, as if he had learned Mathematics; from which Socrates
would conclude, that to learn, is nothing else, but to refresh the Memory.
Which Topic he explains much more accurately; yet in that Dialogue which he
held, the very day wherein he submitted to the Execution of the Sentence passed
upon his Life; wherein he teaches, that any one, let him seem utterly
illiterate and unexperienced, if he answer directly to one that puts apt
questions to him, does make it manifest, that he does not then learn those
Matters anew, but only recollect what he had before in his memory. And that it
were wholly impossible for us to have the Notions, which the Greeks call
common, of so many, and so great things, from our Childhood imprinted, and as
it were registered in our Souls, unless the Soul before it entered the Body, had
been employed in understanding the World. And if it had been nothing, as is in
all places disputed by Plato (for he thinks that to be nothing, which comes by
Generation, and turns to Corruption, and that only to have being, which is such
always as he calls his Idea, we the Species or Kind) the Soul after it was
locked up in the Body could not come to understand them, therefore it brought
the knowledge of them with it hither; by which means all admiration of our
knowing so many things ceases. Nor does the Soul discern them on the sudden,
after she is removed into such a strange and confused habitation, till she has
recollected and recruited her self, for then she recovers those dormant
notices, by remembrance of them; so that Learning is nothing else, than a
recalling to mind. Now I must confess, I do after an extraordinary manner,
admire the memory; what is that faculty, whereby we remember? what is its
force? or whence its nature? I do not demand about such a memory, as Simonides
is said to have had; such as Theodectes; such as he who was sent Ambassador
from Pyrrhus, to the Senate Cynaeas; such as Charmidas lately; such as in these
times, the Scepsian Metrodorus; such as our Friend Hortensius. I speak of the
common memory of men, and those especially who are trained up in any
considerable Business or Art; the compass of whose mind, it is hard to
estimate, so many things do they remember.

(f) So that Plato would have it to be the re-calling to mind, what was known
in a former Life.] It is a known opinion of Plato, the pre-existence of Souls,
too much favored by Origin and Arnobius, perhaps to salve the Doctrine of
original Sin, which they thought less reconcilable to the Souls Creation in
its Infusion. But the truer account of such apprehension, seems to be from the
common Notions, by natural instinct implanted in the rational Soul.

SECT. XXV. Corollaries of the former Argument, from that of Invention.
WHither now tends this whole Discourse? I think it would be understood what is
this force, and whence it is: Certainly it proceeds not from the Heart, nor
Blood, nor Brains, nor Atoms. Whether the Soul be Breath or Fire, I know not;
nor am I ashamed, as some others are, to confess I do not know, what I do not.
But this I can affirm, as much as of any thing else that is obscure, be the
Soul Breath, or be it Fire, I durst be deposed it is Divine; for, I beseech you
now, can you imagine that so great an ability of memory can be produced or
compounded of Earth, or this gross Region of Air? You do not see what is its
Nature: But what are its Qualities, you do see; or if you do not that neither,
what is its quantity, to be sure you do see. How then do we conceive of it?
whether do we think there is any concavity, into which, as into a Fat, we turn
up the things which we remember? that is absurd: For what bottom, or what such
Figure of the Soul can be imagined? or what Gage of so large a Size? Or do we
take the Soul to be impressed as Wax, and the Memory for the Prints of things set
down in the Mind, as in a Table Book? What Prints can there be of Words? what
of the things themselves? Lastly, what Volum so vast, as to represent such
numerous Nations? What think you should that Power be, which brings to light
useful Secrets, which is called Invention, or Devising? or that it can be
compounded of this earthly, mortal and frail Nature? What judge you of him, who
the first imposed names on all things, which Pythagoras reckons a Work of the
highest Wisdom? or who drew scattered men into Communities, and incorporated
them for the mutual Support of Life? or who couched the Sounds of the Voice,
which seemed infinite, into the marks of a few Letters? or who calculated the
Courses, Progressions, Stations of the Planets. All of them were great
Personages. Those of higher Antiquity yet, who found out Corn, who Clothing,
who Houses, who the helps of living handsomely, who guards against wild Beasts;
by whom being civilized and reclaimed, we naturally proceeded from the
necessary, to the more polite Arts? for entertainment of the Ears, was in great
measure found out and tempered, with variety of Notes and Voices. We looked up
even to the Stars; both those which are fixed at certain distances, and those
also which are not so in reality, but in name, only wandering Stars. All the
motions and windings of which, the Soul, that first observed, gave at the same
time proof, that it was like him who had fashioned them in Heaven. For when
Archimedes locked up the motions of Sun, Moon, and the five other Planets, into
his Sphere, he brought that to pass, which the God that in Timaeus, built the
World, that one Revolution should adjust motions most unlike for speed and
slowness. Which if it cannot be wrought in this World without God, neither
could Archimedes in his Sphere, have imitated the same Motions, without a
Divine Wit.

SECT. XXVI. From further Endowments.
IN my judgment, I must say, even these more familiar and illustrious
Instances, seem not performable, without some Divine Power: so as I should
think that either a Poet pours out a grave and accomplished Poem, without some
heavenly Instinct of the Mind; or that any Eloquence, without some
extraordinary impulse, can flow in a mighty Stream of lofty Words, and copious
Sentences. And for Philosophy, the Mother of all Arts, what is it else; but, as
Plato says, the Gift, as I the Invention of the Gods? This first trained us up
to their Worship; next, to Justice toward men, which consists in the
Preservation of Societies: And lastly to Moderation and Courage, this also has
dispelled the darkness from our Souls, as from our Eyes, that we can behold the
Extremities of Nature; what is above, below, first, midst, last. Truly this
Power seems to me to be Divine, which can work so many, and so admirable
Effects. For what is Memory of things and words? What is Invention? Certainly
such, as no greater Perfections can be apprehended to be in God. Now, I am not
of the mind, that the Gods take pleasure in Feasting on Nectar and Ambrosia, or
in a Goddess of everlasting Youth, to bear their Cups: Nor do I believe Homer,
who says, that Ganymede was ravished by the Gods, for his Beauty, to fill
Jupiter Drink; a Cause no way sufficient, why such an injury should be offered
Laomedon. This was a mere Fiction of Homer's, who made Gods like men; I could
have wished, he had rather made men like Gods. Wherein like Gods? in Activity,
Wisdom, Invention, Memory. Therefore, the Soul, which, as I say, is Divine; as
Euripides presumes to say, is a God; truly if God be either Spirit, or Fire,
the same is man's Soul; for as that heavenly Nature is free both from Earth and
moisture; so the humane Soul partakes of neither of them. But if it be a fifth
Nature, first introduced by Aristotle; the same is common both to the Soul and
God. Pursuant to which opinion, we thus expressed our selves word for word, in
our Book of Consolation.

SECT. XXVII. From its Divine Original.
ORiginal of Souls, none can be found here on Earth, for there is no mixture or
composition in Souls, nor any appearance that they were born or molded;
nothing of Water, Wind, or Fire, for in these Natures there is nothing which
has a Power of Memory, Understanding, or Thought, which can both retain what
is past, foresee what is to come, and comprehend what is present, which are
Divine Properties; nor will it ever be made out, whence they could be derived
upon man, but from God. There is then a peculiar Nature and Power of the Soul,
distant from these visible and known Natures. Whatever therefore is that
Principle which has Sense, which has Wisdom, which has Will, which has
Activity, it is Celestial and Divine, and therefore, must of necessity be
eternal. Nor in truth can God himself, as he is understood of us, be otherwise
apprehended, than as a Spirit uncontrolled and free, separate from all mortal
Contagion, perceiving all things, and moving all things, and being it self
endu'd with everlasting Motion.

SECT. XXVIII. From its Faculties.
THE Spirit of man is of this lineage, and of the same Nature. Where therefore,
or of what likeness is that Spirit? Where is yours, or of what likeness? Can
you resolve me? If I am not able to understand all things, which I wish I were
able to do, will you not allow to make use of such Abilities as I have? The
Soul has not that Power, as to see its self; but the Soul as the Eye, though
it see not it self, beholds other things. It sees not what is of small import,
its own form. Perhaps so, though as to that -- but forbear we it. It sees to be
sure its Power, Pregnancy, Memory, Motion, Quickness; these are great, these
are divine, these are everlasting Excellencies. What shape it is of, or where
it dwells, is not to be inquired: As when we see first the face and brightness
of Heaven; then so great a swiftness of Circumvolution, as we cannot conceive:
Next, the Succession of days and nights, and fourfold alteration of Seasons,
fitted to the ripening of Corn, and temperature of Bodies: Then the Sun,
Captain and Ruler over all these; as also the Moon, which by her waxing and
waning, does distinguish, and as it were, point at the days of the Calendar:
Further, that in the same Orb, divided into twelve parts, the other five
Planets do move, keeping constantly their proper Periods, though unequal to one
another; and withal, the luster of the Fir mament, on all parts bespangled
with Stars, then the Globe of the Earth standing above the Sea, fixed in the
middle of the Universe, inhabited and peopled in two distant Regions; the one
of which, where we dwell, is placed under the Pole, by the Northern Bear,
whence.

Blustering cold Boreas Banks of driven Snow raises. The other is Southern,
unknown to us which the Greeks call under the opposite Pole; (g) the remaining
three parts are uninhabited, as being either starved with cold, or scorched
with heat; (h) but here, where we inhabit, without failure.

The Air grows mild; new Liveries grace the Woods;
Luxuriant Vines shoot forth young Grapes and Buds;
Fruit Trees with loaded Boughs, incline their heads;
Springs purle; Grass diapers the flowery Meads.
Furthermore, the multitude of Cattle, some for Food, some for Agriculture,
some for Carriage, some for Clothing; and man himself, as it were,
Contemplator of Heaven, and the Gods, and Worshipper of them; but all Lands and
Seas subservient to Man's use.

(g) The remaining three parts are uninhabited.] The ancient Romans knew little
more than the Northern temperate Zone; but concluded the like of the Southern.
But our Navigations and Voyages have discovered the whole Torrid Zone to be
inhabited; and part of the Northern Frigid to be so; by which the like may be
inferred of part of the Southern Frigid. Nor does any part of the World seem
incapable of Habitation at some Seasons of the year; though less commodious, as
Carpenter disputes in his Decads.

(h) But here, where we inhabit.] He slides into an indirect Commendation of
Italy, as the Paradise of the World.

SECT. XXIX. From its Nature.
WHEN we behold therefore these, and innumerable other things, can we doubt,
but that there presides over this frame, either the maker, if these things were
produced, as is the judgment of Plato; or if they were from Eternity, as is the
opinion of Aristotle, a directer of so great a Work and Administration? Thus
the mind of man, although you see it not, as you do not see God, yet as you
acknowledge God from his Works, so from the memory of things, and invention and
swiftness of motion, and the whole beauty of Virtue, acknowledge the Divine
Power of the mind. In what place then is it? I take it to be in the head. And
why take it to be there? I can give my reason, but at another time. Now for
where the Soul should be? To be sure it is within you. What is its Nature?
Proper I think, and by it self. But suppose it of Fire; suppose it of Breath,
that imports nothing to the matter in hand: Only look to this, that as you know
God, although you are ignorant both of his place and shape, so ought your Soul
to be known to you, although you are ignorant both of its place and form. Now
in the knowledge of the Soul, we can no ways doubt of this, unless we be mere
Dunces in natural Philosophy, that there should be any mixture in Souls, any
composition, any conjunction, any cementing, any thing double; which so being,
neither can it be separated nor divided, nor torn, nor drawn asunder, nor, by
consequent, dye; for death is as it were a Departure, a Separation, and
Disunion of those parts which before death were held together by some common
tie. By these and the like Reasons, Socrates being moved, neither sought to an
advocate in the Trial for his Life, nor petitioned his Judges, but demeaned
himself with an unconcerned stoutness, derived not from the bravery of his
Spirit, not from Pride. And on the last day of his Life discoursed much on this
very Subject; and a few days before, (i) when he might easily have been
released out of Prison, would not. And when he was ready to take that deadly
potion into his hand, spoke after such manner, as that he seemed not driven to
Death, but ascending up to Heaven.

(i) When he might easily have been released out of Prison, would not.] Crito
would have deposited a great Sum, Simmias the Theban had brought more. Other
Fellow-Students would have made a common Purse to have wrought upon the
Keepers, the Informers, and some of the Indigent Magistrates; but he would not
escape by such indirect and dishonorable Practices.

SECT. XXX. From the Authority of Socrates and Cato.
FOR thus he maintained, and thus he argued. There are two ways, and a double
Post-road for Souls, when they go out of the Body. For they who had polluted
themselves with the Vices of the World, and abandoned themselves wholly to
Lusts, with which being blinded, they had defiled themselves, as it were with
Hereditary Family Vices, and Scandals, or had committed inexpiable Villainies in
the overthrow of the State, that these were carried in a By-road, debarred from
the blessed Assembly of the Gods. But those who had kept themselves pure and
incorrupt, and had contracted least infection from their Bodies, but had
always drawn themselves into retirement from them, and in humane Bodies had
imitated the life of God, that such had an easy and open return to those from
whom they came; and then he recounts how Swans, which are not without reason,
dedicated to Apollo; but because they seem to have the Gift of Divination from
him, by which foreseeing what benefit there is in death, they dye with Melody
and Pleasure, so should all good and learned men do. Nor could any one doubt of
this, unless it fared with us, when we think earnestly about our Souls, as it
is wont to do with those that gaze steadfastly upon the Sun in Eclipse, that
they quite lose their sight; so the eye of the mind, looking nearly into it
self, is sometimes dazzled; and by that very means we let go the intenseness of
Contemplation. Therefore our whole discourse upon the Subject, proceeds with
suspense, viewing round the Coast, demurring, crusing forward and backward, as
a small Pinnace beats about in the vast Ocean. But these are old Instances, and
fetched from the Greeks. Now Cato of late, so parted with life, as that he was
glad he had gotten an occasion of dying. For that Vicegerent of God, which
Rules within us, lays a strict Injunction, not to depart hence without his
leave: But when God himself shall give a just Cause, as he did Socrates then,
Cato now, and many often; then truly will the Wise man joyfully escape out of
this darkness, into the light. Nor yet will he break Prison, for the Laws
defend that; but being so discharged and dismissed by God, as by a Magistrate,
or lawful Authority, he will depart. For the whole Life of Philosophy, as the
same Author says, is a Meditation of Death.

CHAP. XXXI. From the Sequestring it self from the Body, in Meditation as in
Death.
NOW what else do we, when we call of our mind from following Pleasure, that
is, the Body? from minding our Estate, that is, the Servant of the Body? when
we withdraw it from managing State Affairs, and all business? What, say I, do
we then, but call the Soul home, oblige it to dwell within it self, and draw it
to the farthest distance from the Body? Now to abstract the Soul from the Body,
is nothing else than to exercise dying. Wherefore, take my word, let us
practice this, and sit loose from our Bodies, that is, accustom our selves to
dye. This, both whilst we shall be on Earth, will be like the Life of Heaven;
and when being set at liberty from these Bonds, we shall ascend thither; by
this means the agility of our Souls will be less clogged. For they who have
always been held fast bound in the Fetters of the Body, even when they are
knocked off, tread more gently, as they who have been many years loaded with
Irons. But when we shall come thither, then shall we live in truth, for this
Life is but a Death; which, if I were so disposed, I could lament.

S. That you have enough lamented, (k) in your Book of Consolation; which when
I read, I desire nothing more, than to leave this World; but upon hearing the
present Discourse, I am much more desirous to do so.


M. The time will come, and that speedily, and that, whether you draw back or
hasten; for Life is upon the Wing; but Death is so far from being an Evil, as
you lately thought; that I doubt whether any thing else be, I say not, no evil;
but any thing else be a greater good; for we shall be either Gods, or with the
Gods.


S. What avails it? for there are many among us, that give no credit to these
things.


M. Now will I never, in this debate, part with you on such Terms, as that you
should be of opinion, that death is evil.


S. How can I, now I have been thus informed?


M. How can you, do you ask? there will come upon you whole troops of
Gainsayers; and those not only Epicureans, whom for my part I do not despise,
though best Scholars generally do contemn: But my dear Dicaearchus has most
earnestly disputed against this immortality of Souls; for he wrote three Books
called Lesbian, because the debate was held at Mitylenae, wherein he would
prove that Souls are Mortal; the Stoics (l) they prorogue us, as Crows, to a
late day of Death; for they allow Souls to abide long, but not for ever.


(k) In your Book of Consolation] Upon the occasion of his beloved Daughter
Tullia dying in Childbed, Tully drew up into a Treatise, all the Heads of
comfort and distress delivered by the ancient Philosophers, and applied them
for his own use; which Book is lost; though there go about a piece under that
name.

(l) They prorogue us, as Crows, to a late day of death.] This is a Tradition
from Hesiod, that Crows live nine Lives of a man. Aristotle denies it, and
affirms only the Elephant to outlive man.

SECT. XXXII. The Adversaries of the Souls Immortality confuted.
HAVE you a mind therefore, to hear how, though it should be so; yet there is
no evil in Death?

S. Use your pleasure; but no one shall ever beat me out of Immortality.


M. I commend you for that; but it is good, not to be too confident; for we
often give upon some subtle Argument; are shaken, and change our Judgment, even
in clearer Matters, for there is some obscurity in these. Therefore, if such a
rencounter should happen, let us be armed.


S. Well advised, but I will watch that it may not happen.


M. Have you then any thing to allege, why we should not dismiss our Friends
the Stoics; those, I mean, (m) who allow that Souls abide after they are gone
out of the Body, but not always?


S. Ay, those Gentlemen who maintain that which is most difficult in this whole
dispute, that the Soul may subsist in a separate condition; but do not yield
that which is not only easy to be believed, but consequent upon that which
they have granted; that the Soul, after it has long survived, should not at
all dye.


M. You rightly reprove them. Should we then believe Panaetius, dissenting from
his Master Plato. Him that in all places he calls the Divine, the Wisest, the
Holiest, (n) the Homer of the Philosophers; yet this only Tenet of his, about
the Immortality of the Soul, he does not approve; for he affirms, what no body
denies, that whatsoever is born dies; but Souls are born, as the likeness of
Children, to their Parents, makes evident, which appears in their Wits also,
nor only in their Bodies. He brings another Argument for it. Nothing suffers
pain, but what may also be sick, and what is liable to disease, that must dye;
but Souls suffer pain, they therefore must dye.


(m) Who allow that Souls abide, after they are gone out of the Body, but not
always.] The Stoics held the Soul to be a hot Breath; that is, a Body
compounded of Air and Fire, so consequently subject to Dissolution, but not
suddenly upon expiring. The Souls of the loose and debauched, they fancied to
abide a time accordingly shorter; but those of the just and resolute, to the
next Conflagration of the World.

(n) The Homer of the Philosophers.] Not only because as Homer led and excelled
in Poetry, so Plato in Philosophy; but also more, because as the continued
Epique Poem of Homer, was that rich Spring, from whence the following Poets
drew the partial Arguments of their Poetry; so the Dialogues of Plato, are that
well-stored Repertory of Wisdom, from whence the succeeding Philosophers have
set up their several Sects, with their respective Opinions. So that, what the
one furnished in gross, the others deal out by retail.

SECT. XXXIII. The Arguments of Panaetius answered.
THESE Reasons may be disproved, for they proceed from ignorance, that when
there is speech about the Eternity of Souls, it is meant of the Understanding,
which is always free from any turbulent Motion; not of those parts wherein
Passions, Wrath, and Lusts inhabit; which (o) he, against whom these Objections
are raised, supposes removed from the Understanding, and lodged in distinct
Apartments. For likeness, more appears in Beasts, whose Souls have no reason.
But the likeness of men, is more visible in the shape of their Bodies; and the
Souls themselves, it much imports, in what kind of Body they be lodged; for
there proceed many Impressions from the Body, which quicken the understanding,
many which dull it. (p) Aristotle indeed says, that all ingenious men are of a
melancholy Complexion; so that I have the less reason to be troubled, that I
am none of the quickest. And, as if the Problem were agreed upon, subjoyns a
reason, why it comes to be so. Now if there be such great influence, see the
Production in the Body, upon the habit of the Mind (and these, whatever they
be, are all that makes the likeness) the likeness of Soul, infers no
necessity, why it should be born. To pass likeness, would Panaetius could be
present; he lived with Africanus, I would enquire of him, whom of all his
Kindred, was Africanus's Brother's Grandson like? In shape, his very Father; in
life, so like any Villain, that he was by far, the basest of all. Like to whom
too, was the Grandchild of P. Crassus, both a wise and eloquent man; as also
the Sons and Grandsons of many other excellent Personages, whom it is no ways
material to name on this occasion? But what drive we at? have we forgot that
this is the Scope of our present discourse, after we had spoken sufficiently
upon Eternity; further to prove that there is no evil in death, though Souls
were also to be extinct.

S. True, I minded it, but all the while you were discoursing upon Eternity,
was willing you should run on wide of the Point in hand.


(o) He against whom these Objections are raised.] Plato.

(p) Aristotle indeed says, that all ingenious men are of a melancholy
Temper.] In his Problems, Sect. 30. Choler adust has the predominancy in them,
and they are upon the confines of madness.

SECT. XXXIV. Upon Supposition of the Souls mortality, death is not evil, being
a departure from evils.
M. YOU look high, I see; and would fain be removing to Heaven: I hope that
will be our portion; but suppose, as those Gentlemen would have it to be, that
Souls do not remain after death; I see we are cut off from the hopes of a more
blessed Life, but what evil does that opinion import? Suppose the Soul so to
perish, as the Body, is there then any pain, or indeed any sense at all in the
Body after death? No body says so; although Epicurus charge that on
Democritus, his Followers deny it; neither is there any sense therefore left in
the Soul; for that it self is no where; where then is the Evil; for there is no
third Subject; is it because the parting of the Soul from the Body, passes not
without pain? Should I believe it to be so, how small a business is that? and I
take it to be untrue, for it happens frequently without Sense, nay sometimes
with Pleasure. And that whole concern, make the most of it, is of small import,
for it indureth but a Moment. That consideration perplexeth, or rather
torments, a departure from all those things which are good in this Life. Look
whether it may not more truly be said from the Evils thereof. Why should I now
bewail man's Life? I might truly, and have title to do so; but what needs it,
when I am laboring to take off the opinion, that we shall be miserable after
death, to make even Life more miserable, by bemoaning it? We have done this in
that Book wherein we comforted our selves, as much as we could. Therefore, to
state the question aright, Death withdraws us from Evils, not from Goods. This
Point was so largely debated by Hegesias the Cyrenaick, that he is reported to
have been prohibited by King Ptolomy, to dispute publicly on that Subject,
because many upon the hearing it, made themselves away. Callimachus has an
Epigram upon Cleombrotus the Ambraciote; who, says he, had no misfortune
befell him; but upon reading Plato's Dialogue, threw himself from the Wall into
the Sea. And that Hegesias, whom I mentioned, left a Book, entitled, The
resolved Passenger; because one departing out of Life, by forbearing to eat, is
dissuaded by his Friends, whom he answers, by reckoning up the Miseries of
man's Life. I could do the like, though not to that degree as he, who thinks it
expedient for none at all to live. Others I wave. Is it expedient for us to do
so, who being stripped of the Comforts and Ornaments both of Family and Court;
had we died before, Death had most assuredly removed us from Evils, and not
from Goods.


SECT. XXXV. Or from uncertain Goods.
SUppose we then, one that has no Evil, has met with some misfortune; (q)
Metellus the Honorable had four Sons; Ay, but Priam had fifty, and seventeen
of them born of his lawful Wife. Fortune had the same power over both, though
she made use of it only upon one; for many Sons, Daughters, Grandsons,
Grand-daughters, laid Metellus in the Grave: but the hand of an Enemy slew
Priam before the Altar, where he had taken Sanctuary, after the loss of so
numerous a Progeny. Had he been deceased, whilst his Children survived, the
State of the Empire continued firm.

By Barbary Guards attended,
In Palace carved and vaulted.
Resolve me whither he had departed from Goods or Evils? from Goods, he would
at that time have thought. But in truth it had fallen out better for him, nor
had that Ditty been sung to so lamentable a Tune.

All these I saw in Ashes lay'n,
Priam by the proud Victor slain,
Joves sacred Altar blood profane.
As if at that time any thing could have befallen him, better than Death. Now
had he been taken away before, he had escaped those Evils; but being so at this
time, he lost the Sense of them. Our Friend Pompey, after a sore Sickness at
Naples, was pretty well recovered; the Neapolitans put on Garlands; so did the
Burgers of Puteoli, no doubt. The adjacent Towns deputed Members of their own
to congratulate him in the Name of their Corporations; a formal piece of
insignificant Courtship, to say truth, and like the Greeks, but yet successful.
Pray then inform me, if he had at that time died, would he have been taken away
from good or evil things? To be sure he had from unhappy ones; for then would
he not have been engaged in a War with his Father-in-law; he would not have
taken up Arms, without any Preparation; he would not have left home; not fled
out of Italy; he had not, after the loss of his Army, fallen naked into the
hands and Poignard of Slaves; his Children had not been left in a deplorable
condition, and all his Fortunes possessed by the Conqueror. He that by
departing then, had died in a most honorable Estate, by prolonging his Life,
how many, great, and incredible Calamities did he suffer?

(q) Metellus the Honorable, had four Sons.] Qu. Caecilius, Metellus
Macedonicus had been himself Consul, Censor, Augur, and had triumphed over
Andriscus the Mock -Philip, Usurper of the Kingdom of Macedon; he saw three
Sons Consuls, whereof one Censor, and Triumphal; also a fourth Praetor. These he
left all in good Estate, and three Daughters Married, by whom and his numerous
Progeny, he was accompanied at his Funeral, having lived the Favorite of
Fortune, indulgent to the last.

SECT. XXXVI. Such as we shall not miss.
THESE accidents are escaped by dying, although they never actually befall us,
yet because of their possibility: But men do not consider themselves liable to
these chances; every one hopes for Metellus's Fortune: As though either there
were more fortunate than unhappy; or there were any certainty in man's Estate;
or it were more prudent to hope than fear. But be this granted, that men are
deprived of their good things, by death, is it therefore consequent, that the
Dead lack the Conveniences of Life, and that it is a miserable thing so to do?
To be sure they must say so. Can he that has no Being, be in want of any
thing? the very name of want is sad, because it imports thus much. The man had
something, has it not; desires, looks after, needs it. These are, I take
it, the Inconveniences of want. One wants Eyes; to be blind is discomfortable:
Another Children; so is it to be Childless. This holds in the Living; but none
of the Dead want any comforts of Life; no, nor Life it self. I speak of the
Dead, which have no Being; we who have a Being, though we are without Horns or
Wings, would any one of us say he wanted them? None, I trow. For if one have
not that which is neither for his use, nor agreeable to his Nature; he does not
want it, though he is sensible he has it not. This Argument is to be urged
over and over, when that is made out, which is unquestionable upon supposition
of the Souls mortality; but that there is so total an Abolition in death, as
that there is not left the least Suspicion of any Sense. This therefore being
fully resolved, it must be strictly searched, to find what it is to want, that
so there be no ambiguity left in the Term. Want therefore, is the being without
that, which one desires to have; for desire is implied in missing, unless in
such case, as when we speak of having missed the Fit of an Ague, in a more
restrained notion of the word. The term of wanting is farther used in another
Sense, when one is without a thing, and sensible that he is without it, and yet
not much concerned about it; but to want any evil, is not properly spoken, for
that would import no sorrow for it. The opposite is properly said to want good,
which is evil; but neither does the Living want what he does not need. Yet it
may be understood, of a living man, that he wants a Kingdom; now this cannot,
with any Logical Truth, be said of you; it might of Tarquin, when he was
deposed and banished from his Kingdom; but the term can by no means be
understood of a dead man; for want is proper to one that has Sense; but the
Dead have no Sense; therefore neither do the Dead want. Though what need we
syllogize on this Point; since we see the matter stands in no such great need
of Logic?

SECT. XXXVII. Since it has not appeared dreadful, even to common Soldiers.
HOW often have, not only our Commanders, but whole Armies also charged the
Enemy, without any probability of coming back alive? Had death been to be
feared, (r) L. Brutus would never have hindered the return of that Tyrant,
which himself had expelled, by losing his Life in the Engagement. Nor would
Decius the Father in Battle with the Latins, the Son of the Hetrurians, and
Grandson with Pyrrhus, have run upon the Point of the Enemies Sword. Spain had
not seen the two Scipio's in one War, fall for their Country; Cannae, Paulus
Aemilius; Venusia, Marcellus; the Latins, Albinus; the Lucanians, Gracchus; is
any one of these at this day miserable? No, nor immediately after they had
expired; for none can be miserable, who is insensible. But that very thing is
grievous, to be without Sense; grievous indeed, if one were to miss it. But it
being notorious, that he can be nothing, who has himself no Being; what can be
grivous to him, who is without any thing; and has no Sense that he is so?
Although we have inculcated this Argument too often already; but for this
purpose, because all that distress of mind which arises from the apprehension
of death, is grounded on this. For whosoever shall sufficiently perceive what
is clearer than the light, that upon perishing of Body and Soul together, and
the whole living Creature being destroyed, and an utter Abolition made of the
entire compound; that Animal which was before, is annihilated; he will clearly
discern, that there is no difference between a flying Horse, which never was,
and King Agamemnon: And that M. Camillus does now no more regard this Civil
War, than I did the taking of Rome when he was alive. Why then would both
Camillus have grieved, had he thought these things would have come to pass
about three hundred and fifty years after; and should I grieve, if I thought
any Foreign Nation would be Masters of our City ten thousand years hence?
Because the dearness of our Country is so great, that we measure it, not by our
Sense, but its own safety.

(r) L. Brutus.] L. Junius Brutus, the first Roman Consul, after the expulsion
of Tarquin, in a Battle for the reducing him, charged Aruns the Son of Tarquin
so furiously, that they gave each the other his deaths wound. Decius Mus, the
Father in the War with the Latins, made a solemn Vow, to take no Quarter, that
he might purchase the Romans Victory; the like did Decius Mus, the Son, being a
fourth time Consul in the Tuscan War; and Decius Mus the Grandson, at that time
Consul, in the Engagement with Pyrrhus King of Epirus, fell in the desperate
Encounter, a third Sacrifice for the deliverance of his Country, out of the
same Line successively. In the second Punick War, P. Scipio (Father of the
elder Africanus) commanding in Spain, was run thorough with a Lance; and nine
and twenty days after, Cn. Scipio his Brother was killed, and all his Soldiers
with him, the Tower being set on fire, into which they had fled. At Cannae
Fight Paulus Aemilius the Consul, with 45000 Romans, were slain. Marcellus,
sirnam'd the Sword of Rome, having first beaten Hannibal at Nola, where he slew
the Captain in chief, hand to hand, was intercepted in a March between Venusia
and Bautia, where he was cut off with his Party. Sempronius Gracchus having
routed the Carthaginians at Beneventum, through the Treachery of Flavius a
Lucanian, with whom he quartered, was killed by Mago in Lucania. Aulus Albinus
encountered the Latins so vigorously, as that he fell in the Charge.

SECT. XXXVIII. Much less to hinder promoting the public good. But as Death is
not terrible, so neither is it amiable.
THerefore Death, which by reason of uncertain Casualties, is daily imminent,
and because Life so is short, can never be far off, does not yet deter a wise
man from providing for the State and his own Family for all future Ages; and
from thinking that Posterity, though he shall have no Sense of it, is his
concern. Upon which ground, he that is of the judgment, that the Soul is
mortal, may yet lay designs for Eternity, not out of desire of glory, whereof
he shall have no Sense, but of Virtue, which Glory necessarily follows, though
you make it not your aim. Now this is natural, that as our Birth gives us an
entrance into the business of this World, so Death should give our Exit from
it. Which, as before our Birth, it nothing concerned us, so neither shall it
after Death. Herein what Evil can there be, since Death is the concern neither
of the Living, nor the Dead; the latter cease to be, it attaches not the
former. Those who speak in a slighting way of it, would have it nearest
resemble a dead Sleep, as though any one would choose so to live to ninety
years, as that when he had arrived at sixty, he should sleep the rest. Swine
would not make such option, much less any man. But Endymion, if we will hearken
to Fables, fell, I cannot tell when, a sleep in Latmos, which is a Mountain of
Caria; and is not, I suppose, yet awake. Do you judge, therefore, that he
regards when the Moon is eclipsed; for he is reputed to have been cast into a
deep trance by her, that she might kiss him as he sleeps; regard it, how should
he, when he is not sensible of it? You have sleep, the Image of Death; every
day it comes upon you; and do you make question, whether there be Sense in
Death, when you experience there is none in its resemblance?

SECT. XXXIX. The opinion of untimely Death examined.
AWAY then with these Sayings, little better than fit for old Wives; that it is
miserable to dye before ones time: What time, I pray? that of Nature? Now she
has lent Life, as Cash, at no day certain of payment prefixed; what reason
then have you to murmur, if she calls in her own when she pleases, since you
received it upon that condition? The same Persons, if a Child dye young, think
it ought to be born patiently, and if in the Cradle, without any complaint. Yet
nature has more rigorously exacted of him, her Loan. He had not as yet, say
they, tasted the sweets of Life; but this other had entertained great
expectations, and had already begun the enjoyment of them. Now in all other
benefits, the very having get some share, is counted better than to get none at
all. Why should it be otherwise in Life? However, Callimachus, say not
unhandsomly, that Priam wept much oftener than Troilus. But their fortune is
commended, who dye of Age. Why? because, I warrant, had their life been longer,
it could not have been so pleasant. Certainly nothing is so sweet to man; as
Wisdom: Now though old Age impair us in other things, yet it improves us in
that. But what Age is long? or indeed what can man long have? lately Children,
and presently after Youths; does not old Age, pursuing close behind, in the
Race overtake us e're we are aware? But we count this long, because we have
nothing further to proceed to. All these accounts pass for long or short,
according to the proportion they bear, with the space allotted to each kind. By
the mouth of the Hypanis, which on the side of Europe, falls into the
Black-Sea; Aristotle reports certain Insects to be bred, that live but one day.
Such therefore, of these, as dye at two in the Afternoon, dye elderly; but
such, as at Sunset, very aged; and the more, if it be on the longest day in
Summer. Compare our life, at longest, with Eternity; we shall be found, in a
manner, as short-lived as are these Insects.

SECT. XL. We must live in our places undaunted, and when our time is come, dye
contented, after the example of Theramenes.
DEspise we therefore, all Fooleries, (for what slighter name can I give this
weakness?) And let us place the whole stress of living well in constancy and
bravery of Spirit, and contempt of the World, and in the exercise of all
Virtue. But now we break our Hearts with most unmanly thoughts, so that if
Death come upon us, before we have met with the good luck read us by
Fortune Tellers, we look upon our selves as mocked, abused, and robbed of some
great Advantages. Whereas, if we are held in suspense, tormented and fretted
with lingering Expectations: Good God! How cheerfully should we enter upon that
Journey, which being performed, there will be no further disquiet, nor anxiety
of mind? How taking, and of what gallant Spirit is Theramenes? for though we
cannot choose but cry, when we read the Story, yet a brave man never dies
pitifully. When he had been imprisoned, by order of the Council of State,
consisting of thirty Tyrants, and had taken of the Poison, in a hearty draught,
as though he had been adry; the small remainder he so flung out of the Cup, as
that it dashed against the ground; then smiling, said, Here is to Critias the
fair, who had been his most mortal Enemy. For it is the Grecian Mode, in their
Feasts, to name whom they would have pledge them, This excellent Person broke a
Jest with his parting breath; (s) and was a true Prophet of that death, which
soon after overtook him who had been the occasion of his suffering by Poison.
Who could commend this indifferency of mind, at the very point of Death, if he
judged death to be evil? A few years after, Socrates goes into the same
Prison, and to the same Cup, by the same perfidiousness of Judges, as
Theramenes did of Tyrants. What, therefore, was that Speech which Plato makes
him to have made to the Judges, after his Condemnation.

(s) And was a true Prophet of that death, which soon after overtook him.]
Theramenes being offended at the Cruelty and Oppression of his
Fellow-Commissioners, toward their Countrymen, was for terrors sake put to
death. Upon which there was a rout among the Athenians, that were but suspected
of Moderation; and Greece was filled with Atticks in Banishment; till soon
after, they banding under Thrasybulus, took Phy, distant from Athens twelve
Miles; and in a first Engagement with the Tyrants, having the better in a
second, slew Critias, with Hippomachus, dissolved the Government, and freed
Athens from the Lacedemonian Yoke.

SECT. XLI. Socrates.
My Lords,
I AM in great hopes (says he) that it will turn to my advantage, that I am
put to death: For one of the two things must of necessity be, that death either
quite takes away all Sense, or is a removal from this, into some other place.
Wherefore, whether all Sense be extinguished, and death be like that sleep,
which sometimes gives a most sweet rest, undisturbed by Dreams; good God? what
gain is it to dye? or how many days can be found, preferrible to such a night
as the perpetual Duration of the following time shall present? Who then so
happy as I? but if, what is said, be true, that death is a removal into those
Coasts, which those, who are hence departed, inhabit, that is yet far more
happy, when you have passed thorough pretended Judges, to come before real
ones, such as are Minos, Rhadamanthus, Aeacus, Triptolemus, and to consort with
those who have lived justly, and with integrity. Can therefore this Journey
seem to you unpleasant? But to confer with Orphaeus, Musaeus, Homer, Hesiod, at
what rate would you purchase? For my part, if it were possible, I could be
content to dye many times over, if I could find what I now mention. Then what
incredible satisfaction would it be to me, when I should accost Palamedes,
Ajax, and others, circumvented by the Sentence of corrupt Judges? Furthermore,
I would sound the Wisdom of that Monarch, who led the numerous Army against
Troy; of Ulysles, and of Sisyphus: nor should I, because I made such enquiries,
as here I have done, be therefore sentenced to dye. You then, my Lords, such as
have voted me not guilty, never be afraid of Death; for no evil can befall any
good man, either alive or dead; nor are his concerns ever dis-regarded by the
Divine Providence; neither is this befallen me by blind chance; nor have I any
reason to be offended at those by whom I was accused, or at those by whom I am
condemned, save only this, that they intended my harm. These things I thus
consider, and judge, that nothing could fall out better. But, says he, it is
time to depart hence, for me, that I may dye; for you, that ye may live; now,
whither of these two be better, God above knows, but no man on Earth, I think,
can tell.

SECT. XLII. The Spartans.
NOW had I rather have this gallant Spirit, than all their Fortunes who past
Judgment upon him: though as to his disowning, that any, besides God, knows
which is better: he knows it himself, for he has told it before: but he
retains to the last, that Principle of his, not to be positive in any thing.
Now hold me this steadfastly, that nothing can be evil which is allotted all by
Nature: And consider, that if death be Evil, it is an everlasting Evil; for of
a miserable Life, Death seems to be the end: but if Death be miserable, there
can be no end of the Misery. Now what do I mention Socrates, or Theramenes, men
excelling in the Glory of Virtue and Wisdom; when (t) a certain Lacedemonian,
whose name is not so much as Recorded, did so much despise Death, as when he
was condemned (u) by the Ephori, and led to Execution upon looking cheerfully,
and with a merry Countenance, when a certain Enemy challenged him, and said, do
you slight the Laws of Lycurgus? He answered, Nay, but I take my self to be
much beholden to him, who has laid that Fine upon me, which I shall be able to
pay, without either Loan, or taking up upon Interest. O Citizen worthy of
Sparta! Insomuch as that he who suffered so bravely, seems to have been
condemned unjustly. Innumerable such Instances has our Government produced;
but why name I Princes and Commanders, when Cato writes, that whole Legions
have often marched up with Alacrity, to the place from whence they never
expected to return? with like Courage did the Lacedaemonians fall (w) at
Thermopylae; upon whom Simonides,

Friend, tell at Sparta, here thou saw us slain,
Our Countries Laws established, to maintain.
What says the Captain General Leonidas? Good cheer! fall on my Lacedaemonians,
we may chance to Sup in the other World. That was a stout Nation, whilst the
Laws of Lycurgus were in force. One of them, when another of the Persian Party,
said in a vaporing way, We shall Eclipse the Sun, our flight of Arrows will be
so thick; replied, Then we shall fight in the shade. I mention men; what was
that Lacedemonian Dame, who having sent her Son to the Wars, and hearing that
he was killed, said, To that end brought I him into the World, that there might
be one who should be contented to dye for his Country.

(t) A certain Lacedemonian.] Called by Plutarch in his Laconic replys,
Thrictamenes.

(u) By the Ephori.] A Bench of High Justicers consisting of five, who by the
softness of the Spartan Kings, grew to that highth, as to have Power of calling
in question the Royal Proceedings in Government; but Lycurgus made no such
Constitution.

(w) At Thermopylae.] The ridge of Thessalian Hills, which parts Greece as the
Apennine Italy; at the Thermopylae is a Pass made good by Leonidas, with three
hundred Spartans against Xerxes and his mighty Army, with the slaughter of
innumerable Persians; till by the treachery of one Ephialtes, the Enemy was
brought round another way, and out off all the Spartans, who were buried in a
common Grave; upon which was erected a Pillar, with the Inscription made by
Simonides.

SECT. XLIII. And Theodorus the Cyrenian. A Digression to the Point of Burial.
ALLOW all this; the Spartans were tough and sturdy, the Countries Discipline
has great influence. What say we of Theodorus the Cyrenian, no mean
Philosopher? do we not admire him? When King Lysimachus threatened he would
Crucify him; Use, says he, those dreadful Menaces to these your Courtiers:
Theodorus cares not whether he rot on ground, or in the Air. By which saying
of his, I am put in mind that it were proper to speak somewhat here to the
Point of Interment and Burial; a matter of no great difficulty, especially
after those Informations of being insensible, which have been even now
premised: What was Socrates Sense of the business, appears in a Dialogue,
which relates the manner of his death: about which we have already spoke so
much; for having argued for the immortality of Souls, when the time of his
dying pressed on, and he was asked by Crito, how he would be buried; Now much
pains, says he, have I laid out, Friends, to little purpose, for I have not
persuaded our Companion Crito, that I shall fly away hence, and leave nothing
of me here below. Nevertheless, Crito, if you can come at me, or shall find me
any where, bury me, as you shall think fit: But believe me, when I shall have
departed hence, none of you will reach me. An excellent reply, for he both left
it to his Friend, and declared that he was upon the whole matter altogether
indifferent. Diogenes was more churlish; though of the same mind, yet like a
Cynick more roughly bid them fling him out of doors, without any burying: What,
say his Friends, to the Birds and Beasts? By no means, says he, but lay my
staff by me, that I may beat them away. How can you do that, answered they,
when you shall have no feeling? Oh! I shall have no feeling; what harm then
will the tearing of wild Beasts do me? Bravely said Anaxagoras, who when he lay
a dying (x) at Lampsacus, and his Friends asked him, whither, if he should do
otherwise than well, he would be carried to Clazomenae, his Country; answered,
There is no need; for it is the same distance from all places, to the other
World. Now upon the whole consideration of Burial, this Principle is to be
held, that it relates to the Body, whether the Soul dye or survive; it is also
manifest, that whether the Soul be extinguished, or escaped, there remains no
Sense in the Body.

(x) At Lampsacus.] Anaxagoras was banished Athens, for speaking irreverently,
as they judged it, of the Sun, which he called a Mass of glowing Iron.

SECT. XLIV. Cruelty toward dead Enemies, and lamenting unburied Friends
reproved.
BUT all the World is full of mistakes; Achilles drags Hector tied at the
Chariots tail; sure he thinks him torn grievously: Therefore this the man does,
out of revenge, as he thinks. Again (y) the Woman bewails it, as a very cruel
matter.

I saw, and at the sight my sad heart failed,
Hector behind the flying Chariot trail'd.
What Hector? or how long will he continue Hector? Better says Attius, and
Achilles at length grown wise.

Priam the Corpse I gave,
But Hector took away.
Thou did not therefore drag Hector, but the Corpse which had been Hector's.
(z) Look! another peeps up from under ground, who cannot let his Mother sleep.

Mother! whose care soft slumbers have beguiled,
Nor pittiest me; rise, bury thy dead Child.
When these Aires are played to a low and lamentable Tune, which raises
compassion in whole Theaters; it is hard not to judge them miserable who lie
unburied. E're Birds and Breasts -- He is afraid least he should not have the
use of his Limbs, if they be torn, but fears not, if they be burnt.

(a) Alas! what of the half-burnt King remained,
Bare bones, lie trod on ground with gore distained.
I understand not what he fears, since he works out such sweet numbers to
the sound of the Pipe. Hold we this then for a Maxim, that nothing is to be
regarded after Death; though many take Vengeance on Enemies, even when they are
dead. Thyestes in Ennius curses his Brother in very ingenious Verses, wishing
first, that Atreus might perish by Shipwreck; a dismal Fate! for such a kind of
death is not without grievous pain; the rest is but empty sound.

Pitched on a craggy Rocks sharp-pointed Top,
There let him hang his Bowels panch'd,
His sides upon the rough Spikes gaunch'd,
On the stones, black gore and matter drop.
Why? those very stones were not more void of all Sense, than he that is thus
empal'd, whom he thinks he wishes it for a Torment. How grievous would they
be, if he felt them; without Sense, they were no torture at all; that too, is
wonderful idle.

Nor of the Graves safe harbor be possessed,
Where after life, his Corpse from harms may rest.
You see upon how great a mistake all this runs on; he thinks the Grave to be
the Bodies Haven; and that when it is dead, it rests there: Pelops was much to
blame, who had not taught his Son better; nor instructed him what regard was
due to each thing.

(y) The Woman.] Andromache, Hector's Wife, the couplet is taken out of a
Tragedy of Ennius, of that name.

(z) Look! another peeps up from under ground.] Priam King of Troy, at the
Greeks Invasion, had sent his youngest Son Polydore, with a great Sum of Money,
to Polymester King of Thrace, who had married Iliona, the Princess Royal of
Asia, his eldest Daughter, that he might be secured against the uncertain
events of War: She tenderly brought him up as her own Son; but the Fortune of
the Trojans being turned, the Tyrant, to curry favor with the Greeks, murders
his Charge, flings him out unburied, and seiseth his Portion. Thhe Ghost of the
murdered, appears to his ruputed Mother in her sleep, and demands burial. This
passage is taken out of the Iliona of Pacuvius.

(a) Alas! what of the half-burnt King.] These seem to be a distinct out of
Ennius, spoken by Hecuba or Andromache, about King Priam, consumed or scorched
in the Flames of Troy; with an allusion to the Greek way of burning the Corpse,
or gathering the Ashes or Bones into Urns.

SECT. XLV. The Customs about some Savages about Burial condemned. What decency
to be observed in Interment of the Dead.
BUT why do I take notice of private Opinions, when we may plainly see, the
diverse Errors of whole Nations? The Egyptians embalm their Dead, and keep them
at home. The Persians over and above embalming, wrap them in Searcloths, that
the Body may continue as long as is possible entire. It is the Custom of the
Magi, not to inter any of their Fellows, till their Bodies have been first torn
in pieces with wild Beasts. In Hircania the Commons maintain Dogs at the
public Charge, Noblemen in their Families. Now we know that is a generous
Race of Mastiffs; but every one purchases them according to his Ability; and
that they take for the best way of Burial. Chrysippus collects many other
Instances, as being excellently well versed in all sorts of History, but some
of them (b) so loathsome, that civil Discourse does nauseate and abhor the
mentioning of them. Now this whole matter is to be despised by us, not
neglected by our Friends; provided always that we judge the Bodies of the Dead,
to have no Sense: yet how far Custom and common Fame is to be complied with,
let the Living consider that, but so as to understand, that it no ways concerns
the Dead. Now death is then to be received with the greatest content, when the
decaying Life can comfort it self with a Reflection upon its past good Services.
No man has lived short of his time, who has completely discharged the Office
of an accomplished Virtue. Many things have occurred to render death seasonable
to my self, which I wish had succeeded; for nothing of new Acquisition was
afterward made; the Duties of my Life were fully discharged; there remained
only Combats with Fortune; wherefore if single reason cannot be prevalent
enough to make us neglect Death, yet let our past Life so far prevail with us,
as that we should think we have lived enough, and too long: For though Sense be
gone, yet the dead do not want the highest and most durable Goods of Praise and
Glory, however they perceive them not; for though Glory have nothing in it
self, why it should be pursued, yet it follows Virtue as its shadow. The true
judgment of the multitude, concerning good men; if at any time it be such, is
more to be commended, than that those men should be happy for that reason.

(b) So loathsome.] The Massagetes and Dervices counted their Friends miserable,
if they dyed a natural Death; so when they grew Aged, first sacrificed them,
and then feasted on their Flesh.

SECT. XLVI. Glory after Death, should abate the fear of dying in Prosperity.
NOW I cannot say, in whatever Sense it be taken, that Lycurgus, Solon do want
the Glory of their Laws, and good Government of their Countries, that
Themistocles, Epaminondas, want that of Martial Valor; and sooner shall Neptune
swallow up Salamina it self, than the Memory of the Salaminian Trophy; and
Leuctra shall be raised out of Boeotia, before the Glory of the Leuctrian
Fight. Nay, much longer shall it be, before Fame shall forget Curious,
Fabricius, Calatinus, the two Scipios, the two Africans, Maximus, Marcellus,
Paulus, Cato, Laelius, innumerable others, whose Copy whosoever shall have
transcribed, measuring it not by popular Fame, so much as the true Commendation
of good Patriots; That man, if occasion shall so require, will, with unshaken
Resolution, advance toward Death, wherein we know, there is either the
greatest Good, or no Evil. Nay, he will choose to dye, whilst he is still in a
prosperous State; for the accession of superfluities which might be cast in,
cannot be so pleasing, as the diminution of those just measures of good,
already attained, will be grievous. To which purpose seems that word of the
Lacedemonian, when Diagoras the Rhodian, a noble Master in the Olympian Games,
had seen two Sons in one day, win the Prize in the same Games, he came up to
the old man, and gave him joy in these words, Dye Diagoras, for you would not
mount up to Heaven and be immortal, (c) The Greeks value that occasion highly,
and perhaps overvalue it, or at least in those days did so, and he that spoke
thus to Diagoras, looking upon it as an extraordinary Privilege, that three
Victors in the Olympian exercises should come out of one Family, thought it
disadvantageous to him, to tarry longer in this World, exposed to the
vicissitudes of Fortune. Now have I, in short, as I thought, sufficiently
answered you, for you had granted me, that the Dead were under no evil. But I
have been earnest, the more to enlarge hereupon, because this is the greatest
comfort in Mourning, and the loss of Friends; for we ought with patience to
bear our own sorrow, and what is by choice brought upon us for our own concern;
lest we be found guilty of self-love. That other surmise creates us
intolerable disquiet, to think that those dear Friends, whose lost Society we
lament, are in a State of feeling those miseries which men commonly conceive.
This conceit I was desirous, utterly to remove from my self, and thereupon have
been perhaps somewhat of the longest.

(c) The Greeks value that occasion highly.] Nothing is so renowned as the
Olympic Games amongst the Greeks; for Jumping, Running, Wrestling, Hurling,
Pitching; for Horse-matches, and Chariot-Races, it was the Academy of all
Greece. The Victors at those Games, were in that general Assembly of the
Greeks, as in a Theater of Glory, proclaimed, crowned, and returning home,
received in Triumph into their respective Cities, where, all their Life-times
after, they enjoyed exceeding great Immunities. These Masteries in bodily
exercise, Tully does not magnify, nor did Socrates before him, approve the
fondness of his Countrymen, in deferring that parrade of Pomp on them; or
their complacency in it, who valued themselves at that rate upon such account:
but these prefer the University Learning, and those Studies which improve the
Mind, better the Man, and promote good order in the Governvernment.

SECT. XLVII. An Epilogue after the Mode of the Greek Rhetoricians, who would
persuade us, that Death is the greatest good that can befall man, upon Divine
Testimonies.
S. YOU of the longest? not in my judgment, I assure you, for the former part
of your Discourse, wrought in me a desire to dye. The latter, sometimes no
unwillingness; other times an indifferency; but upon the whole Tenor of the
Debate; there has been effected a Conviction in me, not to account death among
things evil.


M. Do we therefore still lack a Conclusion (d) after the manner of
Rhetoricians? or is it now time for us, quite to abandon that practice?


S. Nay, but do not you desert that Art which you have always advanced; and
that with good reason; for That, to speak the truth, has advanced you. But
what is this Epilogue? for I would fain hear it, whatever it be.


M. (e) They are wont, in Disputations, to produce the Judgment of the immortal
Gods, in the case concerning Death: (f) nor do they devise them themselves, but
report them upon the Authority of Herodotus and diverse others. First of all
Cleobis and Biton, Sons of the Argive Priestess are magnified. The Story is
well known, it being the received Ceremony, that she must ride in a Coach to a
solemn and anniversary Sacrifice at the Temple, some good distance out of Town,
and the Mules not being brought time enough, then the young men before named,
stripping of their Garments, anointed their Bodies with Oil, put themselves
into the Traces; so the Priestess lighting at the Temple, having had her
Chariot drawn by her Sons, is said to have prayed the Goddess to bestow upon
them a reward of their Piety, the greatest that could be given man by God.
Afterward the young men having feasted with their Mother, went to sleep, and
were found dead in the Morning. A like Prayer Trophonius and Agamedes are said
to have made; these having built the Temple to Apollo at Delphi, and coming to
worship him, requested no small reward of their work and pains, specified
nothing, but what were best for man. Apollo declared he would give it them the
third day after, which day was no sooner come, but they were found dead. Here
they say, that God has determined the Question, and that God too, unto whom
all the other Gods have deser'd, above the rest, the power of Divination.


(d) After the manner of Rhetoricians.] Tully having premised those Reasons,
upon which he grounds the immortality, or removes the danger of death, other
instances florid and specious, but which he esteemed less firm, he turns off to
the Person of Greek Rhetoricians, whom he no where over-values.

(e) They are wont, in Disputations, to produce the Judgments of the immortal
Gods.] When any doubt arises, which affords matter of Debate; if a Divine
Determination come once to be understood, all dispute cease; the Case is
overruled; without further appeal, man's Reason must acquiesce in the Will of
God, as in a peremptory Sentence; against which, to oppose our private
Conceptions, were intolerable Impiety. Nevertheless it is enjoined, our
prudence with all due caution, to examine the Testimony, before it be admitted
as such; lest, in our own wrong, we pay the Homage of Divine Faith, to humane
Inventions. The Stoics were not forward in giving credit to Oracles, or any
sort of Prognostication, suspected South-sayers, Fortunetellers, and
Interpreters of Dreams. Those Ages which have most hearkened to Apparitions and
Visions, have brought in the greatest Errors* Strong Affections joined with
weak Judgments, are apt to betray to Fanaticism. Nay, it is indulged our
frailty, to consider upon what grounds we receive the Holy Scriptures; the Word
of God is tried, and will abide the Test. The Sun at noon day shines not
brighter, than the moral Evidences which verify the Parts and the Whole; but
the Eyes of our Understandings are dim, and further darkened by the Interest of
our inordinate Affections. S. Augustine in his Confessions, acknowledges his
backwardness in assenting to revealed Truths; but with all humble modesty
purges himself from a resolved suppressing its Convictions, or undervaluing
its Author. There is a further caution necessary in the admission of such a
Divine Testimony, to take it in its right Sense, and therefore to use all due
means to be well informed of that. Our Souls are staked, not only against
Faith, but the True Faith: Now, the greater the Sum charged is, the wise
Merchant will take the better advice, before he allow the Bill of Exchange.

(f) Nor do they devise them themselves, but report them upon the Authority of
Herodotus and diverse others.] The following Stories carry the name of great
Authorities, but their Tradition is uncertain in a matter not self-evident; nor
is Herodotus a responsible Voucher, his Narrations resembling the Ionick
Fables, sweet and delightful, sometimes strange even to Admiration; not with
that plainness which is the usual Companion of Credibility. The like may be
said of Homer; nor are Pindar and other Poets, or Mythologers sufficient
Evidences in these Cases.

SECT. XLVIII. Those of Demigods, Oracles, and in Panegyrical Commemorations of
such as have died for their Country.
THERE is told us a fine Tale about Silenus, who having been caught by Midas,
is written to have given him this recompense for his release, that he taught
the King. (g) For man not to be born, is far the best; but next to that, to dye
speedily; to which Sense Euripides in his Cresphantes alluded.

'Twere fit at the same House we met to mourn,
Where any Child into the World is born;
But who by death his painful days should end,
Friends would his Obsequies with mirth attend.
Somewhat to the same effect is found in Crantors Book of Consolation, for he
says, that one Elisius a Terinese being greatly afflicted at the death of his
Son, came into an Oratory to enquire what might be the Cause of so great a
Calamity, and that three Verses to this purport were given him in a Table Book.

Here men in darkness, stray without a guide;
A natural death thy Son Enthynous died,
Thus best for him and thee, did Fates provide.
Upon these, and like Authorities, they prove that the cause has been decided
by a Divine Sentence. One Alcidamas an ancient Rhetorician of the highest Rank,
for eminency has gone so far, as to pen an Encomium of Death, which consists
in a rehearsal of the Miseries, which accompany man's Life. The Reasons, which
are more accurately collected by Philosophers, he wanted; copiousness of
Language, he wanted not. Now (h) Deaths for their Country embraced with eminent
Resolution, are wont to seem not only glorious to Rhetoricians, but also
blessed. They go back as far as Erechtheus, whose very Daughters were zealous
to dye, to save the Lives of their Citizens; descend to Codrus, who charged up
to the midst of his Enemies in the disguise of a Servant, lest, if he had worn
his Royal Robes, he might have been discovered, because the Oracle had
foretold, that Athens should bear away the Victory, if their King were slain.
Nor is Menaeceus past in silence, who, upon a like Prediction, sacrificed his
Life for his Country. Iphigenia at Aulis, bid them lead her up to the Altar,
that so the Enemies Blood might be drained, by the Effusion of her own.

(g) For Man, not to be born, is far the best; but next to that, to dye
speedily.] In consideration of the manifold Vanities, which man's Corruption
has brought upon the World, this Assertion hypothetically taken, carries
truth in it; but simply delivered, is not agreeable to right Reason; therefore
our Author judiciously separates from his sober enquiry after the means of well
living; these Encomiums of Death and Invectives against Life, which favor of
discontent, give indication of the Hypochondriacks, and tempt us to ingratitude
against God and our Parents.

(h) Deaths for their Country embraced with eminent Resolution, are wont to
seem, not only glorious to Rhetoriciaus, but also blessed.] It was a custom
among the Greeks, one day in the year, to make a solemn Commemoration-speech at
the Tombs of those who had dyed Champions of the Liberty of Greece, as at
Marathon, against Darius, and elsewhere. Here the Orators strained all the
Power of their Eloquence, by extolling the Bravery of those Warriers, to incite
their Auditors to gallant Resolution in like honorable Undertakings. Tully so
words this Sentence, as if the Rhetoricians affected Praise of their own Wit,
in the Commendation of the others Valor; intimates also, that they carried it
too far, when they went about to persuade, that there were happiness in loosing
Life upon such accounts; he had proved above, that as death should not be
terrible, when the circumstance requires it, so neither is it amiable. It
suffices to our reward, that we cheerfully submit to the necessity, though we
make it not matter of choice.

SECT. XLIX. The Close of all, applys that Substance of the present Debate to
the Readers benefit.
THEY come thence to latter times; Harmodius is in vogue, and Aristogiton the
Lacedemonian; Leonidas, Theban, Epaminondas flourish; with our Patriots they
are not acquainted; and but to recount them, would be a hard task, there are so
many, who we see, have made it their choice, to dye in the Bed of Honor. Which
things being so, yet must we use great Eloquence, and speak as with Authority,
that men may be brought either to wish for death, or at least may forbear
fearing it; for if that last day do not bring with it an utter Annihilation,
but only change of abode, what were more desirable? but if it destroy, and
abolish the whole, what is better, than in the midst of our labors here, to
fall asleep, and so laid fast to take an eternal repose? If that fall out to be
true, yet (i) better is the saying of Ennius, than of Solon, for that our
Countryman says.

None at my Funerals weep; nor hard Fates blame.

But that wise man on the contrary,

Let not my death want tears; may my Friends mourn,
And with deep sighs, my Funerals adorn.
(k) But as for us, if any such thing should fall out, that a Message may seem
to be sent us from God, to depart this Life, let us submit with joy, and be
thankful, judging our selves discharged from Prison, and our Shackles knocked
off, that we may either return to dwell in our eternal and true home; or may be
set free from all Sense and uneasiness; but if no such Message be sent us, yet
let us be prepared to think that day, so dreadful to others, to be to us happy:
and rank nothing amongst Evils, (l) which is either by God appointed, or by
Nature the common Mother. (m) For we were not without Cause, or at all
adventures born and bred; but in truth there was some Power which had an
especial Providence over man, nor would beget or breed up such a Being, as
after it had endured all the labors of this Life, should then fall into the
eternal Evil of Death. Let us rather think it a Haven, to find provided for us,
into which I could wish we might ride, with Sails top and top-gallant; but if
we shall be beaten off through contrary Winds, yet not long after we must of
necessity be driven back to the same place. Now, what is necessary for all, can
that be miserable to any one? You have the Epilogue, least you should think any
thing has been omitted, or left unfinished.

S. I have it indeed, and that Conclusion, has in truth, more confirmed me.


M. Very well, say I, but at present let us have some regard to our Health;
then to morrow, and as many days after as we shall abide in this Tusculan
Place, let us mind these Matters, and especially such as bring relief to our
Discontents, Fears and Lusts; which is the greatest advantage that can be made
of all Philosophy.


(i) Better is the Saying of Ennius.] The loss of the Virtuous, finds in sorrow
comfort; and yet he that lives undesir'd, dies unlamented; but Cicero must
extol his Countryman above a wise man of Greece.

(k) But as for us, if any such thing should fall out, that a message may seem
to be sent us from God, to depart this Life.] This is a particular Application
of the former discourse, to himself in that present juncture of Affairs,
wherein he seems not to be free from all apprehension of violence from the
displeasure of Caesar, and exasperated Spirits of some of the Caesarian
Officers, and their Army of Veterans, spread all over Italy, and the places
whither he was then retired.

(l) Which is either by God appointed.] Death is not the Ordinance of a
Creator, but Sentence of a Judge.

(m) For we were not without cause, or at all adventures born and bred; but in
truth there was some Power which had an especial Providence over man.] This is
a masterly stroke, to set forth our primitive Institution. Man was ordained to
some good end, no less than that of Virtue and Glory; which State being lost,
as evidently it is, the same especial Providence watching over him, has, by a
new Covenant, in the hands of a Mediator, restored him to a lively hope, that
after he has endured the labors of this painful Life, he shall not then fall
into the evil of eternal Death.

Patience under Pain. The Proem, Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Book II.
SECT. I. The benefit of Philosophy.
NEoptolemus in Ennius, says, he must act the Philosopher; but a little, for
the part is no way pleasing. But I, my dear Brutus, judge that I must study
Philosophy; for in what can I be better employed, especially being out of all
employment? but not a little, as he says, for it is hard, in Philosophy, to
have a little known to him, that does not know the most, or all; for neither
can a little be chosen, but out of much; nor will he that has understood a
little, be satisfied, till he has learned the rest. (n) But in a life of
employment, and such as was that of Neoptolemus at that time, Military, even
that little does often much good, and brings advantages, though not so great as
might be reaped from the whole course of Philosophy, yet such as thereby we may
in some measure be relieved against Lust, or Fear, or Discontent. As by that
Disputation which I lately held in my House at Tusculum, there seemed to have
been wrought a great contempt of Death, which is of no small influence to free
the Soul from the fear of it. For he who is continually afraid of that which
cannot be avoided, can by no means have any quiet of his Life; but he that does
not fear death, not only because he must of necessity dye, but because death
has nothing dreadful in it, that man has gained good interest toward the
ensuring a happy Life. Although we are not ignorant, that many will earnestly
contradict these things which we could no ways prevent, unless we would write
nothing at all; for if our very Orations, which we desired should be approved
to the judgment of the Multitude (for the Faculty is popular, and the
Approbation of the Auditors, is the work that Eloquence has to do) but if
there were some men in the World, who would commend nothing, but what they were
confident themselves could imitate, and made their own hope the Standard of
their good words, and when they were born down with copiousness of words and
sense, would say they had rather have Barrenness and Poverty, than Plenty and
Riches; from whence (o) a sort of Attick Speakers took their Rise, who knew not
themselves what it was they pretended to follow; and who are now silenced,
being almost laughed out of Court: what do we think would become of us, when we
see we cannot now have the People any longer our abettor, as we had before; for
Philosophy is contented to have but few judges; and studiously avoids the
multitude, as being suspected by it, and hated of it. So that if a man would
speak against Philosophy in general, he might have the People on his side; or
if he would go about to attack this, which we chiefly profess to follow, he
might have great assistance from the Doctrines of other Philosophers. Now as to
the Traducers of Philosophy in general, we have answered them in our Hortensius.

(n) But in a Life of Employment.] Skill in Logic, and knowledge of Natural
and Moral Philosophy, do undoubtedly conduce to Prudence and Moderation, both
in Discourse and Action. He that has not shared in such Education, may,
through preguancy of parts, and evenness of Temper, grow upon himself, and into
the good liking of others; but there is this difference between knowledge
obtained from personal Observation, and that which has been received in Arts
and Sciences, the former is an Estate raised by one man's labor; the latter a
Patrimony transmitted to us, from that accumulated Industries of many
Predecessors; let but the: same Observer inherit the Studies of former Ages, he
will more admire God in his Works, understand the ground of Duties, and be more
firm in all Truths. University Studies then are useful, but for men designed
for business, short Schemes are necessary, such as may instruct Action, rather
than feed Speculation.

(o) A sort of Attick Speakers.] He reflects on the Sallustian style,
consisting not in Periods, but broken ends of Sentences; such as is found in
the Declaimers.

SECT. II. That the Academick Scheme is cautious and modest.
THOSE things which are to be spoken (p) in behalf of the Academy, we judge to
have been accurately enough delivered in our four Academick Books; though we
are so far from being unwilling to be writ against, that we desire nothing
more; for Philosophy had never been in so great Reputation in Greece it self,
had it not been brought into request by the Disputations and different
Judgments of the greatest Scholars. Wherefore I exhort all, that are able to do
it, that they would bear away this kind of praise also from Greece, that is now
growing feeble, and that they would bring it into Rome, as our Ancestors have
by their Study and Industry, brought over all other Arts, which were thought
worth the fetching. And indeed the Praise of Orators among us has been so
advanced from a mean condition, till it is come to the highest pitch, that now
according to the course of Nature, in almost all things, declineth and seems
ready, within a very short time, to dwindle into nothing. Let the Birth of
Philosophy in Latin, bear date from these times, and let us be helping to it;
and be contented to be disproved and confuted, which they take impatiently, who
are as it were pre-engaged, and (q) have espoused certain Dictates of the
Doctors of their respective Sects, and so lie under a necessity, to maintain
them for Honors sake, though they are often in their Consciences not convinced
of their Truth. We who pursue after probabilities, and pretend not to advance
farther, than to what carries with it the appearance of Truth, are ready both
to disprove without confidence, and to be disproved without passion. Now if
these Studies shall be translated to our Countrymen, we shall not so much as
need Greek Libraries, in which there is an infinite number of Books, by reason
of the multitude of Writers. For the same things are said over and over again
by diverse Persons, whereupon they have filled the World with Books. Which ill
consequent will attend our People also, if the generality shall break in upon
these Studies. But let us, if we can incite those, who to an ingenuous
Education have added a Practice of polite Discourse, and do handle
Philosophical Questions (r) in an orderly way, with proper and conclusive
Arguments.

(p) In behalf of the Academy.] The Academy was the School of Plato, where he
erected a Chair of the Socratick Discipline, and endowed it; which in sequel of
time, through the Benefactions of diverse Professors and Fellow-students in
that Sect, arrived to a considerable revenue. The Doctrine wherein Tully
professes to follow them, is that of Probability, not to be positive in any
question, nor loud in dispute, but easy of Conviction, and ingenuous in
Confession of that which carries the greatest appearance of Truth.

(q) Have espoused certain Dictates of the Doctors of their respective Sects.]
As the Stoics and Epicureans, but especially the Pythagoreans. The being
wedded to a Party, begets Contention.

(r) In an orderly way.] Methodically.

SECT. III. The Epicurean only regarded by its own followers.
FOR there is a certain Set of such as assume to themselves the name of
Philosophers, who are said to have Books enough in Latin, which I do not
despise, for I have never read them; but (s) because the Authors profess
themselves, that they write neither with distinction of Terms, nor distribution
of Parts, nor elegancy of Language, nor any Ornaments; I neglect to give that
reading which is no ways delightful. For none that has but indifferent
Learning, can be ignorant what the Disciples of that School say, and what they
mean. Wherefore since they make no regard how they speak, I cannot understand
how they should be read by any but those of the same Judgment; for as all read
Plato, and the rest of the Socraticks, and those downwards which derived from
them; all, I say, read them, even such as do not approve all in them, or are
not most zealous Followers of him; but Epicurus and Metrodorus hardly any body,
besides those of their own Sect, takes them into his hands; so they only read
these Latin ones, which think their Doctrines to be true. But our judgment is,
that whatsoever is published, should bring with it that respect to the public,
as to be commended to the reading of all Scholars; nor because we may be not so
able our selves as to perform it, are we therefore less of the mind, that so it
ought to be done. Therefore I always liked that Custom of the Peripateticks and
Academy, to argue upon all Subjects on both sides, not only because that which
is likely in every matter, can no other ways be found out; but all because it
is the best exercise of speaking well, which Aristotle first used, then they
who came after him; but in our memory Philo, whom we have frequently heard, set
up reading Oratory at one time, and Philosophy at another; to which Custom we
being persuaded by some familiar Friends, spent in that business what time we
had to stay in our House at Tusculum; therefore, when in the Morning we had
been at Declamations, as we had done the day before; after Noon we came down
(t) into the Academy, and what Disputation was there held, we deliver not by
way of report, but near word for word, as it was there managed, and
controverted.

(s) Because the Authors profess themselves that.] Epicurus and his Followers
avowed a contempt of Logic and Rhetoric; his Writings are by way of Epistle,
Sentences are continued Treatises; as the Socratick by Dialogue, and
Aristotelick by Disputation.

(t) Into the Academy.] Two Members of the Mannor-House at Tusculum, were an
Academy, or Cloister, and Garden below, in imitation of the School of Plato;
and Lyceum, or Gallery above, after that of Aristotle.

SECT. IV. The bad life of some Teachers, is only scandal to their Persons, not
Doctrines.
AS therefore we were walking, the Discourse fell in after this manner, and was
introduced from such a beginning.

S. (u) It is not to be expressed, how much I was pleased, or rather edified
with your yesterdays dispute; for although I am not conscious to my self, that
I was ever over-fond of Life, yet sometimes a secret apprehension and grief did
over-cloud my Spirit, when I thought seriously on it, that the time would come,
that this light would have an end, and that I must part with all the Comforts
of Life. Now, believe it, I am so perfectly delivered from this sort of
uneasiness, that I think it ought to be the least of my Cares.


M. No wonder at that, for this is the proper work of Philosophy, it heals
the Distempers of the mind, removes vain Disquiets, sets free from impetuous
Desires, banisheth Fears; but this its Virtue is not of equal Efficacy with
all. Then does it most exert its vigor, when it meets with a capable nature.
For not only Fortune favors the Valiant, (as is in the old Proverb) but much
more does reason so too, which, as it were by certain Precepts, does superadd
Constancy to Valor. Nature has made you, as it appears, an excellent Person,
lofty, and overlooking the present World; therefore a Discourse had against
death, made easily deep Impressions on a generous mind. But do you think the
same Arguments would prevail with those very men, bating some few of them, by
whom they have been invented, disputed, and compiled. For where is there one
Philosopher of a thousand to be found, of such a Temper and Conversation, as
Reason requires? who makes use of his Doctrine not for Ostentation of
Knowledge, but a Rule of Life? who believes himself, and observes his own
Precepts? Some of them we may see of such Levity, and so proud Boasters, that
they had better never have been bred up to Learning; others greedy after Money;
some after Vainglory; others Slaves to their Lusts: in such manner as their
Practice does marvellously contradict their Profession, which seems to me
highly shameful. For as if one that professes himself a Grammarian, should
speak false Latin; or he that would pass for a Master in Music, should sing
out of Tune; he is so much the more scandalous, because he offends in that very
thing, whereof he professes the knowledge: So a Philosopher that is an ill
liver, is so much the more scandalous, because he miscarries in the Trade
whereof he would be Master; and having professed an Art of Life, is faulty in
his Life.


(u) It is not to be expressed.] The former three Sections were a Preface in
the Person of the Author, this and the following are Introductory of the
Debate, and between the Parties, show the Efficacy of good Instruction upon an
attentive and honest Hearer. That all Teachers are not affected with their own
Doctrine, the fault not to be found in Philosophy. Land must be manured, and as
the Seed is good, so must the Ground be likewise good, that the Harvest be
plentiful.

SECT. V. The Position makes Pain the greatest of all Evils.
S. IS it not therefore justly to be feared, if the Matter be so as you say,
least you put upon Philosophy the Glory that it deserves not? for what greater
Argument is there, that it is nothing available, than that some excellent
Philosophers live scandalous Lives?


M. Nay, that is no Argument at all, tilled Grounds do not bear good Corn; and
that is a Saying false, and contrary to common experience.

Though Seed into a barren Soil be thrown,
Yet of it self in Springs and thrives alone.
So all minds cultivated, do not bring forth Fruit. And that I may keep to the
same Simile; as a Field, though it be Fruitful, without Tillage cannot bring a
good Crop, so the Soul without Learning. Thus either of both these Matters,
without the other, is defective. Now the cultivating of the Soul is Philosophy,
which Weeds out Vices by the Roots, and prepares Souls to receive good Seed;
then commits those things, and as it were, sows them therein, which being
come to full maturity, bring forth a most plentiful Harvest. Let us proceed
therefore as we begun; tell me, what Subject would you have disputed upon?


S. I esteem Pain to be the greatest of all Evils.


M. What; greater than dishonor?


S. I dare not say so; and some shame it is to be so soon moved from my Opinion.


M. More shame was it for you, if you should have persever'd in that opinion;
for what is more unsuitable to that high Character, than for you to think any
thing worse, than dishonor, scandal, baseness? to avoid which, what Pain would
not only not be declined, but also be eagerly pursued, undergone, encountered?


S. I am clearly of that judgment; yet for all that, though Pain be not the
greatest Evil, without doubt it is Evil?


M. Do you see then, upon a short Admonition, how much you have abated of the
Terror of Pain?


S. I see it plainly, but would seign somewhat more.


M. Well, I will try what may be done; but it is a hard piece of business; and
I must require of you, a disposition of mind, not resolved against Conviction.


S. That you shall be sure to have; for as I did yesterday, so now I will
follow reason whithersoever she shall lead me.


SECT. VI. The different Maxims of Philosophers on that Subject.
M. FIRST therefore I shall speak of the weakness of many; and the^
Philosophers of different Persuasions. The Principal of whom, both for
Authority and Antiquity, Aristippus the Scholar of Socrates, stuck not to say,
in plain terms, That Pain was the greatest Evil. In the next place, Epicurus
proved Scholar apt enough in this lash and unmanlike Lesson. After him Hierom
of Rhodes said, That freedom from Pain was the chiefest happiness; so much Evil
did he apprehend in Pain. The other Philosophers, (w) besides Zeno, Aristo,
Pyrrho, commonly maintain the same, as you lately asserted, That it is Evil;
but there are other things worse. Therefore what nature it self, and an inbred
Gallantry of Spirit does instantly abhor, that you should call Pain the
greatest Evil, and dishonor being matched with it, you should quit the
mistake; in that Point, Philosophy the Schoolmistress of Life, is for so many
Ages peremptory. What Duty, what Praise, what Honor can be so valuable, as
that he should be content to purchase at the rate of bodily Pain, who has
taken up the Persuasion, That Pain is the greatest Evil? Again, what Ignominy,
what Baseness will not any one submit to, that he may escape Pain, if he have
determined that to be the greatest Evil? Nay, who is not miserable, not only at
the time when he shall be under pressure of the greatest Pains, if in these
consists the greatest Evil; but even then when he knows himself liable to be
so? and who is not liable to be so? whereupon it follows, That no man can ever
be happy. Metrodorus thinks him to be completely happy, who has a sound
Constitution of Body, and good grounds of assurance that it will always
continue so; but who is there that can have any grounds of such assurance?


(w) Besides Zeno, Aristo, Pyrrho.] Zeno held nothing Evil but Vice. Pain to be
grievous, rough, uneligible, but not evil. Aristo of Ceos, that besides Virtue
and Vice, all other things, and consequently Pain, were indifferent. Pyrrho
that Sense of Ignorance was Good, Opinion of Knowledge Evil; other things
neither to be desired, nor avoided.

SECT. VII. Epicurus contradicts himself herein, the Tragical impatiences of
Philoctetes.
BUT Epicurus speaks after that rate, that he seems to me desirous to move
Laughter; for in one place he affirms; If a wise man be burnt, if he be
wracked; you look perhaps that he should say, He will be patient, he will
endure; he will not sink under it. By Hercules! a great Commendation, and
worthy that very Hercules by whom I swore. But this will not serve (x) Epicurus
a rough and hardy man: If he shall be in Phalaris brazen Bull, he will say, Oh!
how sweet is this! How unconcerned am I at all this! Is it sweet too? Were it
too little, if it be not better? But those very Persons who deny Pain to be
Evil, are not wont to say, that it is sweet to any one to be put to Torture;
they say that it is rough, hard, octious, contrary to Nature, and yet not Evil.
He who says this is the only Evil, and the utmost of all Evils, affirms, that
a wise man would call it sweet. I do not require of you to speak of Pain in the
same Language as Epicurus does of Pleasure, who was himself, as you know, a
great Voluptuary. Let him say the same, with all my heart, in the Brazen Bull,
as if he were upon a Feather-Bed. I do not attribute to Wisdom, so much
strength against Pain. If perhaps it be sufficient discharge of Duty, to bear
it patiently, I do not further demand that she rejoice at it. For without
doubt, it is a sad thing, bitter, repugnant to Nature, difficult to be endured
with any Patience. (y) Look on Philoctetes, who is to be pardoned his groaning,
for he had seen Hercules on Oeta yelling through excess of Pains. The Arrows
therefore which he had received from Hercules, did then nothing comfort him;
when

(z) The Vipers Gall into his Marrow shed,
Had through his Bowels griping Tortures bred.
Then he roars out seeking for aid, desiring to dye.

(a) Ho! down that Peek who does me throw,
Into the bring Waves below?
Now, now I faint; the belking wound,
The burning sore my Soul confound.
It seems a hard word, that he who is forced to roar out after this sort,
should not be in evil Estate, and that very Evil too.

(x) Epicurus a rough and hardy man.] Spoken by way of Derision; for he was
soft and voluptuous.

(y) Look on Philoctetes.] Hercules on Mount Oeta is said to have bequeathed
his Bow and Arrows to Philoctetes; he one day heedlesly let fall an Arrow on
his Foot, which gave him such intolerable anguish, that with his roaring he
disturbed the Grecian Host, then on their March toward Troy. He may be looked
upon as a fit Emblem of the Gout.

(z) The Vipers Gall.] These and the following Verses are taken out of the
Philoctetes of Attius, translated out of Sophocles. The Arrows of Hercules were
strained with Poison, shed upon them by Hydras, gnawing them, when he emptied
his Quiver into her Body.

(a) Ho! down that Peek.] Ulysses, to rid the Grecian Camp of the Outcrys of
Philoctetes, gets the Fleet to weigh Anchor, and leave him ashore in Lemnos,
where he got on a Rock to look after them; and there took up his abode in a
Grot, and lay on a Couch of Leaves.

CHAP. VIII. Hercules.
BUT look we upon Hercules himself, who was then carried forth into Impatience
thorough Pain; when he was upon acquiring Immortality by his very death. What
Expressions does he utter in Sophocles, in his Play called Trachiniae? for when
Deianira had made him put on the Shirt (b) dipped in the Centaure 's Blood, and
that had stuck to his Body, thus he says,

O many labors hard to be recounted,
Which this spent Soul and Body have surmounted!
Nor spightful Juno's spleen implacable,
Nor sad Eurysthens wrought me so much ill,
As one perverse ill-natured Oeneus Seed,
She has ensnared me in a Hellish Weed;
Which cleaving, rends the flesh away, which drains
My tainted Liver, and exhausts my Veins;
Wanz'd to a Skeleton, I my self survive,
Wound, in an anctious Cere-cloth, up alive.
No proud Foes hand, nor Earth-born Giants force;
No Centaure dealt these blows, half Man, half Horse;
No power of Greeks, no fierce Barbarian hands,
No Savages banished to remotest Lands;
Whither I roved, all harms to exterminate,
But I to a Woman owe my ignoble Fate.
Son, may thy Father all that Name engross,
Nor to a Mothers fondness quit my loss.
Go, hale her hither, with officious hands;
Prove which you value, her, or my commands.
On, start not, Son; over thy wracked Sire lament;
Pity him, Nations shall our grief resent.
Alack! that I should, like a Girl, make moan,
Who none e're saw, in anguish vent a groan,
My manlike bravery thus unmanned and gone.
(b) Dipped in the Centaure 's blood.] The Story of Nessus may be known from
Ovid's Metamorphoses, Englished and illustrated by Sandys; the Jealousy of
Deianira; the twelve Laborers of Hercules, and his being Deify'd after he had
been burned on Oeta, whither the Reader is referred.

SECT. IX.
COME hither, Son, stand near, survey with tears,
The fleshless Carcass thy torn Father wears;
All men behold; and thou that rul'st the Sky,
Quick bolt of Thunder at my head let fly.
Now, now the grinding pangs my Bowels guide!
Now spreads the Plague! O hands that once were feared!
O Back! O Breast! O Arms with Muscles swelled!
Was it your Gripe that Nemeas Lion held,
Till hugged he roared most hideously, then died?
This hand the dreadful Leona pacified.
This Centaur's Horse and Man in death did join,
This quelled the Erymanthus rooting Swine;
This carried off from dark Tartarean Cell,
In his own Chain the foaming Dog of Hell.
This slaying th'oft-twisted Dragon did unfold,
Which watched the Tree that bore the Fruit of Gold,
Many like prize has been our Conquering spoil;
Non man e're yet could vaunt he did us foil.
Nor can we now despise Pain, when we see Hercules himself so impatient under
it?

SECT. X. Prometheus.
ENTER next Aeschylus, not only a Poet, but also Pythagorean; for so have we by
Tradition. How does Prometheus in him bear the Pain inflicted on him for (c)
the Lemnian Theft; whereby Fire that is now become culinary, was clandestinely
dealt among Mortals.

Which sly Prometheus, did they say,
From Heaven to Earth cleanly convey,
And for which bold attempt,
He stands by Jove condemned,
An amends honorable to pay.
Paying therefore this amercement, as he hangs fastened to Mount Caucasus, he
utters these words.

Ye Race of Titans, to us near allied,
Born of high Heaven, behold your Kinsman tied
To rough Rocks, as a Crew of Seamen binds
Their Ship, for fear of night and boisterous Winds;
Here hang in Chains, I by Joves strict commands,
To which obsequious Vulcan lent his hands:
He, cruel Artist, did my quick limbs nail,
With piercing Staples to this hellish Goal,
When the third Execution day appears,
Jove's Bird, my Breast, with crocked Talons tears;
And my shorn entrails, with sharp Beak devours,
So with fat Liver gorged, aloft she tours;
Youks through wide Heaven aloud, then stoops again,
And, as she foaks my warm blood, wags her Train.
My Liver, when recruited, soon she spies,
And keen upon the killing Quarry flies.
Thus I my own tormenting Jailer feed,
And living still, with inward anguish bleed.
Nor can I with Jove's Chains you see oppressed,
Chase the Soul-gnawing Harpsie from my Breast.
Thus damned to live, I only pray to dye;
But angry Jove does this bold Prayer deny.
Now many Ages Periods have gone round,
Whilst on my Bosom I sustain this wound:
Whence the Greese molten by the Sun distills,
Upon the Stones of the Caucasean Hills.
(c) The Lemnian Theft.] When Jupiter had in anger removed fire from men,
Prometheus is said to have stolen it from Heaven; and for that Fact to have
been by Jupiter condemned to be chained to Caucasus, and there exposed to the
rendings of an Eagle. In Lemnos was said to be the Forge of Vuloan; and
Prometheus is fabled to have distributed amongst men, the knowledge of
Mechanical Arts, which as they concern, working in Metals, are performed by
Fire. The Moral of the Eagle, is Remorse of Conscience.

SECT. XI. Digressions against the Poets.
IT is a hard matter therefore, for us not to pronounce a man in these
Circumstances miserable; and if he be miserable, Pain must consequently be evil.

S. (d) You do hitherto bring Arguments in my favor, but that I shall examine
anon; in the mean time, (e) where had you those Verses? for I remember not to
have met with them before.


M. I will tell you truly, for it is a proper question; do you not see that I
have little to do?


S. What of that?


M. You have been, I suppose, in the Philosophers Schools, when you were at
Athens.


S. I have so, and with great satisfaction.


M. You must needs then mark, though there were none at that time very fluent,
yet that Verses were mixed with their Discourse.


S. Yes, and many too by Dionysius the Stoic.


M. You say right; but he would repeat them as a Schoolboy does his Lesson,
without any distinction of what was proper or elegant. (f) Philo observed both
the due number, and choice Pieces, and would apply them in their proper place.
Therefore since I have taken to this sort of declaiming, as it were for my old
Age, I am much conversant in our Poets; but if they be any where deficient, I
translate many things my self out of Greek, that the Latin Tongue might not
come behind in any sort of Ornaments in this kind of Disputations. But do you
see (g) what mischief Poets do? for they bring upon the Stage Persons of a
brave Character lamenting, they soften our Spirits: then so luscious are they,
as not only to be read by us, but also gotten by heart. Thus when over and
above ill breeding at home, a sedentary and soft life, the Poets come in with
their Charms also, they emasculate the Soul. Therefore Plato did well, to
dismiss them out of the State which he modeled, when he inquired after the
sound best Policy, and best ordered State of a Commonwealth. (h) But we now, as
fetching our Education from Greece, read and learn these things from our
Childhood; we account this Gentile Breeding and Scholarship.


(d) You do hitherto bring Arguments in my favor.] These Instances allowed by
popular applause, he alleges against the Epicureans, who affirmed Pain to be
sweet. These over-strain the Matter, a Notion abhorrent from Nature and the
common Sense of Mankind. Therefore sufficiently run down by Stories, poetically
amplify'd and approved by the Vulgar; however the case on the other side upon a
just estimate be herein too far relaxed.

(e) Where had you those Verses?] The Greek, he said before, were of Aeschylus,
in his other Prometheus, not tha^ which is extant; and the Latin ones are so
properly expressed, as that he was loath posterity should be ignorant he was the
Author of them. So true is that judgment I think of Quintilian, that Tully was
a Poet comparable to the best of his Age; contrary to the vulgar Conception
about him; grounded, I suppose, upon the censure of the Satyrist, which yet
should be restrained to that byword of his, noted as well for the Matters,
being invidious as the clench ungrateful.

(f) Philo observed both the due number, and choice pieces, and would apply
them in their proper place.] The Artifice of Tully, (which he learned from
Philo) is admirable, for here treating of a melancholy Subject, he chears up
the Reader with large Portions of Poetry, as if he were at an Interlude or
Opera. Besides these fabulous or heroical Instances of Pain and Impatience,
like magnified Objects, or Colossick Statues, present to the Fancy a clearer
view of the Passion in all its parts, and raise admiration with delight.

(g) What mischief Poets do.] Here is a grave Digression against the Poets, not
giving true measures of Honor. Plato gave them leave to depart with good words,
whom Cicero commends for it. Indeed what Conceptions of God did the Epicks
deliver? what boisterous Humors do the Tragoedians vent? the Lyricks are often
incentives to Lust and Luxury, which they recommend with melody of Voice and
Instruments. Poetry must conform to the Age upon which it depends, and pleases
for its likeness. But Comedy still resembles the most misguided part of
Mankind. So that the wisest Philosophers have prescribed the Poets to be read
with more than ordinary caution, and strong correctives of the ill qualities
lurking in them.

(h) But we, now, as fetching our Education from Greece.] It was modish with
the Romans, at that time, to train up their Children early to Greek, and they
begun at the Poets. Therefore Quintilian makes reading the Poetry part of the
Grammarians Province, whereas expounding Orations belonged to the Master of
Rhetoric. Thus was Cicero first entered in his Studies, by Archias a Grecian
and Poet. This was in Practice after the taking Greece, and acquaintance with
the more polite literature of that Nation.

SECT. XII. Against some Heterodox Philosophers.
BUT why are we angry with Poets? there have been found Philosophers, Teachers
of Virtue, who have affirmed Pain to be the greatest Evil. But you, young man,
when you had but a little before declared that to be your thought, upon the
question barely put by me, whether greater than Dishonor, at the very word
fell off from your opinion. I put Epicurus the very same question, he will
justify it, that a small Pain is greater Evil than the greatest Dishonor.
Because in the Dishonor it self there is no Evil, unless Pains ensue upon it.
Now what Pain does ensue upon Epicurus, when he makes such Assertion, more
dishonorable than which, I cannot expect any thing from a Philosopher. So that
you have secured me, when you replied, that you esteemed Dishonor a greater
Evil than Pain; for do but keep to this, you will have a Rule how far we should
strive against Pain; for it is not so much the Question, whether Pain be evil
or not, as the business to fortify the mind against impatience under Pain. (i)
The Stoics bring little Arguments to prove it not to be evil, as though it
were a Contest about words, and no real concern. Zeno, why do you impose upon
me? for when the thing that seems terrible to me, you affirm to have no ill in
it at all; I am caught, and desire to know how that which I judge most
miserable, should not be so much as evil: Nothing, says he, is evil, but what
is base and vicious. Nay, now you triffle again; I know that Pain is no
lewdness. Forbear teaching me that, teach me this, that it is indifferent,
whether I am in Pain or not in Pain. There is no difference at all, says he,
in order to happiness, which is placed in Virtue alone; but yet it is to be
refused. Why so? It is rough, unnatural, hard to be endured, bitter, grievous.

(i) The Stoics bring little Arguments to prove it not to be evil.] Cicero
having confuted the Epicureans, who, contrary to their own Principles, in a
Bravado gave out, that they counted Pain pleasant, or at the worst but
indifferent; now attacks the Stoics, who thought it indeed offensive, but not
evil, because not morally evil: this Restriction of the term he does not allow,
because in common acceptance it is of larger import. Then satisfies them with
assigning a different definition of the term, Evil, according to the received
Sense. Yet withal, he allows it comparatively to bear no proportion with
dishonesty; so that forfeiture of Honor and Conscience in the least, is
infinitely worse than suffering the greatest Pain. Then dismisseth the Cause,
as a mere Controversy about words. Here he bears the Person of a moderate
Peripatetick.

SECT. XIII. Pain must not betray us to indecent Carriage.
THIS is command of Language, to be able to express in such variety of Terms,
that which we commonly call in one word Evil. You define, but remove not my
Pain, when you say it is rough, preternatural, and almost intolerable; nor do
you speak any untruth; but you that boast in words, should not shrink in the
trial; since nothing is good but what is honorable; nothing evil, but what
base. This is rather to wish what we would have; then to inform what is. The
better and truer Decision were, that whatsoever Nature abhors, is to be
reckoned among things evil; what it covets among the good. This being laid down
for a Maxim, and all Contention about words, removed nevertheless, so much will
that excel which they rightly embrace, which we call honorable, honest, and
comely, which we sometimes comprise under the general name of Virtue, that all
other the reputed Goods of the Body and Fortune appear but little and
inconsiderable. Nor can any one Evil, no nor if all were brought together into
one place, be comparable with the Evil of dishonesty. Wherefore (k) if, what
you granted in the beginning, Dishonor be worse than Pain, Pain is of no force
at all; for whilst you shall think it mean and unmanly to sigh, howl, lament,
to be dejected, melancholy, impatient; then will Dignity, then Honor, then
Decency present themselves before you; and you look steadfastly on them and
restrain your self: Pain truly will give way to Virtue, and be enfeebled by the
assuming Courage: For either there is no Virtue, or all Pain is to be slighted.
Would you have it that there is any Prudence, without which no Virtue can be so
much as understood? Now what think you of her? will she suffer you to do any
thing, so as to take Pains to no purpose? Will Temperance permit you to be
immoderate in any thing? Can Justice be observed by him, who for grievousness
of Pain, reveals Secrets, (l) bewrays Accomplices, and abandons many Duties? What
for Fortitude? how will you answer her and her Attendants, Bravery of Spirit,
Gravity, Patience, Contempt of the World? While you afflict your self, are
heartless, and make a piteous moan, shall you hear, O stout man! while you
demean your self after such manner, none will call you so much as man. Valor
therefore must be parted with, or Grief buried.

(k) If, what you granted in the beginning, Dishonor be worse than Pain.]
Tully has certainly gained the Point, by the short and ready answer of the
ingenuous Youth, according to the common Notion that Mankind undebauch'd, has
of true Honor, the end to which we were ordained, and measure of our Actions.

(l) Bewrays Accomplices.] Where King-killing is accounted an Heroical Virtue,
there must concealing of Accomplices pass for on Act of Perfection. This looks
suspiciously upon the Conspiracy of Brutus; though it may have regard to that
of Zeno Eleates afterward mentioned, which former might influence the latter.

SECT. XIV. -- must be opposed with Courage.
KNOW you therefore, that if you loose a Silver Cup, the rest of your Plate may
be safe; but if you loose one Virtue, (although (m) Virtue cannot be lost; but
(n) if you confess there is one Virtue that you have not) it will follow that
you have none? Can you therefore say, that he is a Valiant man, or of a gallant
Spirit, or Grave, or Patient, or that he despises the World, either that
Philoctetes -- (for I had rather learn from you; but he to be sure is not
valiant) who lies in a damp Grot on bed of Leaves;

Who yelling, roaring, bellowing, with deep Groans,
Makes the touched Rocks reverberate his sad moans.
I do not deny Pain to be Pain, for what need else were there of Fortitude? but
I say it may be suppressed by Patience, if there be any such Virtue as
Patience; if there be none, why do we magnify Philosophy? or why do we value
our selves in being denominated from her? Pain does prick: why? let it goad
you. If you be defenseless, offer your Throat; but, (o) if you be senc'd with
Armor of Vulcans making, that is, with Fortitude, (p) make resistance. For
unless you do so, this Guardian of your Dignity will abandon you utterly. The
Cretan Laws, which either Jupiter himself made, (q) or Minos, agreeable to
Jove's will, as the Poets deliver, (r) and those also of Lycurgus, incur their
Youth to labors, to Hunting, Racing, Hunger and Thirst, Freezing, Sweltring;
the (s) Children at Sparta are so disciplined at the Altar, that much blood
gushes out of their Bodies; sometimes also, as I heard, when I was there till
they fell down dead? None of these ever cried out, or so much as setch'd a
Groan. What then? shall not Men be able to bear what Children have been able to
bear; what Custom can effect, shall not Reason effect the same?

(m) Virtue cannot be lost.] Perseverance in Virtue, was by the genuine Stoics
asserted to the wise man, as an essential Property to his Happiness. Cleanthes
held, that Virtue cannot be lost, if it be true.

(n) If you confess there is one Virtue that you have not, it will follow that
you have none.] Another Property of Virtue, that it is uniform. The inward Man
has an entireness of Parts.

(o) If you be fenced with Armor of Vulcan 's making.] A third Property of
true Virtue, known by the Author, not of Humane Forge; it is an whole Armor of
Gods making. He alludes to the Panoply or Suit of Armor in Homer, related to
have been made for Achilles by Vulcan.

(p) Make resistance.] The first direction to Patience, is an early habit of
Courage.

(q) Or Minos agreeable to Jove 's will.] Minos the Lawgiver of the Cretans, is
said for nine years to have held Correspondence with Jupiter. The first Example
that Pain is superable, and both Soul and Body are hardened by Patience.

(r) And those also of Lycurgus.] Lycurgus living about the middle time,
between the destruction of Troy, and building of Rome, traveled into Creet,
then Egypt, afterward consulted the Delphick Oracle, so gave Laws to his
Country, wherein he tramed up Youth to all hardship, Active and Passive Valor,
Archery, with other bodily Exercise. A further Example of the Power of being
bred to Hardship, in disposing to Courage.

(s) Children at Sparta are so disciplined at the Altar.] On a certain day of
the year, Children were scourged at the Temple of Diana Orthia, whose Image was
conveyed away from the Taurick Chers^nese, by Orestes and Iphigenia, and there
placed. In this Exercise, he who held out longest was called Victor at the
Altar, and some were beaten even to death. Thus did that Idol still delight in
humane blood; what Cicero says he heard when he was at Sparta, of some Boys
there whipped to death, that Plutarch, an Age after, confirms that he had seen;
so much is the World engaged to that Religion, which has freed it from those
inhumane Superstitions.

SECT. XV. Inuring to labor, disposes the Mind to a patient enduring of Pain.
THERE is some difference between Labor and Pain; they border indeed, but yet
somewhat differ. Labor is an employment of Body or Mind, in the discharge of
some toilsom Work or Office. But Pain is a rough motion in the Body, ungrateful
to the Senses. The Greeks, whose Language is more copious than ours, call both
by one Name. For industrious men, they call Pains-takingmen; we more properly
Laborious; for it is one thing to labor, another thing to be pained. Greece
sometimes at a loss for words, though thou think thy self always to abound
in them. It is one thing, I say, to be in Pain, another to take Pains. C.
Marius was in Pain, when his swellings in the Veins of his Feet were cut. He
took Pains when he marched in sweltry weather; yet there is also some likeness
between them, for (t) the being accustomed to labor, renders the enduring of
Pain less difficult. Upon this ground they who made the Platforms of
Commonwealths in Greece, provided, that the Bodies of young men should be
hardened by Labor. (u) These the Spartans extended to Women also, which in
other States are treated with all tenderness, and kept within doors to save
their Beauties. Now after the Ordinance of their Lawgiver.

The Spartan Lasses, such nice Breeding slight,
Who in Sun, Dust, and Toil, take more delight
To Run, Swim the Eurotas, Foes overcome,
Than in Barbarians Pride, a fruitful Womb.
Therefore with these laborious Exercises, Pain does also sometimes
intermingle. They are thrust, smitten, flung, and they fall. So that the very
labor does bring a callous insensibility over the Pain.

(t) The being accustomed to labor, renders the enduring of Pain less
difficult.] A second direction for the acquiring Patience under Pain, is an
early habit of Pains taking.

(u) This the Spartans extended to Women also.] Lycurgus ordained that Boys and
Girls should promiscuously wrestle in their Courts for Exercise. Plato in his
Politics much inclinable to the Spartans, allows the same upon Supposition,
that the Virtues both of Men and Women are the same; which notwithstanding the
Offices of both Sexes are different, and so should be their Education.

SECT. XVI. The Power of Exercise.
(w) NOw for Soldiery, I mean our own, not that of the Spartans, whose March
is in Tune, to the sound of the Pipe, and who use no incentive to Engagement,
(x) without Anapaests. Our Train'd-Bands it is manifest, first, whence they
receive their Denomination; then, what labor do they undergo? how great in
their March? to carry more than a Fortnights Provision; to carry their
necessary Baggage; to carry Palisado's: for Buckler, Sword, Helmet, our men
count no more a burden, than Breast, Arms and Hands. For they say, that the
pieces of Armor are a Soldiers Limbs, which are all carried so titely, that
if occasion offers, they can fling away their Baggage, and stand to their Arms,
as though they were ready with their bare Limbs to make opposition. What means
the training of Legions? what means the running, the shouting at the onset? how
laborious is it? from hence comes that Spirit in Battails, prepared to receive
Wounds. Bring me a Soldier of like Courage, that has not been exercised; he
will seem a Woman. Such difference is there between a fresh and veteran Army;
as we have found by experience, the Age of new-listed Soldiers is ordinarily
better; but, to endure labor, despise Wounds, custom teaches. Nay, we often
see men carried out of the Battle wounded; and then this raw and unpracticed
Soldier, at never so slight a Wound, to make most lamentable outcrys; but the
experienced and old-beaten one, and for that reason more Valiant, looking for a
Surgeon to dress him, says,

Patroclus, I here your helping hands require,
Least, I through Wounds, by insulting Foes expire;
Nor can my bleeding any ways be staid,
Unless by your better skill, death be delaid.
For numerous maimed, all Chirurgions hands forest all;
Nor is there room in any Hospital.
(w) Now for Soldiery.] A third direction to the acquiring Patience, is
Exercise; this is exemplified in Soldiers.

(x) Without Anapaests.] As Taratant, taratant, taratantara.

SECT. XVII.
(y) THIS must be Eurypylus, an old beaten Soldier, when he continues so long
under Pain, see how far he is from giving a mean spirited pitiful answer, that
he alleges a Reason, why he should bear it patiently.

Who another does a mortal blow intend,
Must know, like hand lift up, him to offend.
Patroclus will, I trow, carry him in, and rest him on a Palate, that he may
dress his Wound, if he had any Humanity. But I see no such matter, for he is
asking news of the Fight.

P. Tell me, how do the Greeks the Field maintain?
The Day goes harder than words can explain.
P. -- Cease then, and dress your Wound.
Though Eurypylus should have been able, yet Aesopus could not.

When by Hector 's Fortune our fierce Battle forced; And what follows he
relates, being all the while in Pain.

So ungovernable is Military Glory in a man of Honor. Shall therefore an old
Soldier be able to do this, and shall not a Scholar and Wise man be able so to
do? Nay this may better, and that not a little. But hitherto I speak but of the
Custom of Exercise, I am not yet come to Reason and Wisdom. (z) Weak old Women
oftentimes go without eating two or three days together; do but withold Meat
one day from a Wrastler, he will cry out upon Olympian Jupiter; the same to
whose Honor he shall exercise himself. He will cry he cannot bear it; Great is
the Power of Custom: Hunters keep all night abroad in Frost and Snow; endure
the being starved on the top of bleak Mountains: from the same Custom is it,
that those who Cuff with Whorlebats, though battered black and blew, never
fetched a groan. But why do I mention these Masters of Exercise, who esteemed a
Prize won at the Olympian Games, as honorable as was the Roman Consulship of
old? Fencers, men either Bank-routs, or Barbarians, what gashes do they put up?
how do they that are taught true Play, choose rather to receive a slash, than
unhandsomly to decline it? how often is it apparent, that they desire nothing
more, than to content either their Patron, or the People; when they are even
flashed all over, they send to their Lords to enquire their Pleasures, whether
they have given them content, that they were willing to fight it out to the
last. What Fencer of any Courage, groaned in the Combat? who ever changed his
color? who, not only stood, but even fell indecently? who, after he had laid
himself down, when he was bidden to lie fair for his deaths-wound, shrunk his
Neck in? Such Power has Exercise, Training, Custom. Shall therefore this
Ability be attainable by

A Bully Slave, fit to be hacked and hewed. And shall a man, born to Glory,
have any part of his Soul so nesh, as that he cannot confirm it with Exercising,
and with Reason? (a) The looking upon Fencers playing a Prize, is wont to be
accounted by some, Cruel and Inhumane, and I know not but it may be so, as it
is now used. But when Malefactors sought it out at the Swords point, perhaps
the Ear might find many braver Lectures, but the Eyes could never receive any
Instruction more sortifying against Pain and Death.

(y) This must be Eurypylus.] Eurypylus the Son of Euaemon, a Commander of the
Greeks, was shot by Alexander (that is Paris) into the Thigh, so that the Arrow
broke in the Wound; he comes limping out of the Battle, and meets Parocles,
between whom this Discourse is made to pass; the ground of it is taken from the
eleventh Iliad of Homer.

(z) Weak old Women.] Farther Instances of the Power of Exercise; also in
Hunters, Cuffers with Whorlebats, Fencers.

(a) The looking upon Fencers playing a Prize, is wont to be accounted, by
some, Cruel and Inhumane.] To take pleasure in Bear and Bull-baiting, in
Cock-fighting, in setting Dogs one upon another, are no Indications of a
moderate and gentle Temper. However it may gratify the irascible part wherein
we nearest approach to the wild-beast; but to purchase the pleasure of showing
or seeing men slash and mangle men, is little better than a Subornation of
Murder. The Art of Defense is noble, but not in a procured Assault, nor in
turning it on the Offensive. The old Romans were so transported with foundness
for this Recreation, as they judged it, that they built stately Amphitheaters
in diverse parts of the Empire, to accommodate the Spectators; they exhibited
many Matches of Fencers at their entrance upon Offices, at Funerals, and at
extraordinary Shows. This daily Carnage pampered the Humor of that Martial
People, but the Practice was condemned by the sober Heathen, forbid by the
Church to her Followers, reproved by the Fathers, and at last condemned by the
Christian Emperors.

SECT. XVIII. -- of Reason.
I Have spoken to Exercise, Custom, and Practice; come now let us consider as
to Reason, unless you have any thing to offer against what has been delivered.

S. Do you think I would interrupt you? I would not have had you made this
doubt, your Speech does so powerfully induce me to believe.


M. Whether therefore Pain be evil or not, let the Stoics look to that; who by
certain captious and nice Arguments, such as no ways reach home to the Senses,
would seem to demonstrate that Pain, is not evil. Be it what it will for
Quality, I think it is not for quantity so great as it seems to be; and I do
affirm, that men are more vehemently struck with the false appearance and
conception of it, than they reasonably ought to be; and (b) that its whole
smart is tolerable. Where then should I take the beginning? should I touch
briefly upon the Matters which I have already spoken, that so my Discourse may
proceed more intelligibly. This therefore is agreed upon among all, not only
the learned but unlearned too, that it is the part of men Valiant, and Gallant,
and Patient, and conquering the World, to bear Pain patiently. Nor was there
ever any who did not esteem him who did thus bear it, worthy of Praise. What
therefore is both required of the Valiant; and commended in them when it is
performed; either to fear that when it is coming, or to faint under it when it
is come; how can that otherwise chose, than be base and dishonorable? Now
consider, when all right Dispositions of the mind be called Virtues, whether
that be not a name improperly appliable to all: but whether all be not named
from that one disposition which excells the rest: For manliness is called from
man; but fortitude is the most manly Virtue, whose two principal Offices are a
contempt of Death and Pain: let us therefore put these in Practice, if we would
be virtuous or rather Men; for Manliness, which denominateth the other Virtues,
has borrowed its name from man.


(b) That its whole smart is tolerable.] He induces to Patience, because Pain
is not so grievous as is conceited; it is the object of Fortitude, and matter
of Praise.

SECT. XIX. The direction of Epicurus impracticable.
YOU will enquire perhaps, but how should we come to despise Pain; and a good
question it is, for Philosophy pretends to prescribe Remedies in such case.
Here comes Epicurus, he no cunning Fellow, but rather very honest man, advised
to the best of his Skill; slight Pain, says he. Now who is it that says this?
Why he that affirms Pain to be the greatest Evil: not very consistently: let us
hear on. If Pain be at the highest, says he, it must needs be short. Say me
those words over again, for I do not understand what you mean by the highest,
nor what by being short. The highest, than which nothing is higher; short, than
which nothing is shorter. I despise the greatness of that Pain, from which the
shortness of time will release me almost as soon as it shall come; but if the
Pain be so great as was that of Philoctetes, it seems to me considerably great,
but yet not at the highest; for nothing aketh but the Feet; the Head, the
Sides, the Lungs might, all the Parts might. Therefore it is far from the
highest Pain: Therefore, says he, long Pain has more pleasure in it than
trouble. Now cannot I say, that a man of his Reputation is without common
Sense, but I think we are mocked by him: The Pain which is at the highest (and
I suppose it at the highest, although there may be one ten Atoms greater) I do
not presently affirm it must be short, and can instance in many sufficient men,
that for very many years have been tormented with the Gout; but this wary
Person never defieth either the greatness of the Pain, or shortness of Time; so
that I may come to know what he means by the highest in Pain, what short in
Time. Let us therefore leave him, saying nothing to any purpose, and let us
oblige him to confess, that the remedy against Pain, is not to be expected from
him, who shall hold Pain to be the greatest of Evils. Let the same Person in
his Colic, Stone, and Strangury, set never so good a Face on the matter.
Elsewhere therefore must Cure be sought, and especially if we enquire what is
most suitable, of those who judge that which is honorable, to be the chiefest
good; what is base, the chiefest evil. In their presence you will not dare to
keep a groaning, and make a disturbance; for in their Language, Valor it self
will thus address to you.

SECT. XX. Virtue exhorting personated.
WILL you, when you see Children at Lacedaemon, young men at Olympia,
Barbarians in the Amphitheater receive the severest Strokes, and put them up
quietly, will you, I say, upon the least ail, cry out like a Woman? Will you
not bear it with Constancy and Calmness? It is intolerable, Nature cannot brook
it; these are words; Children endure it for love of Glory, others endure it for
shame, many out of fear, and yet do we apprehend, that Nature cannot stand
under that which is endured by so many, and in so many places? Now she is so
far from not abiding it, that she even requires it: For she has nothing more
excellent, nothing she more desires than Honor, than Praise, than Dignity,
than Decency of Demeanor. By these several Names I mean one and the same
thing; but I use different Expressions, that I may make it out with the
greatest plainness. Now my meaning is, that, to be far the choicest good for
man, which is to be chosen for its own sake, as proceeding from Virtue, or
placed in it, and is in its own Nature praiseworthy; which I would sooner call
his only, than not his chief good. And as this has been said of Honor, so
must the contrary of Baseness: Nothing goes so much to the Heart, nothing
carries that Antipathy with it, nothing is so unsuitable to man's Dignity;
which, if you be thoroughly persuaded of, for at first you yielded it to be
your judgment, that there was more evil in Dishonor than in Pain; it remains
that you govern your self; although this be a pretty odd Expression, as if the
same Man consisted of two; The one the Governor, and the other the Governed;
yet it is handsomely enough said.

SECT. XXI. The manner of subduing our Affections to Reason.
FOR the Soul is distributed into two parts, whereof the one partaketh of
Reason, the other is Irrational: when therefore it is enjoined, that we should
govern our selves, the Sense of the Injunction is, that our Reason should
restrain our Passion. There is in the Souls of all men, in a manner, naturally
somewhat lasche, mean, low-spirited, in a sort emasculate and feeble; were
there nothing else, man would be the most deformed thing in the World; but
Reason the Lady and Empress of all things, is at hand to help; which bearing up
on her own strength, and advancing farther, becomes, at length, accomplished
Virtue. The man, therefore, must take care that this may rule that part of the
Soul which ought to obey. How should it do that, say you? why, as a Lord his
Slave, as a General his Soldier, as a Parent his Child. If that soft and
tender part of the Soul, which I called Lasche, shall give it self over to
effeminate Lamentations and Tears; let it be bound and secured by the guards of
Friends and Allys. For we often see Persons awed by Shame, who could not be
wrought upon by any Reason. These, therefore, like Slaves, let us bind in
Chains, and keep under guard; but those who have some steadiness, but yet are
not of the stoutest, these we should call back with like Admonitions, as good
Soldiers are rallied to make head and maintain their ground. That wisest man
of Greece, in the Play called Niperiae, makes no great Lamentation, or rather
but a very moderate one, when he says;

Tread gently, make even steps with ease,
Least by the choque, my Pain increase.
Pacuvius has done this better than Sophocles, for in this latter, Ulysses is
brought in making piteous moan over his wound; and yet here, though he do but
let fall a groan, those very men who carry him off wounded, regarding the
Gravity of the Person, stuck not to say;

Ulysses, though we you behold
Sore-wounded, yet let us be bold,
You too, almost, faint-hearted are,
Of an old beaten Soldier.
The judicious Poet perceives, that acquaintance with trouble, is no mean
School-mistress of Patience. Yet Ulysses, in great Pain, cries out, not
out-ragiously.

Hold, stifle, stay me; my wound probe;
It Is fester'd; Oh! for Pain I sob.
Then is ready to saint away; but soon recovering, quiets himself.

Wrap me warm; presently be gone;
Void all the Room; leave me alone;
For to handle thus, and jog my Sore,
Does only fret and teize it more.
See you how still he is grown, not upon abatement of his Bodies Pain; but
repressing the Vexation of his mind? Therefore toward the latter end of the
same Play he chideth others, and that being ready to dye.

In grief we may complain, but must not vex;
That manly is; this like the feebler Sex.
The softer part of his Soul was so ranged under the Obedience of Reason, as a
discreet Soldier under a strict General.

SECT. XXII. Armor against Impatience.
THE man in whom perfection of Wisdom shall be (c) (for yet we see none such,
but what he will be, if ever he be, is plainly described in his Character made
by the Philosophers) He, I say, or that Reason, which shall be perfect and
absolute in him, will so keep in subjection the inferior part, as a loving
Father his dutiful Children; he will, with a beck, obtain what he pleases;
without any Pains, any Trouble. He will rouse, excite, furnish, arm himself,
that he may so resist Pain as an Enemy; what now is that Armor, Stoutness,
Resolution, and an inward Check upon himself, as he thus reflects; take heed of
doing any thing dishonorable, low-spirited, unmanly. Let noble Presidents be
still presented to the mind. (d) Zeno the Eleate would be laid before us, who
suffered any thing rather than to discover his Accomplices, in abolishing the
Tyranny over his Country. Let (e) Anaxarchus of the School of Democritus be
thought upon, who falling into the hands of Nicocreon King of Cyprus, neither
petitioned him, nor declined any sort of torment. (f) Kalanus the Indian, no
Scholar, but a rude Barbarian, born at the foot of Caucasus, was voluntarily
burned alive. We, if but a Foot or Tooth do but Ache, (but, suppose Aches over
the whole Body) cannot endure it: For we have a certain effeminate and loose
Opinion; nor that in Pain only, but all one in Pleasure; with which, when we
are dissolved, and swim in ease, we cannot endure to be stung by a Be, without
setting up an outcry. But now C. Marius, a Rustic man, but in truth a man,
when he was cut, as I mentioned before, at first forbid his being bound. Nor is
it reported of any one, before Marius, that he was loose whilst he was cut.
How, then, came others, afterward, to do the like? The Authority of the Pattern
swayed with them. Do you perceive, therefore, that the evil arises from our
conceit, not the Nature of the Thing? And yet, that the Pain was very pungent,
the same Marius showed; for he would not hold forth his other Leg: So he both
approved himself to have the stoutness of a man, in enduring Pain; and again,
the tenderness of man, in that he would not abide more, without necessary
cause. This, therefore, is all in all, to command our selves. And what sort of
commanding this is, I have showed. Now this Consideration, what is beseeming
our Patience, our Courage, our Gallantry of mind, not only restrains our
Spirits; but after a secret unaccountable manner, does alleviate the very Pain
it self.

(c) For yet we see none such.] Here is an ingenuous acknowledgment of our
Imperfection in Morals: Some glimps of perfection the Stoics had, and
therefore give us the Wise man in Idea. This bears Testimony to some Primitive
Excellency of Humane Nature; as the former to the loss of it; but toward the
recovery hereof, the Philosophers maintained it to be wholly in our own Power;
the Will to be still free, and sufficient to reduce the Affections under the
Scepter of Reason. Hence some of them pretended to dispassionateness, that is,
Impeccability, that is, Perfection; and doubtless, many of them were great
Proficients, in curbing their impetuous Appetites, but being ignorant of the
Divine Law, in its extent, could not discover how far they came short of those
Degrees, of Love to God and Man, which Natural Integrity dictates. This
knowledge more aggravates the Spiritual Pride of those, whether Familists, or
Quakers, or Perfectionists, of whatever denomination, who from early Ages have
given the Christian Church no small trouble, with their bold and unjustifiable
Pretenses.

(d) Zeno the Eleate.] He was of Vella in Lucania, an Auditor of Parmenides;
when Nearchus had invaded the Kingdom of Lucania, Zeno was apprehended for a
Conspiracy against him, and being wracked to confess his Fellows, he nominated
all the Tyrants best Friends; but being further pressed, bit his own Tongue
off, and spit it in the Tyrants face.

(e) Anaxarchus of the School of Democritus.] He was of Abdera also, his
Country called Eudaemonick from his sweet temper. On a time, being at the Table
of Alexander the Great, and by him asked, How he liked the Feast, replied,
completely well, only it lacked one Dish with a Viceroys Head, meaning
Nicocreon the Cyprian. He was afterward, by cross Winds, driven into Cyprus,
and there, at the command of the King, bruised in a Mortar, with Iron Pestles;
where he called out to him, Pound on, Pound the Hull of Anaxarchus, for
Anaxarchus himself thou do not Pound.

(f) Kalanus the Indian.] He being Aged 73. followed Onesicritus to the Camp of
Alexander the Great; but sickning at Passagarda, built himself a Pile, and went
alive into it. Alexander asking him, what Will he should execute for him? His
answer was, I shall see you shortly; which fell out accordingly, for a few days
after he died at Babylon.

SECT. XXIII. Faintness of Spirit dishonorable.
FOR as it falls out in Battle, that the Coward and timorous Soldier, as soon
as he sees the Face of an Enemy, flingeth away his Shield, and sets on running
as fast as ever he can; and for that very reason, sometimes is lost before he
had received any wound; when no such thing befalls him who keeps his ground. So
they who cannot abide the appearance of Pain, cast away themselves, and so
grown heartless, sink under Affliction; whereas they who have resisted it, most
commonly come off with Victory. Now there are certain resemblances of the Soul
with the Body. As Burdens are more easily borne, whilst Bodies bear upright, if
these give way, they overwhelm them: Just in like manner, the Soul, by putting
forth its utmost Efforts, does bear off all the pressure of those grievances
which burden it; but, upon shrinking, is so followed, that it can never raise
it self up. And to speak the truth, an intention of the whole mind, is to be
used in the Prosecution of all Offices of Life, for it is the sole guard of
Duty. But, in Pain chiefly, we must watch that we do nothing despondingly,
nothing after a Cowardly, Slavish, effeminate manner; and especially that the
yelling out, like that of Philoctetes above, be disapproved, and utterly
rejected. Sometimes it may be allowable for a man to sigh, and that but seldom;
roaring out is not so, no not to a Woman. And this, indeed, is that lamentation
which the twelve Tables prohibited the use o in Funerals. Nor will a valiant
and wise man, ever so much as let a groan escape, unless it be in straining to
put forth greater strength. As Runners for a Prize. shout as loud as ever they
can in the Race: So do Wrestlers, whilst they are in the Exercise; but Cuffers,
even then when they give their Adversary a Blow, as they fetch their
Whorle-bats round, let go a sigh; not that they are grieved, or out of heart,
but because the stress of their whole Body vents it self in an audible voice,
and the Blow is set on with greater vehemence.

SECT. XXIV. Resolution necessary in War.
WHAT? they that would speak louder than ordinary, are they contented to strain
their Sides, Throat and Tongue, out of which Organs, we see the voice raised
and poured plentifully forth? They force their whole Body, and as it were,
stand on Tip-toes (as the Proverb is) to promote the earnestness of their
utterance. I speak no untruth, (g) I saw Mark Antony, when he made his earnest
defense, being impeached upon the Varian Law, touch the very ground with his
Knee. (h) For as Cross-Bows, wrought up with Cap-stones, shoot forth their
Stones, (i) and other Engines their respective Darts, with so much the more
violence, as they are strained and skrew'd higher, so the Voice, so the
Running, so the Blow falls heavier, with the greater Spring it is set on. Now,
since there is so great force of this straining, if a groan in Pain shall any
way conduce to force the Soul, we shall do well to vent it; but if that sigh
shall be lamenting, if feeble, if base, if whining, he that should render
himself to such low Passion, I should hardly allow for a man. Which sighing
too, if it did Administer any real relief, yet it were, for all that, to be
considered, what were the part of a gallant and courageous man; but since it
abateth nothing of Pain, why do we choose to disgrace our selves to no purpose?
For what is more discreditable to any man, than crying like a Woman. Now this
Rule, which is given about Pain, is of larger extent, for we must resist all
Occurrences; not only Pain, with the like intention of Spirit. Passion bursts
forth; Lust disturbeth. We must fly for refuge into the same Fortress; must
stand to the same Arms; but because our present Discourse is of Pain, let us
wave these Particulars. It is therefore of main advantage toward the patient
and calm enduring of Pain, to consider with our whole heart, as goes the word,
how honorable it is. For we are naturally, as I said before, (and oft'ner it
must be said) most eager and zealous upon Honor; if we see any twinkling of
that, though but thorough a Crevis, there is nothing which we are not ready to
bear, and go thorough with, that we may obtain it. It is from this race and
eagerness of our Souls, after true praise and Honor, that those dangers in
Battle are undertaken. Men of Valor feel not their wounds in the Field; or
feel them they do, but choose rather to dye, than to part with the least
punctilio of their Honor. The Decii beheld the glittering Swords of their
Enemies, when they charged upon their main Body; but the nobleness of their
death, and the glory of their Names, rendered easy to them, all the
apprehension of wounds. Can you imagine (k) that Epaminondas then gave a groan,
when he found his Life run out together with his Blood? Since he left his
Country in command over the Lacedaemonians, which he had found in subjection to
them. These are the Comforts, these the Lenitives of the greatest Pains.

(g) I saw Mark Antony, when he made his earnest defense, being impeached upon
the Varian Law, touch the very ground with his Knee.] At the time of the Social
War, when Tully was about sixteen years of Age, Qu. Varius Tribune of the
Commons, brought in a Bill, that Inquisition should be made, who had been
Abettors of the Allies, Incendiaries of that War; this past, and was called the
Varian Law. In it was a Title about Incest, upon that head was Mark Antony
indicted, before Cassius Praetor, whose Bar, for his great severity, was called
the Rock of Defendants; but Mark Antony, an Orator vehement both in Words and
Gesture, being conscious of his own Innocence, made his defense, and was
acquitted. Some say the Slave, accused to have held the Candle, being wracked,
did, in the most bitter Torments, clear his Patron.

(h) For, as Cross-bows wrought with Capstones.] The old Cross-bow cast Stones,
or shot off 120 pounds weight, which did great Execution upon Walls or Towers,
almost a Mile distant from the Batteries.

(i) And other Engines.] As Hand-Cross-bows, and Bows; nay Slings, with the
greater jerk they are sent; and the Axe on the Wood, or Beetle on the Wedge,
the higher the hand is lift up, and set on with a groan.

(k) That Epaminondas then gave a groan.] In the Battle of Mantinea, after
Epaminondas had led on gallantly, and made many personal Charges, he was
unfortunately run thorough with a Javelin; being fallen, he demanded whether
his Shield was safe; when it was brought to him, he kissed it, as the Companion
of his Labors and Glory; again he inquired whether the Enemies were beaten; and
understanding that also, he bid the Spear-head to be drawn out of his Wound,
and so with loss of much Blood, triumphantly expired.

SECT. XXV. -- in Trials at home.
YOU will say, But (l) what are the Remedies in Peace? what at Home? what on
the Bed of Sickness? you call me back to consider the Philosophers, who do not
often engage in the Field. Amongst whom. (m) Dionysius of Heraclea, a very
fickle man, after he had learned of Zeno to be courageous, was by Pain brought
to alter his judgment; for being troubled with Gravel in the Kidneys, in the
midst of his roaring he cried out, that his former Tenets about Pain, were all
false. And when his Fellow-Pupil Cleanthes, asked him, what reason had
prevailed upon him, to quit his Principle, he replied, Because, I had studied
Philosophy so much, and yet could not endure Pain; therefore he concluded that
Pain was evil. Now I have spent many years in Philosophy, and yet cannot brook
it, therefore is Pain evil. Then is Cleanthes, after he had stamped on the
ground, reported to have repeated a Verse out of the Tragedy called Epigoxi.

Amphiarchus, under ground hears't this.

Zeno, he meant, from whose Instructions he was vexed, that the other had
degenerated. (n) But Posidonius, our Friend, was no such man; whom both I have
often seen, and will now relate what Pompey was wont to tell; which was, that
as he came to Rhodes, (o) in his return from his Government of Syria, he had a
desire to hear Posidonius read, but he was informed that he was very ill, being
much afflicted with the Joynt-Gout; however he had a desire to visit him; as
soon as he had seen him, inquired of his Health, and complemented him; and
withal, added, that he looked upon it as his great misfortune that he could
not hear him. He replied again, But you can; nor will I be so rude, as that any
bodily Pain should occasion that a Person of your high Quality, should be
disappointed in the Visit, wherewith you have honored me. Hereupon he related,
how, that as he lay on this Couch, he disputed with much Gravity, and at large
upon this very subject, that nothing was good but what was honorable; and when
the twitches of his Distemper would guird him sore, that he said often; Pain,
you do but loose your labor, be as troublesome as you will, I shall never
confess you to be evil. And indeed all eminent and renowned Labors whatsoever,
by our contempt of them, come to be within a possibility also of being
sustained.

(l) What are the Remedies in Peace.] Having given Examples of Pain,
voluntarily submitted to for Glory, he comes to the part of more ordinary use,
concerning support under painful Diseases; here from a twofold instance he
demonstrates the question, reducing the contrary to an absurdity in that of
Dionysius the Heracleate; and directly concluding it in that other of
Posidonius.

(m) Dionysius of Heraclea.] Sirnam'd the Turn-coat, because troubled with
Sore-eyes, as is elsewhere said, or with the Stone, as is here; he turned from
the Stoics, to the Cyrenaicks. This account he gives of his change, because he
had been long learning Philosophy, but had not yet attained to the Practical
knowledge of it, therefore the Doctrine was not true. An absurd and
inconsequential inference.

(n) But our Friend Posidonius was no such man.] As to be brought to alter his
judgment for Pain. Posidonius born at Apamea in Syria, was the Auditor of
Antipater, lived at Rhodes, read Philosophy there, and was afterward, by
Pompey, made Governor of the place, whence he chose to be styled Rhodian.
Tully, in his visit of Rhodes, saw him there.

(o) In his return from his Government of Syria.] After Pompey had put a period
to the Mithridatick War, in his return home, he touched upon Rhodes, where he
heard the several Professors read, and gave them the Honorary of Talents
apiece; the like he did at Athens.

SECT. XXVI. -- and in all laudible enterprises.
DO we not see, (p) where those Games, which are called Playing for Mastery,
are in high Reputation, that no Pain is declined by such as undertake to strive
for the Prize? In places too, (q) where Hunting and Horsemanship are in much
esteem; they that would excel in that Skill, avoid no hardship. (r) What should
I speak of our canvasing, what of the pursuit after Honors? What Fire would
not they run thorough, who formerly carried those places by Majority of Voices?
Therefore Africanus was never wont to let Xenophon the Socratick go out of his
hands, in whom he much commended this Passage, that the same labors are not
equally grievous to the Commander, and to the common Soldier, because the very
Honor did somewhat abate the Commanders Trouble. But so it comes to pass,
that an Opinion of Honor bears great sway among the generality of the
indiscreet and false principled, who cannot attain to the true Sense of it.
Therefore they are carried away by the common Cry and Judgment of the
Multitude, to think that Honorable which is commended by the most. But as for
you, though you be in the Eyes of the Multitude, yet I would not have you stand
to their judgment, nor esteem that to be best, which they esteem so; (s) you
must follow your own Conscience; if you shall take complacency in your self,
upon a sound judgment, then will you not only conquer your self, as I before
directed you; but all Persons also, and all things. Propose this therefore to
your self, that a largeness and loftiness of Spirit, mounted as high as may be,
above the common level and lower Road of Mankind, being most conspicuous in
looking down with contempt upon Pain, is the bravest thing in the World, and so
much the braver, if it be removed from the multitude, nor Court applause, and
only please it self. And truly, in my judgment, all actions seem more laudable,
that are done without Ostentation, and calling the People to witness. Not yet
that we should avoid them, (for all good Works are best placed in the light,)
but because Virtue can have no Theater more ample than its own Conscience.

(p) Where those Games.] In Greece.

(q) Where Hunting and Horsemanship.] In Persia.

(r) What should I speak of our canvassing.] The great Fatigues which Persons
of Quality oblige themselves to undergo, when they Sue for any place of Honor
and Trust, at the courtesy of a Popular Election, are excellently well
described in a Treatise written express by Tully's Brother, Quimus Cicero, to
direct him in the means he must use, when he stood for the Consulship; but
because some do not love to be referred from Book to Book, I shall appeal to
their own Experiences in the concern of those who stand for Knight or Burgess
in Parliament: The petty Arts on different hands, used to fix the Mobile; the
profusion of Estates; and too often the most unblemished Reputation for
Prudence and Integrity, set up, as a Stale, to the Interest of a Faction.

(s) You must follow your own Conscience.] A well-regulated Conscience, is Gods
Vicegerent, and in his Name acquit or condemns. Here are honest Prudentials,
directing to gain a good Name, without Popularity or Ostentation.

CHAP. XXVII. Our Patience must be of equal Temper, as to the Field in Battle,
or the Bed in Sickness.
BUT especially let us inure our selves to this, that our Patience, (which, I
have often already said, we must confirm with a sturdy Resolution of mind) be
uniform, as to all sorts of Sufferings; for oftentimes many, who, out of desire
of Victory or Glory, or else to maintain their own Rights and Liberty, have
received Wounds courageously, and bore them in quiet; yet the same Persons
having relaxed the bent of their Resolution, cannot endure the anguish of a
Disease; for neither did they, out of Reason or Principles of Wisdom, endure
that Pain which they did endure, but rather out of Heat and Gallantry.
Therefore some Barbarous and Savage People can Fight stoutly, but cannot bear
Sickness manfully: On the contrary, the Grecians, not over-valiant, (t) but
prudent enough in their way, cannot look an Enemy in the Face, yet the same
Persons take Diseases patiently, and with a Moderation, becoming Masters of
Reason. (u) But the Cimbrians (w) and Celtiberians shout in Battle, lament in
Sickness. For nothing can be even, that does not proceed from a steady
Principle of Reason; but when you behold those that are led by desire or
opinion, not to be deterred by Pain from the Prosecution and acquiring of their
proposed object; you must either conclude that Pain is not evil; or although we
should agree, that whatsoever is rough and disagreeable to Nature, be called
evil, yet it is so little, that it is swallowed up by valor, so that it
appears not at all. Meditate on these things, I beseech you, day and night.
For this consideration will extend it self farther, and take up more room, than
to be restrained only to this Point, about Pain; for if in all our Actions, we
shall have regard to the avoiding baseness, and acquiring Honor, we may then
out-brave, not only the Disciplines of Pain, but also the Thunderclaps of
Fortune; especially having at hand (x) that refuge-provided by our yesterdays
Disputation. For as if, when one is at Sea chased by Pirates, God should say to
him, Cast your self overboard, there is one stands ready to receive you; (y)
as the Dolphin did Arion of Methymna; or, (z) as the Sea-born Horses of Pelops,
bestowed upon him by Neptune, who are said to have run along with his Chariot,
skimming the Surface of the Waters; these shall take you up, and Land you at
your desired Port: such a one would discard all fear; so when pungent and
horrible Pains press, if they be so great, as not to be stood under, you see
the place of retreat. This I have thought proper to be spoken at this time; but
you perhaps adhere to your former judgment.

S. Indeed, Sir, I do not; and hope, that within this two days, I am delivered
from the fear of two things, which I did most apprehend.


M. Tomorrow, therefore, at the hour; for so we have agreed: But I find you
cannot hold to the Assignation.


S. I shall punctually, and the other exercise before Noon.


M. We will be ready, and comply with your most laudable desires.


(t) But Prudent enough in their way.] Tully sets himself every where to
repress the fond conceit of the Greeks, in engrossing Wisdom to themselves,
because of their Scholastical Niceties; and in magnifying their warlike
Achievements beyond all measure, whereas they were now fallen from their old
Martial Glory; the Lacedaemonians having, in great measure, degenerated from the
Constitutions of Lycurgus; and the Athenians turned to servile Flattery.

(u) But the Cimbrians.] In Germany.

(w) And Celtiberians.] In Spain.

(x) That Refuge.] Mark the Artifice of Eloquution; the name of death carries
Terror with it, and is dismal to Humane Apprehension, therefore he substitutes
for it, that of a Refuge, a place of retreat, a desired Port; but yet to count
any Pain too great to be stood under, so as to resolve against continuance in
Life, is a Stoical repugnancy, and derogatory from true Fortitude.

(y) As the Dolphin did Arion of Methymna.] Arion an excellent Harper, having
amassed much Wealth, by his Art in the City of Greece, upon his return home,
the Seamen discovering his charge of Money, Pirates, as they were conspired to
heave him overboard, he begged of them the respit till he could tune his Harp
on the Deck; which as he touched, the Dolphins playing about the sides of the
Ship, delighted with his Aires; one of them took him up on its back gently, and
wafted him over safe to Tenarus. Methymna is a City of Lesbos; the Territory,
about it, famous for generous Wines, and the Country of Arion.

(z) As the Sea-born Horses of Pelops, bestowed upon him by Neptune.]. Pelops
the Son of Tantalus, came from Phrygia, into that part of Greece, from him
denominated Peloponnesus; there he fell in Love with Hippodamia. Her Father had
received an Oracle, that he was to dye when his Daughter married; and thereupon
set up a Race of Chariots in the Isthmos of Corinth, at the Altar of Neptune;
the Prize was, his Daughter to the Victor, but the loser was killed; many had
he beaten and slain in the Race; when Pelops, having received a Set of
Coach-Horses from Neptune, and bribed the Coachman of Oenomaus to break his
Wheel in driving, as he passed by, slew the Father, and carried off the
Daughter, and with the same Horses passed over Sea.

The Cure of Discontent. The Causes and Remedy of the Depravation of Humane
Nature, are premised, Sect. 1, 2, 3.
Book III.
SECT. I. The Reluctance of depraved Man, against his own Cure.
WHAT should I take to be the Cause, most worthy Brutus, since we consist of
Body and Soul? why an Art has been sought out for recovering and preserving
the Bodies Health, and the usefulness of it (a) attributed to the Invention of
the Gods; but the Physic of the Soul was neither so much wanted, before it was
found out; nor so much frequented since its discovery; nor is so agreeable and
accepted by many; nay, is suspected and loathed by the greater part; Is it
because we judge of the Bodies Infirmity and Pain, by the Soul; but have no
Sense of the Souls Maladies by the Body? So it happens that the Soul does not
pass judgment of it self, (b) till that which is to give the judgment be
distempered. Now if Nature had brought us into the World with an Original
Ability, to look into, and clearly discern her Ordinance; and that under her
surest conduct we might pass the course of our Life; there would be no reason,
why any should have use of Logic or Philosophy. But now she has put into us
only some small glimmerings, which we being suddenly corrupted with ill habits
and opinions, so far stiffle, that the Light of Nature does no where appear;
for there are Seeds of Virtues innate in our very Souls; which if they might
spring up till they come to maturity, Nature it self would conduct us to
Happiness of Life. But now as soon as we are brought into this World, and taken
up, we are presently encompassed with all Corruption of Manners, and falsehood
of Opinion; that we may seem to have sucked in Error almost with our Nurses
Milk. But when we are brought home to Parents, and then turned over to Masters,
we are seasoned with such variety of Mistakes, that Truth is forced to yield to
falsehood, and Nature it self to prejudicate Opinion.

(a) Attributed to the Invention of the Gods.] Apollo and Aesculapius.

(b) Till that, which is to give the judgment, be distemper'd] Therefore not
only the inferior Faculties of Will and Passions are disordered, but the
Superior Power of the Soul, the Understanding is disturbed and Sick, contrary
to the answer which he gave Panaetius above, about the Sickness of the Soul:
This, in reference to the mind, consists in a Corruption of Judgment, and
reprobate Sense; only curable by attention and assent to sound Doctrine.

SECT. II. Further Causes of the Depravation of Humane Nature.
THEN come in the Poets: These carrying a great appearance of Learning and
Wisdom, are heard, read, con'd without Book, and stick in our Memories; but
superadd to all, as it were, our highest Master, the People, and the whole
Multitude, on every side, conspiring in favor of Vice, then we become entirely
debauched in judgments, and fall off from our very Natures. So that they seem
to me, to have envied us the Prerogative of the best Nature, who have judged
nothing better for man, nothing more desirable, nothing more excellent than
Honors, than Commands, than Popular Glory, toward which, the best of men
pursue; and affecting that true Honor which Nature does propose, as the sole
object of its most diligent Enquiry, grasp at mere Emptiness and Vanity. These
pursue no substantial and grand Figure of Virtue, but a superficial and
shadowed resemblance of Glory. For Glory is a solid thing, and substantial, not
a faint shadow; it is the concurrent praise of good men; the incorrupt
approbation of such as judge rightly, concerning excellency in Virtue; that
answers to Virtue, as the echo. Which being the attendant on honest Actions,
is not to be rejected by good men; but that which apeth it, popular vogue, a
rash and inconsiderate crier up of Vices for the most part, by a semblance of
Honor, sets a false varnish in the place of a true and natural Beauty. Men,
out of this blindness, having been imported with an ardent desire after some
sort of Excellency; yet having withal, entertained a false Notion, wherein it
consisted; and what are its Properties; some have utterly subverted the
Government of their Countries; others have fallen themselves in the Contest.
Now these propounding to themselves the noblest end, do not so much wilfully
miscarry, as through mistake of the way; What shall we say of them, who are
acted by the love of Money, or Pleasures; and whose Spirits are to that degree
disturbed, as that they come little short of madness, which is the Case of all
unwise men; can no course be taken for their Cure? Is it because Maladies of
the Soul are less hurtful, than those of the Body? or because Bodies may be
cured, there is no Physic for Souls?

SECT. III. That the Soul may have Remedies for its Distempers.
WHEREAS, in truth, there are more and more dangerous Diseases of the Soul,
than of the Body: For even these latter, are therefore vexatious, because they
reach the Soul, and afflict it. Now the Soul vexed, is (as says Ennius) to all
quiet lost: Stays no where long; by new Lusts still is tossed. Now what Bodily
Diseases, in the whole World, can be more grievous than those two Diseases (to
pass over the rest) I say, than Discontent and Lust? But how can it be proved,
that it should be able to cure it self; when it was the Soul that invented the
Art of curing the Body? And whereas the disposition of Bodies and Nature does
work much toward the curing of Bodies; nor are Patients yet come under cure by
certain consequence cured; Souls, on the contrary, which are willing to be
restored to their Health, and follow the Prescriptions of the Wise, do
undoubtedly recover. In truth, there is a faculty of curing Souls, even
Philosophy; whose succor is not, as in bodily Diseases, to be fetched from
abroad; but we must, with our whole might, and by all means, labor that we may
cure our selves. Although, as to Philosophy in its whole Latitude, how much it
is to be desired and studied, has been, I suppose, sufficiently discoursed (c)
in my Treatise on that Subject, called Hortensius; and since that time, we have
scarcely ever ceased, both disputing and writing upon Points of highest
Importance: In these Books too, are laid down those Disputes which we had among
Friends that came to visit us at our House at Tusculum. But because in the two
former, there has been spoken as to Death and Pain; the third days Dispute
shall make this third Volum; for as soon as we were come down into our Academy,
I bid any one of them, that were in presence, propose a Subject to debate upon:
Then the Matter proceeded thus.

(c) In my Treatise on that Subject, called Hortensius.] Tully writ a Book,
wherein he answers the Objections against Philosophy, made by Hortensius; and
therefore calls it by his Name; it is not now extant.

SECT. IV. The Position offers it as a probable Opinion, that a Wise man is
liable to Discontent.
S. IT is my judgment, that Discontent may be incident to a Wise man.


M. May the other Disturbances too; Fears, Lusts, Wrathfulness; for these are,
in a manner, of that Nature which the Greeks call Passions, I might Diseases,
and the word would fully justify me. But the Expression has not been received
in our Language; for Pitying, Envying, Giggling, Rejoicing, all these the
Greeks call Diseases, being Commotions of the mind rebelling against Reason:
but we may, as I suppose, style the same inordinate Emotions of mind,
Distempers; Diseases we cannot, in any received Sense of the Word, unless you
be of another judgment.


S. I am, in that, clearly of your mind.


M. Do you think then, that these are incident to a Wise man?


S. Plainly I am of your opinion, that they are.


M. Then truly this Wisdom, so much glorified, is of no great value, since it
differs not much from madness.


S. What do you take every stirring the Affections, for stark madness?


M. I am not the only Person that take it to be so; but that which I use often
to admire, I find that this was the Sense of our Ancestors, many Ages before
Socrates, from whom all this Doctrine of Life and Manners is derived.


S. How does that appear?


M. Because the name of Distemper, signifies a Sickness and Disease of the
mind; that is, being out of Temper; and that crazedness of mind, which they
called madness, or being distempered. Now the Philosophers style all Passions
Diseases, and say, that no Fool is free from these Diseases; but they that are
not in Temper, are Distempered. Now the Souls of all unwise men are not in
Temper, therefore all unwise men are Distempered. Now this Temper of Souls,
they judged to be placed in a calmness and constancy of mind; a mind destitute
of these things, they called Distemper, or Madness; because in a disturbed
Mind, as well as Body, there can be no good Temper.


SECT. V. That men, imported by Passions, are Mad.
NOR was that less ingenuous, when they termed such habit of the mind, as is
withdrawn from the conduct of Wisdom, being out of the Wits, or besides ones
self. Whence we may perceive, that those who gave these Names to things, were
of the same judgment as Socrates delivered, and the Stoics have firmly
maintained, that all unwise men, are not sound in their Principle. Now the Soul
that is any ways Diseased, (and the Philosophers, as I lately said, term these
inordinate Motions Diseases) is no more sound, than the Body when it is
Diseased. So it follows, that Wisdom is the soundness of the Mind; but Folly a
kind of unsoundness, Distemper, and being out of the Wits. (d) And these words
are much more significant and expressive in Latin than in Greek; as it occurs
in many Instances a different Import; but of that elsewhere; now to the matter
in hand. The importance therefore, of the very word, declares of what Nature
and Property the whole matter under question is. For they must needs be
understood sound of mind, whose mind is disturbed with no Passion, as with a
Disease. Those who are contrariwise affected, must needs be called unsound of
Mind, Distempered, or Mad. Therefore nothing can be better expressed, than the
Latin Phrase, when we say of men, that they are broke loose from Government,
when they are transported with unbridled Lust or Anger; although Anger it self
be but a sort of Lust; for Anger is defined to be a Lust of Revenge. They,
therefore, that are said not to be their own Masters, are therefore said so to
be, because they are not under the Government of their Understanding; to which
Faculty the Sovereignty of the whole Soul is by Nature given. Now whence the
Greeks derive their name for Madness, I cannot easily guess; but we are more
distinct in our Terms than they; for we separate this Distemper of Mind, which
is joined with Folly, and of larger extent from distractedness. The Greeks,
indeed, aim at a peculiar word, but are not very happy in it. What we call
Rage, they term Melancholy. As though the Soul were only disturbed by Choler
adust, and not oftentimes, either by excess of Wrath, or Fear, or Grief; with
which sort of Rage, we say Athamus, Alcmaeon, Ajax, Orestes were transported.
He that is in this Circumstance, the twelve Tables forbid him to have the
management of his own Estate. Therefore it is not written, if he comes to be
unsound of judgment, but to be distracted. For they judged that Folly, that is,
a shallowness of Parts, or a mind fickle and destitute of sound judgment, might
discharge ordinary Offices, and answer the common and daily occasions of the
World; but they looked upon being distracted, as a total darkness of the
Understanding; which though it seem a greater Evil, than want of a sound
Judgment; yet is this of that Malignity, that (e) a wise man may be distracted,
but cannot be of an unsound Mind; lose his Reason he may, but cannot act
against it, while he has it. But this is another question, let us return to
the Proposition in hand; I suppose you said it was your Opinion, that a wise
man might be liable to Discontent.

S. In truth I am of that mind.


(d) And these words are much more significant and expressive in Latin than in
Greek.] Tully seeks all occasion of Buoying up the Latin Tongue against the
Greeks; and therefore a little below picks a Quarrel with their term for being
Mad.

(e) A wise man may be distracted, but cannot be of an unsound Mind.] Wisdom is
consistent with Madness, as with Sleep; but no more reconcilable to folly, than
light is to darkness.

SECT. VI. The absurdity of denying a Wise man all use of the Affections, is
declined.
M. IT is from good Nature that you are so minded; for we are not hewed out of
the hard Rock, but there is implanted in the very Nature of our Souls somewhat
tender and soft, which is subject to be beaten with the Sense of Evil, as with
hardness of Weather. And Crantor of principal Renown in our Academy, said not
improperly. I am by no means of their mind, who cry up a strange unintelligible
Notion of perfect insensibility; whereas there neither can nor should be any
such disposition. My first option is, says he, that I may not be ill; but if I
be at any time, let me be sensible, whether any Incision be made, or part
dismembered; for that same dedolency is not acquired, but at the charges of
long and sore Afflictions, whereby the Body is mortified, and the Soul
hardened. However we may do well to consider, (f) whether this be not the
Language of such as flatter our Infirmities, and fondly comply with our carnal
Ease. But for our own parts, let us take up a bold Resolution, not only to lop
off the out-boughs of our disquiet, but to pluck up the very Roots with all the
Fibers and tendrels of them. Somewhat will perhaps nevertheless be left behind,
such deep rooting have the Stumps of Folly taken in our Hearts; but that only
will be left, which is of necessary use. Take this for a certain truth, unless
the Soul be cured, which can never be done without Philosophy, there will be no
end of our Miseries. Wherefore, since we have begun, let us deliver up our
selves to be her Patients. Recover we shall, if we be put willing, and I will
carry it on further; for I shall not only speak to Discontent, though I shall
to that in the first place; but to every Distemper of the Soul, as I have laid
it down, or every Disease of it, as the Greeks term them. And first, if it
please you, let us proceed in the Stoics way, who are wont to cast their
Arguments into strict and bare Syllogisms; then we will dilate after our own
Fashion.


(f) Whether this be not the Language of such as flatter on Infirmities.] The
subject of warrantable Mortification, is not what is natural, but what is
corrupt; yet we shall do well, to give diligent heed, least an Enemy escape in
the garb of a Friend.

SECT. VII. The Assertion opposed by an Argument from the Topic of Fortitude.
(g) EVERY Valiant man has also Assurance, (since Confidence, by a vulgar
mistake, is only restrained to a bad Sense, although derived from confiding,
which is commendable.) Now he that has Assurance, cannot be in Fear; for to
have Assurance, and be in Fear, are implicatory. But he that is liable to
Discontent, is also to Fear; for we Fear those things impending and
approaching, at whose presence we are Discontented. So it follows, that
Fortitude and Discontent are incompatible. It is therefore likely, that he who
is liable to Discontent, is also liable to Fear, to Faintheartedness, and
dejection of Spirit; and he that is liable to these, is liable to be a Slave,
to confess himself, at some time or other, worsted; and he that can admit of
these, will admit of timorousness and Cowardice; but these things are not
incident to a valiant man, therefore neither is Discontent. Now none is Wise,
but he that is Valiant; therefore neither is Discontent incident to a wise man.
Furthermore, he that is Valiant, must needs be brave Spirited; and he that is
of a brave Spirit, invincible; and he that is invincible, must despise the
World, and look upon it, as beneath him; but none can despise that, for which
he can be Discontented. From whence necessarily follows, that a Valiant man is
never Discontented; but all wise men are Valiant, therefore Discontent is not
incident to a Wise man: And even as the Eye being out of order, is not duly
disposed to the performance of its Office; and the other parts, nay the whole
Body, when it is out of order, cannot discharge its Office and Duty; so the
Mind being out of order, is not in fit case to discharge its Office. Now the
Office of the Soul, is to use its Reason aright; and a Wise man's Soul is
always so disposed, that he uses his Reason after a most right manner,
therefore it is never disturbed; but Discontent is a disturbance of the Soul,
therefore a Wise man will be always free from it.

(g) Every Valiant man.] Syllogistical Disputation was after the Stoical way,
which begins here.

SECT. VIII. -- by another from that of Temperance.
IT is further likely, that he who is Temperate; whom the Greeks call Sober,
and name the Virtue it self Sobriety, which I am wont sometimes to term
Temperance, other times Moderation, and another while Modesty; which yet I know
not but it may be rightly called Integrity; this is more narrowly expressed
among the Greeks, who call men of Integrity only useful men; but the Term is of
larger extent, for it is all sort of abstinence, all sort of innocence; this
has no usual Name in Greek, but might be called by a word importing
harmlessness; for Innocence is such a disposition of mind, as to harm no Body.
Integrity comprehends also all the other Virtues; which unless it were so
great, and had it been confined within the narrow bounds of Frugality or
Thrift, as some conceive, the Surname of L. Piso had never been so honorable;
but because neither he that, through Fear, has quitted his Garrison, which is
an act of Cowardice; nor he, who for covetousness, has denied to restore a
Trust secretly committed to him, which is an act of Injustice; nor he, who
through rashness, has miscarried in any undertaking, which is a piece of
Folly; because none of these are wont to be called honest men, or men of
Integrity: Therefore Integrity comprehends three of the Virtues, Fortitude,
Justice, and Prudence; and if it do so, it is common to all the Virtues; for
all the Virtues are linked and fastened inseparably to one another. Therefore
Integrity must needs be the remaining and fourth Virtue; for it seems to have
this Property, to regulate and compose the Affections, always to repress the
Enormity of the Will, and to preserve a constant Moderation in all things. The
contrary Vice to which, is called Naughtiness. Frugality is, as I suppose, from
Fruit, than which, nothing better springs out of the Earth. Naughtiness is
hence, (though, perhaps it may be somewhat hard, however let us assay, though
it pass but for an Allusion, if there should be nothing more) it is hence
derived from, that such a man has not ought in him, whereupon he is also said
to be nothing worth. He, then, that is Honest, or, if you had rather, that is
Modest and Temperate, must of necessity be Constant; and he that is Constant,
Quiet; he that is Quiet, free from all Disturbance; and consequently
Discontent; but these are the Properties of a Wise man; the^^fore Discontent
will be far from a Wise (...).

SECT. IX. -- by an Induction from Particular Passions of Wrath, Envy.
SO that Dionysius of Heraclea Disputes not unhandsomly upon that Passage of
Homer, wherein Achilles complains to this purpose, as I take it.

My Heart swells big, whilst I on this reflect,
Robbed of my Lawful Prize, and just respect.
Is the Hand rightly disposed, when it is swelled? or is there any other Member
which has a Rising or Swelling, that is not out of order? in like manner,
therefore, the Soul, puffed up or swollen, is out of order; but the wise man's
Soul is always in order, therefore it never rifeth, never swells. But now the
Soul in anger is so; therefore a wise man is never angry, for if he be angry,
he also Lusts; for it is the property of one angry, to desire a fixing the most
grievous Pain on him, by whom he thinks he is injured; and he who covets that,
if he shall obtain it, must necessarily be transported with joy; whence it
follows, that he must rejoice at another harm; which because it is not
incident to a wise man, neither is it incident to him to be angry; but if
Discontent were incident to a wise man, so also were the Passion of Anger; but
because he is free from this, so must he be also from that of Discontent. For
if a wise man were liable to Discontent, so might he also be to Pity, so might
he also be to Envy. I use a word of active signification, because the ordinary
Latin word rather signifies passively an Odium, that so we may decline the
Iniquity of the Term; now the Latin word for Envy, is derived from a Verb,
which imports looking very wistfully upon another Beauty; as in the Play
Menalippus.

Who on my blooming Sons looked with ill eye? The Latin Construction seems
wrong, but Attins said singularly well; who though he departs from Custom, at
present prevailing, yet challenged the Privilege of a Poet, ventured to follow
the natural Analogy.

SECT. X. -- and Pity.
THerefore also the Passions of Pity and Envy are incident to the same
Subject. For he that is grieved at some ones Adversity, is also grieved at some
ones Prosperity. (h) As Theophrastus deploring the untimely death of
Callisthenes his Fellow-Student, maligneth the good successes of Alexander;
therefore he says, that Calisthenes light upon Relation to a Person of the
greatest Power, and highest Fortune; but ignorant how to manage Prosperity as
he ought. Now as Mercy is the being afflicted at another Adversity; so Envy is
the being afflicted at another Prosperity. Whosoever, therefore, is liable to
Pity, the same is also liable to Envy; but Envy is not incident to a wise man;
therefore neither is Pity. Now if a wise man used to take Discontent, he would
use also to take Pity; therefore a wise man is not liable to Discontent. (i)
These Arguments are thus brought by the Stoics, and inferred by legitimate
Conclusions; but they are to be discoursed somewhat more at large, and with
greater Variety. Yet we must maintain their Tenets more expressly, who have
proceeded upon the most courageous, and as I may say, manly Principle and
Opinion. For our Friends the Peripateticks, though there be nothing under
Heaven more Copious than they are, nothing more Learned, nothing more Grave,
yet do not make out, to my judgment, a Moderation either of the Distempers or
Diseases of the Soul; for every Evil, though but indifferent great, is great:
But we are proving this, that there is no such thing at all in a wise man: For
as the Body, if it be but indifferent, is not well; so if there be the same
indifferency in the Soul, it is not in Health. Therefore our Ancestors did
excellently well name, as many other things after their Propriety, so Vexation,
Disquiet, Anxiety a Distemper; and the Greeks express every disorder of mind,
by a Term near the same; for they call every inordinate Sally of the Spirit, a
Passion, which in that Language imports a Disease. We more properly; for the
Distemper of the mind bears great Analogy with bodily Sickness. But Lust is not
like Sickness; nor is immoderate Joy, which is an ecstatical and extravagant
pleasure of the Mind. Nay, Fear it self is not very like a Disease, though it
borders upon Discontent. But properly, as Sickness in the Body, so Distemper in
the Soul, has a name not severed from Pain; therefore the Original of this
Pain, is to be laid open by us; that is, the efficient cause of Distemper in
the Soul, as of Sickness in the Body; for as Physicians, having found out the
cause of a Disease, think the Cure found out; so we, having discovered the
Cause of Discontent, shall find out the method of curing it.

(h) As Theophrastus deploring the untimely death of Callisthenes his
Fellow-Student.] Callisthenes the Olynthian was well known to Alexander the
Great, having studied together under the same Tutor Aristotle. The King took
him along with him to Pen the History of his Asian Achievements; but the
freedom of his Discourse, and uncomplying demeanor, wrought his overthrow. For
when King Alexander, now Lord of Asia, required of his Macedons, to give him
the Ceremony of Persian Adoration; he, with some others of the Macedonian
Nobles, too openly declared their dislike of it. The haughty young Victor could
not brook, that the Majesty of his Empire, and with that, Grandeur improved,
should be disputed by his Vasals; and therefore is said, under a color of a
Sham-Plot of Hermolaus, to have executed many of the Nonconforming Nobility;
but Calisthenes he first mangled and disfigured; cut off his Ears, Nose, and
Lips; afterward put him into a Cage with a Dog, and so carried him about
whithersoever the Army marched; till at last he died with the torture and
regret of Spirit. Theophrastus wrote a Book entitled Calisthenes, or a
Lamentation from whence this Passage is quoted,

(i) These Arguments are thus brought by the Stoics.] From strict Arguing, he
comes to examine Terms, and prepares the way to enlarge more clearly on the
Subject.

SECT. XI. The Cause of Dissatisfaction, is a mistake in Opinion.
(k) THE whole, therefore, is in Opinion; nor is that the Cause of Discontent
only, but of all the other Passions also, which are four general ones, but
sub-divided into more Particulars; for whereas every Passion is a Motion of the
Mind, either destitute of Reason, or slighting Reason, or not obeying Reason;
and the same motion is raised from an (l) opinion either of Good or Evil; the
four Passions are equally distributed under two heads; for two arise from an
opinion of Good; the one of which is a fond Pleasure, that is elevated beyond
the due measure, from an opinion of any great Good, whereof we have the
Possession; the other may be rightly called, either a coveting or Lust; which
is an immoderate pursuit after some conceived great Good, not obeying Reason.
These two sorts therefore, fond Pleasure, and Lust, are disorderly upon a
conceit of Good; as the other two, Fear and Discontent, of Evil. For both Fear
is an Opinion of some great evil impending; and Discontent is an Opinion of
some great Evil incumbent; and further a fresh conceit of such Evil, as that it
is just to be disquieted at it; which comes to this, that the Party grieving,
thinks he ought to grieve. Now if we would pass that portion of Life which is
allotted us with any Peace and Serenity, we must with our whole Strength and
Succors from abroad, resist these Passions, which Folly in common Conversation
sets in upon us, as certain Furies, and incenseth them. (m) But as to the other
elsewhere; now let us, as we are able, repel Discontent. Let that be our
present Subject; since you said that it was, in your opinion, incident to a
wise man, which I do by no means allow, for it is a desperate, wretched,
detestable thing, to be run from, as from a Pirate, by making all Sail, and
tugging hard at the Oar, as is in the Proverb.

(k) The whole therefore.] The Passions are here with great perspicuity
described in their Cause, Objects, and the Times of them; their Cause, and
Opinion its object Good or Evil; Imminent or Incumbent.

Opinion of Good Future Desire. Present Joy.
Evil Future Fear. Present Discontent.



(m) But as to the other elsewhere.] In the following Debate, which is the
fourth Tusculane Question.

SECT. XII. The Picture of Discontent in certain unfortunate Princes.
FOR how like you, that Grandson of Tantalus, Son of Pelops;

Who from Oenomaus, his winged Steeds outrun,
The Royal Bride Hippodamia won.
Great Grandson of Jupiter: Should he therefore have been so mean, so
dis-spirited as to say;

Friends keep aloof; hold there, lest my breath blast,
Or shadow on the good Infection cast;
Such Power of Guilt does to my Body cleave.
Thyestes! will you condemn your self, and cast away the Comfort of your Life,
(n) for the Power of another Guilt? What think you of (o) the man descended of
the Sun? Do you not judge him unworthy to behold the very light of his Father?

My Eyes are sunk; my Body wan and spent;
Salt Tears deep Furrows on my Cheeks indent:
My knotted Beard with filth and stench replete;
O're-grown, against my nasty Breast does beat.
Aeete, greatest of Fools, thou have added these Evils to thy self; there were
none such among Fortunes Inflictions on thee: And this thou have done after the
trouble had grown old, and the swelling of the Soul was assuaged. Now
Discontent consists, as I shall make out, in a conceit of a fresh Evil; but you
afflict your self, as it appears, for lack of Empire, not your Daughter; her
you hated, and that perhaps not without reason; you could not, with any
Patience, be without a Kingdom. Now that is an impudent grief, to pine away
with melancholy, because one cannot usurp Sovereignty over a Free People. (p)
Dionysius the Tyrant, banished from Syracuse, kept School at Corinth; so
impossible was it for him to live without Empire. But what was more impudent
(q) than Tarquin, who waged War with those who could not brook his Haughtiness.
He then seeing he could not be restored to his Crown, neither by the Vejan nor
Latin Arms, is said to have retired to Cunae, and in that City to have been
consumed with Vexation and Melancholy.

(n) For the Power of another Guilt.] Thyestes cries out, as above, when he had
sup'd-upon his two Sons, set on the Table by his Brother Atreus.

(o) The man descended of the Sun.] Aeetes King of Colchos, said to be born of
the Sun; had a Ram with a Golden Fleece, by the Gracle delivered to be the
Mystical Pledge of his Kingdom; when Jason came in the Expedition of the
Argonauts, Medea falling in Love with him, betrayed it, and her Father after
lost his Kingdom; and thereupon in the Tragedies he thus laments.

(p) Dionysius the Tyrant banished from Syracuse, kept School at Corinth.] This
was Dionysius the younger, first driven out by Dion; and afterward recovering,
with exercise of greater Cruelty; but finally ejected by Timoleon the
Corinthian, and sent to Corinth, where he taught Children, as Tully facetiously
remarks, from ambition of retaining an Image of Empire, though over that small
Flock.

(q) Than Tarquin.] The seventh and last King of the old Romans, who for his
Cruelty and more intolerable Pride, was expuls'd. Tully dwells much upon
deposed Princes, not without some tacit Reflection on Julius Caesar; and stomach
for the Roman Liberty oppressed.

SECT. XIII. Not to Despair, under whatever pressures we lie.
NOW do you think this possible to befall a wise man, to be overwhelmed with
Discontent, that is, with Misery? For whereas every Passion is Misery,
Discontent is a Rack. Lust has its Scorching; Fond Pleasure its Levity; Fear a
meanness of Spirit; but Discontent carries along with it more destructive
Evils; a Consumption, Torturc, Vexation, Deformity. It tears, it frets the Soul
like a Canker, and utterly brings it to Destruction. Unless we put off this, so
as to cast it away, we can never want for Misery. Now this is clear, that
Discontent does then arise, when somewhat has the appearance, as if some great
evil did seem present and pressing upon us. Here Epicurus is of the judgment
that a conceit of Evil, is formally Discontent; that whosoever looks upon any
signal Evil; if he thinks that to be fallen upon him, he becomes immediately
Discontented. (r) The Cyrenaicks do not think that Discontent is wrought by
every Evil; but by that only which is sudden and unexpected. That is, indeed,
of no small moment to heighten the Trouble; for all sudden accidents appear the
more grievous; to which purpose that Passage is quoted as well spoken.

I knew that they, whom I begot, must dye,
And bred them up that prospect in my Eye:
Further, when I the Youths to Troy did send,
With Courage Greeces Freedom to defend;
I knew they were for bloody Battle pressed,
And not invited to a Bridal Feast.
(r) The Cyrenaicks.] The Followers of Aristippus, who held Pleasure the
chiefest good.

SECT. XIV. Meditation on possible Events, abates the Evil of bad ones.
THIS Premeditation, therefore, on future Evils, renders their coming less
insupportable by their being descried at a great distance in the way before
their nearer approach. Hence the Saying of Theseus in Euripides is commended,
which we shall take the Liberty to translate out of the Original, as we have
often done the like on other occasions.

I, as by a great Scholar taught,
On future Troubles fixed my thought;
Untimely Death, or Banishment,
Still to me did some Cross present;
That, whatsoever Change should arise,
Might me not unprepared surprise.
Now what Theseus, says he, heard of a learned man, that Euripides, by a
Figure, transfers to him from himself; for he had been the Hearer of
Anaxagoras; concerning whom they report, that upon the News brought of his
Son's death, he replied, I know that I begot him Mortal; which expression
declares, that these occurrents are sharp to them, by whom they have not been
considered. Therefore it is no question, but that all things which are reputed
evil, fall more grievous, when they come unawares. So that although this be not
the sole Cause which creates the greatest Disquiet; yet, because the foresight
and preparation of the Soul is of great Power to the diminishing of Grief, let
all the incidents to Humane Life be well considered by every man: and in truth
this is that excellent and Divine Wisdom, to have a full insight and experience
of all the Chances of Humane Life; to admire nothing when it is happened; to
suppose of nothing, but that it may come to pass, before it is come to pass.

Wherefore all men, whilst in most prosperous State;
To bear affliction, most should meditate.
Suits, Fines, safe home returned, still bear in mind;
Son faulty, Daughter sick, Wife dead to find.
All common, possible; nothing new appear;
What unexpected comes for profit clear.
SECT. XV. -- Is also ground of Constancy.
NOW since Terence has so aptly insinuated this Notion borrowed from
Philosophy; shall not we, out of whose Fountains it is drawn, both say the same
thing better, and more firmly hold it? for this is that countenance always the
same, which Xanthippe is reported to have used to declare, that her-Husband
Socrates had, and that she saw him have one and the same when he went forth,
and when he returned home again. Nor was it that brow which M. Crassus the
Ancient bore, of whom Lucilius reports, that he laughed but once all his
lifetime; but it was calm and serene, for so have we received by Tradition.
And well might it be always the same countenance, when there was no alteration
in the mind, by which the looks are fashioned. Wherefore I receive from the
Cyrenaicks, these Arms against contingent Events, whereby their approaching
insults, may, through long Premeditation, be rebated; and withal I judge, that
their Evil is from conceit, and not nature. For if it were in that object, why
would they be alleviated by being foreseen? but there is somewhat more
accurately to be spoken on this matter after we have looked into the opinion of
Epicurus, who judges that they must all of necessity be Discontented, who
conceive themselves to be under Evils, whether these Evils have been foreseen
and expected; or whether they are grown old; for that neither are Evils abated
by long time, nor yet alleviated by foresight of them; and that the poring on
Evils not yet come, and perhaps that never will come, is foolish. For that all
Evil is Vexation enough, when it is come; but he that is always thinking that
some Adversity may possibly befall him, to him it becomes an everlasting Evil;
but if it shall never actually come upon him, a voluntary Disquiet is taken up
on false grounds; so the mind is always vexed, either with enduring, or
expecting Evil. But the relief of Discontent he places in two things, a taking
of the mind from considering its troubles, and setting it on the Contemplation
of Pleasures; for he judges the Soul in capacity to obey Reason, and to follow
whether that leads: therefore Reason forbids to dwell upon the Causes of its
Trouble: it fetches off from anxious thoughts, the sight of the mind dimmed
with poring upon its Miseries; and when it has sounded a retreat from them, it
pusheth it forward again, and provokes it to look on, and with the whole fancy
taste variety of Pleasures; with which he thinks the life of a wise man is
filled, both through the memory of the past, and hope of following ones. This
account we have given after our own fashion; the Epicureans deliver after
theirs; but let us see what grounds we have to slight what they say.

SECT. XVI. The contrary Tenet of Epicurus and his Followers.
FIRST they do ill to reprove a Premeditation of future Contingences, since
there is nothing does so much take off the edge of Discontent, and weaken it,
as the continual consideration thoroughout the whole course of our Lives, that
there is nothing but may befall us; as a Meditation on man's Frame; as on the
condition of Life, and a Study to submit to it. This has not that effect to
make us always, but never melancholy; for he that considers the order of
Nature, and the Vicissitudes of Life, and the Frailty of Mankind is not
melancholy when he considers these things, but is then most principally
employed in the exercise of Wisdom, for he reaps a double advantage; both that
in the consideration of man's circumstances, he enjoys the proper Office of
Philosophy; and in case of Adversity, he is supported by a threefold
Consolation. First, that he has long considered that such accidents might
come; which consideration alone does most weaken and allay all Afflictions.
Then he comes to learn, that all Trials common to men, should be born, as
such, patiently. Lastly, that he perceives there is no Evil, but where is
blame; but there is no blame, when that falls out, the Prevention of which, was
not in man to warrant; for that sounding a retreat, which Epicurus enjoyneth,
when he calls us off from looking upon our Evils, is null. For not to take
notice, or to put out of memory, is not in our Power, when those things gore
us, which we conceive to be Evil. They Tear, Fret, Spur-gall, apply Torches for
Torture, allow no breathing time. And you bid us to forgo what is against
Nature; what remedy is by Nature given, would you wring away, that of a grief
worn old? True, it is a slow Process, yet of great Efficacy which length and
time do effect. You bid me consider the good, and forget the bad; you would say
somewhat and worthy a great Philosopher, if you held those things to be good,
which were most suitable to the Dignity of man.

SECT. XVII. The true Remedy assigned.
SHOULD Pythagoras now, or Socrates, or Plato say to me; Why are you cast down?
or why do you fret? or why do you sink and render to Fortune, which may perhaps
pinch and prick you; cannot, to be sure, overpower you? Great force there is
in the Virtues; rouse up them, if they chance to be dormant. In the first place
will present it self to you Fortitude; which will oblige you to take such
courage, as to contemn and count as inconsiderable, all the chances of Humane
Life. Temperance will come with her, which is also Moderation, and by me a
little before called Frugality or Staidness, which will suffer you to do
nothing basely, nothing lewdly. Now what is more base or lewd, than an
Effeminate man? Nay Justice will not permit you to behave your self in such
sort; though she seem to have the least relation to this business, which yet
will thus bespeak you; that you are on a double account injurious; both in that
you covet what is none of your own; since being born Mortal, you aspire to the
condition of the Immortal; and in that you take offense, to restore what you
only borrowed: but what Apology will you make to Prudence, instructing you that
Virtue is self-sufficient, not only to living Well, but also Happily; which if
it depend on Foraign Accessions, and have not as its source from; so its resort
to it self, and in the same Circle, comprising all its Pretensions, borrows
nothing from abroad: I know no reason why it either should be thought worthy to
be so much extolled in words, or so eagerly courted in Life. Epicurus, if you
sound to me a chase after these Goods; I obey, pursue, follow your self my
Commander; nay further, I forget my Evils, and so much the easier, because I do
not so much as put these Afflictions into the rank of things truly Evil. But
you draw off my thoughts to Pleasures. Of what sort? Bodily ones, I suppose; or
such as the Soul, in order to the Body, entertains by remembrance of them past,
or hopes of others to come. Is there any thing else in the case? Do I rightly
explain your Sense? For those of that Persuasion, are still wont to charge us,
that we do not comprehend Epicurus, what he means: why this he means, and that
paultry Greek (s) old Zeno, the most subtle Disputant of all that Tribe, was
wont, with great heat, and aloud in my hearing, at Athens, to argue, that the
man is happy who enjoys present Pleasure, and has a confidence that he shall
enjoy the like, either through the whole, or a great part of his Life,
uninterrupted by any Pain; or if he were disturbed by any, that if it were in
Extremity, would be but short; or if it proved longer, would have a greater
mixture of Joy than Evil: he that considered these things would be happy,
especially if he were satisfied with the good things already enjoyed; (t) and
had no dreadful apprehensions of the Deity.

(s) Old Zeno.] There are diverse of the same name, as Zeno Cittieus the
Stoic, also Zeno Sidonius here mentioned, the Epicurean; and, in Philo's
judgment, the chief of them.

(t) And had no dreadful apprehension of the Deity.] Superstition is joined
with a dread of God, as a strict Avenger and inexorable. This partial
apprehension should be set right, by a due consideration of the Divine Nature
and Goodness, and not by discharging God of the Government of the World, with
the Complement of a Writ of Ease.

SECT. XVIII. And verified in the Case of Thyestes, Aeetes; Telamon.
YOU have Epicurus's Scheam of Happiness drawn up in the words of Zeno, so that
it is in vain to deny it. What now? can the Proposal and Contemplation of this
Life, administer any relief either to Thyestes or Aeetes before mentioned; or
to (u) Telamon chased from his Country, and living in Want and Banishment? upon
whom this Admiration was made;

Is this that Telamon, late renowned and feared?
Whose looks the wondering Greeks so much revered?
Now if any one, as the same Poet says, both Courage and Estate has lost; a
Cordial is to be sought from those ancient grave Philosophers, not from these
Sensualists. For what do they call a Store of Goods? Grant them, that to be
without Pain, is the chiefest Good; although that be not properly called
Pleasure; but we cannot at once speak to all Questions. Is that the State to
which we must be brought over, for the relief of our Sorrows? Allow what they
would have, that Pain is the greatest Evil; is there any Consequence, that he
who lies not under it, because he is not under Evil, must therefore be in
Fruition of the greatest Good? Epicurus, why are we shy, and loath to confess
that we speak of that Pleasure, which your own self, when you have braz'd your
Forehead, are wont to speak out? Are these your words or no? in that very Book
which contains the System of your whole Doctrine, you say these words. (For I
will perform the Office of a strict Interpreter, least any one should think it
a Fiction of my own.) In truth I am at a loss, what to apprehend for that good,
abstracting from those delights which arise from the taste; abstracting also
from those which are conveyed by the hearing of Musical Aires; abstracting
likewise from those agreeable Impressions which are made on the Eyes by the
sight of comely objects; or any other Pleasures which are raised through the
whole man from any Sense whatever; nor can it truly be said, that the Joy of
the mind, is only to be reckoned upon as good; for I have known the mind, upon
that very account, transported with joy, upon hopes of all these things
above-named, that Nature would come to enjoy them, and be freed from Pain. Now
all this he says in the very words, that any man may perceive what Pleasure
Epicurus means. Then a little after, he says, I have often inquired, of those
that pass for wise men, what good they left remaining, after they had
abstracted from these things, unless they would utter a parcel of insignificant
Notions, and never yet could learn any thing; but if they shall fall a canting
of Virtues and Perfections, they will, in effect, say nothing more, but the
means whereby the abovesaid Pleasures may be compassed. What follows, is to
the same purpose; nay, that whole Book which is of the chief good, is stuffed
with such Sentences and such Expressions. Now would you exhort Telamon, in the
condition mentioned, to take to this course of Life, that so you might divert
the Melancholy? or if you should see any of your Friends under great dejection
of Spirit, would you set before him a Sturgion, rather than a Dialogue of
Socrates? would you invite him to hear the sound of the Organ, rather than the
words of Plato? will you display before him, rich and gay Embroidery? put a
Posie to his Nostrils? burn Odours? and will you bid him be crowned with
Chaplets of Roses? (w) But if you should go a little farther, then you will, to
be sure, have wiped off all sorrow from him.

(u) Telamon chased from his Country.] Aegina the Kingdom of his Father Aeacus.

(w) But if you should go a little farther.] A decent Abruption in recanting
Pleasures, lest he should particularize in speaking out Obscentities, if you
should procure him a Mistress.

SECT. XIX. -- and Andromache.
EPICURUS, these things must be confessed by you, or else those other which I
have alleged according to the express word, are to be expunged out of your
Book, or the whole Book rather to be expunged; for it is all over made up of
voluptuousness. The question, therefore, lies before us, how we should cure one
of Melancholy, (x) that speaks after this sort;

My present Miseries reproach my birth;
Exile and Poor to a great Kingdom born;
Augments my want, and aggravates my scorn.
What now must we clap to his mouth, a Cup of sweet'ned Liquor to still him
from crying? or take any such course? Look now (y) from another Play in the
same Poet:

A Princess once, Hector! thy help I need;
Help her we must, for she implores aid.
What Succor left, the Castle lost and Court?
What safe retreat to Foreign Land or Port?
My Country Altars, heaps of Stones, are made;
And Sacred Temples in their Ashes laid.
What State my ruined Palace once did bear,
The Pictured Walls, and rich-grain'd Beams declare.
Ye all know what follows, and particularly that,

O Father! Country! Priam 's Palace!
Temple with Gates fast barred and bolted!
I saw thee, when by Phrygians guarded;
With curious Cealings carved und vaulted,
Guilt richly, and inlay'd with Ivory.
O excellent Poet! however slighted by the Modern Songsters of idle Sonnets; he
is sensible that all sudden and unexpected changes do more deeply afflict;
therefore having extolled the King's Power, which to all appearance was
established for ever; what does he sub-joyn?

All these I saw, in ashes lain;
Priam by the proud Victor slain;
Jove 's Sacred Altar Blood profane.
The Verse is singularly well, being mournful both in Sense and Words and Tune;
to put her out of this Melancholy, what course should we take? Seat her in a
Down-bed Couch, bring in a Minstrel, burn strong Perfumes, give her a Cup of
Cawdle, provide her too a Dish of Meat. Are these your good things, by which
the sorest troubles of mind are to be removed? For you asserted, a little
before, that you could not so much as apprehend any goods of other Nature;
therefore Epicurus and I should be agreed, that the Soul is to be called off
from Melancholy, to the Contemplation of good things, if we were but agreed
what is good.

(x) That speaks after this sort.] Cited from the Telamon of Ennius.

(y) From another Play in the same Poet.] The Andromache of Ennius.

SECT. XX. Epicurus proved inconstant to his own Principles.
SOME will object. How now? do you think Epicurus meant any such thing, or that
his Doctrine was licentious? I think so? by no means. For I see many things
spoken by him severely; many excellent well Therefore the Controversy is, as I
have often said, about his Logic, not his Morals. Let him never so much
undervalue those Pleasures which he lately magnified; yet I shall keep in
memory, what he judges to be the chiefest good; for he not only put it in the
simple term Pleasure, but has explained what he meant. Taste, says he, and the
embracing of Bodies, and Plays, and Music, and beautiful Objects, with which
the Eyes are entertained. Is this any Fiction of mine? Is it a Lie? I would
fain be disproved; for what other Interest have I, but that the Truth may be
discovered in every question? Ay, but he also says, when Pain is once removed,
Pleasure admits of no farther increase; and to be free from Pain, is the height
of Pleasure. A few words, but three gross Absurdities: One is, that he
contradicts himself; for but lately, having affirmed that he could not imagine
any good, but whereby the Senses are, as it were, tickled with Pleasure; he now
supposes, that Freedom from Pain, is the height of Pleasure. Can he utter more
palpable Contradictions? A second Absurdity is, that whereas in Nature there
are three Conditions, one of Joy, another of Pain, a third neither of Joy nor
Pain; he takes the first and third for the same, and confounds Pleasure, with
not being in Pain. A third Absurdity, common to him, with some other; that
whereas Virtue is most desirable, and Philosophy was sought out for the
acquiring of it; he has separated the chief good from Virtue. Ay, but he
commends Virtue, and that often. So did C. Gracchus all the while that he dealt
forth great Largesles, and exhausted the Treasury, yet in words defend the
Treasury. What tell you me of Words, when I see Actions? Piso sir-nam'd the
Frugal, always voted against the Bill for Corn-Tickets. When the Bill was past
into a Law, he that had been Consul came to receive his Dividend. Gracchus
perceived Piso standing in the Assembly, and asks of him, in the Audience of
the Roman People, with what consistency to himself, he could Plead the
Privilege of that Law, the passing of which; he had by Speech dissuaded? I
would not, Gracchus, says he, it should be your Pleasure to divide my Goods
among the People, man by man; but if you do it, I will put in for my share. Did
not that grave and wise man sufficiently declare, that the public Revenue was
squandered away by the Sempronian Law? Read the Orations of Gracchus, you will
say he was an Advocate for the Treasury. Epicurus denis there can be any living
pleasantly, without living virtuously. He denis that Fortune has any Ascendent
over a wise man. He prefers a slender Diet before a sumptuous one. He denis
there can be any time wherein a wise man is not also happy. All Notions worthy
a Philosopher, but opposite to Pleasure. He does not mean that Pleasure. Let
him mean what Pleasure he will, to be sure he means that which has no share in
Virtue. Well, if we do not understand Pleasure, do we not Pain neither? I deny
then, that it is consistent with him, who measures the greatness of Evil by
Pain, to make any mention of Virtue.

CHAP. XXI. The stoutness of the Epicureans taken down.
YET the Epicureans complain, Good Fellows as they are (for I know no sort of
People less dangerous) that I am still picking Quarrels with Epicurus. I
warrant the Competition is about some place of Trust or Honor. To my judgment
the chief good is in the Soul; to his in the Body, I place it in Virtue, he in
Pleasure. Now they fall to blows; nay, call the Town to help them; and many
there be, that run in at their cry. On the contrary, I am the man that own no
concern either way; am ready to be concluded by what they determine; for what
great business is it? A Debate about the Punick War? yet in a Council of War
about that, when M. Cato was of one opinion, and L. Lentulus of another, it
never came to any heats. These are too passionate, especially considering that
no very honorable Opinion is maintained by them; since in the Defense of it,
they durst not speak in the Senate, nor in the Assembly of the People; not to
the Army, nor before the Censors. But I shall have occasion to deal with them
elsewhere; yet with this intention, not to make any formal Contest. I shall
readily submit to whosoever speak true; only I shall mind them, though it
should be never so true, that a wise man acts always in subserviency to his
Body; or, to word it more inoffensively, does nothing but what may turn to
advantage, makes his own Interest the ultimate end and measure of all his
Actions; yet because these Principles are not plausible, that they would keep
their Joy to themselves, but forbear to utter lofty words.

SECT. XXII. The judgment of the Cyrenian Sect, how far allowable.
THE opinion of the Cyrenaicks remains to be discust; these think that
Discontent then arises, when any Affliction falls upon us unawares; there is
much in that, as I said above; and I know Chrysippus is of the mind, that what
is not foreseen, comes with the greater Blow; yet this is not all. However an
undiscovered onset of Enemies, puts into somewhat more Confusion, than what is
expected; and a sudden Tempest at Sea gives greater Terror to those that are
Sailing, than that which was sometime foreseen; and most such Instances have
like Effects: yet when one looks narrowly into the Nature of unexpected
Contingencies, he shall find nothing else, but that all sudden things seem
greater; and that for two Reasons: First, because space is not left of
considering how great the accidents are; and then because there seems to have
been a possibility of Prevention, had it been foreseen, the evil creates the
sharper remorse, as if it had been incurred by some fault of our own. That this
is so, time demonstrates; that Process whereof does give such ease, that though
the Evils remain the same, yet the Trouble is assuaged, and, in the most, taken
quite away. Many Carthaginians lived in Bondage at Rome; Macedonians when King
Perses was made Captive. I my self also, when young, saw, in Peloponnesus, some
Corinthians; these could have taken up that Lamentation out of the Andromache.

All these I saw -- But perhaps too, they had already Sung it over so often, as
to leave doing it any more; for such was their Look, Language, all their other
motion, and presence that one would have taken them for Argives, or Sicyonians:
and the Ruins, on a sudden beheld at Corinth, more affected me, than the
Corinthians themselves; for long consideration through tract of time, had
cicatriz'd their Souls. We have read a Book of (a) Clitomachus, which he sent
to his Captive Countrymen, to comfort them upon the rasing of Carthage; in
that is a Disputation of Carneades written, which he says he put down into his
Note-Book; upon this Thesis, that it was the Respondents opinion, that a wise
man would be discontented at the Captivity of his Country. What Carneades
disputed on the contrary; is written; so great a Remedy therefore, of the
present distress, is applied by the Philosopher, as would not have been
requisite, when it had been grown old: for had the same Book been sent some
years after to them in Bondage, it would not have been administered to their
Wounds but Scars. For grief diminishes by a soft and gentle progess, not that
the matter is wont to receive any change, or can admit it; but use teaches
that Lesson which Reason ought, that those things in reality are lesser, which
to appearance were greater.

(a) Clitomachus.] A Carthaginian, who at forty years of Age, came to Athens,
Carneades being Professor in the Academy of the Platonicks; him he heard, and
afterward succeeded in that Chair; being well ^^^s'd in the Stoic,
Peripatetick, and Academick Schemes.

SECT. XXIII. Forecast of possible Calamities is needful.
WHAT need, therefore, is there of Reason, will some say, or of any Argument at
all of Comfort, such as we are wont to use when we would abate the grief of
those that are greatly dejected? for this is obvious to lay before them, that
nothing should be thought unexpected. But how will he bear his affliction more
patiently, who knows that there is a necessity for such accidents to befall
frail men? for this same Language deducts nothing from the Sum of ill; only
acquaints us, that nothing is befallen us, which should not have been expected.
Nor yet is this sort of Address wholly ineffectual in comforting; but whether
it have the most efficacy, again I cannot say: therefore these unexpected
accidents are not so considerable, as that the whole trouble should arise from
thence. Perhaps they give the greater Blow; yet have not that effect to make
Accidents seem greater, because they are new, but because they are sudden.
Therefore there is a twofold Method of finding out Truth; nor in those things
only which seem evil, but in those also which pass for good; for either we
enquire of the Nature of the thing it self, of what kind it is, and how great;
as sometimes concerning Poverty, whose burden we alleviate by recounting How
small and few things they are which Nature craveth; or else we pass our
discourse over from the subtilty of Arguing, to A^^^gation of Examples. Here
Socrates is produced* here Diogenes; here that Passage of Caecilius.

A Gray Coat often Wisdom may conceal. For whereas Poverty has still one and
the same Force, what reason can be alleged, why it should have been (b)
tolerable to C. Fabricius; others say they cannot sustain it; Therefore that
method of comforting, which teaches Accidents to be common to men, is like
this second sort of Arguments; for such Disputation not only contains this,
to lead us into the knowledge of man's Nature; but further implies, that those
things are in themselves tolerable, which others have born, and do bear.

(b) Tolerable to C. Fabricius.] He was General of the Romans, his whole
Cupboard of Plate was a Salt, and Boul for Sacrifice, which yet stood on a Horn
Foot. He refused a great Sum of Gold, presented him by the Samnian Ambassadors;
and returned his excuse to Pyrrhus, offering him to be second in the Kingdom of
Epirus. His Daughters, at their Marriage, received a Portion from the Public
Treasury.

SECT. XXIV. The use of Presidents.
THE question is about Poverty, many Patient Poor men are instanced in. About
despising Honor, many that have fallen into disgrace are produced, and, for
that very reason more happy: And particularly the Life of those is commended,
who have preferred Privacy and Retirement, before Pomp and Business. Nor is (c)
that Stanza of the most potent King, passed by in silence, who commends an old
man, and declares him happy, because he should pass to his Grave ignoble and
inglorious. In like manner, losses of Children, taken quietly, are extolled by
producing instances, and thereby the Sorrows of them who exceed their due
bounds assuaged; so the persevering Patience of others, causes the Accidents
to seem much less, than what they were before reputed to have been. Thus upon
consideration, by degrees it appears, how much opinion has imposed upon us:
Now this the abovementioned Telamon declares, I knew, when I begot them --
and Theseus, On future troubles still I thought; -- and Anaxagoras, I knew that
I begot a Mortal. For all these Persons, by long consideration upon the
Circumstances of Humane Life, understood that they were not to be dreaded,
after the rate of vulgar Apprehensions; and in truth, as to my judgment, those
who have long before considered, and those whom length of time cures, seem to
have been wrought upon, in a manner, by one and the same cause; only that a
Principle of Reason heals the former; Nature the latter; when that comes to
be understood, wherein the Remedy consists, that the evil, which was conceived
to have been excessive, is not yet so great, as to cast down a state of
happiness. This therefore is consequent, that through want of consideration,
the wound is greater; but what they imagine, does not follow, that when equal
misfortunes befall different Persons, he only is afflicted, by the mischance,
on whom it fell unexpected; therefore some in distress, when they have been
minded, that we came into the World upon those terms, that no man can pass the
whole course of Life, without his share of suffering, are said to have been the
more troubled.

(c) That Stanza of the most potent King.] Agamemnon in Euripides, his
Iphigenia in Aulis, bespeaks an old Countryman.

Father, I envy thy content;
Who e're safe, private life has spent,
I envy much his happiness,
But Potentates I envy less.
SECT. XXV. The Cavil of Carneades examined.
WHereupon Carneades, as I find our Friend Antiochus Record of him, was wont to
blame Chrysippus for quoting, as some wise passage, that Verse of Euripides.

No Mortal is advanced above all Pain;
But buries Children, breeds up some again:
Then dys himself; yet their deceased Friend,
Vain Mourners to the Grave with Pomp attend.
Dust will to Dust; one Law is made for all;
Life, like ripe Corn, must by the Sickle fall.
He denied that Arguments of this sort, had any influence at all to the abating
Sorrow: for, said he, that is the very matter of our grief, to be caught in
such a cruel necessity; and a Discourse in rehearsal of other men's Sufferings,
only to be suited to the Consolation of ill-natured Persons. But I am clear of
a differing judgment, for both the necessity of conforming to that condition,
whereunto we were ordained, does withold us from fighting, as it were,
against God, and minds us that we are but men. Which consideration does greatly
allay Sorrow; and the recounting Examples is not produced to give content to
the malicious, but to inform the judgment of him that is in trouble, that he is
well able to bear what he sees many have born before him, with Moderation and
Patience: for they are to be staid up by all methods, who are sinking, and
cannot hold together through excess of grief. Chrysippus was wont to make the
allusion; as if the Greek word importing Sorrow, implied in the very Term, a
Solution of the whole man. This evil Humor may be utterly expelled, by laying
open, as I said in the beginning, the cause of Discontent: Now this is no other
than an opinion and judgment of some great evil instant and pressing; therefore
also bodily Pain, though the Fit be never so sharp, yet is sustained by
entertaining probable Hopes of Ease: and a Life led with Reputation and Honor,
carries along with it such strong Consolation, as that no Affliction can touch
those who so lived; or else Troubles make but a very slight impression on their
Souls.

(d) That Verse of Euripides.] They are the words of Amphiarchus, comforting
the Mother of Archemorus, for the loss of her Son.

SECT. XXVI. The mistake, that trouble of mind is a Duty.
BUT over and above the opinion, that our evil is great, when a further opinion
falls in, that we ought, that we do well; that it is our duty to be disquieted
at any misfortune, then arises that violent Storm of excessive Sorrow. From
this opinion come those diverse and detestable sorts of Mourning, neglects of
being trimmed, smiting on the Breast, Thighs, and Head. Hence Agamemnon in
Homer, and no less in Attius is personated.

Tearing for grief, at times his Looks unshorn. Which occasioned this ingenuous
Saying of Bion, that sure the King was out of his Wits, to pull his Hair up by
the Roots, as though melancholy were to be abated by a bald Pate; but they do
all these things out of a conceit that they should be so done. Upon the same
ground also, does Aeschines inveigh against Demosthenes, because he offered
Sacrifice a Sevennight after his Daughters Death. But in how Rhetorical
strains? how copiously? what strong lines does he compile? what words dart
forth? that one would conclude a Rhetorician may take upon him as much as he
pleases. Which Liberty none could allow, unless they had this Principle
ingrafted in their Souls, that all good men ought to be most grievously
afflicted at the death of their Relations. From hence does it proceed, that in
troubles of mind, some affect solitary Walks, as Homer of Bellerophon.

Who over the Aleian Deserts strayed alone,
Pensive, and sought for Paths to men unknown.
Niobe is feigned to have been turned into Stone; I suppose, for her eternal
silence in Sorrow. Hecuba on the other side, for the bitterness of her Spirit
and outrage, they suppose faign'd to have been transformed into a Bitch.
Others again there are, who in their Distresses, often delight to vent their
Complaints in Soliloquies; as that Nurse in Ennius.

Now does my Passion prompt me to relate,
To Heaven and Earth, Medeas sad Estate.
SECT. XXVII. Farther illustrated.
ALL this do men in Affliction, and conceive it to be just, proper, and what
ought to be done in such Circumstances; and it is no small Evidence, that this
comes from a pretended Conscience of Duty, in that such as mourn in State, if
they chance to let any Action escape that looks like Civility, or speak a
cheerful word, they presently recompose themselves to a disconsolate Garb, and
confess their fault in having transgressed the Ceremony of Mourning. Nay,
Mothers and Tutors are wont to check their Children, and that not only by
chiding, but also beating them, if they say or do any pleasant thing whilst the
Family is in Mourning; they make them cry, what? when the time of second and
less strict Mourning is come; and it is found by experience, that no advantage
arises from Melancholy, does it not declare that the whole business was
voluntary and upon choice. What means the Self-Tormentor in Terence?

I thus resolved in misery to share,
Chremes, would my Sons wrong in part repair.
He resolves to be miserable. Now does any one resolve upon any thing against
his Will?

I judge I should deserve the worst of ills. He judges he should deserve the
worst of Punishments, unless he be miserable; you see plainly that it is an
Evil of conceit, and not in its own Nature. What and if the very Object forbids
Lamentation; as in Homer the daily Slaughters and great Carnage avail to
Moderation in grief; in whom this Passage is found.

Many before our Eyes are daily slain,
So that of Sorrow none can respit gain.
Bury we then our dead, and never repine,
But all our Mourning to one day confine.
Therefore it is in our Power to abandon Grief at our pleasure, in compliance
with our occasions. Now since the matter is in our Power, is there any occasion
of such moment to be complied with, as a present riddance of Discontent? It was
observed that those who saw Cn. Pompey assassin'd, being put in fear for their
own Lives, at that most deplorable and dismal Spectacle, because they saw
themselves surrounded with the Enemies Fleet, did at that time nothing else but
hearten the Rowers, and further their escape; but when they had gained Tide,
then began to break out into Grief and Lamentations: Fear therefore could give
time of trouble to them; and cannot Reason and true Wisdom repel it?

SECT. XXVIII. Rectified by consideration that our Sorrow avails nothing.
NOW what can be of more importance to the laying down Sorrow, than a Sense
that there is no advantage by it; and that it is admitted upon a pure mistake?
And if it can be laid down, it can also not be admitted. It must therefore be
confessed, that Discontent is admitted by Will, and upon Choice. Now this is
evident by their Patience, who having often gone thorough many Adventures, bear
more patiently whatever befalls them, and suppose they are hardened against all
Sense of Fortune; as he in Euripides.

Had this day first arisen in a Cloud,
Had I not long the dangerous Ocean Plowed;
Cause were of Grief; as when shy Colts admit
Into their tender mouths, the curbed Bit.
Habit of Woes, now makes me dedolent.
Since then the being tired out with Miseries, alleviates our Sorrows, it must
necessarily be perceived, that the object of our Sufferings, is not the real
Cause and Fountain of our Grief; the greatest Philosophers, who yet have not
attained to perfect Wisdom, (e) do they not understand that they are under the
greatest Evil? for they want Wisdom: Nor is there any greater Evil, than want
of Wisdom; yet they do not Mourn: Why so? because Evils of this sort have not
annexed to them, that it is fit and reasonable, our Duty to be troubled for
ones not being wise; which yet we do annex to that trouble of mind, which
implys Mourning, and is the greatest of all. Therefore Aristotle accusing the
Ancient Philosophers, who thought that Philosophy, through their Wits, was
perfected; says, They were either great Fools, or very Vain; but that he saw,
within few years, there was made a great Accession; so that in short time it
would come to be complete. Theophrastus also lying on his Deathbed, is said to
have accused Nature, for giving (f) Rooks and Ravens a long life, who have no
occasion for it; when men, whom it most imported, were so shortliv'd, whose
Age, if it might have been of a longer Duration, the Consequence would have
been, that through the Complement of all Arts, men's life would have been
polished in every part of Learning. Therefore he complained that he must be
taken away as soon as he had but begun to have sight of this. What? among the
other Philosophers, do not the best and gravest, confess their ignorance in
many things? and that after the greatest proficiency, they have still more to
learn? and yet are not discontented at the Sense of that Folly which remains
in them, though nothing be more Evil; for there is no opinion mingled of an
officious Grief. What say we of them, (g) who do not think it suitable for men
to mourn? Such was Q. Maximus at the burial of his Son, a man that had borne
the Consulship. L. Paulus after the loss of two Sons within few days. Such M.
Cato at the death of his Son Praetor Elect. Such the rest whom we have
collected in our Book of Consolation. What else pacified them, but only a Sense
that Sorrow and Lamentation were not proper for men? Therefore, what some
having taken for Duty, are wont to abandon themselves to Melancholy; that
these men judging dishonorable, have repelled Sorrow; from whence is evident,
that Discontent is not in the Nature of the thing, but from our own opinion.

(e) Do they not understand that they are under the greatest Evil?] Tully does
not speak it positively, that imperfection is the greatest Evil: but by way of
Interrogation, as according to the Stoical Paradox, doubtless insincerity is
worse; and it is hard to determine, that he who has not reached the Top in
gradual seize, must therefore lie at the bottom; but if the question had
been asked in general, why men are not so much affected with the wants of their
Soul, as Bodily, or outward Damages; the Resolution had been obvious; because
we cannot want or desire what we do not know; therefore he makes instance in
the greatest Philosophers: Do they not understand? Some active dissatisfaction
they had in their present Estate, which put them upon further pursuit after
Wisdom; but they were still much under the Power of an intellectual Lithargy.
Deficiency in Morals, was less than their burden, because they were
unacquainted with the indispensable Sanction of the Divine Law. Had not those
Direction, Motives, and Assistances to work in them a Spiritual Sorrow, which
might engage them to be restless, till they had obtained such degrees of
integrity, as this our frail condition admits.

(f) Rooks and Ravens.] It is a fabulous Tradition from Hesiod; but Aristotle
affirms, no other Creature lives longer than Man, but the Elephant.

(g) Who do not think it suitable for men to mourn. It has been observed that
the old Roman Laws prescribe Women a just time of Mourning, are silent of Men;
whence has also been inferred, that they looked upon Mourning as not very
suitable for them.

SECT. XXIX. That our Sorrows are by misapprehensions, aggravated beyond their
own Natures.
ON the opposite part these things are alleged: Who is so senseless as to
mourn on his own Choice? Nature brings Grief; which, say they, (h) your Crantor
owns, must be given way to; for it pusheth on, and follows hard, nor can be any
ways resisted; therefore that Oileus in Sophocles, who had but a little before
comforted Telamon upon the death of his Ajax, when he came to hear (i) of his
own, broke forth into Passion; upon whose change of mind, is this said.

None to such perfect Wisdom can pretend,
Having, with Counsel, staid his sinking Friend;
But that he, when inconstant Fortunes course;
Shall, against his concerns, direct his Force;
To the surprising Blow renders his Wits;
All his grave Rules, and sage Advice forgets.
They who dispute thus, endeavor to prove that Nature can be no ways resisted;
yet they confess that greater Resentments are assumed than Nature imposes.
What madness is it, therefore, for us to exact the same of others? But there
are several Causes of admitting grief. First, that opinion of Evil, upon the
sight of which, and a persuasion that it is such, trouble of the mind is a
necessary consequent. Then again, men suppose they gratify the Dead, the more
heavily they Mourn for them. Over and above this, there is another
Superstition, like that of Women; for men think they shall more easily, atone
the Deity, if under the stroke of Divine Displeasure, they profess themselves
(k) afflicted and laid prostrate. But many do not perceive how incoherent these
things are, for they praise those who dye patiently; but think those worthy of
blame, who bear with patience another death. As though it were possible, what
is wont to pass for Complement among Lovers; that any one could love another
better than himself. It is very fair, and, if you examine it well, just and
proper to love those that ought to be dearest to us, as well as our selves; but
to do it better, is impracticable. It is not so much as to be looked for in
Friendship, that my Friend should love me more than himself; I him, then my
self. (l) A Confusion of life, and all Duties would thereupon follow.

(h) Your Crantor.] An eminent Academician; and therefore Tully gives the
Objection its full weight, using their own Terms, a Figure called Mimesis.

(i) Of his own.] Ajax the Son of Oileus, smitten with a Thunderbolt, and
wracked. Ajax the Son of Telamon was distracted, and fell upon his own Sword.

(k) Afflicted and laid prostrate.] To be humbled under the correcting hand of
God, is the necessary Tribute of our Obedience; but to fret and repine, to
torment our selves, to despond, neither answers the end of his Paternal
Correction, nor commends our Sense of the Divine goodness; and cannot be a
reasonable Service.

(l) A Confusion of Life, and all Duties.] Natural Selflove, is the Standard of
all Offices, of mutual Charity, and ground of distributive Justice; so that if
every man be false to himself, where shall be had that Bank of Faith, from
whence any may be true to another? Excess of Love renders us fond, as the
defect unkind; in both we transgress the bounds of Charity and Discretion.

SECT. XXX. The Motives of Consolation, too often prove ineffectual, proceeds
not from any defect in them, but our own indisposition.
BUT of this Point elsewhere; it serves our present turn that we do not impute
our Misery to the loss of our Friends, least we be thought to love them more
than they would have us, if they be sensible, to be sure, more than we do our
selves; for as to what they say, that very many find no ease upon Suggestions
of Comfort; and that the Comforters themselves confess they are miserable, when
the tide of Fortune turns against them; both Arguments are answerable; for
those are not natural Defaults, but personal Failures. Now a man may dilate
very copiously in an Harangue against Folly; for both those who are not eased,
invite others to be miserable; and they who deport themselves under troubles,
otherwise than they have advised others to do under theirs, are not more
culpable than almost the generality, who being Covetous, reprove the Covetous;
and being vainglorious themselves, those that are desirous of vainglory. For
it is the property of Folly, to look upon other men's Failings, and to forget
their own. But clearly this is the greatest experiment, since it is plain, that
Mourning is removed by long continuance; that this Power is not in the length
of time, but in long consideration; for if the Suffering be the same, and man
the same; how can there be any change in the Grief, if there be no change
neither in the Object, nor the Subject of it. Therefore a long consideration
that there is no Evil in the misfortune cures the Grief, not the bare length
of time. (m) Here they come in with their Moderations, which if they be
Natural, what need is there of Verbal Consolation? Nature it self will prefix
bounds; but if they subsist in conceit only, let that whole conceit be removed.
I suppose sufficient has been said, that Discontent is an opinion of a present
Evil; in which opinion is contained, that we ought to admit Discontent. To this
Definition, is by Zeno well added, that this opinion of present Evil must be
fresh; but he interprets this term in such sort, that he does not only mean
that to be fresh, which fell out lately; but as long as there is in that
conceited Evil, any force or vigor, and is still green, so long it may be
termed fresh. As that Artemisia, the Consort of Mausolus King of Caria, who
built the noble Sepulcher at Halicarnassus; as long as she lived, lived in
Mourning, and consumed with grief, languish'd to death. She had that opinion
daily fresh, which is then not to be called fresh, when it is withered with Age.

(m) Here they come in with their Moderations.] The Peripateticks, he means,
who do not suppress, but order the Passions.

SECT. XXXI. Directions for Comforters.
THESE then, are (n) the parts of Comforters, wholly to remove trouble of mind,
or to abate the greatest part of it, or to stop it, and not suffer it to spread
farther, or to transfer it to other occasions. Some think it to be the only
Office of a Comforter, to persuade that the Affliction is not at all Evil, as
Cleanthes holds. Some that it is no great Evil, as the Peripateticks. Some
divert the mind from thoughts of Evils, to think of its good things, as
Epicurus. Some suppose it enough to discover, that nothing unexpected, nothing
Evil is befallen them. But Chrysippus thinks that to be the principal Point, in
comforting, to undeceive the Mourner, if he thinks he discharges his bounden
Duty in afflicting himself. Some also there are, who collect all these Topics
of comforting, for one is wrought upon by one Motive, and another by another;
as we have heaped up in a manner, all Arguments, into our single Treatise of
Consolation; for my Soul was then big with Sorrow, and all Methods of Cure were
to be practiced. But the Season is to be observed, no less in Distempers of the
Soul, than Body. As that Prometheus of Aeschylus, to whom when it had been said;

Prometheus, this I need not you assure,
Who better know, Reason can Passion cure.
Replied,

If one with timely Medicines it assuage,
Nor with rough hands the angry wound enrage.
(n) The Parts of Comforters.] Condoling and Comforting have been always held a
Civil or Religious Duty. The Jews in their Common Prayer Book, have an Office
of Consolation.

SECT. XXXII. The Method.
THerefore in Addresses of Comfort, the first Application must be, to inform
that there is no Evil, or but a very small one in the Affliction. A second, to
argue from the common condition of Life, and in especial, from that of the
Mourners, if it have in it any peculiar Merit to moderate his grief. The Third,
how it is the highest Folly imaginable, for one to pine and fret himself away
to no purpose, when he understands there comes no advantage by it; for
Cleanthes comforts the wise man who stands in no need of comfort; because if
you have persuaded one in Sorrow, that nothing is Evil, but what is dishonest;
you do not take away from him his Sorrow, but his Folly; but that is no proper
time for teaching. And yet Cleanthes does not seem to me rightly to have
considered this case, that grief may possibly be sometimes admitted upon that,
which he himself confesses to be the greatest Evil. For what shall we say,
when Socrates had persuaded Alcibiades, as we have by Tradition, that he had
not the worth of a man in him, and that there was no difference between
Alcibiades the Highborn Prince, and any Porter? Now when Alcibiades was
greatly troubled at this, and with tears begged of Socrates, that he would
instruct him in Virtue, and rescue him in Folly; what shall we say, Cleanthes?
will you say that there was no Evil in that thing which afflicted Alcibiades?
what think we of those words of Lyco? who extenuating Discontent, says, it is
raised upon Sufferings in Estate or Body, not Evils of the mind. What now? that
which Alcibiades grieved for, was it not for the Evils and Vices of his Soul?
As to the Consolation of Epicurus, enough has been said before.

SECT. XXXIII. That it is a Duty not to be swallowed up of Grief.
NEither is that Motive of the strongest, although it is both usual, and
oftentimes to good effect: You are not the only Sufferer in this sort. This, as
I say, is effectual, but not always, nor with all, for some reject it: but it
imports how it is applied, for we must urge instances, how particular men have
wisely born their Sufferings, not what they have suffered. That of Chrysippus
is of greatest strength, as to its truth, but difficult as to the time of
Sorrow. It is a great task to prove to a Mourner, that he Mourns out of
judgment, and a conceit that he ought so to do. Thereupon, as in Causes, we do
not always make the same state, (for so we call the several sorts of
Controversies,) but suit them to the Season, to the Nature of the Cause, and to
the Person, so in asswaging Sorrow. For we must discern what method of Cure
each Person is capable of; but I know not how our Discourse has digress'd from
the matter proposed; for your question proceeds about a wise man, in whose
judgment either there can be no Evil, where there is no Dishonesty; or so small
an Evil, that it is swallowed up of Wisdom, so that it can scarce appear. One
who adds no imaginary Troubles, nor improves his Discontent, nor judges it to
be right, to give himself the most grievous Torture, and to fret to Death; than
which, nothing can be more wrong. Yet the sequel has informed us, to my
apprehension, although it were not the direct and proper question at this time,
that there is no Evil, but that which may be called Dishonesty; so that we may
withal see, whatever Evil there is in Discontent, it is not Natural, but
contracted by our voluntary judgment, and mistake in opinion. Now that sort of
trouble of mind, has been handled by us, which is greatest of all; so that
upon the removal of it, we judged the Remedies of the rest, not of difficult
enquiry.

SECT. XXXIV. A Passage to the Remedies of Disquiet, arising from the
particular Passions.
FOR there are certain Common places which are said about Poverty, about an
inambitious and obscure Life; and severally certain Essays upon Banishment,
upon the Captivity of our Country, upon Bondage, upon Maimes, upon Blindness,
and upon every other Misfortune, to which the name of Calamity is appliable:
The Greeks divide these into distinct Disputations, and separate Tracts: For
they lack work, although their Disputations are full of delight; and yet as
Physicians in carrying on the Cure of the whole Body, apply Remedies to the
least affected part: So Philosophy having taken away trouble of mind in
general; yet if any Error arises from Particulars, if Poverty bites, if
Disgrace pinches, if Banishment casts us under a Cloud, or if any of the
abovementioned Calamities befall us: although every Affliction has its proper
Consolation; to which you shall hear discoursed when you please; but still we
must recur to the same Springhead, that all Discontent is stranger to a wise
man, because it is idle; because it is admitted to no purpose; because it
arises not from Nature, but Judgment, but Conceit, but a kind of drawing our
selves on to Grieve, after we have determined that it is our duty so to do.
Remove this which is wholly depending on our Will, and all that fretful
Discontent will be taken away; yet some Gripes and Resentments will remain in
the Mind. Let them call this Natural, if they please; so the name of Discontent
be forborne; a name grievous, vexatious, deadly, which can by no means be; and,
as I may say, dwell with Wisdom. But how many, and how bitter are the Suckers
of Discontent, which must all be plucked up; when the Body of it is felled
down; and if need shall require, at several times; (o) for we abound in this
leisure, such as it is. But the Form of all Passions is one, the Names diverse;
for both Envy is a Passion, and Emulation, and Detraction, and Pity, Anxiety,
Mourning, Fretting, Melancholy, Lamentation, Solicitude, Grief, Uneasiness,
Vexation, Desperation; all these the Stoics define; and the words which
Irehears'd, have several Notions; and do not, as they seem, signify the same
things, but differ somewhat, which perhaps we shall treat of elsewhere. These
are the Fibers and Tendrels of the Suckers, first mentioned; which must be
searched out and torn asunder, that not one of them may ever shoot up. A great
and difficult Work; who denis it? But what is there excellent, which is not
also hard? yet Philosophy professes to effect it, would we but admit its Cure.
Now thus much for this Point; the rest shall be ready for you as often as you
will, both at this, and any other place.

(o) For we abound in this leisure, such as it is.] Spoken with some regret,
for his being out of Practice, Trust, and honorable Employment.

The Government of the Passions. The Prologue Sect. 1, 2, 3.
Book IV.
SECT. 1. The Ancient Romans, probably not Strangers to Polite Learning,
because Borderers upon Greece the Great.
AS in many other Instances, most worthy Brutus, I am wont to admire the Parts
and Perfections of our Countrymen, so especially in these Studies which they
have but of very late time regarded, and brought over from Greece to this
State. For whereas from the first Foundation of the City, Divination,
Ceremonies, Common-Councils, Appeals, Court of Senators, Train'd-bands of Horse
and Foot, the whole order of the Militia, were, from a Wisdom almost more than
Humane, established upon the Regal Constitutions, and some of them upon their
Laws; so when the Commonwealth was delivered from the Oppression of Tyranny,
(p) an admirable advance, and incredible carriere was made toward all
excellency. Now this is not the proper place to dilate upon the Customs and
Ordinances of our Ancestors, upon the Discipline and Temper of our Government;
this has been with some diligence, treated of by us elsewhere; but especially
in those six Books which we have written of a Commonwealth. At the present,
when I consider the Study of Arts and Sciences, I meet with many Circumstances
whereupon to frame an opinion, that they also were imported hither from abroad,
nor invited only, but followed also, and cherished; for they had almost in
sight, Pythagoras, a man excellent and renowned for Wisdom, who was in Italy at
the very time when L. Brutus the noble Founder of your honorable Family, set
his Country at Liberty. Now the Learning of Pythagoras spreading far and near,
seems to me to have reached even to this State. This is probable to conjecture;
so may it be traced by some signs. For who can imagine, when there flourished
In Italy, Greece which was called the Great, having very large and powerful
States; and the renown of Pythagoras first, and then of the Pythagoreans, was
so great in them, that our Countrymen should stop their Ears against their
most learned Discourses. Nay, I suppose it was from the admiration of the
Pythagoreans, that King Numa was reputed by those of later Ages, to have been a
Pythagorean; for they knowing the Discipline and Rules of Pythagoras; and
having received from their Forefathers, the Equity and Wisdom of that King;
but being ignorant of Chronology, to adjust the Times and Ages proper to each
one, by reason of the great Antiquity, thought that he who so much excelled in
Wisdom, was the Auditor of Pythagoras.

(p) An admirable advance.] Spoken like a Common-wealths-man; but how got the
rich Lampis an Estate? A small one, says he, in a great time; and a great one
in a small time.

SECT. II. From their skill in Music, Poetry, and Oratory.
NOW thus much for conjecture; as for the steps of Pythagoreans, although many
may be traced, yet we shall content our selves with a few, because that is not
the proper enquiry on this occasion. For whereas those Philosophers are said to
have delivered some Symbolical Precepts in Verse; and to have relaxed their
minds with suitable Notes of Music from a serious intention of thought to a
staid composure. Cato, a most grave Author, said in his Book of Origens, that
this was the Custom at Feasts among the old Romans, that as they sat at Table,
they Sung, in order to the sound of the Pipe, the Praises and Achievements of
renowned Persons; from whence it is manifest, both that Songs were composed to
Tunes and Verses; which thing the twelve Tables farther declare, that Verse was
so early in use, in that they make a Prohibition, that it should not be made to
defame another; this also is some Argument of Learning in those days, that
Music plays before the Cushions of the Gods, and the Feasts of the
Magistrates, which was a Property of that Education, whereof I am now speaking.
In my judgment that Verse of Appius the Blind, which Panaetius much commends in
an Epistle to (q) Q. Tubero, resembles the Pythagoreans. There are many things
more in our Constitutions derived from them, which I pass by, least we should
be thought to have horrow'd from others, what we have supposed to have invented
our selves; but to reduce our Discourse to the Point in hand. In how short a
time, how many and how great Poets have arisen? and what Orators? that it may
easily appear, that our Countrymen could have attained to any thing,
whenever they did but set their minds to go about it: But as for other
Studies, we shall speak to them elsewhere, if occasion require, and have
already often done it.

(q) Qu. Tubero.] Quintus Aelius Tubero was a great Lawyer, Logician, and
skilled in the Stoic Philosophy.

SECT. III. That Philosophy was of later date with them.
THE Study of Wisdom must have been ancient among our Countrymen; yet I do not
find whom I could instance in before the Age of Laelius and Scipio. When these
were young men, (r) I see that Diogenes the Stoic, and Carneades the
Academick, were sent Ambassadors from the Athenians to the Senate; these men
not having been employed before in any State Affairs, and being the one a
Cyrenian, the other a Babylonian, would certainly never have been taken off
from their Sedentary Life and Philosophical Disputations, to be chosen to that
Ministry, had not there been in those very times, in some of the chief
Nobility, a studiousness after Learning. These having committed to writing
other Matters, some the Civil Law, others their own Orations, others the
Monuments of their Ancestors, did express the noblest of all Arts, the Doctrine
of well living, rather in their Conversation, than writing. Therefore there are
scarce any, or very few Treatises in Latin, about this true and excellent
Philosophy, which deriving from Socrates, has still continued in the
Peripateticks and Stoics, who say the same thing in other Terms, whilst the
Academicks moderated in their Controversies, whether it were by reason of the
importance of their Affairs, and their continual employment, or because they
thought the Subject could not be rendered agreeable to the illiterate Vulgar.
So it was, whilst they forbore writing, (s) C. Amafinius became an Author,
whose Books being once published, the Multitude was so wrought upon, that they
flocked in especially to that Sect; whither it were because the Doctrine is so
exceeding easy, or because they were allured with the soft Charms of Pleasure;
or yet, because nothing better was preferred, they held fast what they had. Now,
after Amafinius, many zealous Promoters of the same way, writ many pieces, so
that they filled all Italy; and what is the greatest Argument, that there is no
solidity in their Doctrine, its being easily committed to memory, and
acceptable to the ignorant; this they count the strength of their Party.

(r) I see that Diogenes the Stoic, and Carneades the Academick.] During the
interval of the second and third Punick War, when M. Cato flourished at the
Bar, and Plautus was Laureate on the Roman Stage, upon this occasion came the
Famous Embassy here mentioned. The Athenians having been exhausted with a
Macedonian War, plundered Oropus. The Oropians fly for relief to the Protection
of the Roman Senate. These commit the cognizance of the whole Cause to the
Sicyonians, their Allies who should impose a Fine on the Delinquents. The
Atbenians refused to give an appearance, but were amerc'd 500 Talents. Hereupon
they sent three Philosophers Ambassadors to Rome, to obtain from the Senate a
release of the Fine imposed. Besides Diogenes the Stoic, and Catneades the
Academick, there came Critolaus the Peripatetick. These Personages, every one
very eminent in his way, held severally public Disputations in the most
remarkable places of Rome, to the great Admiration of their Auditors. The
effect of their Embassy was, that they got four hundred Talents of the Fine
abated, and the remaining hundred was never levied.

(s) C. Amafinius.] He translated some pieces of Epicurus into dull Latin.

SECT. IV. The Position. That it is probable that a wise man is not free from
all Passion.
BUT let every man maintain what is his Sense, for judgments are free; we shall
adhere to our old Resolution, not to be tied up to the Impositions of any one
Sect, to which we must yield our necessary assent in Philosophy; but shall
always enquire after what has most of probability in every Proposition; which,
as we have done often elsewhere, so did we lately, (t) with great diligence, in
our Seat at Tusculum. Having therefore laid down the Disputes of three days, I
shall couch the fourth in this Book. For so soon as we were come down into the
lower walk, as we had done the former days, the matter proceeded thus.

M. Speak any one that has a mind, what Subject he would have disputed upon.


S. I am not of the opinion that a wise man can be free from all Passions of
the mind.


M. That he is from Discontent, you were of the opinion, upon yesterdays
Dispute; unless perhaps you assented out of complaisance.


S. No, in truth, for your Discourse satisfied me extremely well.


M. You do not therefore think that Discontent is incident to a wise man.


S. I do not believe it is.


M. Nay, if that cannot disturb the mind of a wise man, neither can any other.
For what? should fear confound him? Why Fear is of those things absent, at
which present is Discontent. Therefore upon removal of Discontent, Fear is also
removed. There remain two Passions more; excessive Joy, and Lust; if these be
not incident to a wise man, the wise man's mind will be always composed.


S. I am clear of that judgment.


M. Which then had you rather? that we should presently hoyse up Sail, or, as
is usual in putting forth out of the Harbor, to row a while.


S. What do you mean by that? for I do not understand you.


(t) With great diligence.] Tully promises somewhat more than ordinary in this
days Discourse, which is very accurate and judicious.

SECT. V. The Method of the ensuing Disputation.
M. BEcause Chrysippus and the Stoics, when they Dispute about the Passions,
take up much time in the dividing and defining them; for that part of their
Discourse is very small, heals the Soul, and suffers not its affections to
grow boisterous. On the other side the Peripateticks bring many motives to
allay the Heats of the mind; but pass by the pricking Thorns of Divisions and
Definitions. I enquire therefore, whether I should presently spread the Sails
of my Discourse, or should push it on a while before with the Oars of Logicians.


S. Do this latter, for the whole matter in question will be more complete by
joining both means of handling it.


M. That is indeed the more orderly way of Proceeding; but if any thing shall
fall out to be somewhat obscure, you may do well afterward to enquire about it.


S. I shall do so; yet you after your usual manner, will deliver those obscure
matters plainer than they are delivered by the Greeks.


M. I will use my best endeavors; but there is need of heedful attention, (u)
lest all should slip away, if any one thing escape you. Now what the Greeks
call Passions, we choose rather to call Distempers than Diseases; in the opening
those, I shall follow the old Description which was first used by Pythagoras,
and then by Plato, who divide the Soul into two parts; the one they make
rational, the other irrational; in the reasonable part they place Tranquillity
of mind, that is a gentle and quiet Constancy; in the other the turbulent
Commotions both of Anger and Concupiscence, contrary to Reason, and at Enmity
with it. Let this therefore be the source of all; yet in the describing of
these Passions, we shall make use of the Stoics Definitions and Devisions, who
seem to me to handle this question most judiciously.


(u) Least all should slip away, if any one thing escape you.] As the Notion he
lays down of a Passion, is the Sinew of the whole ensuing Argument.

SECT. VI. The Definition of the Passions.
THIS therefore is Zeno's Definition, that a Disorder, which he calls a
Passion, is a Commotion of the mind, opposite to right Reason, and contrary to
Nature. Some more succinctly, that a Passion is an over-vehement Affection, but
they mean it over-vehement when it flys out beyond the due bounds of Natural
Constancy. Now they will have the particular Passions to arise from two
conceived Goods, and two conceived Evils, and so to be four. From the Goods
they judge do spring Lust and Mirth: Mirth is of Goods present; Lust of future.
From the Evils, Fear and Discontent. Fear from future; Discontent from present.
For those things which are feared, when Imminent; when Incumbent produce
Discontent. Now Mirth and Lust respect a conceit of Good things. Since Lust
upon the appearance of Good, being inveigled and inflamed, is imported after
it. Mirth, when it has once acquired what was coveted after, is elevated and
exults. For all men naturally pursue, what things appear Good, and avoid the
contrary. Wherefore so soon as any object is set before the mind, which
carries in it some appearance of good Nature it self, pusheth us on to the
acquiring of it. When this is managed with Constancy and Prudence, such Desire
the Stoics call a Willingness, we may a regular Will; this they think is in
the wise man only, which they thus define. A regular Will is that which
desires a thing according to Reason; but that which is hurried on violently,
in opposition to Reason, that is Lust and unbridled Concupiscence, which is
sound in all Fools. In like manner, when we are so affected, as being in the
Fruition of some good that falls out to be after two sorts; for when the mind
beats gently, and in an even temper according to reason, then it is called Joy:
but when the Soul is flushed without cause, and beyond due bounds, that may be
called transporting, or excessive Mirth; which they thus define an Elevation of
the Mind, without reason. And because, as we naturally affect good, so we
naturally decline Evil; which declining, if it be according to reason, should
be called Caution, and understood to be in the wise man only. But if it be
without reason, and with a base and sordid Dejection of Spirit, should be
called Fear. Fear therefore is a Caution contrary to Reason. As for a present
Evil, the wise man has no concern about it; but a Fool has that wherewith men
are affected in conceited Evils, and let their Spirits sink, and are
Melancholy, not obeying Reason. Therefore this is the first Definition, that
Discontent be a dejection of mind, contrary to Reason, so there are four
Passions, three ordinate Affections; because there is no ordinate Affection
opposed to Discontent.

SECT. VII. The Intellect Accessory to the Passions.
BUT they determine that all these Passions have their Causes, in the judgment
and Opinion. Therefore they define them closer, so that it may be understood,
not only how culpable they are, but also how much under our Power. Thus
Discontent is a fresh opinion of a present Evil, under which it seems our Duty
to be dejected and troubled in mind. Mirth a fresh opinion of a present Good,
upon which it seems our Duty to be elevated. Fear an opinion of an impending
Evil, which seems intolerable. Lust an opinion of an approaching Good, the
presence and Fruition of which, would be beneficial to us. Now as to those
Opinions and Judgments, which I said were Ingredients of the Passions, they do
not say that only the Passions have their subsistence from them, but also the
Effects of those Passions; so that Discontent causes a certain painful
remorse. Fear a withdrawing of the Soul, and a kind of flight. Mirth, an
extravagant Jolity: Lust an unbridled Concupiscence. Again they interpret that
opinion, which we have inserted into the Definitions abovementioned, to be a
weak assent. But under each of these general Passions, there are certain
particular ones of the same sort distributed, as under Discontent, Envying (for
we must serve our selves of a less usual word, in order to the clearness of
Explication, since the word Envy, especially in Latin, is taken not only
actively, as it refers to him that Envys, but passively as to him that is
envied for the Odium that is cast upon him,) Emulation, Detraction, Pity,
Anguish, Mourning, Bemoaning, Distress, Sorrow, Lamentation, Anxiety,
Uneasiness, Selfafflicting, Despair, and whatever else be of the same Nature.
Again subordinate to Fear, are Sloth, Shame, Terror, Timorousness, Dismay,
Confusion, Distraction, Cowardice; under Pleasure, Malice, rejoicing at
another Mischief, Delight, Boasting and the like. Under Lust, Anger, Wrath,
Hatred, Enmity, Discord, Want, Desire, and the rest of that kind. Now these
they define after this manner.

SECT. VIII. The subordinate Passions desin'd. Of Discontent and Fear.
THEY say that Envying is a Discontent, admitted upon another good Successes,
being no ways prejudicial to him that envieth; for if any one be troubled at
the Prosperity of one who hurts him, he is not properly said to Envy; as if
Agamemnon should be so at Hectors: But he who is grieved that another should
enjoy those advantages which are no ways prejudicial to himself, he in truth is
envious. Emulation again has a twofold importance, so as to be taken both in a
good and a bad Sense; for the imitation of Virtue is also called Emulation; but
we have nothing to do with it here in that acceptance, for that is
praiseworthy. And there is an Emulation, a Discontent, if another enjoy, and
one go himself without that which he has eagerly coveted after. Detraction is
now what I would have understood to be Jealousy, a Discontent that another
should share in that which one has eagerly coveted. Pity is a Discontent
arising from the Misery of another suffering wrongfully; for no Body is touched
with pity, at the punishment of an Assassine or Traitor. Anguish is a sore
Discontent. Mourning is a Discontent at the untimely death of one who was dear
to us. Bemoaning is a Discontent with Tears. Distress a toilsome Discontent.
Grief a tormenting Discontent. Lamentation a Discontent with wailing.
Solicitude a Discontent with pensiveness. Uneasiness a persevering Discontent.
Self-afflicting a Discontent with Inflictions upon the Body. Despair a
Discontent without any expectation of better condition. But what are subject to
Fear they thus define. Sloth to be a Fear of ensuing Labor. Terror an
astonishing Fear: Whence it comes to pass, that blushing follows shame;
paleness, and trembling, and gnashing of Teeth, Terror. Timorousness to be a
Fear of approaching Evil. Dismay a Fear that puts the mind besides it self;
whence that of Ennius.

Dismay all wisdom from my Soul expells. Confusion a Fear following, and as it
were attendant on Dismay. Distraction, a Fear that breaks all the Measures we
had taken. Dread, a persevering Fear.

SECT. IX. -- of Pleasure and Lust.
AGAIN, the particular Branches from Pleasure they thus describe; that Malice
should be a Pleasure taken in another harm, without any advantage to onesself.
Delight, a Pleasure charming the mind, with the sweetness of the hearing; and
such as is that of the Ears, such are those of the Eyes, the Touching, the
Scent, and Taste; which are all of one kind, as it were Pleasures melted down to
gratify the Soul. Boasting is a Pleasure naturally Impertinent, and which
exalts it self with some Insolence. But what Passions are subjected to Lust,
they thus define; so that Anger is a Lust of punishing him who appears to have
injured us Wrath is Anger breaking forth, and newly arisen which is in Greek
called Heat. Hatred is an inveterate Anger. Enmity, an Anger watching the time
of taking Revenge. Heart-burning is a deadly feud conceived with inward rancor
of Spirit. Worldliness, an insatiable Lust. Expectation, a Lust of seeing one
who is not yet come. They further distinguish this, that Lust is of those
things which are affirmed of one or more (which the Logicians call Predicates)
as having Riches, bearing Offices Want is a Lust after the things themselves,
as Money as Honors. Again they say the Spring of all Passions is Intemperance,
which is a defection from the whole Understanding, and from right Reason. At
such Aversion to the Orders of Reason, that its Affections can by no means be
regulated nor restrained. As Temperance therefore moderates the Affections, and
causes them to obey right Reason; so its opposite habit Intemperance Fires,
Confounds, puts into an Uproar the whole State of the Mind; therefore both
Discontents and Fears, and all the other Passions take their Rise from it.

CHAP. X. The Original of the Distempers of the Soul.
AS therefore, when the Blood is corrupted, or Phlegm abounds, or Choler in the
Body, Diseases and Indispositions are ingender'd. So the medley of perverse
Opinions, and their opposition one to another, rob the Soul of its Health, and
afflict it with Diseases. Now from the Passions first Diseases, as they so call
them, are contracted, and those Habits which are contrary to those Diseases, as
having a depraved Aversion and Distaste for certain things. Then Indispositions,
which are called by the Stoics Infirmities; and also contrary Aversions
opposed to them. Upon this place too much Pains is taken by the Stoics, and
especially Chrysippus, it setting forth the resemblance between the Diseases of
the Body, and those of the Soul; waving which Discourse, not at all necessary,
let us dispatch those things wherein the Matter consists. Be it therefore
adverted, that whilst Opinions toss about, as they are inconstant and
impetuous, Passion is still in motion. But when this boiling and tumult of the
Soul has fermented, and as it were, shed it self into the Veins and Marrow,
then breaks forth both the Disease and Indisposition, and those Aversions which
are contrary to those Diseases and Indispositions.

SECT. XI. The Nature of Passion and Antipathy.
THESE things which I am speaking of, differ from one another in Speculation,
but in reality are linked together, and arise from Lust and Mirth; for when
Money is coveted, and Reason not presently applied, as a kind of Socratick
Medicim, to cure that coveting; the Infection sinks into the Veins, and cleaves
to the Vitals; and breaks forth into a Disease, and Indisposition of mind;
which being grown old, cannot be plucked out; and the name of the Disease is
Covetousness; and other Diseases in like manner, as Vainglory, as multiplying
Wives, or, as the Greeks have it, Love of Women; and other Diseases and
Indispositions of mind, do in like manner arise; but those which are contrary
to these, they are thought to spring from Fear, as Hatred of Women, such as was
in the Woman-hater; as Hatred of all Mankind, which we have heard was in Timon
sir-nam'd the Man-hater, as is Inhospitality. All which Indispositions of Mind,
spring from a certain Fear of those things which men avoid and hate. Now they
define an Indisposition of Mind, a strong conceit cleaving to the Soul, and
deeply rooted in it, about a thing not truly desired, as though it were greatly
to be desired. But as to that which arises from Aversion, they thus define it
to be a strong conceit, cleaving to the Soul, and deeply rooted in it, about a
thing not truly to be avoided, as though it were to be avoided. Now this
conceit is an Opinion that one knows, what he does not know. But under this
Indisposition, such like Habits are comprised, Covetousness, Ambition,
immoderate Love of Women, Wrangling, Liquorishness, excess of Wine, Daintiness,
and any other suchlike things. Now Covetousness is a strong conceit about
Money, as though it were greatly to be desired, cleaving to the Soul, and deeply
rooted in it; so the Definition of other such Distempers is of like Form. Again
the Definitions of Aversions are of such sort, as that Inhospitality is a
strong conceit, that a Stranger should be greatly avoided, which conceit
cleaves to the Soul, and is deeply implanted in it. In like manner is also
defined, Hatred of Women, as in Hippolitus; and of all Mankind, as in Timon.

SECT. XII. The Analogy between the Sickness of the Soul and Body in ill habit.
NOW that I may come to the resemblance of Bodily Health, with the right State
of the Soul. And we may make that Comparison, though less tri^ely than the
Stoics use to do; some are more inclinable to one Disease, and others to
another, (therefore we call some Scorbutical, others Gouty, not that they are
always in the Fit, but are often so) some to Fear, others to some other
Passion. Whereupon carefulness is named to be in some men, when they are called
careful or worldly men; in others Hastiness, which differs from Anger; and it
is one thing to be Hasty, another to be Angry; for neither are all those
careful men, who have sometimes Care upon them; nor have all careful men at all
times Care upon them; as there is difference between being Drunk, and being a
Drunkard; and it is one thing to be a Bully, another a Suitor. Thus this
Propension of some to one Disease, others to another, is of large extent; for
it is applicable to all Passions; it is also apparent in many Vices; but the
Notion has not a distinct Denomination: Therefore men are styled both Envious,
and Malicious, and Dirty, and Timorous, and Compassionate, because they are
inclinable to such Passions, not because they are always actually imported by
them. This proneness therefore of every man to his respective Humor, peculiar
to his Complexion, from resemblance of the Body, is named an Indisposition in
such Sense as it may be meant a proneness to Distemper; but this, in good
things, may be named easiness. Since some are more ready to one good Quality,
and others to another; in bad things a proneness; to connote a Propension to
fall; in indifferent things it may have the former name. Now as in the Body
there is a Disease, an Indisposition, and a Blemish; so also in the Soul.

SECT. XIII. The Similitude between soundness and unsoundness of Body and Soul.
THEY call a Disease, a Corruption of the whole Mass. An Indisposition, a
Disease with Infirmity. A Blemish, a Disproportion in the order of the Parts of
the Body, from whence arise a crookedness of Limbs, Dislocation, Deformity. So
that the formet two, Disease and Indisposition, grow from the Concussion and
Disturbance of the Health of the whole Body. But a Blemish, without the
Impeachment of Health, is discernable of it self; but in the Soul, we can
distinguish the Disease from the Indisposition, by thought only. But the
Blemish of the Soul is an Habit or Quality of a Mind wavering all its Life, and
at Discord with it self; so it comes to pass, that in the one, Disease and
Indisposition, is caused by Corruption of Opinions; in the other by Inconstancy
and Opposition; for every Blemish has not incongruous Parts, as that of those
who are not far removed from Perfection. It is indeed a Quality jarring with it
self, so far as it is short of Perfection, but not dislocated nor crooked. Now
Diseases and Indispositions are Parts of being blemished. But whether Passions
be parts of it, is a question; for Blemishes are Permanent Qualities, but
Passions moving ones, so that they cannot be parts of the Permanent Qualities.
And as the resemblance of the Body approaches the Nature of the Soul in bad,
so also in good Qualities; for Bodily Excellencies are Beauty, Strength,
Health, a good Constitution, Swiftness, the like are also in the Soul. That
Temper of the Body, wherein the parts of the Body hold a right Correspondence,
is a State of Health; so is it called soundness of mind, when its Judgments and
Opinions thereof, are at accord one with annother; and that is the Virtue of
the Soul, which some call Temperance it self; others a Quality obeying the
Rules of Temperance, and consequent upon it, nor having any particular
Denomination of its own; but whether it be this, or that, they say it is found
in the wise man only. Though there be a certain soundness of mind, whereof an
unwise man is also capable, when he has been distracted, and cured by the
Physicians. And as there is a just Simmetry of parts, together with a freshness
of color, and that is called Beauty; so in the Soul, an even Temper and
Constancy of Opinions and Judgments, with Resolution and Stedfastness;
following upon Virtue, or making up the very Nature of it, is called its
Beauty. Likewise from a Similitude to the Strength of the Body, its Sinews and
Activity; the Strength of the Soul is named in like Terms. Again the Swiftness
of the Body is ham'd Celerity; Wit has also a like Commendation for quickness,
when the mind can dispatch much business in a short time.

SECT. XIV. Their Dissimilitude.
THERE is the Dissimilitude between Souls and Bodies, that Souls in their full
strength, cannot fall into Sickness, Bodies may. But the Disorders of Bodies
may happen without any fault; of Souls, cannot so. All whose Diseases and
Passions arise from a Disobedience to Reason; and consequently are to be found
in men only; for Beasts do somewhat analogous, but fall not into Passions.
There is again this difference between the acute and the dull Wits; (a) as the
Corinthian Brass, in reference to Rust; so they fall into a Distemper slower,
and are recovered sooner; but it is not so with dull Persons. Nor in truth does
the mind of the ingenuous fall into every Disease and Passion; for it does not
into many Brutish and Salvage ones; but some there be, that carry an appearance
at the first sight of Humanity and Tenderness, as Compassion, Trouble, Fear.
Now Indispositions and Diseases are thought to be removed with more difficulty,
than are those greatest Vices, which are contrary to the Cardinal Virtues; for
whilst the Diseases abide, the Vices cannot be taken away; because those are
not so speedily cured, as these are removed. You have what the Stoics
accurately Dispute concerning the Passions, (b) which they call Logic, because
it is argued with much Subtilty; now since our Discourse is gotten, as it were,
clear from among those lurking Rocks; we will stand a direct course in the rest
of our Disputation, if we have delivered these things with sufficient
plainness, in regard of the obscurity of the matter.

(a) As the Corinthian Brass.] This rich Metal, famous in Antiquity, is said to
have been a Compound of Copper, Silver, Gold, melted down into one, at first
casually when the Romans burnt Corinth.

(b) Which they call Logic.] He reflects upon the large and improper use of
that Term, in a Subject really belonging to Morals.

SECT. XV. The Cure of the Souls Infirmities.
S. YOU have sufficiently; but if any thing stand in need of further
Examination, we will enquire about it elsewhere; now we expect the Soul you
mentioned, and the shaping your course.


M. Since we both have in our places, and often must speak about Virtue (for
most questions which concern Life and Manners, are derived from Virtue as their
Fountain) since then Virtue is a Quality of the mind constant and uniform,
making those commendable in whom it is; and is it self upon its own account
commendable, abstracting from any profit thence to grow; from it do proceed
honest Intentions, Expressions, Action, and all right Reason; although Virtue
it self may most compendiously be called right Reason. The opposite then of
this Virtue, is Vitiousness, for I had rather so call it, than Malice, for
Malice, in Latin, is the name of a certain Vice; Vitiousness of all. From hence
are gathered the Passions, which are, as we said a little before, boisterous
and violent Motions of Souls, averse to Reason, and the greatest Enemies of the
Understandidg, and the quiet of Life. For they bear in upon us anxious and
bitter Troubles, and afflict and disable our Souls with Fear. The same inflame
us with too eager Desire, which we call sometimes Coneupiscence, and sometimes
Lust; an unruliness of Mind, set at the greatest distance from Temper and
Moderation; which if it have at any time obtained what was lusted after, then
does it bring a cheerfulness; so that its whole work appears to be empty and
unprofitable, according to his judgment who thinks immoderate Pleasure of the
Mind, to be the greatest Error. The Cure therefore, of these Evils, lies in
Virtue only.


SECT. XVI. Especially to be in Moderation.
NOW what is not only more pitiful, but also more ugly and odious, than a man
in Adversity abandoned to grief, and no ways moving to help himself? To which
Misery he is next Neighbor, who fears any approaching Evil, and without coming
to some Resolution, is lost in endless Debates: which Oppression of Evil, the
Poets signify when they make a ponderous Stone hanging over the Head of
Tantalus in Hell, for his Impieties, the ungovernableness of his Spirit, and
his irreverent Speeches against the Deity; that is a punishment common to all
Folly: For there is always impending over all whose heart is hardened against
the advice of Reason, some such Terror. Now as these are Consumptive Passions
of the Mind, I mean Discontent and Fear; so those pleasanter Concupiscence,
always greedily desiring somewhat, and empty Mirth, that is, extravagant
Jollity, do not much differ from madness. From whence is understood, what
temper of mind he is of, whom, at times, we call Moderate or Modest, Grave,
Sober, and Constant; sometimes we love to rank these Names under the Notion of
Frugality or Honesty, as its general Head; because unless these Virtues were
comprehended under that Term, that saying would never have been so common, as
that it is now past into a Proverb; that a Frugal, or honest, man does all
things well; which very Character, when the Stoics attribute to their wise
man, we take it for a mere Rant and Bravado.

SECT. XVII. This Moderation to be peculiar to the wise man.
HE therefore, call him by what name you will, who through Moderation and
Constancy, has quiet of mind, and is at Peace with himself; so as neither to
fret out of Discontent, nor to be confounded with Fear, who neither is inflamed
with an impatient longing after any thing, nor ravished out of himself into the
Fools Paradise of an empty Mirth; this is the wise man, after whom we are in
quest; this the Happy man, to whom no occurrent of Life can seem either so
afflictive, as to deject his Spirit, or so satisfactory as to elate it; for
what, in this transitory Scene of Mortality, can he judge great, who has
Eternity in prospect, and under Survey the extent of the Universe? Can any
thing, I pray, either in Humane Policys, or in this span of Life, seem great to
a wise man, who so stands always upon his guard, that nothing new, nothing
unexpected can befall him; nothing against which he is not already provided;
and who still walks with such Vigilance and Circumspection, that he always
provides himself a retreat and Sanctuary, of living without disquiet and
perplexity, so that whatever change, Fortune shall bring upon him, he may bear
it readily and with ease. He that shall do this, will not only be free from
Discontent, but also from all other inordinate Affections. Now this
dispassionate mind renders men perfectly and completely Happy; whereas if that
be disturbed and withdrawn from right and steadfast Reason, it loses not only
its Constancy, but also its Health. Wherefore the Opinion and Doctrine of the
Peripateticks must be counted Lasche and Effeminate, who maintain the Passions
to be necessary, but prefix certain bounds, beyond which they must not pass.
Will you prescribe bounds to Vice or is it no Vice to disobey Reason? or does
n^ Reason sufficiently dictate that not to be good which you either eagerly
covet, or grow haught upon the Acquisition of it? nor that again to be evil
under the weight of which you either ly^ overwhelmed, or are ready to run
distracted, le^^ you should be overwhelmed by it; and that a^^ those accidents
come to be either over-sad, o^ over-joyous through mistake in Opinion; which
misapprehension of it, abate in Fools upon leng^^ of time, so that the object
continuing the same yet they bear it in one sort, when it is become old and in
another, whilst it was yet fresh, that it should not at all affect the Wise.
Now what can those bounds be? for let us enquire after the bounds of Grief,
upon which subject the most labor is laid out. It is Recorded in Fannius, (c)
that P. Ratilius laid to heart his Brothers repulse when he stood to be Consul.
But he is judged to have exceeded due bounds, for he so far resented it, a^
that it cost him his Life; he should therefore have bore it more moderately.
Suppose, then, he had taken that with Moderation, and upon it, the death of
Children had fallen in, a new Grief would have arisen, but that moderate; yet
the Addition would have been great: what, if, upon that, had followed grievous
Pains of Body, if loss of Estate if Blindness, if Banishment, if, upon every
particular Misfortune, Griefs were to be added, the Sum would be inflamed, so
as to become intolerable.

(c) That P. Rutilius laid to heart.] P. Rutilius a man of exemplary
Conversation, stood against Scaurus, and lost the Consulship; his Brother at
that time laboring under some slight Distemper, laid it so much to heart, that
it heightened his Disease, of which he died.

SECT. XVIII. The object of this Moderation must not be Vice.
HE therefore, that would look to set bounds to Vice, does just as if he should
fling himself down (d) the Cliff of Leucas, and think to stop when he pleased;
for as he cannot do that, so neither can a mind disturbed and imported,
restrain it self, nor stay at what degree of Passion it will; for what things
are pernicious in their growth, the same are vicious in their Original. Now
Discontent and the other Passions, to be sure, when heightened, are great
Pests; therefore, so soon as admitted, have in them somewhat strongly
Pestilential, for these push themselves forward, when once the hold of Reason
is left; and the very weakness still feeds its own humor growing upon it self,
till it is unawares carried adrift by the strength of its current, into the
main Ocean, nor finds any ground for Ancourage. So that it imports nothing, as
to any difference, whether they approve moderate Passions, or moderate
Injustice, moderate Cowardice, moderate Intemperance; for he that sets bounds
to Vices, in part admits those Vices. Which, as it is of it self detestable, so
draws it the more inconvenience with it, because they stand on slippery ground,
and being once put in motion, tumble down hill, and can by no means be staid.

(d) The Cliff of Leucas.] This was a steep Rock in Epirus, from whence
Cephalus and Sappho are said to have slung themselves into the Sea.

SECT. XIX. The Peripateticks Opinion about moderating the Passions, of Anger
and Lust.
WHAT say we to this, that these Peripateticks affirm those Passions which we
think should be extirpated, not only to be natural, but also for good ends to
be by nature given us? for thus they proceed. First they give great
Commendations of Anger, call it the Whetstone of Valor, and say that the
Charges of men in Fury, both upon an Enemy and a Seditious Citizen, are much
more vigorous, but slight the petty Reasonings of those who move upon such
Considerations; it is right or wrong to do thus or thus; meet it is, that we
hazard life for our Laws, our Liberties, our Country; these Reflections are
powerless and ineffectual, unless Valor be inflamed by Wrath; nor do they
limit this Maxim to Military men only; but think there can be no strict
Discipline, without some roughness of a choleric Humor: In a word, they take
him for no good Lawyer, who not only in impeaching, but even in defending, does
not reflect upon his Adversary with some smartness of resentment. Nay though in
truth he feel no Passion, yet they think it should be counterfeited in words
and gesture, that so the action of the Orator may incense the Auditor. Lastly
they account him no man who cannot be angry; and that which we call Gentleness,
they represent under the ill name of Softness. Nor do they praise this Lust
alone, (for Anger is, as I lately defined it, a Lust of Revenge) but also say,
that Lust in general, or eagerness of Affection, was to good Purposes, by
Nature given us; for no man can atchieve any brave Action, who has not a
strong Inclination toward it. Themistocles walked about the Streets in the
Night, being not able to sleep; and being asked what was the matter, replied,
that the Trophies of Meltiades would not let him take his natural rest; who
has not heard of the late settings up and early risings of Demosthenes; who
said it went to his heart if he were at any time prevented by the industry of
Artificers at their work before break of day. Lastly the most eminent
Philosophers could never have made such advance in their Studies, without an
eager Passion after Wisdom. We are informed that Pythagoras, Democritus, Plato
traveled into remotest Regions; for they resolved to visit those places
wheresoever any thing was to be learned. Do we imagine it accountable, why they
should undertake this without an ardency of Affection, to have been the
Principle by which they were acted in their Enquiries?

SECT. XX. -- and Discontent.
NAY Discontent it self, which we have declared is to be shunned as an harmful
and Savage Beast, they say was ordained by Nature to singular Advantages, that
so men might be made sensible of their Faults, when they are chasten'd,
reproved, and put to shame for them; since those wh^ are insensible of ignominy
and disgrace, seem in a s^^ incorrigible and abandoned to the full sway of
their ^^controul'd Vices. Better is it to have remorses ^^ Conscience; whence
is that reparty in Afrani^^, morally said, and answerable to the use of common
Conversation; for when the Prodigal Son had said, Oh me! -- the strict Father
subjoyns.

Grieve he, though grieve for what he please. They add that the other parts of
Sorrow a^^ useful. Pity toward moving to succor, and re^^ving the Distresses
of good men in Adversity. N^^ that Emulation and Detraction, are not useless
when a man either sees that he has not the same advantages with another, or
that another has the same with him. But if one should take away Fear, tha^ all
diligence would be taken out of man's Life which is the greatest in them who
stand in awe o^ our Laws, of Magistrates, of Poverty, of Ignominy, of Death;
yet they argue so, as to confe^^ that these affections are to be retrenched;
but say they neither can nor ought to be wholly rooted out; so that they hold a
mean to be best in almost all things. Now when they thus explain these things,
do they in your opinion speak nothing to the purpose, or something?

S. In my judgment truly they speak somewhat, and therefore I am in expectation
what you have to rejoyn upon it.


SECT. XXI. Against this Moderation is opposed the Stoics Definition of them.
M. I MAY perchance, light upon some rejoinder, but take this first. Do you not
observe what great modesty the Academicks use? for they speak directly what
concerns the Matter. The Peripateticks are answered by the Stoics. Let them
even play their prize for me; who have no farther Obligation, than to enquire
upon whither side lies the greatest appearance of truth. What is there then
occurring in this question, that so somewhat probable may be apprehended in it,
beyond which, humane understanding cannot advance? The Definition of a Passion,
which I think Zeno has rightly made, for thus he defines it; that a Passion
is an irrational and preternatural commotion of the mind; or more concisely,
that a Passion is an over-vehement affection; but that should be understood to
be over-vehement, which flys out beyond the due bounds of natural Constancy.
What can I except against these Definitions? Now these are terms of sober and
subtle Disputants, those other Rhetorical flourishes, to talk of Ardencies of
Spirit, and Whet-stones of Valor. Cannot indeed a brave man, unless he come to
be chafed, do bravely? that is Fencer like, although we often see, even in them
a constancy of mind. They parley, approach, complain, demand somewhat, so that
they seem rather to be good Friends than angry; but allow in men of that
Profession, there be some Pacideianus, so minded, as Lucilius relates?


I Will be his death, says he, pray how? I Will tell ye;
I Will stick my cold Iron in his Breast, Legs, Belly;
Though, to come at him, I his Steel devour;
I hate him; fight in wrath, long every hour,
'Till hand in Hilt one of us be engaged,
With heat and spite I am so far enraged.
CHAP. XXII. That magnanimity is not the Product of Anger.
BUT now without any of this Fencer-like Fury, we see (e) Ajax in Homer
marching with much cheerfulness when he was to fight in the single Combat with
Hector, whose very gate, when he had put on his Armor, brought joy to his own
Party, and terror to his Enemies; insomuch as Hector himself trembled at the
very heart, as it is in Homer, and repented that he had challenged him to the
Duel. Now these having, before they engaged, parly'd one with the other gently
and Inquiet, did nothing, no not in the Combat, wrathfully or in rage. I do not
imagine that (f) even Torquatus, he who first won that Surname, was angry when
he pulled the Chain from the Galls Neck. Nor (g) Marcellus at Clastidium was
therefore valiant, because he was in a Passion; as to Africanus, he is better
known to us, as being fresher in Memory; I durst venture to take my Oath for
him that he was not angry when he protected with the Interposition of his
Shield, M. Halienus the Palignian in the Battle, and stuck his Sword into the
Enemies Breast. As to L. Brutus I must demur, whether it might not be out of an
infinite hatred of the Tyrant, that he charged Aruns the more furiously; for I
see that they were both dispatched by an interchangeable pass upon each other.
Why do you then call in anger hither? Has Valor no Efforts of its own, unless
it turn outrageous? What say we to Hercules, whom the very Valor, which you
call Wrath, exalted to Heaven? do you think he was angry when he encountered the
Erymanthian Boar, or Nemeaean Lion? or was Theseus angry when he caught the
Marathonian Bull by the Horns; Look well to it, whether Fortitude be not far
from being outrageous; and Wrath wholly composed of levity; for that is no
Fortitude, which is destitute of Reason.

(e) Ajax in Homer.] Iliad. 7.

(f) Even Torquatus.] Manlius slew a Champion of the Gauls, and spoiled him of
his Gold Chain, which he put about his own neck, and left the name of Torquati
to that Branch of the Manlian Family.

(g) Marcellus at Clastidium.] He slew Britomar a Gaulish King at Clastidium a
Town upon the Po; and dedicated the third Royal Spoils to Feretrian Jupiter.

SECT. XXIII. -- but Reason.
THE World must be despised, Death slighted, all Pains and Labors reputed
tolerable; when these things are our determinate Judgment and Sense; then is
that stout and steadfast Fortitude; unless perchance we suspect, that whatsoever
is done with earnestness, vigor, and courage, is done in anger; in my judgment
even Scipio that High Priest, who verified the Stoical Paradox, that a wise man
is never angry, was not angry with Tib. Gracchus; then when he left the Consul
sick, and being himself but a private Person, charged them whosoever tendered
the safety of the Government, in the Consuls name to follow him; I know not
whether we did any thing valiantly in our Government; if we did any thing, we
are sure we did it not in anger. Is any thing liker Madness than Anger? which
Ennius fitly called, the beginning of Madness. The Color, Voice, Eyes, Breath,
violence of Words and Actions, what Evidence do they give of ones being in his
Wits? what is more ugly than Achilles in Homer? what than Agamemnon in his
Brawl? for as for Ajax, Anger brought him to Frenzy and Death. Fortitude
therefore needs not anger for its assistant; it is enough furnished, armed,
provided of it self; for by the same reason one might say, that Drunkenness
were serviceable to Fortitude; and that Madness were so too; because both Mad
and Drunk, men do often many things with much vehemence. Ajax was always
valiant, but most valiant in his Frenzy.

Who did a brave Act, when the Greeks gave way,
He checked the Foe, and raving saved the day.
SECT. XXIV. This use of Anger confuted.
LET us therefore say, that Madness is useful; examine well the Definition of
Fortitude, you will perceive that it stands not in need of Wrath. Fortitude
therefore is a Disposition of the mind, submitting to the Supreme Law, in a
patient enduring what it inflicts on us, or the preserving a steady judgment in
the undergoing and repelling those things which seem terrible; or the knowledge
of sustaining; or wholly slighting things terrible; and contrary to our
Natures, preserving a steadfast judgment concerning them: or shorter, as
Chrysippus; for the former Definitions were (h) of Sphaerus, one who had a
singular good faculty in defining, as the Stoics think; for they are all in a
manner alike; but they declare the common Notions one more than another. How
then does Chrysippus define it? Fortitude is, says he, the Knowledge of
enduring things, or a Disposition of mind in suffering and persevering to bear,
in obedience to the Supreme Law, without Fear. We may inveigh against these men
as much as we will, as Carneades was wont to do; I fear they will prove the
only Philosophers. For which, of all those Definitions, does not open our
Notion of Fortitude, which all of us have of it covered and complicated; which
being unfolded, who is there that would fetch from abroad any aid either for
Soldier, or General, or Orator, and does not think they can act courageously
without being in a rage. What mean the Stoics, who say that all unwise men are
Mad, do they not conclude these things? Remove the Passions, especially Anger;
they will be taken to hold monstrous Opinions. But now they thus argue, that
they affirm all Fools to be Mad, in such manner, as all mire stinks. But it
does not so always. Stir it, you will be sensible whether it do or not. So a
hasty man is not always angry; provoke him, you will presently see him in a
rage. What of that Military Wrath? when it is returned home, how does it demean
it self with Wife? with Children? with Servants? is it then also useful? is
there then any thing that a mind in confusion can do better, than it can when
it is settled? or can any one be angry without disorder of mind? our
Countrymen therefore, although all Vices were in the rank of Diseases, because
none was more foul than wrathfulness, did well name only wrathful Persons, as
it were crazed and distracted.

(h) Of Sphaerus.] Sphaerus a Bosporan, was Scholar of Zeno, and afterward
Cleanthes Fellow-Pupil with Chrysippus, flourished about the time of Ptolomy
Philopater.

SECT. XXV. The Indignation of Orators, Displeasure of Parents, or other
Governors regular.
BUT for an Orator to be angry, is far from decent; to make as though he were,
is not indecent. Do you take us to be angry then, when we speak any thing in
our pleadings, with somewhat more than ordinary earnestness and vehemence?
What? after the Trial is past and gone, when we pen our Orations, do we pen
them in anger?

Ho! None attend? Bind him -- Do we think (i) that either Aesop ever acted in
anger, or Attius writ in anger? These things are acted handsomely, and indeed
better by an Orator if he be a true Orator, than by any Player; but they are
acted dispassionately and with a calm mind. But to praise Lust, what a piece of
Lust is it? You produce me Themistocles and Demosthenes; you add Pythagoras,
Democritus, Plato. What do you call Studiousness, Lust? which though it be
after the best things, as are those in which you instance, yet ought to be
composed and calm. But to praise Discontent, the thing of all to be most
abhorred; what Philosophers, I pray, must that argue? But Afranius said
ingeniously.

F. Grieve he, though grieve for what he please.


He there spoke of a prodigal and dissolute Son, but our question proceeds upon
a constant and wise man. Nay let a Captain or Ensign take this very anger, or
others who are not necessary to be mentioned, least we divulge the Mysteries of
Rhetoricians, for it is expedient for him to serve himself of Affections, who
cannot make use of Reason; but the Subject of our Question is, as I often
testify, a Wise man.

(i) That either Aesop ever acted in anger.] Aesop the Player lived in Tully's
time; the Fabulist 500 years before.

SECT. XXVI. The pretended benefit of the other Passions disproved.
BUT further Emulation is useful, Detraction, and Pity. Why should one pity
another, rather than succor him, if he is able? Cannot we be bountiful without
pity? Sure we are not bound to pull upon our selves Discontents in favor of
others, but to relieve others of their Discontent, if we are able. Again, what
use can there be in detracting from another, or emulating him with that vicious
Emulation which resembles Rivalship; since he that emulates is afflicted at
another good which himself has not; on the other side, he that detracts is
afflicted at another good, because that other has it as well as himself. Who
can approve that, if one would have any thing, he should rather choose to sit
down in Discontent, for being without it, then put himself upon attempts to
gain it? for as to the affecting to engross it to himself, it is the highest
pitch of madness. Again, who can justly commend Moderation in bad? for who is
there, in whom Lust and Covetousness is, but must be lustful and covetous? in
whom Wrath, but Wrathful? in whom Anxiety, but Anxious? in whom Fear, but
Fearful? Do we therefore judge, that a Wise man is Lustful and Covetous, and
Wrathful, and Anxious, and Fearful? of whose excellency much may be said in as
large and copious manner as one please; but most succinctly thus, Wisdom is the
knowledge of Divine and Humane things, and perceiving the cause of every
particular one, which has this effect, that it imitates the Divine
Perfections, and esteems all Humane Occurrents inferior to Virtue. Now did you
give it for your opinion, that disturbance was incident to this temper, as to
the Sea, which is subject to the Winds? What is there able to disturb so great
Gravity and Constancy? is any unexpected or sudden turn? What such can befall
him, to whom no contingency of Humane Life is unpremeditated? For as to their
saying, what is excessive should be retrenched, what natural left; I demand
what can be natural, which also may be excessive; for all these things sprout
from the Roots of Mistakes, which must be torn and wholly plucked up, not pared
and lop'd off.

SECT. XXVII. Whence the Remedies of Humane Frailties are to be drawn.
BUT because I suspect you do not put the question so much about the Perfect
wise man, as about your self in a state of proficiency (for him you think to be
free from all Passion, you would come to be so) let us see how great are those
Remedies, which are by Philosophy prescribed to the Diseases of Souls, for, to
be sure, there is some Physic for them; nor was Nature so insense an Enemy to
Mankind, as to provide so many means of recovery for Bodies, and none for
Souls. To which she has been so much the more kind, as that the aids of Bodies
are fetched from without, the relief of Souls is enclosed in themselves. But
the greater and diviner Excellency is in them the greater Diligence do they
need. On this account reason well consulted, behold what is the best, when
neglected, is entangled in many Errors. Therefore my whole discourse is to be
turned to you; for you put the case, as of a wise man, but perhaps you enquire
about your self. There are then diverse cures of those Passions, which I have
laid down; for every Discontent is not asswag'd the same way, for there is one
method to be taken with him who Mourns, another with him that Pitties, another
again with him who Envieth. There is further in all the four Capital Passions,
this distinction, whether the Discourse be better addressed against Passion in
general, which is a disobeying of Reason, or an over-vehement Affection; or
against the particular ones, as Fear, Lust, and the rest. Again, whether that
particular object, which occasions our Discontent, be to be taken hainously; or
whether we should be discontented upon any occasion at all. As if one should be
troubled that he is Poor, whether you should dispute with him that there is no
evil in Poverty; or that a man should be contented in every condition; clearly
this is the better, least, if you should not persuade in the instance of
Poverty; way must be given to Discontent; but if Discontent be removed by the
proper Arguments which we used yesterday, the evil of Poverty is also in some
sort removed.

SECT. XXVIII. The most certain method of cure, is to convince that all
Passions are of themselves culpable.
BUT all such disturbance of Spirit would be cleared by pacifying the mind, as
thus, to inform it how that is neither good, whence its Mirth or Lust arises;
nor that evil whence either its Fear or Discontent; but this is the sure and
Catholic Remedy, if you inform the Person that the very Passions are of
themselves culpable, and have nothing in them either natural or necessary; as
we see even Discontent it self to be asswag'd, when we expose to Persons,
impatient under Sorrow, the feebleness of an effeminate Spirit; and when we
commend the Gravity and Constancy of those who endure the chances incident to
Humane Life, without breaking forth into Passion; which also is the case of
those who think these Afflictions to be Evils, but such as are to be born
patiently. One takes pleasure to be good; another Money; yet both the former
may be reclaimed from Intemperance, and the latter from Covetousness: but that
other method, which both rectifieth the Mistake, and removes Discontent; that
is indeed the more beneficial, but seldom takes effect. Nor is it to be
addressed to vulgar Capacities. Again there are some Discontents which that
Application can no way relieve; as if one should be troubled in mind, that he
has in him no Virtue, no Understanding, no Conscience, no Honor, he is in
truth afflicted for Evils, but a Remedy of another Nature is to be applied to
him, and such wherein all Philosophers, though otherwise disagreeing, do
consent; for all of them must accord in this, that stirrings of the Soul averse
to right Reason, are faulty; so that whether those things which cause Fear and
Discontent, be not Evil; or those which move Lust or Mirth be not Good; yet the
stirring it self is faulty; for by him, whom we call a courageous and Gallant
man, we mean one Constant, Composed, Grave, and undervaluing all Contingencies
of Humane Life. But neither can one who Mourns, or Fears, or Covets, or Vaunts
be such; for these are the Deportments of such as count the Events incident to
Humane Life, to have an ascendent over their Souls.

SECT. XXIX. Laying open the changes common to our condition allays excessive
grief.
WHerefore it is the universal method of cure, as I said before, of all
Philosophers not to descant of what nature is the object which moves our
Passion, but to discuss the Passion it self. Therefore first as to
concupiscence it self, it being only proposed to remove it, we must not enquire
whether the object of that Lust be good or not, but the Lust it self must be
removed. So that whether honesty be the chiefest Good, or Pleasure, or both of
them jointly, or the three sorts of good; however ordinate be the affection,
yet if it become immoderate, the same address by way of dehortation is to be
made to all. Now Humane Nature brought into view, infers all motives of
appeasing the Spirit; which that it may be the more plainly discerned in its
colors, the common condition and terms of life, are to be explained in our
Discourse. Therefore Socrates upon good grounds, when Euripides first brought
upon the Stage his Tragedy of Orestes, is said to have bid repeat him again the
three first Verses.

No matchless grief can Poets wit invent,
No vengeance from incensed Heavens be sent;
But Humane Nature may its pressure bear.
Now toward the persuading that such misfortunes both may and ought to be
born; the recital of such as have born the like is useful; although the means
of allaying Discontent have been explained both in yesterdays Dispute, and in
our Treatise of Consolation, which we writ in the midst of our Mourning and
Sorrow, (for we were not of them who had attained to Perfection) and what
Chrysippus forbids the applying remedy, as it were, to the green Sores of the
Soul, that did we, and offered violence to Nature, that so the Plaster might
be as broad as the swelling that it was to discuss.

SECT. XXX. The like Remedy of Fear.
BUT bordering upon Discontent, concerning which we have sufficiently disputed,
is Fear, about which a few things are to be spoken. For as Discontent refers to
an evil present, so does Fear to one future; therefore did some say, that Fear
was a part of Discontent; but others called Fear a trouble aforehand, because
it is as it were, the forerunner of ensuing trouble; upon what accounts
therefore present Evils are borne, upon the same following ones are slighted;
for we must take heed in both, that we do nothing mean, base, cowardly,
effeminate, low-spirited, and desperate. But although we are to speak to the
inconstancy, feebleness, and levity of Fear it self; yet is it of good
advantage to depretiate the objects of Fear: So that whether it were by chance,
or upon design, it is fallen out very luckily that we have disputed of those
things which are the great objects of Fear, Death, and Pain, the first and
second day; which Reasons, if they were convictive, we are already in great
part delivered from Fear. Thus much then be said to the opinion of Evils.

SECT. XXXI. The difference between Mirth and Joy.
LET us consider now that of Goods, that is, of Mirth and Concupiscence. I am
of opinion in this whole account, referring to the Passions, the stress of the
whole cause lies in one thing, that they are all under our own Power, all taken
up by choice, all voluntary. This mistake therefore, must be rectified, this
opinion undeceived, and as in conceited Evils they are to be represented
tolerable; so in like Good, those which appear great and joyous, are to be
rendered more calm. Now this is common to Good and Evil, so that if it be at
this time difficult to persuade, that none of these things which disturb the
mind, is to be reckoned among either Good or Evil things; yet one sort of cure
is to be applied to one affection, and another to another; and the malicious is
to be amended by one course; he that is given to Women by another; the
Worldling again by another; the Coward by another; and it were an easy matter,
pursuant to that Supposition which is most current concerning things Good and
Evil, to deny that an unwise man can ever rejoice, because he never possesses
any Good thing. But we now speak after the common Custom; allow them, since you
will have it so, to be Good things, as they are reputed; Honors, Riches,
Pleasures, and the rest; yet a vaporing and flashy Mirth in the Fruition of
those very Benefits, is unseemly; as though Laughter be allowable, yet Giggling
is blameworthy, for the flushing of the Soul in Mirth, is liable to the same
censure, as the shrinking of it in Sorrow; and Concupiscence has the same
levity in Desire, as Mirth in Enjoyment; and as Spirits too much dejected with
trouble, so the same too elevated with Mirth, are justly judged to be light.
Now whereas Envy is a sort of Discontent, and taking pleasure in another
Misfortunes, a sort of Merriment, both of them are wont to be redressed, by
discovering how barbarous and inhumane they are. Now as to beware is seemly, to
Fear unbeseeming; so is it seemly to rejoice, unbeseeming to be merry; since we
distinguish Mirth from Joy, for greater clearness in Explication of the Point.
This we have before delivered, that dejection of mind can never be warrantable,
Elevation may, for Hector in Naevius does rejoice after one sort.

I joy, Sir, praised by you, who merit praise. Chaerea in Trabea after another.

The Baud, with Gift appeased, if I but wink;
Will in my looks read what I will, I think.
Touch but the door, it shall wide open fly;
Chrysis surpised to see, e're I draw nigh:
Shall meet me, smiling, courting my embrace;
Rendered --
How brave this is, himself shall subjoyn.

-- I Fortune shall in bliss surpass. SECT. XXXII. The scandalousness of Lust.
HOW indecent this Mirth is, any one who does but mind it any thing near, may
clearly see. And as those are base who are elevated in Mirth, upon the
satisfaction of their Lust, so are they scandalous, who are carried forth after
it with an enflamed Concupiscence, and that whole affection commonly called
Love (nor in truth do I find by what other name it may be called) has so much
of Levity in it, that I know nothing which I can think comparable to it; of
which Caecilius.

I must the Man, or Fool, or Novice deem,
Who does not Love, a mighty God esteem;
Love an unlimited Power does exercise,
Makes whom he will run mad, keeps others wise;
Some he to cure, and some to kill delights;
Sets others up the Ladies Favorites.
Oh rare Reformer of Manners, Poetry, which thinks that Love, the Author of
Leudness and Levity, is to be seated in the Counsel of the Gods! I speak of
Comedy, and indeed there would be no such thing, as that whole Posie, did we
not approve of these Scandals. But in Tragedy, what says the Prince of the
Argonauts?

You saved me for your love, not my respect. What then? how great a train of
miserable Consequences did this love of Medea draw after it? and yet she dares,
in another Poet, tell her Father, she had for an Husband one.

Whom Love more powerful than a Father gave. SECT. XXXIII. Inordinate Love
taxed in Poets.
BUT let us give Poets leave to be pleasant, in whose Fables we see Jupiter
himself that way scandalous. Come we to Philosophers the professed Teachers of
Virtue, who deny that Love relates to uncleanness, and contest about that with
Epicurus, not much, in my opinion, therein mistaken; for what is that Love of
Friendship? or how comes it to pass, that none fall in Love either with an
unhandsom Youth, or an handsome Old man? This Custom seems to me to have been
taken its Original in the Academies of the Greeks, amongst whom those Amors
are free and allowed. Therefore Ennius said well.

To strip in public, tempts t'immodesty. These men, though they be, as I see
they may be, honest, yet are perplexed and anxious, and so much the more,
because they struggle under Provocations to refrain themselves. Now to pass by
Love made to Women, wherein Nature has granted a greater Freedom, who either
in the rape of Ganymede, makes any doubt what the Poets mean by it? or does
not understand what Laius in Euripides both speaks of, and Lusts after? or
lastly what those learned and eminent Poets publish of themselves in their
Songs and Sonets? Alcaeus a man of tried Courage in his Country, what has he
written of his Love of Youths? as for Anacreon, his whole Posie is amorous; but
Ibycus of Rhegium, that he was most passionate in his Loves, appears from his
Writings.

SECT. XXXIV. -- but more in Philosophers.
NOW we see all these men's were lustful Amors. Philosophers are risen up of
us, and our Plato is the Author too, whom Dicaearchus does not without good
reason, tax in that behalf, for giving Reputation to Love. The Stoics too,
both determine that a wise man may be in Love, and define Love to be an essay
of contracting Friendship upon the account of Beauty. Now if there be any such
thing in Nature, without perplexity, without lingering, without care, without
sighing, be it with all my heart, for it is free from Lust; but this Discourse
proceeds upon Lust. But if there be any Love, as in truth there is some, that
is not at all, or not much removed from madness, such as is in Leucadiae.

If any God do my Affairs procure. A worthy employment indeed, for all the Gods
to procure him the good graces of his Mistress.

Wretch that I am! The truest word you could have spoken. The other also puts
in not amiss.

-- What? are you in your Wits,
To make such idle moan? --
So that he seems mad even to those about him; but what uproar did he make?

Help blessed Apollo! mighty Neptune help!
And you fair Winds! --
He thinks that the whole course of Nature must turn aside out of its way, to
relieve his Passion. Only Venus he excepts against as partial.

To Venus, why should I appeal? He does not allow her to regard any thing out
of Lust; as though he did out of Lust both speak and act so scandalously.

SECT. XXXV. The remedy of Love.
WITH a man therefore, in this condition, such course is to be taken, as to
show him how slight, how contemptible, how worthless the object of his desire
is; how easily it may be supplied either from another place, or by other means;
or be quite let alone sometimes too, the Person is to be taken off to other
Studies, Employments, Cares, Businesses: Lastly, he is often to be cured, as
consumptive Patients, by change of Air. Nay, some think that an old Love is to
be cast forth by a new one, as one Peg is driven out with another. But
especially the Party is to be informed how outrageous the sway of Love is; for
in truth of all the Passions, none is more violent. So that though one should
not at the present inveigh against Debaucheries, Rapes, Adulteries, and to
instance in no more, Incests, the vileness of all which, is justly
reproachable; but to wave all these, the bare disorder of the mind in Love,
singly by it self considered, is deformed. For to pass by, as I said, those
parts of outrage, what fickleness is there in these, seeming petty Matters.

-- Abuse.
Suspicion, open falling out, short Truce,
War, Peace again; who for Absurdities
Account demands, bids be both mad and wise.
This inconstancy and changeableness of mind, whom would it not scare with the
very obliquity of it? for here also must that be demonstrated, which is said of
all Passions, that there is none of them, but in conceit, are taken upon
choice, and voluntary; for if Love were natural, both all would Love and be
loved; and would always Love, and would Love the same thing; nor would shame
deter one, consideration another, a third satiety.

SECT. XXXVI. -- of Anger.
BUT Anger, how long soever it disturbs the mind, is without Controversy
madness; by the instigation of which, such ill Language passes even between
Brethren.

What man more impudent than thee, e're lived?
Or than thee more malicious? --
You know what follows, for bitter reproaches are retorted by one Brother, upon
the other in Verses interchangeably; so that it may easily appear that they are
Atreus his own Sons; his who contrives a new vengeance upon his Brother.

Some strange Plot, deep design I must devise,
His raging heart with horror to surprise.
What then is this Plot? hear Thyestes himself.

Welcome, says my kind Brother, pray fall on;
Good cheer! my Sons.
And sets their Bowels in a Dish before him; for what Degree is there that
Anger will not arrive at, and at which Fury will? Hence we say of men in
Passion, that they are out of all Government, that is Counsel, Reason,
Understanding; for these ought to have the Government over the whole Soul. For
men in this condition, either those are to be conveyed from them, upon whom
they would fall violently, till they recollect themselves (now what is it to
recollect ones self, but to rally the scattered and disordered parts of the
Soul into their proper place?) or they are to be entreated and begged at to
defer what thoughts they had of executing their revenge, till another time,
when their Anger cools; now cooling implys, that the Spirits did boil over
contrary to the Dictates of Reason. To which that saying of Architas refers,
who being in some heat against his Bailiff, said, How would I have ordered you,
were I not Angry.

SECT. XXXVII. The Cause of Passions, an opinion that they are our Duty.
WHERE then are those that say Wrath is useful? Can Madness be useful? or
natural. Can any thing be agreeable to Nature, and contrary to Reason? Now if
Anger were natural, how could it be either that one man should be more hasty
than another; or that it could be over before the desire of Revenge be
satiated, or that any should repent of what they did in Passion; as we see by
King Alexander, for (a) after he had killed his Friend Clitus, he could hardly
forbear offering violence to himself, so strongly did Repentance work upon him.
These things being notorious, who can doubt but that this motion of the Soul is
also wholly in conceit and voluntary; for who can doubt but that the Diseases
of the Soul, such as Covetousness, Ambition, arise from this, that the object
upon which the Soul dotes, is overvalu'd, whence ought to be understood, that
every Passion also has its being from opinion; and if assurance that is, a
firm affiance of the mind, be a kind of Science and steadfast opinion of one
yielding his assent upon good grounds only, then is Fear a diffidence of mind,
upon some expected and impending Evil. If hope be the expectation of Good,
needs must Fear be an expectation of Evil; as Fear then, so the other Passions
relate to Evil. As Constancy then is Fruit of Knowledge, so is Passion of
Error. But as for some men's being said to be naturally hasty, or pitiful, or
envious, or any such thing, they have Souls, as of an unhealthful Constitution,
yet curable, as is said of Socrates, when Zopyrus a great Pretender to skill in
Phisiognomy, had openly in company recounted many Vices, which he concluded
from his Art to be in Socrates, he was derided by the rest who knew no such
Vices to be in Socrates, but was helped out by himself, who owned himself
subject to those Vices, but withal said he had subdued them by Reason.
Therefore, as he that is in the best health, may be thought naturally proner to
some Disease or another; so is one mind more inclinable to one Disease, and
another to another; but they who are said to be vicious, not from Nature, but
through their own default, their Vices consist of misapprehensions about things
good and, bad; so that one is proner to one Motion and Passion, and another to
another; but evil habits in Souls, as Chronical Distempers in Bodies are more
difficult to be removed, than a simple disorder; and a sudden swelling of the
Eyes is sooner cured, than a long soreness is removed.

(a) After he had killed his Friend Clitus.] Alexander the Great, who subdued
all things that stood in his way, yet was vanquished by Wine and Anger. On a
time as he was drinking with his Commanders, Clitus had magnified the Actions
of King Philip, which he took as done in Derogation to his Glory, and run him
through with his Spear; but when he came to himself, and his Passion was over,
he was so troubled at the barbarous Act, that he was ready to turn the same
Spear against his own Heart, tore his Face, and begged of all about him, that
they would not let him survive that infamy. Three days he stirred not out of his
Tent, and could hardly he prevailed upon to take any more sustenance, but by
the intercession of his Friends, and especially the Counsels of Callisthenes,
he was brought again to some comfortable quiet of mind. Clitus was the Son of
Alexander's Nurse, an old Soldier of King Philip, and who in the Battle of
Granicus, had protected with his Shield King Alexander, fighting bare-headed,
and cut off the hand of Rhosaces lifted up against the King's Head, with many
other honorable Exploits.

SECT. XXXVIII. The cure of them in rectifying that mistake.
BUT the cause of the Passions being already found, that they all arise from
Judgments formed upon Opinions, and our Wills, let this Dispute draw to a
Conclusion. We must likewise know, that after the knowledge of the Extremities
of Good and Evil, as far as Humane Nature is capable of it, nothing can be
looked for from Philosophy, either greater or more useful, than the Subject of
these four days Disputation; for after the contempt of Death, and reducing Pain
within the bounds of Patience, we have added a quieting of Discontent; than
which, man has no greater Evil; for although every Distemper of mind is
grievous, and does not much differ from madness, yet are we wont to term other
Persons, when they are in any Passion, either of Fear, or Mirth, or Lust, as
only stirred or disordered; but those who have abandoned themselves to
Discontent, miserable, afflicted, melancholy, calamitous: Therefore it seems
not to have been casual, but with good judgment propounded by you, for us to
dispute about Discontent apart from the other Passions; for in that is the
source and spring of Miseries. But the cure both of Discontent and the other
Diseases of the Soul is one, that they are all from conceit and voluntary, and
taken up for this reason, because it seems fitting so to do. Philosophy
undertakes to extirpate this Error, as the root of all our Evils: Let us then
resign our selves up to her culture, and be content to be cured; for whilst
these evils lurk in us, we are so far from a possibility of being happy, that
we cannot be so much as in our Wits. Therefore either let us deny that any
thing can be effected by reason, whereas on the contrary, nothing can be well
done without reason, or seeing Philosophy consists in a deduction of Reasons,
if we would be both good and happy, let us fetch from thence all the aids and
assistances, to a good and happy Life.

The chief End of Man. The Preamble Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Book V.
SECT. I. The efficacy of Virtue is not to be valued by our faint-heartedness.
THIS fifth day, most worthy Brutus, will put an end to our Tusculan
Disputations, on which day was debated, that which of all Subjects you most
approve; for I perceive by that Book which you writ to me with great exactness,
and your many Discourses, that you are zealously of the opinion that Virtue is
selfsufficient to Happiness; which though it be hard to demonstrate, by reason
of the many and diverse Tortures by Fortune inflicted; yet is it of such
moment, that it deserves all pains to be employed, in order to the clearing of
it up; since there is nothing treated of in all Philosophy, which is more Grave
and Gallant to maintain; for whereas that was their Motive, who first applied
to the Study of Philosophy, to cast all their other business aside, and put
themselves wholly upon searching out the best State of Life; certainly they
laid out so much care and pains in that Study, out of hopes to live happily.
Now if Virtue have been by them completely stated, and if an interest in Virtue
be sufficient to happiness of Life, who is there but must think that the Pains
in studying Philosophy, was to excellent purpose both laid out by them, and
undertaken by us; but if Virtue exposed to diverse and uncertain hazards, be
the handmaid of Fortune, and not of Power enough to defend it self; I fear we
must rather pray for happiness, than aspire to it in any assurance of Virtue.
And in truth when I consider within my self those changes wherein Fortune has
greatly exercised me; I begin to call this opinion into some question; and at
times to dread the weakness and frailty of Mankind; for I fear, as Nature has
given us feeble Bodies, and fastened to them both incurable Diseases, and
intolerable Pains; so least she have given us Souls also, both jointly
sympathizing with bodily Pains, and severally encumbered with Disquiets and
Anguishes of their own. But herein I correct my self, that I judge of the
strength of Virtue, by the softness of others, and perhaps my own, not by
Virtue it self. For that, if any such thing there be as Virtue ( (b) which,
Brutus, your Uncle put out of doubt) counts all things incident to man beneath
it self, and looks down upon the changes of Humane Life with contempt; for,
being utterly blameless, it charge it self with no other concern, than to
preserve its own integrity. But we both increasing all future Adversities with
Fear, and present ones with Vexation, choose rather to condemn Nature, than
acknowledge our own Error.

(a) I fear we must rather pray for Happiness, than aspire to it in any
assurance of Virtue.] That man was ordained to Virtue and Happiness is evident;
that our Nature was originally perfect, and to act according to it, had been
sufficient to the attaining to that end, cannot, I think, justly he denied,
that our Reasons and Wills are yet the Powers and Faculties by which only we
can act as Men. What is said here, I fear we must rather pray for Happiness,
than aspire to it in any assurance, is undoubtedly a Proverbial Loquntion to
this purpose. We must cry out God help us, and surcease all endeavors of our
own; which is unwarrantable, as tending to discourage Industry. In a Storm the
Pilot must not quit the Stern, nor other Seamen their Quarter, as they expect
the Ship should ever be safe. Since our Nature is depraved, could we retrieve
lost Perfection, it were not of it self sufficient to the recovery of
Happiness, because the non-incurring a new Debt, does not quit the old Arrear;
yet have we grounds of hope, that sincerity of endeavors shall not want
acceptance, through another Covenant vouchsafed to Mankind.

(b) Which Brutus, your Uncle.] M. Porcius Cato Uticensis, the Brother of
Servilia Mother to Brutus.

CHAP. II. Philosophy is the Rule of Life.
BUT the whole correcting both of this fault, and all other our Vices and
Misdemeanors is to be fetched from Philosophy, into whose bosom our Choice and
Affections having guided us from our very Childhood, we after being tossed with
a great Storm, are fled upon these most grievous turns of State, into the same
Harbor from whence we had put forth. O Philosophy thou Guide of Life,
Instructress in Virtue, and Correctress of Vices, what could not only we be,
but the very Life of men without thee? thou have founded Cities; thou have
invited scattered men to live in Communities; thou have linked them one to
another, first in Habitations, then in Marriages, and then in Communication by
Letters and Words; thou wast the Inventress of Laws; thou the Mistress of
Manners and Discipline; we fly to thee; seek help from thee; to thee we commit
our selves, as formerly in great part, so now entirely and in whole; for one
day led well, and according to thy Precepts, is to be preferred before an
immortality in Vice. Whose succors therefore should we rather make use of than
thine, who have both freely bestowed on us Tranquillity of Life, and taken away
from us the Terror of Death; yet Philosophy is so far from receiving Praise
suitable to the Benefits she has conferred on man's Life; that she is by the
most slighted, nay by many reviled. O that any one should dare to villifie the
Parent of Life, and stain his Conscience with such Parricide! should offer to
be so unnatural and ungrateful, as to accuse her, whom he ought to reverence,
although he could not comprehend; but this error, and gross darkness is, in my
opinion, cast over the minds of the ignorant, because they are not able to look
so far backwards; nor do think, that they were the Philosophers by whom first
the Life of men was civilized. Which thing, though we see to have been most
ancient, yet we confess the name to be but modern.

SECT. III. The Study of Wisdom of the same standing with man.
FOR as to Wisdom, who can deny it to be ancient, not for the thing only, but
also the name, which acquired this honorable name among the Ancients, from the
knowing of Divine and Humane things; as also the Elements and Causes of every
being. Therefore have we received by Tradition, of those seven, that they were
both named and accounted Sages by the Greeks, and wise men by our Countrymen;
and many Ages before, of (c) Lycurgus, in whose time Homer is said to have been
before (d) the building of Rome; and in the Heroical Ages of Ulysses and
Nestor, that they both truly were, and were reputed such. Nor would there have
been the Tradition that Atlas supported Heaven, nor that (e) Prometheus was
fastened to Caucasus, nor that (f) Cephus with his Wife, Son in Law, and
Daughter, were made Constellations, had not the Divine Knowledge of the
Celestial Bodies and Motions raised the Fable upon their name; from whom in
order descending, all those who sequestered themselves to the Contemplation of
Nature, were both accounted and termed wise, and that name of theirs continued
down to the Age of Pythagoras, who, as writes (g) Heraclides Ponticus, an
Auditor of Plato, and very learned Person, they report to have come to (h)
Phlius, and to have had some learned and free Discourse with Leon Prince of the
Phliasians, whose Wit and Eloquence Leon admiring, asked of him, what Trade he
particularly followed; who replied, that he understood no Trade, but was a
Philosopher; that Leon wondering at the Novelty of the Name, inquired who these
Philosophers were, and wherein they differed from other men; then that
Pythagoras answered, he looked upon the Life of men, to be like that Mart which
was held at the Preparation, for the greatest Games in the Confluence of all
Greece. For as at that place some sought for Glory, and the prize of a Garland
by bodily Exercises; others were attracted by Profit in buying and selling; but
that there was a third sort of them, and that the most ingenuous, who neither
sought for applause, nor gain, but come merely to be Spectators, and beheld
attentively what was performed, and how. In like manner we, as in some
concourse to a Fair, held without any City, being so come from another Life and
Nature, into this World, do some of us drudge after Glory, others after Money;
that some few there are, who slighting all other things, diligently
contemplated the Nature of the Universe; these he called Lovers of Wisdom, that
is Philosophers; and as in that other case it was most gentile to look on,
without any Gain to ones self; so in this Life, that the Contemplation and
Knowledge of Nature, was to be preferred far before all other Studies.

(c) Lycurgus, in whose time Homer is said to have been.] Reputed both to have
lived about the middle Age between the Destruction of Troy, and the Building of
Rome; which time the Alban Kings reigned upward of three hundred years, as some
four hundred.

(d) The Building of Rome.] Which falls into the first year of the seventh
Olympiad.

(e) Prometheus fastened to Caucasus.] Because he had his Observatory on the
top of that Mountain in Asia; and first taught the Assyrians Astronomy; as
Atlas in Lybia, the Inventor of the Globe.

(f) Cepheus with his Wife, Son in Law, and Daughter.] Cepheus was King of the
Aethiopians, his Wife Cassiopea, Daughter Andromeda, and Son in Law Perseus,
all Celestial Constellations.

(g) Heraclides Ponticus.] An eminent Physician relates this in his Treatise
upon the Virgin that lay many days breathless, and afterward returned to Life.

(h) Phlius.] A City of the Sicyonians near Corinth.

SECT. IV. Pythagoras Founder of the Italian Sect.
NOR was Pythagoras only Inventor of the Name, but also enlarger of the Notion;
who having after this Discourse at Phlius, come into Italy, adorned that
Greece, which was called the Great, both in private and public, with most
excellent Arts and Ordinances; about whose Discipline another occasion of
discoursing may perhaps occur. But, by the ancient Philosophers, down to
Socrates numbers and motions were handled, and whence all things were
generated, and whether they were resolved. Also the magnitudes, distances;
courses of the Stars were diligently observed, and the whole Celestial Globe.
But Socrates was the first that fetched down Philosophy from Heaven, and lodged
it in Cities, nay introduced it into Houses, and obliged it to enquire after
Life and Manners, what things are Good, and what Evil. Whose manifold Form of
arguing, variety of Subjects, and excellency of Wit, being consecrated by the
elegant Records of Plato, has produced many Sects of Dissenting Philosophers:
From amongst which, we have especially espoused that which we think Socrates
used, to conceal our own opinion, to undeceive others, and in every Dispute to
enquire what carried the fairest appearance of Truth. This Custom as Carneades
held with great subtilty and copiousness, so have we done both often elsewhere;
and lastly in our place at Tusculum, to dispute after the same Fashion. And as
to four days Debate, we have penned and sent it to you in the former Books. But
on the fifth day, when we had taken our Seats in the same place, it was thus
propounded upon what we should Dispute.

SECT. V. The Position holds, that in the Proposers judgment, Virtue alone is
not sufficient to Happiness.
S. I Do not think Virtue to be sufficient to Happiness.


M. But, truly, my Friend Brutus thinks it is so; whose judgment, without
offense to you be it spoken, I far prefer before yours.


S. I question it not; nor is that the matter now in Debate, what kindness we
have for him; but the merit of this, which I said was my opinion; upon which I
would have disputed by you.


M. Why, you say Virtue is not sufficient to Happiness of Life.


S. I say clearly it is not.


M. What? is there in Virtue sufficient Interest to live uprightly, honestly,
commendably, lastly well.


S. Undoubtedly there is.


M. Can you then either choose but call him miserable, who lives ill, or deny
that he lives happily, whom you confess to live well.


S. Why may I not? for one may live uprightly, honestly, commendably, and in
that Sense well even upon the Rack; so you understand by it, what at present I
mean by it, Constancy, Gravity, Courage, Wisdom. These things are put even upon
the Rack, (i) whether an happy Life cannot aspire.


M. What then does a happy Life only tarry without Doors, and does not turn the
Prisons Key, when Constancy, Gravity, Wisdom, Fortitude, and the other Virtues
are carried away to the Tormentors, and decline neither any Punishment, nor
Pain?


S. You must look out now, if you think to do any good. These Suggestions weigh
nothing with me, not only because they are common, but much more, because like
some thin Winds they cannot bear Water. So these Stoical Paradoxes are better
to taste than to drink. Just so that Quire of Virtues put upon the Rack, sets
goodly Representations before the Eyes; so that Happiness of Life seems ready
to run after them, nor to endure that they should be left behind her; but when
you have taken off your mind from this Picture, and these Images of Virtues to
Reality and Truth; this bare consideration is left, whether a man can be happy
as long as he is upon the Rack. Wherefore let that be our present Enquiry, and
never fear least the Virtues should take it amiss, and complain that they were
deserted by Happiness of Life. For if no Virtue be without Prudence, Prudence
it self perceives this, that all good men are not also Happy; and recounts much
of (k) M. Attilius, (l) Qu. Cepio, (m) M. Aquillius; and if Happiness, being
deluded by Appearances rather than Realities, would offer to venture upon the
Rack; Prudence it self holds it back, and denies that it is any ways compatible
with Pain and Torment.


(i) Whether an happy Life cannot aspire.] It is a byword charged upon
Theophrastus; and indeed if hopes did determine with this Life, it were hard to
reconcile Blessedness with Torments. But in differing respects, if Blessedness
consist in the Favor of God; that Pain which turns to the account of
incomparably greater Joy, cannot hinder from the present title to Bliss, and
future possession of it; but to say, with Epicurus, that Pain is for the
present delightful, contradicts common Sense and Experience.

(k) M. Attilius.] M. Attilius Regulus circumvented by the Carthaginians and
overthrown, was sent upon his Parole to the Senate, to treat for the Exchange
of Prisoners, which he judging neither honorable nor advantageous dissuaded,
and to quit his Faith, returned to endure all the Tortures which the Wit and
Malice of the Moor could inslict, all which he suffered with unshaken
Resolution.

(l) Qu. Caepio.] Qu. Servilius Caepio was Consul the year that Tully was born;
and the following year after, an unfortunate Engagement with the Cimbrians, his
Commission was taken away, Goods confiscated, and he banished at the motion of
C. Norbanus Tribune to the disgust of the honest Party.

(m) M. Aquillius.] He conquered the Slaves in Sicily, rebelling under Athenio,
and relieved that Province, was Consul when Tully was six years old; accused by
L. Fusius, defended by M. Antony, was absolved in consideration of his former
good Service.

SECT. VI. Peace of mind arises from Virtue alone.
M. I Am well content you proceed that way, although it is not fair for you to
prescribe me what course you would have me take in disputing. But I enquire
whether we think there has been any success, or none in the former days
Debates?


S. Success? assuredly, and that considerable too?


M. Why then this question is already made out, and almost brought to a final
Determination.


S. How so, I pray?


M. Because the boisterous motions and tossings of Souls raised, and elevated
with an inconsiderate Violence, repelling all Reason, leave no room for
Happiness of Life; for what man under the dread of Death or Pain; the one of
which is often incumbent, the other always impending, can be other than
miserable? what if the same Person (as it often falls out) fears, Poverty,
Ignominy, Disgrace? if Lameness, Blindness? if lastly that which is not only
incident to single Persons, but often to mighty Nations, Slavery, can any one
who Fears these things be Happy? What, if he not only fear them as future, but
also feel and bear them being present? add to the Sum Banishments, Mournings,
los^es of Children. He that is broken with Discontent upon these occasions, can
he choose but come to be most miserable? What too can we say of him whom we see
inflamed and mad with Lust, raving after all things with insatiable
Concupiscence, and the more plentifully he swallows down Pleasures on every
hand, the more eagerly and with greater Ardour thirsting after them; what can
one truly say of him, but that he is most miserable? what of that other lightly
exalted, and with empty Mirth both frolicking, and idly transported; is he not
so much the more miserable, as he takes himself to be more happy? Therefore, as
these are miserable, so on the contrary are they Happy, whom no Fears alarm, no
Troubles fret, no Lusts incense, no vain Mirths melt down, exulting with
transitory Pleasures. As therefore a Calm at Sea is understood, when the least
breath of Wind does not stir the Waves; so is the quiet and peaceful State of
the mind beheld, when there is no Passion, upon which it may be discomposed.
Which being so, he that counts the Power of Fortune, and that esteems all
possible accidents of Humane Life to be tolerable; whereupon neither dread nor
anguish come near to touch him; and if the same Person covet nothing, be puffed
up with no empty Pleasure of the Soul; what reason is there he should not be
happy? and if these things are effected by Virtue, what reason is there, why
pure Virtue cannot of it self make men happy?


SECT. VII. In Moral Subjects we must dilate on the Proofs.
S. WHY as for the first, it cannot be denied, but they who fear nothing, have
no trouble of mind upon them, covet nothing, are not elevated with any
inordinate Mirth, must be happy; that therefore I grant you, but as for the
other, it is no longer at my disposal, for it has been concluded upon in the
former Debates, that a Wise man is free from all Passion.


M. Why? then the matter is over, for the question seems to be fully determined.


S. It does well nigh to be so.


M. But that is the way in Mathematics, not Philosophy, for when Geometricians
would demonstrate any thing, if there be somewhat in order to prove the matter
in question, amongst what they have before demonstrated, that they take for
granted and proved; they only make out what has not been proposed before:
Philosophers, whatever matter they have in hand, heap up all that which is
agreed upon in common, toward the eviction of that matter, however they have
been elsewhere debated. Were it not so, why should a Stoic need to say much,
if it should be proposed whether Virtue be sufficient to Happiness of Life; it
would be enough for him to answer, he had before demonstrated, nothing to be
good, but what was honest; this being proved, it to be consequent that
Happiness of Life is contented with Virtue; and as this is to that, so that to
be consequent to this, that if Happiness of Life be contented with Virtue,
nothing else is good but what is honest. But they do not proceed after this
sort; for their Books of Honesty, and of the chief Good, are apart; and
although it be rightly deducible thence, that there is sufficiency in Virtue,
to render the Life happy; yet they treat severally of it; for every matter is
to be handled by its proper and natural Arguments and Motives; especially one
of so great Importance; for you are much mistaken if you think any expression
in all Philosophy more glorious, or that there is any promise of Philosophy
either more profitable or honorable; for what does she profess? O wonderful!
that she will make good, whoever obeys her Laws, shall always be armed against
Fortune, shall have all warranties in himself, of a good and happy Life; in a
word, shall ever be blessed. But let me advise with my self, what she performs.
However in the mean time I much value what she undertakes; for Xerxes being
crammed with all the Bribes and Gifts of Fortune, yet not being contented with
Cavalry, nor Infantry, nor multitude of Shipping, nor an infinite quantity of
Gold propounded a reward to him that should find out any new Pleasure. Nor was
he contented with that, for Lust can never be bounded; I wish we could at any
reward invite one to furnish us any Argument, more firmly to believe this
undertaking of Philosophy.


SECT. VIII. Whether Virtue alone be sufficient to Happiness, but not complete
Happiness.
S. I Wish it indeed, but there is somewhat wherein I am dissatisfied; for I
submit that of the Positions you have made, one is consequent to the other,
that as if what thing be honest, that only is good, it follows that an happy
Life is effected by Virtue; so if an happy Life consists in Virtue, nothing is
good but Virtue. (n) But your Friend Brutus, upon the Principle of Aristus and
Antiochus, has not the same Sentiment; for he thinks, although there be
something else good besides Virtue.


M. How now? do you think I will speak any thing in opposition to Brutus?


S. Nay, for that as you please; for it is not my part to direct you.


M. What then is consequent upon what Supposition, refer to another place; for
that was a difference between me and Antiochus often, and lately with Aristus,
(o) when being General I lodged at his House; for I did not think any man could
be happy in the midst of Evils; but that a Wise man might be in the midst of
Evils, if there were any corporal or external Evils. These things were
discoursed, which Antiochus has also written in many places, that Virtue of it
self can effect an happy Life, but not the most happy; then that, most things
were denominated from their major part, although some part of them were
wanting, as Strength, Health, Riches, Honor, Glory, which are judged by their
nature, not their number, in like manner a happy Life, though it were in some
part deficient, yet gained its name from far the greater part. To examine these
things particularly, is not at present very necessary, although to me, they
seem to be spoken not over-consistently. For I neither understand what he that
is happy needs to make him more happy, (p) (for if he want any thing, he is not
happy) and for the denomination and estimate of every thing, from its greater
part, sometimes that may be in force so to do, but when they say there are
three sorts of Evils, he that is pressed with all Evils, of two of these sorts,
so as to have all crossed in his Estate; a Body oppressed and worn out with all
Diseases; shall we say he wants but a little of an happy Life, not only of one
most happy? This is that which Theophrastus could not maintain; for having
resolved that Stripes, Rackings, Crucifixions, Overthrows of our Country,
Banishments, Losses of Children, had great influence on living ill and
miserably, he durst not speak big and loftily, having entertained mean and low
Sentiments.


(n) But your Friend Brutus, upon the Principle of Aristus and Antiochus.]
Tully had before Section 5. checked his Auditor with the Authority of Brutus,
that Virtue was sufficient to render Life happy; therefore there was no other
good, he now retorts that Authority upon him; for Brutus having heard Antiochus
of Ashketon, and afterward his Brother Aristus held, that Virtue was not
sufficient to render Life most happy. Antiochus had been Auditor of Philo, but
set up a new Academy, which brought in a Syncretism of Stoics, with
Peripateticks; this Tully impugns, and supports the Person of a rigid Stoic.

(o) When being General, I lodged at his House.] In his return from his
Government of Asia, for having there routed a Party of High-land Cilicians, and
taken their Town Pindenissum, he was by the Army saluted General in the Field,
after the old Roman fashion, carried his Lictors with their Bundles garnished
with Laurel to Athens homeward, took up his Quarters with Aristus there, and
assayed to enter Rome in Triumph.

(p) For if he want any thing he is not happy.] In this Life, as Virtue is
imperfect, so is Happiness incomplete.

SECT. IX. Of the three sorts of Goods.
HOW well, is not the question; sure it is consistently with his Principles.
Therefore I am not wont to like a denying the consequent of that, the
antecedent whereof you have granted. Now this most elegant and learned of all
the Philosophers, is not much censured for holding three sorts of Goods; but he
is baited by all first, for that Book which he writ of an Happy Life; wherein
he brings many Arguments, why a man in Torture, and upon the Cross, cannot be
Happy; in the same Book he is also reputed to say, that Happiness of Life,
cannot come upon the Wheel. He no where says that in Terms, but what he says
amounts to as much. Can I then, after I have granted one, that bodily Pains are
Evils, that Shipwracks of Estate are Evils; can I be angry with that man, for
saying that all good men are not Happy, when all good men are liable to those
things which he accounts Evils? the same Theophrastus is further harassed, both
by the Books, and Disputations of all the Philosophers for quoting that
Sentence in his Callisthenes.

Fortune, not Wisdom, guide the Life of man. They say never came more lasche
word out of the mouth of Philosopher; and true it is, what they say, yet I do
not understand how any thing could have been more consistent; for if there are
so many good things belonging to the Body, so many extrinsick to it, all under
the Power of chance and Fortune, is it not naturally consequent upon this
Principle, that Fortune, who is Mistress both of external Circumstances, and
corporal endowments, should have a larger Empire, than Humane Counsels? or had
we better imitate Epicurus? who oftentimes speaks many excellent things, but
cares not how agreeable they are, or consistent with his Principles. He
commends a slender Diet: Done like a Philosopher; but if Socrates or
Antisthenes had said it, not he who maintains Pleasure to be the chiefest Good.
He says none can live pleasantly, unless he live also honestly, wisely,
justly. No word can be more Grave and becoming a Philosopher, unless the same
man did make Pleasure the end of his Honesty, Wisdom, and Justice. What can be
better said, than that Fortune has little dealing with a Wise man? but does he
say so, who having affirmed Pain to be not only the greatest, but also the only
Evil, may be seized upon with the sharpest Pains all his Body over at that very
time when he is in his highest Rants against Fortune? The same too says
Metrodorus, and in better words yet. Fortune, I have prevented you, and
barricado'd up all the Avenues, that you can no ways attack me. Excellently
well had (q) Aristo the Cian, or the Stoic Zeno said it, who accounted nothing
Evil, but what was Dishonest. But you Metrodorus, who have buried all your Good
in Back and Belly, having defined the chief Good to consist in a firm
Constitution of Body, and a strong Presumption of its continuance, have you
barred up the Avenues against Fortune? which way? for you may in a Moment be
stripped of that your Good.

(q) Aristo the Cian.] Of Ceos Isle. He held all things beside Virtue and Vice
indifferent.

SECT. X. The Peripateticks accused of inconsistency, but Epicurus much more.
YET unwary men are taken with these Flashes; and by means of such fine
Speeches, multitudes of Disciples are drawn after them. But it is the part of a
subtle Disputant, not to regard what any one says, but what he should say. As
in that very Tenet which we have undertaken in this Dispute, we would have all
good men to be always happy. What I mean by good men is manifest, for we call
men accomplished and adorned with all Virtues, sometimes Wise and sometimes
Good men. Who are to be called happy, let us consider. I indeed think these who
are possessed of Goods, without any Evil added thereto. Nor is there any other
Notion couched under this word, when we say a Happy man, but an Accumulation of
all Goods, without the mixture of any Evils. Virtue cannot attain to this, if
there be any thing good besides it self. For there will press in a throng of
Evils, if we count these Evils, Poverty, obscurity of Parentage, Lowness,
Destitution, loss of Friends and Relations, grievous Pains of Body, decay in
Health, Maims, Blindness, Destruction of ones Country, Banishment, Slavery.
Lastly, a Wise man may be in these so many and so great Evils, and those many
more which may happen; for chance inflicts them, which may fall foul on a Wise
man. But if these things are Evil, who can warrant that a Wise man shall always
be happy, when he may be even under all these at one time? Therefore I do not
easily yield it to my Friend Brutus, (s) nor the Teachers of us both, (t) nor
those Ancients, Aristotle; Speusippus, Xenocrates, Polemo, that having taken
the things above-recounted for Evils, they should yet hold a Wise man to be
always happy. But if they be taken with this plausible and specious Privilege,
fitting to be claimed by Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato, let them be contented
to despise Strength, Health, Beauty, Riches, Honors, Wealth, with the Luster
of which, they are so much dazzled, and utterly to slight their Contraries. Then
may they proclaim with the most loud Voice, that they are neither terrified at
the insults of Fortue, nor the displeasure of the Multitude, nor Pain, nor
Poverty; and that all their Dependencies are on themselves; nor is there any
thing without the Power of their own choice, which they reckon for good. Nor
can it any ways be granted, that one Person should speak after this rate,
suitable to some great and losty Spirit; and withal, account for Good and
Evil, the same things which the Vulgar does, Epicurus proselyted with this
glorious Doctrine, sets up; and his Wise man, in good time, must be ever Happy.
He is taken with the Dignity of this Assertion, but would never say so, if he
were true to himself; for what is less agreeable, than that he who says Pain
is either the greatest or only Evil, should likewise hold, that a Wise man,
when he is racked with Pain, should say, Oh! how sweet this is? Therefore
Philosophers are not to be estimated by some single expression, but by the
constant Tenor and Analogy of their Doctrines.

(r) We would have all good men to be always Happy.] That is in a State of
Happiness in every condition; having a Title to the paternal Providence of God
upon his Promise. Had man persevered in Primitive Righteousness; his Body would
have been passible, and the operativeness of external Agents no less
efficacious; so that his security must have been in the Divine Protection from
harmful Casualties, and supply of needful Enjoyments. When there is argued from
perfect Virtue, to complete Happiness, the Divine Favor and Bounty must
necessarily be included; for when we say Virtue is its own reward, it is not
intended that the Virtuous have their Labors for their Pains. Complacency of
mind in fulfilling a Law, arises from the Sense of our having promoted the
ends of it in mutual Preservation; and consequently our own; or in having
acquired the good Graces of the Lawgiver by Obedience; but to solve the doubt,
why ever it should go ill with the Good, as it is often seen to do; we must
partly discount for the Defects of Goodness here, and consider temporary Evils
in such, ordered for the bettering of the mind.

(s) Nor the Teachers of us both.] Antiochus and Aristus.

(t) Nor those Ancients, Aristotle.] These were Doctors of the Peripatetick
Chair. Aristotle considering that man is made up of Soul and Body, which
requires Necessaries and Conveniences of Life, when he was in quest of the
Good of Man, concluded it to be conjunctly in the Mind, together with the Body
and external Circumstances. Health and competent subsistence all men desire,
and Aristotle defines that to be good, which all men desire. To undervalue the
Benefits of God, who is Good and does Good, restrains Prayer, and suppresses
Gratitude; as in the Tenet of Aristo holding all other things, besides Virtue,
indifferent; but how then can the good man ensure his Happiness? These Goods he
pursues ordinately, uses with Moderation, and wants without Impatience; he can
be no otherwise selfdependent, than by linking his Will to the ever-blessed
Will of a Superior Wisdom. Zeno denied bodily Inflictions and Misfortunes to be
evil, from ignorance of their being Penalties for the Violation of the Divine
Law; but to the truly Good their Nature is changed, their Evil taken away, and
they made serviceable for Good.

SECT. XI. That the Stoics cavil about Words.
S. YOU induce me to give you my assent; but take heed least your consistency
too be not questionable.


M. How so?


S. Because I have lately read over your fourth Book, about the several
Opinions concerning the chief Good; in that, disputing against Cato, you seemed
to me to endeavor to show what I extremely like, that there is no difference
between Zeno and the Peripateticks, but a novelty of Terms. If this be so, what
reason is there, but if Zeno thinks it reasonable, that there is in Virtue,
sufficiency to Happiness of Life, the Peripateticks may say the same? for, I
think, reality, not words, ought to be regarded.


M. Why, you take of me a Bill under Hand and Seal, and call Witnesses to what
I said or writ at any time. Deal so with others who Dispute under Articles
subscribed; we live from hand to mouth, whatsoever smites us with an appearance
of Truth, that we allow. Therefore we only are free; but since we spoke a
little before of consistency, I do not think it to be at this time the enquiry
whether that which Zeno and his Auditor Aristo held be true, that only which is
Honest to be good; but, if it were so, then to place the whole Happiness of
Life in Virtue alone. Wherefore let us yield this to Brutus, that a Wise man is
always happy; how agreeable it is to his Principles, he must look to that. What
man is more worthy the Glory of this Assertion? Yet let us hold that the same
Wise man is most Happy, although Zeno of Cittium, a certain Forreigner, and
ignoble, but Forger of Terms, seems to have wrought himself slily into the
ancient Philosophy.


SECT. XII. That nothing should be called Good but Virtue, is vindicated to
have been the Tenet of Socrates.
THE Gravity of this Opinion, is to be fetched from the Authority of Plato; in
whom oftentimes this expression is found, that nothing is to be called Good but
Virtue, as in his Dialogue called Gorgias. Socrates, when he had been asked
whether he did not think Archelaus the Son of Perdiccas, who was then accounted
most Fortunate, to be Happy; I cannot tell, says he, for I never spoke with
the Man. What of that? can you come no other way to know it? No other; then you
cannot tell of the Great King of Persia, whether he be Happy? Can I do it, when
I know not how he is for Learning, how for Justice? What? do you think
Happiness of Life consists in that? I am clear of the mind, that the Good are
Happy, the Wicked Miserable. Is Archelaus then miserable? Certainly, if he be
unjust. Do you not think he places the whole of an Happy Life, in Virtue alone?
But what says he in his Funeral Dialogue? The man who has all the necessaries
to Happiness of Life, bound up in himself, so that they are not suspended on
the good or bad success of any other; and he by that means constrained to
waver, has the best course of Life ensur'd. This is that Moderate, this that
Valiant, this that Wise man; this, if Riches, if Children increase or fail,
will still observe the old Proverb, neither to be excessive in Joy nor Sorrow;
because all his Interests are depending on his own Soul.

SECT. XIII. Nature has produced all things perfect in themselves.
FROM this therefore, as it were Holy and Venerable Fountain of Plato, shall
our whole ensuing Discourse take its source. And now whence can we more orderly
begin, than from Nature our common Parent, who has taken care that all her
Productions, not only the living Creature, but also the very Plant which so
Springs from the Earth, as to abide firm on its Stock and Root, (u) should be
every one in their respective kind perfect. Therefore both Trees and Vines, and
those Plants which are lower, nor can advance themselves to any height from the
Earth, some of them are ever Green, others stand bare all Winter, but warmed in
the Spring, shoot forth Leaves afresh; nor is there any one which has not such
an inward Vegetation, that it bears either Blossoms, or Fruits, or Berries with
Seeds locked up in all, after their proper kind. So that every thing in all, as
far as in them lies, if no external Violence impeach, are perfect. The Power of
Nature may yet more easily be discerned in Brutes, because Sense is given them
by Nature; for she designed some of these Creatures for Swimming, which were to
be Inhabitants of the Water; others for flying, which were to sport in the open
Air; some to creep, others to go; and of these last, some to range alone,
others to herd together; some wild, and others tame: Lastly, some to dwell in
holes and caverns under ground. Now every one of these having its proper work
allotted, cannot pass over into the life of another Creature, but abides in the
Ordinance of its own Nature. And as one advantage is given by Nature to one
Beast, and another to another, which peculiar it holds fast, nor swerves from
it; so has man somewhat far more excellent; (although those things may be said
to excel, which admit of some comparison;) but the Soul of man being derived
from the Divine Spirit, with all Humility be it spoken, (w) can be compared
with no other thing, but God himself. This therefore, if it be cultivated, and
if its sight be kept pure, so as not to be blinded with Errors, becomes a
perfect understanding, that is, right Reason, which is the same as Virtue. And
if every thing be Happy, which wants nothing, and which is in its own kind
accomplished to the highest; and this be the property of Virtue; in truth all
virtuous Persons are Happy. And in this Point, I and Brutus are agreed; so also
is Aristotle, Xenocrates, Speusippus, Polemo. But in my opinion they are also
most happy; for what does he want to an Happy Life, who has Assurance of his
Goods? or how can he be Happy, who has no Assurance of them?

(u) Should be every one in their respective kind perfect.] A Testimony to the
original goodness of all things in their Creation.

(w) Can be compared with no other thing but God himself.] The Divine Original,
and incomparable Excellency of the Soul, is here acknowledged, which the whole
World cannot countervail.

SECT. XIV. The Perfection of man is properly in his mind.
BUT he must needs have no Assurance, who divides his Goods into three parts.
For how can he rely either upon firmness of Body, or stedfastness of Fortune?
But none can be Happy, unless in the enjoyment of a steadfast, fixed, and
permanent good. Now what of those mentioned, is of such Nature? so that the
Saying of that Spartan, seems very apposite to such men, who when (x) a certain
Merchant bragged that he had many Ventures to all Ports, whither men traded,
replied, I do not in truth envy that Fortune which is tacked upon Cables. Is it
any question, but that (y) nothing is to be taken into the number of those
things which constitute a Happy Life, that can be lost? for nothing that is the
ingredient of an Happy Life, must neither fade, nor be destroyed, nor decay.
For he who shall fear the losing any of them, can never be Happy; for we would
have him who is to be Happy safe, impregnable, fortified, and provided, not so
as to be without much Fear, but any at all. For as he is called Innocent, not
who is slightly harmful, but wholly harmless; so is he to be held undaunted,
not who Fears little, but who is wholly fearless; for what is Fortitude else,
but a disposition of mind, both firm in confronting danger, and sustaining
Labor and Pain; as also free from all Fear? Now these things to be sure, could
not be so, unless all goodness consisted in honesty alone. Since how can any
man have that most blessed and desirable Security (I call now Security a
Freedom from Disquiet, wherein Happiness of Life consists) who is either under
a multitude of Evils, or liable to be so? Further, how can he be brave and
gallant, and slighting all the possible Contingencies of Humane Life, such as
we would have our Wise man be, unless he should think all his sufficiency
lodged in himself? Could the Lacedaemonians demand of Philip, menacing by
Letters, that he would hinder all their attempts, whether he would hinder them
also from dying; and shall not the man whom we seek, be much easier found so
minded, than a whole State? What? and if Temperance, which is the Governess of
all Passions, be added to this Fortitude whereof we are speaking? What can he
want to Happiness of Life, whom Fortitude rescues from Discontent and Fear; and
Temperance reclaimeth from Lust, nor suffers to be transported with extravagant
Mirth? I would show that Virtue works these effects, had they not been made out
in the former days Debates.

(x) A certain Merchant.] Lampis the Aeginete a partowner in many Ships.
Merchants count it Wisdom not to venture too much in one Bottom, but divide the
hazard of the Seas.

(y) Nothing is to be taken into the number of those things which constitute a
happy Life that can be lost.] Cleanthes denied falling away from Virtue:
Chrysippus affirmed it. Confirmation in goodness may produce Assurance, but
never will security or carelessness; a freedom from servile but not watchful
Fear.

SECT. XV. That only what is Honest is Good.
NOW since the Disturbances of the Soul render the Life miserable, but the
composure of them happy; and there is a double rank of Passions; in that,
Discontent and Fear are terminated on Evils conceived; but excessive Mirth and
Lust arise from the misapprehension of good things, since all are inconsistent
with Advice and Reason, if you shall see any one clear, emancipated, free from
these emotions so vehement, so discordant one with the other, and so
distracting, can you make any question of calling him Happy? But the Wise man
is always so disposed, therefore the Wise man is always Happy. Further every
thing that is good is joyous, and what is joyous, is to be proclaimed and
avowed; and what is so, is also to be gloried in; but if it be glorious, to be
sure it must be praiseworthy; but what is praiseworthy, is also truly
honorable; what therefore is good is honorable. But what those men reckon for
Goods, they do not themselves say they are honorable. That only therefore is
good which is honorable, from whence is concluded, that Happiness of Life
consists in Honesty only; which is, the true Honor. Those things are therefore
not to be called nor counted good things, in which a man may abound, and yet be
most miserable. Do you make any question, but that one exceeding in Health,
Strength, Beauty, sound and quick Senses; add further if you please, Activity,
and Swiftness; throw in Riches, Honors, Commands, Interest, Glory; if the
Possessor of all this be unjust, intemperate, timorous, stupid and senseless,
will you make any question of calling him miserable? what sort of Goods then
are they which a man may have, and yet be most miserable? Let us consider
therefore, whether, as an Heap must consist of single Corns of the same Grain,
so an Happy Life must not of parts similar to it self. If this be so, then is
Happiness to be an Aggregation of those Goods only which are Honest, if there
be any mixture of Dissimilars, Honesty can never denominate the Sum total;
which being subtracted, what Happiness can be understood remaining? for
whatever that be, which is good, that is desirable; and what is desirable, is
to be sure to be approved; and what you approve, is to be accounted agreeable
and welcome; therefore also is respect to be born to it, which being so, it
must needs be commendable; therefore all good is commendable; from whence is
concluded, that what is honorable, that only is good. Which unless we
maintain, there will be many things which will pretend to the title of Good.

SECT. XVI. Such as is the Disposition of Mind, such is the Life.
TO wave Riches, which I do not reckon among good things, since any one never
so unworthy may have them. But (z) what is good, that every one cannot have. To
pass by Nobility and popular Fame, raised by the consent of Fools and Knaves.
These petty Advantages must be called good things, white Teeth, black Eyes, a
fresh Color, and those Graces which Anticlea commends, as she washes the Feet
of Ulysses.

Softness of Skin, and gentleness of Speech. If we must call these Goods, what
will there be sounding more reverend or lofty in the Gravity of a Philosopher,
than in the Opinion of the Vulgar, and crowd of Fools? But yet the Stoics call
the same things advantageous and preferrible, which these term Good. They do
indeed so style them, but do not esteem them perfective of Happiness of Life.
But the other think, that without these, not Happy; or if it be, yet will not
allow it most Happy. But we would have it to be most Happy; and that is
concluded by us, from that Pile of Inferences by Socrates. For thus did that
Prince of Philosophers argue. Such as is a man's Disposition of Soul, such is
the man; and as is the man, such his Discourse; again his Facts are like his
Discourse, and Life like his Facts. But the Disposition in a good man, is
commendable; therefore so is a good man's Life too; thereupon honorable too,
or honest, because commendable; from whence is inferred, that the Life of the
Good is Happy. For I appeal to Gods and men, is it not enough evidenced by our
former Debates; or have we discoursed for diversion only and pastime, that a
Wise man is always free from every inordinate commotion of Spirit, which I call
Passion? that there is always in his mind an undisturbed Peace. Therefore a
temperate constant man, without Fear, without Discontent, without any Jollity,
without Lust, can he be other than Happy? But a wise man is always such,
therefore always Happy. Now how can a good man choose, but make what is
commendable, the ultimate end of all his Thoughts and Actions? but he makes
Happiness of Life the ultimate end of all: Therefore Happiness of Life is
commendable; but there can be nothing commendable without Virtue; therefore
Happiness of Life is perfected by Virtue only.

(z) What is good that every one cannot have.] Understand this in a complex
Sense; the Fool cannot at the same time have Prudence; the Oppressor, Justice;
the Coward, Fortitude; the Luxurious, Temperance.

SECT. XVII. Only what may be gloried in is good.
NOW the same is thus further concluded. Neither is there any thing to be
proclaimed or boasted of in a miserable Life, nor in that which is neither
miserable nor happy; but there is in some Life somewhat to be proclaimed,
gloried in, and openly avowed; as Epaminondas;

(a) Under our conduct Spartas Pride is shaved. As Africanus;

From farthest East, beyond the Scythian Tracts,
None may compare with Scipio 's mighty Acts.
Now if a Life be Happy, it is to be avowed, proclaimed and gloried in; for
there is nothing else to be proclaimed and gloried in. Upon these Premises you
know what follows; and in truth unless that Life be Happy, which is also
Honest, there must needs be somewhat better than a Happy Life; for what is
Honest, they will certainly confess to be better; so will somewhat come to be
better than an Happy Life, which is the greatest Absurdity can be spoken. What?
when they confess, that vitiousness is sufficient to render the Life unhappy;
must not it be confessed, that Virtue has the same Power to render it Happy;
for contrary causes produce contrary effects. In this place, I enquire, what
imports that Balance of Critolaus? Who having cast the goods of the mind into
one Scale; those of the Body and Fortune into the other, thinks that the Scale
of former good does so far outweigh, that it would fetch up Sea and Land if it
were thrown in to the opposite toward making even weight.

(a) Under our conduct Spartas Pride is shaved.] Part of the Epitaph on
Epaminondas, who had overrun Sparta for five hundred years untouched. As a
Virgin led into Captivity, and shaved for Bondage; he Peopled Messina with a
Colony, Fortified Thebes, and left Greece in full Freedom.

SECT. XVIII. The same was also maintained by the more resolute Peripateticks.
WHAT then debars either him, or Xenocrates also, the gravest of Philosophers
extolling Virtue, and depressing all other things, so much as to vilify them,
from placing not only an Happy, but also most Happy Life, in Virtue? which
unless it hold good, an utter ruin of the Virtues will ensue; for to whom
trouble is incident, Fear must be so likewise of necessity; for Fear is the
anxious expectation of future Trouble; and he to whom Fear, there is also
incident Irresolution, Timorousness, Consternation, Cowardice, and by
consequent for the man sometimes to be conquered, nor to think himself
concerned in that admonition of Atreus.

So live resolved, as to be vanquished soorn. But the man here supposed will be
conquered, as I said, nor conquered only, but also enslaved; whereas we would
have Virtue to be always free, always unvanquish'd; which Properties, if they
be not granted, Virtue is taken away; but if Virtue have force enough to
Goodness of Life; she has also enough to Happiness; for to be sure there is in
Virtue, force enough for our living valiantly; and if valiantly, then with
gallantry of Spirit, so as never to be dismayed at any thing, but always remain
invincible. It follows that it knows no remorse, no want, no control:
Consequently that it abound in all things, live absolute and prosperously;
therefore happily. Now Virtue has force enough to our living valiantly;
therefore also has it enough to our living happily. For as Folly, although it
has obtained what it lusted after, yet never thinks it has gotten enough; so
Wisdom is always content with what it has, and never repineth at its own
condition.

SECT. XIX. The Dissimilitude between Virtue and Vice, exemplified in the
former Troubles.
DO you think any comparison to be made between (b) the one Consulship of C.
Laelius, and that after a repulse (if, when a wise and good man, such as he
was, is repulsed in an Election, the People do not rather miss of a good
Magistrate, than he of a good People,) but yet, which had you rather be, if it
were at your Choice, once Consul as Laelius, or (c) four times as Cinna? I make
no question what you would answer; therefore I consider to whom I put the case.
I would not ask every body the same question; for another perhaps would answer
that he not only preferred the four Consulships before the one, but one day of
Cinna, before the whole Ages of many and brave men. Laelius, if he had laid his
least Finger on any one, should have suffered for it; but Cinna commanded to
Behead his Fellow-Consul Cn. Octavius, P. Crassus, L. Caesar, Principal of the
Nobility, men of tried Abilities both in Peace and War. M. Antony the most
Eloquent of all that I ever heard. C. Caesar who seemed to me a Pattern of
Courtesy, Wit, Good Nature, Facetiousness. Was he therefore happy who slew
these? On the contrary, I take him to be therefore miserable, not only because
he did it, but also because he had ordered the matter, so as to have Authority
to do it; though no body has Authority to sin; but we speak improperly through
a vulgar abuse of Language, for we say a man does that by Authority, which he
can do without being called to an account for so doing. Pray was C. Marius then
happier, when he (d) communicated the Glory of his Cimbrick Victory with
Catulus, almost another Laelius (for I take him to have been most like the
other) or when being Conqueror in a Civil War, upon the Humble Petition of the
Relations of Catulus; he answered in Anger not once, but often, He must dye;
wherein more Happy was he who submitted to that execrable word, than he who
gave so wicked an order. For as it is better to receive, than do an Injury; So
is it to go a little way to meet death near approaching, as Catulus did; then
what did Marius by the murder of such a Personage, (e) to deface his six
Consulships, and pollute his dying Conscience.

(b) The one Consulship of O Laelius.] With L. Cornelius Scipio, an Eloquent
and wise man.

(c) Four times as Cinna.] A bloody, lewd, and violent Magistrate, when hindered
by his Fellow Consul Cnaeus Octavius, from passing unduly some pernicious Laws,
he fled Rome, freed Slaves, and called home C. Marius from Africa with other
Randiti, stormed Rome, cut off the Head of his Fellow-Consul, and exposed it
upon the Rostra, or Pleading-place. P. Crassus Father and Son were slain, with
C. Julius Caesar, and Lucius his Brother; this latter was so facetious, that
with his Discourse he so charmed the Soldiers, sent to kill Mark Antony the
Orator, that they put up their drawn Swords till Annius a Colonel fell on him,
and brought his Head to Marius, which he joyfully received, set on his Table in
a Feast, and stuck it afterward on the Rostra. Cinnd in his Fourth Consulship
was stoned by his Soldiers at Ancona for his Cruelty. C. Julius Caesar married
his Daughter Cornelia.

(d) Communicated the Glory of his Cimbrick Victory with Catulus.] In Venice
near the Addis, Marius and Catulus fought, the Cimbrians took 60000. and slew
about 120000. when his Colleague quitted the Honor of the day to him; so that
two Triumphs were decreed him alone; he took in Catulus with him to partake of
the Honor. Afterward he fell out with him, and without hearkening to any
Intercessors, obliged him to dye, which he did, locking himself up into a
Chamber, newly plastered over with green Lime, and so departed.

(e) To deface his six Consulships.] This was acted in his sixth Consulship;
the following January he was chosen a seventh time Consul and soon died.

SECT. XX. The ugliness of Usarpation in Dionysius the Elder; with his Fears.
EIGHT and thirty years was Dionysius Tyrant over the Syracusans, having
usurped the Government at five and twenty year old. He held in Servitude a City
of incomparable Beauty, and a State of great Wealth and Alliances. Now we have
received from good Authors concerning him, thus recorded, that he was of
singular temperance in his Diet, exceeding Politic and Industrious in carrying
on business; and yet for all that, of a Nature very malicious and unjust,
whence he must needs seem to all that consider truth narrowly, most miserable;
for what things he had eagerly coveted after, he did not then obtain, even when
he thought himself Sovereign Lord of all. He having been born of creditable
Parents, and such as were of good Quality, (though different Authors write
differently as to that Point) and abounding in Companions of old acquaintance,
and Relations near to him; also having some Youths joined in Love to him, after
the manner of Greece, trusted not any of them; but took for his Lifeguard
those whom he had picked out from the Servants of wealthy Citizens, and had
himself taken from them the name of Servitude; some Foreigners too, and
Salvage Barbarians. So through an unjust affectation of Dominion, he did in a
manner Imprison himself. Nay farther, lest he should entrust his Throat with
the Barber, he made his own Daughters learn to Trim. Thus did the Royal
Virgins, like Women-Shavers, of a sordid and servile Trade, Trim and Shave
their Father, and yet when they came to be of Age, he took from their hands too
the Razor, and brought up a Practice of their singeing his Beard and Locks with
burning Wall-nut-shells. He also having two Wives (f) Aristomache his own
Country-woman, (g) and Doris of Ocri, he so by night consorted with them, that
he had all places spied and searched before, and having contrived a broad.
Trench round about the Bed in his Presence Chamber, and laid a wooden Bridge
for a Passage over that Trench, which too he drew up when he had looked his
Chamber Doors. He also not daring to stand on the common Pulpits, was wont to
Harangue the People from the top of a Tower. The same Person having a mind to
play at Ball (for he delighted much in that sport) and stripped of his Vest, is
said to have delivered his Sword to a Page whom he loved. Hereupon when a
certain intimate Friend of his had said in jest, Assuredly you trust your Life
with him; and the Youth had smiled at it, he commanded both to be slain, the
one because he had showed the way of killing him, and the other because he had
approved that notice with a smile; at which action he was so afflicted, that
nothing in his Life ever more troubled him; for he had killed his beloved Boy.

(f) Aristomache his own Country-woman.] Daughter of Hipparinus, and Sister of
Dion.

(g) And Doris the Locrian.] Mother of Dionysius the younger.

SECT. XXI. Demonstrated to his Court-flatterer.
THUS are the Lusts of such as give way to their Passions, distracted into
contrary parts. Whilst you obey one, you must Rebel against the other; although
this Tyrant past Sentence himself how happy he was; for when one of his
Parasites, Damocles, in Discourse with him, fell on magnifying his Wealth,
Strength, Majesty of Dominion, Plenty of Estate, Sumptuousness of Royal Palace;
Will you then, answers he, Damocles, since you are so taken with this Life,
your self taste of it, and make a proof of my Fortune? upon his replying, that
he would with all his heart, he commanded him to be seated on a Golden Couch,
with a rich Coverlet, a Tapestry Carpet, Embroidered with curious Figures, in
Silks of diverse Colors; furnished also several Side-boards with Plate, and
Vessels of engraven Gold; then ordered Boys of the most exquisite Beauty, to
attend at Table, and diligently watching to run at his least beck: There were
precious Ointments, Garlands, Odours were fuming, the Table piled up with most
choice Dishes. Damocles thought himself in a Fortunate condition; in the midst
of this entertainment, he commanded a drawn Sword fastened by a single
Horse-hair, to be let down the Ceiling, so as to point at the head of this
happy man; so that he could not fix his eyes on those fair Servitors; nor the
excellent Workmanship of the Plate; nor reach his hand to the Table; his very
Garlands were ready to drop off his Head: In a word, he begged of the Tyrant,
leave to be gone, for he was unwilling to be any longer happy. Do you think
that Dionysius did not plainly enough declare, that nothing could be happy to
the man, who had always some terror impending over him? (h) Now he had put it
out of his power, to return to Justice, and restore his Citizens their Laws and
Liberties; for whilst he was young in his inconsiderate Age, he had entangled
himself in such miscarriages, and committed those enormities, that he could not
be safe, had he gone about to be honest.

(h) Now he had put it out of his Power to return to Justice.] An oblique
intimation to Caesar, of the expedience of timely restoring his Country to
Liberty.

SECT. XXII. -- and in the consequent of those Fears, want of Friends.
BUT how much he wanted Friends, whose faithfulness he feared, he declared (i)
in that pair of Pythagoreans; for when he had taken one of them surety for the
other, bound body for body, and the other, to release his Security, had
presented himself at the appointed hour of Execution, I wish, says he, I might
be admitted with you, to make up the Pair of Royal Friends. What a misery must
it needs be, to want the Conversation of Friends, Society at Meals, and even
familiar Discourse? especially to one a Scholar from a Child, and bred up to
ingenuous Arts; particularly as we have by Tradition very Musical; (k) a
Tragic Poet; How good, is nothing to the purpose; for in that sort of
Pretenders, I know not how it comes to pass, more than in others, every one
thinks his own a Beauty. I never knew Poet yet (and I was acquainted with
Aquinius) but he thought himself the best. So stands the case, you like yours,
and I mine. But to return to Dionysius, he was debarred all civil and free
Converse. He spent his time with Vagrants, with Rogues, with Barbarians; he
thought no man, who either deserved freedom, or had a desire to be free, could
be Friend to him. I will not therefore now compare with his Life, than which I
can imagine nothing more tormenting, wretched, detestable, the Life of Plato,
or Archytas, learned and truly wise men.

(i) In that Pair of Pythagoreans.] Damon and Pythias.

(k) A Tragic Poet; how good, is nothing to the purpose.] Dionysius the Elder
was Musical, and Patron of Philoxenus the Harper. He was much addicted to write
Tragedies, but unhappy that way, for he obscured his style, with far fetched
and frigid Humors and Expressions, yet angry with those who past a true
censure on them. Twice his Poems were exploded at the Olympiack Games; a third
time they came off with approbation, at the news of which, he is said to have
died for joy.

SECT. XXIII. The praise of a virtuous Life, in Archimedes and the Philosophers.
I WILL raise up from the Dust, and compass a mean Mechanic of the same City,
who lived many years after Archimedes. Whose Tomb, unknown to the Syracusians,
who denied that there was any such, I being Questor, searched out, as it was
overgrown and invested with Briars and Brambles; for I held in memory some
Verses which I had been informed were ingrav'd on his Monument. These declared
that on the top of his Tomb, was a Sphere erected with a Cylinder; when I had
viewed all about (for at the Agragian Port, is a great number of Sepulchers) I
spied a Pillar somewhat raised above the Bushes, (l) on which was the Figure of
a Sphere and Cylinder. Then I presently told the Syracusians (at that time the
chief of the Town were with me) that I thought that was the thing I looked for;
diverse with Hand-Bills were sent in, who cleared the place; when an open way
was made, we came to the Front of the Base; there appeared an Epigram, the
latter part of the Verses, to almost half, being perished. So that noble City
of Greece, and heretofore very learned, had not known the Monument of her most
ingenious Citizen, had she not learned it (m) of a poor Arpinate. But let my
Discourse return, from whence it has digress'd; for who is there that has any
acquaintance with the Muses, that is, with Humanity and Learning, who had not
rather be this Mathematician, than that Tyrant? If we look into their manner of
Life and Employment, the mind of one was improved by working, and searching out
Proportions, with the delight of invention, which is the sweetest repast of
Souls: The others fed with Carnage and Injuries, with Fears both by day and by
night. Come on, compare Democritus, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras; what Kingdoms, what
Wealth will you prefer before their Studies and Delights? for what is the best
part in man, therein must that best thing of all for man, which you enquire
after, of necessity be seated. Now what is there in man, better than an
ingenuous and sound mind? The good of that therefore must we enjoy, if we would
be happy; but the good of the mind is Virtue; therefore a happy Life must of
necessity be comprised in that. Hence all things which are good, honest,
honorable (as I said above, but that same seems that it ought to be more
largely said) are full of joys. Now seeing it is plain, that a happy Life is
made up of continual and complete joys, it follows that it arises from honesty.

(l) On which was the Figure of a Sphere and Cylinder.] On which he had written
so accurately.

(m) Of a poor Arpinate.] Tully was born at Arpinum a Corporation Famous before
only for the Birth of Marius, a stout but illiterate Commander.

SECT. XXIV. The Exercise of a Wise man in Contemplation of Nature.
BUT lest we should only touch in words, upon those things which we ought to
show; there are some, as it were, motives to be laid down by us, which should
more invite us to knowledge and understanding; for let us presume on some
Person, excelling in the best Arts; and let him, for a while, be fancied in our
Mind and Thought. First, he must needs be of an excellent Wit; for Virtue does
not in all likelihood consort with dull Souls. Then must he have a forward
inclination to the search of truth; from whence arises (n) that threefold
issue of the Soul; the one in knowledge of the World, and explaining of Nature;
a second in the description of what is to be desired, what avoided; the third
in judging what is consequent to what, and what repugnant; wherein consists
both all the subtilty of disputing, and truth of judging. What joy then, I
pray, must needs possess the wise man's mind, dwelling and lodging with these
Entertainments? and when he shall behold the Motions and Revolutions of the
whole Firmament, and shall see innumerable Stars sticking in their Orb, agree
with its own motion, fixed in their due distances. Other seven, each to keep
their courses much differing in height or lowness, whose wide motions yet limit
certain bounded and ordered Posts of their Race. It was the Observation of
these that incited and minded those Ancients to enquire farther. Thence arose
that (o) search of the Principles, and as it were Seeds whence all things had
their Original, Generation, Composition; and what is the Rise, what Life, what
Death, and what the Change or Conversion from one into another, of every kind
with or without Sense, dumb or speaking; whence is the Earth, and by what
weights poised; in what caverns it sustains the Seas; whether all things born
down by their Gravity, do always tend to the middle place of the World, which
is also the lowest in a round Figure.

(n) That threefold issue of the Soul.] Physics, Ethics, and Logic.

(o) Search of the Principles, and as it were, Seeds whence all things had
their Original.] The Creation of the World, in its order, could not have been
discovered, unless it had been from above revealed; for how could Adam come to
understand what had past in the Vigils of his Production, into Being without a
Divine Tradition; but the old Sages beheld the order of Causes in Generation,
and found Matter and Form to concur, when there was a vacancy, to the producing
any new compound.

SECT. XXV. Good Manners, right Reasoning, and discharge of his place.
WHILST he considers these things, and meditates on them day and night, there
arises that knowledge enjoined by the God at Delphi, that the Spirit knows it
self to have put off former Vices, and experiments that it is allied to the
Divine Spirit, and thereupon is filled with insatiable Joy. For the very
Contemplation of the Power and Nature of the Deity, and enkindleth a desire of
imitating that Eternity; nor does it think it self confined to this shortness
of Life, when it beholds the Causes of all Events depending one upon another,
and all of them linked together with necessity; which as they flow from eternal
Duration to eternal, yet a Wisdom and Spirit does conduct. Steadfastly beholding
these things, and looking upwards, or rather looking round on all the Parts and
Extremities, with what calmness of mind again does he consider the
Contingencies of Hurnane Life and things here below? Hence arises that
knowledge of Virtue; the general and particular Virtues sprout forth; there is
found out, what is that chiefest amongst Goods which Nature aims at, what the
utmost amongst Evils, whereinto all Duties are to be resolved, what order of
leading our Life to be chosen. These and suchlike things being searched out,
it is firmly proved which we chiefly drive at in this Dispute, that Virtue is
self-sufficient to happiness of Life. A third branch remains, the method and
skill of disputing, which is diffused, and spreads through all the Parts of
Wisdom. This defines Notions, divides the general into its parts, conjoyns
consequent means of proof, infers regular Conclusions. From which as the
highest usefulness arises toward examining Matters; so does also the most
ingenuous delight, and worthy of Wisdom. But these are the Improvements of
leisure; pass the same wise man to manage the public; what can be more
serviceable than he, when he beholds the Interest of his Country to be bound up
in his Prudence; out of Justice he converts nothing of the public to his
private use; exercises so many others, and such various Virtues? Join hereto
the benefit of Friendships, wherein as all the Counsel agreeing, and almost
conspiring in the conduct of Life, has been placed by the Learned; so is there
singular delight in daily respect and Conversation. What, I pray, does this
Life lack to make it more Happy? To this Estate filled up with so many and so
great Joys, Fortune it self must needs submit. Now if it be Happy to rejoice in
such Goods of the Mind, that is, Virtues; and all wise men constantly feel such
Joys; we must of necessity confess, that all wise men are Happy.

SECT. XXVI. The wise man is Happy in Adversity.
S. WHAT? under Tortures and Racking.


M. Do you think I mean under a Chaplet of Violets and Roses? Shall Epicurus,
who is only a Philosopher in Masquerade, and assumes that Title to himself;
shall he be allowed to say, what yet he does with my applause, as the matter
now stands, that there is no time of a wise man, although whilst he is burning,
wracked, cut, but wherein he may cry out, Now nothing do I value this?
especially when he defines all Evil by Pain, Good by Pleasure; laughs at this
our Honesty, as baseness; and teaches us to be a company of Canters, that set
up for a parcel of idle School-Gibbrish, not having any other true Interest,
but in what feels smooth or rough in the Body. Shall he then, as I said, not
much differing in judgment from Beasts, be allowed to forget himself, and then
to brave Fortune, when as his whole, both Good and Evil, is in the Power of
Fortune? then call himself Happy in the greatest racking and torture, when he
has laid it down for a Principle, that Pain is not only the chiefest, but the
only Evil; and that not having provided himself of those supports, to the
bearing up under Pain; such as are Resolution of Mind, Fear of Baseness,
Exercise and Habit of Patience, Precepts of Fortitude, manly Hardiness; but
says, he rests himself on the bare remembrance of past Pleasures; just as if
one sweltring, when he is ready to faint away with the excess of heat, would
call to mind, that he had been (p) in our Manner of Arpinum, refreshed with the
Breezes from the cool Streams that run about it; for I do not see how past
Pleasures can assuage present Evils; but when he says that a wise man is
always Happy, who could say no such thing, if he would be true to himself; what
should they do, who think nothing desirable, nothing to be ranked amongst
Goods, which is abstracted from Honesty? If my word may pass, even the
Peripateticks and old Academicks should at length leave their lisping, and
without more mincing the matter, take courage to speak plain, and with an
intelligible voice, that Happiness of Life can enter into (q) Phalaris his Bull.


(p) In our Manner of Arpinum, refreshed with the Breezes from the cold Streams
that run about it.] In Cicero's Arpinum were two Rivers, Fibrenus and another,
where the Marian Oak stood; a pertinent and pleasant Similitude.

(q) Phalaris his Bull.] When Phalaris ruled in Sicily, with rigor he put many
to diverse Tortures. Upon this Perillus thinking to gratify the Tyrants cruel
Humor, invented a Brazen Bull hollow, and with a Trap-door to let in the
Sufferers, then having shut it again, to kindle a gentle Fire, and so the Brass
heating, the Person also roared out into bellowings, as of a true Bull; the
Tyrant made the first experiment upon the Artist; it is put Metonymically for
any exquisite Torture.

SECT. XXVII. Objection from Pain against the self-sufficiency of Virtue
answered.
FOR allow there be three sorts of Goods, that we may at length get clear of
the Snares of the Stoics; more of which I understand that I have used, than I
am wont to do; allow them, I say, for sorts of Goods; so those of the Body, and
of the Estate, couch on the ground, and be only termed Good, because they are
to be accepted; but those other Divine ones, let them spread far and near, and
mount up to Heaven; so that he who has acquired them, why should I call him
Happy only, and not also most Happy? But will a wise man dread Pain? for that
is the greatest Adversary to this opinion; for we seem enough fortified and
prepared by the former days Disputes against our own Death, and that of our
Friends; as also against Discontent, and the other Passions of the Mind. Pain
seems to be the most violent Adversary against Virtue, that thrusts out his
burning Torches at us; that threatens to vanquish Fortitude, Magnanimity, and
Patience. Shall Virtue then fall under this? Shall the Blessed Life of a Wife
and Constant man render to this. Good Gods! how base were that? Spartan
Children torn with smarting Lashes, never give a groan. We have seen our
selves, at Lacedaemon, Multitudes of young men Box, Kick, Scratch, Bite, with
incredible earnestness, so as to fall down dead, before they would confess
themselves worsted. What Barbarous Land is more wast or wild, than India? yet
in that Nation, those who are counted wise men live naked, and endure the Snows
and Winter violence of Caucasus without Pain; and when they turn themselves to
the Flame, are scorched without groaning. Nay (r) the Indian Women, when the
Husband of any of them is dead, enter into Contest and Trial, which of them he
loved best, for they are wont to be many Wives to one man; she that gets the
better, joyful and attended by her Friends, is laid by her Husband on the
Funeral Pile; the other that lost, goes away sorrowful. Custom could never
vanquish Nature, for that is always invincible. But we have emasculated our
Spirit with Shade, Delicacies, Ease, Niceness, Sloth, and debauched our
Judgment with Mistakes, and bad Presidents. Who knows not the Egyptians
Practice? whose minds being prepossessed with corrupt Errors, would endure any
the most exquisite Torment, rather than violate (s) an Ibis, (t) or Asp, or
Cat, or Dog, or Crocodile; and if unawares they do any such thing, they are
content to undergo any Punishment that shall be inflicted on them. I speak
hitherto of Men. What do Beasts? do not they endure Cold, and Hunger, Running
and Ranging over Mountains and thorough Woods? do they not so Fight, to protect
their Young, as to receive Wounds? fear no Charges, no Blows? I wave that
ambitious men abide and suffer for Honors sake; what the vainglorious, for
Praise; what the Amorous, for Lust. The World is full of Instances.

(r) The Indian Women.] In the Camp of Eumenes there fell out an admirable
Instance, and very much different from the Grecian Practice. Cetrus, one of the
Indian Captains, having fought bravely, fell in the Battle, and left two Wives
behind him. Now it had been an old Custom in India, that young Men and Maids
married, without asking their Parents Consent, but as they fancied one another.
This rash judgment of Youth, was often followed with speedy Repentance; so that
many Women were debauched, and fell in Love with others, but finding no color
of leaving them, begun to take them out of the way. India is a Country stored
with many Simples and Drugs of such a deletory Nature, as some of them kill
instantly if the Dish or Cup be but touched with them. This Practice of
poisoning prevailed, and many men were thus taken off; nor could any rigor of
Justice deter the rest from the like attempts. At length a Law was made, that
such Women as survived their Husbands, and had no Children, nor were with
Child, should be burnt; which if they refused, they should not Marry again, but
be for ever excommunicated, as impious. This quite altered their Inclinations,
for the greatness of the Disgrace, made them contented to dye rather, and they
both grew tender in Preservation of their Husbands Life, as their own; and also
took a Glory to be Consorts with him in death. As it fell out at this time, for
the Law being express, that one must be burnt with her slain Husband, both of
them presented themselves at his Funeral, standing for the Partnership with him
in death, as for a glorious prize. A Council of War was called; here the latter
Wife alleged, that the former was by her Belly debarred from dying in the
express terms of the Law. But the other pleaded that she ought to have the
priority of Honor, as she had of time; for in all other Instances the Elder
have in Matters of Privilege, title to precedence. The Soldiers being
informed by a Jury of Women, that the Elder was indeed with Child, gave the
cause for the Younger. Upon which, she that was cast, with loud shrieks went
out of the Court, her attire and hair torn, as at the hearing of some doleful
news. But the other, joyful for having carried the day, was dressed up by her
acquaintance, with Ribbins and rich attire; then led to the Funeral Pile, as to
a Wedding, by her nearest kindred, who, as they went, sung the praises of her
Virtue. When they were come to the Stake, she divested her self, and
distributed her Ornaments amongst her Friends and Acquaintance, as a Token of
her last Affections. Thus was her attire; many Rings on her Fingers glistering
with precious Stones of diverse sorts; on her Head a Sky of Golden Stars, set
with radiant Sparks of several Gems; about her Neck many Neck-laces of Pearl,
increasing in size each above the other; at last having taken leave of all her
acquaintance, she was by her Brother helped up the Pile, where, to the
admiration of all that had come from the parts round about to the sight, she
ended her Life in an heroical manner; for the whole Army marched in Arms thrice
round the Funeral Pile, before Fire was put to it; and she lying down by her
Husbands side, when the heat grew more and more powerfully sensible, let no
voice pass which might discover any meanness of Spirit; so that the Spectators
some were touched with Compassion; others magnified her beyond any measure. But
most of the Greeks thought it an inhumane and cruel Law.

(s) An Ibis.] A Bird that kills up Serpents.

(t) An Asp.] A venomous Creature which casts into a deadly sleep; with this
Cleapatra made her self away after the Actian disgrace.

SECT. XXVIII. The wise man is happy though he be in Torments.
BUT our Discourse must keep within bounds, and return thither where it turned
out of the way. Happiness will, will, I tell you, go into Torments; nor having
accompanied Justice, Temperance, and especially Fortitude, Magnanimity,
Patience, when it shall see the Tormentors Face, will it stop; and when all the
Virtues go with an undaunted mind to Torture, will she stand (as I said)
without the Prison doors, and not step over the threshold? for what would be
more scandalous, more ugly, than her left alone and severed from her most
beautiful train of Companions, (u) which yet is no ways possible; for neither
can the Virtues hold together without happiness of Life, nor that without the
Virtues. Therefore they will not suffer her to lag behind, but will hurry her
along with them, to whatever pain and torture they shall be led; for it is the
property of (w) a wise man, to do nothing to be repented of, nothing upon
constraint, all things nobly, constantly, gravely, honestly; to expect nothing,
as presumed certain; to admire nothing when it is befallen, as that it should
seem to have happened new and unexpected; to bring all things to the Bar of his
discretion, and stand to the awards of his own judgment: what can be more happy
than this, cannot enter into my mind; I acknowledge, indeed, the inference of
the Stoics is plain; who having held the chiefest of Goods to be agreement
with Nature, and living up suitably to it; this being in the wise man not only
as to Duty, but also Power; it must necessarily follow, that in whose Power is
the chiefest Good, in the same is also happiness of Life; so that a wise man's
Life is always happy. Thus you have what I think is spoken of a happy Life most
resolutely; and as the matter stands here, unless you can tell us any thing
better, most truly too.

(u) Which yet is no ways possible.] Virtue and Blessedness are inseparable
Companions.

(w) A wise man to do nothing to be repented of.] Take it in a compound sense;
for Wisdom is not to be repented of, but in a State of Imperfection, Repentance
is Wisdom recovered; nor dishonorable, for upon it God also repents of
Punishment.

SECT. XXIX. Whether the Peripateticks may consistently to themselves hold what
the Stoics do.
S. BETTER I can tell nothing, but I would willingly beg the favor of you, if
it be not too much trouble, because you are not under engagements to any
certain Sect, but cull out of all, whatever works upon you, with any apperance
of truth, whereas you seemed a little before to exhort the Peripateticks and
old Academy, that they would take the boldness to say freely without biting in
their words, that wise men are always most happy, I would fain learn of you,
how you think it comporting with their Principle so to say; for much has been
said by you against their opinion, and concluded after the Stoics way of
arguing.


M. Use we therefore our liberty, which we only can use in Philosophy, whose
discourse judges nothing it self, but argues on all sides, that it may of it
self, without the shelter of any ones Authority, be judged by others. And since
you seem to be wishing this, that whatsoever be the opinion of dissenting
Philosophers, about the several chief Goods, yet Virtue has in it self
sufficient Power, to the securing of an happy Life; which we have been informed
Carneades was wont to maintain; but he did it as against the Stoics, whom he
did always most earnestly confute, and against whose Doctrine his Wit broke
forth into Heats. We will do the same thing, but calmly; for if the Stoics
have rightly set the bounds of things good, the matter is at an end; the wise
man must of necessity be always happy, but let us enquire into every opinion of
the rest; if it be possible, that this excellent, as it were, Sanction of an
happy Life, may agree with all their Judgments.


SECT. XXX. The different Opinions about the chief Good.
NOW these Opinions about the Supreme good, have, as I suppose, been kept and
maintained: First, four single ones; that Nothing is Good but what is Honest,
as the Stoic; that Nothing is Good but Pleasure, as Epicurus; that Nothing is
Good but freedom from Pain, as (x) Hierom; that Nothing is Good but to enjoy
the prime Goods of Nature, either all, or the greatest, as Carneades disputed
it against the Stoics. These then are single, the following are mixed. The
three sorts of Goods, the greatest of the Soul; the next of the Body; external,
the third, as the Peripateticks; nor held the ancient Academicks much
otherwise. Pleasure with Honesty Clitomachus and Calliphon coupled; but Freedom
from Pain (y) Diodorus, the Peripatetick, joined to Honesty. These are the
Opinions which held their Station any time; for those of (z) Aristo, (a)
Pyrrho, (b) Herillus, and some others, are vanished away. What claim these can
make out, let us consider, omitting the Stoics, whose opinion I seem already
to have enough defended. And indeed the cause of the Peripateticks is opened,
except Theophrastus, and if any of his Followers do very weakly dread and
shrink from Pain; the rest may do what they usually do, magnify the Gravity
and Dignity of Virtue; and when they have extolled it to Heaven, that which
such Eloquent men are wont copiously to do, it is easy to run down, and
undervalue all other things in comparison thereto; for it is not free for them
who hold that praise is to be sought with Pain, to deny them to be happy, who
have acquired it; since though they are in some Evils, yet this name of happy
has a great length and breadth.

(x) Hierom.] Of Rhodes.

(y) Diodorus.] Surnamed Cronus.

(z) Aristo.] He held besides Vice and Virtue all to be indifferent.

(a) Pyrrho.] He taught Nothing could be known.

(b) Herillus.] His Tenet, that Knowledge is the chiefest Good.

SECT. XXXI. The denomination of the whole is from the greater part.
FOR as Merchandise is said to be gainful, Husbandry fruitful, not if the one
be always free from any loss, the other always from any injury of the Weather;
but if for far the more part there prove good success in both; so Life, not
only if it be crammed with Goods on every side, but if in much the greater and
more important part Goods do preponderate, it may rightly be called happy.
Happiness of Life therefore, in these men's Scheme, will follow Virtue even to
Punishment, and enter with it into the Bull, upon the warrant of Aristotle,
Xenocrates, Speusippus, Polemo; nor will be corrupted by small blandishments to
forsake it. The same will be the judgment of Calliphon and Diodorus, both of
which so embraces honesty, that he esteems all things which are without it, to
be set behind it, and at a great distance too. The rest seem to be harder
beset; yet they save themselves ashore. Epicure, Hierom, and if there be any
that care to defend that Eloquent Carneades; for there is none but thinks the
Soul judge of these Goods, and instructs it how it, may be able to contemn
those things which seem good or evil. For what you take to be the case of
Epicurus, the same will be that of Hierom and Carneades, and in truth all the
rest; for who is not sufficiently provided against Death or Pain? Begin we at
him, if you please, whom we call Lasche, and voluptuary. What? do you take him
to fear Death, or Pain? who calls that day, wherein he is a dying, blessed; and
being in very great Pains, yet silences them with the memory and recalling to
mind of his Inventions* nor does he this in such manner, as that he might be
thought to bolt forth some extemporary flash, for this is his Sentiment about
death, that when the living Creature is dissolved, all Sense is abolished; but
what is without Sense nothing concerns us. About Pain also he has certain
Rules, which he follows; for he comforts their greatness, with the being short;
and their length, with the being light. What I pray? those big speakers, are
they better provided than Epicurus, against these two, which give the greatest
anguish? Do not Epicurus and the rest of the Philosophers seem sufficiently
prepared for those other Evils reputed? Who dreads not Poverty? yet so does not
any of the Philosophers.

SECT. XXXII. and in 33, 34, 35. A Plea for Poverty.
NAY, even he himself, with how little was he contented? None has said more of
a slender Diet; for the things which occasion a coveting after Money; as to
have a constant supply for Love, for Ambition, for daily Expenses, when he
preserves himself from all those things, what great need has he for Money, or
rather why should he at all regard it? Could Anacharsis the Scythian have no
value for Money, and cannot our Country Philosophers do the same. A Letter of
his goes about in these words. Anacharsis to Hanno Greeting. My Clothes is a
Scythian Pelt; Shoes, the soles of my Feet; Bed, the Ground; Dainties, a good
Stomach; Diet, Milk, Cheese, Flesh. Wherefore you may come over to me, as being
at leisure. But those Presents of yours, wherein you display your magnificence,
offer either your own Carthaginians, or the immortal Gods. Almost all
Philosophers of all Persuasions could be thus minded, except those whom
depraved Nature, had perverted from right Reason. Socrates at a Show, when a
great quantity of Gold and Silver was carried by, said, How many things are
there that I do not lack! Xenocrates, when Ambassadors from Alexander had
brought him fifty Talents, which was a very great sum in those times,
especially at Athens, carried their Excellencies along with him into the
Academy to Supper; provided no exceedings, but set before them a bare
Colledge-Commons. The next day when they asked him, whom he would order to have
the Money drawn over to him: What? says he, did you not understand by
yesterdays short meal, that I need no Money. At this when he saw them look
somewhat dissatisfied, he took (c) a hundred Pounds (d) of it, lest he should
seem to slight their Masters liberality. But Diogenes more bluntly yet, as a
Cynick, when Alexander asked him, wherein he could serve him; At present, says
he, a little out of my Sun. He had, it seems, hindered his basking. He it was,
who used to dispute, how much he surpassed in Life and Fortunes, the great King
of Persia: That he wanted nothing; the other would never have enough; he lacked
not the others Pleasures wherewith he could never be satisfied; the other could
no ways attain to his satisfactions.

(c) A hundred Pounds.] A Dram is valuable, against the Denarius, about
eight pence. A Mina, 100 Drachmas, 30 Minae, 300 Drachmae.

(d) Of it*] Of the 50. Talents, a Talent was the Greater. 80. Minae. 266. l.
13. s. 4. d.


The Lesser 60. m. 200. l.


50 lesser T. 10000 l. gr. T. 13333 l. 6. s. 8. d.


SECT. XXXIII. That Pleasures may be purchased at an easy rate.
YOU see, I presume, how Epicurus has divided the sorts of Desires, perhaps
not over cunningly, yet usefully; that they are, part, natural and necessary;
part, natural and not necessary; part, neither; that the necessary may be
satisfied with next to nothing, for the Riches of Nature are low-priz'd; that
the second sort is neither difficult to compass, nor to refrain. The third
because they are wholly empty, and do not concern not only necessity, but so
much as Nature, he thought were wholly to be cashiered. Upon this Head much is
disputed by the Epicureans, and these Pleasures are in particular depressed;
which in the general they do not dis-esteem; but they are straighten'd for
matter; for they tell us that obscene Pleasures also, upon which they hold much
discourse, are easy, common, and at hand; and they think them if Nature
require, not to be measured by their Birth, or Quality, or Rank; but their
Beauty, Age, and Shape; and that it is no hard matter to abstain from them, if
either Health, or Business, or Reputation require; and in the whole, that this
sort of Pleasures is desirable, if it do no hurt; that it never does good. And
this whole Lesson about Pleasure, he has so laid down, that he thinks Pleasure
of it self, because it is Pleasure always desirable, and to be pursued; and by
the same reason, Pain upon that very account, because it is Pain, always to be
avoided. Therefore that a wise man would still hold this Balance, to avoid
Pleasure, if it would work greater Pain; and to embrace Pain, working a greater
Pleasure; and that all delights, however they are judged, by bodily Sense, yet
are resolved into the mind. Wherefore the Body rejoices only so long as it
feels the present Pleasure; the Soul both perceives the present together with
the Body, and foreseeth it coming; nor suffers it to depart when past. Thus
that there will always be close and uninterrupted Pleasures in the wise man;
when the memory of those enjoyed, is continued with the expectation of those
hoped for. Arguments also of like Nature are applied to Diet. There the
magnificence and sumptuousness of Feasting is decry'd, because Nature is
contented with small Provision.

SECT. XXXIV. Examples of a light Diet in the Lacedaemonians and Persians.
NOW who does not see that all these things are seasoned by the appetite?
Darius, upon a flight, having drank Water, and troubled and stained with the
Corpse of the slain, said, He had not made a more pleasant draught. He never,
it seems, had been a dry when he drunk: Nor had Ptolomy been a hungry when he
eat; for on a time, in his Progress through Egypt, his Courtiers and Purveyance
not being yet come up, when Houshold-Bread in a Country-Cottage was brought
him: No Royal Cates ever went down with greater Gust than that Bread. They
report of Socrates, when he was walking very earnestly too late in the Evening,
and was asked why he did so, that he replied, He was going to Market to buy him
a Stomach to his Supper. What? do we not see the Commons of the Lacedaemonians
in their Hall? where when the Tyrant Dionysius had supped, he said, He did not
like their black Broth, which was the prime Dish of the Table to which he was
invited: Then the Cook replied, No wonder, Sir, for you had not the proper
seasoning. What is that, says he, I pray? Hard hunting, sweat, race from
Eurotas, hunger, thirst. For the Lacedemonian Feasts have these Sawces; and
this may be understood, not only from the Custom of men, but also from Beasts.
These, if you put any Fodder to them, so it be not improper to their Nature,
they are contented with it, and look no further. Some whole States trained up
by the mode of their Country, love Parsimony. The Fare of the Persians is
described by Xenophon, who says of them, that they eat nothing with their
Bread but Cresses. Although if Nature do require some more grateful repast, how
many things grow out of the Earth, and upon Trees, both of easy purchase, and
admirable relish: Join hereto that dry Constitution which follows upon this
spare Diet; compare with them the other sweating, belching, crammed with
Feasting, like stall'd Oxen; you will soon understand, that they who most
follow after Pleasure, are the farthest from taking it; and that the delight of
all enjoyments, is in the appetite, not satiety.

SECT. XXXV. -- in the Academy.
THEY relate of Timothy the Athenian, and prime Nobleman in that State, that
having supped with Plato, he was greatly taken with the entertainment, and
seeing him on the morrow, said, your Suppers not only please at the present,
but also do much good the next day. Whereas we have not the free and clear use
of our understanding, when we are stuffed with Meat and Drink. There is an
excellent Epistle of Plato's to Dions Relations, wherein is written to this
effect, almost in the very words. When I was come thither, that Life which was
cried up for happy, full of Italian and Syracusian Feasts; no ways agreed with
me, twice a day to be gorged, never to lie single; and other Consequents of
such a Life; wherein no man will ever he made wise, and sober much less. For
what Nature can ever be of such an admirable Temper? How then can a Life be
pleasant, where there is neither Prudence nor Sobriety? whence the Error of (e)
Sardanapalus, the most wealthy King of Syria, is discernable; who commanded it
to be engraved on his Monument.

This have I, what I eat, and what did sat
My greedy Lust; farewell both Wealth and State!
What else, says Aristotle, would one write upon a Beasts Sepulcher, and not a
Kings? He says he has now he is dead, what, whilst he was alive, he had no
longer than during the enjoyment; why then should Riches be wanted, or wherein
does not Poverty suffer us to be happy? In Images, I warrant, Pictures, Plays.
If any one be taken with these, do not mean men more enjoy them, than they who
have the greatest store of them? for there is in our City abundance of all such
things belonging to the Public, and exposed. Those which private men have, are
neither so many, and they seldom see them, only when they come into their
Country Houses. And then too, fell some remorses, when they call to mind (f)
how they came by them. The day would fail, if I should go about to make an
Apology for Poverty; since the matter is plain, and Nature it self minds us
every day, how few things she wants, how small, how cheap.

(e) Sardanapalus.] He was the last King of Assyria, overthrown by Arbaces the
Mede: at Anchiale was a Monument erected for him, on a Marble Base the Statue
of a Man in Brass, with his right Thumb applied to his middle Finger;
underneath was insorib'd;

Sardanapalus, Son of Anacyndaraxes, built Anchiale and Tarsus in one day.
Stranger, do you eat, drink and play, for all else is not worth this.

The posture above is of one giving a fillip.

(f) How they came by them.] The Villas of Noblemen were garnished with these
Rarities from the Pillage of the Provinces in the time of their own, or their
Ancestors Government.

SECT. XXXVI. A Defense of obscurity in Birth and Condition.
SHALL then obscurity, or meanness, or even falling under the displeasure of
the People; hinder a wise man from being Happy? Consider, whether this courting
of the Vulgar, and that glory which is eagerly pursued, have not in it more
trouble than Pleasure. Sure our Demosthenes was weak, who declared himself
pleased with the whispering of a Woman, bearing a Tankard, as is the fashion in
Greece, and rounding her Fellow in the Ear, There goes the great Demosthenes.
What can be more vain than this? yet how brave an Orator? but he knew, it
appears, to speak to others, had not had much Communication with himself. We
must therefore be informed, that neither is popular glory of it self to be
affected, nor obscurity dreaded. I came to Athens, says Democritus, and no
body took notice of me. Constant and Grave man, who glories that he escaped
Glory! Do Pipers and Fiddlers play Tunes after their own, not the judgment of
the Multitude; and shall a wise man, Master of a far nobler Science, enquire
not what is agreeable to Honor and Conscience, but what humors the Mobile? Can
there be any greater Folly, than (g) to idolize them jointly, whom severally
you look upon with contempt, as Mechanics and illiterate? No, the man
mentioned will despise our Ambitions and Weaknesses; and reject the Honors of
the People, though freely offered him; but we know not to contemn them, before
we find cause to repent of our fondness of them. There is in Heraclitus the
Naturalist, about Hermodorus the prime man of the Ephesians: He says the
Ephesians deserved to be all executed, because when they banished Hermodore out
of their Country, they spoke thus, We will have no man among us more excellent
than another; but if any such there be, let them go elsewhere, and live among
others. (h) Is not this so in all Commonwealths? Do they not hate all eminency
in Virtue? What of Aristides (for (i) I had rather bring Instances of the
Greeks, than our own) was he not, for that very reason, driven out of his
Country, because he was righteous above the common level? How great troubles
therefore do they miss, who enter into no engagements with the People? for what
is sweeter than Retirement and Study? That Study; I mean, whereby we understand
the infinity of the Universe and Nature; and in this visible World, Heaven,
Earth, and Seas.

(g) To idolize them jointly, whom severally you look upon with contempt.] When
Alcibiades appeared timorous, and loath to speak in the Popular Assembly,
Socrates encouraged him after this manner. Do you think that Cobbler (and called
him by his name) should put you in awe? neither that Porter? nor the third a
Dray-man? Why then, nor the People of Athens.

(h) Is not this so in all Commonwealths? do they not hate all eminency in
Virtue?) A Lesson worthy to be considered by all Republicans and petty Statists.

(i) I had rather bring Instances in the Greeks, than our own.] This
Parenthesis insinuates the Roman ingratitude to himself; as formerly to
Camillus, Aquilius, Rutilius; but with great generosity he passes over the
unkindness of his Countrymen, and delights not to aggravate the public
Failings.

SECT. XXXVII. Supports under Banishment.
AFTER contempt therefore of Honor, contempt also of Money, what remains to be
dreaded? Banishment, I warrant, which is counted amongst the greatest Evils. If
that be evil upon account of the Peoples displeasure, how much that is to be
slighted, has been showed a little before. But if it is miserable to be absent
from ones Country; all the Provinces are full of miserable Persons, for very
few return out of them into their own Land. Ay, but the banished forseit their
Estates. What then? Is not enough said of bearing Poverty with Patience. Indeed
for Banishment, if you look upon the Nature of things, and not the discredit of
the name; how much does it differ from taking up our constant abode in a
foreign Country; yet so have the most noble Philosophers spent their whole
Ages. (k) Xenocrates, (l) Crantor, (m) Arcesilas, (n) Lacydas, (o) Aristotle,
(p) Theophrastus, (q) Zeno, (r) Cleanthes, (s) Chrysippus, (t) Antipater, (u)
Carneades, (w) Panaetius, (x) Clitomachus, (y) Philo, (z) Antiochus, (a)
Posidonius, innumerable others, who having once gone out of their Country,
never returned home again; but they did it without disgrace. Can disgrace take
impression on a wise man (for this whole discourse is about the wise man) whom
it can never justly befall; for we should not comfort him who is justly
banished. Lastly, in all cases they have the easiest expedient, who determine
all the events of Life to Pleasure; so that, wheresoever that is to be had,
they can there live happily. Wherefore (b) to every Scheme that word of Teucer
is appliable.

Our Country is, where we live well. Socrates being asked, what Countryman he
styled himself; replys, a Cosmopolite; for he thought himself Native and
Denizen of the whole World. What did T. Albutius? did he not, with great
content, follow his Studies in Banishment at Athens? which misfortune yet had
not befallen him, had he lived quietly in the State, and followed the Rules of
Epicurus. Now wherein was Epicurus happier, because he lived in his own
Country, (c) than Metrodorus, because at Athens? or had Plato advantage over
Xenocrates, or Polemo over Arcesilas, as to being the more happy? But what is
that State to be valued, out of which good and wise men are chased? (d)
Demaratus indeed, the Father of our King Tarquin, because he could not bear the
Tyrant Cypsilus, fled from Corinth to Tarquinii, and there settled his Estate,
and begot Children. Was it foolish in him to prefer Liberty abroad, before
slavery at home?

(k) Xenocrates.] Of Chalcedon.

(l) Crantor.] Of Soli.

(m) Arcesilass] Of Pitana in Aeolia.

(n) Lacydas.] A Cyrenian.

(o) Aristotle.] Of Stagira, Professor in Athens, died at Chalcis.

(p) Theophrastus.] Of Eresus in Lesbos.

(q) Zeno.] Of Cittium in Cyprus.

(r) Cleanthes.] Of Assos.

(s) Chrysippus.] Of Soli.

(t) Antipater.] Of Tarsus.

(u) Carneades.] A Cyrenian.

(w) Panaetius.] A Rhodian.

(x) Clitomachus.] A Carthaginian.

(y) Philo.]

(z) Antiochus.] Of Ashkelon.

(a) Posidonius.] Born at Apamea in Syria, chose to be called Rhodian from the
Isle where he was Student, Professor and Governor.

(b) To every Scheme.] Origin against Celsus censuring the narrowness of some
who confine their Charity to their own Party, that is, in truth, build up
themselves, prefers the good nature of Chrysippus, who in his Treatise of
curing the Passions, calculates his advice to the several Philosophers, upon
supposition of their respective Principles.

(c) Than Metrodorus.] Born at Chios.

(d) Demaratus indeed, the Father of our King Tarquin.] Surnamed Priscus.

SECT. XXXVIII and XXXIX. -- Blindness.
FUrthermore, the Commotions of the Soul, Anxieties, and Discontents are buried
in Oblivion, when our minds are fetched off to Pleasure. Wherefore Epicurus did
not without cause, take the boldness to say, that a wise man had always a
greater portion of good things, because he was always in Pleasures. Whence he
thinks that to be proved which is our question, that a wise man is always happy.

S. What? though he want the Sense of Eyes, of Ears?


M. Yes, for he slights those very things. Since first that same horrible
blindness, what Pleasures, I pray, does it want? whereas some do even dispute,
that the other Pleasures are lodged in the Senses themselves, but what are
perceived by sight, do not act in any pleasing of the Eyes; as the objects of
Taste, Smell, Feeling, Hearing, act on that very Organ, which is their proper
Sensory. (e) No such thing is done in the Eyes. The Soul receives what we see.
Now we may many and diverse ways have delights of the mind, without making any
use of any Eyesight. I speak as to the Scholar, and ingenuous Artist, whose
Life is Contemplation. For the wise man's Study does not use to call the Eyes
in as assistants in the Prosecution of his search. And if the Night take not
away an happy Life, why should a Day like to Night take it away? For that
saying of Antipater the Cyrenaick, is a little toward merry, but yet may admit
an ingenuous Sense. When the Ladies mourned over his darkness, says he, What
do you mean? Do you think there is no pleasure in the dark? (f) Appius the
ancient, who was many years blind, we understand both by the Offices which he
bore, and his Actions, that he was in that his Circumstance, wanting to the
Duties neither of his public, nor private Capacity. We have also heard that
the House of C. Drusus was filled with Clients, when they that could not see
their own business, took a Blind man for their guide.


(e) No such thing is done in the Eyes.] He favors the opinion, that Vision is
effected, not by reception of Species, but emission of Rays.

(f) Appius the Blind.] Appius Claudius was Censor, an active Magistrate, who
paved the Way to Brundisium, called the Appian way; and brought in an Aquaduct
into the City. When he was blind, he gave his Vote in the Senate, and
overruled the question of not receiving the Prisoners taken by Pyrrhus, nor
making Peace with him.

SECT. XXXIX.
WHEN we were Children, Cn. Aufidius, who had been Praetor, gave his Vote in the
Senate, nor denied his Friends Chamber-Counsel, wrote a Greek History, and was
clear sighted in Learning. Diodotus the Stoic lived many years at our House
blind. Now he, what would be hardly credible, exercised himself in Philosophy,
rather much more diligently than before, played on Musical Instruments, after
the Pythagorean usage, had Books read to him day and night; in which Studies he
needed not Eyes. Above all this, what scarce seems possible without Eyes, he
supported the Office of a Geometry Lecture, directing his Scholars by word of
mouth, from what Point, to what Point they should draw every Line. They report
of (g) Asclepiades a not obscure Ereirian Philosopher, when one asked what
alteration Blindness had brought upon him; that he should answer, To carry one
Servant more about with him; for as even the extremest Poverty would be
tolerable, if one might (h) what some Greeks do every day; so Blindness could
easily be born, if it have sufficient Succors against its Infirmities.
Democritus having lost his Eyes, could not distinguish, I grant, between white
and black; but now, good and evil, just and unjust, honorable and base,
profitable and disprofitable, great and small he could; and without variety of
colors, might live happily; without discerning of Natures could not. Nay this
man thought that the intention of his mind was rather distracted by the sight
of his Eyes; and whereas others oftentimes could not see what block lay in
their ways, he ranged over all infinity, so that no extreme could set bounds to
his further advance. There is a Tradition too, that Homer was Blind. But we see
his Picture more like than Poem. What Country, what Coast, what place of
Grcece, what sort of Subject, what Skirmish, what pitched Field, what Gally,
what motion of Men, what of Beasts, is not so drawn to the Life, as that he
has brought us to see, what himself saw not? What then, do we think, could
either Homer, or any other Scholar, ever want to complete the delight and
pleasure of the Soul? or if the Matter were not so, would Anaxagoras, or this
very Democritus, have left their Lands and Estates, and have given up
themselves, with their whole Soul, to this Divine delight of learning and
enquiring. Therefore the Poets never bring in Tiresias the Sooth-sayer, whom
they feign to be a wise man, bemoaning his Blindness. But now (i) Homer having
framed Polyphemus of an inhumane and savage Character, makes him to hold
discourse with his Ram, and praise its Fortunes that it could go whether it
would, and graze upon what it would. He, indeed, did it well; for the Cyclops
himself was never a whit wiser than his Ram.

(g) Asclepiades, a not obscure Eretrain Philosopher.] This is distinguished
from Asclepiades the Prusian, that eminent Physician.

(h) The extremest Poverty would be tolerable, if one might, what some Greeks
do every day.] This general Reflection is more pregnant than any special
charge; whether it mean servile Flattery, ill Practices, or sordid Employments
for Gain.

(i) Homer having framed Polyphemus.] See his Odysseis, Book 9. by Ogilby or
Hobbs.

SECT. XL. Deafness.
BUT what evil is there in Deafness? M. Crassus was thick of hearing, but
another thing had more trouble in it, (k) that he heard ill; though, as I
thought, wrongfully. (l) Our Epicureans cannot speak Greek; nor the Greek
Epicureans Latin; therefore these are to each other, in regard of their
respective Languages Deaf; and we are all so in those Tongues, that we do not
understand which are innumerable; we are in truth Deaf. But they do not hear
the voice of the Harper; neither do they the screaking of the Saw, when it is
in whetting; nor the grunting of the Swine, when its throat is cutting; nor the
roaring of the Sea, when they desire to take rest. And if, perchance, Music
delights them, first they ought to consider, that many wise men have lived
happy, before Airs were ever composed; then that much greater Pleasure is taken
in reading, than hearing Songs. Then as a little before we turned over the
Blind to the Pleasures of the Ears, so may we the Deaf, to that of the Eyes;
for he that can speak with himself; will not much need the Discourse of
another. Put case that all Evils were heaped on one man, so that he were both
Blind and Deaf; further, oppressed with most sharp Pains of the Body; which
first of themselves use to dispatch the man; but if, perchance, they be drilled
out to any length of time, and yet torment so violently, that we should not see
reason enough to endure them any longer; good Gods! (m) why do we make much
difficulty? for the Harbor is at hand, death upon the spot, an eternal
receptacle into a State of insensibility. (n) Theodorus said to Lysimachus,
threatening him with death, you have, indeed, raised your self to great
advancement, if you can compare in power with a Spanish Fly. Paul, when King
Perses petitioned him not to be led in Triumph, replied, That is in your own
Power. Much has been said of death the first day, when the Debate was expressly
concerning death; and not a little, the second, when the Subject was about
Pain; he that can remember that, is in no great danger of not thinking death
either to be desired, or at least not to be feared.

(k) That he heard ill.] M. Crassus the Triumvir, one of the three Keepers of
the Liberty of Rome, with Pompey and Julius Caesar; he certainly lay under a
flagrant infamy of unsatiable Covetousness, both at home, and with the
Persians. On this account Tully inveighs against him in his last Paradox. He
was also brought into some suspicion in the matter of Catiline, but there
compurg'd by him; and perhaps he does the like here, only in point of
disaffection to the Government, in his time established.

(l) Our Epicureans.] A color or facetious Argument, taken to expose that Sect.

(m) Why do we make much difficulty?] A Stoical case to favor impatience in
Pain.

(n) Theodorus.] Called Atheist, was sent Ambassador by Ptolomy to Lysimachus
King of Thrace, where speaking resolutely, he was threat'ned by him, who was of
a choleric Temper; when he bid him come no more into his presence; he replied,
he would not, unless Ptolomy sent him again. Some of the Fathers count him
falsely traduced of Atheism, because he disallowed the worship of the Greeks;
and being a Cyrenian, and known to Ptolomy, he might have acquaintance with the
Alexandrian Jews.

SECT. XLI. That it is an opinion, almost universally, held by the
Philosophers, that wise men are always happy.
THAT order seems, in my judgment, fit to be observed in Life, which is
enjoined in the treats of the Greeks, either drink or be gone. And reason good,
for either let a man enjoy the pleasure of taking his Cup with others, or let
him timely withdraw, lest, he being sober, be fallen upon by the rest in a
drunken Fit. So should a man avoid, by retiring, what injuries of Fortune he
cannot sustain. These same directions of Epicurus, repeats Hierom word for
word. Now if those Philosophers, who are of the opinion, that virtue of it self
is of no consideration; all that we call honest and praiseworthy, they say to
be mere Jargon, and a pure Rant; yet if these judge the wise man to be always
happy; what, I pray, do you think should the Philosophers descended from
Socrates and Plato do? some of which, say there is so great excellency in the
goods of the mind, that those of the Body and external ones, are eclipsed by
them; others do not so much as count them goods; place all their advantages in
their mind. Which Controversy of theirs, Carneades was wont to moderate, as an
Umpire to which both Parties referred their Cause to be compromis'd. For whereas
what things the Peripateticks think goods, the Stoics count the same
Conveniences, and yet the Peripateticks do not attribute more to Riches,
Health, and other things of like Nature; then the Stoics, since they were to
be weighed by reality, not words, he denied there was any just cause of
Dissension. Wherefore let the Philosophers of other Persuasions, look to it,
how they can gain this Point. Yet I am pleased that they make a profession
beseeming Philosophers, about wise men's title to living in perpetual happiness.
But since we must be going to morrow, let us comprise in memory these five days
Debates. And to say the truth, I think I shall draw them up in writing (for
upon what can we better employ (o) this leisure, such as it is?) and we will
send these other five Books to our Friend Brutus, by whom we have not only been
invited to the making Philosophical Treatises, (p) but also provoked. Wherein
how much we shall profit others, we cannot easily tell; but for our own most
bitter griefs, and various disquiets, charging us on every side, no other
relief could be found.

(o) This leisure, such as it is.] Spoken with some Stomach for his being at
that time in Prudence, obliged to compound for his safety by retirement from
his honorable Emploiments.

(p) But also provoked.] By example; and the address of his Book upon alike
Subject.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS Of the First BOOK. Comforts against Death. The Prologue, Sect. 1,
2, 3, 4.
SECT. I. THAT the Greeks were inferior to the Romans, in most Points of useful
knowledge. Page 1. SECT. II. However Superior in Poetry, Pictures, Music and
Geometry. P. 3. SECT. III. Equaled by them in Oratory; which is encouragement
to set upon Philosophy. P. 5. SECT. IV. Philosophy joined with Oratory, is more
beneficial. P. 6. SECT. V. The Position that the Proponent takes Death to be
Evil. P. 8. SECT. VI. The local Hell of the Poets to be fictitious. P. 10.
SECT. VII. They who are not, are not miserable. P. 12. SECT. VIII. Nor is dying
miserable, but essayed to be proved rather good. P. 14. SECT. IX. What Death
is. What the Soul, in vulgar opinion. P. 16. SECT. X. What it is in the
judgment of diverse Philosophers. P. 17. SECT. XI. Inferences from these
different Opinions. P. 19. SECT. XII. Arguments for the Souls subsistence after
death, from immemorial Tradition, from Funeral Rites, and from the veneration
of ancient Heroes. P. 21. SECT. XIII. From this, that there is a Tradition of
the Superior Gods, having been Men deceased. P. 23. SECT. XIV. From an innate
care of Posterity; Zeal for the State. P. 25. SECT. XV -- And thirst after
Glory. P. 26. SECT. XVI. That dead men's Souls abide in Caverns under Earth, is
the groundless Fiction of Poets, or imposture of Magicians. P. 28. SECT. XVII.
That it is more likely they ascend. P. 30. SECT. XVIII. Nor vanish. P. 32.
SECT. XIX. But mount the Sky. P. 33. SECT. XX. And thence contemplate Nature.
P. 35. SECT. XXI. That the Epicureans who plead for Annihilation, have no such
reason to triumph in their Scheme of Natural knowledge improved. P. 37. SECT.
XXII. An immaterial Substance, though invisible, may subsist of it self, as God
so the Soul. P. 38. SECT. XXIII. Arguments for the immortality of the Soul,
from its being the principle of its own Motion. P. 40. SECT. XXIV. From the
capaciousness of its memory. P. 41. SECT. XXV. Corollaries upon the former
Arguments, from that of Invention. P. 44. SECT. XXVI. From further Endowments.
P. 46. SECT. XXVII. From its Divine Original. P. 48. SECT. XXVIII. From its
Faculties. P. 49. SECT. XXIX. From its Nature. P. 51. SECT. XXX. From the
Authority of Socrates and Cato. P. 52. SECT. XXXI. From the Sequestring it self
from the Body, in Meditation, as in Death. P. 54. SECT. XXXII. The Adversaries
of the Souls immortality confuted. P. 56. SECT. XXXIII. The Arguments of
Panaetius answered. P. 58. SECT. XXXIV. Upon Supposition of the Souls
mortality, Death is not evil, being a departure from Evils. P. 59. SECT. XXXV.
Or from uncertain Goods. P. 61. SECT. XXXVI. Such as we shall not miss. P. 63.
SECT. XXXVII. Since it has not appeared dreadful even to common Soldiers. P.
65. SECT. XXXVIII. Much less should it hinder promoting the public Good; but
as Death is not terrible, so neither is it amiable. P. 67. SECT. XXXIX. The
opinion of untimely Death examined. P. 68. SECT. XL. We must live in our places
undaunted, and when our time is come, dye contented after the example of
Theramenes. P. 70. SECT. XLI. Socrates. P. 72. SECT. XLII. The Spartans. P. 73.
SECT. XLIII. And Theodorus the Cyrenian. A digression to the Point of Burial.
P. 75. SECT. XLIV. Cruelty toward dead Enemies, and lamenting unburied Friends
reproved. P. 77. SECT. XLV. The Customs of some Savages herein condemned; what
decency to be observed in interment of the dead. P. 80. SECT. XLVI. Glory after
death, should abate the fear of dying in prosperity. P. 82. SECT. XLVII. An
Epilogue after the mode of the Greek Rhetoricians, who would persuade us that
Death is the greatest good that can befall man, and that from Divine
Testimonies. P. 84. SECT. XLVIII. From those of Demigods, Oracles, and
Panegyrical Commemorations of such as have died for their Country. P. 87. SECT.
XLIX. The Close of all, applys the substance of the present Debate, to the
Readers benefit. P. 89.
THE CONTENTS Of the Second BOOK. Patience under Pain. The Proem, Sect, 1, 2,
3, 4.
SECT. I. THE benefit of Philosophy. P. 92. SECT. II. That the Academick Scheme
is cautious and modest. P. 95. SECT. III. The Epicurean only regarded by its
own Followers. P. 97. SECT. IV. The bad lives of some Teachers only scandal to
their Persons, not Doctrines. P. 99. SEOT. V. The Position makes Pain the
greatest of all Evils. P. 101. SECT. VI. The different Maxims of Philosophers
on that Subject. P. 103. SECT. VII. Epicurus contradicts himself herein. The
Tragical Impatiences of Philoctetes. P. 104. SECT. VIII. IX. Hercules. P. 106.
108. SECT. X. Prometheus. P. 109. SECT. XI. Digression against the Poets. P.
111. SECT. XII. And some Heterodox Philosophers. P. 114. SECT. XIII. Pain must
not betray us to indecent carriage. P. 115. SECT. XIV. Must be opposed with
Courage. P. 117. SECT. XV. Inuring to labor, disposes to a patient enduring
of Pain. P. 120. SECT. XVI. XVII. The Power of Exercise. P. 121. 123. SECT.
XVIII. The force of Reason. P. 126. SECT. XIX. The direction of Epicurus
impracticable. P. 127. SECT. XX. Virtue personated making her Exhortation. p.
129. SECT. XXI. The manner of subduing our Passion to Reason. p. 130. SECT.
XXII. Armor against Impatience. p. 133. SECT. XXIII. Faintness of Spirit
dishonorable. p. 136. SECT. XXIV. Resolution necessary to War. p. 137. SECT.
XXV. -- in Trials at home. p. 140. SECT. XXVI. -- and in all laudable
Enterprises. p. 142. SECT. XXVII. Our Patience must be of equal Temper, as to
the Field in Battle, or the Bed of Sickness. p. 144.
THE CONTENTS Of the Third BOOK. The Cure of Discontent. Premised in Sect. 1,
2, 3.
SECT. I. THE Reluctance of depraved Man against his Souls Cure; with some
Causes of his Depravity. p. 148. SECT. II. Further Causes of the Depravation of
Humane Nature. p. 150. SECT. III. That the Soul may have Remedies for its
Distempers. p. 151. SECT. IV. The Position offers it as a probable opinion,
that a Wise man is liable to Discontent. p. 153. SECT. V. That men imported by
Passions are Mad. p. 154. SECT. VI. The absurdity of denying a Wise man all use
of the Affections, is declined. p. 157. SECT. VII. The Position impugn'd by an
Argument from the Topic of Fortitude. p. 158. SECT. VIII. By another from that
of Temperance. p. 160. SECT. IX. By an Induction from particular Passions, as
of Wrath, Envy. p. 161. SECT. X. And Pity. p. 163. SECT. XI. The Cause of
Dissatisfaction is a mistake in Judgment. p. 165. SECT. XII. The Picture of
Discontent in certain unfortunate Princes. p. 167. SECT. XIII. We should not
despair whatever our Circumstances be. p. 169. SECT. XIV. Meditation on
possible Mishaps abates their Evil when come. p. 170. SECT. XV. Is also ground
of Constancy. p. 172. SECT. XVI. The contrary Tenet of Epicurus and his
Followers. p. 174. SECT. XVII. The true Remedy assigned. p. 175. SECT. XVIII.
And verified in the Case of Thyestes, Aeetes, Telamon. p. 177. SECT. XIX. And
Andromache. p. 180. SECT. XX. Epicurus proved inconstant to his own Principles.
p. 182. SECT. XXI. The stoutness of the Epicureans taken down. p. 184. SECT.
XXII. The judgment of the Cyrenian Sect, how far allowable. p. 185. SECT.
XXIII. Forecast of possible Calamities is needful. p. 187. SECT. XXIV. The use
of Presidents. p. 189. SECT. XXV. The Cavil, that the common condition of
Mortality, is ineffectual in point of Comfort, examined. p. 191. SECT. XXVI.
Trouble of mind to be a Duty, is a mistake. p. 192. SECT. XXVII. Farther
illustrated. p. 194. SECT. XXVIII. That mistake rectified by Consideration,
that our Sorrow avails nothing. p. 196. SECT. XXIX. That the matter of our
disquiet is by misapprehension, aggravated beyond its own Nature. p. 199. SECT.
XXX. That Motives of Consolation too often prove ineffectual, proceeds not from
defect in them, but our own Indisposition. p. 201. SECT. XXXI. Directory for
Comforters, as to the Season. p. 203. SECT. XXXII. -- the Method. p. 204. SECT.
XXXIII. That it is a Duty not to be swallowed up of Grief. p. 205. SECT. XXXIV.
A Passage cleared to the Remedies of Disquiet arising from the particular
Passions. p. 207.
THE CONTENTS Of the Fourth BOOK. The Government of the Passions. The Preface,
Sect. 1, 2, 3.
SECT. I. THE ancient Romans, probably not Strangers to polite Learning,
because Borderers upon Greece the Great. p. 209. SECT. II. Because acquainted
with Music, Poetry, and Oratory. p. 211. SECT. III. But Philosophy was of
later date with the Romans. p. 212. SECT. IV. The Position. That it is probable
th^^ a wise man is not free from all Passion. p. 214. SECT. V. The method of
the ensuing Disputation. p. 216. SECT. VI. The Definition of the Passions in
general. p. 217. SECT. VII. The Intellect to be accessory to the Passions. p.
219. SECT. VIII. The subordinate Passions defined; those under Discontent and
Fear. p. 220. SECT. IX. Those under Pleasure and Lust. p. 222. SECT. X. The
Original of the Souls Distempers. p. 223. SECT. XI. The Cause of Passion and
Antipathy. p. 224. SECT. XII. The Analogy between the Souls and Bodies Sickness
in ill habits. p. 226. SECT. XIII. The Similitude between Soundness and
Unsoundness of Body and Soul. p. 227. SECT. XIV. Their Dissimilitude. p. 229.
SECT. XV. The Cure of the Souls Infirmities. p. 230. SECT. XVI. -- Especially
to be in Moderation. p. 231. SECT. XVII. This Moderation to be peculiar to the
wise man. p. 233. SECT. XVIII. That the object of this Moderation, must not be
Vice. p. 235. SECT. XIX. The Peripateticks opinion about moderating the
Passions -- of Anger and Lust. p. 236. SECT. XX -- And Discontent. p. 238.
SECT. XXI. Against this moderation is opposed the Stoics definition of the
Passions. p. 239. SECT. XXII. That magnanimity is not the product of Anger. p.
240. SECT. XXIII. -- but Reason. p. 242. SECT. XXIV. This use of Anger
confuted. p. 243. SECT. XXV. The Indignation of Orators, Displeasure of
Parents, and other Governors, regular. p. 245. SECT. XXVI. The pretended
benefit of the other Passions disproved. p. 246. SECT. XXVII. Whence the
Remedies of other Prailties are to be drawn. p. 248. SECT. XXVIII. The most
certain method of Cure, is to convince that all Passions are of themselves
culpable. p. 249. SECT. XXIX. Laying open the Changes common to our condition,
allays excessive Grief. p. 251. SECT. XXX. The like Remedy of Fear. p. 252.
SECT. XXXI. The difference between Mirth and Joy. p. 253. SECT. XXXII. The
scandalousness of Mirth and Lust. p. 255. SECT. XXXIII. Inordinate Love taxed
in Poets. p. 256. SECT. XXXIV. But more in Philosophers. p. 257. SECT. XXXV.
The Remedy of Love. p. 259. SECT. XXXVI -- Of Anger. p. 260. SECT. XXXVII. The
Cause of Passions, an opinion that they are our Duty. p. 262. SECT. XXXVIII.
The Cure of them in rectifying that mistake. p. 264.
THE CONTENTS Of the Fifth BOOK. The chief End of Man. The Preamble Sect. 1, 2,
3, 4.
SECT. I. THE efficacy of Virtue is not to be valued by our faint-heartedness.
p. 266. SECT. II. Philosophy is the Rule of Life. p. 268. SECT. III. The Study
of Wisdom is of the same standing with man. p. 270. SECT. IV. Pythagoras was
Founder of the Italian Sect. p. 272. SECT. V. The Position holds, that in the
Proponents judgment, Virtue alone is not sufficient to Happiness. p. 273. SECT.
VI. Peace of mind arises from Virtue alone. p. 276. SECT. VII. In Moral
Subjects we must dilate on the Proofs. p. 278. SECT. VIII. Whether Virtue alone
be sufficient to render one happy, but not most happy. p. 280. SECT. IX. Of the
three sorts of Goods. p. 282. SECT. X. The Peripateticks accused of
inconsistency, but Epicurus much more. p. 284. SECT. XI. That the Stoics cavil
about words. p. 287. SECT. XII. That nothing should be called good but Virtue,
is vindicated to have been the Tenet of Socrates. p. 289. SECT. XIII. That
Nature has produced all things perfect in themselves. p. 290. SECT. XIV. The
Perfection of man is properly in his mind. p. 292. SECT. XV. That only what is
Honest is Good. p. 294. SECT. XVI. Such as is the disposition of mind, such is
the Life. p. 296. SECT. XVII. Only what may be gloried in is good. p. 298.
SECT. XVIII. The same was also maintained by the more resolute Peripateticks.
p. 299. SECT. XIX. The Dissimilitude between Virtue and Vice, exemplified in
the Troubles in Cicero's Touth. p. 300. SECT. XX. The ugliness of Usurpation
represented in Dionysius the Elder; by his Fears. p. 303. SECT. XXI.
Demonstrated to his Court-flatterer. p. 305. SECT. XXII. And by the consequent
of those Fears, his want of Friends. p. 306. SECT. XXIII. The praise of a
virtuous Life, in Archimedes and the Philosophers. p. 308. SECT. XXIV. The
Exercise of a Wise man is Contemplation of Nature. p. 310. SECT. XXV. Good
Manners, right Reasoning, discharge of his place, just Government. p. 311.
SECT. XXVI. The wise man is happy, though in Adversity. p. 313. SECT. XXVII.
Objection from Pain against the self-sufficiency of Virtue answered. p. 315.
SECT. XXVIII. The wise man is happy, though he be on the Rack. p. 319. SECT.
XXIX. Whether the Peripateticks may consistently with themselves hold what the
Stoics do. p. 320. SECT. XXX. The different Opinions about the chief Good. p.
321. SECT. XXXI. The denomination of the whole is from the greater part. p.
323. SECT. XXXII. and in 33, 34, 35. A Plea for Poverty. p. 324. SECT. XXXIII.
That Pleasures may be purchased at an easy rate. p. 326. SECT. XXXIV. Examples
of a light Diet in the Lacedaemonians and Persians. p. 328. SECT. XXXV -- And in
the Academy. p. 329. SECT. XXXVI. A Defense of obscurity in Birth and
Condition. p. 331. SECT. XXXVII. Supports under Banishment. p. 333. SECT.
XXXVIII and XXXIX. Blindness. p. 336, 338. SECT. XL. Deafness. p. 340. SECT.
XLI. That it is an opinion, almost universally, held by the Philosophers, that
wise men are always happy. p. 342.
The End of the Contents.

