THE CHURCHES VICTORY.
IN A Message from Heaven, to the Saints on Earth, by a ^at Pious and Learned
Divine, immediately before his Death. To encourage all those who are now in
Arms for the defense of CHRIST and his GOSPEL.
THis is the day of Jacobs trouble, and Sions sorrow, and you do well that see
it, and take it, to heart, for he is a de^d member takes not notice of the ill,
these sad times may produce, therefore first take heed your selves be not a
part of the misery of the times, that they be not the worse for you. And then
make this the day of Jacobs trust also, for God is never nearer to his Church,
then when the greatest troubles are near to them: when in Earth men are
concluding an utter overthrow (as now) God in Heaven is concluding a glorious
deliverance: Christ now stands upon Mount Sion, and there is a Council in
Heaven will dash in pieces all the Counsels on Earth, and which is more, God
will work the raising of his Church, by that very means by which the enemies
seek to ruin it: God gave to great a price for the Church to suffer it long
to remain in the hands of cruel men.

And for the flourish the enemies now make, it is but for a measured time,
their day is coming, and their Arms and Armies shall both be broken, and
shall not only vex, but torment themselves, to see their Projects
disappointed, and the mould of all their devises turned upon their own heads.

The depths of misery, are never below the depths of mercy, God often for this
very end, strips the Church of all helps below, that it may rely only upon
him for help from above; And that it may appear the Church is governed by an
higher power, then that whereby it is opposed. And then is the time when the
Church may expect her greatest deliverance, when there is a great faith in the
great God; then the captivity of the Church shall return as Rivers in the
South, and she shall become a cup of trembling in the hands of her enemies, for
the prayers of the Church cry, the blood of the Saints cry, and the violence of
the Enemy themselves cry, for deliverance and vengeance. And then an Army of
prayers will suddenly turn the stream; a few Moseses in the Mount will do
more then many soldiers in the valley.

It is your selves keep Antichrist and his faction alive to plague the
unthankefull World, his strength is not from his own cause, but from your want
of zeal and confidence in God: You hinder your Halalujahs by private Brabbles,
selfe-seekings; coldness, and formallitie: If God had once his ends, in the
humiliation of the Church for sins past, with Resolution of Reformation for
time to come, this present age might expect to see the salvation of GOD, which
the generations at hand shall be witness of.

It will therefore prove the wisest resolution to fall and rise with the Church
of Christ, for the enemies themselves shall see and say, God has done great
things for them; Kings shall lay their Crowns at Christ's feet, and bring all
their glory to his Church.

I will have mercy upon the House of Judah, I will save them by the Lord their
God; and will not save them by Bow, nor by sword, nor by Battle, by Horses or
by horsemen, Hosea 1. 7. When the Enemy shall come in like a flood, the spirit
of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him, Esa 59. 19.
Imprinted at London for Mi. F.


