THE City-VVifes PETITION, AGAINST COFFEE Presented to the Public
Consideration, the Grand Inconveniences that accrue to their SEX, from the
Excessive Drinking of that Drying, and Enfeebling LIQVOR.
To the Right Honorable, the Worshipful Court of Female. Assistants, The
humble Petition and Address of several Thousands of Buxome Good Women,
Languishing in Extremity of want.
Shows.
THat since it is Reckoned amongst the Glories of Our Native Country; To be a
Paradise for Women: The same in our Apprehensions can consist in nothing more
than the brick actvity of our Men, who in former Ages were justly esteemed the
Ablest performers in Christendom; But to our unspeakable Grief, we find of late
a very sensible decay of that true Old English Valor; Our Gallants, being
every way so Frenchified, that they are become mere Cuck sparrows flattering
things that come on Sa sa, with a world of Fury, but are not able to stand to
it, and in the very first Charge fall down flat before us. Never did Men wear
greater Breeches, or carry less in them of any Mettle whatsoever. There was a
glorious Dispensation ('it was lutely in the Golden Age) when Lusty Lads of seven
or eight hundred years old, Got Sons and Daughters; and we have read, how a
Prince of Spain was forced to make a Law that Men should not Repeat the Grand
Kindness to their wives, above Nine times in a night: But alas! alas! those
forward Days are gone, the dull Lubbards want a Spur now, rather than a Bridle
being so far from doing any works of Supererrogation, that we find them not
capable of performing those Devoirs which their Duty and our Expectations Exact.

The Occasion of Insufferable Disaster, alter a serious Enquiry, and Discussion
of the point by the Learned of the Faculty, we can attribute to nothing more
than the Excessive use of that newfangled, abominable, heathenish Liquor called
Coffee, which R^ffl^ng Nature of her choicest Treasurs, and drying up the
Radical Moisture, has so Eunucht our Husbands, and Crippled our more kind
Gallants, that they are become as Impotent, as Age, and as unfruitful as those
Deserts, whence that unhappy Berr, is said to be brought.

For the continual sipping of this pitiful Drink, is enough to bewitch Men of
two and twenty, and tie up the Codpice point without a G^a^m. It renders them
that use it as Lean as Famine, as Riwe^d as Envy, or an old meager Hagg
overridden by an Incubus. They come from it with nothing moist but their snotty
Noses, nothing stiff but their Joints, nor standing but their Ears: They
pretend 'twill keep them walking, but we find by scurvy Experience, they sleep
quietly enough after it. A Betrothed Queen might trust her self a Bed with one
of them: nor can all the Art we use revive them from this Lethargy, so unfit
they are for Action, that like young Train-band-men when called upon duty,
their Ammunition is wanting: peradventure they present, but cannot give fire, or
at least but flash in the Pan, instead of doing Execution.

Now let any Doting Superstitious Cato's shake their Goatish Beards, and tax
us of Immodesty for this Declaration, since it is a public Grievance, and cries
aloud for Reformation weight and Measure, it is well known, should be throughout
the World, and there is no torment like Famishment. Experience witnesses our
Damage, and Necessity (which easily sapercedes all the Laws of Decency)
justifie^ our complaints: For can any Woman of sense or spirit endure with
Patience, that when privileged by Legal Ceremonies, she approaches the Nuptial
Bed, expecting a Man that with sprightful Embraces, should Answer the Vigor of
her Flames, she on the contrary should only meet A Bed full of bones, and hug
me a^ger useless Crops rendered as sapless as a Kix, and dryer than a
Pumice-Stone, by the perpetual Fumes of Tobacco, and bewitching Effects of this
most pernicious Coffee, whereby Nature is Enfeebled, the Offspring of our
Mighty Ancestors Dwindled into a Succession of A^es and Pignies: And.

-- The Age of Man.
Now Cramp't into an Inch, that was a Span.
Now is this (though more than enough) all the ground of our complaint: For
besides, we have reason to apprehend and grow Jealows, That Men by frequenting
these Stygian Tap: houses will usurp on our Prerogative of Tatling, and soon
learn to excel us in Talkativeness: a Quality wherein our Sex has ever claimed
pre-eminence: For here like so many Frogs in a puddle, they sup up muddy Water,
and murmur insignificant Notes till half a Dozen of them out babble an equal
number of us at Gossipping, talking all at once in confusion, and running from
point to point as insensibly, and as swiftly, as ever the Ingenious Pole wheel
could run divisions on the Base-Viol; Yet in all their Prattle, every one
abounds in his own Sense, as stiffly as G. K. did at the late Dispute at Turners
Hall, and submits to the Reasons of no other Mortal: So that there being
neither Moderator nor Rules observed, you may as soon fill a Quart Pot with
Syllogisms, as profit by their Discourses.

Certainly our Country-mens Pallats are become as Fanatical as their Brains;
How else is it possible, they should Apostatize from the good old Primitive way
of Ale drinking, to run a Whoring after such Variety of Destructive Foreign
Liquors, to triffle away their Time: Scald their Chaps, and spend their Money
all for a little Base, Black, Thick, Nasty, Bitter, Stinking, Nauseous
Puddle-Water: Yet (as all Witches have their Charms) So this ugly Turkish
Enchantress by certain Invisible Wyres attracks both Rich and Poor; So that
those that have scarce Twopence to buy their Childrens Bread, must spend a
Penny each Evening in this Insipid Stuff. Nor can we send one of our Husbands
to call a Midwife, or to borrow a Glister-Pipe, but he must stay an Hour by the
way, Drinking his two Dishes; and two Pipes.

At these Houses, (as at the Springs in Africa) meet all Sorts of Animals,
whence follows the Production of a Thousand Monster Opinions and Absurdities;
Yet for being dangerous to the Government, we dare be their Compurgators, as
well knowing them to be too Tame and too Talkative to make any Desperate
Politicians: For though they may now and than Destroy a Fleet, or kill ten
Thousand of the Turks, more than all the Confeder^^^^ can do, Yet this is still
in their politic Capacities, for by their personal ^lour they are scarce fit
to be of the Life Guard to a Cherry Tree: And therefore, though they frequently
have not Contests about most Important Subjects; Whether the Great Turk be a
Lutheran or Calvinist, Who Cain's Father in Law was, etc Yet they never fight
about them with any other, save our Weapon, the Tongue.

Some of our Sots pretend tippling of this boiled Soot cures them of being
Drunk; but we have reason rather to Conclude it makes them so, because we find
them not able to stand after it: It Is at best but a kind of Earthing a Fox to
Hunt him more eagerly afterward: A rare Method of Good Husbandry; to enable a
Man to be Drunk three times a Day? Just such a Remedy for Drunkenness, as the
Popes allowing of Stews, is a means to prevent Fornication: The Coffee-House
being in Truth, only a Pimp to the Tavern, a Relishing Soop Preparative to a
fresh Debauch: For when People have swill'd themselves with a Morning draught
of more Ale than a Brewars Horse can carry, hither they come for a Penny Worth
of Settles brain, where they are sure to meet enew Lazy Pragmatical Companions;
that resort here to prattle of News, that they neither understand, nor are
concerned in: And after an Hours impertinent Chat, begin to consider a Bottle
of Claret would do Excellent well before Dinner, Whereupon to the Bush they all
March together, till every one of them is as Drunk as a Drum, and then back
again to the Coffee-House to drink themselves Sober; Where three or four Dishes
a piece, and smoking, makes their Throats as dry as Mount AEtna enflamed with
Brimstone: So that they must away to the next Red Lattice, to quench them with
a dozen or two of Ale, which at last growing Nauseous, one of them begins to
extol the Blood of the Grape, what rate Lampoon, and Racy Canary may be had at
the Mytre: Says thou so? cry's another, Let Us then go and replenish therewith
our Earthen Vessels: So once more they troop to the Sack-shop, till they are
Drunker than before; And then by a Retrograde Motion, stagger back to Soberize
themselves with Coffee. Thus like Tinnis Balls between too Rackets, The Fopps
our Husbands are Bandred too and fro all Day between the Coffee-House and
Tavern, whilst we poor Souls sit Weeping all alone till Twelve at Night, and
when at last they come to Bed, smoakt like a West-Phalia Hogs head, we have no
more comfort of them than from a Shotten Herring or a dried Bulrush; Which
forces us to make up this Lamentation, and Sing.

Tom Farthing, Tom Farthing, where have thou been, Tom Farthing?
Twelve a Cloak e're you come in, Two a Cloak e're you begin,
And then at last can do nothing: Would make a Woman weary, would make a
Woman weary, etc.
WHEREFORE, the Premises considered, and to the end that our Just Rights may
be restored, and all the Ancient Privileges of our Sex preserved Inviolable;
That our Husbands may give us some other Testimonies of their being Men,
besides their Beards, and wearing of Empty Pantaloons: That they no more run
the hazard of being Cuckol'd by Dildo's: But returning to the good old
strengthening Liquors of our Forefathers; That Natures Exchequer may once again
be Replenisht, and a Race of Lusty Hero's beget, able by their Archievements,
to equal the Glory's of our Ancestors.

WE Humbly Pray, That our Trusty Patrons would improve your Interest, That
henceforth the Drinking COFFEE, may in severe Penalties be forbidden to all
Persons under the Age of Threescore; And that instead thereof, Lusty napper
Beer; Cock Ale, Cordial Canary's, Restoring Malago's, and Back recruiting
Chochalet, be Recommended to General Use, throughout the Vtopian Territories.

In Hopes of which Glorious Reformation, Your Petitioners shall readily
Prostrate themselves, and ever Pray, etc.

LONDON, Printed for A: VV: 1700.


