THREE ACTS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, FOR PROMOVING the KNOWLEDGE OF THE
GROUNDS OF SALVATION, AND OBSERVING the RULES OF DISCIPLINE.

Printed Anno, 1652.

Overture for Ordering of Lecturing and Catechizing, to be observed while the
next General Assembly.
Edinburgh 2. August, 1652. Antemeridiem. Sess. XVII.
THe General Assembly, after consideration of the great controversy the Lord
has against the Land, for the manifold transgressions of his known Commands,
and continued despising of Grace and Reconciliation offered through Jesus
Christ, whereby transgressions might have been, and yet may be pardoned, and
amended; And after acknowledgment of the just Quarrel he has against us all
his Ministers, for the sins of our Persons and Calling, for which he has so
shaken the Judicatories and Assemblies of this Kirk amongst us, and does
threaten to cast down altogether the hedge of Discipline, and to thrust all his
Ministers for a time from their places; Do seriously exhort and charge all and
every one entrusted with the holy Ministry, to stir up themselves to seek the
LORD more carefully, and settle their own peace with him, and to make full
proof of their Ministry, so long as the day of his patience continues: And in
particular, to be more diligent in the means of acquainting the people with
the Scripture, and grounds of Religion held forth in the Catechism, And to this
end does Recommend,

1. That every Minister do so dispose of the time appointed for the reading of
Scripture, as both the Order of the Directory, and Act of Uniformity in the
point of Lecture, may be observed; That two Chapters being read, one of the Old
Testament, and the other of the New, after reading of the first, some few
Observations of the chief Doctrines being held forth, and propounded briefly
and plainly to the people, time may be left to read the second Chapter, and to
give some brief Observations on it also, as the time allowed will suffer.

2. For promoving the work of Catechizing, the Assembly, besides that they
renew the Act for Catechizing weekly, 1. Recommends that also every LORDS Day,
when the people do most frequently conveen, some competent portion of the
Catechism be explained before the whole Congregation (without prejudice of the
Preaching) And Recommendeth that in this public Catechetick instruction, the
points that are handled, be propounded by question, to be answered by some
called up for that purpose. 2. And because many being bashful to speak in
public audience, do either altogether absent themselves, or if they must
compear, are so distempered with fear, that the edification is marred; The
Assembly Recommendeth this Overture, that the Minister, in the public
Catechetick Instruction, call up some that are more able in knowledge, and
prepared before, to answer the points that are to be interrogat and explained,
that all the Congregation may the more freely drink in knowledge, and more
frequently attend such exercises; and that others, that are not so fit to speak
in public, be tried in their knowledge, at the more private dyets of
examination, or in their families. 3. That Ministers, beside public teaching
and instructing, be careful, and make conscience to teach and instruct from
house to house, and frequently visit the families within their charge, on
purpose for this very work; And try what pains Parents and Heads of Families
take to instruct such as are under them, according to their station: and, if
they find them negligent herein, to admonish them: and if, after oftener
admoninition, they continue in that sinful negligence, to bring them to more
public admonition before the Session. 4. That the Ministers and Sessions of
every Congregation see, that such as have Schools in their bounds, exercise the
young ones under their charge in getting the Catechism by heart, which will
much serve to further the public Catechetick Doctrine. 5. And that the
Minister, with some of the Session appointed for that effect, do every quarter
of a year, or so often as they can conveniently, visit the Schools in their
bounds, to try what diligence is used in this: And if these that teach Schools
shall be found negligent herein, and after admonition shall continue (...) that
(...) b^ taken to get them removed, and others put in their place.


The Assembly Recommends to Presbyteries to be seriously thinking upon further
Overtures, which may b^ conduceable for making Catechizing further useful, and
may ser^^ for promoving the knowledge of GOD in the land, and to bring their
thoughts to the next General Assembly.

Act concerning admitting Expectants to their trials, and Ruling Elders to act
in Presbyteries and Synods.
Edinburgh 3. August, 1652. Antemeridiem. Sess. XIX.
THe General Assembly having, out of their earnest desire of the Peace and
Unity of this Kirk, condescended upon an Overture of Peace, and not only
propounded it to some Brethren who were here, opposite to the publict
Judicatories of this Kirk; But also in pursuance of that end, Ordained the said
Overture, to be presented and offered by the several Presbyteries or Synods,
to all in their respective bounds, who hes Protested against, and Declined, or
consented or adhered unto the Protestations and Declinatours made against this
and the preceding General Assembly, and the conditions therein contained, to
be required of them; And considering the great prejudice like to arise to this
Kirk, by increasing of our unhappie differences and distractions, if young men
shall be admitted into the Ministry, which shall still blow the fire of
contention, and continue in avowed opposition to, and contempt of the public
Judicatories, Therefore Ordaines Presbyteries to take special care, that upon
the calling of any Expectant to a particular charge of the Ministry, before
they admit him to his trialls, they require him under his hand, to pass from
the Protestations and Declinatours against this and the preceding General
Assembly, if he has been accessory to the same, and to promise and give
assurance that he shall abstain from holding up debates and controversies,
about matters of differences in this Kirk, since the Assembly 1650, in
Preaching, Writing, or other ways. Upon the performance whereof, the
Presbytery shall proceed to his trialls, if not, in that case, the Presbytery
shall forbear to proceed until the next General Assembly, leaving liberty to
the Presbytery and Congregation for planting of the place otherwise. And the
Assembly Ordaines and requires that Presbyteries be not sudden to lay by such
young men as at first refuses or scruples to perform these conditions
mentioned, but that pains be taken upon them to convince them of the
reasonableness thereof, and to persuade them to embrace them, and to give them
a competent time for that effect.

Likeas the Assembly considering the prejudice of Elders coming to
Presbyteries for strengthening a faction in opposition to the public
Judicatories, Ordains, that Presbyteries shall require the same things
forementioned of every Ruling Elder that comes to sit and act in Presbyteries,
and in case of his refusal, shall not admit him to act as an Elder in the
Presbytery, but require the Kirk Session from which he is sent, to make choice
of, and send another, who for the Peace of this Church, shall agree to perform
the conditions required.

Act for putting in execution former Acts and constitutions of General
Assemblies, anent trying. admitting, removing, and deposing of Church Officers,
censuring of scandalous persons, receiving of penitents, and debarring of
persons from the LORDS Table.
Edinburgh 3. August, 1652. Postmeridiem. Sess. XX.
THe General Assembly, considering the obligations that lies upon all
Ecclesiastic Judicatories, and Ministers within this Land, by the commandment
of GOD, and our Covenants, and Engagements taken upon us, before GOD and the
World (whereunto they resolve, in the power of the LORDS might, constantly to
adhere) and to show themselves faithful, and zealous in all their
administrations, for the LORD, and for advancing the Work of Reformation, and
particularly, considering that the condition of this time does require in
special ways, that in trying, admitting, removing, and deposing of Church
Officers, censuring of scandalous persons, dispensing of Ordinances, receiving
of penitents, the rules of the Word of GOD, and constitutions of this Kirk be
diligently put in execution and acuratly observed.

Therefore,

The Assembly Ordains, that Presbyteries and Synods, in admitting of Persons to
the Ministry, be acurate in their trialls, according to the order prescribed in
this Church, that none be admitted to the holy and high function, but such as
are qualified according as is required in the Word of GOD, and constitutions of
this Kirk, both for knowledge in the mystery of godliness, and abilities to
teach and convince the gainsayers, as also in conversation and godliness,
that they lay hands suddenly on no man, nor be partaker of other men's sin, and
for this end that every Presbytery be careful to have gathered together such
Acts of Assemblies as concerns the trial of Ministers, and have them before
them, whenever any person is called to any place of the Ministry, and is
upon his trialls.

2. Ordaines that Presbyteries and Synods, in their respective bounds, make
conscience, that such Ministers as are found either ignorant and not apt to
feed the people of GOD with knowledge and understanding, or erroneous in their
judgment in matters of Religion, or are scandalous in their life and
conversation, and are not examples unto their flocks in godly and holy walking,
or disaffected to the work of Reformation, be censured according to the degree
of their offense and Acts of Assemblies. And for this end, that they be
frequent and acurate in visitation of Kirks, and therein make conscienscious
use of the rules prescribed for visitations, and of such Acts of former
Assemblies, as holds forth the duties of Ministers, and the grounds and causes
of censure.

3. Ordains that, where Ministers lawfully deposed, are unlawfully admitted and
not according to the Order prescribed in the Acts of General Assemblies, or
intrudes themselves into places, Presbyteries and Synods make use of that Power
and Authority which CHRIST hes put in their hands, to remedy the same, and to
censure such disorders and enormities, as they deserve, And that people be not
accessory unto, or concurring with any Ministers that are deposed, in intruding
themselves into places no^ give them any countenance that does so, as they
would not draw upon themselves the wrath of GOD, by contemning and despising
CHRIST'S Ordinance of Discipline, And that no Presbyteries nor Synods proceed to
open the mouths of, or readmit unto the Ministry, and deposed Ministers, but
according to the Order prescribed in the Acts of General Assemblies, As they
will be answerable unto the General Assembly.

4. Ordaines that Sessions be careful that none be admitted to be Elders in
Congregations, but such as are in some competent measure able and qualified
with knowledge of Religion, and understanding of the duties of their calling,
for discharging the duties of that Office, and of a blameless christian and
godly conversation; And that before any be admitted to be an Elder, the Persons
name that is designed, be publicly intimate to the Congregation the LORDS Day
before, that if any have any thing to object against him, they may come and
present the same to the Session or to the Minister. And that if any Elder be
found negligent in the duties of his charge, and continue so after admonition,
or scandalous in his life and conversation, or to be a neglecter of the worship
of GOD in his Family, he be removed from and purged out of the Session.

5. Ordaines that Sessions and Presbyteries be careful, and make conscience by
all means to censure impartially all persons of whatsoever rank or condition,
that are scandalous, either in things of the first, or in things of the second
Table, according to the Rules and Order which Christ has prescribed in his
Word, and to proceed to the highest censures, with such as are grossly and
obstinatly scandalous or are ignorant, and contemn, and continuedly neglect the
means of knowledge, as public and private catechizing, etc. after they are
made inexcusable by sufficient means used to reclaim and gain them.

6. Ordaines that Ministers and Sessions in Congregations be careful, as they
will be answerable to CHRIST JESUS, to debar from the LORDS Table, all such
persons as are found not to walk sutably to the Gospel, and being convinced and
admonished thereof, do not reform; As also all such as have not knowledge to
examine themselves, and to discern the LORDS Body. And that for the more
orderly performing of this, the Minister in examination of the people, have
some of the Elders always with him, and represent unto the Session such as are
found grossly ignorant, that by order of the Session they may be debarred.

7. That Presbyteries and Sessions make conscience, that such persons as are
found scandalous, and are under censure for that cause, be not received nor
absolved from their censure, unless they give such satisfaction and evid^nces
of their repentance, as are expressed in the Acts of the Assemblies, concerning
the receiving of penitents.

J. Makghie.

FINIS.

