Cicero's Prince.

THE REASONS AND COUNSELS For Settlement and Good Government OF A KINGDOM,
Collected out of CICERO'S Works.

By T. R. Esquire

LONDON, Printed for S. Mearne, Bookbinder to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold at his house in Little-Britain, 1668.

To His Grace the DUKE of MONMOUTH AND BACCLEUGH, etc.
THis Piece was once a Jewel (wrapped up in Latin) in the Cabinet of the
Renowned Prince Henry, and composed by an excellent Artist out of the rich
Mines of that famous Statesman, and Orator M. Tullius Cicero. It has in it
Maxims, which void of all stains, and Flaws of Machiavillian Interest, are
raised only upon principles of Honor and Virtue, which best become a Prince. In
the discourse, they are directed to a Sovereign, but may be of no less use to
any great person, whose Birth or Quality may render him capable of Derivative
Authority, in the management of affairs of State, and what is Honorable, and
becoming a Prince, must needs be so in his Ministers, who should be his
Imitators. Your Graces qualifications, and Years may reasonably expect ere long
to be called to employment, in which your care and good conduct of your self
may satisfy the expectation of the world, and divert the censures of a
malicious Age, which your Grace prevents by considering your station, and that
though your years are but few, yet Great Men as they are planted near the
Prince, ought to be (like Trees on rich ground) sooner ripe for affairs then
other of meaner condition, which cannot be without an early application of
themselves to some serious thoughts of business, either in the practice, and
observation, of present transactions, or by reading what has been done in the
world before them; but of this your Grace is already sensible; so that I have
selected this for its Brevity only, to lie by you as a Memorial to prompt you
to put these Maxims, in time, into such practice, as may gain you that Honor
and esteem in the World, to which with a Laudable Ambition, you ought to
aspire, and render your self serviceable to your King and Country, which is, in
this the sole design, and most earnest desire of

Your Graces in all duties of a faithful and humble servant. T. R.

Index of Chapters.
CHAP. 1. OF the excellency of Government in general, of the Cause, and
Original of Civil Life, Laws, Republic, Civil Societies, and Cities. Chap. 2.
Of the Excellency of Kingly Government, the Cause, and Original of Kings. Chap.
3. Of the Difficulties of Ruling, the foundations and Arts thereof. Chap. 4. Of
the Princes Office in general, what he ought to know, do, and consider. Chap.
5. Of Prudence in Debates, Counsels and Actions. Chap. 6^ Of Prudence in
preventing Mischiefs, destroying their beginnings, means, and remains. Chap. 7.
Cautions against the several Causes of Commotions, and Seditions. Chap. 8. Of
the prudent Deportment of the Prince, and the Helps to render him and his
Government happy and glorious. Chap. 9. Of Moderation in Government and use of
Reason in Princes, neglected by barbarous Princes. Chap. 10. Of Princes
Manners, how they do good, or harm by example. Chap. 11. The preparation of
necessaries, Lenity, and Continence, preserve; Neglect, Cruelty, and Avarice
destroy government. Chap. 12. Of Liberality, convenient for a Prince. Chap. 13.
Of Reward and Punishment. Chap. 14. Of the Princes Prudence in consideration of
Times, Things and Persons, with several Rules, and Cautions concerning them.
Chap. 15. Of the Princes Seal, Senate, Senators and Counsel. Chap. 16. Of
avoiding Flatterers. Chap. 17. Of preserving Authority, and shunning Vice, by
which it is diminished. Chap. 18. What a Prince ought to do, and have in
readiness for defense of himself, and his Government. Chap. 19. Of exciting the
slothful to industry and Labor, that they may be useful to himself, and the
State, etc. Chap. 20. Of the Virtues which invite the people to love the
Prince, and the Vices, which alienate their affections. Chap. 21. Of the care,
study and offices of the Prince, and in what they consist. Chap. 22. Seven
things whence the destruction or safty of a Prince, and Government proceeds,
and whereon it depends. Chap. 23. Four Guards by which the Prince may secure
himself and his power. Chap. 24. Of prudence in foreign affairs, and several
cautions concerning Forrainers.
Cicero's Prince.
CHAP. 1. The Excellency of Government and Power, the Cause, and Original of
Civil Life, Laws, Commonwealths, Society and Cities.
EVery Nature which is not Solitary and Simple, but connexed and joined with
some other, must of necessity have something within in it self that Governs; as
in Man the Understanding, in Beasts something like it, whence their Appetites
arise; on a Republic Magistracy, which orders and prescribes what is Just,
Profitable, and suitable to the Laws.

Nothing therefore is more agreeable to the Equitable condition of Nature, then
Government, without which no Family, no Society of Men, no Nation, not even
Mankind, nor the world it self can subsist; For the Universe obeys God, and
to his Dictates and Commands, the Seas, Earth, and the Being of Mankind is
subject, as to their Supreme Lawgiver.

To these when we apply and add Good Affections, they produce that Foundation
of stability which we desire in Government; For Virtue is not Rude, Cruel, or
Proud, but assisting to the Defense of all Men, best consults for their safety;
ordained by Nature as the surest Guard of Kingly Power, and Humane Society, to
reconcile and unite them.

Time was when Men, like Beasts, lived in open Fields, sustaining life with
wild Food, not acting so much by the Reason of the Soul, as strength of the
Body; having then no knowledge of Divine Religion or Humane Offices. No man
reflected on lawful Marriage, or reguarded the Legitimacy of his Children,
altogether ignorant of that benefit, which arising from the Laws of Equity; so
that through Error and Ignorance, Blind and Rash Desire predominant in the
Mind, abused the strength of the Body to satisfy it self by pernicious Force.
Some therefore who first excelled in Virtue and Wisdom, collected the dispersed
into one place, and out of that Barbarity brought them to Justice and Humanity.
And then those things which were of Public Utility, termed by us common
Conventions of men, after called Civil Societies, with the Invention of Divine
and Humane Laws, in Houses built together denominated Cities, and encompassed
them with walls.

CHAP. 2 The Excellency of Regal Power, the Cause and Origin of Kings and Laws.
BUt that I may come to things nearer and more known to us; All Nations
anciently were Governed by Kings, which kind of Government was at first
conferred on Persons most Just; and this in our Republic (while subject to
Regal Power) was most highly valued, and derived to Posterity, still remaining
in those who now Reign with Purple, the Scepter and other Ensigns of Royal
Authority.

But the well moderated Monarchy, to Me, seems not only to have been of old
constituted among the Medes (according to Herodotus) but even among our
Ancestors for the fruition of Justice; for when in the beginning, the multitude
was oppressed by such as exceeded them in wealth, they immediately had recourse
to some one person, eminent for Virtue, who protecting the weak from injury,
kept all degrees of men by exact Rules of Justice within the bounds of Equity,
so that Kings and Laws had the same Origin; for equal Right was that which all
men sought, and if they obtained it from a just and good man they were content,
but failing of it, they then invented Laws which spoke with the same voice to
all Persons. It is therefore most evident, that such only were chosen to
command, of whose Justice the People had great opinion; and from them alone (if
they likewise were prudent) they believed all good to be derived to them.

CHAP. 3. The Difficulties, Arts and Foundations of Government.
BUt these disaffected to Monarchy, would not pretend a total exemption from
Obedience, but not always to be subject to one; it therefore imports a Great
and Wise Prince, by his Studies of the best Arts and Learning, to render
himself such in this high Command, as nothing may seem wanting to complete him
for Government, which of all Arts is the most difficult.

The Foundations and parts of it, which a Prince must preserve and defend, even
with the hazard of his Life, are Religion, the Power of Magistrates, the
Authority of Senates, Laws, Ancient Customs, Justice, Public Faith, his
Provinces, Allies, the Dignity of his Crown, Militia, and Treasury.

Yet are there two Things by which all Requisite to Government in a State may
be secured, viz. Knowledge how to Govern, and exact Discipline in the
Administration of the Laws.

The first of these (of great Advantage and absolutely necessary to a Prince)
contains in it knowledge of Armies, Camps, Battles, Sieges, Provisions for
Troops, etc. with all things pertaining to War.

The other of no less necessity, but often of greater Utility (its subject
Matter considered) is understanding Civil Affairs, the Authority of the Public
Laws, Records, and Examples of Antiquity, and whatsoever else may advance and
conduce to the Benefit of the Commonwealth.

But although these things are set down in Precepts, yet is it too difficult to
be conformable to them in all parts of a Politic Life, because what is in the
hands of Fortune is to be governed (according to Accidents) by time, and so to
be provided for by Council, which was the custom of our Ancestors, who to all
new Emergencies of Time, did always accommodate new Resolves.

So that this knowledge in Public Affairs (which we here mention) is acquired,
not by the daily affected talking of any particular Minister, nor Formal
Determination of Schools, or Republics painted out in Books, but a diligent
observation of greatest Actions, the memory of many, and practice of more, by a
continual exercise and serious use of such things as are daily observed to have
been of Advantage or disadvantage to the Commonwealth.

CHAP. 4. Of the Office of a Prince in General what he ought to know, do and
consider.
IN the administration of Matters of greatest moment, there are Various Acts of
Councils and Times which depend wholly upon the Prince, and therefore require
his greatest care and diligence.

For the Public being to be formed and governed by Councils, and honest and
profitable Actions, it is necessary the Princes Judgment and Virtue should
appear most eminent.

And that his Empire may be preserved, that Prudence (which is to be seen in
his Choice of Good or Evil Ministers) is to be quickened by his calling of
Councils, continuing or dismissing them, in requiring, giving, taking,
communicating, changing, and rejecting advice; as likewise in Actions, by
undertaking, executing, or laying aside designs.

All which, as they concern the Commonwealth, the chief is, perfectly to
understand the Military Force, what Treasure, what Allies, what Confederates,
what Stipendaries, and by what Ties of Amity, Conditions, and Leagues they are
obliged; To maintain a constant custom of determining Causes, to consider
Examples of Ancestors, the Original of their Power, Public Laws, the Intent,
Manners, and Discipline of the Commonwealth.

For as a Pilot purposes to himself a safe Course, a Physician the Recovery of
his Patient, and the General of an Army Victory; so the Design of a Prince
should be the Happiness of his people, that they may be strong in Power,
abundant in plenty; Great and Glorious in Virtue and Honor, and to effect this
work, the best Princes should be most industrious.

Yet is it not to be expected they should have their eyes upon all things; but
if knowingly they omit any thing, it is a great Crime, and they contract
something of another guilt, if their care could have prevented it; but if any
thing happen which they could not obviate, the fault is not theirs. And this
has often befaln the wisest men, who (as the best Pilot cannot withstand the
Fury of a Tempest) could not overcome the violence and insult of Fortune; yet
this, few rightly consider, all things being expected from Him, to whom nothing
ought (at least) to be refused, to perform all things conducing to the Public
good.

I will not reflect on the miserable condition of our Provinces in their
Government, wherein Diligence is Faction, Neglect Dishonor, Severity dangerous,
Bounty unacceptable, common conversation treacherous, compliance pernicious;
every man seems cheerful, while most are discontented, Malice secret,
Dissimulation open, obsequiously observing their new Governors, honoring them
when present, and deserting when absent.

Many of these things happen to the best of Princes, but they (like valiant
men) should trust so much to their fortitude, as not to fear any assault of
Fortune, by performing all things with Wisdom, Courage, and Justice.

For though many men weigh Councils by Events, and conclude that whoever has
had Success, he foresaw much, and who was not so Fortunate understood little;
it was always my judgment to value every man's Virtue or Fortune by his Actions,
not by events: Who can promise to perpetuate happiness to his Country? or who
so hold the Helm of Government in all weathers, as not to be shaken in a
violent Storm? Let it be your endeavor to keep the Ship steady and in a safe
Course, and when the Winds rise, it is sufficient if your Art and care be not
wanting, for that is all that Virtue can perform.

Be sure always (whether busied in Public Affairs, or diverted by Recreations)
to consider the Tenure of your Power, by what Virtue, Care, and Honor of your
Ancestors it was acquired, augmented and preserved, and how it is to be
maintained, governed and confirmed by your Own.

Miltiades was that brave Athenian General who with 10000 men discomfited
the Persian Army of 600000, in the battle of Marathom, the honor of which
victory made Themistocles ambitious to perform things as great.
Themistocles walked the streets in the night because he could not sleep, and
being asked the Reason, replied that Miltiades his Trophies kept him waking.

CHAP. 5. Of Prudence in Councils and Actions.
BUt that you may proceed on Principles well-weigh'd, and diligently explored:
First deliberately consider the Thing to be put in execution, how Just and
Honest, and if you have Power to effect it. Before you venture upon it, make
all diligent preparation, and preponderate the Events, whether good or evil,
that nothing may happen which may cause you to say, You did not think on it.

In Counsels, those are always most safe, which carry with them reasons of
establishing Peace, and nothing of Treachery, on which Cicero endeavored to
reconcile Pompey and Caesar before they began the War, as appears by his 14.
Epistle to Caesar, and elsewhere.
ground had my Advice been followed, we had continued, if not the best, at
least some part of that Republic which is now totally subverted.

Let the better Opinion always take place, act nothing but on probable (good)
grounds, for nothing is in it self honorable wherein there is not a
consideration of Judgment; and therefore you shall do well maturely to consider
that, which once put in execution, cannot be revoked or repressed. I had rather
many should judge you to have acted unwarily, then a few dishonestly; and in
all your Actions be guided more by consideration of the matter then the
witness, that you may be esteemed as a light shining in darkness, and an
imitator of our Senate, who never separated their Profit from their Honor.

Their principles are good, who advise you to do no Act (whether good or bad)
of which your Judgment is doubtful; for Equity shines by it self, but Doubt
signifies some apprehension of injury. Think not it becomes a King to let his
Will be the Rule of his Life, nor that they are happy that live as they will;
for to desire that which is not seemly, is a degree of Misery, nor are you so
unhappy in not obtaining your Will, as in enjoying what you ought not to desire.

You are the Chief in great Commands and Provinces, bear therefore a Mind as
Great and Honorable, that you may appear, not only to be above all men, but
above their Vices; to contemn all libidinous desires, to judge freely, to
consult more for the peoples profit then their pleasure, to provide for the
safty of all men against powerful and dangerous persons; and in these things to
give way to none, but excel all.

Keep it always in your Memory, that the Actions of a Prince are naked to
Censure, therefore consider your Dignity.

Let nothing be done that may leave a dangerous imitation of your example to
posterity, for many think what they do by example is of Right, and often add
something, nay much of their own, but it becomes a great Prince to do that,
which may be, not only of greatest present advantage, but for future example.

CHAP. 6. Of Prudence in preventing Mischiefs, suppressing Commotions in their
beginings, etc.
BE always Vigilant to prevent Mischief, and see that nothing fester under the
skin which may endanger you before it can be known or cured; Reason and
diligence may do much, seconded by Counsel on the Matter and Time.

It cannot derogate from the Dignity of a Prince, which was held decent in
Agamemnon, the chief of Kings, to have a A Wise Counselor to King Agamemnon.
Nestor to consult. Homer makes that great Commander of of the Greeks, Ajax
esteemed one of the most valiant Greeks that besieged Troy.
never to wish that he had ten such as Ajax, but often ten like Nestor, which
could he have obtained, he was confident Troy might soon have been destroyed.
Be sure therefore always to entertain near you such a person, with whom you may
communicate all your concerns; one which loves you, is wise, replys to all your
demands with integrity, without dissimulation or reserve. In sudden and
pressing occasions be of so present a courage, as not to shift any part of the
weight to other shoulders, but be to your self a Senate.

Nothing is more dangerous, then to give time to such as attempt innovation to
confirm themselves; be sure always to cut them off in the midst of their
designs, lest they attain to the end; for that Mischief which may be easily
suppressed in its beginings, if suffered to grow up, may prove too strong.

Therefore timely to suppress impiety and not to suffer it increase by
impunity, is not only profitable but necessary, by which you may not only put a
period to the insolency of wicked men, but to your own Anxiety.

Plancus advised very wisely in the War against Antony, Plancus commanded the
Armies in Gallia Transalpina, and came to the relief of Decimus Brutus, when
besieged in Mutina (now called Modena) but seeing Lepidus joined with Antony,
would not ha^ard to fight them, but retired to preserve his Province, which
must have been lost and he been defeated.
to prevent the strengthening of the enemy, and the apprehensions of our own
men, wherein had celerity been used, the Commonwealth, by the destruction of
those Traitors, had still stood firm in the possession of Victory. He, a
knowing Statesman, was not ignorant of the Weight and advantage of every moment
of Time, and of the difference whether the same thing be Resolved, undertaken,
and Acted before or after. Had all those severe Decrees made at that tumultuous
time been put in execution, either the day when I pronounced them, and not
delayed from time to time; or when they were undertaken, not procrastinated
before put in action, that War had never been.

It is prudence rather to punish wicked Subjects when in your power, then to
entertain perpetual apprehensions of them. Yet in this four things are mainly
to be considered, for prevention of a rash or loose Act, and showing
moderation, which best becomes a Prince.

1. To be severe on the guilty Leaders and Contrivers, and merciful to the
Multitude, who offend rather by chance then design. 2. To act all things by
Public Justice and Counsel, lest you seem rather to punish by violence and
force, than Law. 3. Not to be swayd by conjectures of another sense, or blind
suspicion, lest either the Innocent be oppressed by the detraction and envy of
malicious men, or to evacuate some ill humors, the very bowels and all the
veins be opened. 4. But chiefly, use deliberation and prudence, that you may
not only have Counsel in providing, but judgment in performing, lest that very
mischief, which you apprehend, you seek, so to prevent, as (when it might
happily be avoided) you meet and draw it upon you, which is a very foolish
effect of Fear.
In suppressing present Mischiefs, be sure to have an eye to the future, lest
they grow by degrees upon you; leave no roots behind, for from wild and
venomous plants (though they may be cut up) they sometimes (from small Fibers)
spring up again, and get strength to renew Rebellion. It is not less safe
utterly to purge away the last parts (of a distemper) then to repel the first,
but both with judgment, nothing carelessly, lest in a short time the Mischief
dilate it self; for as after some recovery from a disease, a Relapse is most
dangerous; so their trouble is much more vehement, who having almost
extinguished, and allayed a War, are constrained to renew it.

Beware lest the Punisher of one delinquency, prove the Author of another of
more force then the first. In Augustus made Commander of an Army against
Antony, by that means obtain^d power to gain the Empire.
our Troubles, the cause of the suppression of every first Mischief, was always
the Ground, whence a second sprung worse then the former.

CHAP. 7. Cautions to be observed in Commotions, and causes of Sedition.
BElieve it a great Folly, from a private Pique, to express open emnity; or
when you cannot hurt, to show a desire to do harm.

His counsel is most approved, who thought it best to strengthen himself by
recruiting his Army, with multiplied auxiliaries, that when he should openly
declare his Intentions, Caesar when he first aspired to the Empire, and
commanded in Gallia.
found it not dangerous (against the sense of some) to make known what he
intended to assert. To attain the ends of this resolution, he dissembled many
things, by which how dangerous an untimely declaration had been without
preparation, he saw in the ruin of his Colleague.

Have a care that Great men under pretense of common affairs or business, have
no conventions to take up Arms or raise tumults.

If there be Factions among the people or Nobility, be diligent to reconcile
them; and if Piques grow high (as by heats of opinions, and endeavors for
employments it often happens; for in these every one is Tenacious and will not
easily recede) let them not proceed to bitterness, nor so disagree, as not to
consent for the public safty, but rather contend who shall show most affection
to the Commonwealth.

In Public Assemblies use Moderation, lest the people be incensed by some
turbulent and rash tongue, as the Spur to Sedition, like those of Greece, all
whose Republickes were governed by the Temerity of Long-setting Assemblies; to
omit therefore this Greece, so long shaken and afflicted by her own Counsels,
that more ancient, which once flourished in Wealth, Empire, and Glory, was
ruined by this one Mischief, viz. the Immoderate The Senate of Athens
especially notorious for Faction.
Liberty and License of Public Assemblies. When in the Senate Men unskilful,
rude, and ignorant of all affairs had place; then they undertook unnecessary
and unprofitable Wars, conferred the most eminent employments on Seditious
Persons, and banished the most deserving. And if this was then done in Athens
(the most glorious City, not only of Greece, but of all the world) what (think
you) was the moderation of the Assemblies of Phrygia and Mysia.

We often see the Sea (which in its own nature is quiet) tossed and troubled by
the Force of Winds; so the people of themselves inclining to peace, by the
voices of Seditious men (as by violent storms) are raised into fury, which to
prevent must be your care.

Be no less industrious to preserve your own esteem from the wounds of
dispersed, and Seditious speeches, nor let it suffice that the offender
repents, but let his punishment deter others from comitting the like.

All Libellers, and Scurrilous Poets, are to be punished for example. Our
twelve Wherein the Laws made by the Decemviri, and those fetched from G^eece
were written, and always held most sacred by the Romans.
Tables though they declared very few crimes Capital, yet this was decreed
such. If any person published or composed Verses infamous, or mischievous to
another, how much more to a Prince.

It should likewise be your care, that no man speak rashly of the State, or
disperse uncertain Rumors, in any condition of the Commonwealth, especially in
time of war, and more especially in Civil, which for the most part is governed
by Opinion and report.

P. Varienus returning to Rome from Reate (where he had been Praetor)
traveling by night, two young men on white Horses, told him that King Perses
was King of Macedon, and subdued by P. Aemilius.
that day taken, which he related to the Senate; at first, as if he had spoken
rashly, he was committed to prison; but not long after, Letters arriving from
P. Aemilius confirming his report, he was not only freed from all future
service, but rewarded by the Senate with Lands.

But in all these things great caution is to be used, not to insinuate any
thing to Ears prejudiced, which desire the death of their Enemies, or Fear, or
Hate them; neither to such, as like ill Hounds take up all Scents, and wanting
Crimes infer what is false, which in fear and danger are not only believed
easily, but invented with impunity. This sort of Men, contriving destruction
for others, you ought to look on, as a Pest to your self, whom they would
involve in the same.

Give no matter of probable discourse to Malevolent Tongues, which if once
gained, they will strive to alienate the good will both of your Allies and
Subjects.

Avoid all occasions of infamous Reports; for that the esteem and safty of such
as sit at the Helm of Government, depends not only on Truth, but Fame; For
though Praise is not to be sought in the Shambles, yet the good Report of Good
Men is to be desired, that they may with a cheerful mind, diligently serve and
submit both to the pleasure, advantage, and opinion of the Prince in his
Government, whose firmest Foundations are Justice, Liberality, and Constancy,
without which nothing can be Honorable or worthy of Praise.

CHAP. 8. The Decorum requirable in a Prince; the helps, which may render him
and his Kingdom Glorious.
IN every matter be diligent to find out, understand, and defend the Truth,
maintain the dignity of your place; do all things with a brave and generous
mind, and without Constancy and Equality of temper believe your self beneath a
Prince; for this is a Decorum, then which, nothing can be more useful both to
your whole Life, and each particular Action.

And certainly it gives great reputation to all men's lives, to carry still the
same countenance and forehead, as we read of Socrates and Cajus Lelius. We
find Philip King of Macedon in actions of war, and glory to be inferior to his
Son, but in clemency and humanity, to excel him; and therefore the first was
always great, the other often vile; so that they seem to advise very well, who
affirm that the Greater we are, we should be the more humble, considering the
Instability of humane things, and changes of Fortune.

Theophrastus deploring the death of his companion Calisthenes a Philosopher
much in favor with Alexander, who killed him because he would not
acknovvledge him a God.
Calisthenes, was troubled at the success of Alexander; for Calisthenes was
unhappy to be well known to that Man who was of greatest power, but wholly
ignorant how to use his Prosperity.

Much more worthy of praise was that Cyrus described by Xenophon, not with
Historical Truth but as a Pattern for just Empire; whose extraordinary gravity
was mixed with singular clemency, by that Philosopher, whose book, not without
good reason, our Affricanus was wont always to carry with him, as comprehending
all the duties of a wary and moderate Government.

And those Republics, in the Judgment of Plato (that Prince of Wit and and
Learning) were truly happy, which should be governed by learned and wise men,
or at least were industrious to advance Wisdom and Learning; for he believed
this conjunction of Wisdom and power might conduce greatly to the welfare of
the people; which thing perhaps was once the greatest Advancement to our
universal Republic, wherein they commonly were raised to the highest commands,
whose time and study from their childhood had been spent in the exercise of
Principles of Learning, Virtue, and Humanity.

When Socrates (in Gorgias) was asked by him, if he did not think Archilaus
(the Son of Perdiccas) then very successful, very Happy; replied, I cannot
tell, for I never spoke with him. What? (replied the other) can thou know it
by no other means? can thou not say the great King of Persia is Happy?
Socrates returned, How can I, when I know not whether he be a Learned or a Good
Man?

CHAP. 9. Of Moderation in Command of the use of Reason convenient for Princes
neglected by barbarous Nations.
PRinces and Magistrates in their Command, ought so to deport themselves
toward their Subjects and Allies, as Parents toward their children, or the
Soul over the Body; for the Office of the Soul is to a make right use of
Reason; and as the Mind of a Wise man, so that of a Prince should always be
disposed to make the best of his Understanding, which should render him
Moderate, Modest, Temperate, Constant, and Continent. We sometimes refer
these Epithets to the sole term of Frugality as to their Head, because Virtues
seem to be comprehended under that Title through the use of a Proverb, that,
The Frugal man does all things well. But, I know, Princes are not to be
commended with this attribute, that a King should be a Frugal man, is not much
for his Honor; to be Valiant, Just, Severe, Grave, Magnanimous, Munificent,
Bountiful, Liberal, are the praises of a Prince, the other of a private Man;
let others take it, as they please, I judge Frugality (that is, Modesty and
Temperance) to be a very great Virtue, though not so allowed by Xerxes, who
abounding in the benefits and gifts of Fortune, not content with his great
Forces both of Horse and Foot, his multitude of Ships, and infinite Treasure of
Gold, proposed a Reward to him who should find out a new Pleasure, which when
invented, could not content him; for, Lust is never satisfied, which made
Diogenes dispute, how much he was Superior to the King of Persia in his Life
and Fortune; for that he wanted nothing, and the King never had enough. Nor
(said he) will I ever desire those pleasures with which he can never be
satisfied, and I am sure he can never obtain mine.

We find in Story, that those Barbarous Kings of Persia and Syria had many
Wives, to whom they gave several Cities; to one a City to find the Attire of
her Head, to another one for the Ornaments of her Neck, to a third a City for
some other Dress, etc. So that the whole people were not only conscious of
their Luxury, but servants to supply it.

CHAP. 10. Of the manners of Princes how they do good or harm by Example.
BY all which it appears, how pernicious they are to the Commonwealth who err
in this kind, since the Vices which they practice are diffused among the
people, although even among them who follow the example, the esteem of Princes
is more easily lost, then their life reproved; for though we may in this hold
them immoderate, yet must we not therefore allege it, as a Crime. Nay it is
the sense of all sober men, and a fixed principle, not only to conceal the
faults of Princes, as of our Parents, but patiently to bear them.

Yet it is their part to give Rules of Moderation to themselves, and Laws to
others; for if they look back to former times, they may see that as the
Inclinations were of the Governors of any City, such was the City; and the
people always followed the change of their Princes manners.

There is therefore much in Example, and most men studiously imitate the
Actions of the Prince; so that his desires and Vices infect his Dominions, and
by his Continency they are corrected and amended. How easy is it to restrain
those under your Government, if you contain your self within the bound of grave
and constant Discipline? It is for men Barbarous to live for a Day; your
Counsels should reflect upon Eternity.

CHAP. 11. Of the Preparation of Things Necessary; Lenity and Continence
preserve, Negligence, Cruelty and Avarice destroy both Prince and People.
BUt principally endeavor to avoid (that to which our Ancestors were often
necessitated through the want of Treasure and continuance of Wars) the Levying
of Taxes; and that this necessity may not fall upon you, make provision long
before (for even good men are deaf to the sound of Taxes) and when you attempt
any thing, lose no advantage by expectation or delay of time; a short time is
long to the unprepared, for a Day or an hour, without Providence, often produces
great mischief; but a certain time (for the execution of such resolutions is
not like that of Sacrifice) to be prefixed.

If necessity shall at any time impose upon you, be careful to make all men
understand, they must yield to it for the common safty; and whosoever would be
and Govern well, must have his stores filled with all necessaries for his
defense. What those things are, and how to be provided, the nature of the
Times, and situation of your Kingdom will make obvious to your reason.

Let it be your Maxim always to incline to Lenity and Equity, that your own
people in your troubles may be as willing as able to assist you; for if once
their Affections be alienated from you, you will soon find them animated
against you.

When I led our Army into Cilicia, and the King of Partha's Son had past over
Euphrates with great Forces, I found the affections of our Allies wavering and
in suspense, through expectation of Innovation. For their Auxiliaries, through
the oppression and injuries of our Governors, were either rendered weak and
could not much assist us, or were so alienated from us, that we could neither
expect any thing from them, nor trust them.

But in the execution of all public affairs, even the least suspicion of
Avarice is chiefly to be avoided. I could wish (said Pontius Samnis) that I had
been born, and Fortune had reserved me for those times, when Rome began first
to accept Bribes; for I should then soon have stopped their progress to the
Empire. He needed not to expect many Ages, for that mischief has now seized on
the Commonwealth, and therefore I could more easily admit Pontius to have had
that power at that time then now.

No Vice therefore is more destructive to Government, then Avarice in Princes;
for to make their power mercenary, is not only Vile, but Impious; and therefore
what Apollo Pythius gave as Oracular (that Sparta could not be ruined by any
force but Avarice) seems to be a prediction, not only to the Lacedaemonians, but
to all opulent people; nor can Princes acquire the good will of their people by
any means more easily, then by Continence and abstaining from this Vice.

Such as would preserve the Wealpublick must be far from that kind of
Munificence, which takes from some, to bestow on others; for this sort of
injurious bounty, the Lacedaemonians expelled Lysander (one of their Ephori) and
(which put never before happened among them) to death Agis their King; and from
that time, such dissentions followed, that Tyrants started up, extirpated the
Nobility, and that so famously constituted Republic fell to ruin; nor did it
fall alone, but the Contagion of their miseries diffusing it self, destroyed
all Greece.

CHAP. 12. Of Liberality becoming a Prince.
IT is therefore requisite to use such Liberality as may not be hurtful to any,
for Lucius Sylla's, and Cajus Caesar's translation of Estates from the right
Owners to confer them on others, cannot be called Liberality; for nothing is
Liberal which is not Just and Moderate.

King Philip of Macedon notably reprehends his son Alexander, for insinuating
himself into the affections of the Macedonians by his excessive bounty. What (a
mischief said he) can induce thee to believe, that those will prove Faithful to
thee, whom thou corruptest with Money? Do you intend the Macedonians should
account you not their King but Purs-bearer and Servant. (He said well, that the
title of Servant and Purs-bearer did ill become a King, but better, that such a
sort of bounty was Corruption) For he is made worse who receives it, and is
still more ready to expect it. This to his son, but it may be a precept to All;
for it is a great mischief when that which should be effected by Virtue, is
attempted by money.

Yet did not Philip deal so with Forainers, for he forced open the Gates of
Cities, and overthrew Kings (his Emulators) with Bribes; alleging that all
Strong Holds might be taken, into which an Ass laden with Gold could enter.
Aristotle gravely and justly reprehends that profusion which is made to captate
the multitude with vast loss and infinite cost, especially when neither
necessity requires it, nor Honor is increased; nor does this sort of daubing
last long, but so soon as the satisfaction of it is vanished, the memory of the
Pleasure dies with it; and (as he likewise well collects) this may be grateful
to women, children, and servants, but when weighed by sober and serious men, it
will never be approved.

The expenses on Walls, Ships, Ports, Aquaducts, and such things as tend to
Public benefit, are much more honorable; as likewise to redeem Captives, and
assist necessitous persons, which to have been done frequently by our Order,
copiously appears by the Oration of Crassus. I therefore prefer this Custom of
Bounty before that profusion of Donatives: This becomes great and wise men,
that flatterers of the people, and such as caress the Levity of the multitude
with pleasures, but you must not always be alike affected in different
occasions; for his case who is oppressed by calamity, differs from another who
seeks your bounty, not urged by necessity. Let your Liberality incline more to
those in distress, unless they appear to deserve their misery.

Cyrus is worthy your imitation, who bestowed honors and rewards on such as
designed things great and honorable, by which he raised an ardor of Glory in
the minds of All, every man being studious and industrious to excel in such
things as the Prince approved.

To excel in this kind of Liberality is Kingly, though not to be admired in
Cyrus for that he was very wealthy, but that in these Offices the Prince should
contend with the subject with so much honor and civility was no small wonder to
Xenophon. But this he practiced from his Grandfathers Discipline and advice,
that neither his Treasure should be exhausted by extravagant gifts, nor
incitements to Virtue and Obedience be wanting, because it is not an easy
thing to be always giving; neither would he that the Honors which the King
conferred (as Bracelets, Collars, and Bridles of Gold, which among the Persians
none could wear, but such as received them from the King) should be made common.

It certainly mainly concerns you to preserve the Rewards of Virtue and
service, Sacred and unsullied; not to be conferred on Vicious and loose
Persons, or made cheap by men of mean deservings; for men will be less studious
of Virtue when the Rewards of it are debased, and such as have received Honor
for their brave Actions when they see unworthy men alike honored, think
themselves lesned.

Keep always a Memory and esteem of good services; nor at any time discover in
your self either a want of will, or not to have the Power to reward, for you
ought not only to have a value for the well-deserving, but not to suffer them
to be necessitated to sue for their recompense, difficulty in that kind being
inexcusable; nor is it just to confine the memory of a benefit to a time or a
day, or to defer the acknowledgment, but rather hasten it, lest you lose the
fruit of your Bounty and the thanks; and this is chiefly to be observed, if you
are to bestow any thing on the less importunate and modest persons; for it is
grievous to a modest man to be put to importune him of whom he has well
deserved, lest he may rather seem to exact then desire it, as the Hire rather,
not the Reward of his service.

If those who have well merited, are of that Quality, that their Memory should
be transmitted to posterity, to such you must not be ungrateful; for all
mankind detest those who forget benefits received, and you will have use not
only of the esteem and judgments of men now alive, but of those who shall come
after, although their judgments will be more sincere, as free from malice and
detraction.

Be courteous, not only to those who may seem to deserve it, but to others,
that All, according to their quality may have respect.

Give no countenance to men too covetous of Money or Honors, and immoderate in
their desires, which no prey, unjustly gotten, can allay, but rather augment
and inflame; so that they should rather be punished then admonished.

CHAP. 13. Of Reward and Punishment.
SOlon, who of all the seven was the wisest, and the only Writer of Laws,
affirmed the Commonwealth to be contained only in two things, viz. in Reward
and Punishment; of both which (as of other things) there ought to be a Measure
and Mediocrity. Be not too liberal (not to say Prodigal) in conferring Honors,
nor too severe in correction or punishment; but I hold it dangerous to omit the
punishment of a wicked Act, lest it give encouragement to the imitation of the
like Folly; neither is clemency and mercy otherwise to be approved then that
severity for the common good may take place, without which Government cannot
subsist; for a salutary severity, excels the empty show of Clemency.

But in this (as in other things) it is to be wished that Princes (like their
Laws) would be induced to punish not with Anger, but Equity, and prefer to any
Private, the Public safty.

CHAP. 14. Of the Princes Prudence to be moderated by consideration of Times,
Things and Persons, of which are laid down several Rules and Cautions.
TO all Arts we are to add that, which we call common Prudence, of which every
man who is to govern any design is to have his share. In a Prince is requisite
the knowledge of opportunities proper for Action, for all affairs are managed
by Authority, Judgment, and Counsel, which is to be taken from the Matter,
Person, and Time, and to be governed (like a Ship in its steerage and course)
after the condition of the Commonwealth, since you are not always to adhere to
the same Opinion and Reason, but such as the State of Things, Inclination of
the Times, and Rule of Concord will admit. In great Commotions, Revolution of
Affairs and Trouble, yield rather to the Times then Customs; yet still have an
eye to the main end, viz. Religion and the safty of the people.

This is Plato^s Rule (whom, I confess, I zealously follow) Contend for so much
in the Republic as may be justified to your Countrymen; for you must not
impose violently either on your Parents or your Country, and this he professes
to be the cause why he would never be concerned in the Commonwealth; for
finding the Athenian State almost doting on their long continuance, he
perceived they would neither be persuaded, nor compelled to any better Rule of
Government; and when they could not be persuaded, he did not conceive it Just
they should be compelled.

By this you may perceive the Power of Times, the great Variety of Things, how
uncertain their events, and how flexible the will of men; ponder therefore with
your self the snares and Vanities incident to Life.

Cato, though of excellent inclinations and greatest integrity, did sometimes
hurt the Commonwealth; for he always gave his Opinion, not as in the corrupt
constitution of Romulus, but in the polite Commonwealth of Plato, and pleading
too pertinaciously, for the (too parcimonious) expense and Institutions of our
Ancestors, alienated the Equestrian Order, and the most eminent persons from
the Senate.

It is the duty of every Senator, to endeavor (as much as in him lies) that no
eminent or powerful person be displeased with the Prince or his Counsel; and
though he be an enemy in the highest degree to any particular man, yet this
ought to be observed for the common good.

Concerning Privileges and Honors it is mainly to be considered, that they be
not injuriously impaired; it has been ruinous to many, who have disgusted such
as have been eminent in Wisdom, Power, or Military Virtue. For it is more
grievous to be divested of Honors, then not to be advanced in dignity, and the
sting of lost liberty wounds deeper then perpetual servitude. A man
unacquainted with contumely, a stranger to disgrace, bold in Fight, can hardly
compose the tempest of his thoughts 'twixt grief and anger, when fallen from an
high condition.

Never leave a man eminent for Wisdom, Counsel, or favor nor a powerful
Nobleman (though a Fool) to be wrought upon by desperate men. Caesar while
Pompey endeavored to lessen his esteem, ran into extremes, and with a violent
heat of Youth destroyed the Dignity of our ancient Republic and Empire.

All changes of things of Moment are most easily and commodiously accomplished
if the Times conspire, otherwise they are to be effected gently and by degrees,
as friendships (which when less delightful and satisfactory) in the opinion of
wise men are to be relinquished rather by degrees then suddenly dissolved.

In all Fortunes adhere to what is just and honest; nothing ought to be done,
given, or taken away from any person which may be of example or advantage to
ill-meaning men.

Never confer any thing on powerful men which may render them aspiring or
arrogant. The Senate decreed many great, and almost peculiar Honors to C.
Caesar (as a Province (out of his Order, supplications in number such) as never
to any man in any war; an honor peculiar to him; a Prorogation of his command
for five years, to show their esteem of him in his absence; with these things
he so much advantaged himself, that he kept both his Army and Province in
despite of the Senate, whom he hated for that advantage; his desire was to be
King of the Roman people and Lord of all Nations which he effected; but the
Original of all this was, that he was not resisted when weak (which was then
easy) Pompey began to fear Caesar, too late, and I wish rather that he had
never given him so great strength, then that he should have afterward opposed
him when so strong.

Proportion your Trust to the Fidelity of the persons, but give command only to
such whom you can willingly affect when they have done well, or most easily
punish when they neglect their duty.

A man of a private condition raised t^ great Fortune and power, can scarce
contain himself within the bounds of his duty; as neither one born and educated
in an eminent Estate, always accustomed to applause and glory. This was evident
in that Scholar of Aristotle of great Wit, and as great Modesty, till he was
saluted King; but then, proud, cruel, and immoderate; next to him that
companion of Quirinus, who by error of Opinion, phancied to himself the
Sovereignty: When Pompey had given into his hands, all his own and the Roman
Peoples strength with their Forces, He oppressed both Pompey and the Roman
People, and compelled a City, not only Free, but Commandress of the whole World
to serve him; but we were little careful of the Commonwealth, when we granted
to any one greater strength and power then our Liberty could bear.

Trust nothing in his hands who turns all to his own profit, or wants prudence
in Counsel; give no credit, nor commit any part of your reputation to one, whom
you have once found criminal; for no wise man, yet, thought a Traitor worthy of
Trust.

That error reproved by that common Proverb, Twice to the same, is very
dangerous in a State; whosoever calls to mind our miseries, will never use the
Counsel of a treacherous or malicious person, or trust a Coward.

Reject not any man to whom a thing happens, which may sometimes befall the
wisest and best men, desirous enough to serve the Public; while it appears he
is honest, though he rather followed dangerous then safe Advice which may be
liable to reprehension.

Take no Security for a Person, by whom your own or the safty of the State may
be endangered; for the obligation for another man's Inclinations or Judgment, is
more weighty and difficult, then that of money, for that may be discharged, and
it is only a probable loss of an Estate; but how can any man make good his
obligation to you, or the State, unless the person for whom he stood bound,
will suffer himself to be secured.

Be always so careful of your self, as not to be in the power of those whom you
may suspect, but they rather in yours.

Let your ears give a Value to Truth, and not be open to whisperers and
flatterers for advantage.

Gain gotten by calumny, by reason of the mischiefs it brings upon the innocent
is of all the most vile, and worthy severest pu^ishment.

Those Pests of mankind, who envy the glory, and good of other men, are of all
to be abhorred and suppressed, who very often alienate Princes from their best
subjects, and change their affection to the Prince. These Agesilaus Agesilaus
was King of Lacedemon famous for his valor, wisdom, and modesty, which was
such as he would not suffer any picture or statue to be made of his person,
saying, that Princes ought to have no other Monum^nts but Memorials of their
Virtues and good Actions.
hated more then Thieves, for that he held it worse to be deprived of his
friends, then robbed of his goods. It is therefore a felicity (to a Prince)
when the truth is discovered, and the suppressed defense of Innocence respires,
which is commonly done when those skilled in this base art, will not so much
dare openly to attempt as design, and those of a more desperate Audacity, are
left to their own precipitate Counsels.

Credulity is rather an Error then a crime, and may easily insinuate into the
minds of the best men, yet is it very dangerous in a State.

Therefore that your Government may not suffer by credulity, adhere to this
Maxim of Epicharmus. The Nerves and Joints of Wisdom are, Not to believe
rashly; and let it be your Elogie, Not to be capable of being easily deceived
or overcome.

CHAP. 15. Of the Princes, Seal, Senate, Senators, and Counsel.
LEt not your Seal be as your Instrument but as your self, not the Minister of
another will, but as a witness of your own.

Let your Senate be like that of Areopagus, A place very famous in Athens by
the Temple of Mars, where the Judges instituted by Solon, sat in the night,
and were not to see the Persons that pleaded their causes before them, but
only heard the voices, and gave judgment with exact severity.
Constant, Severe, Grave and Stout; your Senator do all things which become a
person of his condition, and not only those things which are every particular
man's duty, viz. to be Faithful and Vigilant, a Lover of his Country, etc. but
when he gives his Opinion to be (as one most eminent in the Commonwealth)
Prudent also. For when I assumed my part in the Government of my Country, I
thought my self equally worthy of Reproof, when I gave in the Senate
unprofitable, as when unfaithful Advice; neither did I believe my self to be
excused, if when the Public was to be defended, I sought upon pretense of
great Affairs, my own quiet, or resolved not to come into the Senate till
better Times; for no pretense of Rest or Fear ought to hinder your Duty or
Fidelity to your Country.

Take Counsel of the most Faithful and Wise, and confer on such Authority, nor
suffer them to be slighted; if any shall presume to that insolence, think your
self to be Affronted in their injury and your Authority to be despised. All
things of this nature are to be suppressed, as pernicious in their example and
progress; for this mischief grows on by degrees of Custom, and rises to a
sudden height by presumption, and when the punishment is laid aside, liberty
takes place.

It will be of no little benefit to take those into your Cabinet, whose
Fidelity and Experience in Affairs, you have known to excel others, with whom
you may freely communicate and examine all events of past and future Actions,
and according to their weight what is to be suspended, what put in execution;
by these means you will have time to discern Truth from Falsehood, and consider
what is best to be done, and so publish nothing but what has been maturely
weighed, and consulted by them, to your great honor and advantage.

CHAP. 16. To avoid Flatterers.
MAke it your care never to let your Ears be open to Flatterers; it was
Pompey's error, who, though he saw all our dangers involved with his own,
adhered to the Counsels of certain inexperienced and imprudent men.

Do nothing that may create opinion that you hate Truth, or will exercise your
displeasure and malice on such as advise Honestly; for this is poison to
faithful Counselors, nourishes and invites the wicked and perfidious, gives
temptation to obsequious Humor, which indulging to error, precipitates many
into Ruin.

But the greatest Mischief to such as despise Truth, and are drawn into snares
by compliance, is, that they are most commonly apt to flatter themselves and
most delighted with it. Virtue indeed is a Lover of her self, and as she is
Amiable, so she knows best and understands her self. But I speak not here of
Virtue, but of the Opinion of Virtue; for many men would rather seem Virtuous,
then be really endued with Virtue, and these are pleased with Flattery, and a
speech composed to their inclinations, makes them believe that vain Oratory to
be a real testimony of their Worth; this therefore is rather pernicious then
dutiful, when the one is neither willing to hear Truth, nor the other prepared
to speak it.

But this is certain, when a Princes Ears are so shut up against Truth, that
they cannot hear it, his ruin is hardly to be avoided.

CHAP. 17. Of preserving Authority and avoiding evil. desires which diminish it.
LEt your deportment be constant and Grave, which not only resists Flattery,
but removes the suspicion.

For you are to imitate a wise Judge, who avoids offense by the Equity of his
Decrees, and acquires the good will of all men by his patience in hearing, and
care to give just satisfaction. Briefly, be so circumspect both in your life
and Government, that there remain not the lest suspicion of Sloth or Levity;
commit no Act may make you seem Timorous or Effeminate.

If any thing happen worthy of your Fear, dissemble it; use present courage and
Counsel, and quit not your Reason. This was a Maxim frequently practiced in our
Republic, most eminently in the second Punick War; when after the misfortune
at Cannae, they assumed greater Courage then before that Victory of the enemy;
no signs of Fear, no mention of Peace, for it is dishonorable in a Prince to
submit his Courage to any danger.

As in the steps of a Ladder, if you take away some, cut other, and leave the
rest, ill put together, you prepare an instrument to fall down and not to
ascend; so in the distresses of the Commonwealth, if you desert her, when
disjoynted, nor show your self Active to confirm your peoples safty, and
resolve to remove the danger, you will be so far from recovering what is lost,
as you accelerate a total ruin.

Be careful in all things that may be foreseen by Counsel, and when there is an
error of Judgment, amend it by your diligence. I saw Pompey on the 14 of the
Calends of Febr. full of fear; on that day I foresaw his ruin, after that he
never pleased me, but perpetually committed errors; he neither had Courage nor
Counsel, Forces nor Conduct. Not to mention that base Flight from the City,
timorous Orations to the people, ignorance not only of his Adversaries, but of
his own Forces; to be short, he had nothing good left to him but the Cause,
which was that only wanting on Caesar's side, who excelled in all other things,
as vigilance, expedition, diligence, of which had our General made use, we had
recovered the Commonwealth.

As (if placed in this degree of Honor) I would not be of a low dejected spirit
in adversity; so neither would I want the common sense of Nature. For this
hardness of the mind is (like that of the Body, which when burned, grows
insensible) rather stupidity then courage or Magnanimity. A Prince must fly
that error of throwing and offering himself to danger without cause, then which
nothing is more foolish; he should endeavor to acquire glory in his death, and
not leave behind him the blame of a fault and the dishonor of folly.

Very commendable was the prudence of See the 6 Chapter.
Plancus, who would not fall by such rashness; for when the two Armies were
joined, to hazard most faithful Legions (against them) our best Auxiliaries,
the Princes of Gallia, the whole Province: he concluded was highest madness and
temerity; and that if by his overthrow he should destroy the Commonwealth, he
should not only deprive himself of all honor, when dead, but of all compassion.

Good men lamented the death of Trebonius commanded the Army in Asia, and
Dolobella in Syria, by whom Trebonious, under pretense of friendship, was
treacherously slain in Smyrna.
Trebonius, yet were there some (severe indeed they were) that said, he was the
less to be pitied for that he did not secure himself against a wicked and
vicious man.

CHAP. 18. What things a Prince ought always to have in readiness to defend
both himself and his Authority.
IT is the opinion of wise men, That whosoever undertakes the protection of
many, ought first to provide for his own safty, which by my advice King
Ariobarzanes observed.

For when by the Authority of the Senate I was enjoined to have a care of the
safty and preservation of that King of Cappadocia, whose father was murdered
by his subjects.
King, with this added, that his welfare was of great concern to the people and
Senate (which was never before decreed by our order concerning a King) I
carried the Senates Decree to him, and discovering the conspiracies, which I
understood to be on foot against his life and Authority; I advised him to use
all diligence to preserve himself, and withal encouraged those who where tried
friends to his Father, whose sad misfortune, was a Document to them, to defend
him with all their strength and care; and I gave him this Rule, that he should
begin to govern by securing his own life and power, such as he found engaged in
designs against him, on them to exercise the Authority of a King, to punish
some when he saw a necessity, and to free the rest from the fear of it; that he
should make use of the Force of my Army rather to terrify, then contend with
the guilty, and by these means I freed him from those conspiracies, and so not
only rendered him safe, but provided that he should reign with Authority.

The safty of the Prince is the peoples safty, and commonly on his single life
depends the preservation of All.

Nothing therefore is more necessary, then to have good stores of Arms, by
which you may secure your self, defy the insolent, and be revenged when
provoked; as likewise to have ships in your harbors, to secure your Coasts in
the Provinces. These Naval preparations by the advice of Themistocles, were
never to be omitted, for who is Master of the Sea, is ever thought to be the
greatest Prince.

And in my opinion in Islands and Provinces lying on the Sea, where good
Harbors are, there ought to be a particular care of Navigation, not only for
the common safty, but the honor of the Kingdom. This was Reason and greatness
of mind in our Ancestors, who content with little in their domestic affairs
and expenses, living very frugally, converted all to the glory, splendour, and
dignity of the Empire; for in private affairs, frugalitie; in public,
magnificence is to be preferred and commended.

CHAP. 19. Idleness to be suppressed that all may be useful to the Public,
none to be Turbulent.
IF in any place your Country be uninhabited and incultivate, make there your
plantations, that the Sinks of your Provinces and Cities may be emptied, and
the Deserts frequented, but without injury to the ancient Proprietors; that you
may not seem to have removed the one, or dispossessed the other, but to have
constituted both. Consider all things that may invite men's minds from idleness
to honest and profitable Arts, study and industry, which may be several ways
effected; especially (as if at public Game) you propose a Prize to those who
excel. For whatsoever is rare and excellent, seems to men pleasant and
desirable for its reward.

Discipline has great influence on the people; the Laws of Crete and those of
Lycurgus, educated their youth in labors, as in Hunting, Running, etc. to
endure Hunger, Thirst, Cold and Heat. For those who gave the Rules of public
affairs in Greece would have the Bodies of the Youth strengthened by labor,
which the Spartans imposed even on their Women, who in other Cities in a most
soft manner lay idle, within the shadow of their Walls, but nothing like this
was permitted to the Lacedemonian Virgins, who were rather pleased with
wrestling, swimming, heats, dust, labor, and war, then a Barbarous and
unprofitable fertility.

This Nation, while Lycurgus his Laws were in force, were a valiant people. One
of whom, when Perses their enemy boastingly told them that they should not see
the Sun, for the multitude of his Arrows, replied, We shall then fight in the
shade. In this I only mention their men; but what was that woman, who informed,
that her Son was slain in battle, replied, I therefore brought him forth, that
he might not fear to die for his Country.

Such, so valiant, and hardy were the Spartans, and such once the Romans.
Exercitus from their exercise of constant Discipline and labor.
our Armies taking their Name from their harbor, when every man would carry
half a months provision with any thing for use, as Stakes, Palisadoes, etc. For
his Target, Sword, and Headpiece, was not accounted as a Burden, no more then
Shoulders, Arms, or Hands. For weapons are the Members of a Soldier, which
are to be so conveniently carried, as throwing away all other burden, they may
use them as readily as their Limbs. But what is now the practice of our
Legions? Why such a difference between our old and new Troops? They are perhaps
listed at a better Age, but custom of hardship, service, and contempt of
danger, must with a brave desire of honor, render them valiant and famous.

Those labors which are signalized by Honor and Renown, seem always easy. And
this is a light which all men follow who seek glory; and therefore Scipio
Affricanus always carried Socratick Xenophon about him, particularly
commending this his Maxim, That no labor was so burdensome to a General, as to a
Soldier, for that Honor made it less tedious to a General.

The books of Xenophon are very useful for many things, and therefore I advise
you to read them studiously, not omitting that of Husbandry, which he terms
Oeconomick; and that you may understand how much he believes the Study of
Agriculture becomes a Prince, Socrates in that book is introduced discoursing
with Cristobulus, That Cyrus (the less) King of Persia, of an excellent wit,
and glorious in his Empire, when Lysander the Lacedemonian, a person of great
Virtue came to him at Sardis, and brought him presents from his Allies, being
many ways civil to Lysander, he showed him a Piece of Ground exquisitely
planted; and when Lysander admiring the streightness of the Trees, their order
and exact distance, the Earth good and well levelled with the sweet odor of
the Flowers, told him he could not but admire his care and diligence, who had
measured and designed them; Cyrus replied, that all that design and order was
his own work; for most of those Trees had been set and planted by his own hand,
whereupon Lysander gazing on his glorious Habit, enriched with Gold and Gemmes
(after the Persian manner) answered, The world (O Cyrus) does justly call thee
happy, since this Good Fortune, is added to thy Virtue.

CHAP. 20. Of the Virtues which gain men's Affections and Vices which alienate
them from Princes.
Endeavor to free your self from all passion and perturbation so, that by
tranquillity you may with an equal Temper keep your Dignity; for nothing more
becomes a Great man, then Gentleness and Clemency.

It is hard to express how much Humanity and Affability gains on men's
affections; there are extant Philips Epistles to Alexander, Antipaters to
Cassander, and those of Antigonus to Philip (three of the most prudent, we read
of in Greece) wherein they advise to work upon the minds of the multitude by
courteous and civil language, and speaking kindly to the soldiery.

And this ought to be your practice, if you will remember how considerable a
thing it is to preserve in Public the Person of a Prince, which must not only
satisfy the minds, but the eyes and ears of his subjects, That his Nature may
not seem harsh, his Access difficult, his countenance severe, his answers
insolent, and his deportment proud.

Keep up the greatness of your mind with Gentleness and civility; and if your
passion be moved by such as intrude into your presence, unseasonably, or
petition impudently, suffer not your self to be transported into an odious and
useless Morosity, and at length to be persuaded into better humor, through the
Artifice of recovering your good Temper by such as never read of Xenophons
Cyrus, or Agesilaus; from which Kings, no man ever heard an harsh word;
contrary to the practice of other barbarous Princes, who give their commands
thus, Observe and obey my Orders, and if you ask a question, return these
Threats, If I see you here again you die for it, which things as they are
abhorred in the very reading, so much more in the Practice.

Avoid all sudden Passion, ill Language and contumely, which as they are
abhorrent from common civility, so are they altogether disagreeable to the
dignity and power of a Prince; for if your Anger be implacable, it degenerates
into cruelty, if you quickly relent, it is accounted Levity, which
notwithstanding is to be preferred to the other. What can appear more ugly then
Homers Achilles, or Agamemnons quarrels? For Ajax his Fury, led him speedily to
madness and death; but when Alexander had killed his friend Clytus, he could
hardly hold his hands from violence on himself, so great is the power of
Repenting a rash Act.

Nothing appears so ugly as cruelty joined with power, neither does any thing
more incense or scandalize the minds of men, then when Revenge is equalled to
injuries; for dishonor has a kind of sting, which modest and good men can ill
endure, much less the Factious and Insolent, of a proud and mutable disposition.

CHAP. 21. Of the Charge, Duties and Studies of a Prince, and wherein they
consist.
ALL Governors ought to observe two precepts given by Plato. First so to be
careful of the Public benefit, that all their Actions may have respect to
that, without thought of their own commodity. Next that they so consider the
whole body of the Kingdom, as not to protect one part and neglect the rest. For
while they consult for the benefit of one party, and regard not the other,
Discord (which is destruction to both) ensues. Hence springs not only
sedition, but the Plague of Civil War, which a wise and worthy Prince will fly
and detest, and wholly apply himself to the good of all. His first care will be
to preserve every one in his right by Law, Justice, not to suffer those of a
low condition (for that reason) to be oppressed; nor with envy to disturb the
rich in the possession of their wealth. To me it seems most reasonable, that
such as are in Authority, should endeavor to make all happy who are under their
command, to suppress seditions, discontents, oppressions and murders; to
remove that cruel Minister of Avarice and Ambition, Calumny from the Fame,
Fortune, and Quiet of the Wealthy. To be careful that Taxes and public
Contributions be equally born. To provide that the Public suffer not by debts.
To be easy of Access, and ready to hear all Complaints. Not to suffer that any
man's Poverty or want of Friends should exclude him, not only from a Public but
private Address; and lastly that in the whole Kingdom nothing seem cruel or
grievous, but all full of clemency, mildeness, and humanity.

Make this your Rule, that wheresoever you come men may believe that light and
happiness appears with you. Nor let this be your sole Act, but see it be done
by all your Ministers and Attendants, for what can be more to your Honor, or
more desirable, then not to see the people terrified in your Progress,
exhausted by your expense, or troubled at your presence, but rather a Public
and Private Joy wheresoever you come, and when every Town seems to entertain a
Guardian, not a Tyrant; not an Oppressor, but a welcome Guest.

CHAP. 22. Certain things whence the Ruin or Safty of a Prince proceeds, and
on which it depends.
NOthing contributes more to the establishment and preservation of a King, then
to be beloved; nothing more to his destruction, then to be feared, as Ennius
said very well, whom men fear they hate, and whom they hate they desire to
destroy; but an universal hatred no power can resist, a Maxim lately made
manifest, if not formerly known.

Fear is a very ill maintainer of continuance, but goodwill a faithful guard to
perpetuity: And how happy they are that desire to be feared, Dionysius the
Tyrant is a famous example, for when one of his Flatterers in discourse, cried
up the strength, power, and Majesty of his Kingdom; the abundance of his
wealth, and Magnificence of his Palaces, denying any man to have been more
happy. Will thou then Damocles (said he) since this sort of life is so pleasing
to thee, once taste it and try my Fortune? To which Damocles assenting, he was
placed in a rich Chair of State, upon the most costly and magnificent Carpets,
and many Cupboards filled with the statliest and richest Gold and Silver Plate,
and round the Table Boys of the choicest Beauty commanded to wait, and
diligently to observe his Nod; nor were there wanting Crowns, richest Unguents
and sweetest Odours, with all variety of dainties on the Table. Damocles
hitherto thinking himself very happy, till looking upward he saw a bright sword
let down from the Ceiling, and hanging only by a horses hair directly over his
head, so that terrified with this apparition, he neither looked more on his
beautiful Attendants, nor the furniture and Plate; nor moved his hand toward
the Table, and now even his Crown was too heavy, till at length he begged of
the Tyrant that he might be released, for that he had no desire, now, to be
happy. By this it appears that Dionysius thought no man happy, who had any
thing of terror hanging over him; nor was it at all safe for him to return to
Justice and restore their Laws and liberty to his people; for he so far
entangled himself in errors in his youth, that he could never be secure if once
he began to be sober; in his latter time he wanted all necessaries, lived with
Fugitives and barbarous people, believed no man to be his friend, who was
either worthy of liberty or did affect it, but feared all; for such as desire
to be feared, must of necessity fear those to whom they are a terror; neither
can any power of Empire be so great, as to be dureable, when surrounded with
fear; of this we our selves are presidents, who having oppressed and ruined
Forain Nations, were invaded by Civil Wars, by which the Walls only of our City
are left standing, and even those in apprehension of extremest mischief; but
having almost lost the name of a Republic, we fell into these miseries, while
we chose rather to be feared then to be desired or beloved.

But nothing confers more to establishment, then to provide that the Dignity of
the Prince may not be violated, or his Authority brought into common hatred;
for the very name of Empire is of great weight, and in light persons is a
terror; for that being put into command they abuse their Masters name, and mix
their sordidness with the splendour of the Prince.

Let the person whom you place in Authority, be a Minister, not of his own but
your Clemency, and let him always carry his Axes and Rods as greater Ensigns of
his Dignity then Power. Make it appear to your whole Kingdom, that the common
Safty, their Children, Honor, and Fortune are dearest to you.

Lastly take this as a Maxim, That not only those who receive any thing basely,
but such as give it shall be odious to you when it comes to your knowledge; for
then no man will receive or give a Bribe, when it is known that the Ministers
of a Prince, and the Magistrates are so concerned for their Reputation; and
that this Law cannot be infringed, viz. Let them do no injury, take nor give
Bribes either in seeking, executing, or laying down an employment; neither
suffer that Authority, which you have given as an Honor, or an Office,
conferred as a Benefit or a Charge, as a Recompense of former services to be
abused by unlawful gains. Be likewise careful not to permit any thing
injurious, or of a sordid nature to be impetrated from you by such as pretend
to have power about you; but this is not offered as an Advice that you should
be harsh to your servants or suspicious; but cautious in believing, and
diligent in observing what they possess, be honestly gotten without the
imputation of odious or dishonest gain, and let them rather make use of your
Liberality then their own Liberty. Neither is it advised (since these
inclinations now tend only to too much levity, and less dangerous ambition)
that you should be too scrutinous into all miscarriages, and so suddenly shake
off every man, but to trust nothing to such as follow all ways of money, and do
all things for moneys sake.

The Pragmatici, in all their Histories, Precepts, and even Verses, advise to
be cautious, and forbid to be credulous; but when a man has performed any
thing hansomly and well, to reward, and trust him.

CHAP. 23. Four Guards by which the Prince and his Authority should be secured.
THink nothing more your interest then to have near you, a list of such persons
as excel in any Art or Science; to know their qualities and studies, and excite
and invite them to your own and your peoples benefit, by advancing to honors
and employments, men of your own choice, and obliged to you alone, from whom
those rewards ought to proceed, that you may have them every where watchful for
you, placed as Guards to secure you from all mischief.

2. To preserve your self Quiet in your Government, it should be your Principal
care that not only those who are raised to Honors, Command, and Power, but such
as have the Government of your Forts and Garrisons, should wholly and
immediately depend on you; and let this be a Maxim in State, to meet all
occasions, and break all hopes (of Insurrection) for prevention of their
Ambition, who either design or aspire to violent power or Force.

3. By taking Progress at certain times about your Provinces, you may suppress
injuries, insolences, wicked designs, and give timely relief to those parts of
your Empire, which are prompt to lapse into distempers, by which you may make
your Remedy stronger then the Disease; for those parts which are remotest from
the Princes eye, are to be governed with greater care, secured with stronger
Guards, and looked into with clearer lights, because all things may fall into
change, before they can (by reason of distance) be well heard. But in the seat
of the Empire, in view of the Prince nothing can subsist which may not be
extinguished and suppressed soon as it springs up or appears; nor can the great
ones and prime Ministers so easily violate their inferiors, or spoil the
wealthy, as in remoter Provinces, where commonly such as are oppressed are in
that condition, that they cannot so much complain of their Grievances.

4. In the mean time since the people hold all their Benefits, Rights and Safty
by the Laws, be so just and careful, as not to recede from them. For all things
should be governed and administered by Law, as by the soul (of a Kingdom.) For
as our bodies cannot subsist without a soul; so without Laws a Kingdom can make
no use of its parts, nerves, blood, and Members.

CHAP. 24. Of Prudence in extreme affairs; several cautions concerning
Forainers.
1. BUt you are not wholly to apply your self to Domestic Affairs; the State,
Inclinations, Force, Leagues, Contracts and Counsels of Forainers, are likewise
to be considered.

2. Be chiefly circumspect, that none about you be corrupted by them, betray
their Trust and your Counsel to them.

3. That no impressions of Disaffection toward you be made in your Allies.

4. That their Forces raised upon other pretenses, be not suddenly turned
against you.

5. It will much confer to your Grandeur to understand what esteem other Kings
or Nations, your enemies or Allies have of your Person, Government, State and
Power. For that in matters of that high nature, men either despise or fear,
hate or love, and are moved no less by opinion of Fame, then by certain reason.

6. Keep a strict Amity with such as either by ancient friendship, good
offices, dangers, or leagues have been allied to you.

7. Be Just, not only to these, but to others; suffer not your people to do any
rude, barbarous, or injurious Act to Forainers, lest something should be done
contrary to the Laws of Nations.

8. Leave what belongs to Dogs, to fawn on Domestickes, and bark at Strangers.

9. They are very unadvised, who exclude Forainers from their Cities, for it
injures the common Society of mankind.

10. By no means admit those (to familiarity) who come as spies, or otherwise
decline their duty, which is only to follow their own private affairs, or to be
little curious in another Commonwealth.

11. As little as may be, mix not your interest with the quarrels of your
neighbors, but consult for the Peace of your Successors.

12. Trouble not the Foundation of their Quiet, lest you raise in them desires
to seek your Ruin and destroy your friends. For those things which perhaps we
little apprehend to be of consequence; as that in peace we make use of the most
wealthy Citizens (that they have neighboring and remote, fruitful plantations,
to which they can make easy voyages, wherein they cheerfully follow their
business, whence they return partly with supplies of Merchandise and honest
gain; partly with other negotiations of settling their Seats and Families) are
of no small Advantage to the Prince and people, to have so considerable numbers
of their Country to be employed abroad in so honest and beneficial affairs.

13. If any offense be given by your Subjects, whether through the ignorance or
perverseness of Allies, show all readiness to expiate the injury, and
Religiously observe on your part, all that relates to you.

14. Be careful to keep the Seas free from Pirates, and safe for Navigation.

15. The Forts and Garrisons of your Kingdom always in good condition.

16. Your Navy in good order.

17. Preserve your Merchants and Husbandmen, not only from Oppression, but even
from the fear of it.

18. For in other things when any calamity happens, there is (indeed) a loss
received, but in Husbandry and Imposts not only what mischief happens, but even
the apprehension of it, brings calamity. For when the enemies forces are not
far off, though they make no irruption, yet they leave their Cattle, quit their
Tillage, all Traffic cease, and by the sole rumor of danger, and fear of a
War, a whole years profit is lost.

19. Never suffer Forainers to abuse your Merchants, whose Estates and Fortunes
should be in your strictest care to preserve. For the destruction of a number
of Citizens cannot be separate from the whole Republic; for when in a City,
Province, or Kingdom, many suffer in their Estates, and Fortunes, they must of
necessity draw with them many more into the same misfortune.

20. From this danger the Commonwealth is to be secured, and you are to use all
study and industry, by which your own and your Kingdoms honor, the safty of
your subjects, with the Commonwealth, may be preserved, defended and augmented.

21. Add to this, that nothing more becomes a Prince, nothing more generous,
nothing more munificent then to aid the oppressed, to restore them to safty,
and free them from danger (though I confess it a difficult part to assume the
care of other men's concerns) it being not only very profitable, but may be (if
you expect any thing of advantage) the means to obtain it.

22. Let nothing seem too much in time of danger; but it is not then to be
cautious in words. For most men are more apt to fear then to be mindful of
their duty, and I know not whether they appear not more easily kind in their
fear, then grateful after Victory.

23. If according to League, aid is to be desired, their Defense and your Duty
in that particular must not be omitted, for Leagues are things Sacred, and a
Kingdoms chief support is its honor and the kindness of its Allies; upon which
Maxim (not provoked by any injury to themselves) our Ancestors made war
against Antiochus, Philip, the Etolians and Carthaginians for their Allies.
Nothing therefore can be a greater blemish to your Honor, then when you (who
have the esteem of being able to defend, even those who are almost strangers to
your Friendship) shall not be capable to assist your Confederates.

24. If your necessities force you to seek aid from Allies, let it not appear
that your people are to be secured, rather by the benefit of their Aid, then
your own Valor and Power.

25. Beware lest among other mischiefs, either Auxiliary Soldiers or your
enemies think your troubles to be their opportunity, as the Roman people
pretending the defense of their Allies, possessed themselves of all their
lands, and when Conquerors gave and took from Kings and Confederates what they
pleased.

26. A Prince ought chiefly to look to the conservation of the Rules of War;
for since there are two kinds of contention, one by Dispute (in Treaty) and
another by Force; and the first proper to Mankind, the last likewise common to
Beasts; if you cannot make right use of the first, you must have recourse to
the second.

27. Wherefore War is to be undertaken to the end you may live in Peace, and
after Victory such are to be preserved, as have not been cruel or barbarous in
the War; and you are not only to provide for those whom you have conquered by
force; but likewise for those who laying down Arms, fly to your Mercy, even
when you have stormed their Walls. In which procedure, so exactly did our
Ancestors observe the Rules of Justice, that whatsoever Conquered City or
Nation they had received into their Protection, they were afterward the
constant Patrons of them; the equity of war was most religiously observed by
the The Law which Authorized Heralds to pass as persons not to be violated,
between Armies and Countries to denounce War, or offer peace, always held
inviolable and Sacred by all Nations.
Fecial Law, by which it may be understood, that no war was just, but that
which was enterprized for reparation of injuries, and first denounced or
proclaimed.

28. But let war be so undertaken as that nothing but peace may seem first to
be desired; every Prince ought to defend his subjects.

29. Our Ancestors levied war, either when their Merchants were retained or
abused. Our Ambassadors insolently received at Corinth (the light of all
Greece) would have had it extinguished. For that they esteemed the Ambassadors
to represent the Senate, and Authority of the Roman people, and their right
not only to be forfeited by strength of men, but guarded by divine Law.

30. But in the subversion and demolition of Cities great care ought to be
taken, that nothing be done cruelly or rashly, unless perhaps against such as
seem void of all Humanity, as the Carthaginians and Numantins, A City in Spain,
which after a long siege, reduced to all extremities, was taken and destroyed
by the same Scipio, who demolished Carthage.
ruined by our Progenitors. I am not for the destruction of Corinth, though
something may be said for it, considering the situation of the place, very
opportune to begin a war.

31. Be most circumspect in keeping Faith, whosoever infringeth it, attempts
against the common Guard of Mankind, and excites the Deceived to secure
themselves with the Trust of new Necessities, against the Treachery of the old,
and to brand him as infamously perfidious and wicked.

Conclusion.
SInce therefore you see all these things, External Peace, Domestic Quiet,
Common safty, and what else is desirable and dear to Mankind, are brought under
the care and protection of your power, consider your self to be placed in their
Guard, as in a Watchtower, that by your vigilance, and circumspection, your
people may be safe. It is your part to have your eyes open for the security and
benefit of all, with a ready courage, and a mind intent on all parts of the
Commonwealth, wisely considering in all your Orders, Decrees, and Acts, how
much you ow to the Opinion of so many men, and to their Judgments and Esteem of
you.

FINIS.

