PERTH, 20 March, 1651.
A Short Exhortation and Warning, To the Ministers and Professors of this
Kirk; From the Commission of the General Assembly.
THe eminent danger of Religion, King, and Kingdom, by the unjust Invasion of
the blasphemous Sectarian Army, The sad condition of our Contrymen in the
South parts of the kingdom, groaning under the grievous Oppression of
Strangers, devouring their substance, and enslaving their persons, the sad
silence in many Congregations, whose Teachers are driven into corners by the
violence of the Enemies, contemners of GODS Ordinances, and mockers of His
Messengers; The Adversaries roaring and making a strange noise in the midst of
some Congregations, the Inevitable hazard of our dear brethren, to be seduced
into pernicious Heresies and Errors, by the deceatfull practices and speeches
of Sectaries, that are cunning to deceave, and speak lies in hypocrisy; The
Innocent blood of our brethren murdered by the Sword of a merciless enemy;
the sighing of the Prisoners, Inhumanelie and cruelly used by these who keep
them captive; The care of preserving our posterity from being sunk in the dark
dungeon of Errors, and fast bound with the heavy chayns of basest Slaverie;
Do cry so loud in the ears of all who have ears to hear, and a heart to
understand, to be awake and quickened unto the necessary Duty of the time,
that it is a wonder that any Jonah should be found fast asleep in so great a
Storm, wherein the Kirk and kingdom are like to be overwhelmed: Yet the
conscience of our Duty, according to the trust committed to us, and the
carriage of some who either oppressed with a Lethargy, lie still, or seized upon
by a benumming coldness, move slowly, or carried about with the wind of
Strange Doctrine, as children are tossed to and fro, and move contrarily,
Constrayn us to lift up our voices, and from the Watchtower, whereon we are
set, To give warning unto the Professors and Ministers of the GOSPEL
throughout the Land, and to waken them up to their duty, as they would avoid
the displeasure of the ALMIGHTY, And escape the deserved punishments and
censures which may be inflicted by Iudicatories Civil and Ecclesiastic
respective, upon deficients in, and delinquents against duty, according to
the Degree of their offense.

We exhort all men unto Repentance, to return from the evil of their thoughts
and ways, and to mourn after the LORD, coming to Him through the MEDIATOR of
the New Testament, by whom we have an Atonement through Faith in His Blood, It
is more then high time for all to be humbled under the Mighty Hand of GOD,
who has cast us down, And is able to raise us up again, who has wounded, and
is able to bynd up our wounds. To this effect we have appointed a Solemn Day
of Fast and Humiliation, for the causes sent unto the several Presbyteries.

It is the Duty of the Members of this KIRK, and Subjects of this kingdom, at
this time, most cheerfully unanimouslie and speedily to come out, and
concur in the common defense of Religion, King, and kingdom, endangered by
the unjust Invasion of Forraigners, according to the call and command of
Authority: Let it be seriously laid to heart, how much blood is spilt, how
many Towns and Shyres are spoiled, how miserably our Brethren are distressed
and oppressed, how much the common Enemy is strengthened, while you are only
preparing for Relief. What-so-ever is done to the least of them for this
Cause, is to be taken as done to us all in general, and to every one of us
in particular, according to to the express words of the National COVENANT.
And in plain terms, we are obliedged by the Solemn League and Covenant to
assist (which necessarily imports concurrence) and defend all that enter
the League and Covenant in the maintaining thereof, We obtest and exhort you
for the Interest we have in the common Adventure of these rich goods our
Lyves, our Liberties, our King, our Religion, which are all embarked in one
bottom, that ye abandone not the ship of the Commonwealth in this Tempest;
For if the Ship perish, what can be safe that is within?

If you tender true Religion, you see how the Sectaries show themselves plain
enemies thereto, and maintain that impious monster of Toleration; Though
Religion were not in the Question, Let Loyalty to your King, the only King in
the world, Who is in a Religious Covenant with GOD and His People, animate you
against these who are his enemies, Because he is a King, and because
Covenanted; Cast not off the care you ought to have of your Country, which ye
see many festlie and violently Ruined before your eyes. If these will not move
you (we speak the language of our worthy Reformers in the like case of
Invasion by forraigners) Remember your Wyves, Children, and Posterity; your
Ancient Heritages and Houses; And be assured these Strangers will not regard
your Rights, when ever occasion shall serve; And if ye purpose, (As we doubt
not, but all these who have either wit or manhood will declare and prove
indeed) to brook your Ancient Rowmes and Heritages, defended valiantly by your
cowragious Progenitors against all Strangers Invaders of the same (such as the
Sectaries are this day) If you will not be slaves to them, and have your
Lyves, your Wyves, your Children, your Substance, and what-so-ever is dear
unto you cast at their feet, to be used and abused, at the pleasure of
strange Soldiers: If ye will not have experience some day in your own
persons (as we suppose the least of you would not gladly have, but would
rather choose with Honor to die in defense of his own Native Rowme, then live
and serve so shameful a servitude) Then Brethren, join with the Forces of the
Kingdom, and both with Wit and Manhood oppose the common Enemy; Or else our
Liberties shall be here-after dearer bought. Let none be so unhappie and
mischievous, And so withdraw himself herefrom.

Except men will blot out of their hearts the love of Religion, cast off
Loyalty to Sovereign Authority, and lay aside all care of their Country,
Laws, Liberties, and Estates, yea, all natural affection to the preservation
of what-so-ever is dearest to them under the Sun, (all being in a visible
Danger of Ruin and Destruction) They must now or never appear activelie, each
one stretching himself to the uttermost of his power. It is no time now to
delay, nor go about the business by halffes, nor be almost, but all-together
zealous. The Scripture pronounces him cursed, that does the Work of the LORD
negligentlie, that comes not forth to the help of the LORD against the
Mighty. If we have been forward to assist our neighbor kingdoms, shall we
neglect to defend our own? Or shall the Enemy of GOD be more active against
His Cause, then His Covenanted People for it? GOD forbid. If the Work shall now
miscarrie and fail in our hands through our unfaynthfulnesse, our own
conscience shall condemn us, and Posterity shall curse us. Who knows, but
if we stand stoutly and steadfastlie to it, the LORD may yet command our
Delyverance, and show us His Salvation.

Let all sorts both of High and Low Degree in this kingdom, call to mind
their Solemn Covenantes; and namely, that Article of our National Covenant,
which obliedgeth us not to stay nor hinder any such resolution as by common
consent shall be found to conduce for the ends of the Covenant: But by all
means to further and promove the same: Which lies as a bond upon peoples
consciences readily to obey such ordours, as by the public resolution of the
Parliament, and Commission of the General Assembly, are found necessary for
the prosecution of the War; And that Article of the Solemn League and
Covenant which obliedgeth us. Not to suffer our selves directly nor
indirectlie by what-some-ever Combination, Persuasion, or Terror, to be
divyded and with-drawne, from this Blessed Union and Conjunction, or to make
defection to the contrary part, Or to give our selves over to a detestable
indifferency, and neutralitie in the Cause. According to which Article Men's
realitie and integrity in the Covenant will be manifest and demonstrable; As
well by their omissions as Commissions, by their not doing good, as by their
doing evil. He that is not with us, is against us; and he that gathers not
with us, scatters. Since every man's not adventuring his person, not sending
out these that are under his power, according to publik order and appointment;
And not paying the Contributions imposed for Mayntenance of the Army, have
been formerlie esteemed a ground of judging men Enemies, Malignantes, and
Covenant breakers; We wish it may be the care of all to shun the ways that
may bring them, under these foul Characters, and whereby they may run
themselves under the hazard of the displeasure of GOD and the censures of the
KIRK, and no doubt of civil punishment also to be inflicted by the State.

Let Ministers as the Messengers of the LORD, stir up others both publicly,
by free and faithful Preaching, and privately, by admonishing every one of
his Duty, as there shall be occasion. Considering that silence in the
public Cause; Especially in public Fastes, not laboring to cure the
disaffection of people, not urging them to constancy and patience, in bearing
of public burdens, nor to forwardness in the public cause: That speaking
ambiguously, inclyning to justify the wicked cause, uttering words which
savor of disaffection, complaining of the times in such a way as may steal
the hearts of people from lyking good instruments in this Work, and
consequently from GODS Cause; Yea, that some read public ordours, and speak
against them in private conference; Are reckoned up amongst the enormities and
corruptions of MINISTERS in their Callings, by the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, 1646.
Sess. 10.

And because the COMMISSION of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, In their REMONSTRANCE to
the Convention of ESTATES, Iulie 6. 1643. teaching all true Patriots and
Professors of the Reformed Religion, that they may learn to discern and know
the Enemies of the KIRK, amongst other marks of Malignants, give this, Their
offering to Presbyteries, In all the quarters of the Kingdom Papers contratie
to the DECLARATIONS of the Commissioners of the General Assembly. The
General Assembly 1645. In their Seasonable Warning, 12. February, gave these
Characters of secret Malignants and Discovenanters. Their slighting and
censuring of the public Resolutions of this KIRK and STATE; Their laboring to
raise Iealousies and Divisions, to retard or hinder the execution of what is
ordained by the publik Iudicatories; Their Censuring and Slandering of these
whom GOD has used as His Chief Instruments in this Work; Their drawing of
Parties and Factions for weakening of the Common Union, Their Endeavors,
Informations, and Solicitations, tending to weaken the hearts and hands of
others and to make them with-holde their assistance from this Work: Enjoining
such to be well marked, tymely discovered, and carefully avoided; lest they
infuse their counselles into the minds of others: Wherein they require
Ministers to be faithful, and Presbyteries to be vigilant and impartial, As
they will answer the contrary to GOD, and to the General Assembly, or their
Commissioners. The General Assembly, 1646. Sess. 10. Ordayneth, That besides
all other Scandalles, Silence, and Ambiguous speaking in the public, much more
detracting and disaffected speeches be seasonably censured. The General
Assembly, 1647. SESS. 27. Does in the NAME of GOD, inhibit the spreading and
dispersing of Erroneous Books, or Papers, Pamphlets, Lybelles, and Letters;
Requyring all Ministers, to warn their Flocks against such Books in
general, and particularly, against such as are most plausible insinuating and
dangerous; And ordayneth Presbyteries and Synodes, to try and process such as
shall transgress, Recommending to Civil Magistrates, that they may be
pleased to be assisting to Ministers and Presbyteries, in the execution of
this Act;And to concur with their Authority, for that effect.

Therefore, for execution of the foresayds Acts of Assembly, and preventing
the eminent danger of Religion, the people of GOD, and the kingdom, by
practices leading to encourage the hearts, and strengthen the hands of
Enemies, in prosecuting their wicked purposes, to make faint the hearts, and
enfeeble the hands of GODS People, and to seduce their minds, with divisive
and separating counselles and principles; According to the power and trust
committed to us, And according to the practice of former Commissions of the
General Assembly, We do, in the Name of GOD, inhibit and discharge all
Ministers to preach, and all Ministers and Professors, to detract, speak, or
write against the late Public Resolutions and Papers of the Commission of the
General Assembly, In ordour to the calling forth of the people, for the
necessary Defense of the Cause and kingdom; Against the Unjust Invasion of
these Enemies to the Kingdom of GOD, and to the Government of this KIRK and
Kingdom; Or to spread and disperse Letters, Informations, of any other
Papers, against the same, or in any other way to obstruct that service,
Tending to the Preservation and Defense of Religion, king, and kingdom;
Requyring Ministers to warn their Flocks of these Papers in general, And
particularly such as are most plausible, Insinuating and dangerous: And we
do seriously recommend to Presbyteties, that with all vigilancie, they take
special notice and trial of such persons within their bounds, whether such as
have their station there, or such as in this troublesome time, have their
present reside^ce, Ministers, or others, and impartially proceed against them,
As they will be answerable. As also we do, in the Name of GOD, exhort al
Ministers, faithfully to declare and witness, at al occasions, their unfeigned
hatred of maligna^cy, and maligna^t courses, and in their whole deportment, to
evidence their wonted zeal against all maligna^t persons, disaffected to the
Cause of GOD and Covenant: and particularly, to take notice of al mockers of
Piety and Godliness; and of al, who after the profession of their repe^ta^ce
for their accession to maligna^t courses, shall be found, in private or
public, by word or deed, venting their affection thereunto; and after trial,
condignly to censure them in their several Presbyteries. And to report an
account of their diligence in the premises to this Commission from time to
time.

Though our Difficulties be many and growing, yet when we look back upon
the great things which GOD has done for us, and for our Predecessoures, and
our many fold Delyverances out of several Dangers and Difficulties, which
appeared insuperable, Experience breeds Hope. Our Fathers trusted in GOD;
they trusted in Him, and He did delyver them; they cried unto Him, and were
delyvered; they trusted in Him, and were not confounded. Let us wait upon Him,
who hydeth Himself from the house of JACOB. Let us cry unto the LORD OF
HOSTS, who has delyvered us, and does delyver us: And in Him let us trust,
that He will yet delyver us: Though for a small moment He has forsaken us,
yet with great mercies He will gather us, He who has showed us great and
sore troubles, shall quicken us again; and shall bring us up again, from the
Depthes of the Earth: He shall encreasse our Strength, and comfort us on
every side, against our Fears on every side: Only be strong, be of good
cowrage, be of one mind, and accord in the Work of the LORD, and the GOD of
Love and Peace, shall be with you.

A. KER.


