A SHORT INFORMATION FROM THE COMMISSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, Concerning
the DECLARATION OF THE HONORABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT, Lately emitted to the
KINGDOM.

Imprinted at Edinburgh, and reprinted at London for Joseph Hunscot. 1648.

Edinburgh 5. May,1648.
A SHORT INFORMATION FROM THE COMMISSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, Concerning
The Declaration of the Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT, Lately emitted to the
Kingdom.
1 ALthough in the answer of April, 22. which we received in writing from the
Honorable Court of Parliament, we are remitted to their Lordships Declaration
(now printed and published) therein to find satisfaction our eight desires,
presented to the Parliament March 22. And although these desires were such as
were most agreeable to the word of God, and do highly concern the safety and
security of religion; yet, after diligent perusal of the said Declaration of
Parliament, we can not find therein any one of these our eight desires
satisfied.

2 We find twice in the said Declaration a passage cited out of the
Declaration of both Kingdoms, 1643. viz. That the not takers of the Covenant
are declared to be public enemies to Religion and Country, and to be punished
as professed adversaries and Malignants: But while this passage is pressed and
urged upon the Parliament of England against the Sectaries, we cannot see that
it is applied against such Malignants, as have not to this day taken the
Covenant, Shall we require of them the observing of such a rule, and not yet
walk by that rule our selves.

3 As the three breaches of Treaties insisted upon in the said Declaration are
disputable, and not without controversy, so the three demands sent to the
Parliament of England (as they are conceived) are of most dangerous consequence
to Religion, so far as we are able to judge of them, or pry into them: And
although we are real well-wishers to his Majesty's Honor, freedom and
safety, in such a way as may not be inconsistent with the safety and security
of Religion; yet the demand of his Majesty's coming with Honor, Freedom, and
Safety to some of his Houses in or near London, before security had from him,
yea before applications to be made to him by his Parliaments for settling
Religion according to the Covenant, we conceive to be not only a postponing of
Christ's interest to the Kings, but an apparent hazard of the subversion of all
the Ends of the Covenant; considering, that the Army being disbanded (as is
also demanded) and his Majesty under no restraint, but restored with Honor,
Freedom, and Safety, may gather new strength with the help of the Popish,
Prelaticall, and Malignant party for hindering the settling of Religion and Peace
according to the Covenant; which we have the more reason to fear and
apprehend, his Majesty still retainning his old Principles, and having not long
since professed and declared, that he is obliged in Conscience to improve that
power which God shall put in his hands for the establishing of Episcopacy.

4 There are in the said Declaration diverse particulars highly concerning
Religion, determined and resolved upon, without the advice and consent of the
General Assembly or their Commissioners; which is a great prejudice to the
just interest and liberties of the Kirk.

5 We do not find in the said Declaration all lawful and possible ways of
Peace, and namely by Treaties (as before, in 1639. and 1640.) endeavored or
sought after, before an engagement in war; which method we conceive to be
necessary as well by common and natural equity as by the Word of God, and
especially between two Kingdoms united by Solemn Covenant.

6 The Declaration holds forth no resolution of Parliament for opposing and
suppressing of the Popish, Prelaticall, or Malignant party if they rise again
in Arms, but only against associating or joining forces with them, and not so
much as that, except with limitations in case they be refusers to swear and
subscribe the Covenant; and in case they rise in Arms to oppose or obstruct
all, or any one of the ends of the Covenant. Whereas it may be easily
foreseen, that if the Popish, Prelaticall, or Malignant Party rise again in
Arms in England, they cannot only conceal their intentions against the ends
of the Covenant, but also be easily exempted from being reckoned refusers of
the Covenant, the Covenant not being now imposed upon them; and being once
suffered to rise in Arms (as some are already) may grow so strong as that it
will be very hard and difficult to suppress them.

7 Whereas we have insisted for satisfaction to our Consciences concerning the
persons to be entrusted with the managing of the war, and that none may be
employed in Committees and Armies but such as have given constant proof of
their integrity and faithfulness, and against whom there is no just cause of
jealousy; that so we may the more confidently encourage our flocks to follow
the cause of God in their hands: the Declaration in stead of satisfying this
desire, does avoid and keep off from these qualifications desired by us, and so
leaves a latitude for employing such as these qualifications do not agree to.

Finally, as we neither were, nor are against an engagement, if once satisfied
in the grounds of undertaking, and manner of proceeding, and the other
particulars expressed in our former papers; So for the reasons before
mentioned, and diverse others fully expressed in our Representation upon the
Declaration, we judge the present engagement as it is stated, unlawful; and
trust that all the well affected in the Kingdom will make conscience of their
Solemn Vows, and will be careful by the grace and assistance of God to keep
themselves from being ensnared and carried along in any course contrary to the
Covenant.

A. Ker.

FINIS.

