TVLLY'S OFFICES. IN Three Books. Turned out of LATIN into ENGLISH.

By To. L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE READER.
IT IS hard, me thinks, that a Man cannot Publish a Book, but he must presently
give the World a Reason for it; when yet there is not One Book of Twenty that
will bear a Reason; not One Man of a Hundred, perhaps, that is able to Give
One; nor One Reason of a Thousand (when they are given) that was the True
Reason of Doing it. The True Reason (I say) For there is a great Difference,
many times, betwixt a Good Reason, for the doing of a thing, and the True
Reason why the thing was done. The Service of God is a very Good Reason for a
Man's going to Church; and yet the meeting of a M^striss There, may, perchance,
be the True Reason of his Going. And so likewise in Other Cases, where we cover
our Passions and our Interests under the Semblances of Virtue, and Duty. But
however, since Custom; (the Plague of Wise Men, and the Idol of Fools) since
Custom (I say) will have it so, that a Man had as good go to Court without his
Cravat, as show himself in Print without a Preface; I shall even Content my
Self to play the Fool too, in so Much, and in so Good Company. (General
Dedications being no Other, then Fashionable Fopperies.) For what can be more
Ridiculous, than for a Man to Treat Princes, and Tinkers; Coxcombs, and
Philosophers; Men of Honor, and Rascals, promiscuously, all in a Style?

Now as it is no Easy Matter to give a Good Reason for Writing at all; so it
is yet more Difficult to give That Reason in an Epistle; which, at best, stands
in need of another very good Reason, for its own support. But Prefaces, at the
Ordinary rate of Prefaces, are wholly Inexcusable; Only an Idle Deal of
Fiddle-Faddle betwixt the Writer and the Reader, made worse, by Care, and
Peins; and Digested, out of Vulgar, and Pedantique Common-Places, into one Mass
of Putid and Elaborate Folly. This Liberty of Prefacing against Prefaces, may
seem a little Unreasonable; but Common Scriblers are allowed the Privileges of
Common Strumpets. One of the Frankest Prostitutes that ever I knew since I was
born, had These Words the oftenest in her Mouth: Lord! (says she) to see the
Impudence of some Women!

To come now to the Reasons that indu^^d me to the Translating of This Little
Book; I shall Begin with the Excellency of the Work it Self; which has ever
been Esteemed, both for the Method, and Matter of it, as one of the most Exact
Pieces of the Kind that ever was written, and the most Instructive of Human
Life. In so much that Cicero himself valued himself upon This Tract of Morals,
as his Masterpiece; and accordingly recommended the Study of it to his Beloved
Son, under That Illustrious Character. Secondly, as it was Composed in a Loose,
and Troublesome Age, so was it acc^^modated also to the Circumstances of Those
Times; for the assert-of the Force, and Efficacy of Virtue against the utmost
Rigor, and Iniquity of Fortune. Upon which Consideration likewise, I have now
turned it into English, with a regard to a Place, and Season, that extremely
needs it. I do not speak This, as if at any time it would have been
Superfluous; but that Desperate Diseases require the most Powerful Remedies.

To give you the Sum of it in a few Words; It is a Manual of Precepts for the
Government of our Selves, in all the Offices, Actions, and Conditions of Human
Life; and tending, not only to the Comfort of Men in Society, but to the
Conducting of Particulars also, into a State of Felicity, and Virtue. It is a
Lesson that serves us from the very Cradle, to the Grave. It teaches us what we
Ow to Mankind; to our Country; to our Parents; to our Friends; to our Selves;
what we are to do as Children; what, as Men; what, as Citizens: It sets, and it
keeps us Right in all the Duties of Prudence, Moderation, Resolution, and
Justice. It Forms our Manners; Purges our Affections; enlightens our
Understandings; and leads us, through the Knowledge, and the Love of Virtue, to
the Practice, and Habit of it.

This Treatise of Offices, I find to be one of the Commonest School-Books that
we have; and as it is the Best of Books; so it is applied to the Best of
Purposes; that is to say, to the Training up of Youth, in the Study and
Exercise of Virtue. The Foundations of an Honorable, and a Blessed Life, are
laid in the very Cradle; and we suck in the Tincture of Generous, or Perverse
Inclinations, even with our Mothers Milk: Insomuch that we may date the greater
part of our greatest Miscarriages, from the Errors, and Infelicities of our
First Institution, and Education. But though, upon the whole matter, I do Highly
approve of the Usage of This Book in Schools, I must confess yet, with
Submission, that I am not at all satisfied in the ordinary Way of using it. For
the cutting of it out into Particles, here and there a Chop, makes it a Lesson,
to the Boys, rather of Syntax, then Morality; beside the prejudice that it
suffers under the Trivial name of a School-Book; and the disgust which
naturally continues with us, even when we are Men, for that which we were whipped
for, when we were Boys.

Now the Matter of this Book being so Excellent; and truly the Latin of it
hardly Ciceronian; it should be our business rather to inculcate the Doctrine
then the Style; and yet in such manner too, that the One may be Attended,
without Neglecting the Other. And This may be effected to the Common Benefit of
the Scholar, in Both Kinds; by, First, Reading, and Expounding These Offices,
Whole to him, in English, before he be put to Hack, and Puzzle upon them by
Snaps in the Original; the One Facilitating, and Preparing him for the Other.
Let him be, First, and in his Mother Tongue, instructed in the Principles of
Moral Duties; and he shall then with the more Ease, Profit, and Delight, take
the same Notions down in Latin, and Digest them. Whereas in beginning with the
Latin, the Pupil has little more to do, then to bring together the Nominative
Case and the Verb, without either Understanding, or Heeding the main Scope, and
Intent of the Book.

I might here entertain the Reader with Twenty Stories of the Interruptions I
have met with, in the Course of This Translation; how it has been only the Work
of Broken Hours; and I might plead These Distractions in excuse of all its
Inequalities, and Defects. But such as it is, Plain, and Simple, I do here
present it to the Public, without either Vanity, or Complement: and, I hope,
without giving unto any sort of Reader any Just Cause of Compleint. For He that
does not like it, may let it alone, and there is no Hurt done.

TVLLY's OFFICES.
The First BOOK.
ALTHOUGH, It Is a great Advantage, Good Institution, and Good Example.
after Twelve Months spent in the School of Cratippus, and That at Athens too,
you cannot (my Son Marcus) but be abundantly instructed in the Precepts, and
Institutions of Philosophy, by reason of the Great Authority of the Master, as
well as of the Place; the One, for Erudition, the Other for Example: I am yet
of Opinion, that you shall do well, nevertheless, Greek and Latin, Rhetorique
and Philosophy, do well together.
to take the same Course in Your Studies, that I have done in Mine, and to
mingle your Latin with your Greek; as a Method which I have ever found very
much Conducing to the Business, both of an Orator, and of a Philosopher: Beside
that it will give you the Command, indifferently, of Both Languages. In This
Particular, I am persuaded that I have done my Countrymen no small Service;
and that not only those who have no Skill at all in Greek, but even the Learned
Themselves will acknowledge, that I have in some sort Contributed to the
Advantage, both of their Eloquence, and Judgment. Wherefore, as you have the
greatest Philosopher of this Age for your Master, you shall also Learn of him
as long as you please; and so long, certainly, you ought to desire to Learn, as
you find your self the Better for it. Upon the Reading of my Writings, Ce^ro
Half a Peripatetique.
you will see a great deal in them of the Peripatetique, (for I am a Follower
of Socrates, and of Plato Both.) As to the Matter it self, you are at liberty
to use your Own Judgment; but yet the Acquainting of your self with my Style,
will undoubtedly be of some Use toward the Improvement of your Latin Tongue.
And let me not in This be thought Arrogant neither; A better Orator, than
Philosopher.
For, allowing my self the meanest of many Philosophers, I have yet some Right,
me thinks, after an Age spent upon This Study, to value my self upon all the
Parts of an Orator; as Propriety, Perspicuity, and the Flowers, and Ornaments
of Wellspeaking. Wherefore I must Earnestly recommend unto you the Perusal, not
only of my Orations, but likewise of my Philosophical Discourses, which are now
swelled almost to the Bulk of the Other: and that you will read them with
Intention, and Care: for though there may be, in the Other, a greater Force, and
Dignity, yet This smooth, and temperate Mixture is not to be neglected. Among
the Greeks, None of the Greeks Excellent in Both Kinds.
I have not found any Man that has Successfully applied himself to the Language
of the Bar, and to this gentle way of Argumentation, both at once; unless I
should reckon Demetrius Phaler^us for one who was indeed a subtle Disputant, no
very Powerful Orator; but then such a Vein of Sweetness with him, that a Body
might imagine Theophrastus had been his Tutor. For my Own part, I have labored
in Both these Kinds; and with what Effect, let the World judge. Plato, I
believe, would have made a Ready, and a Weighty Pleader, if he had bent his
Mind to it: And Demosthenes, a Queint, and a Polite Philosopher, if he would but
have treated of, and stuck to what he had from Plato. And This was the Case
also, of Aristotle, and Isocrates; they were both of them fond of their Own
Way, and slighted one another.

BUT being resolved to Write somewhat to you at present, and More, Hereafter;
His Reasons for the Choice of This Subject.
I have made it my Choice to begin upon That Subject, which I look upon to be
most accommodate to your Age, and best becoming the Authority of a Parent.
There are many Profitable, and Important Points in Philosophy, which have been
accurately, and copiously handled by diverse Learned Men: But that which I take
to be of the Greatest Latitude, falls under the Head of Offices, or Duties
betwixt Man and Man; whereof, we have many Precepts, and Traditions transmitted
to us from our Forefathers. For there is no Condition of Life, either
Public, or Private; from Courts of Justice, to Particular Families; either
Solitary, or in Society; but there is still a place for Humane Duty: And it is
the Well, or Ill discharging of This Office, that makes our Character in the
World, either Glorious, or Shameful. And This is the Common Theme too of all
Philosophers; for who shall dare to Usurp That Sacred Name, that never
prescribed Rules for the Government of Life? He taxes the Epicureans.
But there are some Doctrines yet, that render these Offices wholly Vain and
Useless; upon a Mistake concerning the Ends of Good, and of Wicked Men: For
whosoever phansies any Possibility of separating the Supreme Good, from Virtue,
That Man can never be either a Friend, or a Just, or a Generous Person, upon
That Foundation. (That is to say, so long as he agrees with himself, and
without attending to the Dictate of a better Nature.) Can any Man be Brave,
that makes Pein the worst of Evils? or Temperate, that makes Pleasure the
Sovereign Good? This is so clear, that it is not worth a Dispute; beside that I
have expressly discoursed upon it in another place. The Patrons of these
Positions must Contradict themselves, if they will pretend, in any sort, to
intermeddle in This Matter: For there can be no Sound, Nothing desirable for it
self but Virtue.
Stable, and Natural Principle of Duty erected upon any Other Foundation, than
This; That Virtue is Only, or, at least, Chiefly desirable, for its proper
self. Wherefore the Stoiques, Academiques, and Peripatetiques, were much in the
Right, in This Particular; as the Whimsies of Aristo, Pyrrbo, and Herillus, are
long since out of Doors: Not but that They had as much Right as Other People,
to a Freedom of Debate, if they had but left us in a State, or Capacity of
Election; without Cutting off the very Means of any Correspondence at all with
Humane Duties. Therefore at This Time, and in This Question, I shall follow the
Stoiques; not as an Expositor, but (after my Usual Custom) I shall draw as much
Water at their Well as I think fit, and then make use of it according to my Own
Discretion.

BEING in this Book to treat of the Offices or Duties of Mankind, it will be
proper, in the First place, to define what is intended by the Word Office; (a
thing omitted by Panaetius, which I wonder at:) For all Reasonable Propositions
ought to be introduced by a Definition; All Disputes should Begin with a
Definition.
for the better understanding of the Point in Debate.

OF Duties, or Offices, A Division of Offices.
there are Two Kinds; the One respects the Ends of Good Men; the Other consists
in certain Rules, and Precepts to be applied to the Use, and Conduct of Humane
Life. Under the Former, are These Questions: Whether All Offices be perfect, or
not? Whether One Office be Greater, or Less then Another? And What Offices are
found to be of the same Sort, and Degree? But those Offices which are delivered
to us by Precept, though they have a regard also to the Life of Good Men, yet it
does not so much appear; because they seem to be rather a Provision for the
Ordering of Life in Society. These are the Offices which we shall Discourse of
in this Book. There is also Another Division of Offices; some are called
Middle, and Imperfect, others Perfect; We may call the Latter, a Right,
(according to the Greek word (...)) and the Other, a Common Office, ((...))
defining That to be Perfect which they call Right, and That to be a Middle
Office, when a Man may give a Reasonable Account for the doing of it.

Deliberation, according to Panaetius, under Three Heads.
IT is Natural to Deliberate, before we Resolve; and Panaetius reduces the
subject matter of Deliberation into Three General Heads. The First Question is,
Whether the thing deliberated upon, be Good, or Evil? wherein several Men are
many times of several Opinions. The Second Enquiry or Consult refers to the
Ease, Pleasure, or Convenience of Life; as Estate, for the Purpose Wealth, or
Power; by which we are enabled to be helpful, both to our selves, and our
Friends: Whether the Matter in debate be convenient, or not? And This Question
is carried by the Appearance of Profit. The Third Point of Deliberation, lies
in a Case, where the Honest and the Profitable come in Competition. For when
Vtility drives One Way, and Virtue invites us Another, there follows a
Distraction of Mind, and a dubious Anxiety of Thought. It is a great failing to
leave out any thing in a Division; and yet there are Two things omitted in
This. Cicero makes Five.
For the Question is not only Whether a thing be Honest, or Not, but where
there are Two things Honest, before us, which is the Honester? and of Two
Profitables, whether is the more Profitable? So that his Three Branches must be
extended to Five: First, the Concurrence of Two Good Things; Secondly, That of
Two Profitables; and Lastly, Both of them in Comparison. Of which in Order.

ALL Living Creatures are Originally moved by a Natural Instinct, Self-love is
Natural.
toward the means of Self-Preservation: As the Defense of their Lives, and
Bodies; the Avoidance of things hurtful to 'em; the search, and provision of
all Necessaries for Life; as Food, Shelter, and the like. It is likewise Common
to them All, the appetite of Propagating, and Continuing their Kind; with a
Certain Care, and Tenderness for their Issue. Now betwixt a Man, The Difference
betwixt Instinct, and Reason.
and a Brute, there is eminently This Difference. The One is carried on by
sense, and to That only which is present; with little or no regard to what is
either past, or to come: whereas the Other, by the Benefit of Reason, sees the
Consequences of Things; Their Rise, and their Progress; and couples together,
Causes, and Effects; compares Resemblances of Times, Actions, and Events; tacks
the Present, to the Future; and so taking in his whole Life at a View, he
prepares all things for the Use, and Comfort of it.

It is by Force of the same Reason, The Seeds of Justice.
that Nature makes one Man a Friend to Another; that she moves us to the Love
of Communication, and Society; Liberality.
that she implants in us a particular Affection to our Children, and dictates
to us the Necessity of Communities, and Councils. This is it that puts us upon
providing for Food, and Clothing; and not for our selves alone, but for our
Wives, our Children, our Friends, and for all those that are under our
Protection. Prudence.
This Impression raises great Thoughts in us; and fits us for Action: but there
is nothing so Appropriate, and Peculiar to Mankind, as the Love, and Faculty of
Tracing out the Truth. Insomuch, that we are no sooner at Liberty from Common
Cares, and Business, but our Heads are presently at work upon something to be
either seen, or heard, or understood; accompting upon the knowledge of things
wonderful, and hidden, as a necessary Ingredient into a Happy, and a Virtuous
Life. From whence may be drawn this Conclusion, That whatsoever is True,
Simple, and Sincere, is most congruous to the Nature of Man. This love of Truth
is accompanied with a desire of Rule; Magnanimity.
so that a Generous and Well-qualified Mind, will never be brought into
Subjection, unless either for Learning, or Instruction sake; or in Submission
to a Just, and Lawful Governor, for the Common Good. This Elevation begets a
Contempt of Fortune, and a Dignity of Spirit. Modesty and Temperance.
And it is no small matter neither, the power of Reasonable Nature even in This
respect; that Man alone understands Order; the Bounds of Decency, in Words, and
Actions, and the Terms of Moderation: That only Man is affected with the
Beauty, the Gracefulness, and the Symmetry of Visible Objects. Now if Nature,
and Reason, take such Care to convey the Images, even of Sensible Things, from
the Eye, to the Mind; how much a greater Value must she set upon the Grace, and
Constancy of our Manners; and the keeping such a guard upon all our Words, and
Deeds, that no Unmanly thing, not a loose Syllable, or Thought escape us? This
is the Composition of that Honesty we look for, which is never the less
Venerable, for being little Esteemed: For without any approbation from abroad,
the whole earth ^^nnot yet hinder it from being praiseworthy in its own
Nature. Oh! my Son, Marcus, we may fashion to our selves some feint Idea of
Virtue or Wisdom; but if it could be presented to our Eyes in its Genuine
Luster, how should we be transported (says Plato) with the Love of it?

THERE is not any Virtue whatsoever, The Four Cardinal Virtues, and the
subjectmatter of each.
but arises from One, or Other, of these four Heads; and consists either,
First, in the search, and perception of the Truth; or, Secondly, in the
Conservation of Hamane Society; giving every man his due; and keeping faith in
all Promises, and Contracts; or, Thirdly, in the Greatness, and Force, of a
Brave, and Invincible Courage; or, Fourthly, in the Order, and Measure of all
our Words, and Actions; according to the Rules of Modesty, and Temperance.

NOW though these four Virtues may be Complicate, and Linkt together, Distinct
Duties in a Complication of Virtue.
there are yet certain distinct Duties, that issue severally from each of them:
As the Scrutiny and Bolting out of a Truth; from Prudence, which is a Faculty
particularly appertaining to That Virtue: For he that makes the best judgment
of the Truth of Things; Prudence searches the Truth of Things.
he that most readily finds the way to it; and gives the best account of the
Reason of it, we conclude him, without all dispute, to be the wisest Man. So
that effectually, the proper Subject of This Virtue, is Truth: Justice shows it
self in Society.
But the Business of the Other three Virtues, is, To procure and maintain
Necessaries for the Commodity of Life; the upholding of Communities, and
Society; and to show the Dignity of the Mind, Fortitude in the Contempt of
Difficulties.
as well in ^^e Communicating of our Fortunes, as in the Acquiring of them; and
more yet (if there shall be occasion) in the despising of them. But Order,
Constancy, Moderation, Temperance in Order and Measure.
and the like, require something of Action, in concurrence with the Operations
of the Mind: And he that would acquit himself in the Course of his Life, with
Reputation and a good Grace, A Decorum in the Congruity of all.
must observe Order, and Measure.

Prudence is a Natural Virtue.
OF these Four Parts, into which we have divided the Nature, and the Power of
Virtue; that which concerns the disquisition of Truth, holds most affinity with
the Soul of Man. We are all of us, both drawn, and led to a desire of
Knowledge; and every man values himself upon being wiser then his Neighbor; but
on the other side, to Fail, to Wander, to be Ignorant, and to be deceived, we
look upon as a wretched, and a reproachful thing.

Have a care of Two Mistakes.
IN the pursuit of this most Natural Virtue, we must take heed of Two Mistakes:
First, the taking up of Things upon Trust; Credulity, and
and flattering our selves, that we know more, then effectually we do. He that
would keep clear of this Rock, (as every man should endeavor it) must
diligently attend his Business, and allow himself time to consider of it. The
Other is the bestowing of more Pains and Study upon things that are obscure,
hard, Curiosity.
and superfluous, then the Matter is worth: whereas by avoiding these Errors,
and employing the same application upon profitable Knowledge, and the study of
Virtue, a Man gains to him self deserved Commendation. We have heard of Cajus
Sulpitius, for his Astrology; of Sextus Pompeius, for his Geometry; and of
other persons eminent for Logique; and Civil Law; which Sciences are all of
them exercised in the Investigation of Truth; and yet for a man to divert
himself, by these Studies, from Common Offices, and Business, is against the
Nature of Humane Duty. For the Excellency of Virtue lies in Action; but yet not
without Intervals; for we must Work, and Rest, by Turns. Not that the Mind is
ever Idle; but still in a Constant Agitation of Thought, even when the Body is
most at Repose: and all the Motions of it are applied either to the
deliberating, and advising upon things Honest, and tending to a good and happy
life; or upon the Acquiring of Wisdom, and Knowledge. And so much for Prudence,
which is the first Fountain of Virtue.

OF the Other Three Virtues, Justice and Liberality.
we find That to be of the largest extent, which directs the Ordering of Men in
Society: and in a kind of Community of Life. Of This, there are Two parts;
Justice, which is the more Glorious Virtue, and entitles us to the very Name,
and Character, of Good men; and Beneficence, which we may otherwise call
Liberality, or Bounty. The first Duty of Justice is This; The Duties of Justice.
That we hurt no man, unless provoked to it by an Injury, and in our Own
Defense. We are then to distinguish, betwixt things Common, and Particular; and
to use them accordingly: Not that any thing is Private in its Own Nature; The
Bounds of it by the Civil Law.
but as it becomes so, either by Ancient possession, as appropriated by the
first Occupant, or by Conquest, upon the right of Arms; or else by Law,
Agreement, Condition, or Lot. From hence comes the Field Arpinas, to be called
Arpinatium, and Tusculanum, to be called the Field of the Tusculanes; and in
like manner is it of Private Possessions. Now since Custom, and Usage, have
rendered many things Private, which Nature made Common; let every man quietly
enjoy his Lot; and be reputed an Enemy to the Public, if he attempt any thing
beyond it. But because (as Plato says singularly well) we are not born for our
selves alone, but for our Country, our Parents, and our Friends: and with the
Stoiques, that the Earth, and all the Productions of it, were Created for the
Use of Man; and Man only for Man's sake begotten; that one might be helpful to
another: What can we do better then to follow, where Nature is our Guide. To
lay Common Benefits in Common; and by an Intercourse of Good Offices, as
Giving, and Receiving; by Arts, Industry, and all our Faculties, to Incorporate
Mankind into One Society.

THE Foundation of Justice, is Faith; That is to say; a Firmness, and Truth in
our Words, Promises, and Contracts. The Stoiques, that are great Etymologists,
A forced Etymology of Fides.
will have Fides to be as much as Fiat, And that it is therefore called Faith,
quia fit quod dictum est; because that which is said, is done. This may seem to
be far fetched; but however, we have taken the Freedom to apply it.

THERE are Two sorts of Injustice: Two sorts of Injustice.
One is the Immediate doing of an Injury; and the Other is, the not protecting,
or defending the Injured person; for so much as in us lies. For he that
Injuriously offers Violence to any Man, either in his Rage, The Injurious
Aggressor.
or any other Passion whatsoever, may be taken to be in some degree,
constructively, a Murderer; and he that does not his best, to save his
Neighbor from harm, and to keep off the Blow, is as well to blame (though not so
much) as the Deserter of his Parents, his Friends, his Country, And the
Deserter.
or his Companions. Now there are many Injuries done us upon Set purpose to
hurt us, which arise yet from Fear; as when he that watches to do Another man
mischief, An Injury out of Fear.
does it upon prevention, for fear the Other should hurt him. But the greater
Part of Injuries are done with a design to compass something we have a mind to:
wherein Avarice has a very great share. As to the Matter of Riches, they are
desired, Avarice.
partly for our Necessities, and partly for our Pleasures. The desire of Money
in great Minds, Magnificence.
is to make an Interest by it; and to get into our Power, the means of
obliging. It was the saying of Crassus, Ambition.
that He that would be Uppermost in a Commonwealth, could never have money
enough, till he Was able to maintain an Army at his own Charge. Luxury.
There is a pleasure also, in a Splendid, and Magnificent Appearance; rich
Furniture; and Men take delight to live in Reputation, Glory, and Plenty; which
begets an Insatiable Thirst of Money to maintain it. And yet we are not
forbidden to advance, or increase our Fortunes; provided it be done without
wrong to Another; and by Fair means, But Men are apt to forget the Rules, and
Measures of Justice, when they come once to be transported with the desire of
Empire, High Places, and Titles. It goes a great way, that saying of Ennius.
There is no Faith, or Fellowship in Empire. It Is a hard matter to preserve
Friendship, and Agreement, in a Case where there are many Competitors, and but
one can succeed: which manifestly appeared in that Tempest which C. Caesar
lately brought upon the Government; who confounded Heaven and Earth, and
overturned all Laws Divine, and Humane, for the compassing of that Power which
he vainly propounded to get wholly to himself. And great pity it is, that this
Inordinate desire of Honor, Dominion, Power, and Glory, does for the most part
infest the most Famous Wits, and the largest Minds: so that an Error in this
Case, is the more to be avoided.

NOW in all Injuries, there is a great difference betwixt that which is done
upon the Sudden, Difference of Injuries.
and in Hot Blood (which is Commonly but Short, and Transient) and that which
is done upon forethought, and Council, for those in a heat, are much lighter
then those upon preparation; and this shall suffice of Injuries, offered, or
done.

NOW why we do not Protect, Injuries of Omission; and the Causes of them.
Expense. Fear. Sloth. Business.
and Defend the Oppressed, but abandon our Duties; there may be several
Reasons. We are not willing to be at the Charge, or Trouble; we are loath to
make Enemies; or it may be, we are negligent, lazy, sluggish, taken up with
particular Studies; or hindered by Business, and This makes us leave those
exposed to Ruin, whom it is our Duty to preserve. Wherefore we must take heed,
not to rest upon that which Plato observes of the Philosophers; as if the
studying and endeavoring to find out the Truth, the vilifying and despising of
the things that most Men vehemently desire, and quarrel about, entitled them
presently to the Character of Honest Men: Not considering, that while they are
so just on the One side, as to wrong no Body, themselves; they are yet so
unjust, on the Other, as to leave Other People to do it: And so rather than
quit their Studies, they forsake their Duties, and their Friends, whom they
ought to defend. And therefore (says he) they would have nothing to do with the
Community it self, if they were not compelled by Force: A Thing which ought
rather to be done, by Good Will, and by Choice. For it is not the Quality of
the Act, let it be never so right, but the Intention of it, that makes the
Virtue. There are some, that either for saving of their Own Stake, or out of an
Averseness even to dealing with Mankind, cry, Let every Man look to his Own
Business; I meddle with no Body; And all this, to get the Reputation of
Harmless People. These Men, while they shun One Injustice, they fall into
Another. For he that contributes neither Study, Labor, nor Fortune, to the
Public, is a Deserter of the Community. Now these Two sorts of Injuries being
laid down, together with the Causes of them; and having stated, beforehand the
Bounds of Justice, it will be no hard matter to assign unto every Person, and
Occasion, its proper Duty, if we be not over partial to our selves: but in
another bodies Case, it is quite Another matter: Although Terence's Chremes
will have every Individual to be concerned in the Common Interest of Mankind:
But yet being more sensible, and quickersighted in our Own Concerns, then for
the Good, or Evil that befalls others; (which we look upon as more Remote) we
pass upon the One, and the Other, (though in the very same Case) a quite
Different Judgment. It is good Advice therefore, to forbear coming to a
Resolution; Do nothing with Doubting.
where we doubt whether the thing be good, or bad. For the Right is as Clear as
the Sun; but a wavering implies the deliberation of an Injustice.

Faith is not always to be kept.
BUT it often falls out, that the same thing which at one time would become a
Man of Honor, and Justice, would at another time not only Vary, but prove the
Clear Contrary. As the delivering up of a Trust to a Mad man; or keeping
promise with him: nay in matters of Faith, and Truth, it is just, in some Cases
to deny; and in others, not to keep Touch; for all must refer to those
Fundamentals of Justice already propounded. As First, to wrong no Man; and
secondly, in all Cases to consult the Common Good. So that the Duty is not
always the same; The Duty changes with the Occasion.
but changes with the Occasion. Suppose such a Promise of Contract past, as if
it were performed, would manifestly tend to the damage, either of the Party
promising, or of the person to whom the Promise was passed to have it
performed. If Neptune (as it is in the Fable) had not made good his Promise to
Theseus, his Son Hippolitus had been saved. The Story goes, that of Three
Wishes, the Last was in his Passion the destruction of Hippolitus: And the
Grant of That request, cast him into Inconsolable Sorrows. So that neither are
we to keep those Promises that are unprofitable to the Promised; or more
hurtful to the Promiser, then advantageous to the Other. Of Two Evils, Of Two
Evils the Less.
we are to choose the Less: As if I promise to plead any man's Cause, and in the
Interim, my Son falls dangerously Ill; it is no Breach of Faith, or Duty in me,
not to appear; but rather the Contrary; and it were yet worse, in him to whom
the Promise was made, to complain of such a disappointment. And now in matters
where a man is under Violence, or over-awed by Fear, or outwitted, and
over-reached by Fraud, every body knows that Those promises are not Binding;
many of them being discharged in Form, by the Praetors Court; and some by the
very Law it self.

Injuries of Fraud and Cavil.
THERE are several Injuries, that are merely matter of Cavil, and only
advantages taken, by a Crafty and malicious Interpretation of the Law. From
whence comes that saying, Extreme Right, is Extreme Wrong. The Proverb is now
worn Threed-bare. Of This Sort, there have been many Practices, even upon a
Public Score: One agreed upon a Truce with the Enemy for 30 days, and
afterward made Incursions upon him, and destroyed his Country by night; because
the Cessation was for days, not nights. Neither can I justify our Countryman,
if it be true: Q. Fabius Labeo (or some body else (for I have it only upon
Hearsay) was by the Senate Constituted Arbitrator of the Boundaries of Nola and
Naples. When he came to the place, he took the Commissioners apart, and advised
them in private, not to do any thing greedily, or to press too much; but rather
to abate of their Pretensions, then to demand more; and prevailed so far upon
them, that there was a good space of ground left betwixt them; so that when
they had marked out their Bounds, according to Agreement, that which was left
in the middle, was adjudg'd to the Romans. This was rather a Cheat then a
Judgment; and this Indirect, and Crafty way of Imposing, should be avoided in
all Cases. There are certain Duties to be observed also, even to those that do
us the greatest wrong; for there must be a Mean in the very Punishment, and
Revenge: and I do not know, whether it may be sufficient, for the Aggressor
barely to Repent of his Injury, without some Penalty over and above; both for
his Own Amendment, and the Terror, and Example of Others.

The Laws of War, The Rules of War.
among all Nations, should be strictly and Punctually observed. For since there
are but Two ways of Contending, the One, by Dispute, the Other, by Force; the
One, Humane, and the Other Brutal; we must of necessity have recourse to the
Latter, where the former will not take place. Wherefore the end of War is to
secure our selves from Violence, The End of War.
in a state of Peace: and in case of Victory, we should preserve those that
behaved themselves with Honor, and Generosity in the Action of the War: The
Roman Generosity to their Enemies.
As our Ancestors received into the very Privileges of the City, the Tusculans,
the AEqui, the Volsci, the Sabines, the Hernici; but Carthage, and Numantia,
they wholly rased. I could wish they had spared Corinth; but they had a
respect, I suppose, to the strength, and situation of the Place, and so
destroyed it; that for the future, it might not, some time or other, prove an
Encouragement to a Revolt. In my Opinion, Peace should be always consulted,
where it may be had without Treachery: and if my advice had been hearkened to in
This matter, we might yet at this day, have had some sort of a Republique,
though not the Best; whereas now we have just none at all. We should provide
likewise, not only for those that are Overcome in the Field, but for those also
that threw down their Arms, and cast themselves upon the Faith of the General.
And to those that yielded.
Nay I would have an Enemy received, even after the Battery is begun, and the
Breach made. In which Point, we have been so scrupulously Just, that according
to the Custom of our Predecessors, those that took Cities, or Nations,
conquered in War, into the Roman Allegiance, were made Patrons, and Protectors
of what they took. And the Rights of War are set forth with exact solemnity in
the Provisions of the Faecial Law; wherein we are given to understand, that no
War can be Just, Upon what Terms to undertake a War.
and Warrantable, unless it be grounded upon some matter of Claim, or denounced
beforehand, by Proclamation. Pompilius (the General) held a Province; A
Conscientious instance.
and a Son of Cato's listed himself a Soldier under his Command. Pompilius,
finding it convenient to discharge one Legion, Cato's Son serving in That
Legion, was also dismissed; but he continuing still in the Army, out of a love of
action, his Father wrote a Letter to Pompilius, Requesting him, that if his Son
continued with him in Arms, he would give him the Military Oath, over again,
because his former Sacrament being dissolved, he could not otherwise justify
his putting himself into the Quarrel. Such was the Reverence they bare, even to
the Conscience of making War! There is extant, an Epistle of Marcus Cato the
Elder, to his Son Marcus, when he was a Soldier in Macedonia, in the Persian
War. Wherein he tells his Son, that he heard the Consul had dismissed him; and
charges him not to engage in any Combat, as a thing unlawful for him, that was
no longer a Soldier, to fight an Enemy. It is remarkable, the changing of the
word Perduellis (a public Enemy) into Hostis; to sweeten the Foulness of the
Thing, by the softness of the Term. For Hostis (with our Forefathers) was as
much as Peregrinus, (a Stranger) as appears by the Twelve Tables. Aut status
dies cum Host. And then, Adversus Hostem AEterna Authoritas. What can be
Gentler, then to Treat an Enemy in this easy Language? Although Custom, I must
confess, has made it harsher, by transferring the signification of it, from
That of a Stranger, to the proper Denomination of one that bears Arms against
us. Nay in the Case of a War for Honor, or Dominion, there must yet be the same
Causes, and Grounds beforementioned, to make it Just: but still all Contests of
This kind must give fairer Quarter: for (as in ordinary Differences) we
distinguish betwixt an Enemy and a Rival, our Title, and Dignity lies at Stake
in the One Case; but our Life and Reputation, in the Other. The War we had with
the Celtiberi, and the Cimbri (the Spaniards, and Danes) was a War of Enmity;
and the question was not, who should Govern, but who should Live. With the
Latins, the Sabines, the Samnites, the Carthaginians; and with Pyrrhus, the
quarrel was Empire. The Carthaginians were perfidious; Hannibal was cruel; but
the Rest more Honorable. It was a Glorious Declaration, that of Pyrrhus, about
the discharge of some Prisoners, as we find it in Ennius. A Brave Resolution of
Pyrrhus.
Let Mercenaries Truck, and Treat for Gold;
Honor's a thing not to be Bought or Sold.
Courage and Steel must end this Glorious Strife;
And in the Case of Victory, or Life,
Fortune's the Judge. We'll take the Chance of War;
And what Brave man soever she shall spare
With Life; depend upon it; I Will set him Free;
Let him but Own the Gift, to the Great Gods, and Me.


This was a Royal Speech, and Resolution, and well becoming the Blood of AEacus.

BUT even in the Case of a Private promise; and upon what pinch, or necessity
soever; Faith is yet to be kept, even with an Enemy. Faith must be kept with an
Enemy.
When Regulus was taken Prisoner in the first Punique War, A noble Example of
Regulus.
and sent to Rome to solicit the exchange of some Prisoners, upon his Oath to
return: so soon as ever he came There, he advised the Senate against himself;
and that they should not agree to the Exchange. His Friends, and Relations
pressed him extremely against going back again; but he chose rather to return to
the Torture, then to stay and break his Faith to an Enemy. In the second
Punique War, after the Battle of Cannae, Hannibal sent ten Prisoners to Rome,
under an Oath of returning; unless they could obtain the Liberty of such and
such Prisoners in Exchange. They were no sooner out of the Camp, by Hannibal's
permission, A glorious piece of Justice.
but one of them found out a shift to evade the Oath; and presently went back
under color of something left behind him, and then returning, went his way, as
if the Obligation of the Oath had been discharged. And so it was, in Words, but
not in Effect; for in all promises, the Intention is to be considered, not the
Letter. The Censor set a Fine during Life, upon all their heads that were
forsworn; and upon His, among the rest, that invented this Shift. But the more
Generous Instance of Justice to an Enemy, was that of our Ancestors. The Romans
a generous Enemy.
in the Case of Pyrrhus: There was a Fugitive that made a Proposal to the
Senate, for the Poisoning and dispatching of Pyrrhus: but the Senate, and
Fabritius delivered up the Traitor to his Master: Such was the detestation they
had for Treachery, that they would not make use of it, though to the destruction
of a Powerful and an Invading Enemy. And so much for Military Duties.

WE must not forget neither, Of Justice to Inferiors.
that toward the meanest of men also, there is a Justice to be observed; even
in the Condition, and Fortune of Slaves: and it is good Council, to advise the
using of them as Hirelings; and for their Work, to allow them their Reward. Now
there are Two ways of doing a man an Injury; the one is by Force, the Other by
Fraud. The One is the quality of the Fox, the Other of the Lion. They are
neither of them proper for a Man; but yet Fraud is the more Odious of the Two;
and of all Injustices, That is the most Abominable, and Capital, which imposes
upon us, under the color of Kindness and Good meaning: and this shall suffice
for Justice.

TO pursue my purpose, I shall now handle the Point of Liberality, Of
Liberality.
or Bounty; then which there is nothing more accommodate to the Nature of man:
But it falls under many Limitations. How to Give, How much, and to Whom.
It should be our first Care to see, that what we Give, may not be to the
disadvantage of the person we would oblige, or of any other body; and that it
be not above our Proportion. Secondly, that it be suited to the Dignity of the
Receiver; for This is the Foundation of Justice, to which all the Circumstances
of it are to be referred, He that pretends to gratify any man with that which
is rather to his damage, then to his Benefit, is so far from deserving the
Reputation of being Liberal, or Bountiful, that he is to be accounted as the
most pernicious of Flatterers. And Those also that Rob one man, to give to
another, are guilty of the same Injustice, with them, that take Money out of
their Neighbors Pockets, to put into their Own. There are many people that look
big, and set up for men of Honor, that yet have this humor of taking from one,
and giving to another; and reckon upon it, as a high piece of Bounty, if they
can but advance the Fortunes of a Friend, upon what Terms soever. But This is
so far from a Good Office, Whom to Oblige.
that it is the clear Contrary. Let us therefore so govern our Favors, that we
may oblige those we love, and yet hurt no body. Shall we call it Liberality, in
L. Sylla, and C. Caesar, the Translation of so many Estates from the Right
Owners, into the possession of Strangers? There can be no Liberality in a Case
of Injustice. The Second Caution is the keeping of our Bounty within Compass;
Give in Proportion.
and not to give beyond our Ability; for they that extend their Kindnesses
beyond this Measure, wrong their Relations, by transferring those Bounties to
Strangers, which they should rather have communicated, or left to their
Friends. This humor of Liberality, is commonly accompanied with a certain
Greediness, that makes no Scruple of getting any thing, though by Rapine, or
Injury, so they may but have wherewithal to supply a mistaken Bounty. Nay,
Consider the Intent of the Giver.
there are many that give largely, merely to be Thought Bountiful; and This,
only upon a Score of Vanity, without any Frankness of Heart; which is rather a
flash of Ostentation, then an act of Generosity, and Virtue. The Third Caution
is, the making Choice of a worthy Person; The Choice of the Person.
wherein we should consider the Morals of the Man that we would oblige; his
particular disposition toward us; our intercourse with him in a Community, and
Society of Life, and the good Offices he has already done us. It would be
well, if we could find a Concurrence of all these; but if not, the more
Inducements we have, and the greater they are, the more is their weight.

HOWBEIT, since we do not live with Men absolutely Perfect, There is no Stoical
Perfection.
either for Virtue, or Wisdom; but with those that acquit themselves very well,
if they can but arrive at some seint resemblances of Virtue; let This be also
taken into Consideration, that no Man whatsoever is to be neglected, in whom
there appears the least sign, or Glimmering of Goodness. But still we are to
set the greatest Value upon him, Whom to value most.
that we find best endowed with the soft, and gentle Virtues of Modesty,
Temperance, and that Justice, of which we have already spoken at large. For a
Bold, and Manly Courage, in a Man that is neither Good, nor Wise; is commonly
more forward, and eager, perhaps, then is Convenient. The Other are more
properly the Virtues of a Good Man. And so much for our Manners.

How to return Benefits.
TOUCHING the Good Will that any Man bears us; it is, First, our Duty to do much
Good, where we are much Beloved: but then we are not to express that Affection,
in a Childish Ardour, and Fondness of Passion; but in a Constancy, and Firmness
of Mind.

Benefits to be repaid with Interest.
IN the Case of an Antecedent Merit, where we are not now to Enter into an
Obligation, but to Acknowledge, and Requite it; there must be a more than
Ordinary Care taken. For Gratitude is the most Indispensable of all Duties. If
Hesiod bids us, Restore what we borrow; if we can, in a Larger Measure; what
ought we to do in the Case of a Prior Obligation? Are we not to imitate
Fruitful Lands, that still Return more than they Received? We are ready enough
to oblige those that we hope to be the better for hereafter. How should we
behave our selves then, toward such as we are the Better for already? Since so
it is, that there are two sorts of Liberality, the One, of Bestowing a Benefit,
and the Other of Returning it; it is at our Choice, whether we will Give, or
no: But an Honest Man is not at Liberty in the point of Returning it; provided
that it may be done without Injury. And yet we are to distinguish also betwixt
Benefits Received; and the Greater the Benefit, the Greater is the Obligation.
Now the Obligation is to be valued according to the Mind, the Intention, and
Good Will of the Giver: For many People do many things rashly, Rash Bounties.
without either Judgment, or Measure. They Squander away their Donatives,
indifferently upon all; carried on by sudden, and impetuous Passions, as if
they were driven by the Wind. Now these Benefits are not so much to be
esteemed, as those that are conferred with Steadiness, and Consideration. As to
the Placing of our Bounties, and Returning of Acknowledgments, Whom to Requite
first.
(supposing other things to be Equal) it is our Duty to help him First, that is
most in Want; though most People do the Contrary. For they are there most
Officious, to offer their Service, where they hope for most again; though in
cases, where their help was not at all needful.

FOR the Preservation of Society, and good Correspondence among Men, we should
do well to proportion our Bounties to our Relations; and to give most to those
that are our nearest Friends. But for those Principles of Nature, which regard
Communities, and Humane Society, they must be fetched higher; as the First
thing that we take notice of in the Fellowship of Mankind. Reason, and Speech
are the Bond of it; Reason and Speech are the Bond of Humane Society.
which, by Teaching, Learning, Communicating, Disputing, and Judging,
accommodate one Man to another, and ciment the whole Body into a kind of
Natural Community. Nor is there any thing wherein we are further removed from
Beasts, than in this Advantage of Society. It is usual for us to speak of
Courage, and Boldness, in Lions and Horses; but we hear nothing of either
Justice, Equity, or Goodness in them; and the business is, that they have
neither Speech, nor Reason. This Society of One Man with Another, and of All,
with All; This Society, (I say) General and Particular, is of a large extent;
And herein there must be a Community preserved, of all those things which
Nature has brought forth, for the Common Use of Men: provided always, that
such things as are limited by Laws, and Civil Ordinances, may be observed
according to the Constitution. As to the rest; they may be reduced to the Greek
Proverb, Friends have all things in Common. Now all those things that Men hold
in Community, are such, as Ennius having laid down in One Instance, may be
applied to Many. To put a Wandering Traveller in's Way,
Is but to light One Candle with Another:
I Have never the less, for what I Give --


FROM this One Case we may learn, that whatsoever we may part with to Another,
Benefits in Common.
without any Damage to our selves, it is our Duty to Give, or to Lend Freely,
though to a Stranger. Of This sort, we reckon many things to be in Common; as
Water from a River; Fire from Fire; Good Counsel to a Man that is in doubt, or
distress. All these things are profitable to the Receiver, without any loss, or
burden to the Giver. So that we may both use these things our selves, and yet
be still contributing of somewhat to the Common Good. But in regard that
particular Persons have not much to Give, and the Number of those that want, is
almost Infinite; Common Liberality must have a respect to that End of Eunius.
We must keep wherewithal to give Light to our selves, that we may have the
Means of being bountiful to our Own.

TO descend now from Humane Society in the Latitude, of which there are many
degrees; Degrees of Communities.
there is a nearer Bond yet, betwixt People of the same Province, the same
Nation, and the same Language: And it is yet stricter, betwixt Men of the same
City: For among Citizens, there are many things in Common: Common Privileges.
As Courts of Justice, Temples, Walks, Ways, Lanes, Customs, Judgments,
Suffrages; beside frequent Meetings, and Familiarities, Common Business,
Commerce, and Contract. And there is yet a nearer Tie; and That is, the Society
of Kindred, which is Contracted into a narrow place, apart from the Vast
Society of Mankind. It is by Nature, Common to all living Creatures, the
appetite of producing the Kind: And the First Society is in Wedlock, Marriage,
Children, Families.
the next, in Children; it comes then to a Family, and a Community of all
things. And this is the Original of a City, and as it were the Seminary of a
Commonwealth. The Relation of Brothers comes next; and after That, of Brothers,
and Sisters Children; who, when they are too many for One House, are
transplanted into Others, as into Colonies. And then follow Matches, and
Alliances, with increase of Kindred; Kindred.
and their Offspring is the Beginning of a Commonwealth. There is no doubt but
Relation of Blood, and the Kindness that arises from it, must necessarily
endear Men to One another. For it is a great matter to have the same Pedigree;
to exercise the same Religion, and to deposite their Ashes in Common
Sepulchers: But of all Associations, Friendship.
there is none so Firm, none so Noble, as when Virtuous Men are linked together
by a Correspondency of Manners; and a Freedom of Conversation. For such is the
Charm of That Honesty which we have often spoken of, that the very Encounter of
it moves us, though in a Stranger, and makes us Friends to the Possessor of it,
wherever we find it. Now though all Virtue whatsoever, is, of it self, Amiable,
and Attractive; insomuch that we cannot but have an Esteem for those that we
find possessed of it; yet Justice, and Liberality gain upon us in a higher
degree. But there is nothing more Lov^ly, or more Engaging, than a Conformity,
and Agreement of Good Manners. For where there are the same Inclinations,
Similitude of Manners.
the same Desires, and the same Will, the One cannot choose but be delighted
with the Other, as with its proper self; and it effects that which Pythagoras
requires in Friendship; the making One, of many: And it is a great Obligation
that is created by the reciprocation of Benefits, that pass Forward and
Backward, in Exchange: Exchange of Benefits.
which being mutual, and grateful; must needs, upon the Intercourse, produce
firm and extraordinary Friendship. But when ye shall have looked over all the
Ties in Nature, as far as your Mind, and your Reason can carry you; you will
find nothing dearer, no Obligation of greater importance, then That by which we
are every one of us Tied to the Commonwealth. Our Parents, Children, Kindred,
Acquaintance, are all dear to us; but our single Country is more then all the
Rest: Our Duty to our Country.
and every honest man is ready to lay down his life for the advantage of that
sacred Interest. How execrable then is the barbarous Impiety of those people,
that have torn their Country to pieces, by all sorts of Villainy; and who not
only have been, but are at this instant, conspiring the destruction of it, by a
final desolation? But if there should be any dispute, or Comparison, where to
pay our duty, in the first place, our Country and our Parents are the
Principals; to whose Benefits we are the most Obliged. Our Children and our
Families are next; Our Kindred and Friends.
as depending upon us alone, without any other Retreat: After These, our
Friends and Relations; which are commonly of our Own Rank, and Condition.
Wherefore we owe the necessary helps of Life to these beforementioned; But for
Conversation, Table-Society, Counsels, Exhortations, Consolations, and (upon
Occasion) Reproofs: These things are found most amongst Friends; and let me
tell you over again; The pleasantest Friendship is That, which is contracted by
a Similitude of Manners.

NOW in the Exercise of all these Duties, we should observe what every man has
most need of; and what with our help, he may, and what without our help, he
cannot attain; and in some cases there is a respect to be had to Times, Duties
vary with Circumstances.
and Occasions, even before Relations: There are some Offices that we should
rather pay to One, then to another; as I would sooner help a Neighbor in with
his Harvest, then either a Brother, or Familiar Acquaintance; but in a Suit of
Law, I Will defend my Kinsman, or my Friend, before my Neighbor. Wherefore these
Circumstances, and the like, should be duly considered in all Offices. By
Custom, and Exercise, we shall become good Accomptants: For it is by Adding,
and Substracting, that we come to know what Remains; and Consequently, in all
Cases, the Bounds, and Limits of our Duty: But as neither Physicians, nor
Commanders; nor Orators, though never so well instructed in the Rules of their
Profession, shall ever be able, without Use, and Practice, to make themselves
Eminently famous; to the same end, are the Precepts of Humane Duties delivered
us; that we should put them in exercise; but yet the difficulty, and Condition
of the thing does over and above require it. Now in what manner that Virtue is
derived, and whence That Duty arises, which falls under the Consideration of
Sociable Rights, and Common Justice; we have almost said enough already.

In the propounding of Four general Heads, from whence all Virtues, and Duties
flow; That which is done with a Noble, and Exalted Mind; a Mind advanced to the
Contempt of Fortune, and Worldly things; Magnanimity.
that Virtue, I say, ought to be reputed the most Glorious: and therefore that
Reproach of Ennius's is always at hand upon Occasion: Young Men, in show, but
Wenches, in your Hearts;
While Cloelia plays the Brave, and acts your Parts.
You're for Exploits that cost no Sweat, nor Blood, etc.


And on the other side, with what Transport and Rapture do we extol the humor
of Brave and Generous Actions? From hence, comes that Field of the
Rhetoricians, upon Marathon, Salamis, Plateae, Thermopilae, Leuctrae,
Stratocles; and from hence it is, that our Cocles, the Decij, the two Scipio's,
Marcellus, and a World of others, especially the Romans Themselves, are grown
so famous, for the Greatness of their Minds. And their ambition of Military
honor, may appear in This, that almost all the Statues they have left us, are
dressed up in Armor.

AND yet That Elevation of Courage, which is seen in Hazzards, and Adventures,
unless accompanied with Justice, and contending rather for the Public, then
for it self; That Courage (I say) is so far from being a Virtue, that it is a
Fault, and a brutal Ferity, inconsistent with the Tenderness of humane Nature.
Wherefore the Stoiques have well defined it, Courage defined.
in calling Courage, a Virtue contending for Equity. Nor did any man ever gain
the Reputation of True Valor, by Treacheny, or Malice. Nothing can be Honest,
but what is Just; and therefore it was notably said of Plato. As That Knowledge
(says he) which is divided from Justice, is rather Craft, then Wisdom; so That
Courage, which is Bold, and Adventerous, is rather Temerity, and Foolhardiness,
then Valor; if it be carried on by Passion, or Interest, rather then for a
Common Good. Wherefore all Men of Valor, and great Undertakings, should be
likewise Men of Goodness, Simplicity, Candor, and Friends of Truth: which are
all Inseparable from Justice. But the Mischief is, that this Tumor, and
Elation of Mind, breaks out many times into a Pertinacy, and an Ambitious
desire of Rule. Pertinacy and Ambition.
For as Plato has it, the Lacedaemonians were Naturally inflamed with an Ardent
desire of Overcoming. So that whosoever has the greatest Soul. is the most
addicted to aspiring Thoughts: And to set himself above All; or in Truth rather
to stand Alone. It is a very hard matter, for a Man to observe the Tenor of
True Equity (which peculiarly belongs to Justice) in the Inordinate Appetite of
Superiority and Dominion, From whence it comes to pass, that such men will not
be governed, either by Reason, or any Public, and Lawful Constitution. This
humor starts Factions in a Commonwealth, that work by Bribery, and Corruption,
to advance their Power, and their Fortunes; whose business it is, rather to
make themselves Greater, by Violence, then to keep themselves in a Station of
Equality by Justice. But the harderany thing is, the fairer it is; nor is there
any Time, or Season, that can dispense a man from Justice. Wherefore Those are
Truly Brave, and Magnanimous, that keep off an Injury, not Those that offer it.
He that is truly Wise, and Stout, places That Virtue which is most consonant to
Nature, in Action, and not in Glory; and in making himself more Considerable
then other men, rather then appearing so. No man can be said to be truly
Heroique, that depends, for his Reputation, upon the Opinion of the Multitude.
But every man, the higher his Stomach is, and the greater his Thirst of Honor,
the more easily is he transported to do Unjust things. He stands upon a
Slippery place: For where is the man, who after all his hazzards, and Travels,
does not desire, and expect Glory, as a reward of his Adventures?

YOU shall know a man of Generosity, True Magnanimity.
and Courage, chiefly by these two Marquis. First, he despises outward things,
upon an Opinion that a man should not admire, wish for, or desire any thing but
what is Becoming and Honest; nor subject himself to any Person, Passion, or
Fortune. The Other is a disposition of Mind (as is said before) that spurs a
man to attempt things Great and Profitable; but difficult, laborious, and
dangerous, as well in the matter of Life it self, as in other Conveniences that
belong to it. All the Splendour, and Reputation (and let me say, the Profit also)
of These two Things rests in the Latter: but the Cause, and the Motive is in
the Former: For There is the Rise, and Spring of great Resolves, that carry men
even above the Consideration of any thing that is below. The thing it self is
seen in Two particulars: First in Judging That only to be Good which is Honest;
and, Secondly, in a Freedom of the Mind from all Perturbations. For it must be
confessed to be the part of a Brave and Generous Mind, to look upon Those, as
Little Things, which many Account to be Great, and Glorious; and to Contemn
them, upon the Foundation of a Firm, and settled Judgment. It is likewise the
part of a Constant, and Invincible Mind, so to bear all sorts of Calamity, and
Affliction, as neither to depart from the Order of Nature, nor to descend below
the Dignities of a Wise man. How Incongruous is it for a man that stands the
shock of Danger, to be broken with Lust? or to endure the Fatigue of Labor;
and then to be overcome with Pleasure? This must therefore be avoided; and so
must the greedy desire of Money. Contempt of Money.
There is not a greater Argument of a Narrow, and Wretched Mind, then to dote
upon Pelf: Nothing more humane, and honorable, then to despise it, if we have
it not; and to employ it generously, and do good with it, if we have it. And so
for the Affectation of Glory: Affectation of Glory.
We must beware of it (as is said already) for it bars a man of his Liberty;
which a Brave Man will rather die, then part with. We should not be sollicitous
neither for Power; which, in some Cases, we should not receive, and in others,
we should lay down We must deliver our selves from all disorders of mind;
either by Fear or Appetite: and likewise from all Sowerness, and Transport,
either of delight, or of Wrath; that we may be Calm, and Secure: In which
State, we shall Find both Steadiness, and Credit. There are at this day, and
there have been many, that to gain this Repose, have wholly withdrawn
themselves from Public Business: Among These, A Retired Life.
the noblest, and most eminent of Philosophers; and men truly, of great
Severity, and Weight; who could neither endure the People, nor Government: and
so retired into Deserts, and Retreats, to live privately with Themselves. And
these men, in this Recess, had the same Design with Princes (whose Privilege is
to live as they list) that they might want nothing, but enjoy their Freedom,
without Control. Wherefore, since both Those that affect Power, and the other
Idle people that I speak of, aim at the same thing; and have This in common
betwixt them; the One thinks they may Gain their End, if they had but ample
Fortunes: and the Other, Theirs, if they can but be content with their Own, and
with a Little: They may be Both, (for ought I know) in some measure, in the
Right. But it must yet be allowed, that a Private, and Retired Life, is both
Easier and Safer: And less Importune, and Troublesome to Others. But the life
of Those that apply themselves to Public business, is more profitable to
Mankind; and more conducing to the Acquisition of Honor, and Reputation in the
World. Wherefore there is something to be said for those Excellent Wits that
dedicate them Selves to Letters; without meddling in Public Affairs: And also
for such Others, as either for want of Health, or perhaps some more powerful
Impediment, have quitted their public Stations; being well satisfied, that
others should enjoy the Power and the Credit of the Employment. But for those
that have none of this Pretense, to talk of despising Government, and Offices,
which most people have in great estimation; I do not only, not approve of them,
but take them to be much to blame. Not that I disallow of their Judgment, in
the little Consideration they seem to have for Glory; but because they are
manifestly afraid of the Labors, Troubles, Repulses, and Displeasures that
they are to encounter. For there are many that behave themselves Unequally in
Contrary Cases: Severe Contemners of Pleasure, but they sink under Pain;
Regardless of Fame, but dejected with Scandal. Nor are they Steady, even in
these very Cases: But for those that are by nature, fitted and qualified for
Civil Business; I should advise These people to apply themselves to it without
delay; and to take some Commission in the Government. For This is Necessary,
both as to Public Administration; and to show the Greatness of the Mind. And
public Officers, as much perhaps, as Philosophers themselves, (if not more)
should be affected with a general disdain of External things, (as I have often
said) and stated in an Immovable Tranquillity, and security of Mind; which will
deliver them from all Anxiety for things to come; and establish them in a life
of Constancy, and Honor. Now this Point is by so much easier, for a
Philosopher to gain, by how much his Life is less exposed to the Stroke of
Fortune: For there are not many things that he stands in need of: beside, that
in case of any disaster, his Fall is not so dangerous. It is but reasonable
therefore to Conclude, that Men in Great, and Public Places, are exposed to
greater Perturbations of Thought, then those that live in Privacy and Repose.
So that a greater Stock of Courage is there Necessary, and a Mind at Liberty
from Trouble, and Care. But for him that puts himself into Business; let him
first consider the Honesty of the Employment; and Then, his Own Abilities, to
go thorough with it. Wherein let him neither rashly despair, out of
heartlesness, and sloth; nor be over Confident neither, in the Opinion of
himself. But in all matters of Business, a man should diligently prepare
himself before he goes about it.

BUT since most Men take Military Charges to be of a greater Consideration then
Civil, A Comparison of Military Virtues with Civil.
This Opinion should be a little qualified; For it is a very Common thing for
men to apply themselves to that course of Life, out of an Itch of Glory; and
this happens most frequently in Men of large Souls, and Abilities: Especially
where the Genius lies that way, and the Disposition carries them to the
Profession of Arms. But if we would deal impartially, there have been Greater
and more Glorious things done in the Senate, then in the Field for although
Themistocles be worthy of all honor, and his Name, and Memory, more
Illustrious then That of Solon; Salamis being still mentioned as a Memorial of
his noble Victory over Xerxes, which is still preferred before the Counsel of
Solon, for the Institution of the Areopagites. This must not at all give way to
That: For the One did once, deliver, preserve, and help the City; but the Other
will ever do it. This Council preserves the Laws of Athens, and Constitutions
of their Ancestors. Themissocles cannot say that ever he helped Areopagus, but
the Other may truly boast of serving Themistocles. For Solon was the Founder
of That Senate which managed the War: And so for Pausanias, and Lysander. It is
true, that their Actions, and Conduct, enlarged the Territories of the
Lacedaemonians; and yet the Laws of Licurgus, are Incomparably to be preferred.
Nay, and upon That very Consideration, their Armies were both Readier and
Bolder. It was my Opinion, even when I was a Boy, that Marcus Scaurus was not
Inferior to Caius Marius; and when I came afterward into Public Business; I
looked upon Q. Catulus not one jot below Cneius Pompeius. For what signify
Armies, Abroad, without Counsel at Home? Neither did Affricanus (though an
Excellent Man, as well as a great Captain) do the Commonwealth a Nobler Service
in the Rasing of Numantia, then Pub. Nasica (a private Man) did at the same
time, in cutting off Tiberius Gracchus. Now This Instance is not purely Civil;
but in some respect, Military, because it was done by a Violent hand: But still
it was done by a Civil Council, and without an Army. It was a memorable saying
of mine, that is so often cast in my Teeth, by a sort of Malicious, and Envious
people. Let Swordmen to the Gown give place.
And Crown the Orator with Bays.


To pass over other Instances. Did not the Sword give place to the Gown, when
the Commonwealth was under My Administration? Never was there a more malicious
Conspiracy; and yet by the Influence of our Diligence, and Counsel, how quickly
was it crushed? Insomuch, that the very Arms themselves fell out of the hands
of the most Audacious of the Mutineers. When was there ever any Action done in
the Field, or any Triumph Comparable to it? This Boast,. to You, my Son, that
are to inherit the honor of my Actions, and to whom I would recommend the
Imitation of them; This Boast, to You, (I say) may be allowed me. Nor is it any
more then Cn. Pompey (a Man laden with Military honors) ascribed to me in a
full Audience. My Third Triumph (says he) would have been to little purpose, if
Cicero, by preserving the Commonwealth, had not left me a place wherein to
Triumph. So that Domestique, and Civil Resolution, is not Inferior to
Military. And it requires more Pains, and Study, to be employed upon it. That
Virtue without dispure, which we look for from a High, and Illustrious Mind, is
acquired by the Force of the Soul, not of the Body. And yet the Body is still
to be kept in Exercise; and so affected, as to obey the Dictates of Counsel and
Reason, in the dispatch of Business, and in the bearing of Toil. But the
honesty here in question is wholly placed in the Care and Consideration of the
Mind: wherein the Men of the Robe, in Civil Administration, bring no less
advantage to the Public, then Those that b^ar Arms: For War is many times,
either not begun, or otherwise finished, by their Advice: Nay, and some brought
on too: as the Third Punique War of M. Cato was; where his Authority prevailed,
even when he was dead. Wherefore the Faculty of Determining, is more desirable
then that of Contending. Always provided that we steer not our Cour^e r^ther by
an Aversion to War, then a Consideration to Benefit. In the Undertaking of a
War there should be such a prospect, as if the Only end of it were Peace. It is
the part of a Vali^nt and a R^solute Man, not to be discomposed in disasters,
or to make a Bustle, and be put beside himself; but to maintain a presence of
Mind, and Judgment, without departing from Reason. As this is the Marque an^
E^^ect of a great Courage; so is the Other, of an Excellent understanding, to
forecast in our Thoughts the Events of things to come: and to weigh beforehand
the Good and the Bad; and what is to be done when it happens, without being put
to the foolish Exclamation of who would have Thought it? These are the Works of
an Elevated Soul, that supports it self upon Prudence, and Judgment: but he
that rashly thrusts himself into Dangers, without fear, or wit; and engages an
Enemy hand over head; this is only Brutality, and Outrage: But yet when the
time comes, and necessity requires it, let a man fight with his Sword in his
hand; and rather lose his Life, then his Honor and Freedom.

IN the Case of Rasing or Demolishing of Cities there should be great Care
taken, Clemency to the Conquered.
that nothing be done either Headily, or Cruelly. It is the part of a Great
man, in Public Broils, to punish the Guilty; but still to spare the
Multitude; Spare the Multitude.
and in all Conditions, to adhere to that which is Right, and Honest.

THERE are some that esteem Feats of Arms above Civil Administrations; (as is
aforesaid) and there are Others that think it more estimable, to deal in
Dangerous, and Crafty, then in Quiet, and Considerate Counsels. We must never
in such manner avoid Dangers, as to appear Weak and faint-hearted; Courage with
Discretion.
And we must likewise have a Care, on the other side, not thrust our selves
into Unnecessary hazzards; which is one of the greatest Follies in the World.
Wherefore in difficult Cases, we should do like Physicians, that apply Gentle
Remedies to Gentle Diseases: but in Cases of Extremity, a desperate disease
must have desperate Cure. None but a Mad man will with for a Storm in fair
Weather. But it is yet the part of a Wise man, to weather it the best he can,
if he falls into a Tempest. And the honor is so much the more, if the
advantage of the success be greater then the Miscarriage.

ACTIONS are dangerous, Danger Public and Private.
partly to the Undertakers, and in part to the Commonwealth: Some run the
hazard of their Lives; Some of their Good names; and Others, of the Love of
the people: Now we should more frankly venture our selves, then the Public:
and more cheerfully expose our selves for Honor, and Reputation, then for
other Commodities. A Mistake in point of Honor.
Some there are that make no scruple of hazzarding their Lives, and Fortunes,
in the defense of their Country; and yet are so nice and scrupulous in the
matter of Reputation; that rather then run any risque of their Honor, they
will leave their very Country in danger. As Callicratidas the Lacedemonian
General, in the Peloponnefian War; after many glorious Exploits, ruined all at
last, by not removing the Navy from the Arginusae, and making his Retreat
without giving the Athenians Battle, as he was advised to do; To which he made
This answer, that if the Lacedaemonians lost one Fleet, they might set out
another; but that if he quitted his Ground, his Honor was lost for ever. But
the Lacedaemonians however might have born this Loss, whereas the Other Blow was
mortal; when Cleombrotus, for fear of an Ill Report, unadvisadly engaged with
Epaminondas, where the whole power of the Lacedaemonians was cut off at a Blow.
How much better now was the Conduct of Q. Fabius Maximus, of whom Ennius.
Fabius was slow; but sure; and his Delay
Restored the tottering State. Now it was his way
To mind his Business, not what people said:
He lived a Great man, but he is Greater dead.


This is an Error, of a Quality to be avoided also in Civil Matters. For there
are many that dare not speak their Opinions, though for the best; for fear of
falling under Evil Tongues.

THERE are two Precepts of Plato to be observed by all Men of Authority in the
Government. The One is, Plato's advice to Magistrates.
in some sort to assert and defend the Public Interest, that all their
Actions should refer to That, without any regard to their Own advantage. The
Other is, to attend the service of the whole, in such sort, that while they are
serving one part, they do not abandon another. It is in the Administration of a
Government, as in the Case of a Ward: The Commission has a regard to the
benefit of those that are delivered up in Charge; and not those to whom such a
Charge, or Care is Committed. But they that Provide for One part of the People,
and Neglect Another, bring into a City the most pernicious thing in the World;
That is to say, Discord, and Sedition: The danger of Factions.
and when they are split into Parties, some side with the People; others, with
the Nobility: but none mind the Whole. This wrought great Mischiefs among the
Athenians; and in our Republique not only Sedition, but the most Pestilent
Civil Wars. A Course not to be endured by a Sober, and Valiant Patriot; or any
man that deserves a place in the Government: For such a man will apply himself
wholly to the Care of the Public, without designing either upon Wealth, or
Power to himself; and in such manner defend the whole, that he also provide for
every part of it: Neither will he bring any man into Envy, or Hatred, by
Calumny, o^ Subornation; but resolutely adhere to Justice and Honesty;
maintaining his Post, in spite of all Opposition; and rather die then desert
the aforesaid Duties.

AMBITION or the Thirst of Honor is a wretched thing: Of Ambition.
Of which Plato says very well; they that strive who shall be Uppermost in the
Republique, do as if Mariners should contend which should be at the Helm. And
he tells us further, that we are to account those for Enemies that take up
Arms against the Commonwealth; and not such as with Honesty, and Judgment
labor to defend it. This was the Controversy betwixt P. Affricanus, and Q.
Metellus, without any sort of bitterness.

GIVE no ear 0to those that take it to be the part of a Brave, and Resolute
man, to be Violently Angry with an Enemy: Against Anger.
For there is nothing more commendable or better becoming a generous Person,
then Clemency, and Good Nature. Nay toward a Free People, where all are liable
to the Law, we should join a Facility with That which we call height of
Courage, least if we should accustom our selves to Transports upon Unseasonable
Addresses, or shameful Importunities, we should fall into a humor of Morose
and unprofitable sourness: Provided that with these soft, and gentle ways, we
use severity also, where the Public requires it; for without That, a City can
never be kept in order.

ALL Reproof, and Correction, Of Reproof and Correction.
let it be without Contumely, as being directed only to the profit of the
Commonwealth; without regard to the gratifying of his Passion, or Interest that
gives either the Words, or the Blows. And the punishment, likewise should be
proportioned to the Fault: For it is unjust that one man should have Blows, and
another, not so much as a Check, for the same transgression. ^ut above All
things, Correction is not to be given in Anger; For a man in Passion will never
observe the due mean betwixt the two Extremes of too much, and too little:
wherein the Peripatetiques are much in the Right; if they would not also
approve of Anger given us by Nature for our Advantage. But I am for the
avoiding of it in all Cases; and I could wish that Magistrates, like the Laws
Themselves, would never proceed to punish, in Wrath, but only in Equity.

LET us also in Prosperity, and when we have the World at will, as much as
possible, avoid Pride; disgusting of every thing; and Arrogance; for it is the
same Levity to be Transported either with Good Fortune, Moderation in both
Fortunes.
or with Bad: And it is an Excellent Thing to observe an Equal Tenor of Life,
and to have still the same humor, and the same Countenance; as we find it
recorded of Socrates, and C. Laelius. Philip of Macedon, was outstript by his
Son, in Glorious Achievements, and Military Execution, but in Gentleness, and
Humanity of Manners, Alexander came short of him: So that the One of them was
always, Great, and the Other was many Times Intemperate, and Brutal. It Is good
Advice, that bids us, the Higher we are, to be the more Humble. Panoetius tells
us of Affricanus (his Disciple, and Familiar Friend) how he was wont to say,
that as we put out Horses of Service to Riders, for the Training them, and
making them fitter for use, when they are grown Fierce, and Unmenageable, by
being chafed, and heat by the Action of the Battle; so should we commit Men,
that are Transported with Prosperity, and over-confident in Themselves, to some
Guide that should keep them, as it were in the Ring; or within the bounds of
Reason, and good Government, to make them understand the Uncertainty of Humane
Affairs, and the changes of Fortune. It is in the height of our Prosperity,
that we should chiefly consult our Friends; and allow them more Authority over
us then at other times: but we must have a Care of Entertaining Flatteries, and
of being imposed upon by Fair words, wherein we are too easy to be Mistaken.
For such is the Conceit we commonly have of our selves, that we think no
Commendation more then we deserve. From This weakness there arise Innumerable
Errors. For when we come once to be blown up with Praises, and high Opinions of
our selves, we do but serve to make sport for Others, and labor under grievous
Mistakes. And so much for this Point.

THEIR Business that Govern Commonwealths, must of necessity be of the greatest
moment, and require the largest Souls; because it has the largest prospect, and
concerns most people. This is to be given for granted; and yet it must not be
denied neither, on the Other side, that great Generosity of Mind has been many
times showed in a private Life; Greatness of mind in a private Life.
either in the search, or attempt of Great Matters; and the people yet keeping
themselves within their own Bounds, or else mingling with Philosophers, and Men
in Public Business; contenting themselves in their Private Condition: Neither
scraping together Estates, by all manner of Ways, nor debarring their Friends
from the use of what they had; but rather dividing with Them, and with the
Republique, where there was Occasion. Now for This Estate, let it be, First,
well gotten; and neither by Shameful, nor by Odious ways: Let a man next do
good with it to as many as he can; (so they be worthy) let him increase it,
with Prudence, Diligence, and Good Husbandry: and let him rather indulge
Liberality, and Bounty, then Luxury, and Lust. He that observes These Rules may
live Soberly, Splendidly, and Generously; and no less Heartily, Faithfully, and
amicably with all Men.

WE are now to speak of the remaining part of Duty; wherein Bashfulness, and a
certain Gracefulness of Life; Temperance, Modesty, the Composure of all
Perturbations of the Mind, and Moderation, are to be considered. Here it is
that we find that same Decorum, or as the Greeks, (...); which is of so
Excellent a Nature, that it is Inseparable from Virtue. For whatsoever is
Decent, is likewise Honest; and whatsoever is Honest, is becoming. But still
there is a difference betwixt this same Honesty, and Decorum; Honesty and
Decorum.
which may be better understood, then explained: For That which becomes us,
does only Then appear, when Honesty is gone before.

NOW this Decorum does not only appear in the Virtue now in question, but also
in the Three former. A Decorum in Prudence.
For the Right and Prudent use of Reason, and Speech; the doing of every thing
Considerately; the finding out of Truth, and the Defending of it, looks well in
Any man; as on the Other side to be deceived, to Mistake, to Slip, to be
Imposed upon, is as misbecoming, as if a man were in a fit of Dotage, or out of
his Wits. And so whatsoever is Just, is also Graceful; and whatsoever is
Unjust, or Dishonest, is likewise misbeseeming? And the same Rule holds in
Fortitude: For whatsoever is done Generously, and like a Man of Courage, cannot
but be Graceful too, and well-becoming a man; and the Contrary as
Reproachful, and Misbecoming. Wherefore the Decorum I here speak of, appears
likewise in all other Virtues; And in all Virtues.
and does in such manner appertain to them, that it lies open; and there needs
no Mystery to the finding of it out. There is in all Virtue, somewhat that is
Graceful, and only separable from Virtue, by Imagination: As the Gracefulness,
and Beauty of the Body, cannot well be separated from Health: And so it is with
the Gracefulness here in question. It is a Decorum that is in a manner so
confused with Virtue, that it is Incorporated with it; but in the Mind and
Conception, it may be distinguished. And there are of it, Two Sorts. The One is
a Certain General Decorum, A Decorum General and Special.
that shines in all Virtues; and there is Another that is subject to This, or
dependent upon it, which respects every Virtue in particular. The Former is
Commonly defined to be a Decorum congruous to the Excellency of Man, in that
which differences Man, from Other Living Creatures. But the Special Decorum, as
dependent upon the General, they define to be a quality so Congruous to Nature,
that Moderation and Temperance appear in it, with the very Image of a Generous
Soul. This we may judge to be the Decorum, which the Poets observe; whereof we
have spoken more in Another place. But we are then said to observe the Strict
Decorum of the Poets, The Decorum of the Poets.
when every Word, and Action is fitted to the Dignity, and Condition of the
Person. As what could be more Improper, and Unseemly then to bring in These
just Judges, AEacus, and Minos with these words in their Mouths, Let them hate,
so they Fear: Or, the Father is the Grave of his Own Children. And yet when
Atreus says it, what Acclamations are there, because the expression Suites with
the Person! But Nature her self, as to us, has given every man his Part, with
greatExcellency, and advantage over other Living Creatures. So that the Poets
will see to the accommodating of all parts to the variety of Persons, even the
Observing of a Decorum, toward the worst of men, as well as the best. But since
Nature has assigned us our parts of Constancy, Moderation, Temperance, Modesty;
and the same Nature teaches us not to be wholly careless, how we demean our
selves toward one Another; it is clear to us, how far that Decorum extends,
that belongs to every Virtue, and every kind of Honesty. For as the Beauty of
the Body, with an apt disposition of the Parts, proves the Eye; and delights us
in the very Correspondence, Symetry and apt disposition of the Parts; so this
Decorum, The Decorum of Order, Steadiness and Moderation.
that Illustrates Life, gains upon all those we converse with, by the Order,
Steadiness, and Moderation of all our Words, and Deeds. Wherefore there should
a Certain reverence be used toward all men, both high, and low; for it is the
humor of an Arrogant and dissolute Man, not to care what the World says of
him. But there is a great difference betwixt Justice, and Modesty, upon all
Accounts. It belongs to Justice not to wrong men; and to Modesty, not to offend
them: Wherein the Power, and Virtue of a Decorum, does most eminently appear.
This is enough said, I suppose, to make it understood, what is intended by that
which we call a Decorum.

THE Duty that proceeds from it, is chiefly to preserve our selves in a
Conformity to Nature; A Decorum in a Conformity to Nature.
A Guide That will never mislead us; but conduct those that follow her, to all
acuteness, and perspicacity of Understanding; to the best means of Uniting men
in Society; to That which is Strong, and Manly. But the mighty power of
Gracefulness is in That part which we are now upon: For not only the Motions of
the Body, according to Nature, are to be allowed, but the Motions of the Mind
likewise much more,

THE Force, and Nature, of the Mind, is Twofold: One part is placed in the
Appetite; From the Appetite ari^e Perturbations.
the Greeks call it (...); that carries a man hither and thither: The Other, in
Reason, that teaches us, and explains to us what to do, and what to avoid; by
which means, our Appetite shall be kept obedient to our Reason. In all Cases,
we should have a care of Rashness and Negligence; and do nothing but what we
can give a fair Account of. This is* in some degree, the Image and Description
of Duty; But then we must so order it, that the Appetite follow the Dictate of
Reason, so as neither rashly to outrun i^, nor out of Heaviness, and Sloth to
desert it; but keep it quiet, and calm, and free from all Perturbation. This
make us Eminent for Constancy and Moderation: For Those Appetites that wander
from the Rule; and Skip from one thing to another, either by Coveting, or
Avoiding: Those Appetites, I say, for want of being governed by Reason, will
without all question pass Bounds, and Measure; for they relinquish and cast off
their Allegiance to Reason, which they ought to obey by the Law of Nature: and
their Ill Efsects are Imprinted, Passion disorders both Mind, and Body.
not only upon our Minds, but also visibly upon our Bodies: As in the
Transports of Wrath, Lust, Fear, Pleasure; What an Alteration is there of
Countenance, Voice, Motion, Gesture? from whence we may Collect, how necessary
it is to moderate, and govern our Passions; and so to keep our selves upon a
Guard, that we do nothing heedlesly, Or as it were by Chance, without Care, or
Consideration. For man was never made for Levity and Pleasure, but rather for
the severity of Grave, and weighty Studies. Not that we are to be debarred the
Freedom of Froliques, and Divertisements; provided that we use them only as
Sleep, The Bounds of Mirth.
and such other ways of Repose; after the discharge of our Serious and more
Important Duties. And our very Liberties in Discourse, must not be Profuse
neither, nor Immodest; but only Candid, and Facetious: For as we do not allow
our Children all sorts of Games; but only such sports as hold some proportion
with honest Actions; So in Raillery it self, there must be a mixture of
Candor, as well as Understanding.

THERE are two sorts of Raillery, or Mirth; the One is Course, Petulant,
Criminal, and Foul; the Other, Cleanly, Gracious, Ingenious, and Facetious: Two
Sorts of Raillery, scurrilous and facetious.
In which kind, not only Plautus, and the Greek Comedians, but the Followers of
Socrates, have written much; and stuffed their Books with a great many of their
sayings, and Conceits: As Cato's Collection of Apothegm's, etc. Now it is an
Easy matter, to distinguish betwixt a Course, and a Cleanly way of Jesting.
The One, is a word in season, only for Recreation, and worthy of a man of
Honor. The Other, not fit for an Honest man; especially where filthy Things
are delivered in as Unclean Words.

NAY in our very Recreations, Honest and Manly Pleasures.
we should keep within Compass; and have a Care that we do not lash out into
Excesses, and pass the Limits of Modesty, in the Transports of our Pleasures.
The Chase of Wild Beasts, and the Military and Manly Exercises that are
Practiced in our Field, or Campus Martis: These I reckon to be Honorable
pleasures; and we need never want these ways of Diversion.

BUT whatever we do, it should be always in our Thought, the Excellency of
Humane Nature, The Excellency of Man.
above That of Brutes; which are only pushed on by Violent Appetites to Sensual
pleasures: Whereas the Enterteinment of a man's Mind, is Learning and
Meditation; which is never Idle, but still employed either upon Enquiry, or
Action; and charmed with a delight that arises from what we hear, or see. Nay
the very man himself, that is most addicted to his Pleasures: Brutal Pleasures.
(if he has but the Soul of a Man in him, and not only the Name, without the
Effect (for such there are) Though he may be overcome by his Lusts, he yet
stands so right, as to be ashamed of, to conceal, and to disguise his Love of
Those pleasures, even for Modesty sake; which shows that the Pleasures of the
Body, are not worthy of the Dignity of the Soul; but rather Contemptible, and
to be rejected. But if any man shall be found to have a great Regard for
Pleasures, let him be sure to use them with Moderation. In our very Clothes,
and Diet, we should still keep an Eye rather to matter of Health, and Strength,
then to the humouring of the Fancy, or Palate; and if we shall but duly
weigh, and examine the D^gnity, and Excellency of Nature; we shall quickly find
how shameful a Thing it is to dissolve in a Luxurious softness, and Delicacy:
And how becoming, on the other side, to live Frugally, Temperately, Gravely,
and Soberly.

EVERY man must be understood to be invested with Two Capacities; Man has Two
Capacities.
the One Common to Mankind, as endu'd with Reason; and in a preference to
Beasts, from whence we do not only d^rive the Knowledge of Decency, and Virtue;
but the very means of finding out our several Duties. The Other is a Propriety
that has a respect particularly to Individuals. There is a great difference in
Bodies: A great Diversity both in Minds and Bodies.
One man is better for a Course, Another for a Skuffle; and so in Beauties; One
Beauty is Imperious, and Majestical; Another, Charming. Several Humors.
Now there are at least as great diversities, and Varieties in our Minds. L.
Crassus, and L. Philippus, were both of them of a Natural, Wonderfully Gentle,
and Gracious; and Both these qualities were yet more Eminent; and more Labored
too, in C. Caesar, the Son of Lucius. There was a strange Austerity of of
Humor, in M. Scaurus, and M. Drasus; and in the same Time, and as yet in their
Youth too. C. Laelius was Gay, and Pleasant; his Friend Scipio more Ambitious,
and Reserved. It is reported, that Socrates, among the Greeks, was a Gentle and
a pleasant Companion; a Wit that lay much upon Innocent Raillery, and had an
Excellent faculty of speaking his Mind, under an agreeable Disguise.
Pythagoras, on the other side, and Pericles, advanced themselves, without any
Gayety of Humor at all. Among the Carthaginians, Hannibal, and among our Own
Commanders, Q. Maximus have the Name of men extremely Close, and Secret,
Silent, Dissembling; notably good at Stratagems; or setting Spies upon an
Enemy, and disappointing their Counsels. Those that the Greeks have the
greatest esteem of, are Themistocles, the Athenian, and Jason the Pheraean. But
above all, they magnify that profound, and politic Fetch of Solon; who, for
the advantage of the Commonwealth, and for his Own security, counterfeited
himself Mad. There are others now, so far from This Artifice, that they are
Simple and Open: to the degree of not enduring any thing but what is done above
board; They will not suffer any thing that looks like Treachery. These men are
the Servants of Truth, and the Enemies of Fraud. There are others again, that
will bear any thing, and crouch to any man, for their own Ends; as Sylla, and
M. Crassus; The Lacedemonian Lysander is said to have been a great Master of
his Art in This kind; and yet Callicratides, that succeeded him in his Command
of the Navy, is reported to have been quite of another humor. And we find
diversity as well in the Style, and Fashion of Speaking, as in the difference
of Manners. As you shall see men of great Authority, and Parts, that yet wont
themselves to the Phrase and Language of the Common people: As the Two
Catulus's, Father and Son, and the like Q. Mutius Maxcinus, which I my self am
a Witness of. Nay I have heard old Men say, that P. Scipio of Nasica, had that
way with him; but his Father the Clean Contrary: and no Grace of Speech in the
World. I speak of him that revenged the Commonwealth, upon the Seditious
attempts of Tiberius Gracchus. And no more had Xenocrates, the severest of
Philosophers; and yet Famous, and Eminent for that very Sowerness. There are a
World of Other dissimilitudes, both of Nature, and Manners, which are not yet
to be despised. So that every man should do well to stick to That Inclination
that nature has given him in particular; provided that it be not Vicious; and
by so doing, he shall easily more discover and attain the Decorum which we look
for in this place.

BUT yet we are so to behave our selves, that without opposing Common Nature,
Nature is the best Mistress.
we follow the Dictates, every man of his Own Genius; and though other things may
perhaps be weightier, and better, we are yet to take our Measures according to
the Bent of our Own Particular. For it is in vain to struggle with Nature; or to
pursue any thing which we cannot attain. From hence it is, that we must gather
the Knowledge of what becomes us. For nothing can be Graceful, that lays a
Force upon Nature. In short; there is nothing more becoming, in humane Life,
then an Equability, and Congruity of our Actions; which, if ever we depart
from, and pass to the Affectation of another man's Nature, we lose our Own. For
as we are to use our Own Native Language, without forcing foreign Words into
it (as some people do) and make themselves only ridiculous for their pains) so
should we, in our LIVES, and Actions, make our selves all of a piece.

NAY, so sensible is This difference of Natures, The same thing Good in one,
and Ill in another.
that one man shall be honored for destroying of himself, and another
condemned for it; all in the same Case; as it was with Marcus Cato that killed
himself, and the Rest that rendered themselves up to Caesar in Africa. This
might perhaps have turned to their reproach, if they had laid violent hands
upon themselves; ^or an action so heroical would have born no proportion with
the softness and facility of their Ways and Manners, but rather have introduced
an Incongruity betwixt their Lives, and Deaths. But for Cato, that was a man
naturally Grave, and Severe, (even to a Miracle) and hardened to it by a long
habit of Constancy; a man unalterably Firm to his purpose, and resolution; it
made for the dignity of his Humor, and Character, rather to support death it
self, then the frown and Dominion of a Tyrant. How many miseries did Ulysses
suffer, in that tedious Ramble of his, ensl^ving himself to Women, (if a body
may give Circes, and Calypso that name) and a Complaisance upon all Occasions
to all sorts of people? Nay at his own house, how patiently did he put up the
Contempts, and Flouts of the meanest of his Servants there? Whereas Ajax,
acc^^ding to the report we have of him, would have born a thousand Deaths,
rather then those Contumelies. This Contemplation should make every man look
into himself, to see what he has of his Own, and to make his best of That,
without di^guising ^^mself, to act the part of Another. That which every man
has Peculiar to himself, Let every man Act his own Part.
is the thing which best becomes him. Wherefore every man should take a true
Estimate of what he is, and impartially examine his Abilities, and Defects;
What he can do, and what he cannot. That we may be, at least, as wise in our
Lives, as Comedians are upon the Stage; who make Choice, not so much of the
Best Parts, or Plays, as of the fittest for their disposition. He that has the
strongest Voice, chooses the Tragedy of Epigonus, or Medaea: The best Actor
prefers Melippe, or Clytaemnestra. Rutilius (whom I remember) always acted
Antiope; and sometimes AEsopus played Ajax. Shall a Stage Player now take more
care of himself in a Comedy, then a Wise man in his Life? Let every man see in
the first place, which way his Talent Lies; and in the next, let him endeavor
to improve it. But if we should be forced at any time, by necessity, to play a
Part that we were never made for; let it be our Care, Study, and Thought, so to
behave our selves, that at least we may not lose our Credit, where we cannot
get any. So that the best of this case will be to avoid Shame, without
pretending to get a Reputation, by the forcing of our Nature.

NOW to those two parts already spoken of, that is to say, of Common Nature,
and particular Inclination, there is a Third, that is cast upon us either by
Time, or Chance, and yet a Fourth, which we accommodate according to our own
Judgment. For Kingdoms Empires, Dignities, Honors, Riches, with their
Contraries, are all of them in the hand of Fortune, and governed by the
Revolution of Times. Now it is wholly at our own Choice, what part we will
Sustein. Let every man choose his own Study.
Wherefore One man takes to Philosophy, another, to the Civil Law, a Third to
Rhetorique, and a Fourth affects an Excellency rather in One Virtue then in
Another. But for those whose Ancestors were any of them very Famous; They
commonly study to get Reputation by treading in Their Steps: As Q. Mueius
followed his Father Publius in the Civil Law: And Scipio Affricanus emulated
his Father in Feats of Arms. Some again are not content with the honor they
derive from their Predecessors, unless they add somewhat to it of their Own. As
Affricanus did yet Augment and Illustrate the Honor of his Military Knowledge
by his Particular Eloquence. And so did Timotheus, the Son of Conon, who being
a Captain not inferior to his Father, made himself yet greater by the Addition
of Letters and Understanding. But it happens sometimes that the Son declines
the Imitation of the Father, and betakes himself rather to some Course, or
design of his own; which is a thing often found in men of large minds, that are
descended from obscure Parents. All these Circumstances must be taken into
Consideration, in the question of This Decorum.

THE First point in Deliberation is This, what it is that we design either to
Be, or to do; and what Course of Life to take to. Some Course of Life must be
pitched upon.
In this Deliberation, there is great hazard, and difficulty. For it is in our
Youth, that we are to resolve, and pitch upon the Condition we propound; at
which time, we are least able to judge of it. So that we are commonly engaged
in some certain purpose of Life, before we are able to distinguish betwixt a
Better and a worse. For although (according to the Report of Prodicus, out of
Xenophon) so soon as ever Hercules came out of his Minority (the time for every
man to choose what Course of Life he will Steer) he retired into a Solitude,
and upon the Sight of Two ways, the One, of Virtue, and the Other of Pleasure,
he sat a long time considering with himself, which of the Two ways he should
take: Yet this might do well enough for Hercules, that was the Son of Jupiter,
but not for us, I fear, that commonly follow those men still that we like best;
and take up an affection for Their ways, and Studies. And yet for those that
are trained up under the Institution of their Parents; they do commonly and
insensibly contract an Affection for the Methodes and Customs of their
Education. Others are carried away by the Stream of Popular practice; esteeming
That still to be the Best; that pleases the most. And yet some there are, that
lead the Course of Life they ought to do; induced thereunto, either by
Providence; a certain Felicity, or Goodness of Nature; a Virtuous Inclination,
or some particular advantage of their Institution: But it is a very rare thing
to find a Concurrence of Eminent Wit, and Learning; or to find Either of them,
with so much Time for deliberation, as is needful for the Election of a
profitable Course of Life. In this deliberation, a regard must be had to That
which is most proper, and Natural to every particular: For (as is already said)
since in whatever we do, we must enquire into every man's particular Genius,
before we can say what becomes him; so we must be more Careful yet, in the
Establishment of our Own Lives, to see that we maintain an Equality in the
Main; and that we never differ from our selves, or falter in our Duty.

Nature and Fortune to be consulted what course of Life.
BUT since Nature has the greatest power in This Case; and Fortune, the next; we
must consult them Both; what Course of Life to fix upon; But Nature, in the
first place: For She is much Firmer, and more Constant; and it is not for
Fortune, that is Frail and Mortal, to contend with Immortal Nature: Whosoever
therefore shall Conform, in the Ordering of his Life, to the Inclinations of an
uncorrupted Nature, must keep constantly to that Tenor, which is the Decorum
of Life; unless he find himself mistaken in his Choice. And in That Case (for
it is a Case to be put) there must be a Change admitted of Purposes and
Manners. And That change will be more easily and commodiously wrought, under
the favor of Times and Occasions: But where the Season is not favorable, it
must be Introduced by Little and Little; as Wise men say of Inconvenient, and
Ill Grounded Friendships; it is better to unstitch then to tear them all to
pieces on a sudden. But when we have once altered our Course, we must be
infinitely Careful to make it appear, that we have done it upon good, and
weighty Reasons. Now whereas I have, (in what is aforesaid) propounded the
Imitation of our Predecessors; let me not be thought to advise an Imitation of
them in their Vices: beside that there are many things wherein Nature is not to
be Imitated. As the Son of Affricanus the Elder. (he that adopted the Son of
Paulus AEmilius.) It was not possible for him, by reason of the Craziness of
his body to be so like his Father, as the Other was like His. Let every man do
all the Good he can.
Wherefore if a man be not in Condition to plead at the Bar; to Harangue the
People in Public Assemblies, or to lead Armies; there are some Duties yet in
his power, which he is obliged to perform: as the Offices of Justice, Faith,
Liberality, Modesty, Temperance, which Benefits will fairly supply the want of
the Other. The best of Patrimonies is the Reputation of Great, and Virtuous
Actions, and Ancestors; and the Son that does not uphold the Renown of his
Father, is a Shame, and a Scandal to it.

NOW in regard that there are several Duties properly belonging to several
Ages; and many things that becoming a Young man, would be ridiculous, in an
Old; we shall say something also under That distinction.

IT is the duty of a Young man to Reverence his Elders, The Du^y of a Young man.
and to make his Choice of the Best, and most approved among them, for his
Directors and Governors: For the Ignorance, and Folly of Youth should be
ordered, and instructed, by the prudence and experience of the Aged. But above
all things, he should be restreined from Loose and Wanton pleasures; Youth
should be Temperate and Industrious.
and trained up rather in Laborious exercises; and in the Fatigues, and Toils,
both of Body, and Mind. For it makes men Vigorous, and Industrious, as well in
War, as in Peace: and even in the Intervals of Liberty, and Refreshment, young
Men should have a Care of Intemperance; and not to pass the Bounds of Modesty:
which will be the more Easily atteined, if they be often in the Eyes of their
Seniors and Tutors.

WHEN we come to be in Years, the labors of the body must be abated, The
Business of Age is Wisdom.
and we should increase those of the Mind: But striving still, by all means to
be serviceable to our Friends, and to our Juniors, by our Advice, and Wisdom;
but principally to the Commonwealth. But above all things, Beware of Sloth and
Luxury.
have a Care of a Drowsy, a Languishing, and a Lasie Old Age; and so likewise
of a Luxurious; which, as it is reproachful and dishonorable, in this Case it
is most of all. But if the Intemperance of Lust, be added to it, the Mischief
is Double. First, the Infamy which it reflects upon Age it self; and Then, the
Ill Example, in Authorizing young men to be more Shamless and wicked.

IT would not be impertinent, here to speak something of the Duties of
Magistrates, The Duty of a Magistrate.
Private Citizens, and Strangers. The Magistrates part, is to consider himself
as the Representative of the City; and to uphold the Honor, and Dignity of it;
to observe the Laws, and Customs, to do Justice; and to remember, that all
These things are committed to his Charge. It is the part of a Private Man, to
live with his fellow Citizens, under one Common Bond of Legal Duty; A privat^
man.
neither falling so Low, as to make himself despicable, nor too much exalting
himself; And never to entertein any Thought, but to the Glory, and Peace of the
Commonwealth. This is the man that we esteem, and pronounce to be a worthy
Citizen. As to the Duty of a Stranger; And a Stranger.
let him mind his Own business, and not intermeddle with Other peoples, but
keep himself within his Compass. By these means it will be understood, when it
shall come to be diligently examined, what is most becoming us, under the
several Circumstances of Persons, Times, and Ages: But there is nothing so
Graceful, as to behave our selves equally, and steadily, in all our Actions,
and Councels.

BUT this Gracefulness shows it self in all our Words, and Deeds, The Decorum
of the Body.
nay in the very Motions, and Postures, of the body; and consists principally
in Beauty, Order, and a kind of Air, or Agreement suitable to every thing we
do. It Is a hard matter to express This; but it shall suffice, that it may be
easily understood. In the Observance of These three Points, we render our
selves Acceptable in our Conversation with all People. And so much for This too.

NATURE has undoubtedly taken great Care in the forming of Man's Body, The Seeds
of Modesty are in Nature.
exposing only Those parts to sight, that are Beautiful, Comely, and Agreeable
to the Eye: and keeping Those parts concealed, and Covered, which would give
Offense if they were laid open to View; and serve us only for Unclean, and
Common Necessities. There is no question, but the Modesty of the Mind conforms
it self, in this particular, to the exquisite fabrique of the Body; For
whatsoever Nature has concealed, all men in their right Wits, do naturally keep
out of sight, and as private as possible, in Compliance with their very
Necessities. Now for Those parts of the body which are of most necessary use to
man; we neither call the part, nor the use of it, by the proper Name; and that
which may be honestly done, (if secretly) we cannot so much as honestly name.
Insomuch, that those things cannot be done openly without Impudence: nor so
much as mentioned, without obscenity. Wherefore there is no harkening to the
Ciniques, The Obscene humor of the Cyniques.
or to the Old Stoiques, (which are almost Cyniques) that blame and laugh at
us, for reckoning those things to be foul, in Words; which are not so, in
Truth. And yet Those things which we all agree to be foul, we can yet call by
Their own names. As Theft, Cousenage, Adultery, are all dishonest in the Deed;
and yet we use the Words without Scruple. To beget Children, is an honest
Action; but it wears a Course name; and we find a great deal more to this
purpose, against Modesty, in their Disputations. But we are to follow Nature,
and to fly whatsoever may offend either the Eye, or the Ear of a Modest man.
Nay, in our very Postures, and Gestures; A Decency in Gestures and Postures.
as Walking, Standing, Sitting, Lying; in the very Countenance, the Eye, the
Motion of the hands, there must a regard be had still to that which is
Becoming. In all This, there are Two things we should beware of. The One, not
to do any thing that is Loose, Nice, and Effeminate; The Other, to void things
that look Harsh, Rough, and Uncivil. For why should That which becomes an
Orator, or a Comedian, misbeseem us? The Discipline of the Theater has a long
time had such a regard to Modesty; The Modesty of the Romans.
that no man enters upon the Stage, without Drawers, least some part of the
body should come to be discovered by Chance that ought to be Conceall'd. The
Roman Customs will not allow Sons, when they are Men grown, so much as to Bath,
with their Fathers; Or Sons in Law, with their Wives Parent. In these points of
Virtuous Modesty, Nature is both our Mistress, and our Guide.

OF Beauty, or Agreeableness, there are Two Kinds; the One is matter of
Gracefulness; the Other, of Dignity; Of Dignity and Gracefulness.
and we may call them Male, and Female: It is not for a man to be Trickt out
with Fooleries; or to have any thing that is Fantastical, or Effeminate; no,
not so much as in his very Motion, or Gesture. How are we disgusted many times,
Affectation is Odious.
at the Conceipted actions of Stage Players? And the more Odious, and affected
Motions of Wrastlers? And yet we Commend that which is Natural, and Simple,
both in the One, and in the Other. The dignity of the Countenance is Maintein'd
by a good Color: and That Color by the Exercise of the Body; and to all This
we should keep our selves Neat and Cleanly; not to the degree of Niceness, and
Affectation, but only so, as not to incur the censure of Rudeness, Sluttery,
and Neglect. And the same Rule we should observe in our Garments: In which
particular, as well as in other things, A Mean does best.
a mediocrity does best. In our walking we must neither march so Slow, as if we
were officiating at a solemnity; nor yet make such post-hast, as to run our
selves out of breath, and put the Mouth, or the Countenance into disorder;
which is a sign of a Light, and Unsteady humor. But we must take more peins,
yet, to keep the Mind in a temper of Conformity to Nature; which we may easily
compass, if we can but preserve our selves from Falling into Transports, and
Perturbations, and diligently attend to a Conservation of the Decorum here
prescribed. The Motions of the Mind are Twofold. Some are of Thought, and
others of Appetite. The Motions of the Mind are Thought and Appetite.
These of Thought are chiefly employed in the finding out of The Truth. Those
of Appetite push a man forward to the doing of something. We must be careful
therefore, First, to apply our Thoughts to That which is most worthy of them;
and, Secondly, to keep the Appetite in subjection to Reason.

Of Rhetorique, and Ordinary Discourse.
AS to the matter of Speech, the Power of it is Great; and it is also Twofold.
The One is a Speech of Contention; the Other, of Common discourse. The Former
is for the B^rre, for Public Assemblies, and for the Senate; the Other, is
for Ordinary Conversation, Casual disputes, private Meetings of Company or
Friends at the Table. The Masters of Rhetorique have given Precepts for the
Former, but we have none for the Latter; although perhaps, that might be done
too. But there is no body that addicts himself That way. For if men would but
apply themselves to the Study of it, they would never want Masters to Teach it.
And yet we are all of us Mad upon Rhetorique; although, for what concerns words,
and Periods, the same Rules would serve Both. It is by the help of the Voice,
that we discourse; and the Two great advantages of it, are to be Clear, and
Sweet; The Voice should be Clear and Sweet.
We must stand indebted to Nature for them Both. And yet Exercise, and
Practice, will help us in the One; and the Imitation of Smooth and gentle
Speakers, Instances of Excellent Speakers.
may be of use to us in the Other. What was it but This, that gave the Catuli
so fair a Reputation, both for Judgment and Language? They were Learned men,
it is true, and so were Others; but These yet were looked upon as the great
Masters of the Latin Tongue; They had a wonderful Sweetness of Voice; and
their Pronounciation, neither too loud, and open, nor yet muffled betwixt the
Teeth. So that it was both Audible, and Agreeable; and without Any Affectation:
The Tone, without any Force, and neither too feint, nor too shrill. L. Crassus,
it is true, was a word-flowing Speaker, and no less Ingenious; but for
well-speaking, the Catuli were no less esteemed. Now for sharpness, and
pleasure of Wit, Caesar, the Brother of the Elder Catulus, went beyond them
all. Insomuch that in his ordinary Discourses, he surpassed the best Pleaders
of his Time. All these things, severally, must be diligently heeded, to make us
understand what it is that may best become us in every thing.

IN Familiar Speech, Of Familiar Discourse.
the Followers of Socrates are most worthy of Imitation. It should be Gentle,
without being too pressing, or tedious; and I would have it pleasant, and
enterteining, in all Cases. Nor would I have any man take possession of a
Common Right, in such sort as to Talk all himself, to the Exclusion of Others;
but in Discourse, as in Other things, every man to take his Turn. The First
thing to be heeded, is the subject Matter of the Discourse. Cautious.
If serious, it must be seriously handled; if Matter of Mirth, a Freedom of
Raillery, and Lightness, does well enough with it. But above all things, we
must be be Careful in the government of our Speech, not to discover any Vice,
or Defect in our Manners; wherein a man is most liable to betray himself, when
he talks spitefully of the Absent; and either in Jest, or in Earnest,
maliciously exposes them to Contumely, and Reproach. The Ordinary matter of
Familiar Discourse, The Subject of it.
is either about Domestique Affairs, the Republique, or matter of Studies, and
Learning. If at any time we pass These Bounds, we must as soon as may be take
up again. But he it as it will, it must be thought upon, how far our Discourse
may be Grateful to the Company: Seasonable and not Tedious.
For we are not Equally pleased with the same things, at all times. And then,
as we begin a discourse upon Reason, we must not continue it beyond Measure.
But as it is laid down upon very good Grounds, and as a general Rule, that we
should keep our felves Clear from Perturbations, or violent Motions of the
Mind, Nor Passionate.
that rebel against Reason, so should we in our Speech keep a guard upon our
selves against Those Intemperate Motions; and that we do not lay open our
Distempers of Anger, Appetite, Laziness, Heartlesness, or the like. We should
be very Careful also in our Conversation, to possess the Company with an
Opinion of the Reverence, Respectful.
and Good will that we have for them. There are many Occasions wherein we
cannot avoid Chiding; and we may be allowed sometime, a more then ordinary
Contention of Voice; Let Reproof be without Anger.
and a sharper severity of Words; but yet This is not to be done neither, as if
we were Angry; but we are to proceed to this kind of Reproof, as we do to
Laming, and Scarifying, rarely, and unwillingly; nor ever at all, but upon
Necessity, and for want of some other way of Remedy; but not in Anger still
upon any Terms; for it never does any thing either well or wisely; And yet it
may do well enough to use a Temperate, and a mild way of Rebuke; but still
accompanied with Gravity, that the reprehension may be applied without
Reproach: It must be also signified that the Only Thing intended by the
Reproof, was the Amendment of him that suffers it. Nay, it will become us in
our differences, even with our greatest Enemies; in despite of all Indignities
yet, to preserve a Gravity; to keep our selves free from Passion; for
whatsoever we do in distemper, can neither be well done in it self, nor
approved by those that are Witnesses to the doing it. It is a lewd thing
likewise for a man to talk much of himself; Ostentation is Odiou^.
especially with Thraso, to brag of things that are false, and to make Sport
for the Company.

BEING now to go thorough all the Points of Decency and Duty (as That is my
design) I shall say something what kind of House I should think fit for a
Person of Honor, Of Building^ and Palaces.
or a Prince, so as to have it accommodate for use; for That Is the Intent of
Building it; and there must yet be had a regard to the State, and Dignity of
the Person that Inhabits it. I have been told of Cn. Octavius (the first Consul
of That Family) that he was highly reverenced for a Magnificent Pile that he
built upon the Palatine-Hill; and that the Reputation he got by so many peoples
coming to see it, opened his way (being but a new man) to the Consulship.
Scaurus afterward caused That to be demolished, for the Enlargement of his Own.
The Former brought the Consulship first into his Family; and the Latter, (though
the Son of an Eminent, and famous Person, and the House enlarged) brought into
it, not only a Repulse, but Misery and Shame. It does well to have the Dignity
of the Master yet further adorned by House; Fit the House to to the Master.
but not that Dignity to be fetched altogether from it. The House should be
graced by the Master, and not the Master by the House; and it is in a House, as
it is in Other Cases: a man must have a respect, not only to himself, but also
to Others. In the House of a Person of Eminent Condition, where many Guests,
are to be received, and men of all sorts to be admitted; there must great Care
be taken that it be Large Enough: But a large house, without People, disparages
the Master of it; and especially if it has been more frequented under a Former
Possessor; for it is an Odious Thing to have Passengers reflect upon it, and say
(as in these Times there is too much Occasion) Here Is the Old House, but where is
the Old Master? I would have him that sets upon Building, take special Care not
to lash out into Magnificence, and Expense, Keep the Expense within Compass.
as a thing of Ill Consequence, even in the Example; for there are too many
Imitators in This Kind, of the doings of Princes. How many have we that Emulate
the Splendour of Lucullus's Villa's, (his Country-houses;) but where is the man
that Emulates his Virtue? There must be a Mean observed in These things; and
that Moderation must be transferred, in all Cases, to the Use, Ornament, and
Convenience of Life. But enough of This.

IN all Undertakings there are three things to be observed. Three Rules for all
Undertakings.
First, That we govern our Appetites by Reason, which is a sure way to keep us
to our Duties. Secondly, That we take a right Estimate of our Enterprises, and
allow Time, and Peins, neither more nor less then the matter requires. Thirdly,
That we keep a Measure, even in those things that are matter of Dignity, and
Reputation. We cannot do better, then to observe the Decorum already spoken of,
without moving one step beyond it. But the First point is the most Excellent of
the Three.

The Decorum of Place and Time.
WE come now to the Order of Things, and the Opportunity of Seasons. Under this
Science is comprehended that which the Greeks call (...) by which we understand
the Harmony of Order; and not That Modesty that regards Temperament, and
Measure. Now to take it as Modesty; the Stoical Definition of it is This, It is
the skill of disposing all our Words, and Actions, in their Proper Place. So
that the Ordering of things, and the placing of them, are much one and the
same: For they define Order to be only the laying together of things in their
due, Order defined.
and sitting places. But they tell us, that the Place of Action respects the
Opportunity of Time: Now That seasonable Time of Action, the Greeks call'
(...), the Latins, Occasio. So that This Modesty, taken in the sense aforesaid,
is the Knowledge of the Opportunities of Times fit for Action. Which is a
definition that may as well agree with the Prudence which we have treated of in
the beginning. But in this place we are discoursing of Moderation, Temperance,
and Virtues of that quality. Wherefore having lodged these matters which
particularly belong to Prudence, in their Right places; we come now to those
Virtues that refer to Modesty, and the Gaining of a Good opinion, and Esteem in
the World; of which we have spoken largely already.

IT should be in the Order of Life, Indecencies in respect of Time and Place.
as in That of an Artificial, and well governed Discourse. All the Parts of it
should be Equal, and Correspondent one to another. Many things do well enough
over a Glass of Wine, that would be most ridiculous and shameful, upon a
Debate. There should be no fooling in serious matters. It was well said of
Pericles, at a Council of War, to his Colleague Sophocles; that was joined with
him in the Command of the Army. As they were upon a Consultation, there
happened to pass by, a very fine Youth. What a delicate Child is there? (says
Sophocles; in the middle of the Debate.) Brother, (says Pericles) a Generals
Eyes, should be as Temperate as his Fingers. But if the same thing had been
spoken at a public Spectacle, nothing could have been said against it; so
powerful is the Consideration of Time and Place. If a man were upon a Iourny,
and going to Plead a Cause, no body would blame him for thinking of his
Business, and conning of his Lesson, by the way; but That pensive, musing
humor, at a Jolly Entertainment, would be looked upon, to be either want of
Wit, or Breeding, in the not distinguishing of Times. Now for things which are
very gross, as for a man to fall a Singing in a Court of Justice; or to do any
thing that is notoriously preposterous, or improper: These are absurdities so
well understood by all people, that there needs no Precept, or Caution, in the
Case. But there are certain Niceties of Conversation, which are indeed so
minute, The Niceties of Conversation.
that some make slight of them; and others do not so much as perceive them. And
yet These are the Points that require our most diligent consideration. For as
it is in Musical Instruments, let them be never so little out of Tune, a
skilful Ear presently takes Cheque at it: and that is the Case in the least
disconsonancy of Life. Only the Offense is so much the Greater here, by how
much the Agreement of our Actions, and Manners is of greater value, and effect,
then a Consent of Sounds. Wherefore, as there is no Jarre, or Discord in
Music, so small, as to escape the animadversion of a Critical Ear; no less
quick, and accurate ought we to be in Censuring, and Detecting the Venial
Errors of Life: Being led to the knowledge of the greatest matters, even by the
smallest. From the Motion of the Eye; from a Smooth, or a Contracted Brow; from
Sadness, Mirth, Laughter, Speech, Silence, nay from the very Tone of Soft, or
Loud speaking; and a thousand such Common Circumstances, we gather the
understanding of Humane Duties; and of what Naturally becomes us, and what the
Contrary.

By Observing Others, we may Reform our selves.
NOW toward the Erecting of a true Judgment upon things in This Kind, it were
not amiss for us to begin our Observations abroad: And then to Avoid, or
Correct That in our selves, which we find misbecoming in Others. For so it is,
(I cannot tell how it comes about) that we are much better at spying out our
Neighbors Faults, then our Own: and therefore it is a good and a Profitable
Method, the teaching of Children to do better, by showing them in imitation how
ill it becomes them to do amiss. In Cases doubtful, and hard to be resolved
upon, it will behove us to consult men of Learning, and Experience, for
Direction. Now it is very Natural for men to follow the Bias of their proper
Inclinations. So that we are not only to attend to what any body says; but
likewise to what he Thinks; and even to the very Motive that leads him to That
Thought. For as it is with Painters, Statuaries; nay, and with Right Poets too;
They love to have their Works exposed, and, as the World finds fault, to mend
them. They take advice upon what is amiss* both with Themselves, and their
Friends, and are induced to the doing, or not doing; to the Changing, or
Correcting of many things by the opinion of Others. But for what concerns
Customs, and Civil Institutions, there can be no place there for the
prescribing, where the matter it self is a Precept. Neither let a man so much
deceive himself, as to imagine that the Example of Socrates, for the Purpose,
or Aristippus, in the saying, or doing of any ill thing against Rules of
Government, must presently authorize him to the same License: For This Liberty,
in those Great and Divine men, Great Virtues are a Privilege to some Mistakes.
we are to look upon as a privilege purchased by their Virtues. Now for the
Cyniques (those Enemies of Shame, and Consequently of Honesty, and Virtue)
there is no enduring of them. To Magistrates, and Persons in Authority, we are
to pay all Honor, and Reverence, and so likewise to all those worthy Patriots
that have spent their Lives in Great, and Honest Actions; and in the service of
their Country. We owe a respect also to Gray hairs, and even to Those that are
but designed to any Administration in the Government. We must distinguish
betwixt a Citizen and a Stranger, and even in a Stranger, betwixt a Private
Person, and a Public. But to sum up all in Word; it is our Duty to Cherish,
Maintein, and Preserve Unity, A General Duty.
Peace, and Good Agreement, in Humane Society.

WE come now to the matter of Trade, and Profit, which we find to be divided
into Liberal, (or in Vulgar English, Creditable) and Sordid. There are some
Painful Employments that carry along with them a General Odium; Of Trade. Which
is either sordid.
as that of a Tax gatherer, or an Usurer. These, in the first place, I do not
like; and I do also look upon all Mercenary Dealings, where we pay for the
Work, and not for the Art, to be Mean, and Ignoble. The very Price of the
Commodity is a kind of Covenanting for Slavery. It is also a Course Business,
That of a Retayler, that only buys in a Lump, to sell again in Parcels: For
they get their very Bread commonly by Lying; which is a most Unmanly
submission. And so for all Mechaniques, they are men of Low, and Vulgar
business, and we are not to expect any thing that is Clear, and Generous, from
the Shop. I am likewise with Terence, no friend to those Trades that Minister
to Luxury; as Fishermen, And Voluptuary.
Butchers, Cooks, Pudding-makers, Fishmongers; nor to the Voluptuous Arts, as
Perfumers, Dancing-masters, and the whole Mystery of Gaiming. But for those
Professions that require a greater measure of Prudence, and minister Advantage
in proportion; as Physique, Architecture, the furnishing of Good Instructions;
These are commendable Employments, where they suit with the Condition of him
that uses them. And then for Merchandising, the driving of a petty Trade, That
way, is little better than Peddling. But when it comes to be Large, and
General, and to be menag'd back and forward, with Candor, and Credit: Or of
Candor and Credit.
it is no contemptible Application. Nay, on the Contrary, This way of Commerce
is highly to be esteemed; when he that has made his Fortune by it, sits down
(not satiated, but) contented; and retires as well from his Port, to the
Country, as he has done many a time from the Sea to the Port, and there quietly
enjoys himself, and his Possessions. Of all Beneneficial Industry, Certainly
there is not any thing more Agreeable, or more Worthy of a Man of Honor, and
Reason, then the Culture and Emprovement of the Earth; which being a Subject
handled at large in our Cato Major, we shall refer you thither for your
satisfaction.

Here is enough said already upon the several parts of Virtue, and our Duties
arising from thence. It remains now to consider in a Case of two Duties before
us, which to choose: Of Two Duties, which to Choose.
(a thing that often happens) and of Two honest Propositions, which is the
Honester, is the Question: (a Point omitted by Panaetius.) For since there is
no Virtue, but what issues from One of these four Fountains, and has a respect
either to Knowledge, Society, Courage, or Moderation; it must necessarily be,
that upon a Complication of these Virtues, there must likewise ensue a
Competition of Duties. Now it is my Opinion, that Mankind is Naturally more
concerned in Offices that relate to the Community, then in matters that only
affect the Understanding; which may be thus made out. Take a wise man, that has
the World at Will, both for Fortune, and Leisure; let him consider with
himself, and comtemplate all things whatsoever, that are worth the Knowing. He
would be yet sick of his Life, for all this, if he were to spend his time
wholly in solitude, and without a Companion.

The Principal Virtue is (as I have said) That, which the Greeks call (...),
and We, Wisdom. Wisdom is the principal Virtue.
But their (...) (or Prudence) is quite Another thing; being the skill of
Judging what we are to do, and what not: Or of distinguishing betwixt Good and
Evil. Whereas Wisdom (which we call the Principal) is the Knowledge of things
Divine and Humane: wherein is Comprehended a certain Correspondence betwixt the
Gods, and Men, and a Society among Themselves. Now if This be the most Eminent
Virtue, as Certainly it is: So must that likewise be the most Eminent Duty,
which refers to Community. For the Speculation and Perception of things, is but
lame and imperfect, if it be not followed with Action; which Action is best
seen, in providing for the Common Benefits of Mankind: And must therefore be
reduced to the Subject of Humane Society; in preference to the naked
Understanding of things. And this does every Good man find to be True, upon his
Own Practice, and Observation. For where is the man, that is so transported with
a Thirst of Knowledge; or a desire of piercing into the Nature of things, that
if he should be called upon the sudden, to the Relief of his Country, his
Father, or his Friend, that were in danger: Where is the Man (I say) that in
the heat and rapture of his most Divine Contemplations, would not quit All, to
attend this Duty, even supposing him to be in his Thoughts already numbering the
Stars, and taking measure of the Universe? This gives us to understand, that
the Osfices of Justice, conducing to the Common Utility of Mankind (then which
nothing ought to be dearer to us) are of so much greater importance, then These
of Study, Justice more valuable than Science.
and Science; and never was any man so taken up in his Life, and Application,
with the search of Knowledge, as not yet to have an Eye to his Duty to the
Public; Our Country in the first place.
and to Consult the well-being of Sociable Nature: As we see in the Instance of
Lycias the Pythagorean, to the Theban Epaminondas; and in That of Pluto, to
Dion of Syracuse: and diverse others that trained up their Disciples to the
Love, Knowledge, and Exercise of Civil Duties. And for the service, (if any at
all) which I my self have rendered to the Republique, I must ascribe it to my
Masters, and to my Books, that instructed, and fitted Me for my Function. For
great men do not only teach the Lovers of Learning during their Lives; but in
their very Graves too: Transmitting their Precepts down to after times, for the
Use of Posterity. Now to show how much Their Leisures contributed to our
Business; These Eminent men have not slipped so much as any one point
apperteining to the Laws, Manners, and Discipline of the Commonwealth; but have
still, with all their Faculties, applied the Fruits of their Labors and
Studies, to the well-being of the Public. So that a Copious Eloquence, joined
with Prudence, is much more profitable, then the most refined subtilty of
Thought, without speaking. For Meditation does only Circulate within it self;
Whereas Eloquence works upon Others, and Insinuates it self into the Affections
of all that Hear it. We must not imagine that Bees gather into Swarms, upon a
design to make their Cells, but it is in their Nature to Congregate, and then
they work their Combs. And so it is with Men, who are much more Sociable by
Nature; when they are gotten together, they Consult their Common business. Now
for That Virtue (of Justice) which provides for the Defense, and Conservation
of Men in Society; if it be not accompanied with the Understanding of Things,
it is but solitary, and Fruitless. And what is Courage, without the softness of
Humane Courtesy, and Candor, but a Savage, and Outrageous Brutality? From
hence we may infer the Excellency of a Practical Justice, in the Ordering of
Mankind; above the force, and effect of a Speculative Notion. Leagues are more
for Society then Defense.
There are foam people that Fancy all Leagues and Associations amongst men,
to arise from the need that one man has for another, toward the supplying of
our Natural, and Common Necessities: because (say They) if Providence had
delivered us from This Care of Looking after Food, and Clothing, by appointing
some Extraordinary way for the furnishing of it; no man, of either Brains, or
Virtue, would ever trouble his head about Business; but wholly deliver himself
up to the attaining of Wisdom. But This is a mistake: For even in That
Condition, a man would fly Solitude, and wish for a Companion in his very
Studies: he would be willing to Teach, and to Learn; to Hear, and to Speak. So
that beyond question, the Duties that defend, and support men in Society, are
more to be esteemed then those, that barely relate to Learning, and Knowledge.

IT may be another Question whether This Community which is so Consonant to
Nature, Justice and Temperance compared.
be in all Cases to be preferred to Modesty, and Moderation. Now I think Not.
For there are some things, partly so foul, and in part so flagitious, that a
wise man (even if it were to save his Country) would not be guilty of them.
Posidonius has made a large Collection of such Cases: But so filthy, so
obscene, that a man cannot honestly repeat them. Now why should any man do that
for the saving of his Country, which his Country it self would rather perish,
that any member of it should do? But however, this is the best on it; that it
can never be for the Interest of the public, to have a wise man do any such
thing. Let it be therefore concluded, that of All Duties we are to prefer those
that tend toward the Mainteining of Society. For a Considerate Action presumes
an Antecedent Cognition, and Wisdom. So that it is more to Do Considerately,
then to Think Wisely. But let This suffice; for the matter is made so plain,
that there will be no difficulty to resolve upon Two Duties in question, which
to Choose. But then in the Community it self, there are several Degrees of
Duties, in subordination one to another. D^grees of Duties.
The First is what we owe to the Immortal Gods; the Second, to our Country; the
Third, to our Parents, and so in Order, successively, to Others. Upon a Brief
Disquisition of This matter, it will appear that the point in debate, is not
only which is honest, and which the Contrary: but of Two honest Propositions;
which is the Honester; and then, which is the Honestest of All. This (as I have
said) was slipped by Panetius; but let us now proceed.

The End of the First Book.
TVLLY's OFFICES.
The Second BOOK.
IN What manner Duties arise from Virtue, and from every distinct Branch of it,
is sufficiently explained, The Subject of This Book.
(as I conceive) in the Former Book. It remains now (my ^on Marcus) that we
proceed upon some certain sorts of Duty, that have a regard to the splendour and
Ornament of Life: As to Riches, Power; and a Competent provision of things
Commodious for the Use of Man. The matter in question was, (as I told you)
First, what is Profitable, and what not. Secondly, What is more Profitable,
Comparatively with that which is Less: And Lastly, What Is most Profitable of
All things, without Comparison. You have here the Subject of This Treatise: But
before I enter upon the Discourse it self, I must give you a word or two of my
Purpose, and Intention.

THERE are a great many I know that have been excited, by My Books, to the Love
of Letters: The Introduction.
And to the love, not only of Reading, but of Writing also: And yet Philosophy
has gotten so Ill a Name in the World, (verily with some good men too) that I
am afraid sometimes, of hazzarding my Credit with them; for bestowing so much
Time, and Labor, upon This Study. But truly, for my Own part, so long as the
Management of Public Affairs past thorough those hands, to which the
Commonwealth had delivered up it self: All my Thoughts, and Cares were directed
That way. But when One man came to Grasp all, and that there was no longer Any
place for Authority, or Counsel, (those Publique-spirited men being gone too,
that had been my Partners in the Charge of the Government) It was not for me,
either on the One hand, to abandon my self to an Anxious, and irksome
Melancholy; or, on the other, to plunge my self into Pleasures, below the
Dignity of my Profession. Oh! that the Republique might have continued still in
the Former state, without falling into those hands; that sought, not so much
the Change of Affairs, as the Total Ruin of them. For if the Commonwealth were
Now standing, I should be doing at this instant just as I did before. First, my
Business would lie more at the Bar, then in my Study; and Secondly, I should
now be setting down my Pleadings, as formerly, instead of these Morals: But
since the Dissolution of the Government, that took up all my Cares, my
Thoughts, my Studies; There Is no more Law, or Senate-Imployment. Matters being
brought to This Pass, (and it is not for any man that has a Soul, to sit still,
and do nothing) What could I better do, then to betake my self to my
Philosophy; My First ^tudy, and the most Innocent, the Honestest Diversion of
my Troubles? It was the Institution of my Youth; and I spent a great deal of
Time upon it: Till I came afterward to push my Fortune in the World, for
Offices, and Preferments; and Then I dedicated my self wholly to the
Government: But still reserving Those hours for Philosophy, which I had to
spare from the Public, and my Friends; and Those very hours were spent in
Reading too: for I had no Leisure to Write. The Calamity of those Times was
Extreme: and yet we have drawn This Benefit from it, that we are now at Liberty
to commit those things to Letters, which our Countrymen were very little
acquainted with, though in themselves infinitely worth the Knowing. For ( in the
name of all the Gods!) What is more desirable then Wisdom? more Excellent; more
useful to a man? or what more worthy of him? The Praise of Philosophy.
We call the Lovers of it, Philosophers, from the very Etymon of the word: For
Philosophy, by Interpretation, is only the Love of Wisdom. The Ancients defined
it to be the Science of things Divine and Humane; and of their Causes. What
will any man speak well of, I wonder, that reproaches this Study? If he seeks
either the Delight of his Mind, or the Allaying of his Cares, this is the Study
that does it Incomparably above all others: For it furnishes him, every day,
with something or other, toward Atteining, and Enjoying a Virtuous, and a Happy
Life. If Virtue, or an Unshaken Constancy, be his Business, it is either to be
Compassed This way, or not at all. There is not a^y thing so small, but there
goes Art, and Applicati^n toward the acquiring of it: And shall any man be so
mad Then, as to think that there needs none toward the most Important
Acquisition of our Lives? But if there be any Discipline of Virtue, where shall
we look for it; if we depart from This way of finding it out? This Question, as
it falls properly under another Topique, So we have handled it in another
place; and more accurately too; That is to say, in our Exhortations to
Philosophy. My present purpose is only to set forth, that having nothing any
longer to do, in the Government, I made Choice of This Subject for my Private
Entertainment. But I must expect to be Here encountered, and that by some of
the Learned too, with a Charge of Contradicting my self. For how does it
consist, An Objection answered.
say they, the entering upon Disputes, and delivering Precepts of Duty, as
things Certain; and yet at the same time, to maintein that we have no certain
Knowledge of any thing? I should be glad to be a little better understood; For
I am none of those Roving, Wandering heads, that Live, and Live on; without
proposing to themselves any Scope, or Design. How Miserable were That man's
mind, or rather his Life, that should be debarred the Use of his Reason, not
only in the matter of Argument, but in the main End of his Being? Now for those
Points which Others Divide, into Certain, and Uncertain; it pleases me better,
that they should be distinguished by calling them Probable, or Improbable. And
what should hinder me now from Embracing the One, and disallowing the Other?
provided that I keep my self from being either Arrogantly positive; or Rash,
and Inconsiderate; Two qualities that hold no fellowship with Wisdom. But our
people, on the Other side, will Dispute every thing: For (say they) without
Comparing Both parts, how shall any man know which is the Right? But This
matter (I suppose) is sufficiently cleared, in our Academical Questions. Now
for You, (my Son) though you have been trained up in the most Ancient, and Noble
sort of Philosophy, and under the Institution of Cratippus; (an Author not
inferior to the most Venerable Founders of it) I would not have you a Stranger
yet to your Fathers Writings, which you will not find much differing from your
Own. But now to the Point.

WE have, for methods sake, made a Distribution of Humane Duties into Five
Parts; The Distribution of ^he Whole Work.
Two, upon the Points of Decency, and Virtue; Two more, with a respect to the
Commodiousness of Life; as Power, Wealth, etc. And a Fifth, with a regard to
our Election, rather of One, then Another, when several things, either Good, or
Profitable, meet in Competition. We have already gone thorough the First Branch
of this Division, which I must recommend to your particular Attention, and
Study. The Point now in hand is That which we call Profitable: The Word
Profitable is Corrupted.
A word, which by the Corruption of Time, and Custom, is perverted insensibly
to the signification of somewhat that may be separated from Honesty: as if any
thing could be Profitable, that were not Honest, or any thing Honest, without
being Profitable; an Error of the most pernicious consequence imaginable to the
Life of man. These Three Points, how confused soever they may appear to be, are
yet by Philosophers of great Authority, very judiciously, and ingenuously
distinguished in the Imagination: concluding in This, that whatsoever is
Profitable, is Honest, and whatsoever is Honest, is Profitable: Profitable and
Honest are Convertible Terms.
And consequently that whatsoever is Either of them, is the Other. From the not
understanding of this matter aright, it comes often to pass, that we have a
Cunning, Artificial Sort of People, in great Admiration: mistaking Craft, for
Wisdom. Craft mistaken for Wisdom.
This Opinion is by all means to be rooted out from among men; and this
following persuasion erected in the stead of that there is is no compassing the
end we aim at, by Fraudulent, and Indirect Courses, but only by just Dealings,
and honest Counsels.

NOW the things apperteining to Conveniences for the Life of man, are either
Inanimate, Things Inanimate.
as Gold, Silver, Minerals,, and the productions of the Earth; or Animated,
Animate.
and indu'd with Impulse, and Appetite; And those again are divided, into
Unreasonable, Unreasonable.
and Reasonable. Of the former kind, we may reckon Horses, Oxen, and other
sorts of Cattle; Bees, etc. whose labor Contributes in some measure, to the
Use and Necessities of Life; and then for Reasonable, Reasonable.
we may account the Gods, and Men. By Piety and Holiness, we make our selves
acceptable to the Gods; but in the next place to the Gods themselves, it is in
the Power of Men to render themselves most Beneficial to one another. One man
is the greatest Benefit or Mischief to another.
And those things which may be Hurtful, or Injurious to us, do fall likewise
under the same Division. But in This Case, the Gods are excepted; as presuming
that they will do us no harm. So that the greatest mischief that we are liable
to, is from one another. For the very Inanimate things we spoke of, are most of
them, The Necessity of Mutual H^lp and Society.
the Effects of Humane Industry and Labor. There goes a great deal of Work,
and Art, to the very preparing of them; and then there must be Humane
Application to the Using of them: For neither Physique, Navigation, Tillage,
the Reaping and Gathering of our Corn, and Fruits, or the Conservation, of
them, could be effected without the labor of Man. There would be no Exporting
what we have to spare, or Importing what we want, without the mutual Help one
of anther. How should we fetch up Stones oat of the Quarries for our necessary
use: or Iron, Brass, Gold, Silver, out of the Bowels of the Earth, without
Labor, and the Hands of men? whence came our Houses, at First, to defend us
from the Injuries of Heat and Cold? or How should we afterward have Repaired,
or Rebuilt them, when they come to be laid in Ruins, either by Tempest,
Earthquakes, or even by Age it self: If the Obligations and Necessities of
Humane Societies, had not moved us to call for Help, one of another? Our
Aquaducts our Canals for the turning of Rivers, and flowing of our Grounds, our
Sea Banks, our forced Ports, and Harbors, are they not all of them the Effect
of Manual Operation and Industry? From these Instances, and a thousand more, it
appears undenyably that the very advantages which we receive even from
Inanimate things would be totally lost to us; but for That Labor and Endeavor
that gives us Profit of them: and to which we are likewise indebted for the
Benefits that we receive even from Beasts themselves. It was undoubtedly the
Invention of man too; the Application of them to the Use of Mankind; Nor can we
at this day either Feed, Reclaim, or Preserve what we have occasion for, or
make our Best of their Service* without the Assistance of one another. Is it
not by the help of Men, that we destroy those Creatures that are hurtful to us;
and take others, that we may be the better for? What should I speak of those
Innumerable Arts, without which we are little better then Dead, Living? What
Care for the Sick? What delight for the Sound? What Food, or Clothing, without
the help of Arts, and Trades, to supply us? This is it that furnishes, and
Sweetens Humane Life; and in our manner of Feeding, and Covering, raises us
above the Condition of Beasts. How should Cities have been either built, or
peopled without Correspondence, and Commerce? And hence come Laws, and Customs,
the Equal and Universal Bounds of Common Right, for the Comfort, and Regulation
of our Lives. And this Communication produces Gentleness of Manners, and
Modesly, and This is it that supports us in a state of Security, and furnishes
us in all our Wants, by the Intercourse of Giving, and Receiving and by the
Exchange of Good Offices, and Conveniences. A great deal of this might have
been spared; For it is Clear to every man, That which Panaetius has so much
enlarged upon; Which is, that never any Prince or General, either in War, or in
Peace, achieved any Great, and Profitable Exploit, without the Concurrence of
Humane Aid. He makes his Instances in Themistocles, Pericles, Cyrus, Agesilaus,
Alexander; who could never have done those mighty things (he says) without the
help of Others. But there was no necessity of Witnesses in so evident a matter.
The great Mischiefs are from one man to another.
Now as the Advantages are very Great, which we receive by Communication, and
Agreement; So there is no Mischief so detestable, which one man does not bring
upon another. Dicaearchus, a Famous, and an Eloquent Peripatetique, has written
an express Tract of the Destruction of Men. He sums up all the Fatalities of
Mankind; as Inundations, Plagues, Desolations; the sudden Incursions of Wild
Beasts, and Serpents, which, according to his Relation, have sometimes devoured
whole Nations: and all This, (he says) is as nothing, to the Calamities, that
by War, and Seditions, we have brought one upon another. Now since it is
without dispute, that we are the Authors both of great Good, and of great Evil,
among our selves, it must be the Business, as it is the Property of Virtue, so
to mould and fashion men's Minds, as to Create in them, Inclinations of
Contributing toward the Common good of Mankind. Now for those Benefits, that we
receive from things without Life, or in what kind soever, in the use and
ordering of Beasts; they are properly Mechanical: and the Works of the Body,
rather then of the Mind. But those Studies, that fit, and dispose us for the
Emprovement of our Fortunes, are excited by the Prudence and Virtue of
excellent Men: Of Pru^ence and Virtue.
For almost all Virtue moves upon These Three Points. First, the Accurate
Perception of every thing in its Naked Truth and Simplicity; in the
Correspondence of Circumstances, and the Consequences of things, with the Rise,
and Causes of them. Secondly, the Moderating of our Passions, and Appetites,
(which the Greeks call (...), and (...), and subjecting them to the Government
of Reason. The Third, is, the Skill of menaging our Conversation with so much
Courtesy, and Discretion, as to gain the kindness and assistance of our
Acquaintance, toward the furnishing of us with all things that our Nature
requires, in Competency, and Plenty; Defending, and Protecting us from
Violence, revenging our selves upon those that affront us, by inflicting such
punishments only as may stand with Humanity, and Justice. As to the Means, and
Faculty both of Making Friends, and Keeping them, (which we shall speak of in
due Time, and Place) only a Word, in Passage.

We are all of us sensible of the Power of Fortune, The Power of Fortune.
in the matter of Prosperity, and Adversity: When she gives us a fair Gale, our
Course is smooth, and gentle; till we arrive at our desired Port. But when the
Wind blows strong against us, we are fain to beat it out, under a thousand
hazards. Now there are some Casualties, Unhappy Casualties.
less frequent, then Others; which are commonly ranged under the Dominion of
Fortune. First, from things Inanimate, as Storms, Tempests, Shipwracks, Ruins;
Conflagrations; from Beasts, as Strokes, Bitings, Trampling under foot, etc.
These are Accidents, as I said, that fall not out often. But the Routing of
Armies; (as of no less than Three lately:) the Loss of Brave Commanders, (one
Incomparable Person but the Other Day) the Envy of the Multitude, and a World
of Gallant, and Deserving Men, by Prescriptions, Imprisonments, and forced
Escapes, sacrificed to Popular Malice: And on the Other Side, Honors, Empire,
Victory; though these things are All Looked upon as Fortuitous; yet neither the
One, nor the Other come to pass, without the Interposition of Labor, and
Industry. Now since thus it is; let us consider by what fair Means we may make
such Interests, and Friendships in the World, as may turn to our Advantage. If
you shall think the Discourse overlong; compare it with the Dignity of the
Subject, and perhaps you will come to wish there had been more on it.

The Grounds of Honor and Esteem in the World.
WHAT good Office soever one Man does for Another, whether in the matter of
Fortune, or Credit, he does it either upon the Account of Good Will, and
Personal Affection; or of Respect, as wishing well to the Advancement of his
Fortune, out of a Veneration for his Virtue: Or else, upon the score of Trust,
and Confidence in him; as one that is able to give us good Advice: Or
otherwise, out of fear, perchance, of his Power. Or in hope of a Reward: (as it
is common for Princes, and Popular Pretenders, to scatter their Donatives.) Or
Lastly; Many Men are moved by the bare Obligation of Money, and Reward. The
foulest, and the basest of all Considerations, both to Him that entertains the
Address, Mercenary Natures.
and to the Other, that makes it. For Matters are at an Ill Pass, when that
which should be obtein'd by Virtue, is attempted by Money. But since there is,
many times, a Necessity of That Provision, we will give some Directions for the
Using of it. Only something must be said in the First place, of Those Things
that have a Nearer Affinity with Virtue. There are several Reasons for which
One Man puts himself under the Power, and Government of Another; Either
Affection, Obligations, Excellency of Endowments, Hope of Profit; Fear of being
forced to it: Or Men are Inveigled by Liberal Promises; or in fine, by
Corruption, and Reward; which we find to be a Common Case in our Republique.

THERE is nothing that secures Power, and Greatness, like Love; Love is the
best Security of Power.
Nothing that endangers it, like Fear. Wherefore Ennius says very well, He that
is Feared, is Hated; and they that hate a Man, wish him Dead. But when it comes
once to a General Hatred, Hatred is the certain effect of Fear.
there is no force that is able to encounter it: As We have found by late, and
dear Experience, even if the thing had been unknown to us before. And it is not
only in the Violent Death of That Tyrant, Caesar, (whom this Oppressed City was
forced to bear, for want of Power to make Resistance:) But we may read it also
in the Common Fate of Other Oppressors; scarce any of them coming to a Natural
End. Fear is a False, and short-lived Security; but Love, on the Contrary, and
Benevolence, are Firm, even to the Death. In the Case of a Conquered People, I
must confess, if nothing else will keep them in Order; I should advise the same
Rigor, and Authority to be exercised over them, that a Master uses over his
Servants. But for any Man to pursue the same Course in a Free City, of making
himself Feared, were a direct Madness. For let the Laws be never so much
Oppressed, by Might, and Faction, and the very Foundations of the Common Liberty
shaken, there will be secret Contrivances yet, Private Consultations, and
Inrolling of Parties; that will some time or other put Life again into the
Government. For Men are more sensible of the Want of Liberty, than of the
Enjoyment of it. Let us therefore embrace That which most Conduces, not only to
our Security, but also to Wealth, and Power. The Ready way to the attaining of
our Desires, either in Public Affairs; or in Private, is, to Cast out Fear,
and to preserve, and maintain Charity. For whosoever would be Feared, must
necessarily be afraid himself of all that are afraid of him. What shall we
think of the Condition of the First Dionysius, The Condition and Fate of
Tyrants.
under the horror and the torture of his Terrors? that sindged his very
Beard, because he would not venture his Throat under the hand of a Barber? Or
of Alexander the Pheraean; that Durst not trust himself with his beloved Thebe,
without a Barbarian, a branded Slave, with his drawn Sword, for his Conducter;
and his Guards sent before him to search all the Women's Boxes, even to their
very Clothes and Linen, for concealed Ponyards, or other dangerous Weapons;
before he durst venture himself only from his Table, into his Bedchamber? O
miserable Wretch, that could put more Confidence in a Stigmatized Barbarian,
than in his Own Wife! But his Fears fell upon him, for she killed him with her
Own Hand, upon the Jealousy of a private Amor. Nor is there any Power under
Heaven that can long maintain it self against a pressing, and an Universal
Fear. And This we may see in the Example of Phalaris; a Tyrant Celebrated for
his Cruelty: who was cut off, not like the Pheraean Alexander, by secret
Treachery; nor yet like Our Caesar, by a particular band of Conspiratours: But
he was put to Death, The End of Phala^is.
by the Unanimous Outrage of the Citizens of Agrigentum; in the very
Marketplace. Did not the Macedonians abandon Demetrius, and go over as one Man,
to Pyrrbus? Were not the Lacedaemonians, for their Iniquity, and Mis-government,
almost totally deserted by their Allies, at that fatal Battle of Leuctra? where
they stood looking on, as Idle Spectators, till the Lacedaemonians were wholly
routed, and cut to pieces. I had rather make use of Foreign Instances, than
Domestique, upon This Subject: ^ut This however let me say, so long as the
Government of Rome was influenced by Principles of Gentleness, more than of
Violence: so long as they fought only for their Friends, or for Empire; the
Issue of the War was either a Generous Mercy, or at worst, no manner of
Unnecessary Rigor. The Senate of Rome was in those days the Haven, the
Sanctuary of Oppressed Kings, Rome was formerly the Sanctuary of the Oppressed.
People, and Nations: And the Magistrates, and Captains of Those Times, had no
Other Ambition, no Other Pique of Glory in Prospect, than to defend their
Provinces, and to support their Associates with Truth and Equity: so that Rome
did rather affect the Patronage of the whole World, than the Empire of it. This
Custom, and Discipline began sometimes since by little and little to decline;
but after the Victory of Sylla, it was totally extinct: And in Truth, it would
not have looked well after such Barbarities exercised upon the Citizens
Themselves, to have kept Touch in any point of Faith and Justice, with their
Allies. Here was a Glorious Cause attended with a most Impious, The Miseries
that befell Rome, for Cruelty and Injustice.
and Shameful Victory. The Goods of so many Honest, Worthy, and Eminent
Citizens exposed to Sale in the Marketplace: And to heighten the Affront;
under the very Title of Sylla's Booty. There was Another that came after him;
whose Cause it self was bad; and yet made fouler by the Victory. For not only
the Goods of Particular Citizens, but whole Nations and Countries, by One
common Act of Calamity, were here upon Auction; and after infinite Vexations,
and Ruins wrought abroad, we lived to see the Image of Marseilles born in
Triumph: Marseilles, I say, without which, we our selves could never have
carried a Triumph beyond the Alps; and This was the Condition too of the lost
Empire. I might reckon up Histories without end, of our perfidious Dealings
with our Allies: but This One shall suffice; being the basest perhaps, that
ever the Sun looked upon. Now this Judgment upon us, is just: For the
Sufferance of many Criminals made way to the boundless License of This One; who
has left a great many Heirs of his Ambition, though but few of his Fortune. And
there shall never want either Disposition, or Matter, for a Civil War, so long
as Sylla's Successes shall stand upon Record, for an Encouragement to desperate
Wretches to enrich themselves by his Example. Prosperous Cruelties are
dangerous Presidents.
Those bloody, and prosperous Usurpations of Sylla; which, as they were
formerly Acted in the Dictatourship of his near Kinsman, so they were now
renewed fix and thirty years after, with more Outrage, and horror. He that had
been but a Clerk under the former Dictatourship, was now preferred, in the
Latter, to be City-Treasurer. Why should we expect now, ever to be quiet, when
Sedition meets with such Rewards? It Is true, the Walls of the City are yet
standing, and in Being, though in continual Dread of the utmost of Extremities:
But the Government it self is absolutely sunk already. And to return to my
Subject, all these Calamities are fallen upon us, for making it our business
rather to be Feared, than Beloved. Now if the Power of Rome could not support
it self under Tyranny, and Oppression; how should any particular Person expect
to escape? It is sufficiently made already appear, that the Bonds of Love are
much stronger than those of Fear. We shall now debate upon the Fairest Means of
obteining that Affection, How to gain a fair Reputation in the World.
which we so earnestly desire, with Honor, and Justice. But we do not all of
us stand in need of it alike: so that we must accommodate the Matter to every
Man's Condition, and Course of Life; to see whether it be necessary to procure a
General Esteem, or that the kindness of some few may do the business. We may
however conclude upon This, as the First, and Principal Point: That we contract
Faithful Friendships; and make Acquaintances with those that Truly Love, and
value us. And this is a Common Medium, almost indifferently, betwixt Great, and
Small. And a Rule that holds with Both alike; not as if all Men stood Equally
in need of Glory, and Reputation, but they are good Helps yet (whoever has
them) toward the Gaining of Other Advantages, and the making of Friendships:
which in my Loelius I have expressly handled. And I have written two Books also
upon the Subject of Glory; which yet I must touch over again, as a thing of
great moment in the Conduct even of our most Important Affairs.

WE are then arrived at the highest pitch of Glory* What is perfect Glory.
when we have gained These Three Points: The Love, the Trust, and the Reverence
of the People: When we can hear them say; That Man is worthy of Honor. Now to
speak ^hort, and Plain; The Method is well nigh the same, of Ingratiating our
selves with a Single Person, or with the Multitude. But yet there is Another
manner of Address also, toward the Influencing of the Minds, and good Will of
the People, in our Favor.

TO speak in Order now, to the three Points before mentioned; Nothing works so
much upon the Affections of the People, as Liberality or Bounty. Bounty and
Gent^eness* w^^k much upon the People.
And next to That, is a Benevolent, and Generous Inclination: Even without the
Means of expressing it in Effects. For the very Fame and Opinion of a Man's
Frankness* Bounty, Justice, Faith: and briefly, of all those Virtues that
Contribute to the Sweetening, and Smoothing of our Manners, has a wonderful
Power over the Hearts of the People. There is such a Charm in That Gracefulness
and Decorum, which we have already Treated of, that the very Nature, and bare
Appearance of it does move us strangely. Beside that as it receives its Luster
from the aforesaid Virtues; wherever we find those Virtues, we cannot but
naturally have a good Inclination for the person that possesses them. These are
the most powerful attractives of Love. Not but that there may be other motives
also, though of less moment.

AS to the Matter of Trust and Credit; if we can but get the Reputation of
being Prudent and Just, The Power of Justice and Prudence.
our Business is done: For we have naturally a Confidence in those that we
think Wiser then our selves; In men of Providence, and Foresight, upon whom we
may depend for our seasonable direction, and advice; as those that in Case of
any difficulty, are able to help us out. This is the True, and Profitable
Wisdom: As to the Trust now which we repose in Just, Good, and Faithful Men; we
must not entertain so much as the least suspicion in it, of Fraud, or Injury;
These being the men into whose hands we do reasonably commit our Lives, our
Children, and our Fortunes. But it is Justice yet, that creates the greater
Confidence of the Two: For Justice may beget Confidence, without Wisdom; but
Wisdom can do nothing without Justice. For take away the Opinion of a man's
Integrity, and the more Crafty, and Subtle he is, by so much is he the more
Hateful, and Suspected. Justice, and Prudence in Conjunction, will give a man
what Credit he pleases; but taking them Apart, Justice, even without Wisdom,
may do very much; but Wisdom, without Justice, Wisdom without Justice, is Craft.
is nothing Worth. Let not any man wonder now at my dividing One Virtue from
Another, as if it were possible for a man to be Just, and yet not Prudent; when
the Philosophers are all agreed upon it (and my self too for one) that he that
has one Virtue, has All. For it is One thing, the Nicety of hitting a Truth in
a Philosophical Decision; and another thing to make a Discourse in Words
accommodated to Vulgar acceptance: And That Is my Intent in this place, when I
say that one is Valiant, another Good, a third Wise. For these are popular
Opinions, and must be clothed in Common and Popular Terms; which was also
Panaetius's way of expressing himself. But to resume my Purpose.

THE Third point recommended toward the acquiring of Glory, is This: So to
behave our selves that people may hold us in Admiration, and account us Worthy
of all honor. The Common people are Generally admirers of all things that are
Great, A^miration produces Esteem.
and beyond their Understanding: And so they are in particular Cases too: Where
they find more Good in a man then they expected. But where they Fancy any
Virtues Peculiar, and Extraordinary, they extol men to the Skies, and behold
them with a kind of Veneration, despising, and villifying such, on the Other
side, as they find wanting either in Virtue, Strength, or Courage. But they
cannot yet be said to Despise all that they have an Ill Opinion of. For there
is a Lewd, Backbiting, Couzening, Quarrelsom Generation of men, which though they
do exceedingly Dislike, they do not yet Contemn: For those Only are properly to
be taken for Contemptible, that lead a Lazy, Droning, Heedless Life; without
any Benefit, either to Themselves, or Others. The Admirable Spirits are such as
have the Repute of a Preeminence in Virtue; Great Virtue produces great
Admiration.
and keep themselves not only from doing Mean and Dishonorable things, but
clear even of those Vices, which others cannot easily resist. For by the Charms
of Pleasures our Minds are Dissolved, and withdrawn from Virtue; And we are as
much discomposed and shaken, on the the other hand, with the Burnings, and
Tortures of Pein. It is a prodigious power that the Consideration of Life and
Death, Riches and Poverty, has over the Weakness of Flesh and Blood. But how
Glorious then, and how Admirable must That Virtue be, that takes so absolute a
Possession of the Soul of man, in the Contemplation of Great and Honorable
things? As Magnanimity.
As in that elevated state of mind, to make him look down upon all the
Circumstances of Fortune, with Indifference* and Scorn. This Bravery of mind
never fails of moving Great Admiration: Especially accompanied with Justice;
Justice.
which singl^ Virtue constitutes the very Character of a Good man; and makes
him wonderful in the Eyes of the People; and not without reason neither: For no
man can be Just, that either Fears Death, Pein, Banishment, or Poverty; Or that
Values before Equity, the Comforts that stand opposed to these Calamities.
Veneration of all is paid to him that holds out against Money: Contempt of money.
And wheresoever they find such a man, they think they can never do enough for
him. So that by Justice we gain all those points that lead to Reputation; As
Benevolence by Obliging as many as we can; Repute and Admiration, by the
Contempt and Neglect of those things which the greater part of the World
p^rsues with Greediness, and Passion.

NOW in my Opinion, there is not any Design or Condition of Life wherein one
man does not stand in need of Another; And especially, as to the matter of
Familiar Discourse, and Conversation: which a body shall hardly find to his
satisfaction, but under the appearance of an honest man. Nay, the very Opinion
of Justice will stand a man in great stead, The very Opinion of Justice gives a
man Reputation.
even in the strictest solitude, and retirement imaginable; and more perhaps in
That State, then in any other, as living, in some sort, out of Protection; and
more exposed to Affronts; which, under the Notion of an Impious person, people
will be forward enough to put upon him: And then for men of Business and
Commerce, as Buying, Selling, Hiring, Letting* there can be no dealing without
Justice. Justice is sacred, even among Thieves and Pirates.
Nay so great is the force of it, that common Highway-men, and those that
support themselves only upon Rapine, and Violence, cannot yet subsist without
it. Insomuch that if one Thief does but Steal from Another of the same Troop,
he is expelled the Society, as a man of no Faith, And if the Captain of the Band
shows but any partiality in the Distribution of the Booty, he is at least
deserted by his Party, if it does not also cost him his Life; For there is a
Discipline even among Pirates themselves: And their Laws are duly executed, and
obeyed. Theopompus writes of an Illyrian Robber, (one Bargulus) that was
celebrated for his Justice to his Partners, and made himself a great Fortune
by it; but not so great a one yet as Viriatus the Portuguese; of whose Power,
and Courage some of our Armies, and Generals felt the sad Effects; till the
Praetor L^lius (surnamed the Wise) defeated and scattered his Forces; and
finally put such a Cheque to his Undertakings, that he left but little work for
Those to do that came after him. How great now must the force of Justice be in
a Regular, and well ordered Government which of it self alone is able to
Advance, and Establish even a Piratic Power, without any other support.

HERODOTVS tells us that the Medians chose their Kings Originally, Kings chosen
for their Virtues.
for the Probity of their Manners; and in hope of enjoying the Benefits of
Common Justice: Which I am persuaded was the End, and Practice likewise of our
Predecessors. For when in old time, the Weaker were Oppressed by the Stronger,
the people presently betook themselves to one more Excellent then the rest, for
their Protector: And it was his part to relieve the distressed, and to make
such Provisions, that common right might be done Indifferently betwixt all
Parties. And in the Making of their Laws, they had the same Prospect, as in the
Choice of their Kings. The thing propounded, was an Equal, and a Common Right;
and in Truth, it could be no Right, without being so qualified. If under the
Administration of some One Man that was Just, and Good, they atteined That End,
they were well contented There to rest: But in Case of failing, there were Laws
Invented, which to all, under them, and at all times, should still pronounce
one and the same sentence. This now is Clear, that in all Elections, the People
have still had a Care to pitch upon him for their Governor, that was most
reverene'd for his Justice: Always provided, that he were a Man of Prudence
too. And what is it that a Nation would not believe it self able to Compass,
under so Auspicious a Conduct? We are therefore obliged to Cherish, and to
preserve Justice, by all manner of Means. First, for its Own sake, (for
otherwise, it were not Justice;) And Secondly, for the Augmentation of our
Honor, and Glory. But it is in Glory, as it is in Money; there must care be
taken, both in the Getting of it, and in the Laying of it out; for we shall
have perpetual Occasions for it; and we must provide for Uses of Dignity, as
well as those of Necessity. It was a great thing said, That of Socrates; A
Notable Saying of Socrates.
The nearest way to Honor (says he) is for a Man so to live, that he may be
found to be That in Truth, which he would be Thought to be. It Is a gross
mistake* for any Man to think of getting a lasting Reputation in the World, by
false Appearances of Things. Vain Ostentation, or studied Forms of Looks, and
Words. True Glory is rooted in the very Soul, and brings forth fruit in our
Actions. All Disguises pass away, and shed, like Flowers; and nothing can be
durable, that is Counterseit. This might be confirmed by Instances in
Abundance; but for Brevity sake, I shall Content my self with an Observation
only upon One Family. The Name of Tiberius Gracchus the Son of Publius, shall
be famous to Posterity, so long as there shall be any Memorial left of Rome it
self: But for his Sons, they were neither Beloved, Living, nor Lamented, Dead;
All good Men agreeing in a Detestation of their Lives; and approving the
Justice of their Executions: He that would make himself truly Eminent for the
Love of Justice, must discharge the Duties of it; of which Duties, we have
treated in the former Book. But how easily soever we may make our selves known
to Others for what we are, (though in truth the main point rests in being such
Men, as we would be thought to be) it will not be amiss yet to lay down some
Certain Precepts concerning this Matter. He that comes into the World under any
Remarkable Circumstance to make him taken notice of, Some are Born Remarkable.
either in respect of Fortune, or Family; as the Son for the purpose of such or
such a Father, (which I take (my Cicero) to be your Own Case:) All Men's Eyes
are presently upon him, and every body enquiring into his Life, and Manners: He
Lives, as it were, in Open View, and all his Words and Doings are made
Public. Now for Those, who by reason of their Obscure Extraction, Others make
themselves so.
are in their tender Age not so much known in the World, I would have them
prompted Early toward great Undertakings; and bend their Endeavors directly
That way; which they will do the more Vigorously, in regard that Young Men are
so far from being Envied, that they are rather Cherished, and Encouraged in
Virtuous, and Generous Inclinations.

THE First Lesson that I would give to a Young Man for the Advance of his
Credit with the People; Let a Young Man study the Use of his Arms.
should be to addict himself to the Study, and Practice, of Arms; at least
where there were any Glory to be gotten by Military Virtues. Our Predecessors,
that were almost Continually in War; made themselves Famous by This Profession:
But it has been Your Lot (my Son) to come into the World amid the Broyls of a
Divided State, where the One side was Extremely Wicked, and the Other as
Unfortunate. And yet in the Command you had under Pompey; even in This very
War, you acquitted your self, as a Man at Arms to all Purposes; an Excellent
Horseman; a Person of Indefatigable Industry; and all This, to the Common
Satisfaction both of the Glorious General, and the Whole Army. But the
Commonwealth it self sunk here, and so did your Glory. It is not upon your
Particular, but a General Account, that I have taken up this Discourse:
Wherefore I shall now proceed to that which remains.

AS the Operations of the Mind, are in All Cases much more Noble than those of
the Body; The Virtues of the Mind are more Noble than those of the Body.
so are the things that we compass by the Faculties of our Reason, and
Understanding, of much greater Value then those things that we bring to pass by
Corporal Force. The First point that recommends us to a good Esteem in the
World, is Modesty; Of Modesty and Piety.
After that, comes Piety, and Reverence to our Parents; and then follows a
Tenderness of Affection to our Relations, and Friends. It is a promising Sign,
when a Young Man applies himself to persons of Eminence for Wisdom, It is a
good Sign when a Man loves good Company.
Authority, and Good Affection to their Country: For it Creates an Opinion, and
Expectation of Great Matters from him that proposes to himself the Imitation of
Great Examples. It was every Bodies Judgment, upon Publius Rutilius, that if he
lived, he would make a Famous Civilian, and an Honest Man. And what was This
grounded upon, but the frequent Conversation that he had in his Youth with
Publius Mucius? But Lucius Crassus, I must confess, without the help of any
borrowed Reputation, advanced his Own Fame, and dignified himself in that
Generous and Memorable Accusation of his. He was at That time, of an Age to be
rather held by Flatteries and fair Words to his very Exercises, than left to
himself. And yet at That Age, with Demosthenes, the things which he had so
happily conceived at Home, he did with no less Honor Execute in Public.

WE may divide Speech into Familiar Discourse, Of Speech.
and matter of Argument, or Pleading. The Latter undoubtedly is of the greater
Efficacy toward the purchasing of Glory: And This is it which we call
Eloquence. And yet there is a Certain Affability, Affability.
and Gentleness of Fashion too, that does wonderfully work upon the Affections
of all People. There are yet Extant some Epistles of Philip to Alexander; of
Antipater to Cassander; and of Antigonus to Philip; (Three Persons highly
esteemed for their Wisdom:) And they do all of them prescribe the Use of
Courtesy, and Fair Language to him that would Ingratiate himself with the
Multitude; and only the Caress of some Frank and Familiar Name, or
Compellation; (as Fellow-Souldier, or Camarade) to the Commander that would
endear himself to the Soldiery. Eloquence, the Power of it.
But then it has another kind of force, the Faculty of Haranging the Multitude;
when with One Speech sometimes a Man gets an Eternal Fame. It is wonderful, the
Transports that are wrought by the Power of Eloquence, and Wisdom: And the
Veneration that is paid by the Auditory, to a Person whom they take to be so
much Wiser, and Intelligent, than other Mortals. And yet there is a Mixed way of
speaking, that does wonders too; Especially with a Concurrence in it of both
Weight and Modesty; which, in a Young Man, makes it still the more Admirable.
There are many Occasions that require Eloquence; and many of our Countrymen,
(and Young Men too) that are highly esteemed for it, both at the Bar, and in
the Senate. But that which I look upon to be the most Effectual, and
praiseworthy, is the Eloquence of the Bar; and the Subject of it, The Subject
of it.
is either Accusation, or Defense: the Latter is the more Laudable of the Two,
and yet in many Cases, the Other is likewise to be Approved. As in what I said
just now of Crassus; and Anthony also, when he was a Young Man, did the same
thing. Publius Sulpicius raised the Glory of his Eloquence by his Charge
against C. Norbanus, a Seditious and an Unprofitable Citizen. But this is not a
thing to be done often; nor, in Truth, is it to be done at all, unless on the
behalf of the Government, as the Two Luculluses: Or in favor of the Oppressed,
as I my self did for the Sicilians: Julius C^sar did as much for the
Sardinians; and Fusius showed his Skill too against Marcus Aquilius: so that it
may be once done, but no more; unless a Man be called to it by his Duty to the
Commonwealth and in the very Case of Public Enemies, there may be an excuse
for Frequent Accusations: But even There too, we must keep within the Bounds of
Moderation: For it is the part of an Ill-natured Man, (or I might rather say,
scarce of a Man) to make a Trade of hunting People to Death. And beside the
danger that it brings upon the Persecuter, it is an Infamous, and a Rascally
Character, that of an Informer. It is a busy Office that of an Informer.
It was the Nickname that was given to Marcus Brutus, (the Son I mean of the
Eminent Civilian) and it cast a Blemish upon the very Luster of his Family. And
moreover, be sure to observe this Duty, as Inviolable, and Sacred; Never to
have any thing to do in the Exposing of Innocent Blood. Have a Care of Innocent
Blood.
For it is a Crime, that no Color in the World can justify; for what can be
so Inhumane, as to turn the Faculties of Reason, and Eloquence, that were given
us for the Benefit, and Conservation of Mankind, to the Ruin, and Destruction
of Honest Men? But it does not follow yet, because we must not upon any terms
persecute the Innocent, that therefore we may not in some Case defend the
Wicked, and the Guilty: For it is a thing many times agreeable to the Will of
the People; to Custom, and to Humanity, so to do. It is the part of the Judge,
constantly to follow the Truth; but the Advocate is not so strictly tied up to
the Precise Truth, as not to make his best sometimes of that which carries some
near Resemblance of it. I should not take This Freedom upon This Subject, if I
had not the Authority of Panatius, (one of the Soundest of the Stoiques) to
support me in it. The greatest Favor and Renown is gotten by a Defensive
Eloquence; and it is so much the Greater, as the Power, and Opposition of the
Adversary is the Stronger; and according to the Streights, and Exigencies of
the Party relieved. We have brought off many, and particularly, in our younger
days, we defended Sextus Roscius Amerinus against the Force and Authority of L.
Sylla himself: The Oration you know is still Extant.

HAVING already set forth the Methods by which a Young man may advance his
Reputation in the World; we shall now discourse the matter of Liberality, and
Bounty, which is Twofold; For we oblige those that stand in need of our Help,
either by our Labor, or by our Money. Liberality is Twofold, Labor and Money.
The Latter is the Easier way; especially where the Benefactor is Master of an
Estate; but the Other is the more Honorable, and Splendid, and better becoming
a Clear and Generous Mind. For though the Will may be Frank enough in Both, yet
the one Obligation is rather a Debt to his Fortune, but the other to his
Virtue. And then by These Pecuniary Bounties, the very Fountein is drawn dry,
and one Bounty is destroyed by Another; and in the very Act, we lose the Means
of Obliging. But he that is Liberal of his Peins, that is to say, of his
Industr^, and Virtue, the more Good he has done already, the more Friends will
he find to assist him toward the doing of more: And then by the Custom and
Practice of doing good Offices a man does not only learn the Way of Obliging,
but gets the very Habit of it. It is a Notable Reprehension, that of Philip, A
Generous Reproof.
in a Letter to his Son Alexander, for endeavoring to ingratiate himself with
the Macedonians by the Force of Money, What is it, (with a mischief) says he,
that should make you expect Faith from those People whom you your self have
Corrupted? Is it that instead of their Prince, you would be looked upon only as
their Servant, or Purse-bearer? An Office so much below the Dignity of a
Monarch! Such a Bounty could not have been better expressed, then by calling it a
Corruption: For the very Receiver is the worse for it, and the more he gets, the
more he looks for. This Epistle was written only to his Son; but it may serve
as a Precept to Mankind.

NOW as there is no question, but that the Bounty which consists in Labor, and
Industry is the Fairer of the two, The Bounty of Labor is the fairest of the
Two.
and the more Extensive, because more men are the better for it; we meet with
several Occasions yet, and many proper Objects for the Exercise also of the
Other sort of Bounty, which in some Cases must be put in Practice, but with
Choice, and within Compass: Give within Compass.
For there are many people that squander away their whole Estates upon
Inconsiderate Gratuities. Nor can any thing be more senseless, then for a man
to take peins to put himself out of condition to do the thing that he loves to
do. And these Unadvised Liberalities are commonly followed with Extortion too;
for when men are brought to Want, by Over-giving, they fall to the repairing of
their Profusions upon Some, by Violence upon Others: And the Friends they get
by Giving, on the One side, will not balance the Enemies they raise, by taking
away on the Other. Wherefore, as I would not lay my Fortune in Common, so
neither would I refuse a Part of it to my Friend, but still in Proportion to
the whole. We have a Common saying which is grown by use into a Proverb, Bounty
has no Bottom, and it is worth remembering. For what Mean can be There expected,
where by the Custom of Giving, and of Receiving, both the Giver and the
Receiver come to desire the same thing.

OF large Givers there are Two sorts; the Liberal, and the Prodigal: The
Prodigal, Prodigality.
they lash out upon Treats, Popular Doales, Prizes, Public Sports, and
Spectacles, and other Entertainments, which are no sooner past, then forgotten.
The Liberal, True Liberality.
they employ their Expenses upon Redeeming of Slaves, setting a Friend out of
Debt, or helping him out in the bestowing of a Daughter, in the Getting of a
Fortune, or in the Increasing of it. I cannot but wonder what put it into
Theophrastus's head. in his Book of Riches, that among so many Excellent
things, he should be guilty of one so very gross an Absurdity. His Discourse
runs much upon the Honor, and Magnificence of Popular Shows, and Presents; and
he makes this to be the great Advantage of an Ample Fortune, that it Furnishes
a man with means to be at That Exepnce. Now in my Opinion, the Fruit of
Liberality is much more Certain, and Considerable, in the Few Instances I have
before mentioned. It is a Grave, and a Pertinent Reproof, that of Aristotle's,
upon This Subject: We make nothing (says he) of our Profusions upon the
Humouring of the Common People, but to hear of Ten Crowns given in a Siege for
a Bottle of Water, what a wonderment is made of it, as a thing Incredible: till
upon second Thoughts, we find the Price excused by the Necessity? But in the
Other Extravagant Spoil, and Excessive Prodigality, where there is neither
Honor, nor Necessity Consulted in it, and the very Pleasure passes with the
Spectacle; we can find nothing there to wonder at. And who are they but the
weakest of the People that stand affected with this Vanity? And no sooner are
they satiated, then the Delight it self is forgotten. And who are they that are
so much taken with these Fooleries, but Women, Children, Fine Shows are only
for Women and Children.
and Slaves; that is to say, people either of servile Condition, or of servile
Minds, scarce any man of Sense, Judgment, or Consideration, approving of them?
I know very well that it is an Ancient Custom in This City, for the AEdile to
exhibit Shows to the People, upon Entering his Office; and that very good men
expect it from him. P. Crassus the Rich (as well in his Fortune, as in his
Name) made a very Magnificent Entry; and so did L. Crassus, after Him; though
joined with Q. Marius too, a man of singular Moderation. And then C. Claudius,
the Son of Appius, with a great many more; as Lucullus, Hortensius, Silanus;
which were all outdone by P. Lentulus, in My Consulship, and Scaurus Emulated
him. But the most Pompous, and Expensive Solemnity of all, was that of our
Friend Pompey, in his Second Consulship; This is enough to show you my opinion
in all these Cases. But yet however, we must have a Care on the Other hand, not
to incur a suspicion of Avarice. Mamercus, (a very Rich man) was repulsed when
he stood for Consul, In what Cases Profusion may be allowed.
because he had refused the Charge of AEdile. Wherefore, if the People call for
it, on the One side, and wise men be not against it, (though they do not desire
it) on the Other; the thing ought to be done: But according to our Abilities,
as it has been my Own Case: Or otherwise, where we may reap some Advantage by
it, that will more then Countervail the Charge. As it turned much to the
reputation of Orestes, not long since, the public Dinners that he exposd in
the Streets, to the Multitude, under Color of Dedicating his Tenths to
Hercules. Neither did any man blame M. Seius, for supplying the people in a
great Scarcity with Corn, at about a Groat a Bushel: when by so doing, he
delivered himself from the great and inveterate hatred of the Multitude; and
(being AEdile too) by a Liberality, that was neither Dishonorable nor
Burdensome. But it was a most Glorious, and Memorable Action my Friend Milo's
engaging of the Sword-players for the Public safety, which in my own
particular I was not a little concerned in: And by Means whereof, all the
Attempts and Outrages of Claudius were Crushed, and disappointed. So that
Bounties should be grounded either upon Necessity or Profit; and even in These
Cases too the best Rule is Mediocrity. L. Philip the Son of Quintus, (a person
of great Worth, But still within Bounds.
and Understanding) was want to make it his Vaunt, that it never cost him one
penny of Money to the People, the obteining of all the Favors that were ever
conferred upon him. Cotta said the same thing, and without Vanity, so might we
our selves too, in some degree; for the expense of my AEdileship was so small,
that it could not signify any thing toward the gaining of those Offices which
were afterward conferred upon me as by a Common Consent; And That in my own
year too: which is more then any of those beforenamed, can boast of. I take
that money to be best laid out which is employed upon Common Walls, and
Ramparts, Docks, Havens, Aquaducts, and other Works, for the good of the
Public. Those Bounties give more of present satisfaction, I must confess,
that are laid down upon the Nail, as I may say; but the Other will find better
acceptance with Posterity: As for Theaters, Walks, Galleries, Temples, I shall
speak the more Favorably of Them, for Pompey's sake: But Learned men, I
perceive, do not approve of them; and Panaetius, for one, whom in this
Discourse I have rather Followed, then Interpreted: and then there is Phalereus
Demetrius, who was very sharp upon the famous Pericles, for his Extravagant
Profusion upon the Porch of the Temple of Pallas. But I have handled this
Subject at large in my Discourse of a Commonwealth. Now for a Conclusion; This
kind of Liberality, upon the whole matter, is stark naught; and yet by the
Circumstances of Times, and the like, it may be rendered Necessary; But in all
Cases there must be observed a Mediocrity, and a Proportion.

AS to the Other sort of Bounty that arises from Liberality, Of Privater
Liberality.
we must accommodate our selves to the Occasion, and in Differing Cases use
Differing Methods. One man lies under the Pinch of a Pressing Calamity: Another
man's Condition is not much amiss perhaps already, but yet he would be glad to
make it better. How to bestow them.
My Charity binds me in the First place, to assist the Miserable Person; at
least if he did not make himself so by his own fault. And yet I would not be so
hard neither as not to help him also, that is Well already, in order to his
Further Advantage; But this is a Point that requires singular Care and Judgment
in the Choice. It was well said of Ennius, A Benefit misplaced turns to a
Crime. But in That which is bestowed upon a Good, and a Grateful man, there is,
First, the Conscientious Comfort of the Virtue it self; and then the
Satisfaction that it brings us in Other respects; For the most acceptable thing
in the World is a discreet Liberality; and the Reputation of it must needs be
great, when the Goodness of every man in Power is the Common Sanctuary of
Mankind.

WE must have a regard also to the Benefit, as well as to the Person; A Regard
to the Benfit as well as to the Person.
and that it may be of such a Quality as to Descend in the memory of it to the
Children and Posterity of the Person Obliged, that there may be no place left
for Ingratitude. For all Mortals have a Detestation for it, and every man looks
upon himself as Injured in the discouragment of Bounty: And the Guilty in this
Case, are reputed the Common Enemies of the Needy. Beside the Benefit that this
Piety of Disposition brings to the Public, in the Enriching of the Poor, and
the Redeeming of Captives, which, as Crassus delivers at large in One of his
Orations, was many times the Work of the Senate it self. And is not this now a
Nobler way of Obliging then the Casting of our money away upon Pageantryes, and
Popular Spectacles? This is an Expense for a man of Sense, and Honor; whereas
the Other is only a Fawning application by Chargeable Fopperies to tickle the
Phansies of the Common People.

AS we are to Oblige with Frankness; Our Obligations should be Frank.
so we are not to Exact any thing again with Rigor, but in all our Dealings,
as buying, selling, letting, hiring, etc. to behave our selves toward our
Neighbor and Acquaintance, with Candor, and Respect; though to the prejudice
sometime of our Own Right: Avoiding Lawsuits as much as may be, and a little
more perhaps then needs; For it is not only Generous, but Profitable too, for a
man in some Cases to remit somewhat of the straitness of his Just due: But in
so doing he must have an Eye yet to his Family, or Estate, which it were
Impious not to defend; but in such a manner too, that there appear nothing of
Harshness, or Greediness in the Dispute. For a man cannot employ his Money
better, then to do others good with it; with a regard still to the Mainteining
of his Own.

It is with great Reason that Theophrastu^ recommends Hospitality; Of
Hospitality.
for in my Opinion it is a very Honorable Fashion for the Houses of Noblemen
to be ever Open to Illustious Guests; and it gives no small Reputation to our
Commonwealth, that Strangers can never want That sort of Beneficence in This
City. But then for those that would make an Honest Interest abroad in the
World, it is a very great Advantage, the Favor, and Recommendation which they
get among Foreign Nations through the Friendship of those they meet with upon
This Occasion. Theophrastus writing of the Hospitality of Cimon of Athens,
tells us that he gave strict Order to his Servants in the Country that his
House should be still Open, to whatever Lacian (or Townsman of his) past that
way.

NOW for Those Obligations that are only the Effect of Care, and Industry,
Obligations of Care and Industry.
without Money, they are both Public, and Private: Extending from the
Commonwealth it self, to every Particular Member of it: For what readier way
can there be in This World to Eminent Wealth, and Preferment, than the Skill of
Directing, and Advising in Difficulties of Law; together with the Power of
Obliging so many upon That Score? Wherefore, among the Excellent Qualities of
our Forefathers, the Knowledge, and Interpretation, as well as the
Constitution of the Civil Law, The Reputation of the Civil Law.
was ever had in great Esteem: And reserved (until This Confusion of Affairs)
as a Matter Sacred, in the Possession of Men of Highest Authority and Wisdom.
But the Glory of This Science, as well as That of our Ancient Nobility and
Virtue, is now quite Extinct: And to aggravate the Indignity, this fell out in
the time of a Person not inferior in Honor to all that went before him, but
in Letters much their Superior. So that This is a Study generally acceptable,
beside that it puts us in the way of doing a thousand Good Turns.

And there is some Affinity or Resemblance too betwixt the Art of a Civilian,
and That of an Orator: Some Affinity betwixt a Civilian and an Orator.
Only the Latter has more in it of Vigor, Agreeableness, and Elevation of
Spirit. There is not any thing that moves the Soul, like Eloquence. It fills
the Hearers with Admiration; The Force of Eloquence.
it gives Hope to the Miserable; it creates as many Friendships as there are
Persons that it Defends and our Predecessors accounted of it as the most
Honorable of all Professions. It is a General, and Public Blessing, when men
of Eloquence, and Industry, (after the Example of our Forefathers) undertake
the Patronage of so many as stand in need of it, without either Grudging, or
Reward. I should take Occasion here, over and over to Lament the
Discontinuance, if not the utter Loss and Destruction of this Divine Faculty,
if it were not for appearing over much concerned in my own Interest and Case.
And yet we cannot but take notice how many brave Orators we have lost; The
D^cay of Orators.
how few we have any hope of, among those that are growing up; and the smaller
number yet, of those that are left; though it is true that we have men of Boldness
without Knowledge in Abundance. Now since we cannot be all of us either
Orators, or Lawyers, (having indeed but few great men in either Faculty) we may
do a world of good services yet, by Recommending, or Soliciting on the Behalf
of Petitioners, or Clients; and by Employing our Interests either with the
Bench, or with the Counsel, for their Behoof. Whosoever takes This Course,
shall be sure to Oblige a great many men, and consequently by a great many to
be well spoken of. But then we must have a Care (which every man will look to
in his Own Discretion) that while we would Oblige One man, we do not Offend
Another. For it happens many times that either through Heedlesness, Disoblige
no man.
we disoblige some body that does not Deserve it, or out of Rashness-provoke
some Other body that may make us rue it. In which Case, we ought to excuse our
selves, as well as we can; for the least offense given to any man, even where
we never intended it; by showing him the Inevitable Necessity that forced us
upon it, and the desire we have, upon any favorable Occasion, to make him some
favorable Amends.

IN the Conferring of Good Offices we have usually a regard either to Peoples
Manners, or to their Fortunes; and therefore we have the Common saying ready at
our Tongues end, In Benefits consider the Man, not the Fortune.
that it is the Man only that we consider, and not the Estate. This is a handsome
Flourish, but where is the Man yet that does not more willingly bestow his Time
and his Peins, upon the service of a Powerful, and a Wealthy Person, then in
the Support and Protection of the best Poor man that ever was born? For we are
naturally inclined to lay out our services where we may reasonably hope for the
speediest, and the most Certain Return. And This proceeds from a Mistaken
Estimate of the Nature of Things. For what if That Honest Poor man cannot
requite us in Kind, He may do it yet in Thankfulness of Heart, and in Just
Acknowledgments? It was well enough said, (whoever said it) He that Has my
Money, has not Restored it; and he that his Restored it, Has it no longer. But
in the Case of Good Will, he that has Paid it Has it still; And he that Has it
still, has Paid it. The Pride and Vanity of Great Men.
Now for those men that value themselves upon their Titles, or Possessions, and
have the World at Will; they are so far from accounting themselves under any
Obligation for a Benefit Received, that they look upon the very Acceptance of
it, (let it be never so Great) as an Obligation laid upon the other side. Nay
they will not stick to be Suspicious, and Jealous of it, as a Prologue to some
Petition, or further Design. But to tell them, that ever they stood in need of,
or were Beholden to any man, is to strike then to the very Heart. Whereas the
Poor man, that takes all Friendly Offices to himself, without any respect to
his Condition; This Poor man (I say) makes it his Business, The Poor man's
Gratitude.
not only to express his Gratitude to those that have already obliged him, but
to ingratiate himself likewise to those which he hopes hereafter May be Kind to
him; as having Occasion for many Friends. And if it be his Good Hap to render
his Patron a Profitable Service; His Humility makes the Value of it to be Less
then it is, rather than Greater. And it is further to be Observed, that upon
the Defense of a Great man, the Acknowledgment terminates either in Himself
alone, or, at the Utmost, in the Effect it may have upon his Children, and
Family. But in the Protection of a poor Creature, that is is yet Virtuous, and
Modest, a man makes to himself an interest in all the poor honest men in
Nature; which is no Inconsiderable Party out of the Body of the Common People.
So that it turns to a better account to oblige the Good, then the Fortunate. We
should do our best however to leave no sort of men unsatisfied; and if This
point should come in question, A Wise S^ying of Themisto^les.
let Themistocles decide the Controversy. It was put to him Whether a man
should rather bestow his Daughter upon a Poor man that were Honest, or upon a
man that had More Wealth, but Less Integrity. And his Answer was This; I had
rather bestow her upon a Man that wants Money then upon Money that Wants a Man.
But our Minds and Manners are now-adays corrupted and depraved with the Love of
Money: And yet, as to the matter of Superfluity, what is any man the Better
for it? It may be of some use perhaps to him that has it; but that is only at
Some Times, and in Some Cases too. Or taking the advantage of it for Granted,
it serves only to make a man the more Powerful, but not one jot the more
Honest. Not that I would serve a good man ever the Less, for being Rich over
and above. But I would still serve him for his Virtue, and not because of his
Wealth: and govern my self by the Judgment I make upon the Qualities of his
Mind, without Calculating upon his Fortune. Now with one Precept more I shall
Conclude: Justice is the Foundation of a Lasting Fame.
We must never Employ our Faculties and Endeavors, either to uphold Iniquity,
or to overthrow Justice. For Justice is the Foundation of an Everlasting Fame,
and there can be nothing Commendable without it.

HAVING already treated of Benefits with a regard to Particular Persons; we
shall now Discourse of That sort of Bounty, Of Public Bounties.
which respects the Universality or the Commonwealth. Of T^is Bounty there are
Two Kinds. The One concerns the whole Body of a City, or the Community; the
Other, the Particular Members of it: And the Latter is the more acceptable of
the Two. It is our Duty, as much as in us lies, to consult the Common
Satisfaction of Both: Or however, to take Care of Particulars: but in such
manner that the whole may be the Better for it; Or at least not the Worse.
Caius Gracchus's Excessive Largess of Corn to the People, was Mischievous; for
it exhausted the Treasury; but the Moderate Donative of M. Octavius was both
Tolerable to the Government, and Necessary to the People; and consequently both
the Republique it self, and the Citizens were the Better for it.

IT should be the Principal Care of him that has the Administration of Public
Affairs, to see that every Individual be Protected in his Propriety; The
Propriety of Particulars most be protected.
and that Private men may not be dispossessed of their Rights and Estates,
under the Pretext of a Public Good. It was a Pestilent Proposition, That of
Philip's, in his Tribuneship, about an Equal Partition of Lands; But then it
was a great Instance of his Modesty, the letting of it fall so Easily again. He
did many Ill things, to curry Favor with the People; and he dropped one lewd
speech too, that there were not Two thousand men of Estates in the whole City.
The danger of Levelling Principles.
What a desperate Hint was That toward the bringing of all things to a Level,
and all Conditions of men to a Parity: One of the greatest Plagues that can
befall a State? For it was the main End of the Founding and Establishing of
Cities and Public Bodies, that Particulars might be secured in their
Possessions, and every man safe in the Enjoyment of his Own. For though men
Associate by an Impulse of Nature, it was Desire and Hope yet of keeping what
they had gotten, that made them Build Cities, for their Protection. It has been
a Great Inconvenience that our Forefathers have been often put upon, the
charging of the People with Extraordinary Taxes: No Extraordinary Taxes.
which happened either through the Lowness of the Treasury, or the Expense and
Burden of a Continual War. This is a Course by all means Possible to be
Avoided, by laying in of Provisions Beforehand; but if ever any Commonwealth
should fall under This Necessity (for I had rather foretell it of any Other,
then Ours; as I speak This only by way of General Discourse) it will be highly
necessary that the People be punctually informed of the Exigent; and that there
is no way for them to subsist, but by complying with such a Necessity. It
behooves all Governors to furnish the Public Stores with Necessaries, before
the Danger presses them; in what Proportion and of what Kind, is a matter so
well known, that it is sufficient the bare mention of the thing thus by the By.

Corrupt Magistrates are the Bane of any Government.
BUT above all things, let all men in Public Administration keep themselves
clear from the least suspicion of Avarice. I would to the Heavens (says C.
Pontius the Samnite) that Fortune had reserved me for another Age, and kept me
from coming into the World, till the Romans had begun to take Bribes. If this
had been, I should quickly have put an end to their Empire. Truly he must have
staid a good while then; sor it is but of late that Rome has been teinted with
This Evil. Now if Pontius was a man of such a Resolution as he appears to have
been, it is well for us that he came into the World when he did. The first Law
that ever we had against the Corruption of Magistrates, is not as yet of a
hundred and ten years standing? and That was Piso's. But we have had a great
many Others since That time; and every one still more severe then the Other.
How many Criminals have we had? How many Condemned? What a Confusion upon the
Social War in Italy? And That War excited too merely by the Guilty, to save
themselves from Punishment? There was no longer any Course of Law, or Justice;
but our Friends and Allies, lay exposed to Seizure and Pillage, without Relief:
And if we are not Totally ruined, it proceeds more from the Weakness of Others,
then from our own Virtue.

PANAETIVS extols Affricanus for his Abstinence in the matter of Money: The
Abstinence of Affricanus.
And why not? But still he might have found greater Virtues in him then That:
For That Abstinence of his was not the Virtue of the Man only, but of the
Times. Paulus AEmilius, upon his Victory over Perseus, made himself Master of
all the Macedonian Wealth, to an Infinite Value; and brought so much Money into
the Public Treasury, that One Captain's Booty delivered the People from any
further need of Taxes. And This he did without any Other Advantage to his
Family, than the Honorable, and Immortal Memory of his Name and Action.
Affricanus the Younger (in imitation of his Father) got as little by the
Destruction of Carthage; and his Fellow-Censor, L. Mummius, as little as either
of them, by the Ruins of the Magnificent City of Corinth. But his business was
rather the Ornament, and Luster of his Country, than That of his House:
Although in giving Reputation to the One, he could not fail of doing the like
to the Other. But to go on where I left.

THERE is not certainly a more Detestable Vice (especially in Princes, Avarice
a Detestable Vice.
and Public Magistrates) than Covetousness: And it is not only a Mean thing,
but an Impious, to make a Prey of the Commonwealth. That which the Pythian
Oracle delivered in the Case of Sparta, looks like a Prediction, not only
Applicable to the Lacedaemonians, but to all Opulent Nations also whatsoever: To
wit, that it was not in the Power of any thing in the World, but Avarice, to
Destroy That Commonwealth. There is no surer way in Nature for Men in Power to
gain upon the Affections of the Multitude, than by Frugality and Moderation.
The Power of Frugality in Public Administrations.
But yet when out of an Affectation of Popularity they come to propound such a
Levelling Division of Lands as is abovementioned; and either to Force the
Right Owners out of their Possessions, or to the remitting of Just Debts; these
People shake the very Foundations of Government; In the First place Dissolving
the Bonds of Concord and Agreement, which can never consist with This way of
taking Moneys from Some, and Discharging Others. And what is become of Common
Equity then, when no Man is left the Master of his Own? For it is a Privilege
Essential to a Community, that it be Free, and every Man secured in the
Enjoyment of what belongs to him. Neither does This way of Confounding all
things create that Interest and Reputation among the People, which the
Projectors may Imagine: for it makes the Loser still your Enemy; and the very
Receiver will hardly thank you for it neither: Or at best, so coldly, as if it
were a thing he had no great mind to: Especially dissembling the Inward
satisfaction of being forgiven a Debt; for fear of being thought unable to Pay
it. Whereas the Injured Party will never Forget it, but carry the purpose of a
Revenge in his Heart. Or what if there should be more to whom we Unjustly Give,
than there are from whom we do as Unjustly Take away? This does not mend the
matter One jot: for we are not to judge in This case by Number, The Danger of
Invading Proprieties.
but Weight. What color of Equity is there for a Man that never Had an Estate,
to Dispossess another of an Estate that has been many Years (nay Ages perhaps)
in the Possession of it, himself and Family; and that he that Has an Estate,
should have it taken from him? It was for this way of proceeding that the
Lacedaemonians Banished Lysander, and put their King Agis to Death, beyond all
President of former times. And there followed such Broils upon it, that their
Best Men were Banished, a Tyranny introduced in the place of an Aristocracy,
even to the utter Dissolution of one of the best-Constituted Republiques upon
the Face of the Earth And Sparta did not fall alone neither; but the Contagion
of Those Tumults spread it self so far, that the rest of Greece was wholly
Ruined by That Example. What shall we say of our Gracchi? (the Sons of the
famous Tiberius Gracchus, and Grandchildren of the Elder Affricanus) It was
this very point of Controversy about Lands, that Destroyed Them too. But on
the Contrary, how much Honor has Aratus worthily acquired to himself, A
Generous Account of Aratus.
by his Exploit upon Sicyon? It had been Fifty Years under the Dominion, and in
the Possession of Usurpers, when he recovered it by a surprise from Argos,
suppressed Nicocles the Tyrant, Restored six hundred of the Wealthiest Citizens
that had been Banished, and set the City it self at Liberty. But finding great
Difficulty at last how to accommodate the business of Lands and Possessions;
and considering that it would be hard on the One side for those that he
restored to their Town to live still in want, while Others enjoyed Their
Estates; and little Better, on the Other side, to break in upon, and take away
Possessions of Fifty Years standing; wherein so many several Interests were
concerned, by Purchases, Portions, Settlements, and the like, and without any
Injury by Them done to the Right Owners: He concluded it Unreasonable either to
take from the One what they were possessed of, or not to satisfy the Other, in
some degree, for their Just Pretensions. Wherefore he bethought himself, and
resolved upon a Journey to Alexandria; giving Orders that all things should
continue in the same state he left them, until His Return: So that he presently
posted away to his Old Friend, and Acquaintance, Ptolomy the Second, King of
Alexandria. He had no sooner informed that Generous Prince of his Business,
with the Design he had, and in what Manner, to Deliver his Country; but without
any difficulty, this Illustrious Person prevailed upon him for a large Sum of
Money. This Treasure he carried with him back to Sicyon, and then picked out
Fifteen of the Principal Persons of That place, to advise with upon This
Affair, and to take a strict account, as well of those that were possessed of
Other Men's Estates, as of those that had Lost their Own. The Matter was so
handled, that, upon a reasonable Estimate of the Lands, some were persuaded to
content themselves with the Value in Money, and to yield the Land; and Others
chose rather to take Money for their Land, than to Contest for the Recovery of
it. So that in the Conclusion, the Controversy was Compounded, and Both Parts
abundantly satisfied with the Accord. What Pity was it that this Great Man was
not born a Citizen of Rome! This is the right way of proceeding in such Cases;
without exposing the Persons and Goods of Citizens (as it has been Twice in Our
Days) to Proscriptions, and Outcries. This Grecian, like a Brave, and a Wise
Man, consulted the Common Welfare: And it is the Highest point of a Good, and a
Prudent Magistrate, to Maintein the Properties of the People, and not to Invade
them; but keeping all within the Bounds of Common Equity. Why should any Man
dwell Gratis in My House? as if I were to Purchase, Build, Repair, and Defend
it, for Another (in despite of my heart) to reap the Frui^s of My Labor, and
Expense? For This is the Case in taking away from me That which is my Own, and
giving to another That which does not Belong to him. And what is the End of
these Letters of Protection, (if I may so call them) but that you shall buy
Land with my Money; you Keep the Land, and I Lose my Money?

IT is a matter therefore of great Moment, that no Debts be permitted, which
may endanger the Public. No Debts to be permitted, that may endanger the
Public.
And This may be several ways prevented, if such a Course be taken, that
Prodigals and Debtors may not raise their Fortunes upon Defrauding their
Creditors; the One losing their Own, and the Other getting what belongs to
Another Man, There is nothing that upholds a Commonwealth like Faith, and
Credit: which can never be expected where People do not lie under a Necessity
of paying their due Debts; a thing which was never so violently pressed, as when
I was Consul: All Sorts and Degrees of Men were even in Arms about it: And yet
I resisted all Motions tending That way, to the very Rooting of This Evil out
of the Commonwealth. There was never more Money stirring, nor ever was there
surer, or better Payment: For where the Hope of Deceiving is cut off, Men must
necessarily keep Touch. It is true, that Caesar, (who was in Those days
subdued, though now a Conqueror) that Caesar, I say, did put his former Purposes
in Execution, even when he had no need so to do: His very Appetite being so
Vicious, that he took pleasure in the Evil it self, without any other
Inducement. It is the Duty then of all good Patriots to keep themselves Clear
of this same Perverse sort of Liberality, that Takes from One, and Gives to
Another: And in the first place, to provide that all Men may be Equally
supported in the Enjoyment of their Own, by Law, and Common Justice. And that
the Poor, and Simple, may not be Circumvented, or Oppressed by Power, nor the
Wealthy Obstructed in the holding or receiving of their Dues, by the Envy and
Malignity of the People. And moreover, they should by all means endeavor, both
in War, and Peace, to advance the Republique, in Empire, Possessions, and
Revenue: These are the proper Offices and Achievements of Great Men, and This
was the Study, and the Exercise of our Forefathers. Those that addict
themselves to these Duties, gain great Glory and Good Will to their Own
Particulars, beside the Profit that they bring to the Public. Antipater the
Tyrian (and a Stoique) that lately Deceased at Athens, charges Panaetius with
leaving out Two Branches touching Health, and Money in these Precepts
concerning Benefits. But I suppose that they were rather passed over by That
famous Philosopher, as things well enough understood, and needless to be
further inculcated, how advantageous soever.

IT is a good means of preserving Health, A Caution in Matter of Health and
Estate.
for every Man to understand his own Constitution; and to observe what Agrees
with him, and what not. To live Temperately in all respects, as well in our
Diet, and the Care of our Bodies, as in our Pleasures: Using the Common Helps
of Physique also, in Case of Need. In the gathering of an Estate, we must do
nothing but what is Warrantable, and Honest: And when it is fairly gotten, it
may be preserved, and improved by Parcimony, and Caution. This Point is
excellently well handled by Xenophon (the Socratist) in his OEconomiques; which
I my self, at about your Age, turned out of Greek into Latin.

THE Concurrence of Two Profitable Things in Comparison, Two Profitable things
meeting in comparison.
(which was the Fourth Consideration, omitted by Panaetius) is a Case which
very often Happens: For sometimes Bodily Goods fall in Competition with the
Goods of Fortune: Sometime Outward Goods with Those of the Body: And sometime
again, One of either of them is compared with Another of the same Kind. As in
the First Instance, I had rather have Health, than Money: In the Second, I had
rather have a Great Estate, than a Robust Strength of Body. And so forward. I
had rather enjoy Health, than Pleasure; I had rather be Strong, then Nimble.
And then in the Collusion of External Things, I had rather have Honor, than
Wealth; and a Fortune in the City, rather than in the Country. The Comparison
that we find in the Elder Cato, was of This Quality. The Question was put to
him, What he looked upon as the greatest Convenience in a Country Life? His
answer was, In the First Place, Good Pasturage. What next then? Pasturage that
was Indifferently Good. And what then? Pasturage still, though a Degree worse
than the Other. And what again? Tillage. What do you think of Usury? (says the
Enquirer.) And what do You think of Murder? (says Cato.) By This, and
abundantly more, we cannot but understand that Things Profitable came often in
Competition: And that This Fourth Enquiry was not at all Impertinent. But as to
the matter of Getting, Disposing, or Using of Moneys, it is a Subject fitter
for a Scrivener than a Philosopher; and better understood by the Good Men upon
the Bourse, than by the Learned Men in the Schools. It is a thing needful
however to be known, as apperteining to the Business of Profit: Of which having
discoursed sufficiently in This Book, we shall now proceed to what remains.

The End of the Second Book.
TVLLY's OFFICES.
The Third BOOK.
IT was the saying (my Son Marcus) of Scipio Affricanus the Elder, A famous
saying of Scipio Affricanus.
(as we have it from Cato, his Cotemporary) that he was never Less Idle, or
Alone, then when he most appeared so to be. It was a Noble thing said, and
worthy of a Great, and of a Wise man; to show that in all his Leisures, his
Thoughts were still taken up with Business; his Solitudes, in Discourses to
himself, without any Loss of Time: And without need some whiles of any other
Company. Insomuch, that the Two things which commonly make Other people
Listless, and Heavy, did even set an Edge upon him: That is to say, Solitude,
and Leisure. Now though I cannot come up to the Imitation of that Illustrious
Person, I am not much Behind him yet in my Good Will (I would I could say as
much of my self, as he does in Effect.) For since I have been driven by the
Force of Impious Arms from my Station in the Government, Cicero's Retreat.
and the Business of the Bar; I have applied my self to a Life of Leisure too:
upon That very Consideration, quitting the Town, and betaking my self to the
Privacy and Solitude of a Country Life. Not that I compare either This Leisure,
or Solitude with That of Affricanus. For His was only a Voluntary Retirement
from the Importunities of Company, when he had a mind to give himself some
Respite from the Honorable Charges he sustained in the Commonwealth, by
withdrawing into a Recess, as a man sometimes puts into a Port: But my Leisures
proceeded not from a desire of Respite, but from want of Employment. For since
the Dissolution of the Senate, what is there to be done, either in the Palace,
or in the Hall, that is worthy of us? The world swarms everywhere with
Criminals; and after a life spent in so Eminent a Post, and in the Open View of
the People, I am e'enforc'd to hide my head, and live (in a manner) quite alone
to avoid the very sight of them* I have heard Wise men say that we are not only
to choose the least of Necessary Evils, but out of all Evils themselves to
extract somewhat of Good. I shall therefore make the best of my Repose, though
not such perhaps as he has deserved from his Country, who has formerly
contributed so much to Their Quiet. And though this be a Solitude wholly of
Necessity, not Choice; I would not yet have it absolutely Fruitless. Affricanus
(I must Confess) gained to himself a Fairer Reputation, Cicero compares himself
with Affricanus.
but we have no Monuments of his Thoughts, committed to Writing: No Remains of
his Leisures, and Solitude that we find Extant. But we may Conclude however,
that he was neither Idle nor Alone, from his Glorious Actions, which were only
the Product of Deliberation and Thought. But Alas! I have not that strength of
Mind to Think away my Solitudes, and supply the want of Company with bare
Meditation. So that My whole Diversion is to pass away my Time, and my Cares
upon Writing: and I have done more that away Now, in a little while, since the
overturning of the Government, then I did in many years before, while it was in
a flourishing Estate.

NOW (my Son) though Philosoyhy be Profitable and Fruitful from one end of it to
the other, without any Waste, or Desert: there is not any place yet in the
whole Extent of it that yields greater Advantage, and Benefit, then that Part
of it which treats of Civil Duties, and the Rules of a Steady, and a Virtuous
Life. Of Civil Duties and a Virtuous Life.
Wherefore, though I doubt not either, of the Great and Excellent Cratippus's
Care in the inculcating of this Lesson daily to you; or of your own Diligence,
and Attention in the receiving of it; it is not amiss yet to be often minded of
so necessary a Point; and (which way soever you turn your self) to have this
voice still sounding in your Ear, even, if it were possible, without hearing
any thing else. This is a thing for every man to do, that propounds to himself
an Honest Course of Life; and it is your Interest perhaps as much as any
bodies; because the world expects it from you, that you should succeed to the
Industry, the Honors, and (if I may so say) in some measure to the Reputation
of your Father. And you have a great deal to answer for upon the score of
Athens, and Cratippus. For what could be more Dishonorable then after so ample
a Commission granted you to the famous Staple of the whole World, for good
Manners and Letters, to come back Empty; to the Disparagement both of the
Master, and the City? Wherefore you must Labor with all the Faculties of your
Soul, and Body, to make good This Expectation: (if I may call That a Labor,
which is so great a Pleasure) and let it never be said that after all other
supplies from your Father, you were only wanting to your self: But let This
suffice: having written so much, and so often to you already, upon This
Subject. We shall now return to the remaining part of the Division propounded.

PANAETIVS is the man, Panaetius of Civil Duties.
without Dispute, that has the most accurately handled This question: and Him
have I chiesly followed, with some amendment and additions of my Own. He lays
down Three Propositions that men are want to deliberate and advise upon, in the
Case of Duty. First, whether the matter in question be Honest, or Dishonest.
Secondly, whether it be Profitable, or Unprofitable. Thirdly, where Two things
meet in Competition, the One of them appearing Honest, and the Other
Profitable; how to Distinguish. He has written Three Books upon the Two former
Heads; and promised a Discourse upon the Third; but he has not been so good as
his word: which I do the more wonder at, because I find in his Scholar
Posidonius, that he lived Thirty years after the Publishing of These Books. And
I am in some Admiration too, that Posidonius, in his Commentaries, should pass
the matter over so slightly; especially making This Remarque upon it, that of
the whole Body of Philosophy, This is the most necessary Part. There are some
that will not have This to be an Oversight in Panaetius; but a Point left out
upon Consideration; as a thing wholly Impertinent. But I am of another Opinion.
The Reason they give, is This. Honest, Cicero excuses an Omission of Panaetius.
and Profitable (they say) are Convertible Terms; and not to be so much as
Imagined in Opposition. From hence there may arise another Question, whether
the Third Branch of Panaetius's Division should not have been absolutely
rejected, without any mention of it all. But it is Certain however, that he did
at first undertake it, and then let it fall. He that makes a Tripartite
Division, and goes thorough with Two Parts of it, is undoubtedly answerable for
the Third: And he passes his word over and above toward the latter end of his
Third Book, that he will go on with it. And we have the Authority of Posidonius
himself to Witness as much; writing in a certain Epistle what Publius Rutilius
Rufus (an Auditor of Panaetius) was wont to say. As there was never any Peinter
(says he) that durst venture upon Finishing the Picture of Venus, which Apelles
had begun (such was the Delicacy of the Face, that there was no hope of
matching it with a suitable Body) so in the Case of Panaetius, the Excellency
of those things which he did perfect, was so Transcendent, that no man after
him durst ever attempt the supplying of what he either Omitted, or left
Imperfect. So that of Panaetius's Intention there can be no longer any Doubt.
But yet whether he did Well or Ill in adding the Third member of his Division,
may perhaps bear a Dispute: For taking it either according to the Stoiques,
that no thing can be Good but that which is Honest; or with the Peripatetiques,
that Honesty is the Sovereign Good, to such a degree, that all other Goods are
as nothing in the Balance Against it; they do both of them however agree in
This, that Profit can never be admitted into a Competition with Honesty.
Nothing can ^e Profi^a^le, but wh^t is Honest.
How does Socrates Curse the First Dividers of Honest, and Profitable, in
Imagination, which are so Inseparable by Nature? And the Stoiques go so far
along with him too, as to hold that nothing can be the One, without being also
the Other. But if Panaetius were one of those that will have Virtue to be
Therefore Esteemed, for the Profit that she brings us; measuring things
Desirable, either by Pleasure, or Freedom from Pein; he might then be allowed
to erect the Notion of a Possible Repugnancy of Profit, to Honesty. But being
of Another Opinion; and that the Only Good is That which is Honest: and that
whatsoever stands in Opposition to it, under the Show of Vtility, a man's life
is neither the Better nor the Worse for it, either With it, or Without it: He
should not so much as have put the Case, methinks, where Profit and Virtue
should appear in the Comparison. For to Live according to Nature, which the
Stoiques account for the Sovereign Good: is nothing else. (as I understand it)
then to lead a life Congruous to Virtue: And in all Cases whatsoever, to follow
the Direction of Nature in a Conformity thereunto. The matter standing Thus;
some men are of opinion that This Comparison was not properly introduced; and
that there was not any need of prescribing in This Kind, at all.

NO man can be Truly Honest, True Honesty and True Wisdom are Inseparable.
but He that is Truly Wise; and there is no separating the One from the Other.
There may be an Imperfect Honesty, it is True, with an Imperfect Wisdom; which
is rather the Resemblance of Honesty, then the Thing it self. And therefore all
those Duties that we treat of in this Discourse, the Stoiques call Middle
Duties: Middle Duties.
which are Common indifferently to Mankind; and of a large Extent: and some
people attein the knowledge of them by a Felicity of Nature; others, by a
Progression, and advance upon Study. But those which They call Right Duties,
are Complete and Consummate in all the Parts (or numbers as they express it)
and This Perfection is only to be found in a Wise man. But he yet that acquits
himself in the Discharge of these Middle Offices, goes for Current with the
Multitude for a good and a Wise man in the Abstract: They not being able to
distinguish betwixt what is Perfect, and Defective. Wherefore, so far as They
understand the Business, there is nothing wanting. We see many times in Poems,
Pictures, and a World of Other Instances, how strangely the unskilful are
delighted with them, and yet for the most part commending the least masterly
stroke in the Piece: which arises from This Ground, (I suppose) they find
something in the whole that pleases them; but they are not able to judge of the
Imperfections of the several Parts: But when they come to be better instructed,
they are easily brought to change their First Opinion.

The Duties here Treated of, are with the Stoiques a kind of Second-rate
Honesty; and not peculiar to wise men, but Common to Human Nature: And
therefore they affect all people that have in them the least spark of Good
Nature, or Virtue. Now when we speak of the Magnanimity of the two Decij, No
man Good or Wise in the Abstract.
or the Scipio's, or of the Justice of Fabricius, or Aristides; we do not
propose their Example as the Standard of That Courage, and Equity that is
required in a Wise man. For I do not look upon either of them to have been Wise
to the Degree of Wisdom here intended; no, nor those very Persons upon whom the
World has bestowed both the Reputation, and the Name of Wise men. I speak of
Cato, Caius Laelius, or the Seven Sages themselves. But by the Frequent
exercise of Middle Offices they had somewhat of the appearance, and Resemblance
of Wisemen. So that we must neither Compare Profit in Opposition to that which
is truly Honest; nor oppose any matter of Gain to that which we commonly call
Virtue; whereupon these people value themselves, that would be accounted Good
men. And we must as well uphold and preserve That Practical Honesty that falls
under our Capacities; as That which in Strictness and Truth, is only the
Honesty of Wise men: For Otherwise, how shall we know what progress we make
toward Virtue? And so much for those that by doing Good Offices get themselves
the Reputation of being Good men.

BUT for those that Measure all things by the Common Interest of Gain and
Benefit, and will not allow Honesty to take place; The Epicureans measure
H^n^sty by Pr^fit.
it is ordinary for Them to put Money in the Scale against Virtue; which no Good
man will ever do. I suppose therefore, that Panaetius, when he says that men
are wont to make some Doubts upon the Comparison, means only (as he says) that
they are Wont to do so; and not that they do well in so doing. For not only the
Preference of Profit to Honesty, but the very Comparing of them, and the making
a Doubt in the Case, is a shameful Business. But what is it that we doubt upon?
Or what is the Ground of our Consideration? It is (I presume) upon the Quality
of the Point in Question: Circumstances alter the Case.
For that which is Dishonorable at One time, may be Warrantable at Another. As
for Example, upon a supposition more at large; What fouler Villainy can be
imagined then the Killing not only of a Man, but a Familiar Friend? And yet the
People of Rome do not only Absolve any man that destroys a Tyrant, though his
Famil^ar Friend; but they reckon upon it as the most Glorious Action of an
Honorable Life. Is it in This Case that Profit prevails over Honesty; Or rather
that the Honesty followed the Profit?

THE Certain way to keep us Right in our Judgments upon the Concurrence of
Profitable, A Rule keeps us Rig^t,
and Honest, will be the Establishment of such a Rule as upon the Comparing of
things will direct us in our Duty: which Rule I would have to be squared to the
Reason and Discipline of the Stoiques: And This is the Rule which I shall
observe in This Treatise; Because though the Ancient Academiques, and the
Peripatetiques also, (which were formerly all one) give a Preference to that
which is Honest, before that which seems to be Profitable; the matter is yet
more Generously handled by the Stoiques, that make Profit and Honesty
Reciprocal, then by those that Imagine a thing may be either Honest, and not
Profitable, or Profitable, and not Honest. Now our Academy allows great
Liberty, and gives us a Right to defend That which appears most Probabl^. But
to Return to my Rule, In our Judgments of Profitable and Hon^st.
To take away any thing wrongfully from any man, or to make my Own Fortune by
the empoverishing of Another, is more Contrary to Nature, then Death, Beggary,
Pein; or whatever else can befall a man's Body, or Estate. For at First Dash it
destroys all Neighborhood and Society: For if we come once to entertain an
Opinion that One man for his Own advantage may Assault, or make a Prey of
Another; there follows necessarily an Absolute Dissolution of Human Society,
and a Violation of the most Certain and Powerful Dictate of Nature. Put the
Case that One Member should draw to it self the Health, and Good Blood of the
Member next unto it; the whole Body must, of Necessity, Consume and Perish: In
like manner if every man should take from Another what he can get, and apply
his Neighbors Goods to his Own Use, This would undoubtedly put an end to all
Friendliness, and Fellowship among men. It is natural Enough for a man to
provide Necessaries for Himself, in the First place; But it is yet against
Nature for him to furnish himself with Money or Provisions, by Spoil and Rapine:
And it is not only by the Dictate of Nature, or the Rights of Nations, but by
the particular Laws and Constitutions of all States, that it is declared
Unlawful for One man to do any Mischief to Another for his Proper Benefit.
Fraud and Rapine are against the Laws of Nature and Nations.
It is the Express Care, Will, and Intent of all. Laws to maintein the Duties
of Society, Safe, and Inviolate: and they punish the Transgressors of these
Rules with Death, Banishments, Prisons, and Fines: And much more does Nature
her self Exact this from us: Nature (I say) which is the Law Divine and Humane,
Both in one. Whoever obeys Her Dictate (as all men will, that propose to live
in a Conformity to the Principles of a Reasonable Being) will never agree to
the Coveting of what is Another man's, or to the taking away from his Neighbor,
and Giving to himself. For Greatness of Mind, Gentleness, Justice, and
Liberality are much more Consonant to Nature then Pleasure, Life, or Riches:
which, in Comparison with the Common Good, are by all men of Brave and Exalted
Minds, neglected and despised. Whereas, on the Other side, to Spoil my Neighbor
for my Own Advantage is more Contrary to Nature, then Death, Torments, and the
like. As it is more according to Nature for a man to undergo all sorts of
Labors and Troubles for the Service and Conservation, (if it were Possible)
even of the whole World: After the Example of Hercules, whom the Gratitude of
Men has placed for his Virtues among the Gods: All This (I say) is more
Agreeable to Nature, then to live in Solitude; and not only free from Cares,
but even wallowing in Pleasures, and Plenty; with all the Advantages of
Strength and Beauty, over and above. This is it that makes all Great and
Glorious Spirits, so much to prefer Difficulty and Action, before a Life of
Idleness and Sloth. From hence it comes to pass, that according to Nature, One
man can never hurt another. And besides, he that wrongs another for his Own
Advantage, he does either imagine that this is not against Nature; or else he
supposes that Death, Poverty, Pein, Loss of Children, Kindred, and Friends, are
more to be avoided, then the doing of Injuries. But if he conceives that one
man may do an Injury to another without an offense to Nature, there is no
disputing with One that has lost his Reason; and in effect, Ejected all that is
Man even out of Himself. But what if he thinks the One to be Bad, and yet the
Other, Worse? He is in a Grievous Mistake, to Fancy any Calamity of Body or
Fortune Comparable to the Disorders of his Mind.

We should all of us therefore agree upon This Common Proposition, That the
Interest of the Whole, is the Interest of Every Part; The Interest of the
Whole, is the Interest of every Part.
and that whoever draws more to himself then belongs to him, is an Enemy to the
Public. Now if it be the very Prescript of Nature, that for Humanity sake,
one Man shall take Care of another; it does necessarily follow, that the
Welfare of the Public, is the Interest of Every Particular, according to the
same Principle. Let but This be admitted, and we are all of us equally under
the Government of the same Law: And then taking That for granted; to do an
Injury to any Man is against the Law of Nature. The Former is certainly True;
and so is the Other, by Consequence. It is a Ridiculous Shift, to say, that I
would not take away any thing from my Father, or from my Brother, to put in my
Own Pocket; but to take from Other people, is quite another Case: as if every
Individual were not concerned in the Protection of the Whole: An Opinion
utterly Inconsistent with the Rules of Government.

THERE are some again will have the Citizens Provided for, but not Strangers:
And These Men tear up the very Foundations of Human Society. For take away That
once, and there will be no longer any Good Nature, Liberality, Honesty, or
Justice, to be found upon the Face of the Earth. And whosoever brings Matters
to That pass, is to be accounted an Enemy to the Gods Themselves, for breaking
That Union among Men, which was no other than a Constitution of Divine
Appointment. It is the strongest Band of Society, a General Agreement in This
Position, that it is a greater Offense to Nature for me to take any thing from
Another, for my Own Advantage, Better suffer any Calamity than do an Injury.
then to suffer all the Miseries that can possibly befall any Man in his Body or
Estate: Nay, that can befall the very Mind it self; saving the single point of
Justice, which one Virtue is the Mistress, and the Princess of all the rest.
But what? (will some say) Shall a Wise Man rather Perish for want of Bread,
than take a Loaf from another Man that is good for nothing, to keep himself from
Sterving? This must not be done yet; no not upon any Terms: Life is not so dear
to me as my Duty; and my Resolution not to wrong any Man for my Own Benefit.
Suppose an Honest Man almost frozen to death might save his Life by taking away
the Cloak of Phalaris; (a Barbarous and a Bloody Tyrant) should he not do it?
This is a Case easily determined: For the taking of any thing away from
another, for a Man's Own sake, is Inhuman, and against the Law of Nature, let
the Man be never so worthless. But in the Case of a Person whose Life may be of
Eminent Use and Service to the Commonwealth, to take any thing from such a
Worthless Person to preserve so necessary an Instrument to the Public; and to
take it purely upon That Consideration, it is not blameworthy: But Otherwise,
I must rather bear my Own Misfortunes, than Relieve my self by what I force
from another Man: so that it is not more against Nature to be Sick, or
Necessitous, than to Seize upon, or Covet the Goods of Another: But the
Abandoning of the Common Good is an Offense to Nature; for it is Unjust; and
therefore the Law of Nature, that Regulates and Provides for the Common Welfare
of Mankind, does in a manner direct the Translation of Necessaries from a
slothful and unprofitable Wretch, to the behoof of a Wise, a Good, and a
Valiant Man, and whose Loss might be of great damage to the Government:
Provided that it be done merely out of such a respect, without any Vanity, or
Self love, or making use of a Public Pretext for a Color to a Particular
Injustice. justice. In so doing, I keep my self still upon my Duty, consulting
the Benefit of Mankind, and (that which I often Inculcate) of Human Society.

AS to the Case of Phalaris, the Decision is Obvious: For a Tyrant is rather an
Enemy, then a Member of Human Society; and there can be no Crime in the
Dispoiling of an Usurper, whom it is Lawful to Kill; and it were well if the
whole Race of this impious and pestilent sort of Men were Exterminated from
having to do with Mankind. For as we cut off Mortified Limbs, when the Blood
and Spirits have in a manner forsaken them, and that they grow dangerous to the
Rest: so should that fierce and outrageous Brutality be separated, if I may so
say, from the Common Humanity of the Public Body. Of This Quality are all
those Questions of Duty, whereof the Resolution depends upon the Circumstances
of Times: which I presume, Panaetius would have persu'd, if somewhat of
accident or business had not taken him off from his Purpose. We have said
enough in our former Books upon This Matter; to show what we are always to
shun, as evil and shameful in it self, and what we are Not obliged always to
avoid, because it is not always, either Mis-becoming, or Dishonest.

BUT being now about to Crown the Work we have begun, Certain Principles to be
given for granted.
I must deal with You, (my Cicero) as the Mathematicians Do with their
Disciples. They lay down certain Postulata, to be taken beforehand for
granted, without the Trouble of discoursing the Points; to the end that they
may make themselves more easily understood. So must I require of You (my
Cicero) to yield me This Point, (if you can afford it) that Nothing is
desirable for it self, but what is Honest. Now if Cratippus will not allow of
the Proposition whole as it lies; This yet, I presume, will not be denied, That
Virtue is Chiefly, if not Only to be desired, and for its own sake. It is all
one to me, which of the Two you take, for they are Both of them more Probable
than any thing else: And First, let me vindicate Panaetius, in This, that he
never supposed a Competition of Vtility, and Virtue; (nor could he have
justified it if he had) but he is to be understood of things that seem
Profitable; for over and over in all his Discourses he still makes Vtility, and
Virtue to be Convertibles, and represents it to be the most Pestilent Error
that ever entered into Human Life, the Opinion that Divided them. And therefore
he introduced a Repugnancy, betwixt Appearances, and Truths; not as separating
the Profitable from the Honest; but for our Caution, and Instruction, that we
might judge betwixt them. We shall therefore dispatch this remaining Part
without any help from others; and upon our own Account, (as we say:) For since
Panaetius left This Subject, I have seen nothing yet that has given me any sort
of satisfaction.

WE are all of us apt to be moved upon any thing that presents it self unto us,
under the appearance of Profit. But if upon looking narrowly into it, we find
any thing that is dishonest, or shameful, annexed thereunto; we are not to
leave it then, as a thing Profitable, but as considering that Vtility, and
Dishonesty cannot stand together. Nothing can be beneficial, that is dishonest.
For if there be nothing so Contrary to Nature as the One or so Agreeable to
it, as the Other; (for Nature affects what is Right, Convenient, and Constant,
and despises the Contrary) it is impossible that they should Both meet in the
same Subject. Again; If we are born for Virtue; either (according to Zeno)
Virtue is to be desired for it self alone, or (according to Aristotle) it
weighs down all other things: then does it follow, of Necessity that Virtue
must be either the Only, or the Supreme Good. So that whether way soever it be
taken, that which is Good, is certainly Profitable; and that which is
Prositable, is certainly Good. Those Men therefore are very short-sighted, that
presently lay hold of that which appears Profitable, and consider it apart from
that which is Honest. From Hence come Murders, Poysonings, Forgeries, Thefts,
Public Cheats, Oppressions, Squeezing of the People, or our Confederates:
From Hence come the Intolerable Insolences of Men of overgrown Fortunes; and
finally, Ambition, and the Thirst of Dominion; then which nothing can be more
Ruinous, or Pernicious in a Free City. They take false Measures of the Value of
things, without so much as dreaming of the Punishment; not the Punishment of
the Laws, (for That they can with Ease break thorough) but That of the
Conscience, The great Punishment is that of Conscience.
which is the bitterest of all. Wherefore This sort of Men should be excluded
Human Conversation, (as most Execrable, and Impious) even for barely
deliberating whether they should either follow That which they see to be
Honest, or knowingly pollute themselves with Villainy. The very Doubt and
Deliberation is Criminal, though without advancing to the Act it self.
Wherefore we should never deliberate at all, where the very Deliberation it
self is Shameful.

AND then in all our Deliberations, we should not entertain any Hope, or
Design, of Conc^aling, or Disguising Matters; for we should take up This for a
Maxim; (at least, A Divine Precept.
if we be ever the better for our Philosophy) that if we could carry things so
Private, as that neither God nor Man should discover us, we should yet have
such a Reverence for our Selves, as not to let any thing of Injustice,
Uncleanness, or Immodesly, Escape us. Plato's Fable of Gyges, The Fable and
Moral of Gyge^'^ Ring
is not impertinent to our Purpose. The Story has it, that a Torrent having
eaten a Hollowness in the Ground, Gyges went down into it, and there observed a
Brazen Horse, with Doors in his Sides. Upon the Opening of these Doors, he
discovered the Dead Body of a Man, of a Prodigious Size, with a Golden Ring
upon his Finger. Gyges boldly plucked it off by force, and put it upon his Own,
and being the King's Shepherd, he went his way, and joined himself with Other
Shepherds. Finding, that upon turning the Stone of the Ring, Inwards, he became
Invisible to Others, and yet saw every thing Himself; and that upon turning it
back again he became Visible, as before; by the Advantage of this Ring he made
his way to the Enjoyment of the Queen, and by her Assistance, Murdered the
King, his Master; and in a short time removed all out of the way that he
thought stood betwixt Him, and the Crown. All this Lewdness he Committed by the
help of this Ring, and so made himself King of Lydia. Now if a Wise Man were
the Master of such a Ring, he would reckon himself no more Priviledg'd to do an
Ill thing with it, then without it; for an Honest Man considers the Goodness of
the Action, not the Privacy of it. It is objected by some (that show themselves
to be better Men, then Philosophers) that this Story out of Plato is only a
Tale; as if any Man would report it for a thing either True, or Possible: but
see however the Force, and Scope of This Ring, and of This Example. How many
things are done out of Avarice, Ambition, Pride, Lust, that no body knows of,
or so much as suspects? Suppose that This Impiety could be kept so secret, that
neither God nor Man should come to know it: Would you commit it? It Is a thing
impossible, (they say, whether it be so or not.) But what, would they do (say
I) if they could do the thing, which they say they cannot? They return you the
same senseless Answer over again: they say it is Impossible; and there they
stick: not at all comprehending the Drift, and Import of the Question. For in
asking what a Man would do if he could Conceal it* I do not ask whether he can
Conceal it, or no:

But I put the Question, as if it were in Case of the Torture. If they make
answer that if they were sure to escape Punishment, they would do what they
found most Expedient, they confess themselves to be Criminals; and if they deny
it, it is a Concession that all evil things are to be avoided, even for
Themselves. But to return now to my purpose.

THERE fall out diverse Cases, that under an Appearance of Profit, The
appearance of Profit oftentimes distracts us.
many times disorder our Thoughts, and trouble us in our Resolutions: not as
upon a Deliberation whether a man should strain a Point of Honesty in regard of
the Greatness of the Benefit in prospect; (for That were Mean, and Dishonest)
but whether That which seems so very Profitable may be done without Dishonor.
It might look like an unjust thing in Brutus, the Deposing of Collatine, his
Fellow-Consul, who in the Expulsion of the Kings, was both his Partner in the
Advice, and his Asfistant in the Execution: But when the whole Body of the
Principals of the City had agreed together to extirpate the whole Family, and
the Relations of that Proud Prince, as well as the Name of the Tarquins; (which
was a Resolution of Public Advantage.) This was so Honest, and Just an
Action, that Collatine himself was Obliged to approve of the Proceeding: so
that this Utility was valued for the Honesty sake, without which, in truth, it
had not been Profitable. But This did not hold in the Case of that Prince that
Founded our City: For he was so wrought upon by the show of Profit, that he
killed his Brother upon the appearing Advantage of rather Governing Alone then
with Company. He cast off all Piety and Humanity, for the obteining of That
which seemed unto Him to be Profitable, though it proved the clear Contrary. The
pretended Honesty in the Action, was to punish the Affront of his Brothers
leaping in scorn over the Wall; but it was neither Competent, nor Likely.
Wherefore, under favor of either Quirinus or Romulus; (no matter whether) it
was undoubtedly a Crime.

How far we may look to our selves.
AND yet we are not to neglect our own Advantages neither; or part with any
thing to Others, when we want it our selves. But every man should attend his
own Profit, as far as may be without Injury to Another. Chrysippus had many
Witty sayings, whereof this was one. In the running of a Course, (says he) a
man may be allowed to strive, and Contend his Utmost: but to trip up his
Antagonists Heels, or to lay hands upon him, this is a thing not to be done
upon any terms. So for any man to get That which may serve for the use of Life,
is very Fair, and allowable; but to take it away from Another, is not Lawful.

IN Friendship, it is true, there are many Niceties as well in the not doing of
any good Office which may Honestly be done, Many Niceties in Friendships.
as in the doing of any thing for a Friend Contrary to Justice. But one short
Rule will serve upon This whole Matter, and it is no hard one neither. Those
things that seem Profitable; as Honors, Riches, Pleasures, and Other
Circumstances of the like Kind; these things are never to be preferred before
Friendship: But no Good man will do any thing for a Friend, that is either
against the Commonwealth, his Oath, or his Word: No not if he were himself to
be a Judge in his Friends Case; for he lays down the Person of a Friend, where
he takes up That of a Judge. I would have him wish that his Friend may have
Justice on his side; and I would have him allow him all the Favor in point of
Time, that the Law will permit; but when he comes to pass his Sentence, let him
remember, and consider, that he calls God to witness; or (as I suppose) his Own
Conscience, the Divinest thing Heaven it self ever bestowed upon a Mortal. It
was therefore a Worthy Practice of our Ancestors; They never asked any thing of
a Judge (and I wish we did so at This day) but upon Condition that it might
consist with Justice. This Request has relation to those things which (as I
said even now) a Judge may Fairly allow to a Friend; for if a man must of
Necessity do all things that a Friend would have him do, this is no longer a
Friendship, but a Confederacy. Let me be understood only of Common Friendships:
For among men that are Wise, and Perfect, there can be no such thing. The Story
goes of Damon, and Pythias, The Generous Fri^ndship of Damon and Pythias.
( Pythagoreans) so great was the Kindness they had for one another, that when
Dionysius had sentenced one of them to death, the Party Condemned only desired
a few days respite to put his Affairs in order; and the Other became Surety
(Body for Body) for his Appearance. The Prisoner returned at his day, and the
Tyrant fell into such admiration at their Generosity, and Justice, that he
requested them to receive Him as a Third man, into that Friendship. Wherefore
in all Friendships, where the Profitable and the Honest meet in Comparison we
should never consider the Profit, but square our actions according to the
Honesty. But wheresoever any thing shall be required in Friendship, which does
not stand with Honesty, in that Case Religion, and Faith, must take place of
Friendship. This is the Rule by which we are to make Choice of the Duty here in
Question.

WE are Liable also to many Public Mistakes under the Appearance of Profit;
Public Mistakes under the appearance of Profit.
as our Countrymen were to blame in the Irrecoverable Destruction of Corinth.
And the Athenians did yet worse, in cutting off the Thumbs of the people of
AEgina, only because they were good Seamen, and they reckoned that this might
turn to their Advantage, and Security, because of the Neighborhood of AEgina to
one of their Principal Ports. But nothing can be Profilable that is Cruel; for
we are to follow the Dictate of Nature, and nothing is more Contrary to Nature,
then Cruelty.

THEY do very Ill also, that either Prohibit, or Banish Strangers from among
them; Humanity to Strangers.
as Petronius did of Old; and Papius, not long since. It is well enough not to
suffer him that is no Citizen, to pass for a Citizen, (according to the Law of
our Consuls Crassus and Scaevola, who were Wise men.) But it is undoubtedly
most Inhuman, absolutely to deny the Common Benefit of Protection, and
Intercourse in a City, to Strangers. Those are Great and Remarkable Cases
wherein the Show or Color of Public Vtility is despised, in comparison with
Honesty. We have in the Story of our Commonwealth, a World of Eminent Examples.
How many times have we (and especially in the Second Punique War, after that
Miserable Disaster at the Battle of Cannae) showed greater Courage in our
Distress, then ever we did in our Prosperity? There was not the least sign of
Fear among us, nor any Mention of Peace; such is the Power of Honesty, that
nothing of Profit can appear against it! The Athenians, when they were no
longer able to resist the force of the Persians, came to a Resolve of putting
all their Wives, and Children into Traezen; to abandon the City, and maintain
the Liberty of Greece with a Navy. There was one Cyrcilus that advised them
rather to stay in the City, and receive Xerxes into it; but they Stoned him to
death for his Counsel. He gave them the advice which he took to be most
profitable; but it ceases to be Profit, when it stands in opposition to
Honesty. Themistocles, after his Victorious War against the Persians, declared
in Council that he had thought of something that might be of great Advantage to
the Commonwealth; but it was not convenient to be made Public, and therefore
desired them to appoint some body to whom he might impart the matter in
Private. They named Aristides; and he told him that the Lacedemonian Fleet,
which was laid up at Gytheon might easily be Fired by surprise, which would
very much weaken the Lacedaemonians. Aristides, when he had heard it, came into
the Senate where they were all big with Expectation, and made his Report that
Themistocle's Counsel was very Profitable, but not Honorable: A scrupulou^
point of Honor.
wherefore the Athenians would not allow it to be Profitable neither, if it
were not likewise Honest; and so rejected the Proposition, only upon the Report
of Aristides, even without Hearing it. How much did these people go beyond us;
that suffer our Pirates to go Free, while our Confederates are Tributaries? Let
it be taken therefore for granted, that nothing can ever be Profitable that is
Dishonorable; no, not in the very Possession of That which we account so to be.
Nay it is a great Infelicity of Judgment, to Imagine that any thing can be
Profitable, that is Dishonest.

BUT there fall out many Occasions (as I have said before) wherein the
Profitable, and the Honest may fall in Competition: In which Case we should
consider how far they stand in direct Opposition, and wherein they may be
fairly reconciled: As for Instance, upon these Questions. An Honest man sets
sail from Alexandria to Rhodes with a Lading of Corn; the Rhodians in great
distress for want of it; Some nice Cases of Conscience.
and the Commodity bearing an Excessive Price. This Person knows that there are
other Alexandrian Ships under way, and bound for the same Port, and with the
same Cargo: whether or no shall he tell the Rhodians now, that there are other
Merchants coming with Relief, or say nothing of it, and make the best Market of
his Corn that he can? We put this Case, supposing him to be a good and a Wise
man, and the matter to be under Deliberation. If he thinks it an Ill thing to
Conceal this from the Rhodians he will not do it; but he makes some doubt
whether it be Ill, or No. In Difficulties of This Nature, Diogenes, the
Babilonian, (a Grave and Famous Stoique) is of One Opinion; and his Disciple
Antipater (a very acute man) is of another. Antipater will have all the
Circumstances laid Open; so that the Purchaser may not be kept Ignorant of any
thing, which the Other knows. Diogenes says that the Vender is bo^nd to
Discover all the Faults, so far as he is obliged to it by the Civil Law; and to
manage his Bargain without Fraud. So that being to sell the Commodity, he may
without Deceit make the best on it. Here (says he) I have brought my Corn; I
have run the Risque on it; and I let no higher a rate upon the Commodity then
Others do; nay perhaps I offer it Cheaper: If you can have it any where else,
where is the Injury? Now Antipater, on the other side, Reasons it Thus. How is
That? (says he) It is our Duty to Consult the Good of Mankind, and to serve
Human Society; and we came into the World under That Obligation. We have
Principles of Nature, which we are bound to Follow and Obey; and we are to
account nothing Profitable to our selves, that is not so to the Public: And
likewise, to account of the Public Profit, as our Own. Shall we conceal That
then from a Society of men, which so much concerns their Commodity, and Supply?
Diogenes will reply (perhaps) that it is one thing to Conceal a matter, and
another thing not to Tell it: Do I tell you (at this Instant) what is the
Nature of the Gods, or the end of Good men; which are things much more
Profitable to be known, then the Price of Wheat? And yet you will not say that
I Conceal This from you. But it is not absolutely necessary for me neither to
tell you every thing which may be Profitable for you to hear. But the Other
will tell you Yes, it is necessary; if you remember that men are naturally
linked together in Society. Well (says the Other) I do not forget it: But will
you have it to be such a Society then, as that no man shall have any thing
particular in it of his Own? If it comes to That once, there is no longer any
Buying and Selling, but only Giving. You see in this whole Dipute, that it is
not said, though This or That be Dishonest, I will yet Do it, because it is
Expedient: But it must be so Expedient, that there be nothing Dishonorable in
it. Now (on the Other hand) out of that very Consideration that it is
Dishonorable, it is therefore not to be done. Suppose an Honest man has a mind
to put off his House for some fault or inconvenience in it, only known to
himself: As a Contagious Air; (for the Purpose) though it may (perhaps) pass for
Healthful; all the Rooms annoyed with Vermin, Ill-built, or Ruinous, which is
only known (as I say) to the Master of the House. The Question is, if he
Conceals these faults to get a better Rate for his House then he could
otherwise have done, whether he does well, or ill, in That Concealment?
Antipater will have it to be very Ill done, and near the Case of not setting a
man Right that is out of his way. A Crime which was punished at Athens by a
Formal Solemnity of Public Execrations. Is not This the Suffering of the
Purchaser to ruin himself, and to fall into the worst of Snares, by a Mistake?
Nay it is worse yet, then the not showing of the way, for one man to lead
another knowingly, and wilfully, into an Error. Diogenes asks, on the Other
side, who forced you to buy it? Nay he did not (says he) so much as Advise you
to it. That which did not please the One, he exposed to Sale, and the Other
bought that which he had a mind to. If he shall not be taken for a Cheat, that
sets up a Bill of a very good Farm to be Let or Sold, and well built, and in
repair, though it be neither the One, nor the Other, much less shall he be
accounted one, that does not so much as Commend his House; for where the
Purchaser uses his own Judgment, what Fraud can there be in the Seller? But if
we are not obliged, in all Cases, to make good every word we say, how should we
be obliged to make good That which we do not say? Nor can any thing be more
Ridiculous then for a Merchant to publish the Faults of the Commodity he
exposes to Sale. What would be more senseless then to make Proclamation by a
Common Crier, Here Is an Infected House to be Sold? Now so it falls out, that in
some doubtful Cases, the Honesty of the Action may be defended, on the One
hand, and the Benefit of it so qualified on the Other; that it may not only be
Honorable, to do that which appears Profitable, but even Dishonorable, to Omit
it. This is a Point that comes often into question betwixt things Profitable
and Honest.

THESE Difficulties must be set right: for it is not our Business to start a
question, but to give a Resolution. Resolutions upon the former Cases.
It is my Opinion, that neither in the Case of the Rhodian Corn-Merchant, nor
in That of the House offered to Sale, the Concealment there supposed was
Justifiable. For it is not properly the Concealing of a thing, to say nothing
of it; but the keeping of another man, for our own advantage, in Ignorance of
that which he is very much concerned to know. What kind of a Concealment This
is, and the Quality of the man that uses it, who does not discern? This is not
the Practice undoubtedly of an Open, a Frank, a Sincere, a Just, or a Good man:
but rather of a Shifting, a Close, a Deceitful, a Malicious, a Sly Shuffler,
and of a very Jugler. How can any man expect to Get by the Bargain, that wears
these foul Names, and lies under all these Reproaches.

BUT if the saying Nothing in this Case be so Blameable; what shall we think of
Them then that speak False? A Pleasant Cheat.
Caius Cannius (a Knight of Rome, and one that wanted neither Wit nor Learning)
going sometimes to Syracuse, not upon Business (as he was want to say) but for
his diversion; he gave out that he had a great mind to buy some Gardens there,
where he might enjoy his Friends when he had a mind to it, without interruption.
When this came to be talked of, there was one Pythius, in Syracuse, that drove
the Trade of a Banker. I have Gardens here (says he) though not to be Sold, but
however if Cannius pleases, he may use them as his Own: And so he invites
Cannius to those Gardens, the next day* to Supper. Upon Cannius's promise to
come, Pythius (whose business gave him a great Interest there, among all sorts
of People) sent for the Fishermen; and directed them to meet next day, and Fish
just before his Gardens; and so gave them their Lesson what to do and how to
behave themselves. Cannius came at his time, where he found a Magnificent
Entertainment that Pythius had provided for him. There were a great many Boats
before the Gardens, and every man brought the Fish he had taken, and laid them
at Pythius's Feet. What Is the meaning of all this (says Cannius) so many
Fishes, and Boats? Pythius told him, there was no great wonder in it; For there
is not any Fish (says he) in Syracuse which is not to be had in this place.
They take in their Water here, and the Town cannot be without This Convenience.
This set Cannius agog upon the Purchase, and nothing would serve but Pythius
must sell him the place; He seemed, at First, very unwilling to part with it;
but without more words they came at last to an Agreement: Cannius was a Rich
man, and presently struck up a Bargain (for the Gardens, and every thing that
belonged to them) with Pythius, at his own Price: Security was given for the
Money, and the business finished. Cannius invited some of his Familiar Friends
thither the next day: and he himself coming betimes, and finding no Boats
there, inquired of the Neighborhood whether the Fishermen kept Holy Day that
day, because he saw none of them There. Their Answer was, that They knew
nothing of any Holy Day, nor of any Fishermen that used to be There: Insomuch
that they wondered what brought them thither the day before. This put Cannius
into a Rage: But what Remedy? For my Friend and Colleague Aquilius had not as
yet made any Provision against Dolus Malus, or Couzenage. Upon my Demand to
Aquilius what was intended by that same Dolus Malus, he told me, that it was
the pretending of one thing, and doing another. Which truly was a Full and
Clear Definition of it, and worthy of a Wise man. Wherefore Pythius, and all
like him, that Pretend one thing, and do another; are to be accounted
Perfidious, Wicked, and Deceitful; So that nothing can be Profitable to us,
that is polluted by so many Crimes. But if Aquilius's Definition be True, there
must be no Feigning or Dissembling allowed of in Human Society: And a Good man
will neither do the One nor the other, either to Buy or Sell, to more
Advantage. And That Deceit was punishable also by the Laws: As in the Case of
Guardianship by the Twelve Tables. And so was the Circumvention of Min ours
punishable by the Latorian Laws. And sometimes by Arbitration, even without a
Law; where the Question was matter of Faith, and Trust. But of all other
Judgments the Words that are used in the Formulary of an Arbitrament upon a
Marriage-Agreement are most remarkable: As Words of Form.
MELIVS, AEQVIVS, the Better, the Iuster: and in matters of Contract, or
Confidence, INTER BONOS BEEN AGIER; Fair Dealing among Good Men. Can there be
any Mixture of Fraud now in BETTER, and IVSTER? Or what place is there for
Collusion, or Iniquity, in Fair Dealing among Honest Men?

NOW the Dolus Malus, or Deceit appears either in Simulation, which is a
Pretense of something that is not; or Dissimulation, Simulation and
Dissimulation.
that is to say a Disguise, or Concealment of somewhat that Is. Wherefore there
must be no Lie admitted in any Business, or Contract; Nor should there be any
Underhand substituting of a Buyer, or a Seller, to enhance, or to bring down
the Price; but Both Parties should say at a Word what they will Give, or Take.
Q. Scaevola, the Son of Publius, being upon a Purchase, bade the Proprietor
tell him in One Word what he would have for the Estate: He did so: And Scaevola
told him he had undervalu'd it, A Generous Scruple of Scaevola's.
and so gave him Two Thousand Crowns more than his Bargain. There is not any
Man but will confess that This was the part of a Good Man, though in the Opinion
perhaps of some People, not of a Wise Man: As if the Other had set it lower
than he could afford it. This is a mischief therefore, that Some Men are
accounted Good, and Other Men Wise, as if they could be separated. Ennius says
that a Man's Wisdom serves him to little purpose, if it be not Profitable to
himself. This may be true Enough, if it were but agreed with Ennius what it is
to be Profitable. I find Hecalon the Rhodian (Panaetius's Scholar) telling Q.
Tubero in his Books of Offices, that It is the part of a Wise Man to do nothing
against Public Customs, Laws, and Institutions; and withal, to take good heed
to his Fortune, and Family: For we should not propound to be Rich, only to our
Selves, but to our Children, Relations, Friends, and chiefly, for the Service
of the Republique: For the Estates and Provisions of Particulars, are the
Wealth of the City. The proceeding of Scaevola abovementioned would never suit
with Hecaton: For he only says that he would not do any thing for his own
Profit that were Unlawful: and truly he deserves little Thanks, or Commendation
for his peins. But allowing both Lying, and Dissembling to be this same Dolus
Malus, or Deceit, there are very few things clear of That Fraud. Or if he be
only the Good Man, that obliges as many as he can, and hurts no Body; such a
Good Man will not be easily found. It can never be Profitable to do an Ill
Thing; because it is always unallowable, and shameful. And it must ever be
beneficial to be a Good Man, because it is always Honest.

IT is an Ordinance of the Civil Law in the Matter of Estates, Concealments
punishable in Ba^gain^ for Estates.
that the Vender should still tell the Purchaser the Defects, or Inconveniences
of the Estate; for it being sufficiently provided by the Twelve Tables, that
every Man should make good what he promises or declares by Word of Mouth, upon
the Penalty of Double Damages for Denying it. The Civilians have also set a
Punishment upon Concealments too; by enacting, that if the Seller of an Estate
knew any Fault or Error in it, without expressly acquainting the Purchaser
with it, he should be obliged to make it good. As in the case of the Augurs
Tower; where they were to take their Observations from the Flight of Birds.
Titus Claudius Centimalus, having some Houses upon the Hill Caelius, the Augurs
commanded him to pull them down, because they hindered their prospect. Claudius
exposed Those Houses to Sale, and so put them off; and Publius Calpurnius
Lanarius was the Purchaser. The Augurs found the same fault still with the
Houses, when they were in His Possession: so that he pulled them down. And
coming afterward to understand that Claudius had made sale of those Houses,
after that the Augurs had appointed the demolishing of them; forced him upon an
Arbitration, what in point of Conscience was to be done in That Case. Marcus
Cato past the Sentence, (the Father of This Cato of ours) For as we denominate
Others from their Fathers, we shall make mention of the person that gave this
Light to the World, as accounting from the Son.) The Sentence was This, That
since upon the Sale of That Estate, he had not told the Other of the
Inconvenience which he knew it was exposed to; he should indempnifie the Buyer
of it; Concluding, that the Proprietor was bound in Conscience to tell the
Purchaser what damage might ensue upon it. Now if This was a Just Judgment, it
was not Warrantable either in the Corn-Merchant, or in him that sold the
Infected Houses, to conceal as is above supposed. But it is not possible for
any Law to reach all the various Cases of these Concealments: And yet however,
so far as they go, they are diligently observed. Marcus Marius Gratidianus sold
to Cai^s Sergius Orata those very Houses which he himself had bought of him but
a few years before. These Houses paid a Duty to Sergius (which was out of his
mind.) But Marius made no mention of it in the Conveying of his Right. The
Cause was brought into the Court; Crassus was for Orata, and Anthony for
Gratidianus. Crassus insisted upon the Law, because the Seller knew that he
ought to have acquainted the Purchaser with this Encumbrance, but did not do
it. Anthony insisted upon matter of Equity, because That Encumbrance was not
unknown to Sergius, who sold the Houses, and so there was no need to say any
thing of it; neither could he be said to be deceived, that knew what Title he
had bought. Now to what End is all This, but to show, that our Forefathers were
not pleased with Wiles, and Shifts?

BUT Laws and Philosophers provide against Frauds several ways: The Laws
regarding only matter of Ouvert Act, whereas Philosophers judge according to
Equity, Laws and Philosophers provide several ways against Fraud.
and Reason: which Reason does it self require of us, that we do nothing
perfidiously, or with False Pretense, or Deceit. But shall we call it a
Treachery to contrive a Pitfall, or set a Toil, without either driving, or
hunting any thing into it? Well, but the Beasts many times fall into it,
without a Persuer. He that offers a House to Sale, what is his Bill, but a
Snare laid for the Purchaser? His House is Faulty, and he would fain put it
off, and some body is caught at unawares. Now though I understand that according
to depraved Custom, and Manners, this is not accounted Dishonorable; and that
there is neither Law, nor Civil Right Against it: It is nevertheless yet
forbidden by the Law of Nature. For, as I have often said already, and must say
oftener, Society, in the Largest Extent, is that which is Common to all men;
next under That is the Society of those of the same Nation, and after That, of
the same City. Wherefore our Forefathers distinguish betwixt the Law of
Nations, and the Law Civil. For the Civil Law is not consequently the Law of
Nations, but the Law of Nations does necessarily comprehend the Civil. The Law
Civll, and the Law of Nations.
Now to say the Truth, we have not among us any substantial or express Image of
the True Law, or sincere Justice: So that we are fain to make use of Shadows,
and Figures; and it were well if we could keep up, even to Them too: For they
are Translated out of the best Originals, of Truth, and Nature. How glorious is
that Provisional Condition for the making of good Contracts! Provided that by
your means, and depending upon your Honesty, I may not be deceived and brought
into a snare. And then that Golden Sentence, we must live Honestly among Good
men, and without Fraud. But then who are the Good Men, and what it is to do
well, is a Great question.

Q. Scaevola the High Priest was wont to ascribe a very great force to all
those Arbitrations that were grounded upon Good Faith; Of Good Faith.
Accounting the very Name it self to be of a Large Extent: As having a respect
to Guardian-Ships, Societies, Trusts, Mandates, things bought, or sold, hired,
or let, relating to the Community, and Intercourse of Life. He must be a great
Judge, that in these Cases can determine (especially meeting in most of them
with Contrary Opinions) how One man is to behave himself toward Another, under
these Circumstances. Wherefore all Tricks and Artifices should be avoided: And
That Craft also which imposes upon the World for Wisdom; how far from it
soever. For Prudence is placed in the Choice of Good, or Evil; but Craft
prefers Evil before Good; at least if things that are Dishonorable be Evil.
And it is not only in Lands, and Houses, that the Civil Law, in Conformity to
That of Nature, forbids Fraud, and Circumvention; but even in the very dealing
for Slaves, the Seller should act as frankly as in Other Cases. For he that is
presumed to know whether the Slave be Healthful, Honest, a Fugitive, or the
like; the AEdiles Law makes That Master answerable for the Servant. But This
does not hold in the Case of an Heir that found such a Slave, or Servant in the
Family. From hence it may appear, since Nature is the Fountein of Justice, that
it is also according to Nature, that no man should make Advantage to himself of
another man's Ignorance. Nor is there any greater Pest, in Human Society, then a
perverse Craft, under the Masque of Simplicity: No Pest like Craft under the
Masque of Simplicity.
And from thence proceed those Innumerable Cases, where the Profitable comes in
Concurrence with the Honest. For, where is the man that would stick at any
Injustice, if he might but hope for Impu^ity; or come off, under a pretense of
Ignorance? Let us examine the Matter if you please; and in Those Instances
where the Common people, perhaps, are scarce sensible that they do amiss: For
we do not speak in This place, of Murders, Poysonings, Forgeries, Robberies,
or Embesilments of the Public Treasure, which should rather be suppressed by
Prisons, and Fetters, then by Words, and Philosophical Precepts: But let us
here rather consider what we find commonly to be done, even among those that
have the Reputation of Honest men. There were some people that brought out of
Greece to Rome a forged Will of Q. Minutius Basilius, A Case of Conscience
about a Forgery.
(who was a very wealthy man) and to make the business pass the better, they
put into the Testament, M. Crassus, and Q. Hortensius, two of the most
considerable men of the City; as Ioint-Heirs, together with Themselves. They
did, Both of them, suspect it to be a Counterfeit; and yet having no hand in it
themselves, they were well enough content, to make advantage of Other peoples
Wickedness. And what then? Is it sufficient that they Themselves had no hand in
it? I am of Another Opinion; although, for the One of them, I loved him while he
was alive, and and I do not hate the Other now he is Dead. But when Basilius
had made his Sisters Son ( Marcus Satirius) his Heir, and would have had him
take his Uncles Name upon him; (I speak of That Satirius that to the Shame of
the Age had the Patronage of the Picenians, and Sabines) it was a most
unreasonable thing that the Chief men of the City should carry away the
Testators Estate, and leave nothing to the Right Heir but his Name. Now if he
stands guilty of an Injustice, that neither keeps off an Injury from his Friend
by way of Prevention; nor Repulses it when he may, (as we have said in our
First Book) what shall we think of him that does not only not Repel an Injury,
but even Helps it on and promotes it? Nay, for my Own part, let the Inheritance
be never so Lawful; yet if it be gained by Craft, Flattery, Servile Offices, or
False Pretenses; even That Lawful Succession I cannot approve. But in such
Cases men are many times extremely misled, in taking One thing to be Honest,
and Another Profitable; for the same Rules holds in Both; And He that is not
sensible of This, lies open to all sorts almost of Fraud, and Iniquity. For
whosoever says thus to himself, This is Honest, it is true, but the Other is
Expedient; he takes upon him to divide those things by a Mistake that are
coupled by Nature; which opinion is the fountein of all Deceipts, Crimes, and
Evil Deeds. Wherefore if a Good man, No Dividing of what Nature has Coupled.
for the very holding up of a Finger, could get himself made Heir to a
Considerable Estate, which he has no Title to; he should not do it, though upon a
Certainty that no man could ever so much as suspect him for it. But if M.
Crassus could get an Estate upon the same Terms, upon my Credit he would leap
out of his skin at it. But a Just, and such a one as we can allow for a Good
man, will never agree to the taking of any thing away from Another, and
transferring it to himself; And whoever wonders at This, does as good as
confess himself Ignorant of what a good man is.

BUT he that will thoroughly examine the Secrets of his Own Soul, will be able
to tell himself that only He is a Good man, Who is a Good man.
who does as much good to Others as he can, and harms no body without some
Injurious provocation. How Is That? He that supplants the Right Heir, to get
himself into his place, has not that man as much to answer for as if he had
removed him by Poison? But what (will some say) may not a man Do that which is
Profitable and Expedient for him? Yes, yes, If he will take This along with
him, that it is not possible for any thing to be So, that is Unjust. He that
has not learned This Lesson, can never be a Good man. I remember, when I was a
Boy, I heard my Father speak of Fimbria the Consul: who was appointed Judge in
the Case of Marcus Luctatius Pythias, (a Knight of Rome, and a very Honest man)
who undertook, upon the Forfeiture of a Sum of Money, to prove himself a Good
man: but Fimbria did absolutely refuse to pass Judgment in That matter; least
he should either derogate from the Reputation of a person so much Esteemed, if
he gave it Against him, or appear, on the Other side, to Pronounce any man to
be Good, considering the Infinite Circumstances of Qualities, and Offices to
make him so, So that neither Fimbria's Good man, nor Socrates's, will allow any
thing to be Profitable that is not Honest: And such a man will not only fear to
Do, but not dare so much as to Think any thing which he would not frankly own
in Public. Is it not a Shame now, for Philosophers to Doubt, where the Common
people themselves are Resolved? For the Old Thredbare Proverb is Their's; when
they would express a man of an exact Sincerity and Justice, You may play at A
Little Play with the Fingers.
Love with him in the Dark, they say; and what is the meaning of This, but to
teach us, that nothing can be Expedient that is not Honest, though he might gain
it, and the World never the Wiser for it? In the Moral of this Proverb, we are
taught, that neither Gyge's way is to be endured, nor so much as a Finger to be
moved, (as in the case formerly supposed) though a man might make himself Master
of the whole World by so doing. For whatsoever is Shameful, and Dishonorable,
let it be never so Secret, nothing can make it Honest; and that which is not
Honest, it is as impossible to render it Profitable, in a Repugnancy and
Opposition to Nature.

BUT where Criminals find great Rewards, there is also a great Temptation to
offend. When C. Marius appeared out of all hope of the Consulship, and (having
lain still, for seven years after his Pratorship) no man imagined that he would
ever have offered at it: Q. Metellus (a great man, and an Eminent Citizen) sent
Marius (being his Lieutenant) to Rome. A Mean Action of C. Marius.
Where Marius publicly charged his Principal before the People, with
prolonging the War, and told them that if they had made Him Consul, he would in
a very short time have delivered up Iugartha, either Alive or Dead, into the
power of the people: whereupon they made him Consul. But This was a Proceeding
contrary to Faith, and Justice; by a false Suggestion to draw an Envy upon so
Brave a man, and so Famous a Citizen: Especially Marius being Metellus's
Lieutenant, and by his order sent to Rome. Neither did our Kinsman Marius
Gratidianus in his Praetorship discharge the Office of a Good man. The Tribunes
of the Common people Consulted the College of Praetors about some Common
Standard for the Valuation of their Moneys, which were then sometimes up,
sometimes down, at such a rate, that no man knew what he was worth. They joined
unanimously in a Decree, with a Penalty upon any man that should not submit
to it; and so they Adjourned for That Morning, resolving to meet again After
noon for the Publishing of it. When they were gone, some, One way, some
another; Gratidianus stepped presently from the Bench to the Tribunal; and there
made Proclamation by Himself alone of that which was the Common Act of the
Court: which you will find (if you observe the Story) to have given him great
Reputation; the people setting up his Statues every where up and down, with
Incense, and Tapers: In one word, no man ever rendered himself more Popular.
Small matters may be of great Importance
These are Points that may puzzle a man sometimes in his Deliberations;
especially when the Matter is but small, wherein any Violence is offered to
Justice; but yet the Consequence seems to be of great Importance. It did not
appear to be so very foul, for the One Marius to preposses himself of the
Favor of the People, by preventing his Colleagues and the Tribunes: And then it
was, in appearance, a matter of great Advantage to the Other Marius to advance
himself to the Consulship by the Means he had propounded. But there is One
General Rule that I would have you take special Notice of; See First that what
you account Profitable, be not Dishonorable; and Then if it be Dishonorable,
let nothing persuade you that it is Profitable. But what Then? Shall we
pronounce either the One Marius or the Other to be an Honest man? Set your Wits
at work, and try, and consider with your self what is the Image, the Character,
and the Notion of a Good Man? Will a Good man tell a Lie, Calumniate, Supplant,
or Deceive? A Good man will not do an Ill thing.
Certainly nothing less. Is there any thing then on the Other side, so
Profitable or so Desirable, as that a man would forfeit the Reputation and the
Glory of a Good and a Wise man to gain it? Can That thing which we call Profit,
bring us any Advantage to Countervail what it takes from us, in depriving us of
the very Name of Good men, and divesting us of Faith, and Justice? What
difference is there betwixt the turning of a Man into a Beast, by a Real
Metamorphosis, and the bearing the Figure, and Fierceness of a Brute in his
Mind, under the Shape of a Man? They that neglect and make light of all things
that are Honest, for the Acquiring of Power, do they not do the same thing with
Pompey that married Caesar's Daughter to make himself Great, under the Boldness
and Protection of his Father in Law? But he looked upon it as a thing
Advantageous to himself to augment his Own Power by the Envy that was born to
the Other: but how Unjust This was to his Country, and how Dishonorable to
himself, he did not consider. His Father in Law had often in his Mouth those
Greek Verses of the Phoenicians out of Euripides, which I Will tell you as well
as I can, not so gracefully perhaps, but so as to be Understood. To get a
Crown, a man would break a Trust.
If break't at all: everywhere else, be Just.


It was a Lewd and Horrible thing done of Etheocles (or rather of Euripides) to
make That the Exception of a Crime, which of all Crimes is it self the most
Abominable. But what do we talk of Petty things, as Inheritances, Traffiques,
Fraudulent Bargains? What do you think of Him rather, that having the Ambition
to make himself the Master of the People of Rome, The Ambition of Julius Caesar.
and the Emperor of the World it self, accomplished his Ends? No man in his
Wits will pretend to justify This Ambition: for in so doing he passes an
Approbation upon the Subversion of our Laws and Liberties; and reckons, as a
point of Honor, that Ignoble, and Detestable Oppression. But he that confesses
the Unlawfulness of any man's Usurping a Dominion over a City that both has been
Free, and ought so to be; and yet supposes it a thing Profitable to him that
can compass it; I would spare no Reprehension; nor, in truth, any Reproach, to
reclaim such a man from his Error: For (I appeal to the Immortal Gods) what
Profit can any man find in the Foul and Execrable Destruction of his Country;
albeit he that is Guilty of it should come afterward to be styled the Father
of it, by the oppressed People? Vtility should therefore be guided by Honesty;
Utility should be guided by Honesty.
and in such manner, that though the Words differ, the Thing should be still the
same. I do not find any thing more Profitable, in the Opinion of the Common
People, then Power, and Empire: Neither, when I look narrowly into the Matter,
do I find any thing more Unprofitable to him that Unjustly atteins it. For what
advantage can it be to any man, to live in Anxiety, Carefulness, Fears, Day and
Night; and to lead a Life that is beset with Snares, and Dangers? There are
more treacherous, and unfaithful men in a Kingdom (says Accius) then there are
good. But of what Kingdom does he speak? even of That which is reported unto us
of Tantalus and Pelops; a Kingdom that procceded by a Lawful Descent. How much
greater then is the Number of the Unfaithful to That Prince, who having oppressed
Rome it self by a Roman Army, and a City, not only Free in its own
Constitution, but giving Laws to others; brought That City, at last, into
subjection to Himself? How ulcerated a Conscience do you think This man must
needs have? What wounds in his Soul? Or how is it possible that This man's Life
should be Profitable to Himself, when such was the Condition of it, that
Posterity will ever have a Veneration, and Esteem for those that took it away?

NOW if those things that carry the Fairest Appearance of Profit, fail yet of
being what they seem to be, because they are full of Shame and Dishonor; This,
methinks, should Convince any man, that nothing can be Profitable, that is not
likewise Honest. Now as This has, in Many Cases, been determined; so most
remarkably, by the Senate of Rome, and by Caius Fabricius, in his second
Consulate: For when King Pyrrhus made War upon Rome, and the Quarrel was Empire
too, and That with a Powerful, and a Generous Prince; there came a Fugitive
from Pyrrhus into the Tents of Fabricius; and promised him, upon Condition of a
Considerable Reward, that he would convey himself back, as privately as he
came; and Poison the King. Fabricius ordered this man to be carried back to
Pyrrhus; Pabricius's Generosity to Pyrrhus.
and the Senate applauded the Resolution. Now if a man should regard the
Appearance, and Opinion of Profit, This One Fugitive might have put a Period to
That hazardous War, in the removal of the most Considerable Enemy of the
Empire. But where the point in Controversy was Honor, it would have been a
Scandalous and an Impious practice to have encountered a Noble Enemy with
Baseness, and Treachery, instead of Resolution, and Virtue. Now which was the
more Profitable, either to Fabricius (who was as Eminent in Rome, as Aristides
was in Athens) or to our Senate (that never separated Profit from Honor) to
subdue an Enemy by Arms, or by Poison? If Empire be desirable for Glories sake,
let there be no Treachery or Injustice in the Attempt: For therein can be no
Glory. And we must have a care too how we compass Wealth it self; Wealth it
self may be Unprofitable.
for it can never be Advantageous to us with Infamy. And therefore it was no
Profitable Advice, that of L. Philippus (the Son of Quintus) to Tax those
Cities over again which L. Sylla had discharged, for a Sum of Money, by a Decree
of the Senate: And This too, without their Money again, which they had already
paid for their Liberty. The Senate however took his Counsel, to the Scandal of
the Empire. At this rate, there is more Faith to (...) found among Pirates then
among Roman Senato^s. Well! But the Revenue was increased, and it was therefore
Profitable. But how long shall we dare to call any thing Profitable that is not
Honest? How is it possible that Hatred, or Infamy, should ever be Profitable to
any Government, that must support it self by its own Reputation, and the good
will of its Confederates? Nay, I have had many a dispute, upon this Point, with
my Friend Cato himself, for insisting too rigorously upon the Interest of the
Public Treasury, and Revenue: He was too hard methought to the Officers; for
we ought to be Bountiful to the One, and treat the Other as we were wont to
treat our Colonies: And so much the rather, because the Connection of the Parts
did much contribute to the Preservation of the Whole. And Curio did very Ill
too; who, though convinced that the Transpadans were in the Right, still
concluded Vincat Vtilitas, Let Utility carry it. Now he should rather have said
that it was not Just, because it was not Profitable to the Commonwealth, then
allowing it to be Profitable, to conclude that it was not Just.

In Hecaton's Sixth Book of Offices, we find a great many Questions to our
purpose. As for Instance, Instances of Good and Profitable in Competition.
he puts the Case, Whether in a great Scarcity of Corn, a Good Man be not
obliged to Maintein his Servants? He Reasons it Pro and Con; but at last, Their
Servants were Slaves.
concludes the Duty with a regard rather to Profit, then to Humanity. He puts
another Question, Whether, in the Extremity of a Storm at Sea, a Man should
rather throw over a Serviceable Horse, or a Servant of little Value. And here
his private Interest draws him One way, and Humanity, Another. And again,
Suppose that, upon a Shipwreck. a Fool should get hold of a Plank; whether or
no may a Wise Man take it from him, if he can? He Is upon the Negative, because
the thing is Unjust. But what if it were the Master of the Ship? Shall not he
take his Own? No, by no means: He may as well throw a Man overboard, that is
at Sea in his Ship, because the Ship is his Own: For till they come to the End
of the Voyage, the Ship is rather the Passengers then the Masters. But what if
there should be but One Plank, and Two Men equally Wise, and Deserving, in
danger to be drowned? Whether shall Neither of them take it, or shall Either of
them yield it to the Other? I would have it yielded to him that may do most
Good, either to the Republique, or in his Own Particular, by Living. But what
if they be both alike? I would have no Contention; But let the One render to
the Other as if the point had been decided by Lot. What if my Father should
Rifle a Church, Cases of Conscience.
or Dig a Passage under ground to Rob the Treasury? Whether or no should the
Son give an Information of it to the Magistrate? This were an Unhappy Case; but
I would however Defend my Father, if he were Accused. But is not my Duty to my
Country above all other Duties? Yes, it is. But then my Country it self is
concerned, that the People in it should bear a Reverence to their Parents. But
what if a Father should Design the betraying of his Country; or the getting of
the Government into his own Hand? Shall the Son Conceal it? I would have him
earnestly desire his Father to Desist; and if That will not do, he is bound to
Accuse him. But I would have him threaten him First; and, in the Conclusion, if
he finds his Country in danger, he is to value the safety of it before That of
his Father. He puts another Question, if a Wise, and Good man, shall by
oversight take False money, whether or no may be put it off again in Payment,
after he knows it to be Counterfeit? Diogenes says he may: Antipater is against
it. With whom I do rather agree of the Two. Suppose a man sells a Piece of
Wine, knowing that it will not keep; Is he bound to tell this or no? Diogenes
says he needs not; but Antipater says that a Good man Will tell it. These are
the Propositions in Controversy, among the Stoiques. In the selling of a
Slave, whether or no am I bound to discover all his faults? Only those which
the Civil Law obliges me to discover, or to take him again. But for Discovering
him to be a Liar, a Gamester, a Thief, a Drunkard; Some are For the telling of
it, and Others, not. What if a man should sell Gold, believing it to be Copper?
Is a Good man that knows it to be Gold, bound to tell him it or no? Or
whether can any man Justify the buying of That for One Penny which is worth a
Thousand? I have now cleared my own Opinion; And what are the Points in
Controversy among the Philosophers before-named.

WE come now to consider how far Those Offices and Contracts are to be
observed, Conscience in Contracts.
that are neither Extorted by Force, nor (as the Law has it) Dolo malo, or by
Circumvention. I have a Remedy given me for the Dropsy, upon This Condition,
that if it Cures me, I am never to use that Medicine again: Within a few years,
and after I have been once Cured of it, I relapse into the same Disease, and
the person with whom I contracted will not give me leave to make any further
Use of it: What am I to do in This Case? It is an Inhumanity in Him to refuse
me; beside that my Using of it does Him no Hurt: In this Case, we must Consult
the Means of Life, and Health. Well! Suppose a Wise man should be made Heir to
a great Estate, upon This Obligation from the Testator, that before he touches
one penny of the Profits of it, he should dance publicly before a Court of
Justice, or in the Market place? He promises accordingly so to do; and without
passing That Promise, he could never have been entitled to that Estate: Should
he do it or no? I could wish he had not promised it; and my Opinion is, that it
would better have become his Gravity not to have done it; but in regard that he
has past his Word, if he accounts it a Shameful, and Dishonorable thing to
discharge That Condition, he may break his word with a better Grace by making
no Benefit of the Estate, then Otherwise; unless peradventure the Benefits of
it might be converted to so Great, and Public an Advantage, that it would be
no longer Dishonorable so to do, as being Profitable to his Country.

Neither is a man ( always) bound to keep those Promises that are of no
Advantage to those to whom the Promise is made. Some Promises better broken
than kept.
Phoebus (to come back to Fables) having promised his Son Phaeton a Grant of
whatever he should ask; Phaeton demanded the Government of his Fathers Chariot;
he had his Desire, and in his full Carriere Jupiter cast him down with a
Thunderbolt. Had not this promise of his Fathers now been better broken then
kept? And then the Promise that Theseus extorted from Neptune, what became of
it* Neptune accorded to him Three Wishes: One was the Destruction of his Son
Hippolitus, upon a suspicion of his Familiarity with his own Mother-in-Law; and
the Granting of That Wish was the greatest Affliction that ever came near to
Theseus's Heart. And what was Agamemnons Vow to Diana, in promising her the
most beautiful Creature that should be born within his Dominions that year?
which proved to be own his Daughter Iphigenia; whom he accordingly sacrificed,
as the fairest Creature which That year produced. How much better had it been
if This Promise had never been made, then so horrible a Crime admitted?
Wherefore sometime we should not pass a Promise: Nay a Depositum it self is not
in all Cases to be restored. A man leaves a Sword in Trust with me when he is
Sober, and calls for it again when he is Mad; Now to Restore it, in such a Case,
were a Crime, and the Refusal of it, a Duty. What if I should lay up Money for
him, and then find that he is about to make War upon his Country? Shall I render
it? I think not; because it is against the Republique, which we ought to
prefer. So many things that seem Honest enough in their Own Nature, are yet
made Unwarrantable by Time, and Occasion: To make good a Promise, stand to a
Bargain, deliver up a Trust; when it comes to be rather Hurtful then Profitable
becomes Dishonest. This is enough said of those Vtilities against Justice that
are covered with a Pretext of Reason. But as we have drawn all Duties from the
four Fountains of Duty in our First Book, we'ell keep still to our Subject; and
Show, how those things that seem to be Profitable, and Are not, stand in the
greatest Opposition to Virtue. Here is enough said of Prudence, and of the
Counterfeit of it, which is Craft; and likewise of Justice, which can never
fail of being Profitable.

THE Two remaining Parts of Honesty follow, the One is seen in the Greatness of
an Excellent Mind, Of Fortitude.
the Other in a Conformity and Moderation of Continence, and Temper. It seemed
Profitable to Ulysses, the Counterfeiting himself Mad, to avoid the War, as the
Tragadians would persuade us. (For there appears no such suspicion of him in
Homer, who was an Eminent Author.) This was no Honest Counsel, but it may be
said perhaps, that it was a Profitable one, to stay at Home, and Govern, in an
Easy, Lazy Life at Ithaca, with his Wife, his Son, and his Relations; But do
you Imagine, that in daily Labors, and Hazzards, there can be any Dignity that
is to be compared with This Tranquillity of Life? And yet I cannot but have a
Contempt for such a Retreat, because those things that are not Honorable, I
cannot allow to be Advantageous. But what do you think the World would have
said of Ulysses if he had gone on in that Disguise; who notwithstanding all his
Brave Exploits in the War, did yet suffer these reproaches from Ajax, in the
Tragedy? He that contrived the Oath, and made us take it.
Was the only man, Himself, you know, that brake it:
Playing the Mad, Driv'ling Fool, under That Blind
To sleep in a whole skin, and stay behind:
And the bold Cheat had past, without all doubt,
But for fly ^alamede that found it out.


NOW it was much better for him, to encounter, as he did, not only Enemies, but
likewise Seas and Tempests; then to abandon Greece, which was then by one
Consent carrying a War among the Barbarians. But to pass over things Fabulous
and Foreign. Let us now come to our own Country, and Affairs. Marcus Attilius
Regulus, The Case of Regulus.
in his second Consulship, when he was surpised, and taken prisoner in
Affricae, by Xantippus the Lacedemonian, a Commander under Hamilcar the Father
of Hannibal: (who was then General) he was sent to the Senate, under an Oath of
rendering himself again at Carthage, unless certain Carthaginian Noblemen should
be released in exchange. Being come to Rome, he had before him a fair Color of
Profit, but as the Story makes it out, he found it Vain, and Idle* The
condition of it was that he might stay in his Country, live at home with his
Wife and Children, suffering the Calamity he was fallen into as the Common
Fortune of the War, and still reteining the Honor of his Consulary Dignity.
Will any man deny these things to be Profitable? Or what shall we say, when
Courage, and Magnanimity oppose it? What Greater Authority or Security would a
man desire? For it is the Property of these Virtues not to fear any thing; to
despise all accidents; and to reckon nothing Intolerable, that can befall a man.

But what did he do? He came into the Senate; told them his business; His
Honor and Justice.
but refused to to give his Opinion; for so long as he was under an Oath, he
was in the Condition of a Prisoner to an Enemy, and not of a Senator: But (like
a Fool as he was (as some will say) and one that stood in his own light) that
which he did speak was against himself: He would not allow it to be the Roman
Interest to exchange their Prisoners; for the Carthaginians were young men (he
said) and good Soldiers, but himself wasted with Old age. His Authority
prevailing, the prisoners were detained, and himself returned to Carthage,
without any regard to the Affection he had either for his Country, or for his
Friends; He was not Ignorant neither, to how cruel an Enemy, and to what
exquisite Torments he exposed himself, by his Return; only he was resolved not
to violate his Oath. When they had Tortured, and Watched him even to death; his
Condition was yet more Honorable, then if he had ended his days in his Own
house; a decrepite Captive, and a Forsworn Senator. But what a Fool was he, not
only not to agree to the remitting of their Prisoners, but also to dissuade it?
But what? shall we call That, Foolish, that conduces to the Good of the
Commonwealth? Or can any thing be Profitable to any Member of the Public,
that is not so to the Whole? It is a Subversion of the Fundamentals of Nature,
to divide Profit and Honesty, for we do all of us desire that which is
Profitable: It is an Attractive that draws us to it, whether we will or no. Is
there any man that avoids it; or rather that does not vigorously pursue it? Put
since Profit is not any where to be found, but in that which is Praiseworthy,
Honorable, and Honest, therefore do we account these Considerations as most
Noble, and Excellent; intending under the name of Profit, what is rather
necessary then Splendid.

But what is there, you will say, in an Oath? The Sacredness of an Oath.
are we afraid that Jupiter should take offense at us? Now This is a point
common to all Philosophers, that God is neither Angry with us, nor Hurts us:
and not only to those that take God himself to be Idle, and wholly careless of
us, but to those also that will have God to be always in Action, and doing of
something: But what greater harm could even an Angry Jupiter do to Regulus,
then Regulus did to Himself? So that there was nothing of Religion in the
perverting so great a Profit. Was it least he should do a mean thing? First, of
Two evils (we know) we are to choose the Least. But was That Dishonorable
Proposition then an evil Equal to the Torment? And then, That of Accius: Have
thou broken thy Faith? To any man that does not believe me, I neither Have
given, nor Do give it. Now though this was spoken by a Wicked King, it was yet
well enough said: And moreover; as we say that some things appear Prositable,
which are not so; so do they say on the Other side, that some things appear
Honest too, which are not so: As in this case of Regulus's returning to the
Torment, to save his Oath: For it is rendered Dishonorable, because it was done
under a Force, and by an Enemy, and so ought not to be made good. And they go
farther, that whatsoever is very Profitable, becomes Honest upon That
Consideration, though it was not so before. This is it which is commonly urged
aginst Regulus. But let us examine what it amounts to. Jupiter was not to be
feared, least he should hurt us in his Anger; because he does not use to be
either Angry or Mischievous. This Reason lies as strong against all other
Oaths, as against This of Regulus. But the question is not in an Oath, the fear
of being punished for breaking it* but the Conscience and the Obligation of
keeping it. Now an Oath is a Religious Affirmation and whatsoever we promise
p^sitively, as in the presence of God, we must keep it: for This does not
concern the Anger of the Gods, which is none at all; but it belongs to Faith,
and Justice. It is a glorious Exclamation of Ennius. O Holy Faith! the Tie
of the Gods;
And fit to have thy Mansion in their Blessed Abodes.


He therefore that violates his Oath, profanes the Divinity of Faith it self,
to which our Forefathers ascribed Divine Honors; placing her in the Capitol,
as ( Cato tells us) next unto Jupiter himself. But even an Angry Jupiter (you
say) could not have hurt Regulus more then he did himself. That were true, if
there were no Evil but Pein: Pein is no Evil.
But we have the Authority of the greatest Philosophers for it, that Torment is
so far from being the Greatest Evil, that it is None at all. And let me
recommend Regulus to you upon This point, as no Ordinary Testimony; Nay,
perhaps none more Convincing. For what nobler instance can be desired, then to
see so Illustrious a Roman subject himself voluntarily to the Torture, rather
then forego his Duty? For in saying the Least of Evils, it is meant by
suffering rather Dishonorably, then Miserably. Is there any Greater Evil then a
Shameful Dishonesty? How offensive is it to the Eye, any Deformity of the Body?
But how much greater then should we account the Pravity, and Corruption of a
Polluted Mind? Wherefore they that argue these things with the greatest
Generosity and Vigor, as the Stoiques, pronounce That Only to be Evil which is
Shameful: Nay the Peripatetiques themselves (who are not so Masculine as the
other) make no difficulty of unanimously pronouncing it to be the Greatest
Evil. As for That saying, I have neither given, nor do I give, my Faith to a
Faithless man: It was well enough said of the Poet, in the Case of Atreus;
because it was accommodate to the Person: But (...) they take up This once for
Granted, that a man is not obliged to keep Faith with him that has no Faith:
let them have a Care not to make use of that Shift as a Cover for Perjury.

As to the Rights and Customs of War, and keeping Faith with an Enemy, they are
points we must be very Tender of: For whatsoever we swear, upon a full
Persuasion in our Minds that it ought to be done, That must be observed: But
Otherwise, a man may dispense with that Obligation without Perjury. A Pagan
Dispensation.
As if a man that lies at the mercy of common Thieves, should promise them a
certain Sum of Money for the saving of his Life: It Is no deceit, the receding
from it, though I had given my Oath for the performance: for we are not to look
upon Pirates as Open and Lawful Enemies; but as the Common Adversaries of
Mankind. For they are a sort of men with whom we have neither Trust, nor Oath
in Common. For Perjury is not the Swearing False, but the not performing of
That which we swear, with an Intention to do it; as may be gathered from the
very form of our Oath. It was wittily said of Euripides, I swore with my
Tongue, but not with my Heart. But it was not for Regulus, however to embroyle
the Conditions, and Rules of War, with Perjury; having to do with a Just, and a
Lawful Enemy; in which Case, all the Rights and Laws of Arms were admitted
betwixt them in Common. For if it were otherwise, the Senate would never have
sent and delivered up so many famous men in Chains to their Enemies. The Rigor
of the Roman Discipline.
Which was the Cas^ of Titus Veturius, and (...) Posthumous, in their Second
Consulships: Who when they were beaten at Caudium, an our Legions disarmed; for
concluding a Peace with the Samnites, were delivered up to them as their
Prisoners, because they had done it without the the Order, and Consent of the
People, and Senate. And at the same time T: Numitius* and Q. Melius, who were
then Tribunes of the Common People, were delivered up likewise, to Evacuate the
Peace concluded, because it was done by Their Authority; and Posthumous
himself, that was delivered up was the man that advised and propounded it. And
the sam^ thing was done many years after, by C: Mancinus, who having made a
League with the Carthaginians, without the Authority of the Senate, persuaded
the representing of it to the People, himself, that he might be delivered up to
the Enemy; which proposition, being so recommended, by L. Furius, and Sextus
Attilius, was accepted and he accordingly delivered up. This was more
Honorable yet, then that of Q. Pompeius, who, in the same case, upon his
supplication that such a Decree might not be past against him, prevailed, and
was discharged. Here, that which seemed Profitable, was more Considered then
the Honest; but in the Other Examples; the false Appearance of Profit, was
overcome by a Dignity of Honor, and Virtue. But in the Case of Regulus, the
Promise was made under a Force, and he was not obliged to Perform it. As if any
Force could work upon the Mind of a Valiant man: Why did he go to the Senate
then, expressly to move against himself, and dissuade the Release of the
Prisoners? This is to reprehend the most Generous point in the whole Case, He
would not rest upon his own Opinion; but undertook the Cause, that the Senate
might pass judgment upon it; wherein if he had not interposed, the Prisoners
had been certainly restored to the Carthaginians and then, Regulus might have
continued safe in his Own Country. But as he did not account that course
Profitable to his Country, so he took the Honester Part, in choosing rather to
suffer, and undergo what he did. Now as to their saying that when a thing is
very Profitable, the advantage justifies it, though it were not Honest otherwise:
Let me tell you, that it must Be so, and not be Made so: For there is nothing
Profitable, which is not Honest, and it is not Honest, because it is
Profitable, but it is Profitable, because it is Honest. So that out of many
Wonderful Examples, a man shall hardly find a greater, or a more laudable
Instance then This. For in the whole Character of Regulus, the most Worthy and
Generous part of it was his Opinion for the deteining of the Prisoners. For as
to his Return, though we wonder at it now adays, he could not yet at That time do
otherwise: So that it was the Glory of the Age, rather then of the Man: For our
Forefathers looked upon the Tie of an Oath as the most Sacred Obligation in
Nature. The Tie of an Oath.
And this we find in the Twelve Tables; the Laws which we call Sacrate, show as
much: And so do our Leagues, by which we are tied to keep Faith, even with an
Enemy; and so do the Orders, and Penalties of our Censors; who were not so
strict in any thing, as in the business of an Oath. Lucius Manlius (the Son of
Aulus) in his Dictatorship was summoned by M. Pomponius, the Tribune of the
Common people, for Exercising the Power of a Dictator, some days beyond his
time; And was further accused for Banishing his Son Titus (who was afterward
called Torquatus) out of the Town, and Commanding him to live in the Country.
The Young man, hearing that his Father was in trouble about it, is said to have
gone presently to Rome; and the next morning by daylight, to Pomponius's
house. To whom it was suggested that Torquatus being very Ill used, had
probably brought him some Complaint against his Father. Pomponius presently
left his Bed, turned all people out of the Room, and so ordered the young man
to be brought unto him. He was no sooner in the Chamb^r, but Titus drew his
Sword, and swore that he would immediately kill him, if he did not presently
give him his Oath, that his Father should be discharged: Pomponius, upon the
apprehension of his present danger, past his Oath, and afterward reported the
matter to the People; telling them he was forced to desist, and the reason of
it: Whereupon Manlius was let go. Such a Veneration had they in those times for
the Tie of an Oath! This Titus Manlius is the man, who having killed a
Frenchman in a Duel upon a Challenge, at the River Anien, and taking from him a
Chain, which the Latins call Torquis, took the Surname of Torquatus. In his
Third Consulship the Latins were routed and dispersed at Veseris, near the
Mountain Vesuvius. He was a man of the highest rank of Brave men, and not more
eminently Indulgent to his Father, then he was afterward severe to his Son.

But as Regulus was to be commended for keeping of his Oath. The Severity of
the Romans in case of Perfidy.
So were those Ten men after the Battle of Cannae as much to be despised.
Hannibal sent them to the Senate, upon an Oath to render themselves again in
the Camp of the Carthaginians, if they could not obtain such an exchange of
Prisoners as was propounded. But this Story is variously reported: Polybius (an
Author of singular Credit) says that Nine of the Ten Noblemen that were sent,
delivered themselves up, without prevailing for the Exchanges, but that One of
the Ten never went back again; Having Returned to the Camp, so soon as he was
out of it, upon pretense that he had left something behind him; by which
Return, he would understand himself to be discharged of his Oath: But without
reason; For the Fraud increases the Iniquity, without dissolving the Perjury.
Wherefore it was a foolish piece of Cunning, and a most perverse Imitation of
Prudence. Hereupon the Senate decreed that this shifting Jugler should be sent
bound to Hannibal. But the most glorious thing of all was This, Hannibal had
8000 Prisoners; not taken in the Battle, or that had run any hazard of their
Lives, but they were only such as were left in the Camp, by the Two Consuls
Paulus and Varro. They might have been redeemed for a small Sum of Money; but
the Senate would not agree to it: for a Lesson to the Roman Soldiers that they
must either Conquer, or Die. This resolution being made known to Hannibal, went
more to the heart of him then any thing else (as the same Author has it) to see
that the Senate and People of Rome in their greatest Adversity, should still
uphold so generous a Resolution. So that things seemingly Profitable are still
overcome by things that are really honest. Now Acilius that wrote the Story in
Greek* reports it, that there were more of them went back to Hannibal's Camp,
under the same Color, to deliver themselves from their Oath; and that they
were branded for it with all sorts of Ignominy by the Censors. We shall now put
an end to This matter; for it is clear, that whatsoever is done with a
Timorous, Abject, Mean, and Broken Mind, cannot be Profitable, because it is
Flagitious, Dis^onorable, and Shameful: as this Action of Regulus would have
been, if he had rather consulted his Own Interest, then that of the Public,
in the business of the Prisoners; or rather chosen to have staid at home.

The Fourth part yet remains, consisting in Decency, Moderation, Modesty,
Continence, and Temperance. Of Temperance.
Now can any thing be Profitable, in opposition to this Catalogue of such
Virtues? But Aristippus's Cyrenaiques, and the Annicerian Philosophers place
all Good in Pleasure, and account Virtue to be therefore Laudable, for the
Pleasure it produces. As these grew out of date, Epicurus came on; the
Supporter, Emprover, and in a manner, the Author of the same Opinion. With
these we must contend (as they say) for Life; If we are resolved to defend, and
to maintein the Cause of Honesty: For if not only Vtility, but all Happiness of
Life rests in a Sound Constitution of Body, or in the search and hope of such a
Constitution (as Metrodorus will have it) This Vtility certainly (and in the
highest degree too (for so they understand it) will be found to clash with
Honesty. For first, what Province shall we assign to Prudence? If the search
and enquiry after Delights; How wretched a thing is Virtue, when it comes to
serve Pleasure? But what is the Office of Prudence? To judge learnedly of
Pleasure? Suppose that nothing could be more Delightful then That: There is
nothing yet to be imagined, that is more Dishonorable. Now for him that
pronounces Pein to be the greatest of Evils; what place is there in such a
Mind, for Magnanimity, that Exercises it self in the Contempt of Labors, and
Peins? For though Epicurus, Epicurus places Good and Ill in Pleasure and Pein.
in many places speaks Generously enough (as he does in This) of Pein and
Affliction; We are not yet so much to consider what he says, as what may be
Reasonable for him to say, upon the Foundation of Terminating all Good and Ill,
in Pleasure and Pein: As to hear him now speak of Continence and Temperance; he
says many very good things in several places; but yet he is gravelled; (as we
say) for how can any man commend Temperance; and yet place our Chiefest Good,
in Pleasure? For Temperance is the Enemy of Sensual Pleasures, and our
Appetites are the Servants, and Followers of them. And yet in these Three
kinds, they shuffle as well as they can, and their Evasions are not without
some Color. They make Prudence to be the skill of supplying or procuring
Pleasures, and keeping away Peins: And then they make a shift too, to acquit
themselves in the point of Fortitude: which they say enables us to contemn
Death, and to endure Pein. And in speaking of Temperance; though they are not
clear, yet they extricate themselves after a fashion; for they say that the
Greatness of Pleasure arises only from an Absence or Detraction of Pein. And as
for Justice, it is with Them, either Tottering, or rather Grovelling upon the
Ground; and so are all those Virtues that are exercised in Common, and in the
Society of Mankind. For there can neither be any Goodness, Liberality, or
Gentleness (any more then Friendship) if these things be not desirable for
Themselves; or else desirable only in relation to Pleasure, and Profit. But let
us bring the matter into a Narrow Compass: For, as we have laid it down that
nothing can be Profitable, in Opposition to Honesty, so we do here affirm that
all Pleasure is directly Contrary to it. Concerning which point, I reckon
Calliphon, and Dinomachus to be the more to blame, in thinking to put an end to
this Controversy, by coupling Pleasure, with Honesty, as if it were a Man,
with a Beast. Whereas Virtue does not admit of That Conjunction, but despises
and rejects it. And then for the end of Good and Evil men, which must be
Simple; it cannot be Tempered, and Compounded of disagreeing things. But of
This elsewhere more at large: And it is a weighty business. But To my purpose
now in hand. Concerning any matter to be determined in the Case of a Concurrent
Opposition betwixt Profit, and Honesty, we have said enough already. But if
Pleasure shall be said to carry some show of Profit also, there can be no
Conjunction of it with Honesty. For allowing the most we can to Pleasure, it
does but serve us for Sauce, without any Profit in it at all.

IN This Book (my Son Marcus) your Father makes you a Present; in My Opinion a
Great one; but it is to You according as you Take it. And yet however, you may
allow These Three Books of Mine, an Entertainment in your Study, among the
Commentaries of Cratippus. If I my self had come to Athens (as I had done, if
my Country had not Commanded me back, even when I was half way thorough) you
should sometimes have been your Fathers Disciple too. So that I am now fain to
speak to you in these Writings. Bestow as much of your time upon them as you
can; and what you have a mind to do, you may do. When I shall understand that
This Study pleases you, I hope it will not be long before I be with you my
self. And however, at this distance, though in absence, I shall still be
speaking to you. Wherefore My Cicero farewell: And assure your self that you are
exceeding dear to me; And yet much dearer you will be, if I shall find that you
take delight in these Memorials, and Precepts.

THE END.

