THE ORATION OF CICERO FOR M. Marcellus.

Done into English.

With an APPENDIX Relating to the Prince of Orange.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

THE ORATION OF CICERO FOR M. Marcellus.
Done into English.

THIS day has put an end, O ye Senators, to the long silence I kept during our
late troubles, a silence which no apprehension of danger, but partly the
heaviness of my grief, and partly respects of modesty did oblige me to; and it
has at once given me opportunity of expressing my desires and thoughts with the
same freedom I was heretofore wont to deliver them in this Audience. For so
great an instance of Gentleness, such a rare and unheard of Clemency, that
admirable Temper, as to all points in conjunction with supreme Power, and then
so incredible besides, and almost divine Wisdom, are things too extraordinary
to be overlooked, and to pass away without any noise or notice. For M.
Marcellus being thus honorably returned to you, and to the Commonwealth, I
make full account, that not his only, but my voice, and authority also
restored unto both; for I could not choose but grieve, and be extremely
troubled, when I saw that a person of his merit, who had embarked with me in
the same interest, did not share alike with me in the same fortune; neither
could I persuade my self to appear in public, nor did it seem reasonable or
graceful, that I alone should carry on our old employment, when he, who had
set me as a pattern for imitation, he the most ingenious, and withal the most
affectionate rival of my Studies and Practice, whom I always looked upon as a
partner and companion therein, was now forcibly torn, and divorced from me. You
therefore, O Coesar, by clearing the passage to his return, have opened my way
too, and both invited me to resume the former course of my life, and given all
here a very signal encouragement to hope and believe well of the Commonwealth
in general. For my part, I did plainly perceive from your dealing with several
persons, and more sensibly in my own case, but now of late all men are
satisfied thereof, since you released Marcellus at our common instance, to the
Senate, People, and State of Rome; especially after mention of diverse things he
had said and done, which did highly disoblige and offend you; upon this the
whole World was convinced that you prefer the Authority of this House, and the
public Dignity, before any resentments or suspicions of your own. He indeed,
as well by the unanimous accord of the whole Senate, as by your most weighty
and most valuable Sentence, has to day received the highest recompense of all
his life past; from which doubtless you understand how greatly commendable this
Action is in you, when the vouchsafement does prove so glorious to him; and
certainly he may now pass for a happy man, whose particular safety has conveyed
to every one a content and pleasure, little inferior to that which he himself
will receive from it: A felicity this to which he had the clearest right, that
deservedly befell him; and with good reason; for who can pretend to surpass and
outvie him, either as to the nobleness of his Blood, the probity of his Mind,
or the study of excellent Arts, or the innocence of his Carriage, or in any
kind of worth and commendation whatsoever: There is no man living has such a
fluency of Wit, no body is master of that forcible and copious Eloquence, as
may enable him, O Coesar, either by his Tongue or Pen, I will not say, to adorn
and set off, but so much as to enumerate and recount your mavelous
achievements; yet this I maintain, and hope I may say it without offense, that
none of them has gotten you a greater reputation, than that which is the
purchase of this day. It is a thing very often in my thoughts, and which I make
the usual matter of my discourse, that all the famous exploits of our own
Generals, all the bravest actions of foreign Nations, and the most potent
States, all those memorable deeds of the most renowned Monarchs, are not able
to bear the least comparison with yours; And that, either as to the sharpness
of the Conflicts, or the number of the Battles, or the variety of Climates, or
the quickness of Dispatch, or the different nature of the Wars themselves: Nor
indeed could any one travel through the most distant Countries with the same
speed that you have run them over, I will not say by your swift Marches, but
your nimble Victories. I should be little better than distracted not to own
such performances as these to be so vast and vigorous, that scarce any man can
reach them with the motions of his Mind, or the flights of Fancy: And yet there
are other things still which in my opinion do far exceed them; for many make it
their business to abate and lessen the repute which is got in War; they will
detract from a Captain and divide part of his praise among common Soldiers,
that Commanders alone may not appropriate the honor of great services; nor can
it be denied that the valor of Soldiers, the advantages of Place, the
assistance of Allies, that Navies, Provisions, and the like, are of huge
importance in all military affairs; beside that Fortune does step in here also
for the largest share, which she challenges as a due, and whatsoever is
attended with good success, she reckons that in a manner to be all her own: But
this glory, O Coesar, you have so lately acquired, does admit none to a
partnership with you, the sum total of that, (how much soever it amounts to)
which certainly must be very great, the whole of it, I say, is entirely yours;
no Captain or Colonel, neither Infantry or Cavalry, can bring any title to
that praise, or enter into the merits it is founded on; nay, even Fortune her
self, that Lady Governess of humane things, has not the confidence to offer at
a claim and interest in this glory; she acknowledges the clearness of the case,
and gives up all to you, without the least intrenchment on so visible a right,
and your peculiar property.

And it must of necessity be thus here, since there can be no mixture or
fellowship, between rashness and prudence, nor is chance and hap-hazard ever
let into the Debates of Council.

You have subdued Nations, it is true, barbarous as to cruelty, innumerable for
multitude, and infinitely distant in places, abounding too with stores and
provisions of all sorts; but after all is said, you then overcame things that
were superable by Nature, whose very state and constitution rendered them
obnoxious to conquest; for there is no such Power in the world, nor any Forces
so great, as that none may be able to defeat and ruin them by Arms and
Puissence.

But now for any one to master his own mind, to restrain his passion, to
moderate his victory, not only to raise up a noble, a witty a valiant
adversary from his low estate, but also to enlarge and heighten his former
dignity; he that acts after this unusal and heroic rate, is a person I forbear
to rank among the worthiest Men, but resemble him rather to God himself.

The Fame then of your martial Exploits shall become a theme of Panegyric, not
for us Romans alone, but they shall employ the Orators and Historians of almost
all Nations, and pass down with celebration and applause to every Age of the
World. And yet for all the terrible noise that such adventures make, I know not
how it happens, that when people read or rehearse them to each other, they seem
to be drowned, as it were, with the shout of soldiers and the sound of
trumpets. But when we read or hear of a transaction that was managed with
clemency, with mildness, with justice, with great temper and discretion,
especially under provocation, which can hardly brook any sober counsel, and in
the midst of victory beside, that is naturally insolent and of a haughty
carriage; the business then does so mightily warm and affect us, not only in a
real case, but when the story is romantic, that very often we conceive an
inclination for those whom we never saw: But as for you, O Caesar, seeing we
behold your person, and enjoy your presence among us, when your mind and
meaning is no less visible than your aspect, since you have given us so many
demonstrations of your care and pleasure to preserve whatever the fortune of
War has left standing in the Commonwealth, what acclamations and praises, what
affectionate regards, and what testimonies of kindness do you deserve from us?
It is my opinion, and I speak it with great seriousness, that the very walls of
this venerable Court are desirous also to offer you their acknowledgments,
foreseeing as it were that the whole Senate will in a little time, recover its
ancient authority, and use it shortly here, with a freedom due unto the place,
and worthy of those Benches where they now sit. I must needs confess, when I
beheld the tears which C. Marcellus, an excellent person, and strangely fond of
his brother Marcus, shed lately before you, that a remembrance of all the
Marcelli did then come into my mind, and touch me to the quick; to whom you, O
Coesar, have restored their dignity after death by preserving Marcus, and
rescued a noble family (reduced now to a small number) from decay and ruin.
You ought therefore to value your self more, and set a higher esteem upon the
sole honor of this concession, than of all the loud and numerous Gratulations
that were ever made you; for this is the proper action and the personal merit
of Coesar only: Other things were achieved under your conduct and direction;
great services indeed those, but in which you were attended with much company,
and a mighty train of followers; whereas nothing of that appears here, you
being your own Leader at once, and retinue also, a guide and companion to your
self alone. The thing then I am speaking of, is herein hugely considerable, and
has this eminent advantage, that, when the Trophies and Monuments erected by
you shall decline, and hasten to a period, (for there is no workmanship of Art,
or effect of Industry, which old age does not impair by degrees, and finally
demolish) this justice and lenity of yours shall have a quite contrary fortune,
and the more it grows in years, become still the more fresh and flourishing; so
that how much soever any length of time may detract from the stateliness of
your Fabrics, shall certainly be added to the height of your Commendation. As
for all others that happened to be victorious in Civil Wars, you had formerly
outdone them in equity and mercy, and this day was reserved for the nobler
Conquest of your self.

I am afraid my Auditors may not so clearly and rightly apprehend what I am
going to deliver, as I conceive it in my own thoughts; now the thing I would
express is this, That you seem to have vanquished and worsted even Victory it
self, since you discharge the obnoxious, and refuse to exact those forfeitures,
which a Conqueror might fairly pretend to; for when we of the adverse party
were but so many dead men according to the Laws of Conquest, you have preserved
us all by the judgment of your clemency, So that you alone may be well termed
invincible, who have brought into subjection the very state and power of
Victory. Now inasmuch as Coesar has been pleased to pass such a sentence in our
favor, let me request the Senate to consider, what is the natural consequence
thereof, and how far it does extend; for as many of us as were driven to take
up Arms through I know not what wretched and lamentable fate of the
Commonwealth, though guilty perhaps of some humane failings, are acquitted
thereby from all imputation of wickedness; for when, upon your intercession he
condescended to spare and release Marcellus, he did at the same time restore me
to my self, and to the Roman State, and many other honorable persons to
themselves and their native soil, without the least entreaty, who now make
their appearance in great numbers, and with much splendor at this Assembly. We
must not imagine he has brought any into the Senate, whom he looks upon as
Enemies, but he rightly supposes, that ignorance and misprision, a false and
groundless fear, rather than passion and cruelty, did engage most of them to
enter into a Civil War; during the course of which, it was ever my opinion,
that we should all hearken to overtures of Peace; and I was always troubled to
observe, that not only Peace it self, but even the Discourses of those who did
propose and demand it, were still rejected by us; for I never did promote or
approve these intestine Discords, nor indeed any domestic Broils or Contests
whatsoever: my Counsels, it is well known, did incline to quietness, and sided
constantly with the Gown, but were no friends to the rattling of Arms and the
rage of Battles. I went over to Pompey, it is true, but I was drawn into his
Camp rather on a private score of my own particular engagements, than any just
consideration of the public interest; when the pure sentiments of gratitude
and an honest remembrance of past kindness had such a prevalence over me, that
not only without any eagerness of desire, but so much as the least hope of
advantage or success, I did, as it were, wittingly and knowingly precipitate my
self into a wilful overthrow. Which aim and intention of mine was not made a
secret; for I had often and earnestly spoke here, and that before ever the War
broke out, touching the means of accommodation; and, after things came to
extremity, I continued firm in the same mind, though with the manifest hazard
of my life by it. So that no body sure can be so much swayed by prejudice in
his estimate of matters, as once to question what was Coesar's inclination and
desire in reference to the War, when he presently declared himself in favor of
such as had made it their business to compose things; but gave marks of his
displeasure against all those who had pushed them on to a final rupture: which
proceeding of his would then perhaps have been less wondered at, while the event
was uncertain, and the chance of War appeared yet to be loose and dubious; but
he that, having gotten the Victory, shows a real kindness for the known
Authors of peace, does, methinks, sufficiently evidence he had rather not have
fought than overcome by fighting. And I must do Marcellus that justice to
testify thus much on his behalf, (for as our opinion did not differ in the
time of Peace, so there was the same agreement between us while the War
lasted,) How often, alas! and with what disorder of mind! have I seen him both
detest the insolence of certain men, yea and even dread, on that side, the
sierce and ungovernable spirit of victory it self: so that we, O Coesar, who
have had experience of a quite contrary temper, must needs be the more taken
with this your generous and noble usage; for now I shall compare, not the
causes themselves, but the respective victories: as for yours, we have seen it
ended with the decision of the Battle; this City has not been terrified so much
as with the sight of a naked Sword; how many soever of our friends and
relations are now missing, their loss must be imputed to the stress and havoc
of War alone, not to any heat and outrage of victory; So that there is no
question to be made, but than Coesar, if possible, would raise up many a
Pompeian from his grave, seeing he saves every one he can of the remaining Army.
As for the other Party, I shall say no more then what we were all apprehensive
of, that their Conquest would in all likelihood have proved over sharp and
violent; for some of them have been heard to threaten, not only their armed
adversaries, and the active sticklers against them, but even all the quiet and
peaceable sort, because they sat still without entering into their quarrel; and
it was given out as a Maxim with these, that no consideration should be had how
any man stood affected, but how he did dispose of his person in that
conjuncture ^ So that notwithstanding the immortal powers may have raised this
desperate and bloody War, as a punishment of our crimes, yet being either
appeased now, or even glutted at length with the Roman sufferings, they seem to
have cast the entire hope of our safety, upon the Wisdom and Clemency of such
a Conqueror.

Rejoice therefore, O Coesar, in that excellent and happy disposition of yours,
and, together with the fortune, and the glory which wait upon you, enjoy also
the benignity of your nature, and the sweetness of your deportment, which bring
in the greatest gain, and afford the most exquisite pleasure to a wise man.
Upon a survey and remembrance of all your other Achievements, though
frequently your Valor may deserve the thanks, yet for the most part they will
appear due to your great Felicity: But as often as you think of us, whom you
were pleased to indemnify and retain with you in the Commonwealth, so often
shall you think of your own incomparable benefits; then that the Ideas and
results of a Godlike bounty and sublime wisdom occur to you; which I not only
reckon to be things of a sovereign excellence, but shall venture to affirm,
that nothing is good beside, or in comparison with them. For there is that
luster and shining in deserved Praise, such a State and Majesty does flow from
true Greatness of Mind, and a sage Conduct, that these seem to be freely given
us by Virtue, but other things to be only borrowed of Fortune. Let me exhort
you then never to be tired out in your care and protection of good men, and
such especially as have been subject to slips and deviations, not through any
perverse or impetuous humor, but from an opinion of duty (which peradventure
might have weakness in it, but certainly no malice) and by some little specious
appearance of State-interest: For how could you help it, if some undiscerning
and mistrustfull people were afraid of you; but then on the contrary it makes
very much for your honor to have convinced them since, that their fears and
jealousies were without reason.

I proceed now to that grievous Complaint and heavy Suspicion of yours; to
satisfy and clear which, you cannot but be more nearly concerned your self,
than all the Citizens of Rome, and we above the rest (who stand indebted to you
for our Lives) are sollicitous and careful to provide against it; and although
I am not without hope that such a startling surmise may prove false and without
foundation, yet I shall not use any artifice here to extenuate or disguise the
matter, being well assured that the caution we take for you, is the common
security of us all; so that if I must unavoidably run into extremes, and there
be no way left to escape erring on one side or other, I had much rather,
(considering the nicety and weightiness of this case) be thought excessively
fearful in my fears, than seem the least defective in a due foresight and
providence. But who should this so furious Aggressour and desperate Assassin
be? Is he one of your own creatures? (and yet who can possibly be more yours
than such as were effectually made so, by the unexpected grant of their lives
and fortunes.) Or may I suppose him to be one of that number which followed you
to the Wars? But then it is highly incredible that any man should be so void of
understanding, or fall into such a fit of distraction, as not to prefer the
life of that General before his own, who had raised him to wealth and honor,
and the highest dignities and preferments in the Roman State.

However if your friends and dependents are alike utterly incapable of such a
cursed design, let us take care to prevent your Enemies from attempting ought
of the same barbarous and horrid nature; What enemies, I beseech you? since all
of that denomination have either lost their lives through their own obstinacy,
or else retain and enjoy them by your grace and favor; so that either you have
no enemies at all in being, or else they that survive must needs have the
greatest friendship in the world for you.

But seeing there is that close shelter and safe refuge for villainy in the
minds of men, and they have so many ways to conceal or disguise their
intentions, let us raise and heighten your supicion at the present, for by that
means we shall at once quicken your diligence and increase our own. For is
there any man living so ignorant of things? so much a stranger to our affairs?
or that takes so little thought, either about his own, or the public safety?
as not to perceive and know that his own personal security is involved in
yours, and that the lives of us all do depend on your single preservation? When
the motions of a sensible concern (which presents you continually to my mind,
and that with good reason,) do work within me. I am apt only to apprehend the
usual accidents of humanity, or the uncertain issues of health, or the common
frailties of nature; and it very much afflicts me to consider, that the
Republic, which was made for immortality, and should last always, has no other
present subsistence, but what is drawn from the breath, and lodged in the
welfare of one mortal. But now if, beside humane casualties, and the ticklish
condition of health, we are also liable to the assaults of wicked and
treacherous Conspiratours, what Guardian-Angel, do we think, let him desire it
never so much, shall be able to defend and secure the Roman Government? You, O
Coesar, and you only, are to raise and erect all you find ruinous, and which
must of necessity have been shattered and broken by the shock and violence of
the War it self; you must establish Judgment, and restore Faith, and restrain
licentiousness, and propagate a new Offspring; whatsoever is fallen in pieces,
or has slipped out of its due place, must be made up, and knit firmly together
by severe Laws. Amidst our late eager Animosities and warm Conflicts, and in
that vehement Clashing as well of Inclinations as of Arms, there was no help
for it, whoever should get the better, but that the poor shaken Republic must
infallibly lose, both several ornaments of its honor, and many supports of its
strength and firmness; and that the Leader of each party should do many things
himself in his Coat of Mail, which he would not have suffered when he wore a
Gown. Now all these gashes and contusions do expect to be closed and cured by
your hand, to which no body else can apply any healing remedy. Give me leave
therefore to declare how uneasy I was to hear you come out with that, however
worthy and wise, saying of yours, wherein we are told, that you had even lived
long enough already, either with respect to the measures of Nature, or the
stretch of Glory: Now suppose the extent of your life to have been such, if you
will needs have it so, as may suffice Nature, I shall add likewise, since it is
your pleasure to say it, as may have reached the attainment, and satisfied the
ends of a glorious reputation; but then (that which is the most considerable
point here) it appears little to us who do yet need your assistence, and falls
very short still in regard of that charitable relief, and those important
services your native Country demands from you: Wherefore I must entreat you to
lay aside all that Philosophic learning and unseasonable sageness in despising
death; do not resolve to show your self brave and prudent, at our cost, and
with the public hazard: For I am frequently informed that you too often
discourse after the old strain, and to this effect, that you have lived
sufficiently in reference to your self, and your own concerns: I do verily
believe you speak just as you think, but I should then bear it with greater
patience, did you live merely for your own sake, or if you were brought into
the World for your self only; but when the welfare and happiness of each
individual Roman, and that of the whole Community is included and wrapped up, as
it were, within the circle and compass of your Actions, you seem to be so far
from the due perfection, and signal accomplishment of your mighty works, that
you have not yet laid the very foundations you design. Will you then limit and
measure out your life, not by the rule and standard of our common good, and a
general interest, but by some plausible notions of equity, and the rare
moderation of your private sentiments? Now what if all hitherto does not prove
sufficient, even for your own glory? which all the wisdom you have cannot
possibly extinguish the thirst of, or even force you to disown the passionate
desire you have for it. But imagine, say you, I were to dye immediately, would
any man think I should leave then but a slight and slender reputation behind
me? For others, I grant, there would be a fair inheritance of glory, though
many were to share and divide the purchase; but all that treasure of fame would
be poor and incompetent for you alone: for let it be never so vast and
extensive, the thing will then seem to be little and scanty, when a larger
object appears, and there is somewhat still more ample behind it. But if this,
O Coesar, must be the end and upshot of all you have Achieved, and we are to
see no farther advantage of your immortal deeds, but that, after the defeat of
your enemies, the unhappy Republic shall be left still in that torn and
tottering condition, wherein we now find it, take care, I beseech you, lest
that undaunted Courage and divine Virtue of yours may attract perhaps more
admiration than glory: For true glory does import an illustrious and diffusive
Fame arising from great and numerous obligations, conferred either upon
Fellow-Citizens, or the whole Country where we live, or the Universal Body of
Mankind.

This therefore is the last honor reserved for you, this is the remaining part
you are now to act; herein you must bestir your self, and proceed vigorously to
order and compose things, to fix and rivet the Commonwealth; and when it is
settled in the first place, you may then take and enjoy your own ease, and
repose your self in the sweetest pleasures of a deep tranquillity: after you
have quitted all scores with your Country, and glutted Nature as it were with
a long and various entertainment of Life; then, I say, you shall have our free
consent to declare, if you be so minded, that you have enough of this World,
and are even surfeited with living.

But to talk of any long while in describing our continuance here, is a fond
and idle impropriety; for what is this very length we speak of, which has a
close and period? and, when that is come, all the foregoing pleasure ought to
pass for nothing, because there will be none left to succeed it. Albeit that
active and spacious Soul of yours could never acquiesce or contain it self
within the narrow bounds which Nature has prescribed us, but was always
inflamed by the love, and big with the conceit of Immortality: Nor indeed can
this deserve to be reckoned for your life, which depends upon the body, and is
kept up by a little transient breath; that, I say, is your proper subsistence,
that only, O Coesar, is a life worthy of you, which shall flourish in the
memory of all ages, which they that come after us will successively cherish and
maintain, which Eternity it self will have an endless regard to, and shall
support for ever.

This is it you must consecrate your labors and travels to, and to this you
must evidence what a gallant person you are, how much you are able and willing
to do for its sake and service. We discern many things already in the glorious
courses you pursue, which excite our wonder, but we now look for such as may
deserve our commendation. It will be matter of astonishment to all future
generations, when they shall read and hear of the charges you have born, the
Provinces you have subdued, and what has been done by you in Germany, in the
Ocean, and in Egypt; the perusal and report, I say, of your Battles without
number, of your Victories above belief, of all your Trophies and Triumphs,
shall questionless amaze and confound posterity: but unless this imperial City
shall, by your authority and contrivance, be immovably pitched upon a solid
bottom', your great and formidable Name then will only shift and wander about
the World, but have no certain abode, nor any settled habitation. And as we our
selves have been of different minds, so will there be a great dissension among
those that shall be born hereafter; when some shall cry up and extol your
Achievements to the very Skies, while others may perhaps fansy them to be very
lame and imperfect, as wanting their chief complement and luster, if you do not
effectually provide, that the late blustering storms may expire at length into
a calm of peace, and the settlement of your Country: so that the former may be
thought a kind of fatal necessity, but the latter seem to proceed from design
and counsel. Recommend therefore and approve your self to those Judges, that
shall pronounce of your Actions a thousand years hence, and, for ought I can
tell, may give a more impartial sentence than we do at present; for their
judgment will be equally void both of favor and prejudice, neither shall envy
or hatred have any force to bias and corrupt them: And although this remote
censure of theirs should not any way touch or affect you then (as some falsely
imagine) however it concerns you now at least, so wisely and worthily to demean
your self, and appear one of such a character and credit, that no revolution of
time, no forgetfulness of men, no ignorance of any age may ever obliterate or
eclipse your Praises.

From the very beginning of those unhappy Disputes, we Romans had our
sentiments apart, and our wits divided; and the little janglings of thought and
affection hurried us at length into several Camps, and armed defiances of each
other: Nor is it much to be wondered we should draw different ways, under such
puzzling and perplexed circumstances, while things were so much in the dark,
and when a controversy arose between two of the most famous Captains in the
World.

Many did then deliberate what was absolutely the best, and not a few consider,
what was best for themselves; some were demurring on the point of Decency, and
others taken up with the Case of Conscience.

The Republic, in fine, after much struggling, has got her self clear of this
so miserable and fatal War, and he prevailed at last, who would not raise and
ruffle his displeasure by success, but rather qualify and soften it by
goodness; nor could he value provocations at such a dreadful rate, as to mark
out all that should offend him either for death or banishment.

The matter is now brought unto this issue, that some have laid down their Arms
of their own accord, and others have been forced to surrender them. Whosoever
then, being freely discharged from the guilt and peril of former opposition,
does still retain hostility in his heart, is highly chargeable with ingratitude
and injustice; and I look upon him to be much a better man, who appeared in the
field, and was slain fighting against you, than any one that shall now keep up
the quarrel, and spend his last breath in the prosecution of it: for that which
is thought mere obstinacy and a stubborn stifness by some, may pass for brave
resolution, and a noble constancy with others.

But seeing we have been well beaten into some kind of agreement, and all our
heats and heart-burnings are now totally extinguished by those temperate and
cooling applications of the Victour's kindness, it remains that every one of
us, who has either a grain of discretion, or even of common sense, should
unanimously agree as to your particular. For unless you, O Coesar, do continue
safe, and in the same mind (which as well heretofore, as to day especially you
have given proofs of) we are all utterly undone, and must inevitably perish:
All of us therefore, who desire the preservation of this Empire, do at once
earnestly exhort, and most humbly beseech you to have a care of your Life, and
to consult your Safety: And forasmuch as you conceive there is some treachery
on foot, and a secret mischief designed you, which requires caution, we all
here with one consent (for I presume that of others which I mean my self) do
not only promise to have a watchful eye, and keep a close guard about your
person, but we offer you our own attendance beside, as ready to interpose
betwixt you and danger, and even to hazard our lives for your defense and
security.

And now to close up all with gratulation, as I took my rise from it, we do
all, O Coesar, return you our greatest thanks and acknowledgments, with a
reservation of greater still than we are able to express; for all here have the
same sentiments, as you might easily perceive by the joint supplications and
tears of all: but because it is no way requisite that every one present should
make you his single complement, they were extreme desirous that I at least
would undertake it in the name of all; who do now ly under some kind of
necessity to perform it, because it is both their pleasure I should, and
because, upon your restoring Marcellus to the Senate, and the People, and the
whole State of Rome, I find my self particularly concerned to discharge that
duty: for I observe this vouchsafement of yours has given such a public
satisfaction, as if men did not rejoice now at the private deliverance of one
person alone, but were transported with joy for their own common safety. If
therefore, while there was the least question of his safety, I acted the part
of a true friend toward Marcellus (as my affection for him was very well known,
wherein I scarce yielded to his dear Caius, the best natured brother in the
World, but to no man living besides him) if, I say, that singular kindness of
mine did appear then, by the solicitude, and care, and industry I showed on his
behalf, much more, undoubtedly, at this time, being newly freed from the weight
of those troubles and perplexities, ought I to attest and evidence the
good will I bear him.

Wherefore I leave you, O Caesar, to imagine the deep and lively resentments I
feel within me, desiring you would so interpret my thanks, as I understand the
favor, which I do to such a degree of obligation, that although you have with
all tenderness and respect, not only preserved my life, but taken care of my
honor, yet by this action of yours (a thing which after that I thought wholly
impossible) there is an infinite addition made to the many signal engagements
you had heaped upon me.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO THE TRANSLATION OF TULLY's Panegyric on JULIUS CAESAR FOR His
Restoration of M. MARCELLUS, Relating to the Prince of Orange.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

AN APPENDIX TO THE TRANSLATION OF TVLLY's Panegyric on JVLIVS CAESAR FOR His
Restoration of M. MARCELLVS, Relating to the Prince of Orange.
HE, who had ventured Cicero to translate,
Would needs attempt your deeds to celebrate.
But when his fancy faded as it wrought
On that bold task, at length he wisely thought,
This Gratulation put in English dress
Might do the thing perhaps with more success;
Since all now justly would apply to you,
What once that Speaker made his Coesar's due;
Though Coesar's business it of old did seem
All to enslave, while yours is to redeem.
If him such thanks the Orator does give,
At most, for letting one Marcellus live,
How would his raptured Language you adore,
Who to three Kingdoms a new life restore;
And that Peace, Order, Unity, Effect,
He from his Master vainly did expect:
So that all here was a Prophetic praise,
Wrapped darkly up in Latin till our days,
And its true meaning now in you displays.
That then, with our Addresses, he may free,
His highborn sense from servile flattery;
For Panegyric, that he may not range,
Let him have you for Julius in exchange;
His matter else his rhetoric will not fit,
He wants our subject, and we want his wit,
Yours is the likeness though another sit.
Yet after his inimitable hand,
Still the resemblance does imperfect stand;
To finish and adorn his piece, he drew
All that was lovely then, and all he knew;
But you such grace add to the Hero's air,
And make his character so wondrous fair,
That all Idea's they could raise of old,
The strokes of mast'ry that were counted bold,
And all their painting to the life long since,
Would now look flat and dead about the Prince.
However had he been preserved by fate,
To see the marvels of this Eighty eight,
And their great Author to congratulate,
He might the weighty Argument sustain,
Which we bend under, and support with pain.
And when he came to touch, above the rest,
That noble part, the sake and interest
Of sacred justice, and of truth divine,
Which gave the rise and spring to your design,
What lightenings would he dart to make it shine?
Were he a constancy to represent,
Confirmed by danger and discouragement,
Which difficulties and disasters whet,
By obstacles and cross winds forward set;
Then would he proudly in tost's Eloquence swim,
Bear up, and strain the cordage of each limb;
So would his style engage and force the storm,
That you might feel him speak what you perform.
After the Mental, having next surveyed
The Naval preparations you had made,
Seen what a joyful terror spoon'd away,
All fraighted with deliverance for Torbay,
Here with that tide and torrent he would go,
And sails so stretched, that you should hardly know
Whether as yet you were a shore, or no:
Like your own Frigates, this would all along
Fire at his Eyes, and thunder in his Tongue.
When all was ready for a fair descent,
He would, like Archimedes, ways invent,
How by once setting foot on English ground,
You the whole Land should move, and turn it round.
As against public force the Orbs above
Wheel by the bias of a private love;
As Loadstones Iron, as Jet and Amber Straw,
Things different with like fondness to 'em draw,
You should light hearts, and heavy steel attract,
By virtue of the Cause for which you act.
With Langston, Cornbury, starting for the race,
Our eager Troops should gallop on apace,
Not Enemies to wound, but Friends embrace:
And your slow march should more retarded be
By crowds, which their Preserver came to see,
Then Western passages, or fallen rains,
Or the redoubted Camp on Salisbury Plains.
His Oratory, where the cause did fail,
Should over Zeal and Hatred so prevail,
So Wildness, Rage, and every passion charm,
That Teague himself would scarce intend you harm.
Thus would he lead along your peaceful course,
Not stopped but guarded by our armed Force.
The War begins not till you come to Town,
And chiefly there attacks the treacherous Gown.
Then all his powers had mustered to invade
Such as their Faith, or Country had betrayed:
Wem, Sunderland, and Talgol, should have been,
His Clodius, Antony, and Catalin;
Those Criminals and Felons of the Bench,
Who the strong Bars of liberty did wrench,
With that forged Engine of Dispensing Power,
(Which, feeding them, did all beside devour)
He to the Bar of Aeacus would Cite,
That for themselves, at least, they might have right:
Or Old Lawgivers Ghosts would make appear,
To terrify our New Law-sellers here.
Rattling the Magna Charta, they should come,
As dreadful as Mompesson's midnight drum.
Among the Jugglers, struck with that surprise
Penn should his Hat pull off, and all disguise,
And quake in earnest, when he saw 'em rise.
Proud Hales, that Lawful things abhorred so much,
As to leave Church, and Wife, for being such,
Pale at the sight, should cry like Balaam's Ass,
My Obadiah no true Prophet was.
Where Is now the Tower? the Babel we had built,
To raise our name, and to secure our guilt.
A noise of Truth, Sense, Justice, fills the Land,
Strange words our daubers do not understand,
But sneak away with Trowels in their hand.
Then regulating Vermin would, like Moles,
Or timorous Conies, creep into their holes,
But should no shelter, or protection find
Within the Buroughs they had undermined.
Despair, Amazement, Horror, he would bring,
Bombs, Furies, Vipers, among Villains fling,
Their Breasts to tear, and Consciences to sting.
At Axes, and at Halters, they might smile,
Whose quick dispatches Justice do beguile,
But should his Charge, which ever will be read,
His lashing of their Memory, when dead,
As an eternal Execution dread.
And when these wretches had received their doom,
His Flowers and Ornaments he would resume;
To you return all pompous, and all gay,
Who Hydra's, which the Realm envenom, slay;
He should you term our Hercules, who fight
With Monsters, and a Juno's deadly spite;
Who, Atlas being withdrawn, approach the Court,
Which first a Heaven you make, and then support.
How would his Genius here, and Skill combine!
Strong mix with sweet, and forcible with fine;
The powers of Nature, and the rules of Art,
Should be employed, and work in every part.
His Reaches, Figures, Beauties, all come forth,
To shape an Image which might hold your worth;
All that is Great, Good, Blessed, Excellent,
Should in one single Character be spent;
And melted, like Corinthian metal, take
The sacred form that would your Statue make.
Since for our rescue, you did means provide,
None else could use, durst offer at beside;
Whatever none could say, or think, but he,
That, to your Highness, should appropriate be;
You, the rich Thanks, full Elogy, should have,
(Who better things, and with more brav'ry save)
Which, to himself the grateful Consul gave.
And when our last acknowledgments were over,
He would attend you with his Vows to Dover,
Wishing that France may find you in the end,
Just such a Foe, as England has a Friend.
For though you have already more Achieved,
Than will in after Ages be believed,
Tho all admire, some envy, we applaud,
That Courage which has Rome, and Caesar awed;
Yet neither you, nor we, can rest content,
With our own Safety, Ease, and Settlement;
These goods must scatter like the vital Air,
And with our Isle, the Continent must share;
As the World's light from Delos took his birth,
Then suddenly illustrated the Earth.
Others to you appeal, your Arms invite,
In Worthies all the injured have a right.
For greater things you seem by Heaven designed,
With that Just, Active, Universal Mind,
Which thinks naught done, when there is more behind,
While there are any that oppress Mankind.
You carry, Sir, a double conquering Name,
And to each part you owe its proper fame;
The William has been satisfied, it is true,
Whenas your kind Invasion did subdue;
But Henry calls your late succesfull hand
To plant fresh Laurels on a neighboring Land;
And that the Prince may with good Omens march,
There stands by Orange a triumphal Arch:
Marius the brave did that erect, and you,
Both by the Spirit Masculine you show,
And by your Female half are Marius too.
Beside, we Bards, the wonder of this Age,
And you, discry in old poetic rage;
Behold the laboring Sibyl how she heaves,
Plucks from a golden bough her sweet green leaves,
To which she does commit this unripe sense,
Of a mysterious distant Providence.
Another young Augustus I espy,
Arisig from the womb of Destiny;
In whose triumphant and auspicious Reign
The great Messiah shall be born again;
Live he, and truth, for ever then in spite
Of miter'd subtilty and crowned might;
Though blustering Herod, and the cross High Priest,
Should, for their ruin, be together piec'd;
But while vain Franchises set them at odds,
This generous youth shall from their slavish rods
Set Nations free, and from their knavish gods.
The Druids too have wrote in fatal Oak,
Of one should break the European yoke,
Confine the Lillies that abroad do roam,
And for their living make 'em spin at home.
That fatal Oak was split, but since it meets
Now by conjunction of the D. E. Fleets,
This Oracle is plain to every sight,
And Lewis scares, being read in open light,
As Mean Tekel did Belshazzar fright.
Nay their Pucelle, and famous Nostradame,
Have strange inspired Sayings much the same;
Obscure at first, but late events of time
Interpret all the ridlings of their rhyme.
When the Welsh Mountains lie-in of a Mouse,
Which, with old Rats, shall quit the falling House;
When Albion's Sun arises in the West,
And Wolves to suckle Romulus are pressed;
When Pais Bas shall be no longer low,
When Britain shall be won without a foe,
Let Gallia then beware a Mortal blow.
Whenever a Tree, whose fruit the Dragon keeps,
(And that keeps him from any quiet sleeps)
Shall to the Wood give wings, and with it fly,
Where Neptune, that sure Protestant Allie,
The Union spoils of Cousin L. and J.
Dragon, look to it, there is something in the wind
Worse than the Fistula in your Tail behind.
^^ Louis Le Grand, that is the monstrous Cheat,
Who has so long, so falsely past for great,
You must detect, and prove him counterfeit.
Whose only fighting metal is his Gold,
And Victories, Towns, or Princes basely sold;
The Hardship, Hazard, Stress of real War,
Are things he only hears of from afar;
But if there has been trucking, or the like,
He comes, his bargain, not his foe to strike.
Whose faith is fraud, and his most Christian works,
Advice, and Bribes, and Succor to the Turks:
Thy Edict, Nants, now Interdict, that shows,
This the betrayed, attackt Vienna knows.
He always has pretensions on the weak,
As bound all Covenants with them to break;
The Gordian knot of Articles in words,
If not by tricks untied, is cut by Swords.
His thoughts are troubled, and his rest does cease,
While Neighbors quiet, or the World has peace;
Nor Harp, nor Tabor can remove his fits,
Then Saul complains in Council as he sits.
No falsehood? no perfidious part to play?
No mischief done? Friends, we have lost the day.
O scandalous! how people live at ease!
Go, let a Fever upon Europe seize,
It is the only cure for my disease.
There let each paroxysm have its turn,
The Peasant tremble, and the Village burn:
What an indignity! when I am near,
For any to be safe, or without fear:
This horrid insolence I must chastise,
Wherein the highest provocation lies,
Who thinks himself secure, does me despise.
As if the Majesty of Nost' Plaisir
Could be tied up by Truce till such a year,
As if I were not able to subvert
What paltry States and Lordlings make so pert;
Or else I would not, with fierce Ottoman,
Render as many wretched as I can:
When, save my self, it is my great bliss and pride
To see no happy, or proud thing beside,
The wings we clipped are grown, behold! how soon
That Eagle mounts, and soars above the Moon;
Let him be humbled to the state before,
Until the Crescent has new horns to gore.
Against the Palatine our Troops employ,
A petty right, not mine, he does enjoy,
Nor were it worth the while him to annoy,
But for that royal pleasure to destroy.
Then Furstenburg the Traitor, but our Slave,
Does to weak titles strong protection crave,
Bid Baviere, Pope, Emperor, begone,
For those three Kings of Cologne, I Will make one.
Let Humieres make haste the Dutch to plague,
And fetch their Hannibal to defend his Hague;
By Cannons on the Rhine my will rehearse,
That the confed'rate Rabble should disperse,
Tell the old Jethro, that is grown a Child,
Squabbling for toys, if he would be reconciled,
Now is his time, or else to all intents
He Will find a Herod for the Innocents.
The English above all my patience urge,
Those Heretics with Scorpions I would scourge,
But, since the Sea will not let me thither skip,
That, in their stead, like Xerxes, I must whip.
If there be more, as yet not overrun,
Let 'em together meet and be undone;
Defiance we to all at once declare,
And bait, for pastime, the whole Northern Bear.
It was too mean to deal in Contributions,
And little military Executions;
Banditi, Tory's, Highway-men live thus,
There are more stately mischiefs left for us;
Great and small villainy has a different vogue,
That constitutes a Lewis, this a Rogue.
For slighter evils, and for partial woes,
For piecemeal havoc upon single foes,
When Countries, Kings, Worlds, should be overthrown,
Now, by their total ruin, I Will atone;
Pardon me, Soverign Honor, that so late
This Victim to thy Shrine I consecrate.
So spoke the Lucifer of France, and fell
With armed Fiends straight to enlarge his hell;
For thraldom, suffering, want, despair and grief,
And desolation reign where he is chief.
From Antichrist let Nero's name be freed,
Here Is an Heroic Beelzebub indeed;
Who having Cities, Blood, and Treasure wrung,
Then causes a Se Deum to be sung:
Of all destructive Powers, the Earth scarce had one,
Like this strange King Apollyon and Abaddon.
New Tyrants lessening still their rights and wealth,
A Syracusian Dame wished Denis health,
A Successor more ravenous to prevent,
But now might save her witty Complement;
The present Denis cannot leave a worse,
T'improve Oppression and the public Curse.
St. Denis did not supererogate
So much in works of love, as he of late
In mortal crimes, and more than mortal hate.
His needless slaughters, and superfl'ous wast,
Oaths, Temples, Consciences by him defaced,
His uncommanded frankness to infest,
Ills done, no other Satan could suggest,
With a vast treasure of such vile demerits,
Might serve to damn an host of blessed spirits.
Yet for such feats as these his frantic crown,
Is blown with bubbled thoughts of high renown;
And all are charged who write his huffing Story,
To hoop it well, for fear it burst with glory;
Glory, the La Valiere, that does cajoll,
And tickle the lewd passions of his Soul;
That glory you shall make the chastest Nun,
And veil her from the rapes of this hot Sun.
If he has Deeds to bring of any sort,
That ever were enrolled in Honor's Court,
Let him his Proofs alledg, his Claims produce,
His Services attest, and show his Use;
We'll set the fair Particulars to account,
See to what sum of glory they amount;
As yet, he seems to have obliged men,
As Earthquakes Naples, and Seas Groningen.
If Glory be a large, illustrious Fame,
That spreads and recommends a worthy Name,
For great and numerous obligations laid
On our own first, thence to the World conveyed;
Then, Monfieur has not only torn away;
Your Principality, as lawful prey,
But robs you too, if glorious he would be,
Of your best right, and dearest property;
Though that of your revenue is a part,
He cannot strain by force, or steal by art,
Till he can storm the mind, or win the heart.
All Votes, and Nature's everlasting Laws,
Have settled his reproach, and your applause.
A Fortune this you legally inherit
By ancient Records of your House's merit;
The Title (and such Titles sure are good)
Runs from the first conveyance of your blood,
Which clear, and undisputed still has stood.
No interruption, failure, crack, or flaw,
Is in the Line, or Claim of Great Nassaw:
A Name beloved and reverenced by all,
Which their delight and blessing men do call;
Whose Honor to proclaim the World agrees,
In solemn Judgments, and by firm Decrees:
A Family our Kings so much respect,
And which the Royal Virgins so affect,
That, till their suit is heard, and they obtain,
All other Princes court, and sigh in vain:
Happy Pretenders still, and richly sped,
With England's Daughters, who the Nation wed;
Of their repute, of them we are so fond,
Our hearts are twisted in the Nuptial bond.
What could be wished a person more to grace,
Than to be sprung of that Renowned Race?
And should naught else your Ancestors commend,
It were enough that you from them descend,
So each their mutual illustrations lend.
For to old deeds in former Ages shown,
You add authentic Ev'dence of your own;
The sparkling History of your Life is it,
An instrument so fresh, so fairly writ,
So well attested to our present sense,
He must be blind that questions your pretense.
That glittering of your Predecessors praise,
The tracks of light which shone about their ways,
Yield to the rising of your stronger rays.
The entailed estate of glory you derive,
As your self grew, prodigiously did thrive;
And Providence your labor so does bless,
The heritage, is, than the purchase, less.
The Bank of fame does with your stock so teem,
You might, by your sole virtue and esteem,
The age from Vice and Infamy redeem.
But though your actions give a real draught,
Of what before was but described by thought,
Though fancied excellencies all prove true,
The Cyrus and the Trajan breath in you;
Yet when your minds on this dear Object fix,
Grief does with joy, and pain with pleasure mix;
For qualities, which should immortal be,
Lodged in one breast, and mortal that we see:
Truth, Wisdom, Goodness, with our frailty joined,
A godlike shape on earthly matter coined;
These put our twins of passion at a strife,
Divine perfections, but a humane life:
We hope, we fear, we are, and are not pleased,
We have enough, yet the desire not eased:
From past mishaps, much love and great concern,
The worst of chance to apprehend, we learn;
When we count farthest, and the best suppose,
A coming period, and a final close,
The present sense of our enjoyments doze.
It Is an allay to all the Phrygian joy,
That Hector only is the prop of Troy.
When you have spent your glorious days, and ly
Embalmed in aromatic memory;
Who shall the Rights of Christendom secure?
Or make the benefits you leave endure?
Where Is he that can to such a pattern stretch?
And you to life by imitation fetch?
That worthiness may not decline, and fall
From the raised pitch of your Original:
Heaven did not sure its care and cost bestow,
In polishing a bright Example so,
That things, which our capacity transcend,
Should both begin with you, and have an end:
As a new Star a while is seen to blaze,
And then forsake beholders as they gaze.
These miracles of Nature, and of Grace,
Were not intended for a little space;
Short happiness is but a lightsome trance,
Experiment, without continuance,
Of bliss it self, does misery enhance.
But you our appetites have set on edge,
Not as a taste, but as of more a pledge;
More like your self, close causes are agreed
And, when we little think, the chosen seed
Invisible posterity does breed.
The world will want'em, and there must be some,
(Though Isaac's may be long before they come)
To take the copy, and to fill your room.
This is locked up as yet in dark reserve,
That we such grace may study to deserve;
As the last favor this, the sole, the great,
Must your and our felicity complete:
This we believe, and beg; now faith and prayers,
(So with the trusting, and devout it fares)
Are of known virtue for producing Heirs:
A starry Offspring, that may rise in throngs,
And happily revenge their Grandsires wrongs;
That as you have your Fathers, in a run
Of Nobleness and Gallantry, out done,
So you may be, by many and many a Son.
Page 13. lin. 4. for Whenas read When us.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
HEnrici Mori Cantabrigiensis Opera Omnia, tum quae Latin, tum quoe Anglice
scripta sunt; nunc vero Latinitate Donata, Instigatu and Impensis Generosissimi
Juvenis Johannis Kockshuti Nobilis Angli. In three Volumes in Folio.

Telluris Theoria Sacra: Orbis nostri Originem and Mutationes Generales, quas
aut jam subiit, aut olim subiturus est, complectens. Libri duo priores de
Diluvio and Paradiso.

Telluris Theoria Sacra: Orbis nostri Originem and Mutationes Generales, quas
aut jam subiit, aut olim subiturus est complectens. Libri duo posteriores de
Conflagratione Mundi, and de Futuro Rerum Statu.

Apocalypsis Apocalypseos; Or the Revelation of St. John the Divine unveiled:
containing a brief but perspicuous and continued Exposition from Chapter to
Chapter, and from Verse to Verse, of the whole Book of the Apocalypse.

A plain and continued Exposition of the several Prophecies or Divine Visions
of the Prophet Daniel, which have or may concern the People of God, whether Jew
or Christian; whereunto is annexed a threefold Appendage, touching three main
points, the first relating to Daniel, the other two to the Apocalypse.

An Answer to several Remarks upon Dr. Henry More his Expositions of the
Apocalypse and Daniel? as also upon his Apology: Written by S. E. Mennonite,
and published in English by the Answerer: whereunto are annexed two small
pieces, Arithmetica Apocalyptica, and Appendicula Apocalyptica. Of all which an
account is given in the Preface.

An Illustration of those two abstruse Books in holy Scripture, the Book of
Daniel and the Revelation of S. John; by continued, brief, but clear Notes,
from Chapter to Chapter, and from Verse to Verse, with very useful and
apposite arguments prefixed to each Chapter, framed out of the Expositions of
Dr. H. More.

Paralipomena Prophetica, several Supplements and Defenses of Dr. Henry More
his Expositions of the Prophet Daniel and the Apocalypse, Whereunto is added
Phililicrines upon R. B. his Notes on the Revelation of St. John.

Tetractys Anti-Astrologica, or, the four Chapters in the Explanation of the
grand Mystery of Godliness, which contain a brief, but solid confutation of
Judiciary Astrology, with Annotations upon each Chapter; wherein the wondrous
weaknesses of John Butler, B. D. his Answer called a Vindication of Astrology,
etc. are laid open to the view of every Intelligent Reader. All six written by
the Reverend and Learned Henry More, D. D. since the publication of his Latin
Works.

Dr. Henry More's brief Reply to a late Answer to his Antidote against
Idolatry, etc.

Dr. Falkner's Libertas Ecclesiastica: or a Discourse vindicating the
lawfulness of those things, which are chiefly excepted against in the Church of
Eng. especially in its Liturgy and Worship, etc.

-- 's Vindication of Liturgies, etc.

-- 's Christian Loyalty, etc.

Jovian, or an Answer to Julian the Apostate.

Plato's Doemon, or the State-physician unmasked, in Answer to Plato Redivivus,
by T. Goddard, Esquire

Ampraldus's Discourse of divine Dreams.

Some opinions of Mr. Hobs considered, etc.

A Dialogue between Philiater and Momus, concerning a scandalous Pamphlet,
called the conclave of Physicians.

The Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man, etc.

Religion the Perfection of Man.

Roman Catholics uncertain whether there be any true Priests or Sacraments in
the Church of Rome.


