CICERO'S Three Books Touching the NATURE OF THE GODS Done into English; WITH
NOTES, AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

Setting forth, (from All Antiquity,) What Perceptions, Man, by the Only Light
of Reason, may Entertein, concerning a Deity!

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Black Bull, in Cornhill. 1683.

SENECA'S MORALS.
Lately printed for Joseph Hindmarsh.

THE PREFACE, TO THE READER.
AFTER Tully's Parts, An Introduction to Tully's Treatises touching the Nature
of the Gods.
and Good Fortune, had, from a Low Beginning in Rome, advanced him to the
Highest Honors, and Offices of the Commonwealth; and that, by Caesar's
Usurpations upon the Public, there was no longer place, either in the Senate,
or the Hall, for the Art he had made so much his Study, and Whereof, his
Orations in behalf of M. Marcellus, King Dejotarus, and Q. Ligarius, (most
grateful to the Palate of every Reader,) Had before Caesar himself, show he
was a very great Master: A Letter of his, to Sulpitius, witnesses, that he
betook himself wholly to, the Common Consolation of Wise Men in Distress,
Philosophy. Now, having copiously and elegantly Discoursed the Other Branches
Hereof, in his Hortensius, his Academical, and Tusculan Questions; as also, his
Tracts upon the Ends of Goods and Ills, touching a Republique, Laws, Offices,
and the Rest of this Argument: He, at length, with an Industry suitable to the
Divineness of the Purpose, and Difficulty of the Work, set upon Searching into,
the most Religious and Sacred Part of Philosophy, the Nature of the Godhead.
And indeed, it can never be enough admired, that a Common Man, amids such a
Cloud of Errors Opposite one to another, and the thick Darknesses of a
benighted Ignorance, should have the sharpness of Wit so subtly to pierce into,
luckily Comprehend, and in so clear and lofty a Style Deliver such a Number of
Refined, and Recondite Notions concerning a Deity. For, what Sublime and
Arduous thing ever was, (or was possible to have been) excogitated by the most
Sagacious, concerning the Divine Nature; that the Eloquent Oratour-Philosopher
has not hit upon, explained, and set off with its Proper Graces and Ornaments?

An Encomiastic Synopsis of them.
In the First Book, there seems not to have been That Opinion of any one Wise
Man, concerning God, which he has not fetched out of the Schools of Ancient
Philosophy, and declared to the Roman Academy. Then, for Epicurus's Doctrine,
of what kind soever, whether Fleeting in his Light and Invisible Atoms, or yet
in his Shadowy and Pellucid Deities, he so Fixes, Confirms, and as it were
Consolidates it, that one would think it were able to stand by it self: By and
By, so Explodes and Extenuates it, that it may be hissed by Boys even beyond
those very Innumera-Worlds, that Epicurus (sleeping) phansi'd to himself. And
for his Blessed and Eternal Nature, though neither Doing, nor Intending ought at
all, for fear of being tired; This Fortunate Mormoe of a Divine Nature (I say)
does he so incessantly teaze and perplex, as not to let it have the least
particle, or moment of Happy Quiet. To the Second Book; the Dignity, Gravity,
Elegance; the Manifold, even Infinite Learning of it; and the Religious, almost
Christian Theology of the Stoiques, can no Words be Equal: Though, if it be
possible for me in the least to advantage it, by a Commendation, the proper
place will be, to bring That in as a Preamble to the Book it self. But, I hear
Complaints, and allow the Justice of them. The same Nimble, and Shifting
Proteus, according to the Academical Way, and Wit, in the Third Book, tears up
by the very Roots that Magnificent Temple, by the Hand of the Stoique, in the
Second, erected to the Divinity; and utterly extinguishes and destroys all
Sense as well of True Religion as of False, by a Wretched, Licentious
Volubility of Tongue. I cannot but acknowledge that he stands Convicted by his
own Pen: And He is not upon any account to be Cleared, that has pronounced
Sentence upon himself; By affirming it a (...) of ^t (...)
Lewd, an Impious Custom to Dispute against the Gods, be it either in Jest or
Earnest. But, the Temerity has already felt some degree of Punishment; the
Production being Maimed, and as it were Cut off, not so much by the Injury of
Time, perhaps, as a Just Judgment of the Offended Deity: Beside that, Tully
himself was so well Resolved, as, in the Conclusion of so long a Concertation,
to incline to the Side of the Divinity.

Preliminary Considerations,
But, to omit Unnecessary Encomiums of a Great Work, and an Author Celebrated
in Volumes, and Ages; I come (to what may be more seasonable, and expected,) to
Premise a few Generals, (the Author, the Argument, the Dedication, the
Distribution, the Style of these Books, the Persons of the Dialogue, the
Auditors, the Place, and (lastly) the Time of holding the Disputation,) that I
hope will be of Common Light to the Whole Discourse.

As for the Author Touching the Author of them.
(then) of these Tracts; 'twas undoubtedly Marcus Tullius Cicero: A Name Famous
all the Roman (and other Parts of the) World over; and that, in the Present
Age, by perpetual Reading becomes every day more Illustrious than other, and
grows brighter and brighter, as it were, by Using. Plutarch, among Ancient, and
Lambin of Modern Writers, have spoken at large concerning Cicero.

The Argument The Title, and Argument.
is, the Nature of the Godhead. By Nature, in this place, I understand not
barely what Philosophers term Essence: But, all Proprieties that flow Thence,
as from a Fountain; all Qualities, (as they name them,) and whatever happens to
the Deity Extrinsecally, and is done to his Honor, as Temples, Sacrifices,
Ceremonies, in a word the Whole Body of Religion; all These (I say) does not my
self only, but even Tully, (in Sect. 14. of the First Book,) declare to be
Comprehended under This Title of the Nature of the Gods.

The Dedication The Address, or Dedication^
of them is, to Marcus Brutus; of the Junian Family, Noble amongst the Romans,
and that produced Lucius Junius, (the First Asserter of the Roman Liberty,)
who, upon account of the Stollidity he prudently counterfeited, for fear of
Tarquinius Superbus, had the Surname of Brutus affixt to him; his Posterity
retaining it: Of which, was the Marcus in Question, a Man of Wisdom, and
Courage, as Cicero, his Intimate Friend, testifies. But yet, at the time our
Theologue was searching into the Nature of the Immortal Gods, He was plotting
the Death of Caesar; which, with the rest of the Conspiratours, he effected, in
the midst of the Senate House, and so, set the first step to his own; for,
being sometime after vanquished in the Plains of Thessaly by Octavius, and
Anthony, out of a False Bravery, lest he should fall into Their Hands, he
killed himself; Thus, preventing the Triumph, and Mockeries of his Enemies, and
offering up his Free Blood for the Liberty of his Country.

The Whole Work The Distribution of the Whole Work.
is Divided only into Three Books. In the First, Velleius Raises an Argument
concerning the Deity, according to the Philosophy of Epicurus; and, is
Confuted, by Cotta: In the Second, Balbus Disputes notably touching the Nature
of the Gods, persuant to the Doctrine of the Stoiques, and more especially for
a Providence: And, in the Third, the same Cotta that had Refell'd Velleius
before, attempts again to Answer Balbus.

The Style and Expression The Style, and Expression.
of These Books, is not Rude, and Unelegant, (as that of Philosophers for the
most part uses to be;) but Smooth, Free, altogether becoming an Orator and
Philosopher both under one, and accommodate to the Manners of the Accomplished
Gentlemen that Tully, in a Form of Dialogue, has here Introduced Discoursing
amongst themselves.

The Persons of the Dialogue.
The Menagers of the Dispute are, Caius Cotta, High Priest by Office, and, of
Heresy, an Academique: Caius Velleius, of the Senatorian Order, and, by Sect,
an Epicurean: Quintus Lucilius Balbus, by Discipline, a Stoique: All Romans
Born.

The Auditors.
Marcus, out of Modesty, Personates only an Auditour; tho, in very Deed, he was
the Doctor.

The Time And Lastly, the Time of holding the Dispute.
was also very Opportune; it being the Latin Festivals: Which I shall speak to,
By and By.

But, more Particularly upon the First Book; A more Particular Division of the
First Book.
it may be Divided into Three Parts. In the First, (almost to the Bottom of p.
10.) Cicero premises certain things, that may serve as a Preface to the Whole
Work: In the Second, (even to the End of page 31.) Velleius, (an Epicurean,)
after he has Rejected the Opinions of all Other Philosophers, delivers the
Placits of Epicurus concerning the Divinity, and highly applauds them: And
then, in the Third, (the rest of the Book,) Cotta, (of the Academy,) utterly
overthrows the Doctrine of Epicurus, touching the Nature of the Gods, thus set
up by Vell^ius.

Now, The Me^^od, Observed by the Translat^r, in his Exposi^ions,
Illustrations, etc.
since it seems not only proper to the Exposition of an Author, but, also to
Engage the Mind, and Attention of the Reader, to prefix the Contents of each
Section of the Treatise; under Examination; It shall be my First Care to do
This, in a Smaller Character, according to this Threefold Distribution, and in
a Division somewhat Diverse from That in the Body of the Translation: And,
Then, I will immediately subjoin the Amendments, and Illustrations of each
respective Part. This Method, to be observed throughout the Whole Work; as the
best, the easiest, the most orderly I could think of.

BOOK I. then; PART I. Page 3. The Contents of each Section of the First Part
of the First Book the Nature of the Gods.
Having said Before, that the Main Disagreement of Philosophers, was, about
Providence; he, Now, produces their several Opinions: First, the Epicurean, who
Denied a Divine Providence; and so, effectually, overthrew all Religion, and
Civil Society. THENCE, to lin. 17. of page 4. To Epicurus'^, opposes he the
Opinion of the Stoiques, asserting a Providence: And against This, again, sets
up Carneades, and the rest of the Academiques, who render the matter Doubtful.
Upon which Diversity of Opinions he observes, that All of them may be False,
but that it is Impossible that more than One should be True. Thus, tacitly
leaving every man to Conclude upon the Prudence, and Moderation of the
Academiques, who, in so great a difficulty of discerning the Right, are not
forward to yield assent to what is Doubtful and Uncertain. THENCE, to lin. 5.
of page 5. There being no Ambition without Fear, the Author, studious of
Praise, is apprehensive of Censures, upon appearing Abroad: And therefore,
thinks, that Well-meant Exceptions are to be satisfied, but Malicious Carpings
Refell'd. So that, to pacify all, he rehearses the Judgments and Reflections of
the Town, upon his Books. Now, they are of Three Sorts, as appears by the
Context. THENCE, to lin. 25. of page 5. He Answers the First Sort of Carpers,
by Denying that he began to Philosophize on the sudden; urging, to strengthen
the Denial, the Sententiousness of his Orations, his Familiarity and Converse
with Learned Men, his Education under Grave Masters, and the Whole Course of
his Doings, both in a Public and Private Station. THENCE, to lin. 13. of page
6. His Inducements to Write, were (he says) Leisure, (by Caesar's Encroachments
upon the Public,) and a Love to his Country, which he was desirous of
bringing Honor to by Learned Writi^gs. Nor slips he an Occasion of giving
himself his due. THENCE, to lin. 29. of the same page. A Third Motive was,
Trouble of Mind, which he sought to mitigate by Philosophy: He also, in
transitu, gives a hint of the excellent Method observed by him in Learni^g it.
THENCE, to lin. 8. of p. 7. He prudently, and with the Genius of an Academique,
reminds those that were earnest to know his Judgment; that Reason, not
Authority, ought to sway them in their Choice of an Opinion: And takes an
Occasion to Reflect upon the Pythagoreans, for attributing ov^r much to their
Doctor, or Founder. THENCE, to lin. 26. of the same page. The Third Sort of
Objectours, who found fault with the Academy for asserting nothing to be True,
in that, Then, there could be no perception of any thing, he refers to his
Academical Discourses; and here repeats, that Truths there are, but mixed with
Falsities so like them, that it is very hard for a body to Distinguish betwixt
them. THENCE, to lin. 16. of page 8. He Rep^ies to the Fourth Sort; who ta^t
the Academy with Obsoleteness, by subtly wiping off the Reproach as well as he
can. THENCE, to lin. 7. of p^g. 9. Being aware how it would be resented amongst
a Religious People, to bring the Divine Nature into Doubt; he takes the Blame
off himself, and his Party, and lays it upon the Disagreeing Opinions of Other
Philosophers concerning the Deity, which have made the Question so hard to be
Explained. And This Topique he Illustrates and Exhilerates with a jocular
Quotation out of a Comedy. THENCE, to lin. 24. of the same page. He makes an
easy Transition to his Purpose: And follows Plato, in his way of Writing;
feigning the Occasion of the Dialogue, according to his Fancy, proper enough:
That, being sent for, Cicero came to Cotta's House, while this same Academique,
Velleius the Epicurean, and Lucilius the Stoique, were Disputing one with
another; and was courteously W^llcom'd by his Friend that had Invited him.
THENCE, to lin. 13. of page 10. Cicero applauds his good fortune in coming in
so favorable a Juncture as to hear the Three Chiefs of the Three Sects of
Philosophers Then in Repute: But, a Fourth, some P^ripatetique or other,
seeming to be wanting, he Thence takes occasion to give the Reason, not in his
Own, but in C^tta's Words, why he has Introduced none of That (in no wise
Contemptible) Sect into this Dialogue; which is that there is little or no
Disagreement betwixt the Stoical Tenets, and Theirs; (tho the Stoiques
themselves will by no means allow This;) and so, no need of bringing in Two of
the same Opinion. But, from this short Digression, he presently returns to his
Purpose. THENCE, to lin. 34. of the same page. Cotta likes they should proceed
in the Question prop^s'd; and, in Complement to Tully newly-come, briefly
expounds the Argument of the Dispute in hand; desiring Vel^eius also, to Repeat
what he had said before Cicero's coming, that so, he might not be at a loss.
Velleius Consents, bearing himself up upon the Natural Confi^ence of the
Epicurean Sect; but yet, touches Civily (tho Sh^rply) upon Tully: Which makes
him openly declare, that he means to be an Equ^l and Impartial Auditour;
according to the way of the Academiques. And This Ends the Preface, or First
Part.

In This, [the Academical] Matter, Amendments, Explanations, etc. of the
Preface, or First ^ar^ o^ the First Bo^k.
[way of Writing,] therefore, etc. page 4. lin. 17. surpised at my applying my
self more particularly to, etc. lin. 34. of the same page.

that I should, so much contrary to people's Expectations, undertake, etc. page
5. lin. 3.

this sort of Study on the sudden, [without first spending any Time upon
Learning it,] etc. lin. 7. of the same page.

page 5. lin. 16.
our Family, etc. [that did me the Honor to frequent my House.]

Ibid.
-- the famous [those so* famous Men of their respective Sects] Diodorus (or,
according to some Diodotus) etc. a Stoique. He has been particular upon all
These, in his Book de claris Oratoribus.

lin. 18.
under whose Tuition I was Educated [by whom I was Instructed in Philosophical
Learning,] etc.

lin. 20.
regard to Life, etc. [to the laudable discharge of the Duties, and Offices of
an Honest Life:]

Ibid.
Those [Philosophical Precepts,] etc. Let it be considered whether This be to
be applied to his Writings, or to his Doings in a Public and Private Station.

page 6. lin. 9.
received [learn'd] in Greek, etc.

lin. 10.
This Particular [of delivering the Grecian Philosophy in the Roman Language,]
etc.

to his Master's [to the Judgment of Him, of whose Sect he is a Follower,] etc.

page 7. lin. 1. lin. 5. Pythagoras's Country Uncertain.
Pythagoras was a Philosopher of great Account; of Country Uncertain, many
Places Contending for the Honor of his Birth, as for Homer's; but, according
to most, of Samos. See Ovid. Metam. lib. 15. and Laertius, lib. 8.

lin. 11.
Academical Questions [ about Sect. 99.] The Academy was a Woody place about a
Mile from Athens, What the Academy was, and whence it had its Name.
taking its Name from Academus the Owner of it; Plato first taught School here,
and had many Auditors. Cicero had also a Country House of the same Name, by
the Seaside, not far from Puteoli: Whence his Academical Questions had their
Title.

it is in a manner deserted, page 8. lin. 2. With whom the Academical Sect
fell, in Greece.
even in Greece it self.] Laertius seems to intimate, as if the Academical Sect
had fallen There) with Clitomachus, and begun to gain credit at Rome, soon
after, by the Industry of Philo.

which He [the Academique,] etc. lin. 9.


wherein, [in which Point, lin. 20.
All seem to be called together,] etc.

His [some or Other's, lin. 30.
in the Fable of Statius,] etc.

Solemn Sacrifices [Sacrifices performed Once every Year, Solemnia Sacrificia
what.
] etc. Annual Sacrifices were Instituted to Romulus, as also, to Remus, on the
Ides of May.

on Jupiter of Latium's Day. page 9. lin. 13. The Latin Festivals what; and
when Instituted.
Feriis Latinis. These were certain Festivals indicted on a Set day, (the Last
of March, says Mannutius,) every Year, either by the Pontifex, or the
Magistrate, wherein they Sacrificed to Jupiter of Latium on the Hill Albanus;
whither the Latins resorted, and therefore they had the Name of Feriae Latinae.
Tarquin, upon his Conquering Hetruria, appointed One Day for them; but, in
process of time, they were gradually advanced to Four; upon the Expulsion of
the Kings, the Reconciling of the Commonalty to the Senate, etc.

Equaled even among the Greeks. lin. 18.
[that had made so great a Proficiency in the Stoical Dogmata, that few even
Grecian Stoiques were fit to compare with him,] etc.

lin. 27. The Number of the Sects of Philosophers. page 10. lin. 5. The
Division of Good, according to the Ancients; and the Difference of the
Peripatetical and Stoical Opinions, concerning it.
No Order of any Repute, etc. Authors have reckoned up two Hundred eighty
eight Sects of Philosophers, in all.

Separate the Honest from the Profitable, etc. The Ancients Divided Good, into
Honest, Delightful, and Profitable. Now, the Stoiques ((...), a Porticu, they
had their Name from a Porch) separated the Honest from the Commodious, (i. e.
from the Pleasant, and Profitable,) in the Whole Genus; accounting upon the
Honest as the Only Good, and the Profitable barely amongst things some way or
other tending and promoting to Good. But the Peripatetiques ((...), ab
ambulando, so called from their way of Disputing, Walking; following
Aristotle;) Confounded the Honest and Profitable, etc. i. e. would have the
Profitable and the Delightful Good to agree well enough in the Genus with the
Honest; the Pleasant and the Profitable, amongst Them, being Goods, as well as
the Honest, and not Differing in Substance, but only in Degree and Magnitude;
they holding the Honest to be a Greater Good than the Pleasant, and That, than
the Profitable: Which same Degrees the Stoiques rejected; reckoning upon all
Goods as Equal, and all Ills so too.

lin. 23.
already delivered [that so, my New-come Friend here, may not be to seek as to
the Scope of what we Discourse upon,] etc.

Positive in any thing. The Academiques reprehended.
The Academiques allowed that Truths there were, only they could not be
Perceived. An Assertion of seeming Modesty; but, in the Course of their
maintaining it, they indulged themselves even to a most scandalous, and
criminal degree of Licentiousness; Disputing both For Truth, and Against it.
This may suffice, as to the First Part.

The Epicurean Disputation concerning God, may fitly be Divided into Two Parts,
The Distribution of the Epicurean Disputation concerning God; or, of the Second
Part of the First Book.
(or Sections.) In the First, Velleius Recites the Opinions of the
Philosophers, and Poets, touching the Divine Nature, and either Overthrows, or
some way or other Discredits them: to These subjoyning the Fables of the
Egyptians, Magi, and Common People, and Confuting, only by Neglecting them. In
the Other, he statelily Proposes, and somewhat at Large Declares the Opinion of
Epicurus concerning a Deity. I shall Proceed, according to This Division.

PART II. SECT. I. FROM the Bottom of page 10. to lin. 14. of page 11. The
Contents of Each Section of the First Branch of (the Second Part,) the
Epicurean Disputation, touching God.
He plays the True Epicurean, beginning with Insulting and Disputing both
together; and, in the very Entrance of his Argument, setti^g light by the most
Grave Philosophers, he cavils at their Opinions; at Plato's First, (who thought
God to be the Architect of the Universe,) then, at Those of the Stoiques, (who
Asserted a Divine Providence;) both more deserving of Veneration, than
Exception: But yet, it is justly that he makes merry with the Stoiques for
accounting of the World as a Divinity. THENCE, to lin. 12. of page 12. Velleius
notes, as most Gross, that Error of Plato's of delivering the World to have
been Create^, and yet to be likely to abide for ever. Then, turning to the
Stoique Lucilius, he presses a Dilemma upon him, tho a blunt one, as but a
Smatterer in Philosophy may see. THENCE, to lin. ult. of page 12. He disputes
against Plato, and the Stoiques, that, the World, if it was Created by God,
must have been made from all Eternity; in that, there was no Cause that might
either keep the Deity from Acting even from before All Time; or, being at rest,
induce him, afterward, to Build it. By the way, he Describes Eternity,
according to the shallow Apprehension of Man. THENCE, to lin. 28. of p. 13. The
Epicurean proceeds, more at large, to show the World not to have been Built by
the Deity; in that, Then, it must have been made either for his own sake, or
for Man's; both which he Refells. THENCE, to lin. 24. of page 14. The
Platoniques held, that the World was Animated, Wise, Immortal, and Happy; which
Conceits Velleius Confutes, either only by Contempt, or with very little ado.
THENCE, to lin. 11. of page 15. Velleius concluding with himself that he has
exploded the Placits of Plato, and of the Stoiques, concerning the Deity; he
now advances briefly to run over the Opinions of the rest of the Philosophers,
touching the Divine Nature: First, of the Ionian; Then, the Italian. And in
This Section, he begin^ with (the two first of the Ionian Stock) Thales, and
Anaximander. THENCE, to lin. 4. of page 16. He briefly Rehearses, and Confutes
the Opinions of Anaximenes, and Anaxagoras, concerning God. THENCE, to lin. 23.
of page 16. The Sense of (the Italian Philosophers) Alemaeo, and Pythagoras,
concerning a Deity. THENCE, to lin. 15. of p. 17. What Xenophanes, and
Parmenides* thought, upon the Same Subject. THENCE, to lin. 6. of page 18. The
Theology of Empedocles, Protagoras, Democritus, and Diogenes of Apollonia
rejected. THENCE, to lin. 26. of page 18. Having, contrary to expectation and
order, laid hard at Plato, upon the First Onset; he, now, falls upon him again,
in his proper place, and notes the Inconstancy of his Theological Opinions.
THENCE, to lin. 12. of page 19. The Theology of Xenophon, Antisthenes, and
Speusippus, THENCE, to lin. ult. of page 21. The Opinions of Xenocrates,
Heraclides, Theophrastus, and Strato, touching the Divine Nature, reprehended.
THENCE, to lin. 27. of page 21. Velleius proceeds to confute the Theology of
the Stoiques, beginning with their Founder Zeno. THENCE, to lin. 31. of page
22. The Epicurean sets as light by the Theological Opinions of ( Zeno's
Auditors,) Aristo, Cleanthes, and Persaeus, as by their Master's Dogmata.
THENCE to lin. 13. of page 24. The Theology of the Stoique Chrysippus reported
somewhat at large, and of Diogenes of Babylon touched upon more briefly. THENCE,
to lin. ult. of page 24. The Opinions of the Poets, Magi, Egyptians, and
Common people, cast together in the last place; and reproved of Error,
Monstrosity, Madness, Levity, and Ignorance.

Epicurus's Intermundia, Epicurus's Intermundia what.
etc. (page 11. lin. 4.) (...); which Epicurus himself, in his Epistle to
Pythocles, Defines to be (...), Spaces between Worlds; which same Distances he
would have to be Voids, and the Worlds Infinite.

Nor yet to that Thinking, lin. 10. The Stoical, and Plato's Opinions, touching
the World.
etc. The Stoiques accounted upon the World as Animated, endu'd with
Understanding, of a Round Figure, a Circular Ardent God of a kind of Fiery Form.
Plato held much what the same things before them; he terming the Universe
Animal (...), and ascribing to it a Round Figure.

Whence proceeded those Five Forms, lin. 23. Plato 's Five Forms what,
etc. There are Three Opinions as to these same Forms; the most probable makes
them to be Plato's Essentia, (or Ratio Formalis of every thing,) Idem, (whereby
every thing agrees with it self First, then with others,) Alterum, (That
wherein it differs from something else,) Status, (by which it for a time
reteins its proper Unity,) and Motus, (whereby it advances from Power, to Act.)

Physiology what. lin. 35.
so much as a Smatterer in Physiology, etc. This Enquires into, and Discourses
of, Natural Causes.

page 12. lin. 5, etc.

Epicurus's, and Plato's Opinions as to the Duration of the World.


As to Pronaea, if your [the Stoiques] Providence, Lucilius, be the Same, [with
Plato's God,] etc. Epicurus held the World to be Corruptible, because
Generated; but Plato judged it Framed for Perpetuity, and to be Dissolvible
only at the Will of God the Maker of it.

lin. 22.
Revolution of the Orbs, [the Circular Motion of the Orbs,] etc.

lin. 25, etc. Eternity Defined several ways.
Tho, of what Length it was, cannot be comprehended; because, it falls not so
much as within our Imagination, that a Time, etc. Eternity is expressed by
Innumerable Ages, and Infinite Time; which Plato in Plutarch terms (...), a
Fleeting Image of Eternity; Boethius, possessio vitae interminabilis tota simul
and perfecta; a Description generally entertained at this day.

lin. 34. Aedilis Romanus.
obeyed the Divinity, etc.

of turning City-Surveyour, etc. (page 13. lin. 1.) Aedilis. There were two
Ranks of these Officers, amongst the Romans; the Plebeian, and the Patrician.
See Rosinus, at large, concerning them. The Questions here asked by Velleius,
Lucretius, (a Poet of the same Sect) had put, (lib. 5.) before him: And, St.
Austin (lib. 11. cap. 5. of his City of God) has Resolved them all, and
Confuted the Epicurean Doctrine. So has Gassendus too.

Signs, [Stars,] etc. page 13. lin. 3.


Of Wise men, [the Good] etc. (lin. 14.) or, of Fools, [the Bad,] etc. (lin.
16.)

by their Virtues [by a Compensation of Blessings, lin. 25.
] etc. a perception of Benefits, that may Recompense for the Inconveniences.]

a Figure to which Plato ascribes more, etc. page 14. lin. 1: Plato's Opinion
of the Sphere.
He termed the Sphere (...), a handsome and convenient Figure: And Xenophon, in
Laertius, imputes to the Deity (...), a Substance of a Spherical Figure; some
making Plato to have held, that God made the World Round, because he was of a
Round Form himself. A Conceit highly unworthy (sure) of so Great a man.

a Steady [Sedate, Calm] Mind, etc. lin. 9.

The Countries under the Torrid and Frigid Zone Uninhabited, in the Opinion of
Ancient Geographers.

lin. 21.

lin. 23, etc.

Manutius Dissented from in This.




some of it, etc. [the Southern Parts] (lin. 16.) And some again, [the
Northern.] (lin. 18.) Ancient Geographers held those Countries under the
Torrid, and Frigid Zone to be Uninhabited: but Later Discoveries have proved
This to be a Mistake.

Since These are Parcels of it, etc.

And These [Opinions] now are Yours, [the Stoical,] Lucilius! But, what Those
of Others [other Philosophers] were, I will Report, down from the Last [the
most Ancient] of the Higher, [of the Philosophers that were before the Times of
the Stoiques.]

For, Thales of Miletum, And This Break; being an Explanation of Thales's
Theology.
[a City of Calabria, now called Melazo,] who was the First that searched into
[Disputed touching] matters of This [a Divine] Nature, made, etc. ( lin. 30,
etc.) -- That Wisdom [Mind.] which, etc. (lin. ult.) -- the Deity [the Gods,
i. e. the Principles of Things, which usually had the Name of Deities given
them. page 15.
] can, etc. ( l. 1. of p. 15.) -- or Nature; [and a Mind;] why did he assign it
a Watery one? [Why joined he the Mind to Water?] etc. (lin. 3.) This seems to be
the Epicurean's First Exception to Thales 's Doctrine, that it makes the
Divinity, i. e. the Water, ( a God in Thales 's Opinion, as being the Principle
of Things,) to be able to Subsist, without a Body, and a Mind.] [Why Water to
the Mind,] if the Mind it self be, etc. (lin. 4.) [and This the Other, that the
Mind can Be, separate from a Body: Neither of which Epicurus would allow.] I
look upon the Original, Here, to be somewhat Imperfect: But, for Thales; having
taught in Egypt, where the Israelites once dwelt, it is possible he might light
upon the Book of Genesis, and read (what Moses has wrote in the beginning of
it,) the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters.

Anaximander's Theological Opinions Expounded.
The Gods [ the Stars, or else, the Worlds] [Nativos esse] were Born [had a
Beginning] Rising and Setting at great Distances of time: And therefore, [i. e.
because they did thus Rise and Fall,] that the Worlds were Innumerable, etc.
(lin. 6, 7, 8.) Tho Anaximander was Thales's Countryman, and Intimate
Acquaintance, yet he would not Subscribe to his Opinion, we see. And then, the
Stars, in Latin, are sometimes put for Worlds: But yet, whether Stars, or
Worlds Different from Stars be here intended, if so be he meant them not for
some or other Secondary Deities, he cannot be cleared from Error.

As if that [either the Air, i. e. not That which we draw in breathing;
Anaximenes's Doctrine, upon This Subject, Illustrated.
but some other Divine Spirit (perhaps) that should, after a sort, cherish, and
animate this Universe,] which, etc. (lin. 15.) -- Or, how should [or, that,
That which had a Beginning, should not Consequently be Mortal,] etc. To enlarge
upon what I Hinted before. Whatever Principle or Original of Things any
Philosopher Excogitated, That he held to be a God; (or, at least, it was
commonly looked upon as His Deity;) whether it was an Efficient, or only a
Material Principle, wherein some Tript; as Aristotle, and Plutarch inform. So
that, when Anaximenes had delivered All things to be constituted out of Air, as
the First Principle, he was, by all, presently understood to have held the Air
to be a God. But, Minutius Felix would not believe they really ascribed
Divinity to the Material Principle, of what kind soever.

Him Anaxagoras both [Then; Anaxagoras, As also, Anaxagoras's.
who received his Discipline from Anaximenes, was the First,] etc. (lin. 20,
and 21.) -- the Model, [and Convenient Disposure] of Universal Nature [of all
things,] etc. (lin. 22.) -- Conjunction [and Consistency] of any, etc. (lin.
27.) -- where the Soul [the Nature it self] is not affected, upon [feels not]
External, etc. (lin. 29.) -- So that, [And then,] if he, etc. (lin. 30.) --
there ought to [will] be, etc. (lin. 32.) -- take a Name [have the Name of
Animal.] But, what can be [is] more, etc. (lin. 34.) -- This Doctrine [Now,
since This [i. e. that, this Mind, which he terms a God, should be girt about
with an External Body,] will not please Him; [ a Mind Naked [i. e. without the
Vail, and Conjunction of a Body indu'd with the power of Feeling] Single, and
not joined with any thing that may be Sensible; comes not within the force and
notion of Our [i. e. Human] Understanding;] ( page 16. lin. 1, etc.) says the
Epicurean. (...); All things were together; but, the Mind separated them, and
digested every one into its proper Order: Was the Beginning of Anaxagoras's
Lucubrations, say Plutarch, and Laertius. So that, he believed not things to
have been Created, in the Beginning; but only severed, and brought into Order.

Alcmaeo spoken to. page 16.
Alcmaeo of Cratoe, etc. Aristotle Delivers, that Alcmaeo held Contrary
Principles of Things; and those Indefinite too, as White, Black; Sweet, Bitter,
etc. These, now, were his Principia Rerum, but not his Deities, if we give
Credit to Velleins. The Scholar is (here) put before the Master, (Pythagoras,)
to observe the Decorum of the Epicurean Negligence, perhaps.

As also, Pythagoras.
And, that Ours were still taken from it, [where-from Ours were still taken,]
any more, etc. (lin. 12.) -- be Ignorant of any thing, (lin. 20.) [Epicurus was
of Opinion, that the Deity did not Note every thing.] -- This Universal Soul,
[this same Deity, if it be nothing but a Spirit,] be mingled with, etc. (lin.
22.) As if the Deity were the Soul of the World, and the World the Body of the
Deity. Now, God is not mixed with the Things he Governs, any more than the Pilot
with the Ship he Steers; says Lactantius: Neither yet, are Our Minds Particles
of the Divine Mind.

Then, Xenophanes; Xenophanes.
who, together with the Mind, would have all that was Infinite beside, to be a
God; is Reprehensible, touching the Mind it self in the same manner with the
Other: but, more vehemently, as to his Infiniteness; wherein there can be
nothing Sentient, nor in Conjunction (lin. 24, etc.) He was of Colophonia: And,
(says Tully, in the Fourth Book of his Academical Questions,) held, that All
things were One, This One not Mutable, This a God, and neither having any
Beginning, but Sempiternal, and of a Conglobated Figure.

and endu'd with, etc. [and Consists of a Continual, and Ardent Light.] (p. 17.
l. 4.) -- subjecting [reckoning in the Number of Deities War, Discord,] etc.
This Parmenides Parmenides. page 17.
did, in the Book that Simplicius says he wrote touching the Gods, not
according to his own, but the Sense of the Common People; who were generally
addicted to foolish Superstitions. War was every where Consecrated in Mars and
Bellona; Discord and Sedition seem to have been placed in the Fourth Region of
the Air, amongst the Supernal Deities, tho of right they were of the Infernal:
And, Cupidity I take were of be no Other than the Goddess Libentina. So that,
if Things that are worn out by Distemper, etc. were accounted of as Deities; no
wonder if the Pagans held it but reasonable that what Defaced them, Fever,
Sleep, etc. should be placed in the same Number. Plutarch, in Placitis, is more
large in his account of Parmenides's Theology. And some ( Eugubinus, etc.) have
pretended to find out, I know not what Sacred, and Mysterious meaning in this
same Circle of his; and made him the (almost) only Right Philosopher, in his
Opinion touching the Deity.

p. 17. l. 16. etc. Empedocles.
Empedocles was a Sicilian Philosopher, and Poet: Aristotle, in the Fourth
Chapter of his First Book of Metaphysiques, notes some of his Errors; And he,
Plutarch, and Laertius give a more sincere account of his Opinions touching the
Gods, than this Epicurean has here done.

one jote more [at all] Knowing, etc. (lin. 27.)

Democritus.
Ranges the Stars, [both Images, i. e. Idea's, flowing from solid Bodies, but
not solid themselves,] their Orbs, [Circumcursations,] and that Incorporated
Virtue, [that Nature,] I know not what Corporeal, Sempiternal and Divine one
(either a God, or Atoms,) that Democritus computed upon; says St. Augustine, in
his Epistle to Dioscorus: So that, Epicurus held not all Images to be Divine,
but only those that flowed from the Deity.] Which produces [out of it self] and
directs their Courses: [sends them forth,] etc. (from l. 29. to l. 33.) -- any
Account, [Opinion, Imagination] of him, page 18.
etc. (p. 18. l. 3.) Laertius will furnish Democritus's Life, and Placits. The
same Laertius writes, that Diogenes held the Air (here, page 18. lin. 4.) to be
((...)) an Element, but no Deity.

Plato.
of [touching] Laws, etc. (lin. 11.) -- He feigns, an Impossibility [what such
a Deity should be, there is no apprehending; for he would be,] etc. (lin. 15.)
in the [together with the] Notion, etc. (lin. 18.) -- the Air, [Skie,] Stars,
etc. (lin. 21.) -- all Those [scil. National, and Popular Deities] In his
Timaeus, Plato says it is hard to find out this (as it were) Parent of the
Universe; and, When discovered, not Convenient to publish him amongst the
Multitude. He leaned toward an Unity of the Godhead.

Xenophon was a Socratic Philosopher, page 18. l. 27. Xenophon.
and an Historian: and of Noble Extraction, amongst the Greeks.

called the Naturalist, [touching Nature, Antisthenes. page 19.
] that there, etc. (page 19. lin. 3.) He was the Founder of the Sect of the
Cyniques; but yet he asserted the Essence of a Deity as much as any of the
Philosophers.

and Govern it, [the Motion of the World] etc. (lin. 19.) -- that it [the Sky]
is part, etc. (lin. 22. Aristotle.
) -- an Agitation [So great a Celerity of Heaven,] etc. (l. 26.) -- [where will
all the Other Deities Dwell,] if Heaven it self be set up for one: etc. (l.
28.) Epicurus thought the Gods must needs have some House to Dwell in: And
therefore, (said he) if so absurd a thing as the Divinity of Heaven (held to be
the Mansion of the Godhead) be admitted, where can the rest of the Gods Live?
Aristotle was the Founder of the Sect of the Peripatetiques. His Third Book of
Philosophy, here Quoted, is not Extant. A great many more Theological Opinions
and Errors of His, than are Here recounted, may be collected out of his
Physiques, Metaphysiques, and other parts of his Works.

The Planets [Five of them are Nominated, page 20. Heraclides of Pontus, in
Asia.
in the Planets,] Five, etc. page 20. l. 6.

has stuffed his Books with sundry Childish Fables; [tho his Book be, for the
Greater Part, only (Allegorical) Fables, and that he, for the Generality, treat
of Lighter Matters; yet, now and then, he advances to things of more weight;
and] one while he will, etc. (lin. 17.)

Universal [Brute] Nature, which contains within it the Causes of,] etc. (lin.
ult.) Strato was an Atheist; Strato.
ascribing All to Brute Nature, whom he made to follow the temerarious Impulses
of Chance. He Denied Atoms. See Laertius touching him, L. 5.

Zeno. page 21.
was a Divinity [was Divine; and, that it was] Capacitated, etc. (page 21. lin.
5.) -- we can have no Notion of any such [which never meets us] either in, etc.
(lin. 13.) -- Impulse extended [ Reason, (i. e. a certain power of
Understanding,) Diffus'd] through all Natures to be Divinely affected, [indu'd
with the same Qualifications, that the Divine is,] etc. (lin. 15, 16, 17.) --
he [utterly] destroys the Notions of the Deities vulgarly imprinted in the
Minds of Mortals; for he reckons not, etc. ( lin. 22, etc.) -- but teaches,
that Those Names do, after a certain manner, signify the Inanimate Things. (to
lin. 26.) Now, for the Law of Nature, the Error of the Platoniques, Stoiques,
etc. with relation to it, was; that they held it to be actually the same with
the Divine, and not barely to flow Thence, as from a Fountain. The Stoiques did
not Deify this Ethereal Body and Element of Fire, the Sky; but only the Mind
that they conceived it to be indu'd with. And then, for their Reason diffused
thorough every Nature, they understood by it a Spirit, that took a several Name
according to the various Mutations of the Matter it passed thorough; that it
accommodated its Operations to the Matter; but that its Principality was in the
Sky. The same Stoiques held God to be One; only they assigned him several
Appellations, according to his various Faculties, or Offices.

to be Indiscernible [ cannot be Comprehended, Ar^sto.
] etc. (lin. 30.) As Xenophon had said it could not be discerned, and therefore
ought not to be inquired into.

with the Other (Aristo) [last mention'd] First, ^lea^thes. page 22.
etc. (lin. ult.) -- the Universal Mind and Spirit [of Universal Nature,] etc.
(page 22. lin. 2.) -- that last and highest; every way spread about and
extreme, All surrounding, etc. (lin. 4.) -- against Pleasure [ against its
being the Supreme Good, as Epicurus Understood it to be.] (lin. 7.) -- at
length [thinks] that, etc. (lin. 10.) -- which we only know with our
Understandings, [ this is said, because the Stoiques phansy'd the Deity might
^e discerned even by the Eye,] and whom we, (Epicureans) more than any other,
^re for certainly constituting in the Notion o^ ^he M^ d, as in a Print [i. e.
which Notion imprinted in our Minds by Nature, we hold to be a most sure
Argument of a Divinity, as a Foot step is a Token of an Animal,] comes not to
appear at all [i. e. comes to be so distracted, and dispersed, by Cleanthes 's
various and manifold Opinions concerning him, that he is not to be discerned at
all, etc. (from lin. 11. of page 22. to lin. 16.)

intimating as if [insomuch, that he would not barely say that they are the
Inventions of the Gods; but, really Divine themselves,] etc. (lin. 23, 24.)
This Philosopher's Name ought to be writ Persaeus, Persaeus.
not Perseus. And, then, the Adoration of Adonis consisted chiefly in Mourning,
if we believe Lucian in his Dea Syria.

Chrysippus.
get any Information of them [cannot so much as guess what Form they should be
of,] etc. (page 23. page 23.
lin. 1.) -- the Divine Virtue [Divinity] to be placed in Reason [ or, Rational
Nature, diffused thorough the several parts of the World, (which it cherishes
and conserves,) and the Noble (...) of the Stoiques,] etc. (lin. 5.) -- of that
Soul, etc. [the Principality of this same World, which abides in the Mind, and
Reason] (lin. 9, 10.) -- All, [and Singular] things, etc. (lin. 12.) -- dark
Representation [the Fatal Shadow, (i. e. Fate;) and the necessity of Future
Events.] (l. 13, 14.) -- which do naturally flow, and persevere [which are
naturally in constant Motition (Decay) and Mutation.] as the Water, etc. (lin.
18.) -- that Supreme Circle, which Environs the World, [the University of
Things, by which All is bound up, and preserved,] etc. (lin. 20, 21.) -- to be
[the same with Her call'd] Ceres, etc. (lin. 26.) -- that [perpetual, and]
eternal, etc. (lin. 28.) -- and calls this same Immutable Decree it self [and
also, terms the same] Fatal Necessity, the Sempiternal, etc. (lin. 33, 34.) --
Plutarch makes Fate, and Necessity to have been Different, in the Opinion of
the Stoiques. -- dreamed of any such matter, [never so much as Imagined any of
These things,] might [also] seem, etc. page 24. lin. 7, 8. page 24. And Lastly,
Di^genes of Babylon.
)

Imitating [in accommodating Fables to Divine Matters] in the, etc. (lin. 9.)
-- will not allow, etc. [separates the Story, etc. from Fable, and] reduces,
etc. (l. 10, 11.) to Physiology [vulgarly Physiques, i. e. Natural Philosophy]
lin. 13.

Judgments of Philosophers; The Last Break of page 24. explained, etc.
which truly [Neither (indeed) are those things so very much more Absurd,
which, being Chanted by the Poets, have poisoned,] etc. (lin. 19, etc.) --
These having [who have] introduced, etc. lin. 23.) -- prodigious [most
Intemperate] Veneries, etc. (l. 28.) -- with Women [with Human Kind; and
Mortals procreated from Immortals.] (l. 29, 30.) -- Superstitions [strange, and
wild Opinions] of the Magi (lin. 32.) [Herodotus tells what the Persian Magi
held, concerning God.] -- Uncertainty, and [by reason of their] Ignorance, etc.
-- (lin. 36.) Here we may observe, the Author's Division of Theology to be,
into Natural, Fabulous, and Civil. The Partition of Theology.
It will not be amiss, to defer the more Strict examination of the Dogmata of
the Stoiques, till I come to Remarque upon the Second Book.

The Contents of the Second Branch of the Second Part of the First Book.
SECT. II. of the Second Part. IN this Other Branch of Velleius's Disputation,
he Declares, Confirms, and highly Extolls the Opinion of (his Author)
Epicurus, touching the Nature of the Gods. And, in the First place, (from page
25. to lin. 4. of page 26.) he advances This, that a Notion of the Godhead is
planted in Men by Nature. THENCE, to l. 32. of p. 26. The same Nature that
teaches the Existence of a Deity, speaks him also to be Blessed, and Eternal.
Whence Epicurus infers, that the Gods can neither Receive, nor Do any Harm;
and, that they are without Love, and Anger: And then, he thinks two Certain
Goods to arise from this Opinion; the One, that the Gods ought to be piously
Worship^; the Other, that Human Life is thus freed, and delivered from all
Superstitious Apprehensions. THENCE, to lin. 3. of page 28. After he has, in
the foregoing Section, laid the Foundation of his Argument; he then, briefly
propounds, and divides what is remaining to be delivered concerning God. He
intends to speak to the Figure, Life, and Contemplation of the Deity: And, of
the Figure, First; which, here, he endeavors, both by Nature, and Reason, to
show to be Human. THENCE, to lin 5. of page 29. Velleius imputes to the
Subtlety of Epicurus the things that were not Intelligible in his Doctrine.
Then, he Declares ( could but the dark whimsies of a Giddy man be declared,)
which way it is, that the same Epicurus thought we came to discern the Nature
of the Gods, but, at length, from a certain Rule of Equality, which Epicurus
held forth for Certain, he concludes, that, in the Nature of Immortal Things,
there is a kind of Infinite Number, in like manner as of Mortal. THENCE, to
lin. 2. of page 30. From the Figure of the Divinity he passes on to (the Third
Head of his Proposition) his Life; which he will have to be most Happy; and
therefore, absolutely at Rest, and Free from all manner of Administrations, at
least most undoubtedly of External: For, he teaches that, the Deity Within
Himself Contemplates Himself, With Himself only Rejoices in Himself, and is
secure from all Harm. And then; against This God of His, he sets the Laborious
Deity of the Stoiques; that so, the Rest, and Beatitude of Epicurus's Divinity
may appear more Illustrious. THENCE, to lin. ult. of the same pag^. from the
Sempiternal Cessation of the Deity, (which he would have to be necessary to his
Beati^ude,) Epicurus, of Consequence, Inferred, that, the World was not Built
by God; but that, by Nature, out of Atoms thronging about and together, in a
Void, were Innumerable Worlds made up. Not forbears Velleius to Rally with the
S^oiques, for Attributing the Erection of this World to God. THENCE, to lin.
32. of page 31. By the way, he ^witches at the Fate, D^^ination, and
Superstition of the Stoiques; that, he may set off his Ep curus the more
gloriously, upon the Opposi ion, who makes Piety toward the Gods to be Free and
loosed from all Dreads of Religion. And Then, Velleius Con^ludes his D scourse,
with some what more Modesty than he began it.

The Folly, page 25. Amendment^, Explanations, etc. of the Second Branch of the
Second Part of this Book.
and Presumption [how Inconsiderately, and Rashly these things are delivered,]
etc. (page 25. lin. 2.) -- amongst Those [of the Number of those Gods, who,
etc. (lin. 5.) -- He [alone] discerned [First] that, etc. (lin. 6.) -- touching
the Rule and the Judgment [touching the Instrument of Judging; his Logique, as
Seneca witnesses,] etc. lin. 19. -- to one thing [without so much as One
Exception,] etc. lin. 24. -- every body submit to as such [touching which, the
Nature of every man consents,] etc. lin. 30. -- by most [not only Philosophers,
Prolepsis what.
but Unlearned also,] etc. lin. 34. Chrysippus Defines Prolepsis to be a
Natural Notion of Universal things: And, Suidas, out of Laertius, Describes it
at large. Quem vide.

Epicurus [himself] called, etc. page 26. page 26.
lin. 2. -- And Then, This we held further [We have This same Prenotion,
therefore, that the Gods are,] etc. (lin. 5, 6.) -- it was not without Reason,
that [That Opinion was Truly set forth, by Epicurus, that, what is Blessed] And
so on, in the Singular Number. (lin. 10, 11.) -- Opinion [of the Divine
Beatitude,] etc. (lin. 34.) -- and Action [of Mind] and Agitation in the
Divinity. (lin. ult.) I will, here, only note, that Nemesius gives this Reason
of the Placit of Epicurus that the Deity is without Anger, (...); A Reason why
Epicurus made God to be without Anger.
because, Anger is raised about what is beside one's Will; but, with the Deity,
there can be nothing beside his Will.

page 27.
in part [taught] by, etc. (page 27. lin. 2.) -- Nature tells us, [by Nature we
know,] that, etc. (l. 3.) -- Sleeping or Waking (l. 8.) [Empericus writes, that
Epicurus held the Knowledge of the Deity to proceed from the Visions of Dreams;
Epicurus held, that the Knowledge of the Human Shape of the Deity was
Originally drawn from the Visions of Dreams.
and that, in regard there were certain mighty Images under Human Form, that
came into us Sleeping, there must be, in very deed, some or other Gods of Human
Figure, (...) according to Plutarch, (...) with Galen, and Laertius. Neither
was even the Church without her Anthropomorphites (Heretics so called) also.]
-- to my [Friend] Cotta here, [he says now One thing, then Another,] etc. (lin.
19, 20.) -- This [Shape of the Gods] is not a Carnal Body, etc. (l. 34, 35.)
Had he imputed a Real Body, and Real Blood, to his Divinity, he had made him
Corruptible. Homer (in Iliad. e.) attributes to Venus (wounded by Diomede)
Blood much what of this sort. But, Why he phansi'd the Gods to have only as it
were a Body, etc.
Epicurus had also another Reason for This; which was, that he phansi'd the
Gods to be made up of Images proceeding continually from Atoms, and gliding
away in a perpetual Flux: Which same Images could not rightly be said to have a
Body, but only as it were a Body, (i. e. the Form, and Resemblance of one;)
just as a Man's Shadow is as it were a Man, a painted Flower, as it were a
Flower, etc.

who not only pried, page 28.
[who not only discerned with his Mind, but even handled, just as with the
Hand, dark and abstruse matters,] etc. (p. 28. l. 10, 11, 12, 13.) -- Corporeal
Essence [propriety] of the Divinity to be [such, that, First, it was]
Imperceptible, etc. (lin. 14, 15.) -- their Firmness [Firm, and Corporeal
Solidity] he, etc. lin. 19. -- the kinds [there being Infinite Kinds of Images
one like another,] etc. (lin. 22, 23.) -- that continually flow [and
continually flowing,] etc. (lin. 24.) -- upon them [these same Images, we come
Thus to understand what that Blessed and Eternal Nature is] (lin. 26, 27, 28,
29.) Tho I might (perhaps) be excused from troubling my self about the Opinion
of a Wild Philosopher confounded in his own Subtlety; yet I Will take the pains
to Explain this Whole Matter; Thus. Epicurus Epicurus's means of Discerning the
Deity, Explained.
was most Perspicacious, in that he so evidently knew things very Abstruse, as
if he had handled them with his Hand. He delivers the Power and Propriety of
the Gods to be such, as cannot be perceived by any External Sense, but only by
the Understanding: Nor yet, can This Nature be Discerned as consisting of a
gross, and s^lid Body, as are those things seen which he, in consideration of
their Firm and Bodily Solidity, termed (...); but, this same Divine Nature,
may, in a certain manner, be known by us, while we fancy in our Minds certain
most Slender Images, which are the Same only in Form, and remain not so, ad
numerum, since they glide away by perpetual Flux, and Transition; ( Note, that
Velleius Opposes Images to Solidity, Similitude and Transition to (...) ad
numerum;) For, in that Infinite Images are sent forth from Innumerable Atoms,
and throng on all sides into our Understanding (no Other, with Epicurus, than
Imagining) Faculty, he teaches, that we perceive what the Blessed and Eternal
(i. e. the Divine) Nature is, while, with Singular Delectation, we Contemplate
these Images. Now, Atoms were so called by Epicurus, Way Atoms were so Named by
him.
not that they were small; but, because they were so hard, that they could not
be Divided, and were free from Vacuum.

also Complete [that All things may Answer All; Equals be suited with Equals,]
etc. (lin. 31, etc.) -- Even-ballancing [ Equal Partition. From This, therefore
is Concluded,] that, page 29.
etc. (page 29. lin. 1. -- and the Means [and, if the things that Destroy be
Innumerable, those that Preserve must necessarily be also Infinite] (lin. 4,
5.) The Reason of Epicurus's making Images, The Reason of his Makin^ Images,
and the Denies, to be Innumerable.
and the Deities, to be Innumerable; was, because of that Equal partition which
he thought was absolutely necessary in Nature: That all things might be poised
(as it were) in an Even Balance. For, when he saw the Infinite Number of
Mortals, he affirmed the Immortals were also Infinite; and, when he had before
his Eyes the Innumerable Pests, bred for the Destruction of the World, and
which would bring manifold Calamities, and Ruin on Universal Nature; he
phansi'd, it ought certainly to be Collected from Thence, that there were, in
like manner, Innumerable Images, by the constant Approach whereof, the Decay
brought upon the World might, as by an Aid, be Repaired.

Naught at all [no External things,] etc. (page 29. lin. 12.) -- and also quiet
[exempt from Offices of Trouble,] etc. lin. 26. The Stoiques not only held the
World, to be a Deity; but also some or other Power within this same World:
Which Velleius has regard to, in what follows in this place.

From all Employ [from bearing any Offices of Magistracy, page 30. What
Epicurus meant by Nature.
] etc. (page 30. lin. 1.) -- by Nature, etc. (lin. 5.) [which was no Other,
with Epicurus, than Atoms. He also said the World was made by Fortune, because
his Atoms were not governed by Advice, but only carried by a blind Impulse.
Tully in the 17th Section of his First Book de Finibus, tells how the World
came to have a Being, in the Opinion of Epicurus.] -- being gravel'd, and at a
plunge [being unable to give the Reason of the Thing,] etc. (lin. 15.) --
boundless magnitude of Regions [Infinite Void] wherein, etc. (lin. 18, 19.) --
power [Multitude] of, etc. (lin. 19.) -- but by [without] Bellows, etc. (lin.
30.) This is only an Ironical Exaggeration; Bellows* etc. an Ironical
Exaggeration.
as was his Demand, before, of the Tools, Engines, etc. made use of by Plato 's
Deity, in Building the World.]

Hence [i. e. From this Opinion of an All-providing Lord sprang up, in your
Minds, (O Stoique's!) That other, of Fate,] etc. (page 31. page 31.
lin. 1.) -- An Immutable Constitution [from an Eternal Verity, i. e. Eternal
Decree, which is ever True, because it aiways alots the Effect.] and [a]
Continuation of, etc. (lin. 4.) -- ascribes All to [thinks all things come to
pass, by] Fate, etc. (lin. 8.) -- or [Art of] Divination, etc. (lin. 9.) -- any
heed to it, [heed to You,] would, etc. (lin. 10.) -- that we must down upon
[fall to Worshipping your Sacrifice-Inspecters,] etc. (lin. 12, 13, 14.) -- But
my Zeal [But, carried on with a Desire of Talking of a most weighty Matter, I Am
afraid I have been somewhat Long:] only I, etc. (l. 27, 28.) There is a
Posthumous Piece of the Learned Grotius's, Grotiu^ 's Col^^ction of Opinions
touching Fate.
that contains a Collection of all the Opinions of Philosophers, Ethnicks,
Jews, Christians, touching Fate. And, Bulinger, in the First Tome of his Works,
has Handled the Whole Body of the Ancient Art of Divination. Epicurus's
Impieties shall be touched upon in the Next Part.

The Contents of Each Section of the Third ( and Last) Part of the First Book.
PART III. In This Third ( and Last) Part of the First Book, Cotia Refells
Velleius. FROM near the Bottom or page 31. to lin. 31. of page 32. Immediately,
in the very Entrance of his Argument, he discovers his (the Academical) Faculty
to consist in Refelling, rather than Asserting, and Confirming Opinions. And
then, to lessen the Envy (if any should arise) of his Intended Confutation, he
Complements his Adversary a little, and Commends his Perspicuity, Copiousness,
and Eloquence. THENCE, to l. ult. of p. 33. He compares Velleius with the
Epicurean Zeno in the Faculty of Speaking; that, by a soft Assentation, he may
mitigate the more heavy Censure of the Placits of Epicurus. Then, makes he,
here, as great a show of Despiciency, as Velleius had done of Confidence;
observing strictly the Academical Disposition, (still Doubtful, ever
Uncertain,) which (indeed) he either Illustrates, or Excuses, by the Example of
Simonides. THENCE, to lin. 32. of page 34. Cotta intending to be a little
Sharper than Ordinary in his Reprehension of what Velleius had Disputed, he
prudently turns the Envy of those Wild phansies from his Antagonist, upon (the
Author) Epicurus: And, setting to the First Question touching the Gods,
Whether or no any such there be; he strives to overthrow, or at least render
doubtful, that most true and certain Prolepsis of Epicurus's, or, the
Anteperception, ( or, Innate Notion) of a certain Divine Nature, in the Minds
of all men. THENCE, to lin. 7. of page 35. Tho, by a Rhetorical Concession, the
Academique admitted the Existence of a Deity; yet, he impugns the Argument of
General Consent, urged, by Velleius, in proof of the Topique; and, by some few
Instances of Atheists, shows there is not an Universal Assent, in the Matter.
THENCE, to lin. 31. of the same page. He Descends, from whole Nations, to
Particular Men; and produces certain Wicked, and Atheistical Persons, in proof
of the Falsity of Epicurus's Assumption, that All were of Opinion that Gods
there are. THENCE, to lin. 27. of page 36. Having, in his Oratorial way, by
Omission, and Rhetorical Concession, passed it over, as Granted, that Gods
there are; In the Whole, he Asks Five Things of Velleius: First, the Rise of
the Gods, (if any there be;) Then, their Place of Abode; Next, what kind of
Body they have; Next, what sort of Mind; and Lastly, what Course of Life they
lead. And First, in This Section, he comes to the First Head, the Rise, or
Original of the Deities: In Which, it is his chief business, here, briefly to
confute the Atoms, and Void, that, (after Lucippus, and Democritus,) Ep^curus
is feigned to have made the Principles of all things. THENCE, to lin. 15. of
page 37. He Twits Epicurean Velleius, for his Stiffness in his Heresy, for
which is in vain pretended the empty Desire of a Happy Life, and of Tru^k.
THENCE, to lin. 2. of page 38. Admitting, Atoms, in his usual way of Rhetorical
Concession; he shows yet, that the Nature of the Gods, (such as himself feigned
(perhaps) that the Epicureans phansi'd,) arising from, and consisting of Atoms,
falls to ruin: For, Hence he infers, contrary to what Those Philosophers would
have, that, the Deities are not Eternal, nor Immortal. THENCE, to lin. 22. of
the same page. He, then, confutes (a Simili) the Evasion of Epicurus, of as it
were a Bo^y, and as it were Blood, in the Divinity: And, shows the Foppishness
of sundry Other Shif s of his, of the like sort, that are Inexplicable, and
opposite to Common Sense, and Reason. First, That of the Declension of Atoms
is, here exploded. THENCE, to lin. 9. of page 39. With the Same Intent he
pursues the same Argument, with a Similitude; and, produces two other Fictions
of Epicurus's, no less Absurd, (he thinks,) than the Former. THENCE, to lin.
30. of the same page. He shows that Device of Epicurus's, as it were a Body,
etc. to be not only Ridiculous, but so very Obscure, (too) that it cannot be
understood even by the Epicureans themselves. THENCE, to lin. 4. of page 41. He
Taxes the Epicureans in General, of a more Simple and Scandalous sort of
Childishness; but, more at large pursues that vain Boast of their Founder, of
pretending, he never had any Master. THENCE, to lin. ult. of the same page.
After a short Excursion against the vain, and lying Arrogance of Epicurus; he
again, the third tim^, takes in hand That Wretched Dogma of his, as it were a
Body, etc. presses harder upon it than ever, and lays (afresh) to Epicurus's
Charge the same Obscurity, that he had insul^ingly Objected to him in the
former Sections. And, in that Velleius, in Explicating the Figment of his
Master, had made use of the Same Words, that painted Images are usually
Described by; he Concludes the Gods to be (in Livius's Term) altogether
Imaginary. THENCE, to lin. 1. of page 43. By a Rhetorical Concession, he passes
on to Confute the Figure of the Gods: And, falls upon the First of the Three
Arguments, before produced by Velleius, in proof of that same Form; teaching,
that Human shape came to be Attributed to the Deities, not in regard of that
feigned Prel^psis of Epicurus's, but either by the advice of Wise men, or
through the Superstition of the more Ignorant sort. THENCE, to lin. 33. of the
same page. He proceeds in Confuting the Human Form of the Gods, which only the
Natural Self-love of Men had feigned for them. THENCE, to lin. 25. of page 44.
Having, lately, said there was, in Men, a False Judgment of Beauty, a ris^ng
from Self-love; he now shows This Judgment to be very Uncertain, (also) since,
every body pronounces upon the Form of each one, according to his own fancy
and liking. THENCE, to lin. 7. of page 45. From his little Digression, being
returned to the Gods; he proceeds, by the Absurdness of the Consequences, to
Confirm their Form to be in no wise Human. THENCE, to lin. 27. of the same
page. What Cotta seemed to have a little before Granted Velleius, that to a man
meditating upon God no other than Human Figure occurs, he now Contends to be
False: both because this Shape is rather Imputable to the fancy of Peinters,
than to any Notion impressed in us by Nature; and also, for that sundry Nations
have feigned the Deities under another Habit. THENCE, to lin. 9. of page 46. He
proceeds to overthrow the False Assumption of Velleius, of the Gods being every
where feigned under Human Form* First, by the Example of the Egyptians, who
Worshipped Sacred Beasts more Religiously, than the Romans either their Divine,
or Human Images. THENCE, to lin. 22. of the same page. Cotta, persevering in
the same purpose, upbraids to an Epicurean Man, so Devoted to Physiques, his
Confirming by most Idle Phantasms, his grave Opinion touchi^g the Form of the
Gods; Whence, not a few Absurdities follow, in Consequence. THENCE, to lin. 10.
of page 47. The Acad^mique presses the same thing, by a Similitude, an
Absurdity, and an Indecency. THENCE, to lin. 28. of the same page. Cotta seems
to introduce Velleius speaking again; and urging afresh the same Arguments with
those brought before for the Human Form of the Gods. He does not, here, Confute
him: But, only argues Epicurus, and his Followers of Superstitious
Apprehensions, contrary to the Opinion of some, who thought Epicurus to be an
Atheist. THENCE, to lin. 26. of page 48. The Academique goes on in Vindicating
Epicurus from all suspicion of Atheism; nay he represents him to have been more
Fearful than all other men, out of too much Superstition. THENCE, to lin. 29.
of page 49. Passi^g by Velleius, by Dissimulancy, that he may have the freer
Scope of Reprehension, he presses upon (the Master himself) Epicurus, and, by
its Consequences, explodes that so frigid and insulse Reason, of his, that
moved him to deny the Divinity of the Stars, World, and Sempiternal Mind, viz.
that he never Saw a Soul participating of Reason and Understanding, (For
Epicurus held it for Certain, and Uncontrolable, that the Deity was indu'd with
Sense, and Reason,) but only in Human Figure. THENCE, to lin. 15. of page 50.
From Epicurus, he returns to Velleius; and, having noted, from the very first,
the whole Sect to be generally Unseen in Logique, that so it might be less
strange for Velleius (a Party of it) to be grossly Out in his Syllogisms, he
shows the Argumentation he used, in proof of Reason to be able to abide in
Human Figure only, to be no way Coherent. THENCE, to lin. 11. of page 51. He
subtly contends for our saying rather that Men are of a Divine Form, and like
the Gods, than that They are of Human Figure, and like Men: And then denies
that Men could come to be made like Gods by a fortuitous Concourse of Atoms.
THENCE, to lin. 9. of page 52. As yet, the Subtle Academique had not marked any
Inconveniences in the Opinion of the Epicureans, which made the Gods to be
like Men, So that, now, as if he had only pref^c'd, all this while, to the
Confutation of the Fancy, he seems to set to Refell it in good earnest, by
more Substantial Arguments: The First is derived from the Authority of
Philosophers, the Second from Vnprofitableness. THENCE, to l. 4. of page 53. A
Digression upon the Reflecting way of the Epicureans. THENCE, to lin. 29. of
the same page. He quits not even Velleius himself, whom he had handled
favorably hitherto, from (the Common Vice of the Party) Evil-speaking. And,
from This Vice, (if so be he have Charged it Truly,) collects a great Absurdity
against the Epicureans themselves. Then, after a mighty Contempt of the
Epicurean Philosophy, he returns, from the Digression, to his Purpose; And, by
the Illness of the Consequences, somewhat more luculently Refells the Human
Form of the Deities. THENCE, to lin. 34. of page 54. Cotta derides the most
Light Reasoning of the Epicureans; which from the Beatitude of the Deities
would of Necessity collect the Human Figure of them; A^ if Happiness could
neither be in any Nature of Another Form than Human, nor separate from any Body
at all. Now, in that This might easily be gainsaid, the Epicureans only
Answered Thus to it, that they Saw not any other thing Happy. So that, in This
place, chiefly, does the Academique explode this frivolous and childish Reply.
THENCE, to lin. 32. of page 55. Persevering in Refelling the Same Form, he
easily quashes the Argument by the Epicureans fetched from Similitude. And then,
he shows the Falsity of the Placit, by the same Phil^sophers assumed, that
Reason could Only be in Human Figure. THENCE, to lin. 32. of page 55. Human
Members are Superfluous, nay even Incommodious, in the Gods; and so, ought not
to be imputed to them: And, what is a Consequence to This, Therefore, are not
the Gods of Human Form; would the Academique Mean; tho, here; his business
seems to be only to set forth the Unprofitable Redundancy of Members. THENCE,
to lin. 13. of page 56. If (as the Epicureans Thought) there be no Work of the
Gods, they cannot any way be Known: A great Inconvenience; which the Stoiques
avoided, in collecting from the admirable Contrivance of the World the
Existence of a most skillful Architect! Thus the Academique, in a manner! What
says Epicurus to the contrary? He has recourse to his Prelepsis; which, Cotta
Ironically amplifying, sets forth for Ridiculous. THENCE, to lin. 2. of page
57. He Refells the Idle Deities of Epicurus, First, by the Sense of the Common
People, Next, by the Religion of the Egyptians, tho unsound; Then, by Childish
Estimation; and Lastly, by the Great Inconvenience Consequential to the
Doctrine. THENCE, to lin. 5. of page 59. After he has even more than Confuted
the Human Figure of the Gods, by a Rhetorical Concession he passes over to
other Questions concerning them; that so, he may Oppress his Adversary by That
(as it were) Mass of Difficulties. THENCE, to, lin. 7. of page 90. Of the many
Questions before moved with Relation to the Deity of Epicurus, he, in this
place, sets upon a Discussion, and Confutation only of the Two Last; viz. How
this same God comes to be Happy, and how Eternal. THENCE, to lin. 5. of page
61. He confutes the Images Invented by Democritus, (and Entertained by the
Epicureans,) to expound the Reason both of Seeing, and Understanding. THENCE,
to lin. 7. of page 62. He explodes the Eternity of those same Imag^s, that is
to say, Deities of the Epicureans. THENCE, to lin. 25. of the same page. When
he has taken away the Immortality of the Divinity of the Epicureans, he sets to
destroy his Beatitude also; this being the Scope of all the four Sections
following. But, Here, he draws his First Argument from the Nature it self of
Beatitude, which the Greater part of Philosophers would have to be placed in
Virtue; Epicurus, contrariwise, in Corporeal Pleasures. THENCE, to lin. 30. of
page 63 He descends to the Pleasures of each of the Senses, which he shows the
Gods of the Epicureans to be without: And, that the Epicureans may not, upon
This, betake themselves to the Pleasures of the Mind, and say their Deity
enjoys Pleasures of That sort in Abundance, he deprives them of That Evasion,
and Convicts them by the very Words themselves of Epicurus, and Metrodorus. So,
Concluding the Deities of the Epicureans not to be Happy. THENCE, to lin. 21.
of page 64. Cotta objecte to himself what was brought by the Epicureans, both
for the Beatitude of the Gods, and the Religion of their Founder, and then
wipes off the things Objected. THENCE, to lin. 6. of page 65. He furth^r
opposes to himself what was urged in proof of Epicurus's Religion. Viz. his
saying the Gods were to be worshipped for their Excellent Nature, not for any
Benefits to Men; and straight overthrows it First by denying the Excellency of
the Epicurean Deities. Then, by, the Absurd Consequences of the Doctrine, a
Subversion of all Piety, and Sanctity. THENCE, to lin. 29. of the same page. He
represses the Vanity of the Ep^cureans, who vaunted they had delivered men from
Superstition, by showing they had no otherwise done This than by extinguishing
all Religion, and Divinity; a thing that the Atheists did as well as They. This
is the Point he pursues, in the Three Next Sections. THENCE, to lin. 15. of
page 66. He proceeds in recounting A heists, or men little better than Such,
who, by introducing vain Deities, and Religions, (a Crime that the Epicureans
were guilty of,) had destroyed the True God, and Religion, as well as the Fear
of God, which the Epicureans would have to be chiefly comprehended under the
Name of Superstition: So, leaving it to be Concluded, that the Epicureans value
themselves in no other respect, than wherein the Atheists Glory also. THENCE,
to lin. 14. or page 67. Epicurus outwent his very Author in Impiety; For,
Democritus only Staggered in the Nature of the Gods; but he absolutely took
away all Religion in stripping the Deities of Help and Favor. Wherefore
Epicurus is not to be termed an Extingu sher of Superstition, but of all
Religion. This is the Scope of all that Cotta delivers henceforth. THENCE, to
lin. 16. of page 68. He strengthens himself against the Epicureans, who stripped
the Deity of Assistance, and Favor, by the Authority of the Stoiques, in that
he tells us they allowed of a Friendship amongst Wise Men; not such as the
Epicureans reckoned upon, which only drove at gain and benefit, but a Voluntary
one, studious of other men's Good. Whence he Infers, that a Friendship of This
quality is also to be admitted amongst the Gods. THENCE, to the End. He again
takes in hand the Answer of the Epicureans, touched upon before, that Epicurus
had written a Book touching Sanctity, and so, was not to be deemed an A^heist.
Now, Cotta, no more here than in the other place, denies the Fact; but, as
formerly, slights it, and shows Sanctity in no wise to be Consistent with the
Placits of Epicurus. So concluding Epicurus to have been an Atheist in
Masquerade, which he Confirms by the Authority of Posidonius, and a brief
Recapitulation of the Epicurean Dogmata concerning God. And Thus much, for the
Contents of the First Book.

page 32. Amendments, Explana^ions, etc. of the Third ( and Last) Part of the
First Book. Whence, the Toga Romana.
Then why False, etc. (page 32. lin. 2.) Because, Falsity is Manifold, Truth,
Single.

all the Roman Nobility, etc. (lin. 17.) Togatis Omnibus: all the Romans; who,
upon Enfranchisement, put on the Toga, and were stripped of it again, if
sentenced to Banishment. Tertullian, in his Book de Pallio, writes, that the
Toga came from the Pelasgi to the Lydians, and from Them to the Romans.

so that having learnt [with this Intent, I believe; that, I might the better
know how those things (the Epicurean Dogmata,) were to be Refell'd, upon
hearing them Explained by the very Chief of the Epicureans,] etc. (lin. 33,
etc.)

page 33.
what always [often] happened, etc. (p. 33. lin. 6.)

Hiero spoken to.
upon King Hiero 's putting, etc. Tertullian, in Cap. 46. of his Apologetique,
tells much what a like Story of Thales, and Craesus. Lilius, in Hist. Poet.
speaks of Simonides; and Diodorus Siculus, Lib. 1. of this Hiero, Brother of
Gelo the Tyrant of Syracuse.

dust it our [Dispute] with Him, etc. (page 33. page 34.
lin. 2.) -- worthy of Philosophy, etc. (lin. 4.) He had before denied Epicurus
to have been an Orator; now, he will not let him be a Philosopher neither. --
a Priest [High Priest] my self, etc. (l. 11.) -- to be not a matter of Opinion,
etc. [made out, not only by the Doubtful Opinions of Men, but by such sure
Arguments as may plainly show the real Existence of a Divinity in the Nature of
Things.] (lin. 16, etc.)

Many Countries so absolutely Barbarous, page 35. No Country without Religion.
etc. (page 35. lin. 4.) But, no Instance of any One, Cotta; and indeed none
could be produced. -- the greatest Sophist, etc. (lin. 13.) Cicero, in the
Fourth Book of his Academical Questions, A Sophist what.
Defines a Sophist to be one that professes Philosophy either out of Gain, or
Ostentation.

Would ever Tubulus, or Lucius,
Lupus, or Carbo, or a Son of Neptune,
(as the Satyrist Lucilius has it,) have been guilty, etc. (lin. 24, etc.)
Tubulus, etc. were Notorious Rogues amongst the Romans. Neptuni Filii who.
The Poets used to term Stout and Good men sons of Jupiter; but Fierce and
Brutish, as if sprung from the Sea, sons of Neptune; says Gellius. The Son of
Neptune, here meant, might be Polyphemus, or any such Impious Monster. -- then
it seems to be, etc. (lin. 32.)

what kind of Bodies have they; what sort of Minds, etc. (page 36. page 36.
lin. 3, 4.) -- with your pretended [in Explicating all things by Atoms, which
reign so licentiously throughout the whole Philosophy of Epicurus,] etc. (lin.
7, etc.) -- nothing is Incorporeal [there can be no Vacuum,] etc. (lin. 11.) --
Theses, (Oracula.) Axioms, etc. (lin. 14.)

not rather forgo [and what shall one give you now, to cease to be an
Epicurean, etc. (page 37. page 37.
lin. 12.) -- the Image [method] of a, etc. (lin. 5.)

But, mindful, etc. [But, forgetful of that Freedom I a little before used
toward you, I reckon up too much.] (l. 16, etc.) -- all things are Compounded
[consist] of, etc. (lin. 18.) -- to avoid [to prove] This, you fall into great
Difficulties, as into Places overrun with Briars, etc. (lin. 3, 4.)

to salve it [the matter] by, etc. (page 38. page 38.
l. 6.) naturally to [to be carried downward by their own weight,] etc. (lin.
12.) -- carried directly (ad lineam rectam) downward,] etc. (lin. 18.) Epicurus
phansi'd two Sorts of Motion for his Atoms, Epicurus's Motion of Atoms Twofold.
the One Natural, the Other Reflex; and then again divided the Natural into
Perpendicular, and Oblique. The Former he had from Democritus, the Other was
his own Device.

Shuffles he [ with the same Stolidity Replies he to the Dialectiques,] etc.
(lin. 25.)

Arcesilas (the Author of the Middle Academy, as Laertius styles him,) holding
all things to be False, that were discerned by the Senses; quarreled Zeno (the
Founder of the Stoical Sect,) for Supposing all so perceived not to be False,
but some only: But, Epicurus being afraid that, in admitting the Error of any
thing so discerned, nothing would be True, etc. (l. ult. and l. 1, etc. of page
39.) page 39.
-- the Concretion, etc. [ in seeking to avoid making the Deities to be
constituted of Atoms, lest they should be Dissoluble,] etc. (lin. 11, 12.) --
of another [while he is predicting to the People,] etc. (lin. 19.) 'Twas Cato's
saying. -- were it Formed, etc. [were the Question touching Images formed in
Wax, or in Clay] (lin. 23, etc.) -- Stumbled upon [through Negligence Falsely
persuaded himself of] are Retail'd [are Recited by You, as Dictates.] (l. 31,
32.) Laertius says, that Epicurus enjoined his Followers not only to Read and
Study what he wrote, but, like Children, to learn it by Heart too. -- any
Master, etc. (lin. ult.) The Greeks termed such (...); and Laertius tells,
(...) who.
that Heraclitus pretended to be one of These, as well as Epicurus.

The Lycaeum (page 40. lin. 7.) was a School not far from Athens; The Lycaeum
what. page 40.
Aristotle taught in it 13 Years, and had many Auditors.

For, his Father Neocles coming with the New Colony into That Isle, Epicurus, (
when young) lived there with his said Father and Brothers, (Neocles,
Chaeredemus, and Aristobulus:) And, the little Plot not being sufficient for
their Sustenance, it is probable the same Epicurus turned Schoolmaster, There,
etc. (lin. 16, 17, etc.)

all the rest [almost all his Physiques,] etc. (page 41. page 41.
lin. 2.) -- to Strangers, etc. (lin. 18.) Pythagoras distinguished his
Scholars, into two Ranks (...) Civiles, and (...) Externos. -- such a one, etc.
[ we will then say of your Gods what we usually do of the Picture of Venus at
Cos.] (lin. 28, etc.)

allow [be persuaded of] This, which, etc. (page 42. ^ag. 42.
lin. 1.) -- and Lineaments [Lines,] etc. (lin. 4.) Such he means, as those of
Painters, upon their First Draught of a Picture in Red -- erected [attributed]
and, etc. (lin. 25.) [that there should be Images, which to Reverence, was to
be understood to be an approaching to the Deity himself,] etc. (lin. 30, etc.)

page 43.
at liberty to [make to our selves and join any shape we pleased, would you not
be of that sea Triton 's swimming triumphantly with his Two Fish-Tails joined
to a Human Body,] etc. (lin. 28, etc.) Virgil describes Triton in lib. 10. of
his Aeneads; and Pausanias in Book 9. -- of Nature [loving her self] that a
man, etc. (lin. 33.)

Flock of Boys, etc. (page 44. page 44.
lin. 4.) Not only the Babylonians of Old, but even the Greeks and Romans also
kept their Boys ad delicias; Socrates, Plato, etc. seeming to approve of the
Proceeding -- you may laugh, etc. ['Tis a Liquourish Smile That,] (says Cotta,
to Velleius Smiling,) etc. but, (etc. (l. 4, 5.) -- Aleaeus ( of Mitylene in
the Isle of Lesbos, a Famous Poet,) held a Wart upon a Boy's (Lycus's) Knuckle,
etc. (l. 10.) -- Freed-man [Towns-man] Roscius (the Admirable Comedian, born at
Lanuvium in Italy, as was Velleius, etc. (lin. 14.) -- Rising Sun. Aurora, the
Rising Morn; it being Customary with the Romans to worship her; and then, Deus
for Dea is usual with the Poets, etc. (lin. 16, etc.) -- To Him, he was Fairer
than a God, (or, the Goddess Aurora,) yet, was he Then, as he is Now, sadly
Squint-eyed, etc. (lin. 21, 22.) -- to be [if not Squint, yet, at least
Pink-ey'd,] etc. lin. 27. -- from Imperfections, etc. (lin. 32.) Laurentius
Pignorus writes, that the Egyptians mended not their Imperfections in their
Deities.

an Academy [ as little Certainty, as amongst the Academiques, who hold, that
nothing can be Perceived,] etc. (page 45. page 45.
lin. 4.) -- such Absurdities [as You teach, concerning the Human Figure of the
Gods,] etc. (lin. 12.) -- it is said [you say] it has, etc. (lin. 16.) -- Forms
[Visages] that, etc. (lin. 19.) -- Beasts in greater Reverence [and therefore,
must needs conceive of the Deities under the Shape of Beasts,] etc. (lin. 25,
26.) -- Harmed a Cat [Herodotus writes it to have been Certain Death, there,
for any to Hurt these, either on set purpose, or by accident,] etc. (lin. 32.)
The Egyptians Consecrated Diverse of their Men too, Men Consecrated by the
Egyptians, etc. as well as Beasts.
as well as the Greeks, and Romans: So did the Syrians also, tho indeed they
worshipped Semiramis under the Form of a Dove.

the Roman Juno and the Grecian, etc. [Pausanias, ( in lib. 2. de
Corinthiacis,) Describes the Grecian Juno; and Albricus, ( the Philosopher,) in
his Small Tract de Imaginibus Deorum, the Roman,] etc. (p. 46. page 46. Jupiter
Capitolinus.
lin. 4.) -- Jupiter of the Capitol [ was stamped upon their Coins Naked on his
Upper parts, Covered on his Lower; with a Thunderbolt in his Right hand, and a
Scepter in his Left,] etc. (lin. 8.) -- Jupiter Hamon Jupiter Hamon.
[ had the Head of a Ram, all the rest of his Body Human, says Marcianus,] etc.
(l. 9.) -- at This rate [if you may fetch, etc. you may affirm Jupiter,] etc.
(lin. 13, 14.) -- Alcamenes was an Athenian Statuary (l. 17.) -- who, [as he
stands,] through his, etc. (lin. 18.) -- the Gods to be of [those to be the
Proper Names of the Gods, that the Romans give them,] etc. (lin. 23, etc.) --
For, you are out [For, it is not that, as you are still called Velleius,
wherever you come, so, Vulcan has one and the same Name in Italy, etc. (lin.
29, etc.) [he was also called Mulciber; by the Egyptians, Onas,] etc. A Dark
Passage Explained.
This is Cotta's First Argument, drawn from Similitude; that, as Other Nations
Varied from the Romans in their Appellations of their Deities, so in their
Forms too; therefore could not those Figures given by the Romans be the proper
Forms of the Gods, (lin. 27, etc.) -- [no Names at all, etc.] This, the Second,
from Absurdity; that if (as the Epicureans held) they were all of a Feature,
the Gods needed no Name at all: But, This seeming to be Absurd, and against the
Books of Ceremonies, where some certain Names were set down for them; in
Consequence they could not all have one Human Face: This Inferred from these
words. How much more Commendable, etc. then, to Nauseate one that blunders
forth such stuff as This, and become Uneasy to your self, etc. (from lin. 31.
of p. 46. to l. 8. of p. 47.) -- And then, the Third from Indecency, is
contained in the words do you believe the Gods to be like You, or Me? (lin. 9.)
which is to say, that, since no one man dare affirm the Gods to be like his
Individual self; it follows, they are not of Human Form. This (sure) must be
the Sense of this Paragraph.

are they Capable of [Do they enjoy,] etc. (p. 47. page 47.
l. 13.) -- such a Bulk [i. e. in a Nature void of all Sense,] etc. (l. 15.) --
meanest of the Deities [all the very Least Images of the Gods,] etc. (l. 25.)
-- Fundamental Articles [proper, precipuous Opinions,] etc. (l. 32.)

Doubtful [simple in expressing,] etc. (p. 48. page 48.
lin. 1.) -- [They observe not, that he has spoken ambiguously Here; but, in
many Other places, both he, and Metrodorus as plainly, as your self ere-while,]
etc. (lin. 8, etc.) -- [What, could you ever see the Sun,] etc. (lin. 34, 35.)
The Drift of this Argumentation is somewhat hard to find out, The Intricate
Sense of another passage in the Original Cleared.
but, Cotta may mean Thus perhaps: That, since Epicurus would not allow the
Sun, etc. to be a God, because he only saw, a Rational Soul in an Human Figure;
it is here showed we allow of many things, tho we never discerned them with our
Eyes, or any of our Senses: So, no good Inference of Epicurus's, that the Sun,
Moon, etc. are altogether Destitute of Reason, only in that he never beheld
them make use of any: Neither, because he saw Reason only in Human Shape, ought
he to deny it to be found in any other Figure, so long as he granted that
Planets there are, tho he never saw either the Substance or Motion of them.
This seems to be the Sense of the Original, how perplexed soever the Expression
be.

two extreme Parts [i. e. the Tropic of Cancer, and That of Capricorn,] etc.
(p. 49. page 49.
lin. 1.) -- the same Course. [ the Moon moves much slower than the Sun, only
her Orb is Narrower, as being Next the Earth: she is in the same Zodiac with
the Sun; tho not in the same Line thereof, but a more Contracted,] etc. (lin.
4.) -- same Circle [i. e. the same Zodiac, which is fansi'd to be of great
Latitude,] etc. (lin. 5.) -- some Nearer, etc. [ Note, First, that it was the
Custom, in Cicero 's Days, to separate the Sun and Moon ( tho wandering, as the
Rest) from the Number of the Planets, in regard of their Extraordinary Light,
and Influence. Then, that (the lowest) the Moon, The Di^tances of the Planets
from the Earth.
is 117595 Miles distant from the Superficies of the Earth; Mercury, 226652;
Venus, 597132; Sol, 4349990; Mars, 3168365; Jupiter, 51464862; Saturn,
80039436: According to a more Loose Computation This; omitting some Fractions
of small moment, which Clavius, in his Commentary on the Sphere of John de
Sacro Bosco, pursues more strictly (lin. 6.) -- born in Seriphus, etc. (lin.
21, etc.) As the Boeotians amongst the Greeks, so the Seriphians of the
Islanders, were noted for much Dullness. Nierembergius his History Naturae
maxim peregrinae may be consulted touching the Beasts here mentioned; things
being somewhat more Certain, there, than in Pliny.

must also be allowed [is Coherent also,] etc. (page 50. page 50.
lin. 4.) -- phansy [authority,] etc. (lin. 11.) -- you will ask, what
Difference is there? etc. lin. 18. to lin. 28. seem to be Velleius's words;
and, what Cotta infers from them, begins at their Shape therefore, etc. (lin.
28.)

have presumed to grapple with [spoken against,] etc. (p. 52. page 52.
l. 12.) -- Leontium [ a Woman of the Epicurean Sect; Hermachus, etc. being
Famous Epicureans also,] etc. (l. 14.) -- Attique [i. e. Elegant] style (lin.
15.) -- Garden has been so luxuriant [i. e. Followers have been so Faulty] in
this respect, etc. (lin. 17.) -- Phedro [Phedrus, the Epicurean,] etc. (lin.
22.) -- Elegant; [but yet] the Old man, etc. (lin. 23.) -- Tart word of mine
[scil. against the Epicureans,] etc. (lin. 24.) -- under whom he profited
little [of whom he would not be thought ever to have learnt,] etc. (l. 33.) --

Sylla [Syllus,] but who or what this Syllus was, Antiquity is silent,] etc.
(page 53. page 5^
lin. 1.) the Attique Buffon [ using a Latin Word, Scurra Atticus,] etc. (lin.
3.) -- Chesippus [(...), alvum exonerare,] etc. (lin. 4.) -- undertake for
[admit,] etc. (lin. 16.)

in our Researches, etc. (p. 54. page ^4
l. 15, etc.) [when the Question is, touching the most Excellent Nature, and
That Blessed, and Eternal; which [scil. Beatitude, and Eternity,] are only in
the Divine; [are the things, you say, that Constitute the Deity.] it cannot,
etc. (lin. 17, etc.) -- Then his Form, etc. (l. 24) [Cotta it should seem, An
Explanation.
would (from lin. 13. here, to lin. 24.) argue Thus; that, if, in any thing we
be like the Gods, it is rather in Vertae, than in Form; but, in Virtue, even in
the Judgment of you Epicureans, we are not equal to the Deity; Therefore, nor
in Figure neither. And yet, I think, he, in very deed, only means by all This,
that, the Deity, if so be he is Corporeal, far surpasses all Mortals, (yet,) in
Beauty, and Excellence of Bodily Form.

is your [that] similitude [scil. betwixt God and Man,] etc. (lin. penult.)
This seems to have been the Epicurean Enthymeme, There is a similitude betwixt
God and Man; therefore is the Figure of the One and the Other alike. Now,
Cotta, easily destroys the Consequence of This Syllogism, by showing in what
follows, (to lin. 11. of page 55.) that one thing may be like another in one
respect, unlike in another.

to the purpose, etc. [i. e. in no wise proves the Form of the Gods, and of Man
(the question in hand,) to be one and the same.] (page 55. page 55.
lin. 1.) -- calls it [sings,] etc. (lin. 3.) -- The Elephant comes short of,
etc. [ and therefore, is almost like Man in Prudence] (lin. 6.) -- put over all
these Hard things, etc. [But, if you do gainsay all these things, Another.
that may be assumed, by another, with the same Right that You took for Certain
that Reason could only be in Human Figure,] (lin. 22.) -- why stickle you so
much for a Bare Figure? etc. [i. e. why scruple you to deny this One thing
(also,) that, Human Figure is Necessary to the having of Reason.] (l. 23.) --
of them [of a Human Body] do but, etc. (l. 30.) -- For surely [unless
perchance, you considered not,] etc. (lin. 32.)

Privities. Femen is the Inward part of the Thigh. (page 56. page 56. A Third.
lin. 6.) -- An Unaccountable Prenotion [a certain ingrafted Notion,] etc.
(lin. 33.) [i. e. It were superfluous (Replies Epicurus) to prove a Deity by
any Mighty Works, so long as I have a Notion of one in my Mind.] -- of a
Bearded, etc. [i. e. You might as well tell us, Epicurus, or Velleius, (Returns
Cotta, then,) that you have an Information of the whole Figure of them; their
Habiliments, etc. But, This you do not think: So, nor have you any Innate
Information of a Deity neither, would you but confess the Truth. ( lin. penult.
etc.)

This Particular [scil. as to the Action of the Deity,] etc. (page 57. page 57.
lin. 3.) -- hear of their being [think they are altogether] Idle, etc. (lin.
10.) -- decreed Divine Honors to [ascrib'd in the number of Deities,] etc.
(lin. 13.) -- by [killing and] devouring, etc. (lin. 19.) -- advantages they
reap by their Ichneumons, Cats, and Crocodiles, The Beneficialness of
Crocodiles, etc. to the Egyptians.
etc. (lin. 25.) The Ichneumon ( or Indian Rat) used to hunt out and destroy
the Crocodile's Eggs. The Crocodile terrified the Arabian Robbers, and the
Africans from passing the Nile to Harm the Egyptians. And, the Cat was held to
be of Antidote against the Mortal Sting of the Asp.

Since [if so be] not, etc. (p. 58. page 58.
l. 9.) -- highest [Region] of all, etc. (lin. 22.) -- amphibious [as it were
of Uncertain Kind,] etc. (lin. 25.) -- Appetites are [Final Cause is,] etc.
(lin. 31.)

a Trip in any of these Particulars is a Blot [meddle with any of these
Particulars now advanced, and you come badly off, page 59.
] (Epicurus,) etc. (page 59. lin. 34.) -- the Figure [ Image, The Nature of the
Deity what, according to Epicurus. A Recapitulation of Epicurus's Doctrine
concerning Images Exp^a^^'^^.
nay even Nature it self; for the very Power, and Nature of the Deity was no
other, in Epicurus's Opinion, than his Shape or Image, which flowed from
Atoms,] of, etc. (lin. 7.) -- was effected by a similitude, etc. [i. e. that,
the shape of the Deity is no otherwise to be perceived, than by phansying to
one Image passing away, and vanishing, another like it still succeeding in its
place; there never being wanting an Accession of the like Images from Atoms
Infinite not in Magnitude, but, in Number; and therefore it is, that while we
attentively consider these things, we conceive this Image of the Dei^y arising
from Atoms to be Blessed, and Eternal; in that it never fails, by reason of the
Continual Succession of the like Species or Images, in the place of the former
vanished.] (from lin. 10. to lin. 15.) -- This, now, is a Rehearsal of what
Velleius had delivered before; what follows is Cotta's Reply to it. Viz. What in
the Name of, etc. do you Mean by all This? (lin. 15, 16, 17.) [Is there any
thing either of Probability, Cotta's Answer to it Expounded also.
(cries Cotta,) or worthy a Philosopher in all This?] For, if the Gods of
Epicurus do only Exist (lin. 18.) [are only to be perceiv'd] in Thought, and
are absolutely void of Substance and Solidity (l. 20.) [have nothing of Bulk or
Substance in them, that may fall under Sense;] what matters it (i. e. it is all
one,) whether we think of an Hippocentaur, (lin. 22.) [a fictitious thing,] or
of a Deity that is without swelling or Solidity,] etc. (to lin. 22.) -- and
from the Capitol, etc. [ and, when those Assemblies are anew held in that same
Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, The Academical and Epicurean Opinions touching
the Images of things past.
are brought again into my Mind, upon my calling those Assemblies to
Remembrance.] (lin. 32, 33.) So that the Academiques (it should seem) held the
Remembrance of any thing past to be a vain Motion of the Mind, because it was
conversant about what had no longer a Being. But, the Epicureans (on the Other
side) thought perpetual Images of Times past continued in Nature, and were
whirled about with Incessant Motion; and that, by means of these Images
slipping into our Minds, a Remembrance of past Time was ever and anon revived
in us.] -- That, the Case of Divine Images is not Unlike this (lin. 3, 4.)
[That, The Exposition of Cotta's Reply pursued.
just the same way is the Deity discerned;] -- by an earnest Intention
whereupon (lin. 35.) [by the frequent New Images of whom] our Minds are stirred
up; and, from this Force, and Excitation of our Minds, we come to understand
that the Deities are Happy and Immortal ( lin. ult. and lin. 1. of page 60.
page 60.
) [we may gather, that the Minds of All are Blessed and Eternal.] -- Now,
supposing, etc. (from lin. 2. to lin. 7.) [Now, admitting (what might well be
denied) that these kind of Images, whereby our Minds are affected, are Deities;
we are Then taught indeed that God is a Species or Image; but (yet) in no wise
shown why this same Image should be Blessed, and Eternal.] yes, why Eternal;
(Cotta?) because the Epicurean said before, there is a perpetual Supply of
Images of the same kind from Atoms; but he urged nothing (I confess) for the
Beatitude of his Images.

The great Devotion of the Pythagoreans to their Founder.
Cecrops [Cecrops] (lin. 24.) Tho the Word seems to be the Proper Name of a Man,
yet I suspect it here put for some or other heavy and ignorant Imitatour, (That
Sect, in Old Time, producing many such,) who transcribed the Placits of his
Doctor Pythagoras (almost ad verbum) into his own Commentaries.

page 61. St. Augustin's account of the Reason why the Epi^ureans made only One
Image of a Body that sends forth Innumerable of them (as They thought) to be
Discernible.
But, how inordinate, etc. (from l. 5. of p. 61. to l. 10.) [But, how
Licentiously speak you All? There is a Transition of Images frequently flowing;
and therefore, one ( made up of many) comes to be perceived.] The Epicurean is
Introduced speaking This. What follows, I should blush, etc. (l. 10.) is the
Academiques reply to this Doctrine. St. Augustine (to Dioscorus) explains This
Tenet after This manner; that, when the Epicureans were asked, why one Image
might be seen, of any Body wherefrom Images flow Innumerably; they answered, in
regard Images did thus frequently flow, and pass from one thing, it fell out,
that, by a kind of thronging and crowding of these together, there came one to
be made up of many, that might be discerned. -- whirl about [flow] Incessantly,
etc. (lin. 15.) -- to be Eternal [ for, things that flow and decay are not
Eternal, Cotta's Consutation of the Isonomy of the Epicureans Explained.
] etc. (lin. 16.) that they [that all things else should be Sempiternal? i. e.
does what you tell us touching the Innumerableness of Atoms, which still
furnishes out New Images, equally prove all things else in the world, to be no
less Eternal than the Deities; since that same Innumerableness of Atoms may be
able, in like manner, to repair the whole Decay of things?] etc. (lin. 19.) --
and, you say further, that as [and, since] there, etc. (lin. 28.) -- admit
that, etc. (from lin. 27. to lin. 32.) [i. e. I grant that there are things
Salutary, (for, as to the two other Consequences of your Doctrine of Isonomy,
they are too absurd to be allowed by any body,) as well as there are
Pestiferous: But yet, those, [Imaginary Deities,] which you compute upon as
Salutary, I deny to be so; because, in very deed, they have no being at all: Do
but you, therefore show me, first, that any such Gods there are, and I will,
then, allow them to be Preservers.] (Here we may cast our thought ad Deos
(...), The Ancients had Helping and Harming Deities.
(in Apuleius's term, Salutigeros,) and Vejovem, and other harmfull and
destructive Demons of the Ancients.) -- comes this whole mass of things [come
all these Images] to arise from Atoms, etc. (lin. ult.)

consists in Action [is always doing something,] etc. (page 62. page 62.
lin. 10.) -- a constant supply [sufficiency] of, etc. (l. 14.) -- an Hebe, or
a Ganimede, [a little Girl, (the Goddess Hebe;) or a Boy] to fill their Cups,
etc. (l. 32.) of this Fooling [speaking Dissemblingly,] etc. (page 63. page 63.
lin. 8.) -- with making sport with [your pretending to set light by] the, etc.
(lin. 9.) -- consider well on it, now, and toss it in your Mind, whether the
Godhead does [comprehend in your Mind, now, and set before your Eyes a God,
doing] nothing, etc. ( lin. ult. and lin. 1. of page 64. page 64.
-- which way that God should be Happy [why this Blessed Deity of yours should
not be in fear of Dying, being] continually, etc. (lin. 5, 6.) -- that we are
not beholden to [from whom we receive nothing, etc. (lin. 29.) --

what more, in effect, did those, etc. [unloss perchance you think Diagoras,
etc. could ^^^e been Superstitious] who flatly, etc. ag. 65. lin. 11, etc.) --
And the Pro^agoras I mentioned before [Tho, I hold not even Protagoras to have
been so,] who doubted, etc. (lin. 14, 15.) -- All whose, etc. [For, the
Opinions of all these] were (l. 16.) -- by Reason. [ Did not They tear up
Religion by the Roots?] Or, what, etc. (l. 26.) -- and Adore? [are not These
utterly void of all Religion?] (lin. 34.) -- This Doctrine [This way of coming
to be Gods] Euhemerus [ a Greek Historian whom, etc. has more especially
appeared in favor of, [has more particularly Treated of] who speaks, etc.
(from lin. 24. to lin. 1. of page 66. page 66.
) -- And That of Hers at Samothracia, [And the (Orgia) Sacrifices of the Isle
Samothracia,] too, etc. (lin. 8.) In This Isle (which is in the Aegaean Sea,
near Thrace,) Mercury, Hecare, The Deities of the Isle, Samothra ia, and ^emnos.
the Curetes, Coribantes, and Cabiri, were heretofore Honored with most Impure
Rites, and filthy Ceremonies. Nor (again) was Lemnos (lin. 10.) far from Thrace
neither; and therefore, it is not unmeet to Conceive (nay and Hesychius an
Ancient Author, who lived in the time of Anastasius the Emperor, witnesses)
that not only the Great Mother of the Gods (called Lemnos) used to be There
Sacrifie'd to, and appeased with the Blood of Virgins, nor yet Vulcan, whom
they entertained, and honored with Divine Rites, when cast down from Heaven
(as, Poets and Mythologists tell;) but the same Cabrici also, and in the same
shameful manner, (too) with (their Neighbors) the Thracians. -- of the [of
Created] things, etc. (l. 14.) -- in this Particular [scil. of the Nature of
the Gods] tho, etc. (l. 17.) -- from whose Fountains, etc. [i. e. from whose
Books Epicurus drew his Dogmata.] (lin. 19.) -- who can believe, etc.
[comprehend these Images in his Mind] (lin. 32.) -- whence Juvenal [Martial]
says, etc. ( lin. ult.)

of Power, etc. [in teaching that the Gods bring no Help to Men, nor do them
any Good at all.] (page 67. page 67.
lin. 2.) -- how do you overshoot your selves, etc. [of how much Mischief are
you the Authors, in supposing, that none love one another, but with Intent, by
mutual Aid and Assistance, to relieve their proper wants, and weakness.] (from
lin. 23. to lin. 26.) -- to use [any one of] them, etc. (page 68. page 68.
lin. ult.) -- no such thing in Nature [any such Nature there cannot be] and,
etc. (page 69. page 69.
lin. 4.)

This, now, is sufficient (I hope) to Clear the Sense of this First Book: And,
as to the Doctrine of it, and the Impieties of Epicurus, the Context, and my
References must Content for a farther Confutation. A Judgment upon the First
Book, by way of Comparison of the two Disputants.
It only consisting with the Brevity I have propounded, to say, by way of
Comparison of the two Disputants, that Velleius is the more Confident; Cotta,
Frigid. This bears the greater show of Despiciency; the Other, of Modesty. The
Epicurean thinks nothing too much for (the little God) his Author; the
Academique ascribes more to his own Understanding, than to the Deity. He but
badly Confirms his Tenets; This thinks all things to be Infirm. The Epicurean
Scruples nothing; the Academique Determines upon Nothing. Velleius's Deity is
known by Anticipation, before all manner of Instruction; Cotta's becomes
Obscure, even after Consultation, by an Intemperate Liberty of Speaking. This
is very much pleased with his little Fortunate Mormoe of a Divinity; the Other
is ashamed of that same Scant Beatitude; wherein, He is apprehensive of
Weariness, This, of Business: Neither of them conceiving Action in Leisure,
Rest in Employ to be the greatest Felicity. In a Word; They both run into
desperate Errors, in the matter of the Godhead; the Epicurean, lest he should
be thought to doubt of, or fear any thing; the Academique, that he might not
seem to have ought Certain, and Assured. And Thus, I have done with the First
Book.

HAVING made a kind of a Promise, (page 3.) when I Prefac'd Generally, to
Introduce my Notes, etc. upon this Second Book, A Commendation of the Second
Book.
with a Word or two in Commendation of it; I shall venture to say that,
whatever has been usually deemed worthy of Praise, in any Writing, is contained
Here in the Highest Perfection: ( Weight, and Loftiness of Argument; an
Incredible Abundance of Matter; and an Elegance of Style not Unsuitable:) The
Argument, is a Deity; not that Shadowy and Lineal one of the Epicureans; but, a
God as Great as was (almost) possible to be discerned by the acute and subtle
Understanding of the most Learned men; which same Understanding yet, is not
seldom Dimmed and Eclyps'd, (I must confess) by the Brightness of this Divine
Sun. Plenty of Matter there is no where more in all Cicero: For, what part of
the Universe, or of Learning has he left untoucht, that could any way be
pierced into by a Sagacious Wit, and handled in Discourse? The Whole Body of
the Stoical Theology is Vnveil'd; not cursorily, and in transitu, (as it were,)
at the rate Velleius has passed over That of Epicurus, in the First Book; nor
yet in the pincht, dry, and concise way of Speaking, the Stoiques for the most
part used; but, it is, in a free and flowing Disputation, explained, even to
Pomp and Magnificence, with singular Ornament, by a most Eloquent and Knowing
Man, and a sharp Defender of the Stoical Party. Therefore may it plainly be
perceived, that all the Other Arts and Disciplines, as Tributaries, have
brought in their preciousest Treasures, toward the beautifying and bedecking of
this One Theology. Poetry scatters here and there, in the Beginning of the
Discourse, Verses out of her Ancient Professors, to serve as Flowers. History
statelily sets forth certain special Events, that can never enough be wondered
at. Divination produces Celestial Impulses of the Divinity, and Predictions of
Future and most Secret Events. Physiques, (that most diligent Searcher into All
Nature,) intimates whatever is abstruse and hidden in the very Bowels of
Matter: First, the salutary Heat which the Stoiques deemed to be in the Whole
World and every Part thereof; Then, fetching a Compass, it brings forth, (what
the Porch so highly accounted of,) that (...), or, (as Cicero renders it,)
Principality of the Universe. Mythology draws out its Fables full of Mystery.
Geometry gives a Taste of its Figures, by the By: while Astrology, freely and
at leisure ransacks every Quarter of the Heavens, and fetches Thence what
contributes unspeakably to the Luster of the Stoical Theology; gives in the
Innumerable Multitudes of the Stars, their eternal Conversions, Constant
Orders, and Certain Risings and Settings by Turns; the Infinite Power of Light,
and a Pulchritude that can never sat us. In short, Here it is that Universal
Nature uncovers her Bosom, as with Hands, and submits her whole Proportion to
Open View. And, as the Eloquence of the Greatest of Orators reigns every were
throughout the Book; so, more particularly, in the last Part thereof, it grows
above it self, almost Equal to the Infiniteness of the Argument, and triumphs
even to Splendor and Admiration: For, being got out of the Narrownesses of the
Porch, and come into a Field the spaciousest that can be, it courses over the
whole Parible world, in a Clear and Streaming Oration. First, the Stars, the
Various Courses of the same; the Vicissitudes of Days and Nights, and the
Seasons of the Year, effected by the Sky; Next, the Elements; And Afterward,
Those usually termed Mixed Bodies; the whole Generation of Vegetibles and
Animals, the Innate Virtues imparted to each Kind by the Provident Deity, as
well as the Arms enabling them to defend and preserve themselves, are most
admirably described, in so pure and Rapid a Current of Elocution, that one
would almost say, the Stars of the Night, the Moon, nay even the Sun it self
received an Accession of Light from the Luster of the Expression, that the
Countenance of Nature was rendered more Cheerful by such an Elegance of
Language; that the World it self, (than which not any thing can so much as be
imagined to be more adorned) derived no small Embellishment from the Splendor
and Brightness of so Noble a Style: Last of all, he comes to Man, (the
Masterpiece of God the Architect;) and, when a body would expect all the Power
of Rhetorique that ever Tully was Master of had been quite spent, by so long a
Course of Speaking, Then it is that he sets upon Pourtraying this Admirable
Piece of the Greatest Artificer: And yet, Entire Man, (I say,) from Head to
Heel, Within and Without, stupendiously contrived with all Faculties and
Abilities of Body and Mind, does he Represent with so unspeakable a Variety of
Colors, such a Store of Matter, and so great a Plenty, even abundance of
Words; that one would think he had gathered Strength and Vigor by the very
Exercise.

But, further Preface, and Exhortation apart; (for, his Pulse must needs beat
very cool toward Letters, whom what has been already said excites not to a
perusal of this more Human Theology, whereunto so many Famous Arts are
Subservient,) I will subjoyn a Compendiary Synopsis, that will (at one Glance
as it were) summarily and distinctly show the Contents of the respective
Branches of the whole Book. It may (then) be divided into Three Parts; The
Division of the Second Book.
the First is a kind of Passage to the Argument; by a commendable Contest of
the Well-bred Disputants, mutually Lessening themselves by turns: The Second,
is the Disputation it self of Balbus, setting forth the Theology of the
Stoiques at large, even to the very last Section of the Book, which is the only
one Left for the Other Part: The Third, is a Brief sort of Peroration, wherein
the Stoique exhorts Cotta, in the Academical Liberty of Disputing rather to
Defend, than to Oppugn the Deity.

The Contents of the First Part of the Second Book.
PURSUANT to This Division, then; BOOK II. PART I. from page 71. to lin. 17. of
page 72. Cicero passes from the Disputation of Cotta, wherein, in the Foregoing
Book, he had Exploded the Theology of the Epicureans, to That of Balbus: But,
before Balbus, is Velleius here brought in; who, a^ If overcome by Cotta, with
a Gentile Courtesy commends both the Learning and Eloquence of his Antagonist,
and Invites Balbus to speak: He, again, out of Modesty, refers the Province to
Cotta; exhorting him, with the same power that he took away False Gods to
Introduce the True. THENCE, to lin. 11. of page 73. Cotta, Thus called upon,
Excuses himself; And Balbus, being desired a second time, gently enters upon
the Disputation, which he Divides into Four Parts; and, making a Motion to let
two of them alone till another time, Cotta requires to have them all spoken to.

But This, by the By. Explanations, etc. of the First Part of the Second Book.
page 72.
[I will come to at another Time] i. e. I will speak of your Learning and
Eloquence at another Time, Cotta,] etc. (page 72. lin. 1.) -- as to things of
this Quality, what should not be thought, than what should, etc. (lin. 21, 22.)
This same Academical Profession of Inscience of Cotta's, upon all Occasions,
and in Divine Matters more especially, seems to have some Affinity with that
sort of Negative Theology professed by Plato Himself, in his Timaeus, Negative
Theology; what.
where he declares he knows not What God is; but only, what he is not; no
Color, nor any thing of That Kind. And indeed, how Great soever the things,
attributed by Divines to the Godhead (Wisdom, Goodness, etc.) may be; yet,
being so Inferior to such a Majesty, they agree with the Divine Nature only
Negatively: That is to say, God is Denied to be Wise, the manner we usually
speak of Men. Agreeable whereunto is a passage of Dionysius, (that (...), Bird
of Heaven; as St. Chrysostom in regard of his soaring Contemplation of Divine
Matters, styles him,) in C. 1. of his Mystical Theology; Viz. (...). i. e. It
is meet, in It, (the Divine Nature) as the Cause of every thing, to place and
affirm all the Positions ( vulgarly Attributes) of whatever is, and more proper
to Deny all those with relation to the same, as being above each one of them:
And, we are not to imagine, that Affirmations are (Here) Opposite to Negations;
but, much rather, to conceive it (the Divine Nature) to be above Privation, as
what is beyond all Ablation, and Position. [Here observe that which comes
nearer to the Mind of our Academique, that, it is more proper to Deny, than to
Assert the Attributes so common in every Body's Mouth, with relation to the
Deity.] To the same Purpose also, wrote St. Cyprian, (or whatever other ancient
Author it was, that passes under His Name) in the Introduction to the Treatise
of the Cardinal Works of Christ. Thus much, for the Preamble, or First Part of
this Second Book.

PVRPOSING to proceed according to Balbus's Four fold Distribution of his
Dispute; let me tell ye, by way of Epitome of the First Branch thereof, the
Scope of which is to make out there are Gods, The Being of a Deity (the First
Branch of the Stoical Disputation) proved by Three sorts of Arguments.
( i. e. the Existence of some or other Divinity;) that, he confirms the Point
by Arguments of Three Sorts: the Consent of all Men, the Constancy of the
Opinion, the Appearance of the Gods, and the Revelation of things to come, are
of the First; and, for the Second, and Third, they are plainer in the Context
it self, than to need a Declaration. So that, I pass to the Contents of the
First Branch; The Contents of each Section of the First Branch of (the Second
Part, or,) Balbus's Disp^tation.
as follows.

PART II. SECT. I. From lin. 14. of page 73. to lin. 7. of page 74. Balbus,
entering upon the Proof of a Deity, draws the First Argument, to that purpose,
from Heaven; which being beheld, all men presently Confess that a God there
is-THENCE, to lin. 27. of the same page. Another Reason, that persuades of the
Existence of a Deity, is, the fixed and stable Opinion of him, in the Minds of
all men; and the Religious Adoration constantly paid to his Majesty. THENCE, to
lin. 33. of page 75. He also collects the Thing, from the Appearances of the
Gods themselves. THENCE, to lin. 6. of page 77. He undertakes to strengthen the
Credit of Divine Revelations, (which he conceived to be of great force toward
Confirming a Deity,) First, by removing all suspicion of Fiction; then, by
Variety of Events, and the Punishment of some that slighted the Tokens. THENCE,
to l. 20. of page 78. Somewhat is likewise derived toward the support of
Predictions, by pressing the Examples of their Ancestors, who showed much
Faith, Piety, and Constancy in their Care of the Auspicia, THENCE, to lin. 15.
of page 80. That so Firm Prop of Divination, at First, drawn from the Event it
self of the Things Divined, only in the General, he Now resumes, and fortifies
with the Predictions of the Sibylls, and the Answers of the Southsayers, (as if
found True;) but more especially, by the peculiar and notable Eact of Tib.
Gracchus, which he relates at large, in the whole 10. and 11. Sectious almost.
THENCE, to lin. 2. of page 81. Then, by a Brief and Clear Syllogism, (fetched
from Divination,) he Concludes, that Gods there are: And, that the Conclusion
might not be Infirm in any part, he Anticipates an Objection that would ruin
it. In the end he again inculcates (what it was the Drift of the whole to
prove,) the Existence of a Deity; Confirming it by the Testimony of Nature, as
by the Seal and Suffrage of all Mortals. THENCE, to lin. 34. of the same page.
He (Here) urges over again much what the same Arguments, in proof of a Deity,
that he had used before; only they are Confirmed by the Authority of the
Principals of the Stoical Sect; Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and ^eno: And, First, of
Cleanthes, who speaks of f^ur ways whereby men have come to a knowledge of the
Deity; Three of which are set forth in This Section; the Other, in the Next.
THENCE, to to lin. 20. of page 82. The Fourth and Chief Cause alleged by
Cleanthes for the Impression of a Notion of the Deity in the Minds of Mortals
is, the Contemplation of things Celestial: A Cause, that he (Here) Illustrates
by a queint and proper Comparison. THENCE, to, lin. 8. of page 83. He produces
the Argumentation whereby Chrysippus collected the Existence of a Divinity;
That, there is something or other in Universal Nature better than Man; and so,
there must needs be a God. In proof of the Antecedent, Three Reasons are given;
the First of them, derived from the Noble Effects that exceed Human Ability, is
in This Section; the other Two, in the ensuing. THENCE, to lin. 33. of the same
page. What Chrysippus has proved in the Section above, I mean the being of
something in the World that is Better than Man, does Lucilius (also) now
Confirm by two Arguments; to be more at large expounded by and by. THENCE, to
lin. 24. of page 84. The Divine Mind of the World is collected both from the
Mind of Man, and from the Excellence it self of the Universe. THENCE, to lin.
9. of page 85. He moreover Confirms the Divine Mind of the Universe, First, by
the Admirable Consent of the Parts of the same World; Next, by the Constant
Variations of the Seasons of the Year; Then, by the Tides of the Sea, the
Vicissitudinary Flux and Reflux whereof is so Certain; and Lastly, by the
Course of the Stars, in so Steady an Order, for so long a time. THENCE, to lin.
33. of the same page. He strengthens the Assertion of Reason in the World, by
the Authority and Arguments of Zeno; in Transitu, noting the Stoical Brevity in
Disputing; and, by a decent Comparison, showing how much Rhetoric surpasses
Logique. THENCE, to lin. 20. of page 86. The same Zeno labors to to make out
what he stickled for in the Last Paragraph, that the World is indu'd with Sense
and Reason, by two Other Syllogisms, and a Double Similitude. THENCE, to lin.
6. of page 87. He advances to the Physical Arguments made use of by the
Stoiques in erecting their Divinity; and, before All, states This Principle,
that, whatever has Life, Lives by the benefit of a kind of Heat. THENCE, to
lin. 25. of the same page. He Confirms the Position of the foregoing Section,
that all Life is derived from the virtue of Heat, by the Authority, and
Arguments of Cleanthes. THENCE, to lin. 18. of page 88. This same Vital Heat of
the two Sections above, shows he more at large, by an Induction through the
Four Elements, to be diffused into all the Parts of the Universe. THENCE, to
lin. 3. of page 89. From the Earth, he advances to the Water, and endeavors to
make appear that in It is Heat implanted by Nature. THENCE, to lin. 33. of the
same page. He finishes the Induction before set upon; and, far more easily
demonstrates the Heat above averred to be included in the Bowels of the Earth,
and Mingled with the Water, to abide also in (the two remaining Elements) the
Air, and Fire. Whence, by a step from the Parts to the Whole, he Concludes the
World it self to be in like manner preserved by means of the same Heat. THENCE,
to lin. 15. of page 90. He set to demonstrating the Fiery Property, in the
Sections foregoing taught to be disfus'd thorough the several Parts of the
Universe, to be also indu'd with Sense and Reason, And, with This Intent, he
Premises, as if Decreed, that whatever is constituted of Parts, has some or
other Principality in it: Declaring This, by a short Induction; and, that the
matter may be the more Plain, expounding what this same Principality is.
THENCE, to lin. 32. of the same page. Having, (as in the last Paragraph,)
constituted the Principality of Nature; he, as is but meet, ascribes to this
Nature whatever is most Excellent, and Worthy of a Prince; and, in the First
place, Sense and Reas n; Both which being before imputed to that Fiery
Property, he now proves they ought so to be by an Argument a Minori, ad Majus.
THENCE, to lin. 15. of page 91. He goes on inculcating, by the like kind of
Argument, the Sense of the Universe; having compared the Heat of the World with
That innate in Men, and Beasts. THENCE, to lin. 7. of page 92. The Excellency
in the Paragraph above attributed to the Sky, of being moved by it self, he
now Illu ^rates with the Authority, and Doctrine of Plato: From whence, he
collects the World to be Animated, Intelligent, and Wise, by a familiar
Argument a Minori ad Majus, from the Parts to the Whole. THENCE, to lin. 33. of
the same page. He ascends by the Four Degrees of Things that have Life, and, in
the Fourth, places the Deity, or, in the Stoical Sense, the World: Vegetables
are the First Degree; Beasts, the Next; the Third, Men, who come to be Good and
Wise, by the guidance of Reason; and, the Other, is that of the Gods, who were
Good and Wise ever. THENCE, to lin. 21. of page 93. He Here, by an Argument
Plain in the Context, Confirms this Fourth and Highest Degree of some or other
Perfect Nature, according as the Last Section ended: THENCE, to lin. 11. of
page 94. He Here, again and again, by the Absurdity of the Consequences,
Inculcates, what he had taken so much pains about before, that the World is
Animated, partakes of Reason, and Understanding, and lastly, is a Deity.
THENCE, to lin. 13. of page 95. The Things as yet only Attributed to the World,
he now shows to be due to it, both by the Authority, Reasons, and Similitudes
of Chrysippus. THENCE, to lin. 5. of page 96. He, now, from the World in
General, comes to, the more Eminent Parts thereof, the Stars; whereunto he also
ascribes Divinity, upon account of their Noble Virtues, and Influences; but,
before all their Other Qualifications, he is not sparing of Words to ^onfirm
the Fiery Nature of the same Stars. THENCE, to lin. 25. of page 97. In that he
had endeavored to make out the Fire of the Sun to be like the Heat in the
Bodies of Living Creatures, he Concludes, the Sun is Animated, as also the rest
of the Stars; Confirming This, by a New Argument a Minori ad Majus;
Illustrating the matter also by the Glorious Name of the Great Arist^tle.
Moreover, from the Superexcellence of the E^hereal Region, and of the Aliment
those Bodies use, he Scruples not to Infer the Superexcellent Intelligence of
the Stars; and, from their Understanding, their Divinity also; clearing it by a
Simile. THENCE, to lin. 4. of page 98. This same Divine Virtue of Understanding
impured to the Stars upon the score of the Excellence of their Place, and
Nourishment, does he now confirm by the Certain and Immutable Order they
maintain in their Eternal Courses; he rejecting those Other Causes, whereunto
might be ascribed the Constancy of those Regular Motions. THENCE, to lin. 31.
of the same page. He strengthens what he delivered in the last Section, by the
Authority of Aristotle: And Then, upon the whole matter, Concludes that Gods:
here are. Only, in the very end of all, he tacitly reprehends the Ignorance,
Impiety, and Madness of the Epicureans. And so, He has Done with the First
Branch; and I, with the Contents of it.

amiss, [in This Discourse,] to, etc. (page 73. page 73. Amendments,
Illustrations, etc. of the First Branch of the Second Part of the Second Book.
lin. 4.) -- harder to make out [more weighty,] etc. (lin. 5.) -- what is over
our heads, [Celestial things,] then, etc. (l. 17.) -- which, were it not so; [
i. e. were it not perspicuous that a Deity there is,] how could Ennius, etc.
[how could Ennius have pleaded Universal Assent, in the Case, in saying, Behold
you Deity [(Coelum) Heaven] glittering, etc. (lin. 20, etc.) But yet, an
Universal Assent to the Divinity of Heaven ought not to be pleaded; for, Heaven
not generally allowed to be a Deity.
not only we Christians deny it, but sundry Wise Men before, accounted upon a
Mind that Governed Heaven, and not Heaven it self, to be a Deity. So that, it
was the Double Error of the Stoiques, First, to Confound the Starbearing
Heaven with the Sky, or Element of Fire; and then, to Deify this same Heaven,
and Invoque it, under the Appellation of Jupiter.

Still ready to help us [still Present] i. e. both by his Immensity, and his
Favor,] etc. (page 74. page 74.
lin. 3.) -- the [Being of the] One more evident than [That of] the Other, etc.
(lin. 6, 7.) -- those Goblins below [i. e. the Hell of the Poets; A future
Punishment, in the Opinion of the Ancients.
as also, the Future Retribution, generally believed by the Ancients.] that,
etc. (lin. 21.) -- were always [in ancienter and better days] in use, etc.
(lin. 25.) -- is This [scil. the Propagation, and Increase of the Worship of
the Gods] the Result, etc. (lin. 28.) -- vanquished Octavius Mamilius, in the
Battle of Tusculum, [in a Set Battle, There, (i. e. at Regillus, Mamilius
Tusculanus.
) Overthrew Octavius Mamilius Tusculanus,] etc. He was the General of the
Latins; by Nation a Latin, himself; but, of Country, a Tusculan. This Miracle
of a Victory is related in Valerius Maximus, lib. 1. cap. 8. de Miraculis.

page 75. Pr^secturates, with the Rmans, what; and how many ^arts of them.
his Government [the Prefecturate,] etc. (page 75. lin. 8.) Sextus Pomponius
Festus says, Those Places were termed Prefecturates, in which Courts, Fairs,
etc. were kept; yet had no Magistrates of their own; but Prefects were sent
Thereinto every year, to determine Controversies, etc. and, that there were two
sorts of them; into one of which four Prefects (chosen by the Suffrage of the
People, out of the Number of the Viginti-Sex Viri) used to go; The Towns of
This being Capua, Cumae, etc. the Other, whereinto those went, that were every
year sent, by the City-Praetor, into each respective Place, as Formiae, Reate,
etc.] -- speaking rashly [as one that had brought a feigned story of the
Victory of the Common Wealth] of, etc. (lin. 14.) -- that he was altogether in
the Right [that he had Overthrown Perses the very day that Vatienus had told]
they, etc. (lin. 17.) -- also written, [deliver'd, The Years of the Overthrow
of Mamilius, and of Perses.
] that, etc. (lin. 20.) Petavius Writes, that Perses was overcome in the 586th
year of the City; Mamilius in the 258th.

had there really been no such people [had it really rejected the Thing it self
[ i. e. Augurs, page 76. The Heathen Divination of no force to prove a Deity.
or the Augural Art.] (p. 76. l. 12.) Let me say upon the whole matter now,
that this same False Divination is of no more force toward the Defense of a
Deity; than are captious, and fallacious Sophistries, for proving the Truth:
Though yet, the True Prophecy of the True Deity is a most certain Demonstration.

of a Sow that was lost, etc. (page 77. page 77. A Escape of Tully's
lin. 18.) In Sect. 30. of his First Book De Divinatione, Tully tells this
Story quite another way; that it was Grape that was to be found, not a Sow:
And, that the thing Happened under Tarquinius Priscus, etc. So that, if Navius
was but a Boy then, there is no probability that Tullus Hostilius (who Reigned
before Priscus) ever made use of his Augural Art in his Wars.) -- Indifference
of our Noble Men, None but Noblemen Augurs, in Rome, upon the First Institution.
etc. (lin. 24.) They were all Patricians and Noblemen, that Romulus Instituted
Augurs: And twelve Sons of the Nobility used every year to be sent into Etruria
(the Parent of the whole Art) to be Initiated in those Sacred Mysteries. But,
in Process of time, and the Decay of the Augural Discipline, some of the
Commonalty were admitted into the College of Augurs.] -- only a bare species of
it retained [and it is only retained in show,] etc. (lin. 27.)

No part of the Acumina, etc. (page 78. page 78.
lin. 1.) It Is variously conjectured what sort of Divinations What sort of
Divinations the Acumina were.
These should be. A Probable Opinion is, that they were those Auspicia that
used to be taken from the Points of their Military Ensigns; It being their
Custom, upon Encamping, to stick These in the Ground, and to divine good or bad
luck from them, according as they came easily or hardly out of it again.] no
Southsayers are Convened [no Men are call'd] and so, Some particular Men in the
Roman Armies used to have Names of Good Luck, given them, as F^rtunatus,
Vi^ior, etc. and were, Then, termed Primicerii.
etc. (lin. 2, 3.) it is not unlikely (says Turnebus) but that these were the
Viri, quibus Nomina Boni Ominis fuere, who were wont to be of great account in
their Armies; the Romans commonly terming such Primicerii.] do usually give the
Onset, as soon as ever they have placed the Auspicia [do usually begin to wage
War, when, ( together with their higher Offices of Magistracy;) they have
quitted the Right of taking the Auspicia] Of which sort were the Proconsuls,
Consuls and Pretors, sometimes chosen, etc. termed Proconsuls and Propretors,
at the end of their Year; and as such, had no Power to take the Auspicia.
and Propretors, who, though they used to be Commissioned to wage War, yet had
they no longer authority to take the Auspicia, the time of their Consulship or
Pretorship, (Offices that had power to Auspicate,) once expired.] (lin. 7, 8,
9.) -- diverse Prophesies of the Sibyls, etc. (lin. 22.) As to the Theology of
these same Sibyls, Lactantius says they preached up One God. Which appears also,
by their Verses; a few whereof (out of Theophylus to Autolycus) follow. viz.
Some Verses of the Sibyls; as a Taste of their Theology.
(...),
(...);
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...), etc.
Ye Mortal, Carnal Men, of no Existence,
How, soon Lift up, never looking to the end of Life?
You Fear not, Tremble not at God your i. e. Inspectour.
Bishop,
Who Notes on High, sees, and of All Is a Witness;
That Cherishing Builder, who infus'd's sweet Spirit
Int' All, making't the Guide of every Man;
That One God, Supreme Ruler, not i. e. not Created.
Ingender'd,
Omnipotent, Invisible, Viewing All things,
Himself yet never beheld by any Flesh, etc.
-- in proof [Confirmation] of these, etc. (lin. 24.) -- by matter of Fact [the
Event] it self, etc. (lin. 28.) -- sought to have them chosen again [went about
having them elected the second time,] etc. (lin. 32.) It was a Custom in Rome,
The Consul etc, Chosen in two several Assemblies.
(says Rofinus,) to have the Consuls, and other Great Officers, chosen in two
several Comitia, (or Assemblies) the Centuriata, and the Curiata -- the Chief
Rogator, Primus R^gator who.
etc. (lin. 34.) i. e. he that delivered the Suffrage of the Prerogative
Century, which all the other still concurred with for the most part:] -- went
on with [finish'd] the Assembly, etc. (page 79. page 79.
lin. 1.) -- as a matter of Religion. [i. e. had raised in the people a
Religious Apprehension, lest the Consuls should not have been duly Elected,]
etc. (lin. 4.) -- he was no due (Rogator Comitiorum) Speaker of the Assembly
[he had not Legally (duly) Indicted the Assembly,] etc. (lin. 12.) They had
two sorts of Rogators in their Assemblies (we see; Two sorts of Regators, in
the Roman Assemblies.
) of the First, as many, as there were Centuries; Of the Other, only One, and
he some or other of the Greater Magistrates, who held the Assemblies, and had
authority to preside over them. He had the Name of Rogator Comitiorum, (quia
Rogaret) from Asking the People in General, before he sent them to their
Suffrages; the Common Beginning of all Action with the People, being Velitis,
Jubeatis, Quirites.] -- was not duly qualified, [did not hold it Rightly,] who,
etc. (lin. 15.) -- he found he had committed a fault, etc. [remember'd he had
taken his Tent, in Scipio's Gardens Wrong; [i. e. without Auspicating;] in
that, [because,] when he had afterward entered the Pomaerium, to Hold a Senate,
as he passed, etc. he forgot to Auspicate, etc. (from lin. 29. to lin. 35.)

The Manner of the Roman Auspicia, before the Holding of their Comitia, or
Assemblies.
That this ancient Superstition of the Romans may be somewhat more Intelligible;
I say, that, after the Auspicia had been Taken, and the Sacra performed for the
First Time; the Magistrate, about to hold the Comitia, went forth of the City,
and Took his Tent or Tabernacle, wherein to take afresh the Auspicia whereby
the Former might be Confirmed. Now, the Taking of this same Tabernacle was held
to be Faulty, if, before he passed over the Pomoerium, he either consulted not
the Auspicia at all, or they proved to be Adverse: And, so very much was
Imputed to these Auspicia of Taking the Tabernacle; that, if there happened to
be any Error at all in this matter, the whole Action was judged to be Faulty,
and Inauspicious. But if, before the Auspicia were quite finished, any occasion
chanced to call back the Magistrate into the City, the Auspicium was to be
begun anew, in the very Passage over the Pomoerium, when he returned to take
the Tabernacle afresh; (not that which he had taken before, but a New one, (as
Plutarch in Marcello expressly avers,) whereby he was again to Observe from the
Sky.) So that, when Tiberius Gracchus, the Auspicia not yet Perfected, was
called back into the City, to Hold a Senate, and remembered not to Auspicate,
as thorough the Pomoerium, he went forth of the City again, to Take Another
Tabernacle, the whole Creation of the Consuls, even by This one Error, became
Inauspicious, and Void.

the Consuls were not duly elected [there was a Fault in the Election,] (page
80. page 80.
lin. 1.) -- that so the Election might be made Void, [the Senate Decreed, that
the Consuls should abdicate themselves from the Office,] which was done
accordingly. [and, the Consuls did Quit it accordingly.] what, etc. (lin. 4,
etc.) -- mistake [be mistaken, in Expounding] them, etc. (lin. 29.)

Stones, and [Gapings, or] sudden, etc. (page 81. page 81.
lin. 18.) -- Blazing Stars in the Firmament, [Meteors in the Air,] and those
[Blazing Stars] which, etc. (l. 22.) -- P. Africanus [Minor] another, etc.
(lin. 30.) -- Conversion, [Circular Motion] of, etc. ( lin. ult.)

any way prejudiced, [made any Alteration in,] he, etc. (page 82. page 82.
lin. 16.)

page 84. All Philosophers, down from Trismegistus, of Opinion, that Human
Souls proceeded from, and were Particles of the Soul of the World.
Whence, [scil. but, from the Divine Mind] had Man, etc. (page 84. lin. 2.)
This Error reigned in all Schools and Academies, down from Trismegistus even
to the Dawn of Christianity: For He, (in Cap. 10.) delivers, that (...), from
the One Soul of the Universe, do All Souls exist. Adding, (...), the Mind is
not rent from the Essence of God, but as it were disfus'd, even as the Light of
the Sun. Whence Epictetus, (One for All the Stoiques,) took occasion to say,
that (...), our Souls are so tied and joined to the Deity, as existing
Particles of him, and fragments after a sort plucked away. The E rour confuted
by St. Augustine.
Contrary whereunto, St. Augustine (in Epist. ad Optat. Milevit.) Writes, that
the Original of the Soul lies hid without danger: Yet, Thus much; that, we are
not to believe it to be a Particle of the Deity, but his Creature. And, He
Confounds the Error (in Cap. 2. of his Original of the Soul) by this
Impregnable Argument; should the Soul be a Particle of the Divine Mind, either
God would be Mutable; (which is remote from the Divine Nature;) or, the Soul
void of all Mutation; and so, would neither degenerate into Worse, nor advance
to Better, nor begin to have any thing in it self, or that it had not: which is
plainly False.] -- and, (in short) [Lastly] that, etc. (l. 6.) -- wherein we
breath [which we draw in breathing] i. e. Attract by Aspiration, The drift of
an Argument of Balbus.
] etc. (lin. 10.) The Argumentation (Here) of Chrysippus (or, of our Balbus,)
is Obvious. Man derived the several Parts of his Body from the respective Parts
of the Universe, therefore, his Mind also, from the Mind ( or Soul) of the
World.] -- Solstices and Winter-Seasons, [ Summer and Winter Solstices,] etc.
(lin. 33.)

Rolling [Conversion] of, etc. (Page 85. page 85.
lin. 2.) -- contained [conserv'd] by, etc. (lin. 8.) -- and constant Spirit
[Soul, or Mind diffused through all the Parts of the World,] etc. (lin. 9.) --
Errors [Blemishes] of the, etc. (lin. 19.) -- And That, Thus too, [The same
Zeno Argues Thus also,] etc. (lin. 33.)

more closely [scantly,] etc. (page 86. page 86.
lin. 2.) -- a different way of proceeding [a more Fuse way of Disputing,] etc.
(lin. 21.) -- from Nature, [Principles of Natural Philosophy, Fire alone, not
the Author of Vital Motion.
] etc. (lin. 28.) -- their Proper [Vital] Motion, etc. (lin. 34.) This is not
True, unless a Soul be also present, which may Impart to the Ingenite Heat (as
its Instrument) the Vital Power of Moving.] -- But [and then] such, etc. ( lin.
ult.)

convenient Fervency, etc. (p. 87. page 87.
l. 1.) [i. e. Every thing that has Life, is moved, not by a fortuitous and
casual motion, but by a definite; and a certain temperate rule, and in the same
Tenor.] -- which [and] so, etc. (l. 2.) -- all Bodies [the Bodies of all
Animals,] etc. (lin. 9.) -- That Nature wherein this Heat is embodied, has
within it [this Nature of Heat (i. e. Fiery Property) has in it self] a
certain, etc. (lin. 26, 27.) -- take a view of [touch upon] the, etc. (lin. 33.)

things that spring out of the Earth [ Seeds which the Earth conceives] and
those Seeds themselves, etc. [and whatever things [ i. e. Plants] the Ground
contains, generated out of it, and fixed Therein, by their Roots;] do receive,
etc. of Heat [ i. e. of the Heat of the Earth. A Stoical error.] (page 88.
page 88.
lin. 13, etc.) -- by the Contrary [by warmth,] etc. (lin. 29.)

in the same [in the Waters,] etc. (p. 89. page 89.
lin. 12.) -- every Nature, etc. [is thus extended thorough every part of the
World, in as much as in It is the Power of Procreating, and Faculty of
Generating; From which, both] Living Creatures, etc. (l. 27, etc.) -- it is
[the Fiery] Nature that, etc. (lin. 34.)

void of Qualities, [Solitary,] but, etc. (page 90. page 90.
lin. 2.) -- [But now,] we see that [some] Parts, etc. (lin. 19.) -- that
Particular of it, [the Sky] wherein, etc. (lin. 23.) -- admirable [lively,]
etc. (lin. 26.) -- and the Powers, etc. [and all Virtues or Excellencies
contained in the Divine Nature thereof [ i. e. of the World,] etc. (lin. 32,
33.) -- the Heat also of the Universe, [ the Sky,] it is, etc. (lin. 34.) --
lively, [active,] then, etc. (lin. 35.) -- move the Senses, [create Sense,]
then, etc. ( lin. ult.)

of ours [plac'd in Sublunary Natures,] etc. (page 91. page 91.
lin. 1.) continued [preserv'd in vigor,] etc. (lin. 2.) -- agitated [caused]
by, etc. (lin. 11.) -- Proper, [and implanted in the Thing moved,] etc. (l.
18.) -- That which [what] of, etc. (lin. 19.) -- the other, that [that which]
is, etc. (lin. 21.) -- Voluntary sort [Proper Motion,] etc. (lin. 22.) -- the
Heat of the World [the Sky,] etc. (lin. 26.) Plato, Plato's Ten sorts of
Motion.
(in his 10th Book touching Laws,) reckons up Ten kinds of Motion; Circuit,
Local Transition, Condensation, Rarefaction, Augmentation, Decrease,
Generation, Corruption, Mutation, or Alteration in another caused by another,
and Mutation in it self from it self, What he meant by (the two last of them)
the Proper, and the External.
and made in another. Which two Latter only (as proper for his Purpose) has
Lucilius here mentioned. Concerning which, the Atheniensis Hospes of Plato, (in
the Book before cited,) speaks (...), etc. There must then be One kind of
Motion which can move other things, but not it self always: And, another, able
to move both it self always, and other things: And a little after; (...),
(...), which chiefly, of all the Ten Motions, do we rightly prefer before any
of the rest, as the most Prevalent, and Efficacious. Clinias Answers, in the
same place; (...), It is necessary we Affirm, that far to Excel, which is able
to move it self; and all other to be Inferior to it. And the same Hospes
Atheniensis (a few Lines after), terms that Motion, whereby any thing is moved
by it self, (...), the most Ancient, and Powerful Mutation of all. This now,
is what our Stoique here produces out of Plato, in saying, that thing is more
Divine, which, of its own accord, etc. (lin. 20.)

of greater value, [more Perfect] than, etc. (page 92. page 92.
lin. 1.) -- from the Beginning [ever] a Reason, etc. (lin. 28.)

at liberty, [not hinder'd] fulfills her Course [comes to Perfection,] etc.
(page 93. page 93.
lin. 1.) -- That (therefore) must needs be the [Therefore must there needs be
a] Fourth, etc. (lin. 14.) -- the Nature of all things [i. e. that Universal
Nature ( the World) which conteins the Perfection of all Particular Things or
Natures; on which, ( a Deity) in that other Causes do depend in Acting, none
can be able to Impede it. The Stoiques (as I said before) Confounded God with
the World, The Stoiques Confounded God with the World,
the Work with the Artificer; and imputed to the World what is only to be
Attributed to God alone.] (lin. 17.) -- Influence, [preside over] all, etc.
(lin. 18.) -- indu'd with Understanding, etc. (lin. 20.) It is rightly,
Administration Implies Wisdom.
that he concludes the power of Acting from the Act it self; that is to say,
Wisdom and Understanding from the Administration of Affairs: For, it is proper
to the Intelligent and Wise, to preside over the rest. Says Aristotle (in 10.
Metaph. cap. 2.) (...). For, a Wise man, Six of the Seven Wise Men of Greece
Governors of their respective Cities.
is not to be Governed; but, to Govern. And indeed, all the Wise men of Greece
(save only Thales of Miletus) are delivered to have presided over their
respective Cities. (Cic. lib. 3. de Orat. 135)

of Perfection [of that, which is so. i. e. the World,] etc. (page 94. page 94.
God not confined within the World.
lin. 23.) -- and every thing is contained therein, etc. (lin. 25.) Christians
comprize not God within the Circle of the Universe, (or, the University of
Created things;) as did the Stoiques.

Absolute Nature, [says the same Chrysippus:] But, etc. (p. 95. page 95.
l. 4.) -- properly belongs to [is the Propriety of] the, etc. (l. 7.) --
Virtue is effected [by Study and Exercise is Virtue acquired, even by] It, etc.
(l. 9.) -- it is Wise, etc. (l. 13.) Tho Plato attributed the Epithete Wise
only to God: Yet the Presumptuous Stoiques absolutely joined the Wise man and
the Deity together; The Stoiques Confounded the Wise Man, and the Deity.
Such a one with Them, being another God.] -- of a Contrary Nature,] etc. [of
any other than an Etherial Substance] (l. 19, etc.) This (the Etherial
Substance, and Divinity of the Stars) was (heretofore) the Theology of
Pythagoras, Plato, the Persians, and of all the East; The Peripatetiques made
up the Stars out of a kind of Fifth Element.
the Peripateticks denied it, and constituted them out of a kind of Fifth
Incorruptible Essence.

Kind, to [grow, and] come, etc. ( p. 96. page 96.
l. 25.)

Humors [Vapours, and Exhalations] of, etc. ( page 97. page 97.
lin. 23.) -- cannot be expressive of [Now, Nature cannot be the Cause of the
so Constant Order, and Stability of the Stars: in that, it ( the Constancy of
the same Stars) is perfectly Rational,] etc. (l. 33, etc.) Which the Stoiques
also understood Nature to be; so that, (here) (perhaps) he speaks according to
the Sense of the Vulgar, or of the Epicureans, who thought Otherwise; and that
she was only a certain Blind, and Necessary Power.] --

against Nature, [i. e. contrary to the Nature of all other things; in that
They (the Stars) are neither moved Upward, nor Downward, but in a Round,] etc.
(page 98. page 98.
lin. 15.) And (Here) you have the First Branch of the Dispute, Explained.

A Synopsis of the Second Branch of the Stoique's Dispute.
BY way of Synopsis of the Second Branch of the Stoical Disputation, (wherein
Balbus Discourses who, and what the Gods are,) let me say; that, although it was
held for certain, both by the Epicureans, and the Stoiques, that Gods there
are; and, that a Notion of the Deity is impressed in the Minds of Mortals, by
Nature her self: Yet, there were (nevertheless) two things (chiefly) in
Controversy between them, with relation to the same Gods; I mean their Form,
and their Action. For the Epicureans (as Velleius taught in the First Book)
phansi'd the Deities to be of Human Figure; the Stoiques, of a Round: Moreover,
These would have them to be altogether Unemployed, and neither to take Care of
ought in the least, nor to be any way Beneficial to Men, for fear of Labor;
the Other, (contrariwise,) ascribed Action, and Providence, (This Profitable,
(also,) without Toil,) to their Divinities. So that, if we except but the
Excursions, (as noted in the Contents,) this whole Branch may seem to be
divided into these two (as it were) precipuous Members, the Figure, and the
Action of the Gods. Now, in regard the Action of the Deities is Useful and
Beneficent; it is conveniently enough that Profitable and Beneficial Gods are
here brought in; some from Men, and some again, from other Natural Things.
Whence, a Twofold Theology arises; the One, Civil; Honoring Famous Men, and
their Virtues with Divinity, and Altars; the Other, Natural; advancing into the
Number of the Gods all Natural things that were of any Extraordinary Use, and
Virtue. This same Theology (likewise) is often termed Mythology, in that it is
wholly wrapped up in Fable. In the Conclusion of the Branch, is subjoined a kind
of short Appendix, touching the Divine Worship. Now, as for the Contents of it;
PART II. SECT. II. FROM lin. 31. of page 98. to lin. 18. of page 99 Balbus
proposes the Question intended to be discussed in this Second Br^nch; The
Contents of each Section of the Second Branch of the Second Part of this Second
Book.
as also, the Difficulty thereof: And, reflects upon the Epicureans by the way,
tho he omits their Error, in that he had noted it before. Then, he makes good
his passage to the Figure he means to assign to his Deity, (that is, a Round
one, persuant to the Placit of the Stoiques,) by Concluding First, that the
World is Animated, and also; a God. THENCE, to lin. 5. of page 100. He
reprehends the Scoff of Epicurus, and employs the Tenet of the same Philosopher
in Confirmation of the Divinity of the Universe. THENCE; to lin. 30. of the
same page. Having done what he can to prove the World to be a God; he may have
the like Privilege further to infer the Figure of the same to be the Form of
the Deity. Therefore shows he it (Here) to be Worthy of the Godhead, that is to
say, the most Beautiful of all Figures. THENCE, to lin. 23. of page 101.
Another Commendation of the Sphere is derived from Necessity; inasmuch as in
any other Figure such an Equality of Motion, and Constancy of Order, were never
to be preserved: Ba bus, in the mean time, not abstaining from some Gentle
Touches upon the Epicureans, and (particularly,) their Author, who, had he but
considered the Sky, must needs, from their very Conversion, have concluded upon
the Round Figure of the World, and of the Stars. THENCE, to lin. 10. of page
102. An Occasion (Here) offering, he Digresses, to Describe the Motion of the
Planets; beginning with the Sun. THENCE, to lin. 28. of the same page. Next to
the Sun, he sets forth the various Courses, Forms, (or Phases,) Sites, and
Effects of the Moon. THENCE, to lin. 17. of page 103. He considers Generally,
and admires the Motions of the Other Five Planets. THENCE, to lin. 33. of the
same page. He descends particularly to the Courses of each of the remaining
Planets; of Saturn, First; Then, of Jupiter. THENCE, to lin. 20. of page 104.
The Courses of Mars, Mercury, and Venus are Described. THENCE, to lin. 9. of
page 105. From the Constant and Convenient Motion of the Planets, he concludes
them to be not only indu'd with Understanding, but to be Divinities also. Upon
the same Consideration, ascribes he Prudence and Intelligence to the Fixed Stars
likewise; denies them to be moved together with the Sky, (or Heaven;) and will
have them to be separate and apart from all Etherial Conjunction. THENCE, to
lin. 20. of the same page. To the Fixed Stars, (in like manner as to the
Wandering,) does he Arrogate a Divine Mind, together with the Consequences of
it; and removes Objections. THENCE, to lin. 12. of page 106. To strengthen his
Assertion (hitherto) of a Divine Mind's being in the Whole World, he produces
Zeno's Definition of Nature; who makes it to be indu'd not only with a Mind,
but with Art too. THENCE, to lin. ult. of the same page. Over and above an
Artificial Mind does he (upon Zeno's Authority likewise) attribute a Providence
to the World, with whatever he imagines to be an Appertenance thereof. THENCE,
to l. 22 of p. 107. Here, he makes a short Recapitulation of what he had
hitherto delivered, in this Second Branch of the Dispu ation; Wherefrom may be
in a sort collected what the Quality (the Question in Proposition) of the
Divine Nature is; Viz. such, as acts something, and That, without any Labor
too: And, why This, he shows by a Reason out of the Porch; at the same time
Refelling Epicurus, who thought Otherwise. THENCE, to lin. 13. of page 108. He
conveniently introduces, (as on the Opposition, to Epicurus's Idle and Vnactive
Deities,) a number of a sort of Profitable and Beneficent Gods, Consecrated by
the Judgment, and Religion of the Wise men amongst the Greeks, and Romans.
THENCE, to lin. 21. of page 109. He proceeds, from Things, to Persons; and
Rehearses Beneficent Men accounted for Gods. THENCE, to lin. 6. of page 110.
Being about to set upon an Explanation of Natural Theology, wrapped up in Fables;
he takes his Beginning from Coelum. THENCE, to lin. 21. of the same page. Who
Saturn is: Whence, his Name; according to both Greeks, and Latins: The Intent
of the Fables of his Devouring his Children, and being Bound by Jupiter.
THENCE, to lin. 17. of page 111. The Explication of the Name, (and Sirnames) of
Jupiter, Illustrated by the Authority of Wise Men. THENCE, to lin. 22. of page
112. The Mythology of Coelum (Heaven, the Sky,) is followed by That of the
Air, Water, Earth, under the Appellations of Juno, Neptune, Dis, Proserpina,
and Ceres: He (also,) by the way, showing the Etymology of these same Names,
They being expressive of the Virtue and Power of each respective Deity. THENCE,
to lin. 20. of page 113. The Mythology of Mars, Minerva, Janus, Vesta, and, of
the Dii Penates; as also, the Original of these Apellations noted. THENCE, to
lin. 27. of page 114. Whence proceeded the Name of Apollo and Sol, Diana and
Luna, of Menses, and of Venus: Why Lucina (or Luna, the Moon) was Phansi'd to
be present at Nativities. THENCE, to lin. 20. of p. 115. He lays open the
Spring of the whole Superstition, (so Unworthy of the Gods, in his Opinion,)
which is, the False Divinity ascribed to Natural things under a kind of Human
Form: Whence it came, that in a manner all the Vices of Human Frail^y were
imputed to the Deities in like sort as to Men. A Madness that Balbus utterly
disapproves of. THENCE, to (the End, or to) lin. 18. of page 116. Having in the
Former Section repudiated Vain Deities; He, in This, Advances One, and a True
God, worthy of all Worship, and Adoration. He showing (opportunely) of what
sort this same Worship ought to be; that is to say, Remote from Superstition.
And Thus he puts an End to the Second Branch of the Dispute.

page 98. Amendments, Illustrations, etc. of the Second Branch of the Stoical
Disputation.
What kind of Nature they are of [who are Gods, and What they are,] etc. (p.
98. lin. 32.) -- from the Appearances of things to our Eyes, [from the Custom
of the Eyes, which continually behold the Deities represented under Human
Form,] etc. (lin. ult.)

of it [scil. of the Opinion of the Divinity of the World,] etc. (page 99. page
99.
lin. 24.) -- Proves as much [Proves it,] etc. (lin. 25.)

forbear [making a show;] bewraying the [there is a] great, etc. ( p. 100. page
100.
l. 6.) -- respective Parts [Semi-diameters] Equal, etc. (lin. 27.) -- the
Extreme [the Circumference,] etc. (lin. 28.) -- That: [the Middle] etc. (lin.
29.) In Solids there is Length, Solids, and Planes, what.
Breadth, and Depth; in Planes, only Length, and Breadth.

what is Best, by the Palate [but, while he is studying what is most Grateful
to the Taste, he, etc. the Palate of Heaven,] etc. ( page 101. page 101.
lin. 11, etc.) -- by Immutable Spaces [by Ways which they never change,] etc.
(lin. 15.) -- their Motion any other way [i. e. either Ascending Higher, or
Descending Lower,] etc. (lin. 16.) -- from [the Conversion of] both, etc. (lin.
19.) -- same [Earth; etc.] i. e. when it has sent forth, etc. it leaves the
same Earth Darkened sometimes in One ^art of the Hemisphere, sometimes in
Another, Night, how occasioned.
] etc. (lin. 26, etc.) -- of it [of the Earth] interposing [obstructing, and
Interposing between the Sun and Us,] etc. (lin. 30.) -- equal to those of Day
[i. e. because they recover in Winter what they lose in Summer,] etc. (lin.
31.) -- moderate approaches [tho' the Sun always moves Swiftly; yet, In what
Sense the Sun is said to move Swifter, or Slower.
it neither comes to, nor departs from Our Zenith, but Leisurely, and (as it
were,) by degrees,] etc. (lin. 32.) -- the Proportions of [i. e. the Leisurely
Approaches and Retreats of the same Sun, do constitute a certain Measure or
Temperament (as it were) of Heat and Cold,] etc. (lin. 33.) -- of it [of the
Orbs of the Sun, i. e. the Circles where it runs,] in 365 Defects of the Orbs
[365 Days] -- a fourth part of a Day [i. e. of a Natural Day, 6 Hours; which
six hours, in every Fifth Year, make up the Dies Intercalaris, and, The
Occasion of the Bis-Sextile or Leap-year page 102. Summer and Winter how
effected by the Sun.
the Year this same Dies Intercalaris happens in, is usually termed
Bis-Sextile, or Leap-Year,] etc. (l. 35, 36.)

bending. (Inflectens,) etc. (page 102. lin. 2.) This is a Significant Word;
because, the Sun finishes his Course thorough the Oblique Zodiac; and makes
our Summers, when he comes to the North, and our Winters, when he retreats to
the South, even as far as the Tropic of Capricorn: Ours, I say; for,
(contrariwise) he causes the Summers of the Southern Line, which is Opposite to
Us, when he approaches to the Tropic of Capricorn, and the Winters, in That of
Cancer.] -- Mutations of Seasons, [i. e. not the Solstices, and Equinoxes; but,
Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter;] are [doe,] etc. (lin. 8.) -- derived
[proceed,] etc. (lin. 10.) -- Dimmest sight, when she comes nearest to it, etc.
(lin. 13, etc.) [That Rule, the Nearer any thing is to its Agent, the more
Virtue it receives from it, (e. g. the Closer we are to Fire, the more it Heats
us,) holds not Good in the Communication of Light: For, this is more largely
diffused into things that are Opposite, and at a distance from it, than that
are near it: Why the Moon shines not, when in Conjunction with the Sun; and
brightest of all, when furthest off from him.
And, Hence it is, that the Moon, when she is near the Sun, receives the least
Light, in that Then she is within the very Confine of the Sun; and in no wise
over against, and Opposite to it: But, when she turns the furthest Off from the
Sun, then she is illustrated by him with the most Light of all, because, in
that Site and Position, she is directly and diametrically (as I may say) on the
Adverse to the Sun.] Form or Figure, etc. (lin. 16.) As to the several Phases
(as they are usually termed) of the Waxing, and Waining Moon; The several
Phases of the Waxing, and Waining Moon.
) the First Day, (or, in the New Moon,) (when it is in Conjunction with the
Sun,) it has none (is not seen) at all; the Fourth, it appears hooked or
horned; the Seventh, One exact half of it is Light, the Other, Dark; the
Eleventh, it is Gibbous (or Crookt) on both sides; on the Fifteenth, it is
Filled, (vulgarly Full Moon:) On the Nineteenth, it decreases, and appears
Gibbous on both sides again; the two and twentieth, it is again Half'd; the six
and twentieth, Horned; And, on the Thirtieth, it disappears; being again in
Conjunction with the Sun. And, that none may be surpised at hearing of the
Thirtieth day of the Course of the Moon; and object, that the Periodical Motion
thereof is finished in a few hours more than seven and twenty days: I add, that
though indeed the Moon do return to the same point from whence she had departed
within this last Number of Days, yet, in that she finds not the Sun in the same
Step she had left him in, (for he, in the mean time, has advanced a little on,)
there are two days more spent, before she be again joined with him: Therefore
is the Distance of time betwixt one Conjunction and another, or, that Course of
the Moon usually termed Synodical, almost thirty days; in which compass, the
Synodical Motion of the Moon is perfected. Moreover, it is not only on the days
I have mentioned, but every day; even each hour, and moment, that the Moon is
Changed.] -- Site and Region [i. e. her Latitude, or her Deflexion from the
Ecliptic either toward the North, or the South,] etc. (lin. 19.) -- Winter
Solstice, etc. (lin. 23.) [because, she, (in her Monthly Course, as well as the
Sun in his Annual, How the Moon may be said to have her Solstices, as well as
the Sun.
) has ^^se that Astrologers name Tropicks; which, when she comes to, she is
said to stand, in that, Now, she goes no further. Thus, has the Moon her Bounds
(as it were) and Stations, which she is not to exceed; that is to say, certain
Points in the Heaven, beyond which she advances not either toward the North, or
South; and yet, these are not the same with those of the Sun, nor yet so fixed
as they; for, sometimes she is carried some degrees Beyond her Tropic, at
Others, stopped short of it.] -- that which is chiefly [This (i. e. their
preserving their Motions fixed and certain, is so much the more wonderful, etc.
in] that, etc. (lin. 35, 36.)

Abscond, Appear, [i. e. when (as we spoke before of the Moon) they are joined
with the Sun, in Synodo, and, when they turn aside, from it,] etc. (page 103.
lin. 1.) -- go away [scil. from the Sun,] etc. (l. 2.) -- moved swifter, In
what Sense the Pl^nets may be said to move fwifter or slower.
etc. (l. 4.) [All do agree, that the Planets are in very deed at all times
moved with an equal swiftness; but, yet, that, by reason of the Eccentricity of
their Circles, which have a Center diverse from the Center of the Zodiac, they,
in Unequal Spaces, run over the Equal Quadrants of the same Zodiac: Whence it
happens, that they seem as if they were moved sometimes swifter, otherwhiles
slower, etc. (Which Geminus (in cap. 1. Isagoges) clearly proves of the Sun.)
So that, unless this Passage of Balbus's be understood in a mild Sense, (as
here spoken of,) it is in no wise True.] -- is much disputed, etc. (lin. 15.)
[Achilles Tatius (in Isagoge, cap. 18.) says, i^ the space of 350635. But, in
very deed, so long it is, that it is hard to determine it precisely. The Great
Year of Phil^sophers.
The Great Year that Censorinus, (in lib. 2. of Petavius de Doct. Temp.) avers
to have been Instituted by Democritus, Democritus's different from it.

To finish a Period; and return from point to point, what.


consisting of 82 years, is quite Different from This] -- and, [of all the
Planets,] is, etc. (lin. 18.) -- compleats its period [i. e. returns again to
the same Sign of the Zodiac: This being altogether diverse from what
Astrologers term returning from Point to Point, or, to the same Site wherein
all the Stars were, when they first began to be moved:] -- working a great
deal, [by which (I think) is only understood the so Constant Varieties of its
Course, and Light; for, there is nothing else to be commended in it, being held
to be a Noxious and Fatal Planet. Saturn a Noxious Planet.
] -- fulfills [Courses] the same Orb of the Twelve Signs, etc. (lin. 20, 21.)
[That is to say, the Zodiac; The Zodiac what.
or, that Celestial Circle divided into twelve Parts, and distinguished with
the like number of Signs, at the pleasure of Astronomers. Moreover, tho not
Jupiter only, but all the Planets, move in the same Orb or Zodiac; yet are they
not carried about in one and the same Line thereof; for, (as Achilles Tatius
(cap. 23.) admonishes,) the Zodiac has Latitude; a thing not allowed to any of
the other Circles of the Sphere.

below This, etc. (page 104. page 104. The place of Sol in the Zod ac.
lin. 2.) [not immediately, or next below it; for, the place betwixt Mars and
Mercury is usually attributed to the Sun. As to the Order of the Celestial
Spheres, Clavius (upon de Sacro Bosco's Sphere) may be consulted.] -- with
These [ i. e. with Reason, Understanding,] etc. (lin. 26.) -- neither have,
etc. [are neither moved along with the Sky,] etc. (lin. 33.) -- for lack of
Natural Knowledge [thorough Ignorance of Natural Philosophy,] etc. (lin. 35.)
such a Nature [a Substance so Firm] as, etc. ( lin. ult.)

force about [along with] the, etc. (page 105. page 105.
lin. 2.) -- indu'd with a suffusion of Heat in the Temper of it [of a moderate
Heat,] etc. (lin. 3, 4.) -- without any Sense [any Mind] at all, etc. (lin.
14.) Yet, Christians Christians hold not the Stars to be Deities.
impute not Divinity to the Stars themselves, but only to the Author,
Preserver and Governor of Them, and all other things] -- have their Course
nearer [wander about] the, etc. (lin. 21.) -- so that, I cannot do better, [i.
e. since I have thus strongly proved the Great Soul of the Universe, (as taught
by Zeno,) I can hardly be mistaken, if I follow the same Zeno, in these other
things also,] etc. (l. 29, etc.) -- Luckiest [First, Chief] of, etc. (l. 31.)
-- Nature, etc. (lin. 4.) [This Nature the Stoiques accounted upon as a Deity:
The Stoiques in a manner Confounded Nature with the Deity.
And, in Plutarch and Stobaeus, they Define their Deity (much what after the
same manner with Nature, here,) to be (...) or, (as Athenagoras and Others
read it, Their Definition of God.
) (...); A Mechanical or Artificial Fire, proceeding by a Way [i. e. by Reason,
Counsel) in the Generation or, (if you had rather,) to the Generations of the
World, containing within it self all Semin^l Reasons (i. e. Causes) by which
every thing comes to Be, according to Fate.] -- methodically [i. e. by Counsel,
and a certain way of acting, that leads to the end propounded,] etc. (lin. ult.)

Consonant to Art [By art, he means not (here) Created, and Human, but Divine;
not having Nature for its Foundation, Divine Art.
but making Nature her self; not the Imitatour of Nature, but the Author of
her,] etc. (page 106. page 106.
lin. 2.) -- not Artificial only, but, a Complete Artist [i. e. not only indu'd
with Art, but absolutely the First Author, and the very Sovereign of all Art;
and a prudent provider of all things [Profitable and Commodious,] etc. (lin.
15, etc.) -- support [Conservation] from, etc. (lin. 20.) -- termed [either
Prudence, or Providence; for, in Greek, it is named (...),] etc. (l. 28, 29.)
-- persevere [subsist,] etc. (l. 32.)

nor yet effect [but, such as are still Acting, tho without any the least
Toil,] etc. (page 107. page 107. Ceres and Bacchus who.
lin. 5, 6.) -- Thus [i. e. because Corn was Invented by Ceres, the Daughter of
Saturn and Ops, King and Queen of Italy (as Reported,) and Wine by Liber (or
Bacchus, the Son of Semele Daughter of Cadmus King of Thebes,] etc. (lin. 35.)

Whence [i. e. from which Metonimical Figure of Speech] That of Terence [ in
his Comedy entitled the Eunuch,] etc. (page 108. page 108.
lin. 1.) -- dedicated [reduc'd into the number of Deities] in the Capitol [a
very High Hill of Rome,] etc. (l. 8.) -- the Latter [of Later Days] by Marcus
Aemilius Scaurus; for [but] Faith, etc. (l. 9, 10.) who, Regulus (or
Calatinus,) and Q. Maximus, were Roman Consuls, Scaurus, Regulus, etc. Roman
Consuls.
] etc. (l. 9.) -- in the War with the Lombards, [in the Ligurian War,] been,
etc. (l. 13, 14.) -- And so for [what need I speak of the Temples of Health,]
etc. (lin. 15.) -- the Efficacy [the Virtue being so Great, that they could not
be Governed but by a God,] therefore, etc. (lin. 16, etc.) -- Upon the same
score are the Appellations [amongst which sort of Deities, are the Names] of,
etc. (l. 20.) -- Unnatural [i. e. things that Nature Instituted according to
Right Reason covets not,] etc. (lin. 25.) -- their [Extraordinary
Beneficialness, Where an Account may be had of the Roman Deities, and Temples.
] were, etc. (lin. 29.) Now, as to These same Temples; Livy, Pomponius Laetus,
Lilius Giraldus, Rosinus, and (more particularly) Marcianus (who have expressly
treated of Antiquities,) may be Consulted.

This was the Case of [i. e. In Consideration of their Benefits, were Hercules,
Castor and Pollux, etc. taken up into Heaven, etc.] of [as also] Liber, etc.
(page 109. page 109.
lin. 4, etc.) -- the Mysteries [Books of Church-Ceremonies,] etc. (lin. 11.)
-- Liber and Libera [i. e. Apollo and Diana, or Sol, and Luna,] etc. (lin. 14.)
-- not in Libera [for, they termed Sol, Liber; but, not Luna, Libera, I am not
fully satisfied with this Explanation my self; only I see not what more
tolerable one to assign the Passage,] etc. (lin. 15.) -- persevere [Remain
after Death] and, etc. (lin. 19.) -- for that they are the Best, etc. [i. e. in
regard both of their Excellency [Benefits,] and of their Eternity, How the
Greeks and Romans, termed their Demigods.
etc. (lin. 21.) [The Romans termed these sort of Gods, Indigetes; the Greeks,
(...)* Semidii Curetes. Moreover, Cicero (in Lib. 2. de Legibus,) distributes
the Deities into Three Classes, viz. Stars; Things, Piety, Virtue, Tully's
Three Ranks of Deities.
) etc. that had advanced Men into Heaven; and Men. (Hercules, Liber, etc.) who
had deserved well of Mankind. And then, for the Immortality of the Soul; the
Stoiques The Immortality of the Soul, according to the Stoiques;
were much Divided about it: Cleanthes phansi'd the Souls of all men to Remain
till the Conflagration; but, Chrysippus, only those of the Wise. Whereas
Christians are of a Steadfast Belief, and, to Christianity.
that the Souls both of the Bad and the Good, after Death abide for ever, These
to Perpetual Joy, the Other to Eternal Torment.] -- Upon another Consideration,
and That a Physical one too, [From the Consideration of Natural Things] has,
etc. (lin. 22.) -- Involved Mankind in [fill'd Men's Minds with] the, etc. (lin.
26.) -- Philosophical Reason [Sense,] pleasant, etc. (l. 25.)

contains [Rules, Defines, Bounds] the, etc. (page 110. page 110.
lin. 7.) -- which is as much as to say [which same (...) signifies a space of
Time,] etc. (lin. 11, 12.) As to the Fables of Saturn, and of his Father
Coelus, The Fables of Saturn, etc. where handled.
(or Coelum,) Natalis Comes has diligently persu'd (in Lib. 2. Mythol.) and
Lactantius exploded them (in Lib. 1. of his False Religion] -- in Adversity we
call him, [whom, in Change of Inflexion, (for, the Word Jupiter makes Jovis in
the Genitive Case, contrary to the General Rule,) we name Jove,] etc. (lin.
23.) -- as above [as I said before] Expresses, [Names,] saying, [Thus,] Behold,
etc. (lin. 32, 33.)

more Clearly [plainly, sup. does he express Heaven] in, etc. (page 111. page
111.
lin. 1.) A Person for whose Service I Will i. e. Vndeify. Some Slave or other,
(perhaps,) introduced by Ennius, says This.
Abjure
This The Sky, or Heaven; (i. e. Jupiter, according to the Stoiques;) which no
wonder if a Slave knew not how to Call; since, only the Learned know what it is.
same, what ever it be, Whence Light's And by the benefit of which, all things
come to be seen.
derived
(lin. 3. etc.) -- It is Him also, etc. [i. e. it appears, by the Discipline of
the Augurs, and their way of Speaking, that, by the Name of Jupiter, Heaven, (
or the Sky) is usually understood,] etc. (lin. 7.) -- Untemper'd [and
Immense,] etc. (lin. 13.) -- Honored with the Appellation [Consecrated under
the Name] of, etc. (lin. 20.) -- it was supposed to be [they made it [i. e.
Aer, a word of the Masculine Gender,] Feminine [ i. e. a Goddess of the
Feminine] and, etc. (lin. 24.) -- by [according to] Fable, etc. (lin. 29.)
Homer (Il. o.) furnishes the Division of these Kingdoms; Plutarch, Plutarch,
etc. referred to.
in the Life of the same Homer, (as also, Fulgentius, Bocacius, and Natalis
Comes) the Physical Exposition of the Fable; and, Lactantius, (Cap. II. de
Falsa Religione,) the Historical.

page 112.
which, [who is named Dis, by the Latins, as (...), (i. e. Dives, Rich,)
amongst the Greeks] because, etc. (p. 112. l. 8.) -- Diminishing, [scil. the
Forces of the Enemy, perhaps] -- Menacing [sup. Death to the Adverse Party,]
etc. (lin. 27.) -- greater Power and Virtue [most Importance: It being an usual
saying He that has Well Begun, has Half Done; And, the End Crowns the Work,]
etc. (lin. 30.) -- to Begin with Janus [scil. because they phansi'd him to have
the Command of the Beginnings and Endings of all things,] etc. (lin. 32.)

Their (...) [i. e. Focus, a Hearth,] etc. (page 113. page 113.
lin. 5.) -- This Power [scil. with the Goddess Ceres,] etc. (lin. 20.)

Consumed by Fire, etc. (page 114. page 114.
lin. 16.) Erostratus burnt it, to get a Name.] -- And, because this Goddess
[Now, upon that Goddess, who comes to (has an influence upon) all things, have
Our People bestow'd] the, etc. (lin. 20, etc.)

brought down, etc. [and all the Infirmities of Human Nature Imputed to the
Gods,] etc. (page 115. page 115.
lin. 4.) -- shows himself in [passes thorough, scil. by his Immensity] the,
etc. (lin. 21.) -- And Others, in Other Cases, etc. [And Others may be
understood, in the Other Elements; who, what they are, and, by what Name Custom
has styled them; which] Deities we ought, etc. (lin. 23, etc.)

as it were to Collect, etc. [very often to Read, and every where studiously
as it were to Collect all] matters, etc. (page 116. page 116.
lin. 7.) -- the force of Reading is One [i. e. All these Words denote the same
Original with the word Religiosus a Relegendo.] etc. (lin. 13.) So much for
this Second Branch of the Dispute.

THIS Third Branch of the Stoiques Disputation means to Prove a Divine
Providence Universally. Th Su^^ ct of th (...) Br^^^ ^e ^^sp^^.
I shall not subjoyn any other Synopsis of it, than what Balbus (page 117,
118.) draws up himself. So that, to the Contents.

The Contents of each Section of it.
PART II. SECT. III. From page 116. to l. 30. of page 117. In making a
Transition to the Third Branch of the Dispute, He, First, briefly repeats what
he had Treated of in the two foregoing; Then, Intimates that which he purposes
to Prove in This; Next, Raises Expectation, both by the weightiness of the
Argument it self, and the Considerableness of its Opponents, And, in the Last
place, after a Reproof of the Epicureans for their grosser sort of Ignorance,
in that they were still Cavelling at the Divine Providence, he removes all
Occasion of Exception, by more clearly Proposing the Question, THENCE, to lin.
23. of page 118. He advances anew the Particulars he means to Handle in this
Third Branch of his D^scourse; Divides the Branch it self into Three Parts; and
forthwith proceeds to the First of them; wherein he makes the Reason (or Being)
it self of a Deity to be the Leading Argument of a Divine Providence. THENCE,
to lin. 17. of page 119. He shows that, a Divinity once admitted, a Providence
must also be allowed; First, by the Absurd Consequence of Denying it; in that
Then it follows, that something or other is more Excellent than the Deity:
Secondly, by removing two Obstructions of Providence, (Ignorance, and
Imbecility.) THENCE, to lin. 3. of page 120. He assumes This, as the Right of
the Divine Essence, that the Gods are Animated, indu'd with Reason; and that,
being in a kind of Civil Communion and Society one with another, they Govern
the World: Whence he infers, that, there is the same Reason, Truth, and Law
with the Gods, that there is in Men; and also Collects, that Reason and
Vnderstan^ing were derived to Mankind from Above. Upon which Consideration, the
Mind, Faith, Vert^e, Concord, in that they were conceived to Proc^ed from the
Powers Divine, were held to be Goddesses; which, should they not be in the
Deities, were rashly worshipped in their Images. THENCE, to lin. 25. of the same
page. He again Inculcates what he had taught in the Section foregoing, that
Human Virtues are in the Deities; and, in much greater Perfection too, than in
Men. Then, he as of Right Assumes, that the Gods make use of these same Virtues
in administering the World, nothing being more Noble than such Administration.
And, in the Last place, from the Beneficialness of the Stars, and other Divine
things, in the World, he Concludes All to be Governed by the Providence of the
Gods. THENCE, to l. 33. of page 121. He proceeds to Another Argument of a
Divine Providence, inferred from some or other Governing Nature. Moreover, in
regard the word is of doubtful and various signification amongst Philosophers,
to make the matter the plainer, he expounds what Nature is, according to the
Sense both of the Epicureans, and the Stoiques. THENCE, to lin. 19. of page
122. Having thus, from the Placits of the Stoiques, shown What Nature is, he
next makes out that the several Parts of the World do Exist, are Preserved, and
Act, by the benefit of this same Nature, (i. e. Providence,) cohering one with
another, and being joined in a kind of Common League and Intercourse. THENCE,
to lin. 10. of page 123. Moreover, from the conjunction of the Parts of the
World, (All which tend to the Center, and continue themselves by Mutual
Conversions into one another,) he concludes the whole Universe to be
administered by the Nature above mentioned, which is indu'd with Art, and
Advice. THENCE, to lin. 31. of the same page. By a Collation of the Wo^l^ wi^h
Lesser things, he confirms it to be Governed by some or other Intelligent
Nature; as also, by an Argument from the Parts to the Whole, from the Effects
to the Cause. THENCE, to lin. 11. of page 124. He Here finishes the Course of
Argument ere while begun, with intent to prove the Administration of the World,
wherein he contends that nothing can be found fault with. THENCE, to lin. 1. of
page 125. From the Absolute Perfection of the World, he collects the Providence
whereby it is Governed: And, making a kind of Induction, he, in this and the
next Section, is somewhat Large in Argument derived from things made by Art,
which he had before given a Hint of. THENCE, to lin. 25. of the same page. He
takes notice of the Sphere of Posidonius; and, from this so Admirable a Piece
of Art, Concludes, by an Argument usually termed a Minori ad Majus, (what in
the Section above he had undertaken to prove,) that the World was Perfected by
Reason. THENCE, to lin. 27. of page 126. He Illustrates the Argument derived
from things made by Art, by a passage out of the Poet Actius. THENCE, to lin.
16. of p^g. 127. He Convinces, by the Example of the Shepherd in Actius, that
Philosophers ought to acknowledge God the Ruler and Author of all things, by
Arguments hardly to be excepted against. Toward the End, he tacitly notes the
Epicureans of a lower sort of Stolidity. THENCE, to lin. 17. of page 128. He
describes the Admirable Order of the Elements, and Celestial Bodies, whereon
the Health of Universal Nature so immediately Depends; and, in the next
Section, shows, that this Order is to be ascribed to a Divi^e Providence. By
the by, he notes the Greek Original of the words Aer, and Ae her; as also, of
the Poet Pacuvius. THENCE, to lin. 17. of page 129. From the so Beautiful
Order of the Universe, (as before set forth,) he takes occasion to make an
Excursion against the Epicureans, (who pretended the World to have been made by
a fortuitous Concourse of Atoms,) and, refells them by a Simile, and an
Argument a Minori. THENCE, to lin. 12. of page 130. From the short Transition,
in the end of the last Section, (made in the words which is the Next Point,) he
comes to propound the Third Argument of a Providence, drawn from things
Celestial, and the imbellishment of the same; Confirming it by the Authority,
and Argument a Simili of Aristotle. THENCE, to lin. 32. of the same page. He
produces another Similitude much of a sort with the former Then, he reprehends
the Stupidness of Mo^tal^, wh^, because they have the Sky continu^^ly before
h^ir Eyes, are not stirred up, by the Admir^bleness of Celestial things, to
Inquire nto the Causes of them. THENCE, to l. 16. of p. 131. He has recourse to
the same Arguments a Similibus, nay a Minoribus, to show, that a Divine
Providence is the Occasion of the Motion, Order, and Coherence of Heaven.
THENCE, to lin. 18. of page 132. The Stoique brings down the whole Controversy
to the Judgment of the Eyes; supposing, none, that are not Blind, can Deny a
Providence. Therefore, by a most Elegant Description, subjects he to the Eye
the several Parts of the Universe; and, First of all, the Earth, and Earthly
things. THENCE, to lin. 17. of page 133. A Description of the Sea, Air, and
Sky; and of the things contained in them: Wherein, a Providence is most
apparent. THENCE, to lin. 18. of page 134. The Courses of the Sun, and Moon,
and the various Dispositions and Effects of them both, and of the rest of the
Planets also, Described, in Confirmation of a Providence. THENCE, to lin. 12.
of page 135. The Stoique Advances to a Description of the Fixed Stars; (still
with the same Intent of Confirming Providence's Governing the World;) by the
way, commending Tully's Latin Version of Aratus's Greek Description of the same
Stars. THENCE, to lin. 16. of page 136. In the Beginning, he briefly touches
upon Both the Poles, and the Etymology of the Word. Then, he describes the two
Bears that are Rolled about the Arctic Pole; and tells their Different Names,
and diverse Aspects, and Uses. THENCE, to lin. 19. of page 137. He describes the
Site, and Figure of the Heavenly Dragon; and the Stars, of which that
Constellation is Composed. THENCE, to lin. 7. of page 139. The Description of
Engonasis, the Crown, Serpentar^us, Arctophylax, and the Virgin, in
Confirmation of a Wise Providence. THENCE, to lin. 10. of page 139. The Twins,
Crab, Lion, Chariotier, Kids, Bull, and Hyades are Described. THENCE, to lin.
13. of page 141. He here describes the Royal Constellations Cepheus, Cossiopea,
Andromeda; as also, the Win^'d Horse, Ram, and Fishes. THENCE, to lin. ult. of
page 142. Perseus, the Virgil ae, (or Pleiades,) the Harp, Swan, Water-hearer,
and Capricorn. THENCE, to lin. 17. of bag. 143. He passes from the Northern
Signs to the Southern; Om^tting some, Describing others; in This Section,
Orion, the Dog, Hare, Ship, River, Whale, and Fishes. THENCE, to lin. ult. of
page 144 He proceeds in describing the Southern Signs the Altar, Centaur,
Snake, Goblet, Crow, and Little Degrees. THENCE, to lin. 17. of page 149. from this
so large Description of the Stars, he at length Concludes, (against Epicurus,
and Strato,) that, this Order of the Stars, and Adornment of the Sky, could
never have been effected by a Fortuitous Concourse of Atoms, or by a Brute
Nature; Therefore, does he, (over and above the Imbellishment of the World,)
ascribe the Preservation of it also, ( Another Argument of a Provi ence,) to
the same Divine Providence; (to be Concluded afterward.) Moreover, he
conceives, (reasonably enough,) that, it is a kind of Common Bond of all things,
that is the sure Foundation of that Stability which is in the World. THENCE, to
lin. 11. of page 150. What he had said of the Universe, that it is Conserved by
Means of its Center, (whereunto, by a certain mighty Conjunction, it is on all
sides carried, chiefly in a Round Form) does he likewise show of the several
Parts of the same Universe; (the Earth, Sea, Air, Sky;) in proof of an All.
preserving Providence. THENCE, to lin. 4. of page 151. A Pr vidence also, in
the Preservation of the Stars by a kind of Social League, their very Figure it
self, and their Nourishment; (according to the Stoical Sense, This;) The
Opinion of the same Stoiques, touching the Constagration, and Renovation of the
World, is likewise briefly Inserted. THENCE, to lin. 22. of the same page. He
Concludes the Topique of the Conservation of the Stars; and shows, that the
Motion and Order of the Planets contribute to the safety of the Universe: A
Particular so Emphatical of a Providence, that only such as never considered
the so Convenient Harmony and Correspondence of the Celestial Bodies, can be
unsatisfied of it. THENCE, to lin. 6. of page 152. From an Higher Nature, he
Descends to a Lower; wherein the diligent Care of a Conserving Providence
appears to Human Eyes if not so admirably as in the other, yet more plainly and
gratefully; in Plants, First; and, of Them, (particularly) in the Vine. THENCE,
to lin. 26. of the same page. From Plants, he passes on to Animals; in the
Preservation of whom a Providence shows it self likewise; as what has Clothed,
Fed, and secured them, either by Weapons to repel an Enemy, or Wings to escape
him; and furnished them with Instruments proper for Taking and Concecting their
Food. THENCE, to lin. 11. of page 153. He proceeds in relating the Faculties
necessary to the Feeding of Animals that the Divine Providence has bestowed
upon them. THENCE, to lin. 34. of the same page. He shows how Providence has
Qualified such Creatures as live by the Blood or Flesh of Others; And namely,
the Spider, Nacre-Fish, and Sprawn. THENCE, to lin. 25. of page 154. How
Providence conserves Water-Creatures that abide on the Land; and feeds the Bird
Plateala, which lives upon Fish, and yet cannot dive into the Water. THENCE, to
lin. 18. of page 155. Here, the Subtilty of the Sea-Frog, Kite, Crow, and
Crane, is also taken notice of, in Commendation of the Divine Providence.
THENCE, to lin. 5. of p. 156. The wonderful Care of Beasts to Preserve
themselves by Food, Shelter, and Remedies, imputable to Providence also.
THENCE, to lin. 31. of the same page. Providence has furnished Beasts with
various kinds of Arms against Force, and Fear: And, moreover, been exceeding
careful that, by a constant Generation of Animals, each respective kind should
be preserved and continued, to the Perpetual Ornament and Renovation of the
World. THENCE, to lin. 21. of page 157. A Divine Providence is also apparent in
the Conservation of every Species of Animals both by the benefit of Generation,
and of Duration. THENCE, to lin. 8 of page 158. The Work of This Section is
much the same with That of the foregoing; for, tho he make no Particular
mention of Providence here, yet he would Insinuate that to It ought the
Tenderness of Brutes in Educating and Keeping their Issue to be ascribed.
THENCE, to lin. 28. of the same page. The Divine Providence has remitted the
Conserva^ion of some things to the Ingenuity of Man, that they might not seem
to h^v^ been given in vain. But then again, she has v^luntarily gratified them
with many and rear Advan ages (not only toward the relief of ^h^ir N e ssi^rs,
but the Perception of Pleasure also,) that ost them no pains at all. Hither
tend the Ben^fits of certain Rivers Here Commended. THENCE, to lin. 7. of page
159. The Fruitfulness of ^he Fi lds Plen y, Variety, and Deli^iousness of
Provisi^ns, S asonableness of Annual Winds, and other Benefits, are Witnesses
of the provident Affection of the Div nity toward us. THENCE, to (he E^d, or,
to) lin. 26. of the same page. With a kind of Rhetorical Preterition, briefly
and in general tou hing upon Sundry Conveniences of Human Life, he concludes
this Third Branch of the Dispute, which shows the World to be Administered by a
Divine Providence.

Amendments, etc. of the Third Branch of the Dispute.
are not so much acquainted, etc. [do not so well understand in what sense each
Particular is spoken:] For, you, etc. ( page 116. page 116.
l. 28.)

Introduced [into Nature] by, etc. (page 117. page 117.
lin. 1.) -- Particularly; [somewhat briefly;] for, etc. (lin. 6.) -- I [you
are to] Take it, etc. (lin. 11.) As to the Council of Ariopagus, Sigonius
referred to.
Sigonius's Third Book of the Commonwealth of Athens may be Consulted.

page 118.
Sensitive [to a sort of Intelligent] Nature, etc. (page 118. lin. 6) --
Inanimate Nature [such as Strato Computed upon] or, a Necessity, etc. [i. e.
that fortuitous Concourse of Atoms of Epicurus 's, so full of necessary
concitation, whereby he would have This Universality of Things to have been at
first cimented together, and to be now continued and governed, without any
Reason at all, or Liberty, without Advice, or Providence,] etc. (lin. 27, 28.)
-- nor Transcendent [most Powerful, in that, it must needs be Subordinate to
this or Necessity, or Nature, by which Heaven, Earth, and Sea should be
Governed.] But, etc. (l. 32.)

effected [Concluded] what, etc. (p. 119. page 119.
lin. 15.) -- that they be Animated, etc. (lin. 19.) Zeno in Laertius (Lib. 7.)
Defines, Zeno's Definition of the Deity.
the Deity, to be (...), an Immortal Animal, Rational, Perfect in Beatitude,
Incapable of all Evil, Provident of the World, and the things that are therein:
And, Lipsius, (lib. 2. Physiol. Stoic. Dissert. 7.) cites a Passage out of
Eusebius, to show the Polity of the Gods; A Steical Passage quot d ^y E^s^^^,
^o show the ^^lity of the Gods.
viz. (...). The World is as it were a City made up of the Gods and of Men; of
which, the Gods indeed have the Government, and Men are in Subjection: yet is
there a Communion betwixt them, in that they both partake of Reason, which is
the Law of Nature.] -- Verity to [Cognition of Truth in] both, etc. (lin. 28.)
-- Depulsion [Prohibition] of, etc. (lin. 30.) -- it may [likewise] be, etc.
(lin. 31.) -- by [in the Institutions of,] etc. (lin. ult.)

in the Capacity of [in the] Gods, etc. (page 120. page 120.
lin. 1.) -- to Their [scil. those of the Gods,] etc. (lin. 2.) -- the Earth,
[Men,] save, etc. (lin. 6.) -- the Universe, [ to the great Use and Advantage
of Human Kind:] In, etc. (lin. 23.)

necessary Motions, etc. [moving Bodies not of Choice, but Necessity,] etc. (p.
121. page 121.
lin. 2.) -- in a Track, [i. e. by a sort of Reason, and Method, in the
Production of things,] and declaring [shewing] what the Cause of every thing
is, and what the Effect [it can Effect by the Cause of each thing, [i. e. what
End it has respect to, in Acting, and whither it tends,] etc. (l. 5, etc.) --
attain unto, [Equal,] by, etc. (lin. 8.) -- For as much as, [For, as the
Stoiques teach,] tho, etc. (lin. 9.) -- all Natures that, etc. [Atoms, Void,
and their Accidents, are the Nature of all things that are in the World.] But,
etc. (lin. 22, etc.) -- understand [that it subsists only] after, etc. (lin.
27.) -- is without, etc. [has no longer any Conjunction at all with the Main
Body, after it is severed from it;] But, of, etc. (lin. 29, 30.) -- Temerity
[Casualty of Fortune] but, etc. (lin. 32.) To speak once more for all, Two
sorts of Opinions amongst Philosophers, concerning Nature. Hippocrates, of
Nature.
of Nature; the Opinions of the Ancients concerning it may be reduced into two
Ranks: One of which, made her to be Destitute of, the Other Indu'd with Reason.
Of the Former, beside Strato, etc. Hippocrates seems to have been; for, he
says, (Epidem. 4.) (...), Nature found out her ways of her self, not by Reason:
Nor does Epicurus acknowledge any other, Epicurus's Accidents of A^^ms.
by his (Three Principles of Things;) Atoms, Void, and the Accidents of Both,
of which Accidents he (with the Peripatetiques) admitted two sorts, but under
different Terms; for what the Former called Proper, he named (...), or, not
separated, (whereof are usually reckoned Three, Magnitude, Figure, and Gravity
or Weight;) and, (...), or, that are Separated, those which They termed Common;
(as Concourse, Connection, Position, Order, etc.) I do not well perceive what
might be his Accidents of Void, save only a kind of Infiniteness, and
Immobility. See Epicurus's Physiology Collected and Illustrated by Gassendus.
Of the Latter, Plato (in Philebo) constantly asserts (...). that, Plato,
touching Nature.
Nature digested (adorned) the Universality of things according to Reason, and
with Reason, and Understanding: And the Stoiques Defined her as in the Context,
and Notes before.

She [Cherishes, and] augments, etc. (page 122. page 122.
lin. 5.) -- higher and External Natures [i. e. the Water, and Air,] etc. (lin.
6.) -- nourished [preserv'd] by, etc. (lin. 10.) -- the same Reason holds, etc.
[i. e. for the like Reason, is the rest of the World sustein'd by the same
Nature;] For, etc. (lin. 11, etc.) -- sustein'd by breathing the [kept alive by
drawing in] Air, etc. (lin. 13.) -- fees, etc. [a Catacresis] (lin. 14.) --
Conversion [Circumvection] about, etc. (lin. 23.) -- the Middle; [the
Vicissitude i. e. alternate motion of one into another] of these, etc. (lin.
23.) -- One [a Continuate, and] Entire, etc. (l. 24.)

those Natures [Principles, things,] that were, [before the World was made;]
the best, 124
etc. (page 124. lin. 5.) -- Sense, [Intelligence,] and, etc. (lin. 18.)

effects the same thing in [represents the same Motions of] the Sun, etc. (page
125. page 125.
(lin. 4.) -- horrid [Raging] Noise, etc. (lin. 32.)

some Whirlwind pressed in, etc. the Round Tops -- Of Billows forced Aloft by
the Whirling Waters,] etc. (p. 126. page 126.
l. 8, 9.) -- (perchance) some Island, etc. (lin. 18.) -- [the Sea be waging
War against the Earth;] and This some vast Piece of Bank that Neptune thus
tosses up in Triumph] -- Cries [says Thus of them,] etc. (l. 21.) -- of [swift,
and] sharp-set [sportive] Dolphins, etc. (lin. 24.) -- a Song [Melody] by some
or other Chief Man amongst the Argonauts,] etc. (lin. 26.) -- a fuller view,
[more certain Tokens,] begins, etc. ( lin. penult.)

the World [Heaven] chance to, etc. (page 127. page 127.
lin. 2.) -- established [firm] Orders, etc. (lin. 6.) -- weighty a Charge
[Glorious a Spectacle,] etc. (lin. 11.)

there are [out of the Sky do arise,] etc. (page 128. page 128.
lin. 5.) -- the [whole] Earth, etc. (lin. 8.) -- Here [i. e. since, the Order
of the Universe is so Admirable,] etc. (lin. 18.) -- by [their own] force, etc.
(lin. 21.)

the Universe [or rather, Innumerable Worlds] to, etc. (page 129. page 129.
lin. 2.) -- signs [Images] and, etc. (lin. 21.)

Those, [Heretofore,] upon, etc. (p. 130. page 130.
lin. 14.) -- it so fall out, etc. [the same thing happen to Us, escaping out
of] Eternal, etc. (lin. 21, 22.) Now, as for Aetna, and the Fires thereof,
Fasellus, Fasellus's History referred to.
(who has treated of the Affairs of Sicily) lib. 2. cap. 4. may be repaired to.

Anniversary Vicissitudes [the various seasons of the Year,] to, etc. (p. 131.
page 131.
l. 12.) -- pass [not barely] by Reason, [but, by a certain] Transcendent and
Divine [Reason,] etc. (lin. 15, 16.) -- Conglobated, as to its proper
Inclinings, etc. [ i. e. by its own weight Collected into a Round, whilst All
Parts, in Equal Moments, tend to the some Centro,] etc. (lin. 24.) and an
Insatiable Diversity [a Variety that never sates the Eye of the Beholder,] etc.
(lin. 28.) -- gelid Perseverings [perpetual Coolnesses] of, etc. (lin. 29.) --
Depths [Latitudes] of, etc. (lin. 31.)

the Universe [Ocean,] etc. (page 132. page 132.
lin. 12.) -- of Islands [scil. in that part of the Mediterranean, at this day
termed the Archipelago, and elsewhere, etc.] the, etc. (l. 22.) -- Coveting,
etc. [approaching to, and (as it were) laying hold of the Earth] does, etc.
(lin. 28.) -- Distinguished [Vary'd,] etc. (lin. penult.)

driven [gather'd] into, etc. (page 133. page 133.
(lin. 2.) -- enriches, etc. [makes the Earth more Fruitful, by] showers, etc.
(lin. 3.) -- highest [most Remote] from, etc. (lin. 11.) -- termed the Sky,
etc. (lin. 13.) [the Stoiques The Stoiques Confound Heaven with the Sky.
(as I hinted before) Confounded the Element of Fire with Heaven; but other
Philosophers (the Peripatetiques especially,) accounted of them as vastly
Different] -- Rising and Setting, etc. (lin. 20.) [i. e. ascending above, and
descending below the Horizon; for, the very shadow of the Earth hindering the
Light of the Sun, Night how Caused. The Sun, how coming Nearer the Earth.
causes Night, said Lucilius before] coming nearer the Earth, etc. (lin. 21.)
[i. e. to one of the two Plaga's of the World, either the Northern, (wherein we
Live,) or, the Southern, (from which we are at a mighty Distance;) the Sun
departing from the One, while he is coming to the Other] -- Two Reversions
Contrary from [opposite to] the Extreme, etc. (lin. 24.) [scil. the One from
the Tropic of Cancer, the Other from That of Capricorn; which two Tropics,
Cicero, The Poles why termed Entremes.
(here) terms Extreme, not that they really are the Extremes in the Sphere, or
in the Heaven; (for the two Polar Circles are Further, and there is a great
distance betwixt Them and the Tropics;) but, because they are the Utmost Bounds
of the Course of the Sun.] -- Interval of which [i. e. which same Reversion
while the Sun is making,] etc. (lin. 25.) -- affects, etc. [scil. in
Wintertime; for, while it wanders (thus) to and again, it causes Winter and
Summer. Winter, etc. how occasioned.
] -- gladden'd [together] with, etc. (lin. 29.) -- spaces [Zodiac] with, etc.
(lin. 33.)

changes its light into several Forms [it self suffers several Mutations of its
Light.] These its Phases have been Noted before,] etc. ( page 134. page 134.
lin. 2.) -- Opposite to the Sun [interpos'd betwixt the Sun and our Sight] its
Beams and Light are Darken'd] it darkens his Beam and Light, i. e. takes it
away from our Sight,] etc. (lin. 4, 5.) -- Eclipsed [it self] (lin. 10.) i. e.
is really without any Light at all, in that it has no proper and innate Light
of its own, as has the Sun. Yet Berosus (in Laertius) makes one Half of it to
be Bright, One Half of the Moon Light, in the Opinion of some.
or (as Cleomedes says) Fiery; and Others (in Plutarch) allow it a sort of
innate Light. Upon This matter, and the various Motions of the rest of the
Planets, Sempilius (the Scot,) and Gassendus may be Consulted. Moreover, The
Moon how much Less than the Earth.
in that Tully (here) (page 133. lin. 32.) speaks the Moon to be bigger than
one Half of the Earth, I find not any Astronomers agree with him: Ptolemy makes
it to be 39 times Less than the Earth; Copernicus about 43; Tycho Brahe almost
42.] -- figuration whereof, etc. [i. e. these Stars are so distinguished in
Astrological Descriptions, that, Names have been applied to them, according to
the various Figures of things well known to us; which they seemed after a sort
to represent.] And here, etc. (lin. 21, etc.)

and Nights and Days, etc. ( page 135. page 135.
lin. 8, 9.) [and, are Rolled about -- Together with the Heaven, and Nights and
Days] -- the Extreme Top, etc. (lin. 13.) [These, so called, not because they
are the highest Parts of Heaven; but, in that it is turned about them: For, to
speak truly, the Poles The Poles what
are the two Extreme Points of that Axle-tree, which Astronomers feign to be
drawn from the South, through the Center of the World, to the North.] -- never
Set [i. e. descend below the Horizon,] etc. (lin. 17.)

Survey, etc. (page 136. page 136.
lin. 1, etc.) [i. e. by surrounding, visits the same Arctic Pole, with Stars
equal in number, and disposed in the like Manner and Figure with those of the
Greater Bear] -- but small [if compared with the Other, either in its Place, or
Light,] etc. (lin. 12.)

bowed down [oblique,] etc. (page 137. page 137.
lin. 10.) -- bent [turn'd back] as, etc. (lin. 11.) -- him who, [that Image,
which,] in, etc. (lin. 20.)

the Septentriones [i. e. the greater Bear] is, etc. (page 138. page 138.
lin. 17) -- And yet further; [ Then, those that follow Boots;] for, etc. lin.
23.)

all the Figures, etc. [in the Distribution of them into Order,] etc. (page
139. page 139.
l. 6.) -- Trembling [Quivering] Flame, etc. (l. 13.)

a ^ouble Figure [ i. e. That of Andromeda, and Pegasus] in, etc. ( p. 141.
page 141.
l. 2.) -- Winged [Swift] Bird, etc. (lin. 21.)

a Spacious Circle [the Spacious Zodiac,] etc. (page 142. page 142.
lin. 4.) -- has invested with his Constant Light, etc. [Tho the Sun does ever
Illuminate Capricorn and all the Other Stars; yet, (here) he is said to Invest
the Celestial sign of Capricorn The Tropie of Capricorn.
with a Constant (or perpetual) Light, at the time (more especially,) wherein
he comes to that his Station (as it were,) scil. after the 22d day of
December;) For, when the Sun has reached the Tropie of Him, he advances no
further to the South; but, bending his Course, returns again to the North.] Not
far, etc. (lin. 9, etc.) -- Rising, shows himself Aloft, -- With a Crosse-bow
behind him: [the Scorpion's Tail being Crookt into a Bow:] Here, by it self, --
Lies the Arrow, The Arrow.
but no Archer: Somewhat near It -- Hovers the Bird: [the Swan, surely] And,
not far off the Eagle, -- Bears her self, The Eagle, with Ganymede in her Talon.
and an Ardent Body with her. [This she carries in her Talon; the Greeks
understand it to be Ganymede, the Latins, Antinous. It is termed Ardent, not
because Inflamed with Lust, (perhaps,) but in regard of its Light, (both
Enlightening, and Inflaming,) composed of full Eight Stars.

Hence; on the Oblique to Taurus, shines Orion, etc. (page 143. page 143. The
Dog Days whence, and when.
lin. 1.) -- The Dog, etc. (lin. 4.) [i. e. Canis Major; whence, the Dog Days
(from the 24th of July, to about the 22d of August,) have their Name; all which
Time, this Star Rises and Sets, along with the Sun.] -- Then, for [And, after
the same Orion also, comes] the Hare, etc. (lin. 6.) -- his [her] Course, etc.
(lin. 7.) -- glide [Hall'd, [because moved with the wrong end forward] along,
etc. (lin. 8.) -- Here now, etc. (lin. 10, etc.) [The Ram, and Scaly Fishes
cover the Whale; Pistrix.
-- whose [the same Whales] Shining Body touches the Banks of the River] -- her
[it, the River Eridanus] stretching, etc. (lin. 14.) -- South-breezes cool [It
Forebodes Storms,] etc. (lin. 19.) -- not far from it [under Scorpio, and
Libra] is, etc. (lin. ult.) The Original it self was Imperfect in some of these
Places.

the Chelae of the Scorpion [under Libra; Servius (in lib. 1. Georg.)
testifying, that, the Chelae of the Scorpion Compose Libra: Whence, The
Chaldaeans Confounded Scorpio and Libra.
the Chaldaeans (of Old) accounted upon Libra and Scorpio as one and the same
Sign,] etc. page 144.
(page 144. lin. 2.) -- Four-footed Creature [i. e. the Wolf,] etc. (l. 5.) --
Shining-feather'd Crow [ Crow, born on her Wings,] pecks. etc. (lin. 12.)

Description [Disposure] of, etc. (p. 148. page 148.
lin. 2.) -- what Other Nature [were any Nature (either)] destitute, etc. (lin.
7.)

Compacted for Duration, [i. e. in such manner constituted of Parts so joined
and allied one to another, for mutual Preservation] as not, etc. (page 149.
page 149.
lin. 4.) -- surrounding, etc. [tending to the Center, are carried Thither-ward
with an Equal endeavor [i. e. equally, on all sides, at once.] And, more
especially the [and, the Greater] Bodies, etc. (lin. 9, etc.) -- diffused
[extended] thorough, Most Philosophers of Opinion, that the Divine Nature was
extended through the Universe; and, that it was the Center of all things.
etc. (lin. 15.) That the Divine Mind or Nature was diffused and extended
through the Universe, is delivered to have been the Common Opinion of the
Platonics, Academiques, and Stoiques.] -- to the Middle [ i. e. to the Center;
the Divine Nature it self, by Plato, etc. being held to be the Center of all
things,] etc. (lin. 16.) -- Converts Extremes [i. e. reconciles whatsoever
things are placed in that which we term the Circumference, about the Center,]
etc. (lin. 17.) -- contained in like proportion, etc. [ i. e. equally distant
from the Center,] etc. (lin. 20.) -- that, nothing can Interrupt the Parts
thereof tending to the Middle, ( now, this same Middle is the Lowest in the
Globe of the World,) which may be of force to obstruct so vehement an Endeavor
of Weight and Gravity,] etc. (lin. 22, etc.) -- and without, etc. [neither ever
redounds it, or overflows,] etc. (lin. 32.) -- Comprehending [Continuate,] etc.
(lin. 34.) -- Sublime Levity [ of a Lightness that tends Upward,] etc. (lin.
35.)

Naturally [by Nature] carried toward Heaven, page 150. The Stoique's Twofold
Division of Heaven.
etc. (page 150. lin. 2, etc.) The Stoiques Divided Heaven into Two Parts;
calling the Lower, the Air, the Higher, the Sky.] -- by their own Power, [i. e.
being gathered into a Round by the very endeavor whereby they are carried
toward the Center, do preserve themselves,] etc. (lin. 14.) -- [forth [back]
scil. in Rain, Snow, etc.] to the same Place (the Earth) from whence they had
them;] and again draw them up [from the same place;] so, that, etc. (lin. 25,
etc.) -- From Hence [i. e. in that both the Sky, and the Fiery Stars are
nourisht with the rest of the Elements,] etc. (lin. 28.) -- at the Last [at
Length] the, etc. (lin. 32.) -- return [arise] again, etc. (lin. 35.)

Thus [i. e. upon the Consumption of the Other Elements, page 151. The
Stoique's Renovation of the World, after their General Conflagration, no
Christian Opinion.
] etc. (p. 151. lin. 1.) -- Reanimating Power [and so, a God] the World would
be Renewed, etc. (lin. 3, etc.) Christians are not of This Opinion.] -- a
Consonancy, from [a Concord, tho their Motions be,] etc. (lin. 8.) -- the Top
of [the Highest Star or Planet] Saturn, etc. -- Mars (the Middle) Heats,] etc.
(lin. 9, 10.) -- Tempers them [scil. the same Sublunary Bodies that Saturn
would Chill, Mars, Inflame,] etc. (lin. 12.) [Venus and Mercury] are Assistant
to [Subject to, under] Sol, etc. (lin. 13.) conduces to, etc. [is the Cause of
Conceptions, and of Births, in as much as she brings the Young to such
Maturity, that, in convenient time, it comes to be Born,] etc. (lin. 16, 17.)
-- affected [mov'd to acknowledge a Providence] with [by] this, etc. (lin. 18.)
-- of Nature, toward the Conservation of the World, I take, etc. (lin. 20.) --
Intelligent Nature [ scil. a Providence, the Matter in Question,] etc. (lin.
25.) -- Trunks [Roots] do, etc. (lin. 28.)

to food [plac'd upon the Ground.]

the more, etc. (page 153. page 153.
lin. 10.) -- The Nacre is a Shellfish, the Sprawn a Fish, by Kind.

Stir [Creep,] etc. (page 154. page 154.
lin. 4.) -- shells, etc. (lin. 22, etc.) Shell-fishes; and, when he has made
them Gape, by the Warmth of his Stomach, he casts them up again, and so
(chooses) pecks out what is fit to be Eaten [scil. the Fish.] Now, etc.

with many other, etc. [These, now, are Wonderful things: And, are not Those
so too, that] were not long, etc. (page 155. page 155.
lin. 23, etc.) -- The Dog eases his Stomach by Vomit, ( provokt by eating
Grass,) the Egyptian Ibis by Clyster; ( that Bird using her Long Bill to cast
Salt Water in at her Fundament. Whence, the Original of Clysters.
[Whence, the Clyster.] It is, etc. (from lin. 27. to lin. 29.) -- run Mad, by
Eating [in Barbarous Countries they have eaten Poyson'd] Flesh, (the Barbarians
Hunting them with such,) they have a certain Remedy, [scil. Human Ordure,]
that, etc. (lin. 28, 29.)

with Teeth [by Biting,] etc. (page 156. page 156.
lin. 10.) -- Trunks [Stalks,] etc. (lin. 23.) -- Berries [ any sort of
Fruits,] etc. (lin. 27.) Berries [Seeds] -- are, etc. (lin. 28.) Nature, scil.
God himself, the Author of Nature,] etc. (lin. ult.)

to show [that we might understand] there is, etc. (page 157. page 157.
lin. 15.) -- such [Beasts] have, etc. (lin. 20.)

Moreover, [i. e. Beside this Love of their Issue, is also, to some Animals,
etc. Human Industry and Diligence superadded,] etc. (pa. 158. page 158.
lin. 9, etc.) -- great Opportunities, etc. [Conveniencies toward our Food, and
Clothing.] The Nile, etc. (l. 16, 17.) -- other [different] sorts, etc. (lin.
31.) -- Nature, [Divine Providence,] in, etc. (lin. 33.)

Eastern [Annual] Winds, etc. (page 159. page 159.
lin. 4.) -- the Swift and Certain Courses of [Navigations on] the, etc. (lin.
7.) -- Continually, etc. [sometimes Ebbing, other-whiles Flowing,] etc. (lin.
12.) -- Reason Apparent, [sorts of Arguments made out,] that, etc. (l. 21.)
This, for the Third Branch.

HAVING Thus (from p. 116. to p. 159.) An Introduction to a Synopsis of the
Fourth Branch.
at Large Disputed touching that General Providence, whereby the Deity Governs
the Whole World, and every Part thereof; he Gradually descends to the Especial
Providence of the same God, toward Man, even to Particular Men: A Point that
tho occasionally Touched upon before, yet, he now Handles anew; making a
Discourse often by it self. Of which, the Synopsis following. Viz.

Tully's Reasons for the Deity's more Immediate Care of Human Affairs in
General; by way of Synopsis of the Fourth (and Last) Branch of the Dispute.
I. God Consults Human Affairs in a more especial manner; 1. Because he Made
All Things for Our sake: (upon which Topique he is (Here) Brief, indeed; but
(Afterward (page 178, etc.) very Large.) 2. In that he has so admirably Framed
Entire Man: ( Which same Composure, and the Conveniences thereof, are fully
set forth.) 3. For as much as to Him alone (of all Living Creatures) has he
vouchsafed the Privilege of Beholding, and Knowing him in his Works; (his
Heavenly ones more eminently:) This is (as it were) by the By (but yet
Conveniently) interposed, upon his coming (p. 169.) to describe Human Senses.
4. In regard he has (moreover) Communicated a kind of Divine Power of
Understanding to Man alone: Whence, Arts, and Sciences; and the Dominion over
all things: Whence, Moral Virtues; ( chiefly arising from a Contemplation of
Matters Celestial, and Above;) and (what is a necessary Consequence of them,) a
Happy Life. And 5. Because to Men he Reveals Things Future.

A Summary of His Arguments for a Providence toward Particular Men.
II. The Deity has a Care not only of Mankind in the Universality, but also, of
Particular Persons; First, for the Reasons before produced for a General
Providence. Then, In regard of the special Benefits wherewith he has indu'd,
and the Help he has brought to Certain Men, in the Menage of Weighty Affairs.
And Lastly; for as much as the Misfortunes that sometimes Happen to Mighty Men,
to Exercise and Illustrate their Virtue, are not of Force to Overthrow the
Assertion. -- As for the Contents of it; PART II. SECT. IV. FROM page 159. to
lin. 11. of page 160. First of all, The Contents each Section of the Fourth
(and Last) Branch of the Stoical Disputation.
he undertakes to prove the Special Care of the Deity for Men, from Hence,
that, the mighty things before treated of were originally made for Their sakes,
as well as upon account of the Gods. THENCE, to lin. 1. of page 162. As Another
Argument of a Divine Providence to Us ward, he sets upon a Description of the
Body of Man; and, in This Section, speaks of the Usefulness and Convenience of
the Mouth, Nostrils, Teeth, and Tongue. THENCE, to lin. 10. of page 163. The
Site, and Offices of the Stomach (or Oesophagus,) Tonsils, and Rough Artery,
(or Weazon.) THENCE, to lin. 7. of page 165. The Seat, Office, and Faculties of
the P^unch, (or Ventricle;) as also, the Temper, and Duty of the Lungs
Described. THENCE, to lin. 4. of page 167. He elegantly shows which way
Nutrition is effected; and, what Parts are Assistant to that Work. THENCE, to
lin. 13. of page 168. He teaches Whence, and Where the Vital Spirit is
Generated; and likewise, How, from the Heart, it is diffused into all the Body
through Arteries, in like manner as the Blood by Veins. THENCE, to lin. 18. of
page 169. He in some measure sets forth the Structure, and various Uses of the
Bones. Then, he comes to the Composure of Man, altogether fitted for
Contemplation, and, Thereby, a Knowledge of the Divinity; which was what
Providence had regard to, in Framing it. THENCE, to lin. 18. of page 170. The
so commodious Situation of the Senses, every one in its proper Place, argues a
Divine Providence. THENCE, to lin. 28. of page 171. He anew admires the Divine
Skill, in Contriving the Senses; and First, in Framing the Eyes, which are
(Here) most elegantly Described. THENCE, to lin. 8. of page 173. The Eyes are
followed by the rest of the Senses, most strong Evidences of a certain Divine
Workmanship. THENCE, to lin. 5. of page 174. He Demonstrates the Excellency of
Human Senses, above Those of Brutes; and, First, of the Eyes. THENCE, to lin.
22. of the same page. He shows, that Men surpass Beasts, in the Other Senses
also. THENCE, to lin. 15. of page 175. He teaches that, from the same
Providence came those Human Virtues usually termed Intellectual; and, in the
First place, the Faculty of Reasoning; Whence arise Arts, and Sciences. THENCE,
to lin. 28. of the same page. He not unelegantly commends the Dignity and
wonderful effects of Eloquence. THENCE, to lin. 9. of page 176. He relates the
Instruments of Speech, in Praise of Provident Nature. THENCE, to lin. 31. of
the same page. He ascribes to the Divine Bounty the Composure, and Aptness of
the Hands; and, in the three following Sections, discourses at large how
Convement they are; in This, particularly, observing the ready and easy
Subserviency of them to many Arts THENCE, to lin. 14. of page 177. He (Here)
further produces other advantages of Life obtein'd by the Work and Benefit of
the Hands; Namely, Food, the Service of Laboring Beasts, and Metals. THENCE,
to lin. 2. of page 178. He now winds up the almost numberless conveniences of
the Hands, in the use of Wood more especially, and the Tillage of the Ground,
touched upon by the By in the Sections above. THENCE, to lin. 27. of the same
page. From the Fabrique of Man's Body he advances to (the Other Half of Him)
his Mind or Soul; the most sharp and piercing E^ge whereof does Single
Astrology of all the Sciences, especially commend; Each Fruit, and Excellence
of which Famous Art is Touched by the way: And then, he puts a Period to this
somewhat Long Consideration of Man; absolutely concluding the matter in
Proposition, that, this so Artificial Composure of the Body, and admirable
Subtlety of Wit, are to be attributed to Providence, not to Fortune. THENCE, to
lin. 25. of page 179. Having thus subjected to our view the whole Structure of
Man; he clearly speaks it to be his Intention, in the rest of the Disputation,
to make appear, as a further Demonstration of the Providence of God toward Us,
that whatever, in the Universe, is placed Without us, was originally ordained
and provided for Our sakes: Now, in this Paragraph, he will have, First, the
World in General, then, Heaven and Heavenly Things in Particular, to have been
Perfected, for the Behoof of Men, as well as for the Gods. THENCE, to lin. 23.
of page 180. That the Fruits of the Earth were generated for the Sake of Men,
not of Beasts. THENCE, to lin. 3. of page 181. He shows, by an Induction, in
almost four entire Sections, that Beasts were created, by the Deity, for the
Convenience of Man; and, in This, represents the Advantages we reap by Sheep,
and Dogs. THENCE, to lin. 18. of the same page. To what Uses we put Oxen.
THENCE, to lin. 5. of page 182. Providence has further granted Mules, Asses,
Swine, Fish, and Birds; for our Service, and Gratification in sundry respects.
THENCE, to lin. 30. of the same page. The Benefits derived from the Hunting of
Wild Beasts plainly speak even Them also to have been procreated for Our
Behoof. In the Last place, he takes it for granted, that the Whole Earth, all
the Waters, (which are so wonderfully productive of Advantages, both within and
without,) were made for, and accommodated to us, who have the Fruition of their
Treasures, and Opportunities. THENCE, to lin. 25. of page 183. Divination
Confirms the peculiar Providence of the Deity toward Man. THENCE, to lin. 27.
of p. 184. The Divine Providence not only consults Mankind in General but also
Particular Persons. THENCE, to lin. 12. of page 185. The St^ique's Assertion
before, that none of the Eminent Men ^^uld have been such, without the
Assistance of the Divinity, is (here) strengthened by the Authority of the
Poets; as also, by the Appearances of the Gods, Portents, and the rest of that
sort of Significations of things to come. THENCE, to lin. 27. of the same page.
He briefly Refells the Vulgar Objection against Providence, of many
Incommodities daily happening to Mortals; and so, puts an End to the Branch.

Sake [the so mighty things I have been speaking of, were, with such
Contrivance, Amendments, Explanations, etc. of the Last Branch of the Dispute.
page 159.
Originally made and designed:] whether, etc. (page 159. lin. 28, 29.) --
sustein'd [Preserv'd] by, etc. (lin. 31.) -- framed, etc. [taken so much
peins,] upon the, page 160. God did not take any peins in Creating the World.
etc. (page 160. lin. 1.)

Moses Writes, that God was so far from being put to any peins in Creating the
World, that he did it with a Word; i. e. the Word and the Work were together:
For, (says S. Ambrose, 1. Hexa.) He did not Speak, to the end that the
Operation might ensue; but, the Work was Done, in the very Instant of Uttering
the Word.] -- But [And,] it, etc. (lin. 12.)

draws in [takes in the more] Air, etc. (page 161. page 161.
lin. 2.) -- bruised, etc. [Cut in pieces, and masht] by them, etc. (lin. 6.)

stop the Breath [hinder Respiration,] etc. (page 163. page 163.
lin. 10.) -- Capacity of the [Capacious] Paunch, etc. (lin. 11.)

Breath [Air] from, etc. (page 164. page 164.
lin. 1.) -- at Others [scil. in both its Orifices,] overcoming, etc. (lin. 8.)
-- Breath, The Vital Spirit Assistant to Concoction.
[the Spirit; scil. that Threefold one, the Natural, Vital, and Animal, which
most Physicians allow to be included in the Veins, Nerves, and Arteries; the
Ventricle having them all in great Numbers,] all, etc. (lin. 12.)

taking in [Remitting] Breath, and Dilate, [in taking it in;] to the, etc.
(page 165. page 165. The First Passage of the Chyle, according to the Opinion
of the Ancients.
lin. 3, 4.) -- being severed from the rest of the Meat, flows from the Small
Guts, and Ventricle, to the Liver, thorough certain Open Passages, [scil. the
Mesaraique Veins,] direct from the Mesentery, [which is a sort of Membranous
Body, (made up of Two Coats, almost Numberless Veins and Arteries, and much
Kernel, and Fat,) whereunto the Guts stick and are fastened,] that, from the
same Middle Entrail, ( or Mesentary,) even as far as that which they call the
Port Vein, (these Mesaraique Veins being all Branches of the Porta,) run along
to the Liver, and cleave Thereunto, etc. (lin. 9, etc.)

Thence, etc. (page 166. page 166.
lin. 1.) [scil. from the Ports of the Liver, (or Port-Vein)] -- propagated
(lin. 2.) [through the whole (...) (as they term it) of the Liver] --
Nourishment (lin. 3.) [i. e. the Chyle, now turned to Bloud] -- Liver (lin. 4.)
[scil. to the Heart, and other parts of the Body.] -- poured forth of
[distill'd (says Laurentius) from] the Reins, The Office of the Reins.
( scil. the Right, and the Left; whose Office it is, to receive these Humors
severed from the Blood; (as the Bladder of the Gall takes in the Yellow Choler,
and the Spleen the Black,) thorough those Capillary Disseminations, First, into
certain Caruncles, next, How, and whither they convey what they receive.
into the Membranaceous Tube, and Vrinary Vessels usually termed the Vreters,
and then, into the Bladder.] -- Consistence, [ scil. the Chyle, that is brought
to the Liver] -- its other Passages [the Other Veins, scil. of the Liver] do,
The Passage of the Blood from the Port, to the Hollow Vein.
etc. (lin. 9.) -- And, (lin. 10.) [all the Nourishment ( Chyle, or Blood) in
this same Place (scil. the Port-Vein,) being] thorough Them, slipped to the
Vessel termed the Hollow Vein, (in consideration of its remarkable Size, and
Cavity,) it flows in: [so says Tully; The Watery Humor when separated from the
Blood, according to Modern Anatomist^.
But, at this day, it is generally thought that, after both the Cholers are
severed from the Blood, the Serous Humidity still remains with it, that, by the
help thereof, it may the more easily get through those so narrow Passages which
lead from the Port, to the Hollow Vein; and, that this Watery Humor is not
separated from the Blood, till after, by this Vehicle as it were, it has
entered the Hollow Vein. The Liver the Chief Instrument of Sanguification in
the opinion of the Ancients; and of Galen: But Aristotle, and the Sto^ques make
the Heart to be it.
] -- elaborated, [shut up in Vessels,] etc. (lin. 14.) The Ancients ran into
the Mistake of the Liver's being the almost only Instrument of Sanguification,
by reason they had not found out the Milky Veins since discovered, and the
new-Office invented for the Liver, by Later Anatomists. Galen was for the Liver
to be the Author of Blood; Aristotle, for the Heart; Balbus, here, (in making
it first to slow from the Liver, then, from the Heart,) seems to side first
with the one, then, with the other, and scarce to agree with himself; all
Physicians allowing the Original of the Blood, and of the Veins to be one and
the same. See Averrhoes, Vesalius, etc. for Aristotle; and Laurentius, etc. for
Galen.

Girding [scil. above] and Relaxing [below] the Crasse Entrails (page 167. page
167.
lin. 2.) it belonging to Them to detrude the Excrementitious parts of our
Food. The Office of the Entrails.
Their Description may be seen in Laurentius.] -- Nature (lin. 5.) [scil. of
Man, Man, a Little World.
the Epitome of the World, or, of Universal Nature, as Laurentius (Lib. 1. Cap.
2. Anatom.) clearly shows.] -- in Breathing [by Aspiration,] etc. (lin. 6.) --
Breath [Spirit] it, etc. (lin. 7.) -- Coagitation [Contact] of, etc. (lin. 8.)

from These Parts [scil. the Two Ventricles of the Heart] it, etc. page 168.
page 168.
lin. 8.) Breath, [i. e. the more Subtle part of the Blood, termed the Vital
Spirit,] by, etc. (lin. 9.) Theodoret referred.
Theodoret's Third Oration concerning Providence furnishes an Elegant
Description of the Admirable Contexture of the Veins, and Arteries, in all the
Body.] -- Supporting [being put under the Other parts of the Body, to support
them] are, etc. (l. 14.)

contained [tackt together,] etc. (p. 169. page 169.
lin. 2.) -- They, etc. (lin. 3.) Galen delivers, that the Stoiques, Whence,
the Nerves are Derived.
with the Peripatetiques, held, the Nerves, (as well as the Veins and
Arteries,) to proceed from the Heart, (the First Made, they thought, of all the
Parts;) We derive them from the Brain.] -- Providence [Workmanship] of [Divine]
Nature, etc. (lin. 6, 7.) -- Erect from the Ground, etc. (lin. 11.) [Laurentius
(Lib. 1. c. 2.) gives the Efficient, Material, and Final Causes of This
Rectitude, derived even from Nature it self] -- upon [arisen out of] the, etc.
(lin. 14.) -- Inhabitant [upon it:] but, and (lin. 15.) -- Other Animal, etc.
(lin. 18.) and yet, Naturalists affirm the Elephant to Worship the Sun, Moon,
and Stars; The Religion of the Elephant.
and, the Eagle (also) the Sun.

Judgment, etc. (page 170. page 170.
lin. 3.) in that it very mu h belongs to Them, to Judge of Meats and Drinks,
etc.] -- approaches [Attempts, Attacks,] of, etc. (lin. 12.) -- Nature [the
Maker of Man] placed, etc. (lin. 17.) -- none is more skillful, [none can be
more Sagacious,] could so industriously, and ingeniously have contrived the
Senses,] etc. (lin. 20, etc.) -- in [their proper place.] she, etc. (lin. 27.)

shutting up [Covering] the, etc. ( page 171. page 171.
lin. 9.) -- Hearing [Ear,] etc. (lin. 28.) -- it, [This Sense,] even, etc.
(lin. 29.) -- Flexucus [Tortuous,] etc. (lin. 31.)

Horny, [and, have many windings;] that, etc. (page 172. p^g. 170.
lin. 6.) -- And therefore [Wherefore; ( i. e. by reason of the same Hardness)
do Lutes and Harps send forth Musical Sounds; which from their Tortuous and
Recluse Bellies, are returned much Louder,] etc. (lin. 9, etc.)

Framed [Plaister'd,] etc. (p. 173. page 173.
l. 12.)

Virtues, and Vices, etc. (page 174. page 174.
lin. 2.) This is not spoken out of a Philosophical, but only a kind of Civil
Opinion; Aristotle, etc. making Color, and Light, to be the Proper and
Adequate Objects of Sight as well in Beasts, as Men.] -- Emprovement, etc. [for
the Perceiving, and Relishing the Delicacies of which Senses,] are, etc. (l.
17.) -- Delicacies, etc. [whatever may render the Body Trim and Gay,] are, etc.
(l. 22.) -- have no claim to [be without] any, etc. (lin. 27.) --
Understanding, etc. [Notion of Principles] Then, etc. (lin. 31.)

Define [Particular] Things, and Comprize them in a few Words;] and so, etc. (
page 175. page 175.
lin. 1, 2.) -- think, etc. [ Extenuate, or absolutely Deny; in that we
perceive what is without us, (i. e. External Objects,) both by the Senses, and
the Mind;] of which, when, etc. we also make up, etc. (lin. 8, Why the
Academiques Den^'d Arts and Sciences.
etc.) It was the Placit of the Academiques, to call all things in Doubt,
pretend to know nothing, and that not ought can certainly be perceived by Man;
in regard all Human Science (says Aristotle) Depends upon the Senses; which
often happen to be deceived, and drawn into Error. As for the Original of
Arts, The Original of Arts and Sciences.
they proceeded from a diligent, and accurate Consideration of Particular
Things, how, and with what success every of them was Done: As, upon finding
that some Pleaded better at the Bar, than Others, the First Authors of
Rhetorique pondered upon the Reasons of This; and so, from the Observation both
of these Excellencies, and Imperfections, and a Collation of them one with
another, sprang up that same Moving Art. The Like, for all the rest.] -- is
sent forth, [and Heard,] etc. ( lin. penult.)

Quill [Bow,] etc. (page 176. page 176.
lin. 7.) -- Cavities [Musical Instruments] that, etc. (l. 8.) -- Commissures;
[ Ligaments, and Joints;] were, etc. (lin. 15.) -- Knit [Serv'd,] etc. (lin.
23.) Polydore Virgil Polydore Virgil, upon the Inve^tours of Arts.
has, in Eight Books, collected out of Ancient Authors the Inventours of all
the Arts here mentioned, and of a great many more omitted.] -- Meats, etc.
[Food been Invented;] the, etc. (lin. 34.) -- ripened, etc. [kept till
After-Time,] etc. (lin. ult.)

determined [bounded within certain Compasses,] etc. (page 178. page 178.
lin. 8.) -- Behoof [Vse] of, etc. ( lin. ult.)

Definite [reduc'd by us to certain Measures] we so, etc. (page 179. page 179.
lin. 20.) -- Exhilerating [Excellent,] etc. (lin. 32.) -- are of no use at all
[do not at all belong] to, etc. (lin. 33.)

Apples [Fruits,] etc. (p. 180. page 180.
l. 19.) -- Caused them for the Good of [bestow'd them upon] Man, etc. (lin.
22.) -- made [provided] for, etc. (lin. 25.) -- bring forth their Young [be of
any profit at all] without Human, etc. (lin. 29.)

Tilled by a cleaving of the Glebe, [Plow'd,] no sort of Violence, etc. [i. e.
they used not to be Killed,] etc. (page 181. page 181.
lin. 10, 11.) -- Entrails [Flesh,] etc. (lin. 18.) -- Soul is, etc. (lin. 24)
Hereby noting (doubtless) the Sluggishness of the Swine; Cr^si^pu^'s Queint
Expression, upon the Sluggist ness of the Swine.
whose Life seems scarce to serve it for any other End, than what Salt does,
when it is Dead; that is to say, keep it from Putrefying.]

Wild, (page 182. page 182. Alites, and Oscines What, with the (...).
lin. 2.) (Alites,) by which were meant such Birds, as they thought made (the
Auspicium, or) significations, b^ their Expanded Wings, and Flight; but Tame
(Oscines,) were those, supposed to do This, by the Tone of their Mouth.] --
and not only [as] from, etc. (lin. 12.) -- perceived [known] by, etc. (lin.
15.) -- things [scil. Metals, Waters, Stones, etc.] (lin. 27.) -- Stoiques [who
asserted a Divination,] etc. (lin. 34.)

bestowed upon Man, by no Other than, etc. (page 183 page 183. Two sorts of
Divination according to the Stoiques.
lin. 18.) The Stoiques account only upon Two sorts of Divination; (in our
Authors Lib. 1. de Divin.) the One, of Art; the Other, of Nature: So that, by
Power, (Here, l. 16.) which seems to be a Third, is only intended (perhaps)
Vaticination; This, and Dreams being comprehended under the Natural kind of
Divination. The Natural sort split into two Branches.
] -- Now, tho you should not be moved by any one of these Predictions of the
Southsayers single, perhaps; yet, take them, etc. (lin. 21, etc.) -- at the
greatest [not joined to our Europe] they, etc. ( lin. ult. etc.)

Particularly Homer, etc. (page 184. page 184.
l. 29.) Much Excellent Doctrine might be Collected out of Homer, concerning
the Deity; would Time permit, or the Place bear it.

portended [foreshewn] to, etc. ( page 185. page 185.
lin. 4.) -- Strange Sights, [Prodigies,] etc. (lin. 6.) -- let pass smaller,
etc. (lin. 21.) A Stoical Error; Providence extends to the smallest things,
without any Tr^uble.
for there is nothing so small, as to escape the Notice of the Godhead. And, no
trouble (neither) in This; since, (as Clem. Alexandr. Writes, Stromat. 7.)
(...). He is not Divided into Parts, Distracted, nor Passing from place to
place; but, Is Everywhere Always, and Nowhere Circumscribed; All Mind, All
Light, All Eye; Seeing, Hearing, and Knowing All things.] -- Our Party, etc.
(l. 24.) In whom Virtue is, No Misery, in the Stoique's O^inion, where Virtue
is.
there is nothing wanting to Happy Living; was a Stoical Paradox.] --
Perfections [Riches,] etc. (lin. 26.) Here Is an End of the Stoique 's
Disputation.

BOOK II. PART III. Balbus Ends the Book, The Contents of the Third Part of the
Second Book.
with a short, but Grave Exh^rtation to Gotta, Henceforth to employ the
Eloquence whereof he is so great a Master in the Defense of th Divinity; as
also, with a Censure of the Liberty of the Academy.

The Amendments of it.
is [most of] what I could think of, as proper, etc. (lin. 28, 29.) And Thus, I
have done with the Second Book.

The Divisi^n of the Third Book.
THIS Third Book, of the Nature of the Gods, may, (as the Two Former,) be
Conveniently Divided into Three Parts; viz. the Preface, which takes up the Six
First Sections, and, the Dispute it self all the rest; save only the Two Last,
allowed for the Conclusion. Here, Cicero, passes from Balbus's Dispute to That
of Cotta's. In the Disputation it self Cotta Confutes the Theology of the
Stoiques, so at Large set forth by Balbus, in the foregoing Book. And, the
Epilogue (or Conclusion,) tells what was the Issue of the Concertation.

An Introduction to the C^rrection of it.
The Peins already bestowed upon This Book, may do much (perhaps) toward an
Explanation of it: So that, I shall not proceed (Here,) as before; but only
subjoyn the Amendments, etc. in Gross, as follows. Viz.

Amendments of the Whole Th^rd (and Last) Book of the Nature of the Gods.
BOOK III. Page 187. lin. 4. bespeak [advise] -- l. 10. may [is to] -- p. 188.
l. 13. Censure, [or Punishment,] -- l. 24. Consistent one with [Consequential
one to] -- p. 189. l. 5. As the Method of the Oration directs [i. e. in the
Method we have begun] -- p. 190. l. 12. These [Religions] -- l. 19. [As I
remember,] Your -- p. 191. page 191.
lin. 32. disadvantaged [Lessen'd] -- l. ult. Speech [scil. Philosophical way
of Disputing, which will not admit of any thing Superfluous.] -- p. 192. l. 2.
92.
as easy to look with Both. [Why the Eyes are necessarily moved together, and
both (still) look the same way, may be seeen in Aristotle's Problems, Sect. 31.
q. 7. and, Aquilonius's Optic. lib. 1. Prop. 19. But (yet,) in Birds, and in
Mad men, this holds not.] -- l. ult. Jupiter. [The Academique (here) passes by
the First of Balbus's Arguments, ( viz. the Presumption of a Deity from the
Sight of Heaven,) as too Heavy for him, perhaps; and, only Answers the Latter,
of the Divinity of the Sky.] -- p. 194. l. 15. 94.
as Certain [Truer] -- p. 195. l. 8. came [come] -- l. 27. 95.
throwing [casting] -- p. 197. l. 29. So, 97,
[ in This Disputation, the Point in Proposition] may -- p. 198. l. 31. is
[not] a -- p. 200. 98,
200.
l. 23. was [is] -- l. 24. were [are] -- l. 25 betook [betake] -- p. 201. l.
201.
l. ult. Formed [Confirm'd] -- p. 202. 202.
l. 2. Sense [Soul] -- p. 203. 203,
l. 12. may [not] be -- l. 25. some [part] of -- l. 26. nothing [none] of -- p.
206. 206.
l. 10.) [For,] one -- l. 11. it [more] likely -- p. 207. 207.
l. 8. naturally [by Nature] -- l. 17. yet ascribe Reason [yet, Reason] either,
-- p. 210. page 210.
l. 8. Astraea [Astaerea] -- p. 213. l. 14. 13.
Supplication [Supplications] -- p. 216. 16.
l. 11. you are [are you] not -- l. 30. Seasons [Tempests] also; -- p. 219. l.
4. 19.
sprung from [begot] Aetes -- p. 220. page 2^0,
l. 14. and, [the Third,] (reputed, etc. -- p. 223. l. 4. Overthrown
[Confounded: 23.
] -- l. 13. [we see] they -- l. 14. And, [For, they are] either -- l. 15, etc.
the Mind, Hope, Virtue, Concord; or to be wished for] by us, as Honor, [Health]
Victory -- l. 23. all ascribe [none separate] -- p. 224. 24.
l. 4. 224. l. 4. [to have been] not -- l. 6. took [take] -- l. 7, etc.
Saturetur [se saturet] Annis, he [fills himself with] years -- l. 9. verteret
[vertit] -- l. 10. minueret [minuit] -- l. 13. has an Influence upon [comes to]
all -- l. 14. dangerous [hazzardous] -- l. 15. Beside, [For,] that -- l. 17.
say you to [will you do with] -- l. 23. appeared [seem] to -- l. 27. show
[give] the -- l. penult. is [has] the -- p. 225. l. 1. are [have] both Divine
Names [been] -- l. 4, etc. and we see the Altar of Orbona, [and, Orbona Hers,]
near That of the Lars; [and, there is (also) an Altar] Consecrated -- p. 230.
page 230.
l. 10. Villainies: [Wickednesses:] -- p. 231. 31.
l. penult. [neither did] Deianira [Intend] Hercules -- p. 232. 32.
l. 30. Support [Subminister to] such -- l. ult. (still) in -- p. 233. ^^.
l. 1. How subtlely does [Does not] He -- l. 2. [subtlely] with -- l. 7. (with
the Academiques) a Vulgar -- l. 8. Happiness [Pleasant] to -- l. 20. the [Him]
-- l. 21. [How much more freely may you send] a going? 34.
-- p. 234. l. 2. if there were no [without] Reason? -- l. 18. of Other
Inquisitions; the Gold, etc. -- p. 235. ^5,
l. 7. Decrees relating to [Suits about] Wills. -- l. 12. Laws [Judgments
(Decrees)] touching -- p. 238. 38.
l. 9. for, [and,] it is -- p. 239. 39.
l. 20. provided for [to have taken care of] the -- l. ult. lost [convey'd
Maximus his Son (the Consul) to the Pile. Why was Marcellus killed by Hannibal?
Why cut they off] Paulus, etc. (p. 240. page 240.
l. 1, 2.) -- l. 3. exposed [yielded] to -- p. 241. l. 1. 41.
at the Feet of [before] the -- p. 243. l. 6. 43.
[made] betwixt -- l. 10. was a Living [bore] Testimony -- l. 16. [very]
favorable -- l. 17. (Smiling,) [Laughing,] -- p. 244. l. 9. (also,) that -- p.
245. l. 2. 44, 45.
(I said) was -- l. 4. called in Chapmen [and Sold] by -- l. 14. Dying [being
Dead] in -- l. 15. Mournful sound of Bells [sound of Unbrac'd Drums] (Or else,
with high-swoln Eulogies in his Praise;) -- p. 246. l. 7. [in it] for -- l. 46.
21 Whole Estate [Safety (Life)] -- p. 247. l. 9. 47.
[Tho] Pythagoras -- l. 10. Tho [Yet, (truly)] I -- l. antepenult. the [all]
Power -- p. 248. l. 21. 48.
) pointed to [shew'd them many] Other [Vessels] under -- l. 23. Diagoras [was]
in those [Ships] also. Now, [For,] so -- l. 24. [the matter of] Good -- p. 249.
l. 11. But, [For, 40, 50.
] -- p. 250 l. 7. think [Nor will I ever say] the -- l. 14. saying he cannot
[denying that he can] be -- l. 15. was able to [could] have -- l. 18. teach
[are used to tell us,] -- l. 19. Labor [Endeavour] -- p. 251. 51
l. 4. and [in which All] is, -- l. 5. [absolutely] yielding -- l. 6. [even] in
-- l. 13, 14. Well! [No Wonder! For,] nor of Cities, (truly) -- l. 22. are
certainly [must needs be] heeded -- l. 24. regards, [has regard even to] -- l.
25. speak [think] of -- l. 26: turning about [inspecting] -- l. 37. Balbus
[Lucilius] -- l. 41. Night [Evening] -- l. 42. other day, [day or other,] -- l.
43. the [my] Contest [with You] must -- p. 252. page 252.
l. 6. were surely [I hold to be] a -- l. 11. much You are too Strong for Me.
[easily I may be Overcome by You.] -- l. 20, etc. Truer than Balbus 's; [the
Truer; but, to Me, Balbus 's seemed of, etc. Thus, have you the Amendments,
etc. of the Third ( and Last) Book.

A Preparatory to an Enquiry touching the Opinion of Cicero, as to a De ty.
UPON the Reader's finding Cicero to make himself the Auditour, (at least;) if
not the Arbiter of the Concertation; he may become a little Curious (perhaps)
to understand what might be his Own Thoughts upon This Subject. Now, He was of
a Sect that professed to have naught at all Certain, as to Divine Matters
especially; so that 'twere difficult absolutely to Affirm any thing concerning
him: And yet so Strong is Truth; that it was able to Force even Him (we may
see) to Pronounce (against his Fellow-Academique,) in favor of the Stoique
Lucilius.

S. Augustin's Charge of Atheism Mitigated with relation to him.
But, This notwithstanding; S. Augustine is very Hard upon him; (almost
throughout the whole 9th Chapter of his City of God:) For, after he has laid
down, that, to acknowledge a Deity, and yet Deny his Prescience, is perfect
Madness; he in such manner Reflects upon Tully, for having done This, (Here,)
in the Person of Cotta, and, (in his Second Book of Divination,) in his Own; as
to speak him not to have been much better than an Atheist. Now, True it is;
that, to gainsay the Prescience of the Divinity, is even all one with denying
his Existence; in regard, a Knowledge of things to come is Inseparable from
him, as such: And yet, (with this Father's good Leave,) the Matter is not so,
in the Conceit of an Erring Man: For, it is not Impossible, but a body may,
through Mistake, persuade himself that something Proper to the Godhead is
Repugnant to That Blessed Nature, or (however) not Reconcilable with somewhat
else, that Manifestly, (and without Contradiction) Belongs to it; in Denying
which to be in Him, he is not of Opinion he Oppugns his very Essence. Thus, our
Marcus; believing himself to be Free, and not being able to Concert This with
the Divine Prescience; was rather (it seems) for stripping the Deity of an
Attribute, than quitting his own pretenses to Liberty: Tho, at the same time,
well aware, (questionless,) that, 'twas more Likely He should be without
Freedom, than the World without a God; in that he knew the Existence of a
Divine Power to be an Innate Principle; tho not so the Quality, since there are
various Opinions concerning it, which would not be, were it (as the Other,)
Impressed in us by Nature.

So that, I shall venture to say, He is presumed neither to have been Ignorant
of, nor really Denied a God.
(with all Deference to the Judgment of this Grave Doctor of the Church,)
that, (surely,) our Author was neither Ignorant of, nor yet Denied the
Divinity; (in as much as, in the whole Course of the Second of these Three
Books, by Another Mouth, (indeed,) are such things delivered; as that, if they
do not absolutely Prove a Divine Power, they must needs (at least) raise a
strong Presumption of one, into the Minds of All that have regard to Reason, in
the Conduct of their Lives:) Only I suspect he hung a little in Suspense; (as
usual in the Case of Obscure, and Wonderful Matters;) and, by his great
Strength of Wit, fully perceived the many False things, (then) Generally
Imputed to the Godhead, by mortal men; though, wanting the Light of Faith, and a
Divine Enstructer, he was not able, in like manner, to Discern what was True:
And indeed, even himself (effectually) acknowledges as much, in saying (here,)
in the Person of Cotta, I wish I could but as easily find out what is True, as I
can confute that which is False: He that so often Convinced Others of Mistakes,
is sometimes Reprovable of Error himself.

He was persuaded of the Existence, tho not able to Comprehend the Quality of
the Divinity.
Wherefore, Cicero, (as I said,) undoubtedly perceived that a God there is:
(for, I am not for Denying to Him, what I should scarce Refuse Any man:) But,
What he is, he only saw in Part; and, Partly, discerned not; because, either
dazzled with the Splendor, or oppressed with the Weight of the Divine Majesty.

The Judgment of the Learned upon these Three Books of Tully's, touching the
Nature of the Gods.
But, whatever his Opinion might be, as to a Deity; I find the Judgment of
Learned Men upon these his Treatises touching the Divine Nature, to be This:
That, if they Confirm not the True Deity, and Religion, they are certainly of
great force toward Overthrowing the False. Nor, is this any more, than what the
Worshippers themselves of those same sorry Gods (shall I call them) were very
sensible of; for, they, (still,) by a kind of Confederacy (as it were,)
Conspired the Destruction of This Work: and, more particularly, in the Reign of
(that Great Bigott of the Heathenish Superstition, and Enemy of the Christian
Religion,) Dioclesian, These Books, and his Two Other of Divination, were
publicly burnt, (as Baronius Delivers, (Anno Christ. 302. number. 19.) in
company with the Writings of the Christians. Nay and, before Him, had Arnobius
written to the same Effect; who (also) highly Commends Tully, for setting forth
These Tracts; and, in the Third Book of his Disputations adversus Gentes, (though
(as yet) a Heathen, or (however,) no Christian, not so much as a Catechumen,
(says the same Baronius,) sharply Inveys against the Burners of them. His Words
are to This Effect. Viz. But, before all Others, Tully, the most Eloquent of
any of the Romans, not fearing the Imputation of Impiety, with great Ingenuity,
Freedom, and Exactness, showed what his Thoughts were, as to such a kind of
Opination, etc. And yet, I hear of some, that are much Transported against
these Books of his, and give out, that the Senate ought to Decree the
Abolishing of them, as bringing Countenance to the Christian Religion, and
Impairing the Authority of Antiquity. Rather, (say I,) if ye believe you have
ought Certain to deliver, as to your Deities, Convince Cicero of Error,
Confute and Explode his Evil Doctrine. For, to Destroy Writings, or go about to
hinder the Common Reading of them, is not to Desend the Gods, but to be Afraid
of the Testimony of Truth. Thus far, Arnobius: With Whom, I conclude these same
Illustrations, etc. And indeed, I could not leave Cicero, and his Books, in a
Better, or more Illustrious Place, than amids those Bright Flames, wherein the
Divine Writings were Consumed: For, what Greater Honor, than for Him to be
joined with Christ; in the Same Cause, and Punishment? Thrice Happy, and
Glorious, Cicero, if Another Fire seize not upon thee!

The Translators Account of this Preface, etc.
HAVING, now, Done with my Author; let me say as to This Preface, that the Aim
of it is, by the Contents, (Here,) to furnish the Connection of the Discourse;
by the Alterations, to reduce the Translation as near as possible to the
Expression of the Original; and, by the Explanations, Illustrations, etc. to
deliver as True, and Clear as might be, the Sense, and Meaning of it. How far
it Answers These Ends, the Reader must Judge. If any think it too Long, to be
looked into; they may understand, that, it is not Absolutely Necessary, but only
for such as will take that peins. I am not aware of any Harm These Treatises
can do in English, since they come forth Thus Attended. There is no Fairer Plea
to Candor, perhaps; than what the Nicety of the Work it self, and the
Circumstances of the Translatour of it make up: And yet, this Word of Advice
may be accepted, (perchance;) but (however,) must pass for all Apologies; That,
Time, brings every thing to Perfection: And, that, a Version of Aristotle's
Ethics, and of some Bit or other out of French, (by an Intimacy with Those
Tongues, (also,) to be the better fitted for an Agreeable Study, and
Profession,) is all the Trouble of the Kind, Likely ever to be given the World,
by This Hand.

In that a Perfect Explanation of the Second Page of This Work could not be got
in on the Margin of it; as was hoped it might: You are Troubled (thus
Irregularly) with what follows, to That End.
Viz. Page 2. lin. 1. The Second Page of the First of these Three Books
Explained.
Knowledge was the Cause, etc.] [i. e. That, the Whole Genus and institution of
Philosophy, and the Several Sects of Philosophers, proceeded from that Desire
of Knowledge Innate in all Men: For, each one Coveting to Know, and ascribing
Most to his Own Genius, ( promising to himself a Discovery of at least some New
Star or other, New World, ( as the Saying is;) Philosophers (Thus) came to
Think Diversely, and to be split into Several Parties, according to the Variety
of these Opinions. Turnebus, (lib. 14. Cap. 14.) Expounds the Passage, Thus;
That, there can be no Philosophy Without Science, and a Cognition and
Comprehension of the Truth. And, Manuccius, by Himself, puts Inscientia for
Scientia; and so, makes this Academical Tenet to be the Sense of the Place,
Viz. That, the very Ground of Philosophy is no better than Uncertainty.]

lin. 14. Protagoras, etc.] -- [ He was a Sophist; Laertius, Philostratus, and
Aulus Gellius, write Much, but Differently, concerning him.]

lin. 15, 16. Diagoras Melius, etc.] -- He was termed Melius, either from the
Isle M^los, one of the Cyclades; or, from Melia, a City of Caria in Asia Minor:
Diogenes, Suidas, etc. speak at Large of him. -- * Theodorus the Cyrenaique,
etc.] One Aristippus, ( who used the Pleasures he had, and despised those he
had not,) of Cyrene, ( a City of Africa,) is delivered to have been the Founder
of this Sect of Philosophers.

ERRATA.
IN the Preface, page 17. lin. 29, 30. read Miletus, a City in the Borders of
Ionia, and Caria, etc. p. 18. l. 10. after a r. sensible, etc. p. 22. l. 24.
for Epicurus r. (in S. Augustin's Opinion,) Democritus, etc. p. 59. l. 4. for
Cabrici, r. Cabiri. p. 73. l. 18. r. a Grape. p. 78. l. 30. for Existing, r.
as, that they are, etc. There are some Scapes of the Press in the Book it self;
also;) but, since either Amended in the Preface, or not very Material, I (Here)
take no notice of them:

M. T. CICERO OF THE NATURE OF THE GODS, etc. The First Book.
. 1. AS there are Many Points in Philosophy far from being (Yet) sufficiently
Cleared; Cicero (Here) acquaints his Intimate Friend Brutus, with the Reasons
of his setting upon a Discussion of the Question of the Divine Nature; which
are, the Difficulty, the Illustriousness, and the Necessity of it as to
Religion: Then, he shows this Difficulty, First, by the great Disagreement
amongst Philosophers disputing touching the Deity; whence, is (by the way)
Collected, that Knowledge, ( or rather, the Love, and Desire of it) was the
Original of Every of the Sects of Philosophers; and, that the Academy is
Prudent, in Withholding Assent from Uncertain Opinions; he (also) Illustrating
this same Prudence by (its Contrary,) Temerity.
so, Particularly, the Question of the Nature of the Gods (I need not tell You,
Brutus,) is more Especially Intricate, and Obscure: A Matter of it Self most
Cognitu Praeclara.
Worthy to be Known, as well as Necessary to the Due Ordering of Religious
Worship: Concerning Which, the Opinions of the Learned are so Various, and
Disagreeing, as to make up a very strong Argument that * Knowledge was the
Cause (the Original, that is,) of All Philosophy; and, that the Academiques are
Prudent, in Withholding Assent from things Uncertain. For, what is more Stiff,
and Rude, than Temerity? Or, what, so Rash, and Unbecoming the Maturity and
Dignity of a Wise man; as either to Cleave to a Plain Mistake, or Peremptorily
Defend what is not thoroughly Perceived, and Comprehended?

The Various Opinions of Philosophers touching God, and his Attributes, but
especially a Divine Providence, more at Large Recited, in Confirmation of the
Prudence of the Academiques: Moreover, he shows the absolute Necessity of
Deciding the Question of a Providence, by the Inconveniences that ensue, unless
it be.
As, now, in the Present Case; Most have Held, (What is Highly Probable, and,
what we are All led to by Instinct of Nature,) that, Gods there Are: Protagoras
Doubted of it: Diagoras Melius, and Theodorus the * Cyrenaique thought there
were None at all. And then, for those that were for the Affirmative, they are
so very much Divided, and at Odds, that it would be Tedious to reckon up their
Conjectures. For a great deal is delivered with relation to the Figures of
these same Deities, their Places and Abodes, and their i. e. manner of
bestowing themselves.
Action of Life: And, here, the Doctors are mightily at Variance. But, the
Chief, the Immediate the Head of this Question of the Divine Nature.
Stress of the Question, is, Whether they neither Act, nor Endeavor to Do
Ought in the least, are free from all manner of Solicitation, and
Administration of Affairs; Or, on the Other side, Whether by Them were all
things Designed and Made in the Beginning, and be (Now) Governed and Moved, to
all Eternity. This is the Point so Mainly Controverted: And, unless it be set
Right and Determined, men must of necessity be engaged in very great Errors,
and remain Ignorant of what they are most nearly Concerned to Know.

For there are (as there have been) The Epicureans; whose Doctrine he seeks to
explode, by drawing it in its Consequences.
Philosophers, that conceive the Powers Above do not take any notice of what
passes here amongst us. Which if True, what will become of Piety, Sanctity, and
Religion? For these Offices are all of them the Tributes of a pure and chaste
Mind to the Divinity of the Gods, in presumption of the delight they take
therein, and a communication of their Bountyes to our good. But if they neither
can nor will help us; neither consider, nor heed what we do; and that we are
never the better for them; what reason can there be for our Praying to,
Worshipping, or Adoring them? For Piety will not long bear a Counterfeit, any
more then the Other Virtues; And take away That, Sanctity and Religion fall
together with it: Nay and I am afraid that when we have once quitted our Piety
toward the Gods, the very Faith that we owe to Human Society, and Justice it
self (the most excellent of all Virtues) will not live long after it.

But then there are The Stoiques, etc. whose Tenets he allows to be more
Proba^le then the Other's.
Others, (and They Persons of Fame and Reputation too) that believe the world
to be governed and administered by a divine wisdom and direction; and not only
so, but that the Deityes are studious of the Welfare of Man: For they look
upon the Grain, and other Productions of the Earth, the Seasons, Variations of
the Times, and Changes of the Climate, from whence terrestrial Fruits derive
Life and Maturity, and which (indeed) are of such a quality as makes it likely
enough that the Immortal Beings had an eye to Human use in their Creation, to
have been constituted and ordained for our particular service. They do also
account upon many other things, according as the following Treatises have set
forth.

And yet even against These, A stiff ass^rter of the Doctrine of the New
Academiques.
Carneades has made such vigorous opposition; that men must be very Lazy, not
to be incited by it to a desire of finding out the Truth. The Difficulty yet
further heightened by a co^ation of Special with General.
And there is not any thing (perhaps) whereupon the Learned as well as the
Unlearned are so much Divided: Tho amids all This Clashing none of their
Phancies may (perchance) be the Right; but that more then One of them should,
is Impossible. A Preparatory to his own Apol^gy.
In This matter therefore, I may pretend in such sort to pacify those that
oppose me out of good Will, and confute the Malevolent, that the One may wish
they had let me alone, and the Other receive the satisfaction of being better
informed: For they that admonish as friends are to be enstructed as such; while
those that pursue as enemies, are so too to be beaten off.

Objections against his Books, and Course of Philosophy.
FOR a mighty bustle has (I find) been made about the Books which I have now
within a little while set forth; and much Discourse concerning them: Some
admiring how I came all on a sudden to set up for a Virtuos^; Others, being
curious to know what I have to say upon each particular subject: I have also
observed many to be surpised at my applying my self to That kind of Philosophy
which seems to take away the Light, and leave all things dark and doubtful;
especially, (it being a Discipline now abandoned) that I should undertake the
Protection of it my self, when it was given over by Others.

Now the Truth is, In answer to the First, he denies that he betook himself to
the Study of Philos^phy upon a sudden.
I have not broken in upon this sort of Study, on the sudden; for it is with no
small labor and industry that I have addicted my self to it, even from my
Youth; being Then most intent upon it, when people took least notice of me for
it. Thus much may be gathered from my Orations, which abound in Philosophical
Sentences; and from the Intimacy I had with the many Learned men that
frequented our Family; and namely, the famous Diodorus, Philo, Antiochus,
Posidonius, under whose Tuition I was educated. Socrates reduced all Philosophy
to Morality.
Nay, and if all the Precepts of Philosophy ought to be considered with a
regard to Life, those which I have His Moral Discourses urged to insinuate how
early a friend he was to to this Study.
delivered, relating to Public as well as Private, do hold some conformity (I
persuade my self) to the dictates of Authority, and Reason. Reasons why so late
before he expressl^ trea^^^ ^^ Phil^s^phi^al matters.
But if it be demanded Why so La^e, before I fell upon This Subject. It Is
easily answered: For being wholly at leisure my self, and the state of the
Commonwealth necessarily reduced under a Subjection to One single Head. The
First Mot^ve, his being ^os'^ tr^ns^ utlique Car^t, by Ju ius Caesar's
Vsu^pations upon the Liber^y of he C^mmonweal^h.
First, upon a Common account I thought it might be worth my while to try to
bring our People acquainted with Philosophy: as deeming it much for the Cities
Honor to have matters so weighty, and so worthy of Note, recommended to the
world (also) in the Roman Language. And I do the less repent me of my
Undertaking, in regard my Labors herein have excited in many a desire not only
to Learn but to Write too: For tho we had a great number who before were
tolerably well skilled in the Greek Tongue, yet the Nation was little the
better for it; because it was still conceipted impracticable, to turn that which
they had received in Greek into commendable Latin. Now in This Particular I
have been so happy, (as I flatter my self at least) that the Latin I have made
use of, comes not much short even o^ the Greek it self. The Other Inducement, a
hope of mitigating his griefly it, for the l^ss of his Countries Liberty.
Another Motive to it was Trouble of Thought, upon the consideration of my hard
Fortune; for which, could I have light upon a better remedy, I should scarce
have made choice of This sort of Application. But there was no other means of
Comfort I perceived, then not only to devote my self to Books; but also to run
thorough the whole Body of Philosophy: And indeed, that which gives the fairest
view of the several Parts and Proportions of it, is to descant upon it in all
its members; for the series and connection of things is such, and so admirable,
that they are as it were linckt to one another, and all adapted and bound up
among themselves.

A Reprehensi n of these that put too great an Estim i^ upon Authorities.
As to those that would have my Thoughts upon each Particular, they are more
Curious then needs; for it is not so much Authority as Reason that carries it
in Disputation. Nay, the reputation of the Teacher is frequently hurtful to the
Scholar, who not seldom lays his Own judgment aside, and resigns himself
implicitly to his Masters. I am not for the Pythagorean way they talk of; which
was, upon any Positive Affirmation, to cry He himself has said it; and that
same He himself was Pythagoras. Such was the power of a prejudicate opinion,
that the bare Authority supported it even without Reas^n.

To those that are concerned at my having Listed my self into This Which
allows not the credit of any m^n to influ^nce the Judgment.
Sect, my Four Academical Discourses may perchance afford satisfaction: But
however, for the sake of some that are not so apprehensive as I could wish they
were, I will, in this place Repeat; that the Practicers of This Method are not
absolutely destitute of A denial of their being conversant only in D^ub^s, and
I^r^s^lutions; si^ce they aim a^ a disc^very of Right from (...) of Truth.
Certainty: For we do not say that All things are False; but only, that every
Truth is attended with Falsehoods so like it, that it is a hard matter to know
certainly where the Right lies. And Hence that other Asserti^n of ours takes
its rise; that There are many Probabilities, which, th^ugh they cannot entirely
be comprehended, yet, being of (...) and plausible Appearance, a wise man will
not stick to govern himself by ^^em.

Neither (Lastly) have I undertaken the protection of what is wholly
antiquated, The last A ^^^tio^ ^^swer'^, by cle^ri^g the doctrine of the
Academiques from obs^l^t^ness.
and out of r^pute; for Opinions do not Dye with the Authors; tho perhaps they
may S^^^^r for want of them to Illustrate 'em: As the way of Philosophizing in
question, that Disputes all things and Pronounces upon none, was set on foot by
Who said This only ^e was assured of, that he c^uld be confident of Nothing.
Socrates, revived by Accesil^^s, confirmed by Carneades, and so has flourished
down to our Times; tho at present (I hear indeed) it is well nigh extinguished
even in the greater part of Greece. The disc^u^^gement i^ (...) ^^th to what to
be impute^; and why.
Which (yet) I do rather impute to the insufficiencies of its Asserters, then
to any fault in the Doctrine it self, for if a knowledge of the Institutions of
any one Sect be a matter praiseworthy; how much more then must it be, an
insight into them all; which he undeniably bide fairest for, who, in quest of
the Truth, ^^r^ples not to be indifferently s^r, or against all Philosophers,
as he sees Reasona^le. (...) of himself.
I do not pretend to be absolutely a Master of this difficult but glorious
Faculty; tho I cannot but value my self (however) upon the point of
endeavoring it.

The ^indl^^^ ^f the Pr^s^nt (...).
BUT now, to free my self from all Obloquy, I will expose the (...).
Opinions of Philosophers touching the Nature of the Gods; wherein I shall
appeal unto the whole world, to determine which is the Right: And if either All
can agree upon, or any One be found to have discovered the Truth; I shall then
admit the Academy to have been (...) Saying, (...) ^o the M^n.
Arr^^ant. Wherefore I may (with Statius, the Comedian, in his Twins) An (...).
Crave, be^, beseech, pray, supplicate and impl^re the Aid and Atte^tion of
young and old, gentle and simple; not upon so Trifling an ^^casion as was His
Capital Villainy of a Common Strump^t's refu^ing her Punk'^ (...), for the g ^
Turn she had done him; but that they come, mark, and know how they are to
conceive of And (...) the usefulness of ^^e Argument.
Religion, Piety, Sin^rity, Ceremonies, Faith, Oaths; Of Temples, Altars,
Solemn Sacrifices; nay and of the very Divinations by Inspection of Birds. The
dissensions of the Learned upon This Topique again, m^re particularly pressed
in b^half of his ^a^ty.
Auspicia too, of which I am President: for all These refer to the Question in
hand.

Now, in very deed, the Dissensions amongst the Learned concerning This Point,
do not a little stagger even those that pretend to something of Certainty: The
Occasion of the D^spute.
And as I have observed This often, so did I more especially note it, in my
friend Cotta's late accurate and elaborate Dispute, upon this same subject of
the Nature of the Gods. For coming to him once, upon his Message and
Invitation, on The last of March.
Jupiter of Latium's Day; I found him sitting in the Exhedra, a kind of Porch,
where Professors of Sciences used to exercise.
Hall, discoursing with C. Velleius the Senator, (whom the Epicureans cry up
for the ablest man of all the Latins;) C. Lucilius Balbus (a Stoique, hardly to
be equaled even among the Greeks) being likewise present. Cotta, as I entered
the Room, told me I came in good time, for that he was Then in Controversy
with Velleius upon a weighty matter; which, (considering the quality of my
Studies) was not improper for me to interest my self in. It is indeed Lucky,
(said I) in meeting with Three Princes of The Ferr consider^ble Sects were the
Academiques, Stoiques, Per^patetiques and Epicureans.
Three Sects; and were but The Per^tatique.
M. Piso here too, no Order of any repute would want a Patron. Colta Replied,
If our Antiochus's Book, which he lately presented to Balbus, be in the Right;
there will not be any great need of That Gentleman; for Antiochus is There of
Opinion that the Differences betwixt the Stoiques and Peripatetiques, are
rather Nominal then Real: And (Balbus!) favor us with your Judgment of it.
Mine? said he, Why truly, I Am amazed that so quick-s^ghted a man, as is
Antiochus should not discern the Clashings between them to be much more
considerable then he speaks of; since the The differences betwixt ^he Stoiques
and ^^tipatetiques.
First separate the Honest from the Profitable both in Name and Kind; whereas
the Other consound them in such sort, as only to distinguish them in Degree and
Value, not in Substance. So that it is not barely a slight disagreement of
Words, but a very great difference of Things. But more of This at another time;
Now, if you please, to what we were upon. With all my heart, ( Returned Cotta)
but First, let me acquaint our New-comer (looking upon Me) that our subject was
the Nature of the Gods: A point, Sir, that now (as ever) appearing to me to be
exceeding difficult and obscure, I had prevailed upon Velleins to report
Epicurus's Thoughts concerning it; and, Sir, ( added he, howing to Velleius) if
it be not too much Trouble, oblige us with a Recapitulation of what you have
have already delivered. I Am Content, (Replied he) tho this Person (Smiling upon
Me) will not be my Second, but yours; you having both Learnt from the same An
Acade^ique.
Philo not to be Positive in any thing. My Return was, that Cotta would answer
for our T^nets, and that I came not to assist, but impartially to hear;
bringing with me a mind wholly disengaged from all obligations of a necessary
to defend either this or ^other Opinion.

Veil^ius introduc'^, (...) up the Opinions of Others concerning the divine
Nature, or Essence.
. 2. HEREUPON, Velleius, [with as much assurance, I must confess, (according to
the wont of That Party) as if he dreaded nothing more then to seem to Doubt of
any thing, and as if he had been just dropped thorough Epicurus's Spices he
phansied between Worlds.
Intermundia from the Council of the Gods] Give ear (said he) then; not to vain
and devised Tales; not to the Mechanical, World-making God of Plato's His Dialo
gu so entitle^, which treats of the Origin of the World, and its Creator.
Timaeus; not to that Conjuring old Gypsy of the Stoiques ((...), or)
Providence; nor yet to that Thinking and Feeling, Round, Fiery and Voluble
Deity, the World: These being the Mormoes and Goblins of Dreaming, rather then
of Reasoning Philosophers. He seeks by Radiculing of Plato, to overthrew his
assertion that the World was made by God.
For how should your Plato see God in the great So Plato called the all
surrounding Circle of the Air, or Heavens.
Workhouse, he talks of, giving fashion and shape to the Universe? What
Engines, Tools, Machins, Beams, Assistants were made use of in the Erection of
so stupendous a Fabric? How came the Air, Fire, Water, Earth, all on a sudden
to be subservient to the Will of the Architect? Whence proceeded those Five
Forms, that he phansy'd to give being to all the Other, and that jumpt so
luckily for the fashioning of the Mind, and production of the Senses? It would
be endless to run through All; which indeed are generally of such a
consideration, as that they look more like things to be wished, then to be
found: But his Masterpiece is, his suggesting the World to have been Created,
made (I may say) with Mortal hands; and in the same brea^h pronouncing it to be
Everlasting. Can He pass but for so much as a Smatterer in Philosophy, who
shall conceit any thing, that had a Birth, to be Eternal? His Argument ag^i^g
Pla^^'s Eter^i^y of ^e Wo^ld.
For what composition is there, that is Indissoluble? Or what, that having once
had a Beginning, will not also have an Ending?

A Refutation of the St^iques Providence.
As to ((...), or) Providence; if taking it (Lucilius!) as you would have it, I
demand (as even now I did of the Other) the Tools, Instruments; the Model and
Designation of the whole Work. But if Otherwise, why yet did she make the World
Mortal, and not (as Plato's Divinity had done) Everlasting? And I do further
require of you both, how came it that these Globe-makers appeared all on a
sudden; and that we should hear nothing of them for so long before? (...) Times
and (...).
For it does not follow that if there was no World, there were no Ages; I do
not mean such Ages as are made up of so many years, and upon a computation of
so many days and nights; That could not be, (I grant) without the Revolution of
the Orbs: But, from Infinite Time, there was a certain Eternity not confined to
any Rules or Measures of Seasons. Tho How it was, we cannot understand, no nor
as much as imagine that a time there should be, when no Time was. Epicuru^^s
Argument against the St^^ques Providence; there is no such, because ^^e must
have bee^ Idle, wh^^ it was Impossible f^r her to have (...).
Resolve me, now, (Balbus!) why your Providence was Idle all so Immense a
Space. Was she loath to undergo so much Toil? Nothing of That kind could reach
the Godhead: Nor, in truth, was there any in the Case; seeing all Seminary
Powers; the Air, Fire, Earth, Water, are said to have obeyed the God of Nature.
And then wherefore was he ambitious of turning A^dilis, an Officer amongst the
Romans, that had in charge to adorn the Temples, and pu^lique Spectacles.
City Surveyor, (as it were) and garnishing the Firmament with Signs and
Lights? If for his own more commodious Habitation; for an Infinite space before
he dwelt (it should seem) in the dark, as in a dungeon. Moreover, can we
believe him to be Taken with That Variety, wherewith we see Heaven and Earth to
be imbellish'd? What Entertainment can This be to Him? Or if it were a delight,
he could not so long have been without it. Or again, were all These made (as
you still tell us) for the use of Men? Of Wise men only? Truly, a great Lumber
of things for a very small Company! Or, of Fools? First, there could be no
reason for his accommodating the Bad: And further, what could he hope to get
by it; in regard Fools are confessedly the most miserable, even in the very
Notion of such: For, then Folly, what can be more Deplorable? And yet once
more; seeing there are such numberless Crosses incident to Human Life, that a
Wise man is Fain to temper them by his Virtues; Fools, on the contrary, are
neither able to avoid them at a distance, nor to Bear them at hand.

Now, for those that have bestowed Sense and Reason upon the World it self; He
objects against th^s^ who th^ms^^^ the World to be indu'd wi^h Reason.
they appear to be utterly Ignorant of the Nature of the Mind, and what Forms
it is possible for it to Actuate. But These shall be spoken to by and by; and I
will now continue my admiration at the Heaviness of The Platoniques, etc.
them that will needs have it to be Animated, Immortal; and Happy and Round
withal: Which is a Figure to which Plato ascribes more then to any Other; tho
for my part, I should as soon have given my Vote for the Cylinder, Square,
Cone, or Pyramid. Why the World could not be happy, were it such a God ^s P^ato
pretends.
But what kind of Life do they appropriate to This Round Deity? Why, a being
whirld about with an Incessant unimaginable Celerity. With which Motion I do
not see how Happiness, and a steady Mind can be consistent: A Motion, the least
exercise whereof upon Our Bodies, is Painful; why then may it not be alike
Troublesome to Him too? Nay, the very Earth, as part of the Universe, must
consequently be a Portion of the Deity: But a great deal of This is barren, and
uninhabitable; some of it scorcht with the over near approach of the Sun; and
some again, by his too great distance, hardened and covered with Frost and
Snow. Wherefore, if the W^rld be a God, and These Parcels of it; some of his
Limbs must necessarily be parcht and burnt, others chilled and benumbed.

He now comes t^ w^^t m^re especially rela^es to the Stoiques; and opposes to
All, the Principl^s of his own Sect.
BUT I will now report, and prove the quality of what you (Lucilius!) are more
directly concerned in; Beginning with the Last of the above-named Elements. He
blames Thales f^r supp^sing the Mind to be able to liv^ without a Body
(c^ntrary to the judgment of the Epicurean:) and yet subst^tuti^g (...) Water
as (...), and so making the Deity to ^e M^rtal, as it were,
For Thales Milesius, who was the first that searched into matters of This
kind, made Water the Original of all things; and God to be That Wisdom which
formed All things out of Water. Now if the Deity can subsist, abstracted from a
Corporeal Sense, or Nature; why, did he assign it a Watery one? were the Mind it
self able to live without a Body.

Anaximander phansy'd that the Gods were born; and that after a long space of
time, they died; and that there were Innumerable Worlds. The Epicureans held
God to be Eternal,
But how should we conceive the Godhead to be other then Sempiternal?

Anaximanes was next; who pronounced the Air to be God; to be Generated,
Immense, Uncircumscrib'd, and in perpetual Motion. And ^^a^ he is ^f Human
(which they t ke (...) be the m^st beautiful) s^ape.
As if That which is absolutely void of Form, could be a Divinity; to whom must
needs belong not Some only, but the most Beautiful shape. Or, how should that
which had a Birth be exempt from Dissolution? Him Anaxagoras both followed and
borrowed of. But yet he was the first that affirmed the Model of Universal
Nature to have been projected and perfected by the efficacy of an
All-comprizing Intellect. His Exceptions against Anaxagoras's Doctri^e, are all
Epicurean too,
Wherein he was not aware that to such an Incomprehensibleness there could be
no Conjunction of any sensible Motion; nor that there cannot be any sense at
all, where the Soul is not affected, upon external Violence: So that if he
accounts upon this Intellect as something in the Nature of an Animal, there
ought to be some or other Existence yet more internal and within it, from
whence it might take a name. But what can be more Inward then the Mind? and
therefore it is enclosed in an External Body, This Doctrine will not go down
with Him: And Epicureans.
We, on the Other side, are not able to apprehend how there can be any Soul
separate from all material adjuncts.

He was a Pythagorean.
Alemaeo of A fam^us City of Calabria.
Crotoe, in Deifying the Sun, Moon, Stars; as also the Mind; did as little
consider that Thereby he attributed Immortality to Mortal Things. Nor yet did
He ha^ a great many followers, in this Opinion.
Pythagoras, who asserted the Essence of One Universal Soul included in and
extended thorough all frail Beings, and that Ours were still taken from it, Why
the W^rl^^ can have no Soul.
any more discern that in such a rending away of Human Souls the Deity it self
could not but be dilacerated; and that seeing our Minds were to be (as they too
often are) exposed to great Afflictions, Part of This Divinity must
consequently be Miserable: Which cannot be. And Then, were Human Reason a God,
how could it be Ignorant of any thing? Or how (moreover) could This Universal
Soul, if it be purely And w th ut any Body: He sp^aking ^arnally, and as if it
were a pouring of Liquour one a Vessel.
Spiritual, be mingled with, or infused into the World?

Xenophanes, who held the whole Mass of things, as Infinite, and indu'd with a
Spirit, to be a God; lies open to the same exception with the Alemaeo, Thales;
etc. who presum^d the Mind, which they still speculate^ upon as in mixtures, to
be yet able to subsist without any Body at all.
Other; especially as to his The same Case with Anaxagoras's before,
Infiniteness, which excludes all sensible Appertenences.

But He was of Elea, a City of Lu^ania.
Parmenides Harps upon a certain Device in the nature of a Ring. That Supreme
Others term his Supreme Circle in Infinite Mind.
Circle which environs the Heavens, and is endu'd with Light and Heat, he terms
Stephane; and makes it to be a Deity: Tho neither sense, nor any Divine Form is
discernible in it. He abounds in other Monstrosities of the like stamp;
subjecting the Gods to Broyls, Discords, Lusts, and such other Infirmities as
are defaced by Time, Distemper, Sleep, Age, or Oblivion. Nor are his Concepts
about the Stars of any better Leaven: But having objected against them in
Alemaeo, I will here pass them by.

Empedocles is Out, in many things; The Elements no D^ityes; and Why.
but in his Opinion of the Gods, most shamefully: For he will have the four
Principles (whereof he phansies all things made and to consist) to be Divine.
Which yet are palpably liable to Rise, and Decay; and absolutely void of Sense.
Neither did Protagoras's U^certainty in the Matter reprehended likewise: The
Epicureans being still peremptory in all Cas^s.
Protagoras, in acknowledging himself unable to deliver any thing of Certainty
touching the Gods, or to say whether there were any or no, or what they were,
seem to be one jote more Knowing in the Nature of the Deity.

What shall I say of Democritus? D^mocritus's opi^ions explo^ed.
who ranges the Stars, and their Orbs in the number of the Gods, and that That
i^, a^j^y? to sensi^l^ ma^ter; and s^ ^^pable of M^tion.
Incorporated Virtue which produces them, and directs their Courses: As also
Human Judgment and Understanding. Was he not involved in great Errors? And
then, in denying any thing to be Sempiternal, because nothing always abides in
one and the same state; what does he but so wholly overthrow That God, that
(...) sear^^ l^a^ s us any account of him. The Air no Deity.
As to the (...) which Diogones of Apollonia takes to be a ^^iry; what sense
can it pretend to? Wha^ (...) of a Divinity?

He comes back to Pla^o aga^n; and c^ r^^^ him with V^steadyness.
IT would be Long, to insist upon Plato's Fluctuation in This Particular. In his
Dialogue ^^^i^led Timeus, he denies God to be Expressi^le* as the Father of the
Univ^rse: And in his Books of Laws, will not ad^^^ ^f too much Inquisitiveness
touching his Nature. The Epi^ureans hel^ God to have a Body.
But in making him to be (...) (as the Greeks say) and without a Body, he
feigns an Impossibility; since, Then, he could not but be destitute of Sense,
Reason, Pleasure; all which we comprehend in the notion of a Deity. The same
man, both in his Timeus, and Books of Laws, sets up the World for a God; as
also the Air, Stars, Earth; our Minds too; and all Those which Tradition has
handed down, as instituted by our Ancestors. All which are in themselves
notorious Untruths, as well as plain Interferings one with another.

Xenophon, Xenophon reprehended.
in fewer words commits in a manner the same Mistakes: For in his Summary of
Memorable Sayings and Acts of Socrates; he represents him Disputing the
Lawfulness of enquiring into the Figure of the Deity; and yet asserting the
Sun, and the Mind to be such; and one while the Being only of One God; by and
by, of More. Which are Levityes much of a sort with those before noted in Plato.

He was an Athenian.
Antisthenes's Doctrine, (in his Treatise called The Naturalist) that there are
Many Gods of vulgar Consecration, but only The Epicureans p^ansied that there
were many Gods.
One Natural one; is likewise destructive of the Power and Nature of the
Godhead. Nor is Speusippus's much otherwise; for, (following his Uncle Plato)
in maintaining a certain incorporeal Power, capable of Perception, by which all
things are administered, he seeks to root up out of our minds the very Notion
of a Deity. Because They conceit that the Soul can neither Exist, nor discern,
if abstracted from a Body.


Aristotle, in his Third Book of Philosophy, O^jecti^^s against Aristotle's
Conjectures upon This Topique.
is as confused as the rest: varying in one thing alone, from his Master ^lato.
First, he Deifies the Mind only; Then the World it self; By and by sets a
certain Herein he diff^rs from Plato, in that he sets up another kind of Deity
beside that Divinity which his Master comprised wit^ in the Ci^cumf^ren^e of
the Mind.
Essence over That, and gives him in charge to guide and govern it by a knack of
Revolution, or tossing to and again. Next, he ascribes Divinity to the Heat of
the Firmament; never considering that it is part of the Universe, which he had
elsewhere accounted upon as a God: Tho it be hard to conceive how That Divine
sense should abide in so great an The Epicureans supp^s'd the ^re^s to be ^^le.
Agitation; and what, too, must become of all the Rest of the Deities, if even
Heaven it self be set up for one? And Then, in not allowing him a Body, what
does he less, then at once strip him of As They rea^h.
Sense and Reason? And moreover how, without a Body, could the World be moved?
Or how (Lastly) can it be at ease, and Happy; being in Incessant Self-motion?

His Fellow-Pupil Xenocrates Xenocrates excepted against, for not descr^bing
^he Term of the Gods; and upon other accounts.
has not any greater cunning to boast of, in this Particular; In whose
Discourses upon this Subject, we meet not with any Description of the shape of
the Deity. He makes the Gods to be Eight in number; the Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, Mercury.
Planets Five of them; the Sixth to consist of all the other Stars in the
Zodiac; Or thus either, Which, as of s^ many scattered Parts or Members, (as it
were) are to be, etc.
which, severally, are only Limbs and Members; but in the Cluster, must be
reputed One single Divinity: The Sun (he says) is the Seventh, and the Moon the
Eighth. But in what respect any of these can be deemed Happy, a man can hardly
Imagine.

Heraclides Heraclides's whi^ sies ^isapprov'd.
of Pontus (who came out of the same School) has stuffed His Books with sundry
Childish Fables. One while he will have the Universe to be a God; another, an
Intelligence, and by and by the wandering Stars; divests him of a And therefore
Ch ldish.
sensible Body, and yet pretends his Form to be Variable. In the same Books he
also crowds the Air, and the Earth into the number of the Deities.

So are Theophrastus's.
The Inconstancy of Theophrastus is not a whit more Tolerable; for sometimes he
attributes divine Prerogatives to the Mind; Then, to the Firmament; and anon to
the Planets, and Celestial Constellations. And als^ his Scholar Strato, whose
Op^^^ns were mu h the same wi^^ P^thagor^s'^.
Nor yet does his Scholar Strato (dignified with the Title of For his great a
(...) to the Study of s^^sible Nature.
Naturalist) deserve more regard; who makes the whole Divine Virtue to be
seated in, and diffused thorough Universal Nature; and to occasion Birth,
Growth, and Dissolution; but withal to be void both of And consequently of
Prudence, and Pleasure; according to Their Doctrine.
Sense and Form.

BUT, to return to your Friends, He comes now to take the Stoics themselves,
directly, to task; beginning with their Founder Zeno.
(Balbus!) Zeno was of Opinion that the Law of Nature was a Divinity
capacitated to stir up good Desires, and quell the contrary: Tho how such a Law
should come by Life, we are as much to seek, as we are assured that the Deity
is Animated. In another place the same Person Deifies the Fiery Circle of the
Heavens: Only there is no conceiving of a God that understands nothing; He
derides the Opinion.
we can have no notion of any such either in our Prayers, Wishes or Desires. In
Other Books he makes a certain Impulse extended thorough all Natures, to be
divinely affected. He attributes as much to the Stars also; and to the Years,
Months and Seasons. And in his Exposition of Hesiods (Theogonia or) Origination
of the Gods, he destroys the imprinted, conceived Notions of the Deityes;
reckons not Jupiter, Juno, Vesta, nor any of the rest that are of Vulgar
Appellation, in the number; and teaches, that those Names are, in a certain
respect, to be affixt to things Mute and Inanimate.

Nor is his Scholar Arish any nearer the Mark, Aristo blamed too.
in phansying the Figure of the Gods to be Indiscernable; that they are without
Contrary to the Opinion of the Epicureans. As also Cleanthes.
Sense; and doubting whether they have Life, or no.

Cleanthes (who was a Hearer of Zeno, at the same time with the Other) First
Deifies the World it self; Then, the Universal Mind, and Spirit; Next, he
pronounces for a most certain Deity: That Highest, Lowest, All-surrounding and
Embracing Heat, which may be called the Firmament. The same man, (Doting, as
it were) in the Books he wrote against Pleasure, One while holds the Gods to
have a certain Form and Shape: Then, that the Stars are the Only Deities; and
at length, that nothing is more Divine then Reason. Thus that Great God, whom
we only know in Contemplation, and take no other Impression of, then in the
Notion of the Mind; Thus that God (I say) comes not to appear at all!

Pers^us censured.
Perseus (another of Zeno's Scholars) teaches to reckon upon those as Deities,
who have been the Authors of any Invention beneficial to Human Life; and to
dignify the Profitable things themselves, so found out with Divine
Appellations; intimating as if they were Gods in very deed, rather then matters
of Divine Institution. Now what can be more absurd then either to attribute
Divine Honors to things sordid and deformed; or to place in the Number of the
Deities, men long since Dead and Rotten, for whom Tears and Mourning were the
most proper sort of Adoration?

Crysippus's Opi^ions Reported, and condemned.
As to Crysippus, (who is held to be the sharpest Interpreter of the Dreams and
Dotages of the Stoiques) he set up a great Company of Unknown Deityes; and so
wholly Unknown too, that it is impossible to get any Information of them, even
so much as in Conjecture: Tho one would think that a man might take any Figure
into his Imagination. First, he makes the Divine Virtue to be placed in Right
Reason; and in the Mind and Spirit, disfused thorough the whole Mass of Nature:
Then, he Deifies the World; and the Universal Effusion of its Soul: Next, the
Power of That Soul, influencing the Mind, and Judgment: By and by, that Common
Nature, which contains, and conjoyns all things: Then again, the Fatal and Dark
Representation, and Necessity of things to come; as also the Fire, and that
which I before termed the Sky, or Firmament. And Lastly, those things which do
naturally flow, and persevere; as the Water, Earth, Sun, Moon, Stars; and that
Supreme Circle which environs the whole World; and such Men too, as have
acquired Immortality. The same Person stickles for the Sky, or Firmament to be
him who is usually called Jupiter; for That Air which glides thorough the
Water, to be Neptune; and for the Earth, to be Ceres; after the some fashion
interpreting, and applying the Ordinary Names of all the Other Deities. He
av^r^ further, that the Power of that Eternal Rule, or Law, which seems to be
the Guide of our Lives, and the sourse of Honest actions, is also Jupiter; and
calls this Immutable Decree it self Fatal Necessity, and the sempiternal verity
of future Events. But none of These seem to have any thing in them in the least
expressive of a Divine Virtue. Thus far, his First Book touching the Nature of
the Gods: And it is the chief scope of his Second, in such sort to accommodate
to what he had delivered in his First, the Fables of Orpheus, Musaeus, Hesiod,
H^iner; that the most ancient Poets (who never dreamed of any such matter)
might seem to have been Stoiques.

He was of Seleucia a Town near B^bylon, and ther^^ ^ re he was called
Babylonius.
Him Diogenes of Babylon imitating; in the Treatise he entitles Of Minerva, will
not allow the Story of Jupiters Birth, and the Rise of the Virgin to be a
Fable; but reduces it to Physiology. [That Fable is, that upon Vulcan s cutting
of Jupiter 's Head with an Ax, a Little Armed Girl (Minerva) started out of it;
who Invented the Arts.]

The P^il^s ^her as mu^^ Ou^ upon This S^bject, an ^^s Extrav^gant ^^ the
Poets, Egyptians, M^^^, and the Common People.
And thus have I run thorough most of the Dreams of Doaters, rather then
Judgments of Philosophers; which truly come little short of the Fictions of the
Poets, (that have poisoned by their very suavity) in Absurdity, and
Unreasonableness: These having introduced their Gods raging with anger,
inflamed with Lust; and presented to our view their Feuds, Brawls, Skuffles,
Wounds; as also their Piques, Hatreds, Discords, Births, Deaths, Complaints,
Lamentations, prodigious Veneries, Adulteries, Bonds, Copulations with Women,
and Mortal Bratts springing from Immortal Begetters. And with these Poetical
Levities, may be coupled the superstitions of the Magi, and the Extravagancies
of the Aegyptian^ in the some kind; as also the Opinions of the Common people,
which are wholly made up of Uncertainty and Ignorance of the Truth.

. 3. He comes new to reci^e Epicurus's Opinions, as to This Matter.
WHOEVER therefore duly weighs the Folly and Presumption of these things,
cannot but have a Veneration for Epicurus; and account of him as amongst those
who are the subject of this Dispute. The Existence of the Gods inferred from
natural Instinct.
For He first discerned that Gods there were, because Nature her self had
impressed a Notion of them in the Minds of all men. For what People, or
Country ever was there, that had not, previous to all instruction, a certain
Anteperception of a Deity? Now This Impression Epicurus terms (...); meaning by
the Word, a Prefiguration of any thing in the Thought, without which, nothing
can be understood, inquired into, or discussed. And for the force and benefit
of this argument, we stand indebted to that Divine Tract of his touching the
Rule and the Judgment. Thus then you have the Foundation (as it were) of the
Question firmly laid: For, where an Opinion is not grounded upon any
Institution, Law or Custom; and there remains an Universal consent, and
submission to one thing: We cannot but be satisfied of the Existence of a
Deity, because all are possessed with Ingrafted, or rather Innate, and
Connatural Apprehensions of one. Now That cannot but be true, which every body
submits to, as such. Conclude we, Then, that Gods there are, because the Being
of them is acknowledged by most, as well Fools, as Philosophers. We must
likewise own This to be Certain, that we are all of us indu'd with This,
whether Anteperception (as above; for new things require new terms of
Expression, as Epicurus called That (...) which no Body did before him) or
Prenotion of a Divinity.

And also t^^t they are Blessed, and Immortal.
And Then, This we hold further; that They are to be reputed Blessed and
Immortal: For the same Nature that furnished the Notion of their Existence it
self, engraved also in our minds an assurance of their Happiness and
Immortality. And therefore they are concluded to be I^le, and void of f^vour
and aversion.
Which if so, it was not without Reason that Epicurus held that, As Blessed and
Eternal, they can neither be cumbred with any trouble themselves, nor create
others any; and consequently, are neither actuated by Favor nor Aversion: In
regard that what is liable to such Passions is usually Frail and Mortal. If we
only sought piously to worship the Gods, and be delivered from vain
Apprehensions; Here were enough said for That end: For our Our ad^rations due
to the Ex^^llency of their Nature.
Devotions are due to the admirable and adorable nature of the Godhead, upon
the single score of its Blessedness, and Immortality: Because that which is
Excellent exacts, as of a Due, Regard, and Veneration. And thus is all
Superstitious fear taken away, he says.
And Thus, now, are all superstitious Dreads of the Power, and Anger of the
Deity removed. For Hatred and Affection are understood to be That is,
inconsistent with Happines^, and Immorta^i^y.
separate from the Blessed and Immortal nature. And they once taken away, there
can be no longer any cause to stand in fear of those that are Above us.

But to Corroberate This Opinion, Th ir S^^p^, (...), ^^d Thoughts (...).
let us enquire into their Figure, Course of Life, and Action, and Agitation of
Mind. As to their Shape, it is partly hinted to us by Nature, and in part by
Reason. Nature and Reas^n urged to make out that they are of ^uman Shape.
Nature tells us that no Men, nor Countries, ever represented the Divinity
under any other Form then what was Human: And indeed, what other Figure of him
ever yet Occurred to any Body, Sleeping or Waking? But, not to reduce all to
First Notions, Reason it self speaks the same thing: For since it se^ms to be
but requisite, that the most Exc^ll^nt Nature (whether to be esteemed such,
upon account of its Felicity, or of its Eternity, comes all to a point, as to
This) should also be the most Beautiful; that Composition of Memb^rs,
Conformation of Lineaments; what Shape or Figure can be able to we with Ours,
in That Particular? Your Tribe ( Lucilius! for as to my Cott^ here, he is a
Little Every thing) forget not, in their Panegvriques upon the Divine Skill and
Workmanship, to expatiate upon the Aptness and congrui^y of all the Parts of
Man's Body, as well for Use as Com^lyn^ss. Now if it excel the shape of any
Other Animal, and the Deity be Animated, how can he but be of this most
Beautiful Form? A kin^ of S^ll^g stical Gradation.
And if it be out of Doubt that the Gods are most Blessed; That nothing can be
Happy, without ^r, (...) dispos'
Virtue; That Virtue cannot be where Reason is not; nor Reason be inherent in
any other Shape but Ours: It must nec^ss^rily be granted that the Gods are of
Human Form. W^ (...) be (...) by (...) o (...)
And yet This is not a Carnal Body neither, but only as it were one; nor has it
any Real Blood, but somewhat only of such a Resemblance. [Being in the next
degree of Potency to what is constituted both of Flesh and Blood.

He excuses his brevity.
These things, tho they were more acutely discovered, and subtly expressed by
Epicurus, then to be understood by every body; yet, in confidence of your
quickness of Apprehension, I make shorter work with them then were otherwise
convenient. Epicurus commended.
This Epicurus now, (who not only pried into the most secret Recesses of
Nature, but was plain, nay even palpable in Expounding such Mysteries) affirms
the Force and Of what quality he takes the Body of the Deity to be.
corporeal Essence of the Divinity to be Imperceptible to sense, and only
discernible by the Spirit; that it has nothing solid in it; abides not always
exactly the same, after the manner of those things, which, upon the score of
their Firmness, he calls (...), How it comes to be discerned.
but that it is seen by Images which are perceived by Similitude and
Transition: Infinite Images, and whence they proceed.
For the kinds of these Images being Infinite, resulting from the Innumerable
Atoms that continually flow from the Deity; and our minds being with in^ffable
delight intent and fixed upon them; there comes thus to be wrought in us a
Comprehension of That Happy and Eternal Essence.

Nor is the mighty Power of This Infiniteness unworthy of great and serious
Contemplation: How this infiniten^ss is to b^ reputed qualify'^.
For it must needs be supposed in such sort qualified, as to complete speci^^al
N^^^^^s, by a tacking together, and poisi^^ (...) ^oms with corresponding
At^^^^^ (...) Epicurus termed (...) or Even-ballancing; and from it inferred,
Tiro Epicurean Tenets.
that since the number of Mortals was so large, That of Immortals could not be
inferior; and the means of Conservation equal to those of Dissolution.

YOUR People are wont further to demand of us ( Balbus! Their Course of Life
laid down.
) How the Gods spend their time; and what course of Life they lead. Such a one
(I answer) as that nothing can be imagined to be more Blessed, or more
abounding in all goods: Wherein Epicurus makes their Happiness to consist.
For they do naught at all, are not entangled in any Affairs, nor hammer out
any Designs; but are wholly taken up in the delight and contemplation of their
own Wisdom and Virtue: And so live in assurance of enjoying both the greatest,
and never-fading Pleasures. The Felicities of His Deity illustrated, by an
opposition of the hard Tasks that the Stoiques, etc. impose upon theirs,
Such a Deity, now, may properly be pronounced Happy; whereas yours, at the
very best, is no better then a Drudge: For if we take the World it self to be a
God, what can be less at rest then It? Since it is, with wonderful celerity,
whirld about the Axeltree of Heaven, without Intermission. Now nothing can be
Happy, that is not also Quiet. Or if (again) we reckon upon some or other
Divinity within the World, that rules, and governs it; preserves the Courses of
the Stars, Mutations of the Seasons, and the Order and Vicissitudes of Things;
and, Surveying the Earth, and the Deep, provides for the Life, and Weal of Man:
Neither yet is he exempt from Offices of Toil and Trouble: Whereas we place
Happiness in the Security of the Mind, and a vacation from all employ.

How the World was made, in (...) Opinion of Epicuru^.
For the same Epicurus that taught us This, further informed us, that the
Universe was made by Nature her self; and that there was no need of a Forge or
Shop in the Case; the Work which you account upon as Impossible to have been
effected, without the aid of a divine skill, being so easy to Her, that
Nature, unassisted with any divine Reason, makes Innumerable Worlds every
Instant.
she will, does make, and has made Innumerable Worlds. Now because you see not
how she should be able to Frame it, unassisted with some special Providence;
you fairly (after the manner of the Tragic Poets) being gravel'd, and at a
plunge, betake your selves to a Deity, whose Help you would never have called
upon (I Am confident) could you but have seen that The place he phansies for his
Atoms.
Immense and every way boundless magnitude of Regions, wherein the Mind
casting, and stretching it self, wanders far and wide without finding any
Superficies, or place to rest on. All things pretended to have been made by
them,
In this Broad, Long, Deep Immensity (now) swarms an infinite Power of
Numberless Atoms; which by sticking together, and clinging to one another, are
Continued, notwithstanding the Interjection of a Void: Whereby These same Forms
and Shapes come to be fashioned, which you phansy not to be formable but by
Bellows and Anvils. He ^^p^ at the I^l^^ s^ by of the Stoiques.
And therefore have you Erected, and set over us a sempiternal Lord, to be an
Object of Terror to us day and night; for who could choose but be afraid of an
All-disposing, All-claiming, Thinking, Noting; an Inquisitive, Restless
Divinity? Hence sprung up your ((...), or) Fatal Necessity; by which, you make
all accidents to result from an Immutable constitution and continuation of
Causes. Is not That a precious kind of Philosophy (think you, now) that, after
the wont of Old Wives, and the Sillier sort of people, ascribes All to Fate?
And thus too, came on, your ((...), or) Divination, which (should we give any
heed to it) would plunge us into superstitious amusements, to such a degree,
that we must down upon our Marrow-bones to the Aruspices, Anaures, A^^oli,
Vate^, and Conjectores.
whole Litter of your shavling Sacrifice-Inspectors, Crafts-men in the
Chatterings of Birds, ^irate Fortune Tellers, Signifiers of the Fates of the
Commonwealth, and Interpreters of Dreams. The better to set off the Excellency
of his Parties Doctrine.
But We, having been loosed from these vain Fears, and put into a State of
Liberty, by Epicurus; are now (to our comfort be it spoken) no longer afraid of
those whom we believe to be free from Trouble Themselves, and to molest no
Body: And we pay our unfeigned Devotions to them upon the only consideration of
their Excellent, Adorable Nature.

But my Zeal (I doubt) has made me Tedious: An apology for his being so large.
Only I could not bring my self to break off abruptly, from so weighty and
noble a subject: Tho I ought to have had more regard to what I was to Hear,
then to what I was to Speak.

4. THEN Cotta, Cotta's Preamble.
with his accustomed gentleness, Had not your Discourse ( Velleius! said he)
furnished Occasion of Speech; I should assuredly have still held my Tongue: So
the Academiq^^ (...).
For why any thing should be True, is usually to me of harder conception, then
why False. And as it has often fared Thus with me at Other times, so did it Now
also, upon hearing You. If you demand what My Thoughts are concerning the
Divine Nature, I shall answer you with silence, perhaps. If you ask whether I
take it to be Such as you have represented; I must tell you, to Me it seems to
be nothing less. But before I come to the Particulars of your Disputation, I Will
first acquaint you what I think of your self. His Common^^^^^ ^word; Velleius.
I have not forgot that L. Crassius (That very good Friend of yours) was wont
to say, that you far excelled all the Roman Nobility, and that there were few
Epicureans even in Greece that were worthy to compare with you: But knowing
what a great affection he had for you, it was possible (I thought) that That
might make him somewhat Larger then ordinary in your Commendation. As for my
self, now, tho I am not apt to praise a man to his face; yet can I not but own,
that (so far as I am able to Judge) you have been tolerably Clear upon a Dark
and Difficult Point, and not only more Pithy and Sententious, but more Elegant
in Words too, then your People generally are. While I staid at Athens,
Insinuates his ability to oppose him.
I was (even by our Philo's advice) a diligent Hearer of Zeno, whom he called
the Prince of the Epicureans: So that having learnt after what manner the Chief
of you delivered your Doctrine, I may know how to go somewhat the readyer way
to work (perchance) to confute it. And deliver it (I must confess) he did, not
at the common rate of the Party; but regularly, properly, and neatly, as you
your self have done. Insomuch that what always happened to me Then, did so Now
too, while you were discoursing; That I could not forbear to be inwardly
grieved to find such a great deal of Wit, unhappily fallen (pardon my freedom)
into such idle, not to say childish Phansies. He only intends to Oppose, not to
Assert.
Yet nevertheless, I do not my self, at this time, intend to advance any thing
more Rational: For I can (as I hinted before) in most cases, and in Physiques
especially, more easily show what is not Right, then what is. How he would
demean himself, upon being qu^stion'd touching the Nature of the Gods.
Should you therefore require of me, What, or of What Resemblance God is; I
would imitate Simonides, who, upon King Hiero's putting the same question to
him, craved a days time to consider on it; and after That, (being called upon on
the Morrow) Two more; still doubling his number of days so often, that the
Tyrant wondering at it, asked the reason of his so doing. Whereupon he told him,
The more he thought on it, the harder the matter appeared to him to be Resolved.
Now Simonides (being (as is Reported) not only a pleasant Poet, but, over and
above That, a Wise and Learned man) upon the thronging of many subtle and
refined Notions into his Head, and his not being able to discern which of them
should be the Truest, came thus (I presume) to despair of finding out any Truth
at all.

(...) rest ^s upon Epicu^us.
BUT to your Epicurus, now, (for I had rather dust it Out with Him, then with
You) what does he say that is worthy of Philosophy, nay or even of an ordinary
Prudence? He First (upon the subject in hand^) enquires Whether there be any
Gods or no. Were it before a Public Auditory, it would scarce be safe
(indeed) to resolve in the Negative: But in such kind of The Dispute was not
(...) in Open S^^^^l, but only in ^ Private Ro^m, amongst two or ^^ree ^rien. ^.
Discourse, and such a Presence as This, he need not be afraid to do it. Now,
being a Priest my self and of belief that the established Rites and Ceremonies
of our Religion ought inviolably to be maintained, I might require to have this
First and Chief Topique (the Existence of a Deity) made out to be not a matter
of Opinion and Persuasion only, but of certain and undoubted Verity: Since many
things occur, that disorder and confound to such a degree, that now and then
a body would think there were no Gods at all. Promises to be a g^^ner us
Adversary.
But see how freely I Will deal with you; I will not insist upon those things
which You hold in common with Other Philosophers; whereof This is one: For they
do generally allow (and my self with the Foremost) that Gods there are. Allows
that there are Gods; but denies Epicurus's argument, drawn from Natural Impulse
to be Conclusive of that (...).
This Point then I do not Dispute; Tho yet I look upon the Argument you bring
to prove it, not to be strong enough: For you said it was sufficient to
satisfy us that Gods there are, that all men of all Degrees and Nations, have
ever been so persuaded. Which is a pretense that has no real weight or force in
it self, and is Untrue over and above: He oppugns the Truth of the assertion.
For, First, how come You to be so well acquainted with the Opinions of all
Nations? I (truly) am apt to think that there are many Countries so absolutely
overrun with Barbarity, that they have not so much as any Imagination of a
Divine Power. And then, what say you to Diagoras, (usually called the Atheist)
or (after Him) to Theodorus? Did not They flatly deny the Being of a Deity? And
so too for your beforementioned Protagoras of Abdera, who was counted the
greatest Sophist of his time, was he not, for placing these words in the Front
of a Treatise, As to the Gods, I am not able to say whether there be any or
none, by Order of the Athenians expelled their City and Territories, and his
Book publicly burnt? It is not unlikely but that this Proceeding might keep
several from openly asserting the Nullity, to see that the bare Doubt of a
Godhead could not escape Punishment. And intimates that many people never
believed there were any Gods at all.
Or, what shall we think of the Sacrilegious, Impious, or Perjurious? Would the
Ruffian, Prostitute, Cutthroat, or Assasinate (as the Satyrist Lucilius has
it) ever have been guilty of Perjury, Murder, and the like Villainies, had he
been persuaded that there is a God? This argument therefore is much weaker for
the business you put it to, then at first blush it seems to be. Yet since it is
not you alone that make use of it, I will at this time press no further upon
it; but come to what is peculiarly your own.

I admit (I say) that Gods there are. But tell me, Then, His Demands of
Epicurus.
whence they came; where they reside; and of what substance are their Bodies,
Minds; what is their course of Life? For these things I would fain be satisfied
in. You do altogether Trifle us, with your pretended Power and Efficacy of
Atoms; out of which, you feign, and frame all things hand over head (as they
say): Arguments against the being of Atoms, borrowed from the Naturalists.
For First, any such there cannot be, because nothing is Incorporeal; neither
yet is any Place unoccupy'd by a Body: And if so, your Void, and Individuals
fall to the ground. I urge these Theses of the Naturalists, not as undertaking
for the absolute certainty of them; but only as deeming them to be of more
probable appearance then are Yours: The Pretense of them Childish.
For as to the little Essences you talk of, some Smooth, some Rough, some
Round, some Square, some Crooked and almost Hookt, by a fortuitous conflux
whereof, Heaven and Earth, without any divine help, should be originally made;
These, I say, (whether Democritus, or Leucippus, were the Author of them,
skills not) are mere Whimsies, and boyish Levities. You indeed, (Velleius!)
have brought This That is, the Philosophy of Epicurus.
Opinion down even to Our Times; and a body might sooner put you out of the
number of the Living, then get you out of conceit with it. He civil^ l^ssens
the Refl^ction, as to Veleius.
For you judged it fit to enter your self an Epicurean, before you came to the
knowledge of such absurdities; and so had no other choice left you but either
to make the best you could of them, or part with your new Philosophical Title:
And what would you not rather forgo, then your Interest in That Sect? Sports
with the Epicurean Positions, as Extravagant.
But is it so slight a matter (you will say) to desert the Truth, and the Image of
a Happy Life? I meddle not with your Happy Life; which you deny even your God
himself to be capable of, unless he languish in Idleness: But wherein does This
Truth you tell us of consist? In your Innumerable Worlds, (I Will warrant) some
Rising, others Dissolving, and Perishing every instant. Or else, in your
Individual little Bodies, atchieving such mavelous exploits, without the
Influence of any special Reason, or Providence.

But, mindful of my Promise of Generosity, at First; I will not oppress you. Be
it therefore, that all things are compounded of Atoms. What Then? For it is the
Nature of the Gods that is the Question: Why the Gods cannot be made of Atoms.
Whom you may make up of Atoms and welcome; but then they cannot be Eternal:
Because what is in such manner constituted must some time or other have had a
Beginning: If so, they were not Gods before That: and if they had a Rise, that
they must also Dye too, is Inevitable; as your self e're while argued against
Plato's World. What becomes then of your Blessed and Immortal? by which two
Words you denote your Deity.

Now in striving to avoid This Objection, He recounts the doubtful expressions
and Evasions of Epicurus.
you fell into the Betake your selves to forced and doubtful terms of
Expression.
Briars (as they say) For thus you told us; That God has no real Body, but as
it were one; nor Blood, but only something like it. And in Truth, This is your
constant case, and practice; for when you drop into an Improbability, and would
escape reprehension; you seek to salve it by advancing something yet more
Absurd: In so much that it were much Creditabler for you down right to
acknowledge your selves Non-plus'd, then to persist in so Scandalous, so
Impudent an Opposition. Why Epicurus pha^^ss'd the declension of his At^ms to
be Oblique.
Thus Epicurus, finding that should he allow his Atoms naturally to tend
downward, our actions would be no longer Because our minds must be subjected to
the Motion of the Atoms.
Voluntary, since Their Motion could not but be Certain and Inevitable; hit
upon a Knack (which He denied Free Will.
Democritus never dreamt of) to avoid this necessity; pretending, that tho
indeed they were carried downwards by their proper weight, yet their Course was
somewhat Oblique, and Sloping. Now is not this rate of Triffing more shameful,
then could have been an Ingenuous disclaimer of his Assertion? [ Epic^rus
asser^ed it.
a Free Will] His dealing with the Dialectiques.
After the same fashion shuffles he with the Dialectiques, or Logicians; Who
holding that in all Propositions wherein a All Disjunctive Propositions.
Yea or a No is laid down, one of them cannot but be True; and he, perceiving
that in granting any such thing, it would follow either that Epicurus would be
alive to Morrow, or he would not; flatly denied that either a Negative or an
Affirmative is necessarily consequential, in such cases: Then which, what could
be more dully spoken? Arcesilas pressing Zeus to resolve him, whether or no he
thought all things to be False, that are discerned by the senses; he Replied,
All seem not to be so, but some only. But Epicurus, being aware that in
admitting any thing to be False, the Truth of All might be disputed, pronounced
the Senses to be Infallible. Now was not here a monstrous deal of subtilty in
all This? for in seeking to shun a Lighter Blow, he falls under a Heavyer.
Neither yet (in the present question) is his Luck any better; for in laboring
to avoid the Concretion of Atoms, that so Death and Dissolution might not
ensue; Why it was, that he made the Gods to have only as it were a Body.
he splits upon a Denial of the Gods to have any real Body at all; but only
something like a Body, nor Blood, but as it were Blood. I have often admired
how one Aruspex.
Entrail-Pryer can forbear Laughing at the Extravagancies of While he is
inspecting and pren^uo^ing upon the Entrails of the Sacrifice.
another: He m^kes merry with the Pretense.
But it is (methinks) a yet greater Wonder that You, [upon the Recital of these
more egregious Levities] should be able to contain your selves. I could, were
it formed in Wax, or in Clay, distinguish betwixt a real Body and the bare
Resemblance of one: But what this as it were a Body, and as it were Blood
should be in a God, I am not able to apprehend. And affirms it to be
Vnintell^gible, even to Velleius himself.
No nor you your self neither (Velleius!) but that you will not confess it; For
those Absurdities which Clodpated Epicurus stumbled upon, and blunder'd out,
are Retail'd to You for Prescriptions: Further Reflections upon Epicurus, for
giving out that he never had any Master,
Although he sticks not to vaunt, (in his Books) that he never had any Master
himself. And truly, I should have thought as much, tho he had not proclaimed
it; with as little honor to himself too, as That owner of a pitiful Cottage
deserved, who bragged that no Carpenter had a hand in the Raising of it. For
what is there in all his Writings that smells either of the The Schools of
Plato, and Aristotle. That is, savours of the Learning of either of them.
Academy, or Lycaeum; or indeed, that is other then pure Frippery, and
Childishness? He questions the Truth of it.
And yet he might have heard So dull a Scholar of Plato's, that he used to say
Aristotle needed a Bridle, but He a Spur.
Xenocrates; (a Doughty man, believe me!) nay, and some fancy he did hear
him: But since himself denies it, I Am apt to take his own word as soon as
another. He owns he heard, at Samos, a certain Scholar of Plato's called
Pamphilus; for when his Father Neocles came to Rent a Farm in That Isle, the
young man lived there with his Parents and Relations: Whose little Plott
(perhaps) not being sufficient to furnish him a Livelihood, it is probable he
might turn choolmaster. Taxes him with Ill nature,
Yet Epicurus grossly vilifies this Platonique: So fearful he was least it
should be thought that ever he had been instructed! That he was a Hearer of
Na^siphanes the Democratique, was so cl^arly proved upon him, that tho he could
not gainsay it, yet he persu'd him with all Ingratitude,
manner of Contumelies. And in truth, if he learnt not these Democratical
Tenets, what did he learn? And for a ^lagiary.
For what is there in Epicurus's Physics, that is not filch'd from Democritus?
Some things he has Altered, indeed; (as the before noted Inclination or Sloping
of Atoms, for one) but for the m^^t part they are the very same; as his Atom^,
^^^id, Images, Infinity of Places, Innumerability of Worlds, their Rise and
Dissolution; and all the rest (I may say) which relate to Natural Science.

But to return to your as it were a Body, He presses yet further upon his
saying as it were a Body, etc.
and as it were Blood. Pray what do you mean by it? For I not only own that you
are, but am content that you should be better skilled in these Matters, then my
self: Tho were things once plainly delivered, it might (I confess) look
somewhat Odd, that Velleius should know what to make of them, and Cotta not.
Now I understand what a Body is, and what Blood; but cannot imagine what as it
were a Body, and as it were Blood should be. Be not therefore so Reserved with
me, as Pythagoras was to strangers; nor yet industriously Obscure, as
Heraclitus affected to be. But the honest Truth is, you your self are as much
to seek in This Particular, (amongst Friends be it spoken) as am I. This I see
you stickle for, that the Gods have a certain Form that has nothing Fleshy,
Solid, Swelling or Exuberant in it; but is Simple, Smooth and Diaphanous. And
Drolls upon i^.
Such a one we will then phansy it to be, as Apelles bestowed upon his Venus;
which (I grant) was not a Body, but only the Figure of one, nor the Red drawn
along and mingled with the White, real Blood, but the bare Resemblance of it.
But Thus then, in Epicurus's God there would be only Image and Shadow, no
Substance.

BUT suppose I should allow This; which in very deed, is not so much as
Intelligible: What can you say, yet, to the Draughts and Lineaments of these
Shadow-Deities? He Sums up the Arguments brought to prove that they are of
Human Shape.
Here, plenty of Arguments are produced, whereby you would fain make out, that
they are of Human shape. The First is, that our minds are in such sort affected
and prepossessed, that we can never think upon a God, but the shape of a man
still comes into our Fancy. Secondly, You say that in regard the Divine
Nature is most Excellent, their Form ought consequently to be the most
Beautiful; and that none can vye with Ours in That respect. Thirdly, That no
Other shape is capable of furnishing a fit Receptacle for the Mind, or Reason.

And confutes them.
Now, to examine the strength of all These apart: First, methinks you, at a
venture, presume upon a matter somewhat Improbable: For who is there that so
little considers the Reasons of things, as not to discern that How Images came
at first to be erected.
such Human Images came originally to be erected, and applied to the Gods,
either by the advice of Wise men, so the more easily to draw the People from
the corruptions of the Flesh, to the service of the Divinity; Or else, out of a
Superstitious conceit, that to Reverence and Apply to these Images, was all
one with addressing to the Gods themselves: Nor did the Poets, Painters,
Statuaries, forget to improve such Phansies. Why ^he^ were made ^f Human Form.
And truly, it would have been a little odd to have represented Acting,
Deliberating Deities under any other Form. And it is not unlikely neither, that
our taking no shape to be so handsome as our own, might be something of an
Inducement This way: For do you pretend to Physics, and yet not see how
Favorable Nature is, and in a manner a Bawd to her self? Natural Impressi^ns
and Pr^^^^^i^es.
What Creature either upon the Land, or in the Water can there be, that is not
best pleased with its Own kind? Were not This so, why should not a Bull lust
after a Mare, and a Horse after a Cow? Do you believe that the Eagle, Lion, or
Dolphin, values any Form more then his own? Now since she has after the same
fashion disposed Us also, to compute of our own Figure as the Fairest; what
wonder is it that we should fancy the Gods to be of Our shape? For would not
even Brutes, (think you) were they indu'd with Reason, every one attribute Most
to their respective Genus? And yet, in Troth, (to speak freely) tho I have a
conceit good enough of my self, I dare not however, vye for Beauty with That
Jupite^, whom the Fable made to turn himself into a Bull, out of a F^t of
Gallantry.
Bull which carried Europa. For Here, the question is not touching our Wits, or
Faculty of Speech, but only concerning our Form and Figure. Drollery.
Nay, and were we at liberty to choose our own shape, or change it into what we
thought best, would we not covet to be of that Neptune's Tr^^^^e^er the
P^e^s^^^'d (...).
Sea-Triton's, whom they paint sitting upon the Backs of Mermaids.
Monsters, half Man, half Fish? 'Twere a hard Cast; for so great is the force
of Nature, that a Man would still be like a Man, as well as a Pismire like a
Pismire. But like what man then? For Few Beauties,
how few of us can fairly lay claim to Beauty? When I was at Athens scarce One
tolerable one could be picked out of a whole flock of Boys. You may laugh at it
as you please; but yet I tell you the plain Truth on it. Besides that with Those
who (with the good leave of the Ancient Philosophers) are Friends to
^ads-flesh, even Imperfections are sometimes Taking. It only consists in Phansy.
Thus Alcaeus held a Wart upon a Boys Knuckle to be a Beauty-spot; tho really
it be a Blemish: And Q. Catulus (my Friend and Colleagues Father) had also a
hankering after your Freedman Roscius; upon whom he made the following Verses:
Standing once to salute the Rising Sun;
Roscius appeared, and on my Left hand shone.
Pardon't (Celestials!) if I say I took
The Man's Face fairer then the That is, the Sun, which the Persians and
diverse Other Nations worship^, and held to be a God.
God's to look.
What He fairer then a God? Why he Then was a Squint-eyed Rascal, and so he is
at This day. But (indeed) That mattered not, so long as he accounted upon the
Infirmity it self as Amiable.

The Consequences of the Gods being supposed to be of Human shape.
But now, to the Gods again. Must we hold any of Them to be both Squint, and
Pink-ey'd; to be troubled with Warts; to be Shooing-horn-nos'd, Bangle-ear'd,
Jobber-nol'd, or Bittle-brow'd, as many of Us are? Or, contrary-wise, are they
absolutely free from Imperfections? Suppose That. But have they all Faces alike
then? For, if they be many, some cannot but be handsomer then Others; and
consequently some or other Deity not the most Handsome. Or, if they be all of a
Feature, there must necessarily be an As little Distinction as was in Plato's
School that was thronged with Scholars.
Academy in Heaven too: For if there be no difference betwixt Deity and Deity;
they can have no Distinction, nor Certainty among them.

But what if it prove altogether Untrue, The Truth of the First assertion
impaired.
at length, Velleius, that no Other shape, but what is Human occurrs to our
thoughts, when we contemplate a Deity? Will you still persist in the Defense of
such Absurdities? Now tho it should be admitted that no Other presented it self
to Our Phansies; tho it should have happened (as it is said it has) that
Jupiter, Juno, Minerva, Vulcan, Neptune, Apollo, and the Rest have appeared to
some of us, and been known by the self same forms that the Painters and
Statuaries have thought fit to give them; and not only by their Faces, but by
their Habiliments too, Age, and Apparel: Yet the Case is otherwise with the
Assyrians, Egyptians, and most Barbarous Nations; who (plainly) hold certain
Beasts in greater Reverence then we do the most Holy Temples and Images of the
Gods. For diverse Churches are Robbed, and Statues torn away even from the most
Sacred places, by many of Us; but we meet not, There, with so much as the least
Rumor of any Egyptian that ever harmed a The Egyptians worship Brutes.
Cat, Ibis, or Crocodile: What think you then? Do not They take that Apis, that
Holy Ox of Theirs to be a Deity? As surely as you hold that Juno of Ours to be
one; whom you (it seems) can never see so much as in a Dream, but clad in a
Goat-skin, with a Spear, a Shield and Reflected Pumps. The Forms or Images of
the Deities vary according to the Humors of each Country.
Neither again, is the Roman Juno, and the Grecian both alike; so that They
must needs conceive of her under One Form, We under another: And also, we
represent our Capitoline Jupiter otherwise then the Affricans do their Jupiter
Hammon. Natural prejudices no good Argume^^s.
Is it not a shame now for a Naturalist, a Pryer into the Secrets of Nature, to
fetch a Testimony, or Confirmation of the Truth from Minds prejudiced with
Custom? They ^cc^si^n the di^f^r^^ts of divine Re^r^sentations.
At this rate you may be allowed to feign Jupiter always to be Bearded;
Apollo, never; Minerva to have Gray, Neptune Hazle Eyes: And to commend that
Vulcan at Athens, of Alcamenes's making, who, through his Robes, discovers his
no uncomely Lameness. But shall we then account upon a Limping Deity, because
Tradition has made Vulcan to be Lame? Their Names t^^ differ wi h the Language
of the place.
Add to This, that we make the Gods to be of the same Names that our selves
bestow upon them: Whereas First, they must needs have as many several
Appellations as there are sorts of Languages: For you are Out (Velleius) in
phansying (as you do) that wherever you come, whether into Italy, Africa,
Spain, you shall still find one and the same Vulcan. And Secondly. I do not
meet with any great Number of Names, even in our Books of Church-Ceremonies;
tho the Deities (you say) are Innumerable. Have they none at all then? He
applies all to Epicurus's Doctrine.
You must be forced to own as much. And indeed, what need can there be of many
Names, if (as you believe) all their Faces are alike? How much more commendable
were it for you (Velleius!) freely to confess you do not understand what realy
you do not; then blindly to Dance after a Fellow that fumbles out such Wretched
stuff as This, which cannot but be distastful to your very self! Do you believe
the Gods to be like either You or Me? I Am confident you do not. Is the Sun,
Moon or Sky such therefore? Then they would consequently be The Epicurean's
Reasons why the Sun, etc. are not Gods.
Happy too. But what kind of Pleasures are They capable of? And Wise. But how
should there be Wisdom in such a Bulk? These are your Own Arguments! Wherefore,
if they be not of Human shape, as I have made out; and you cannot think they
are of any Other: Their Tenets effectually destructive of the Exist^nce of the
Deity.
Why do you stick to say that there are no Gods at all? You know what you do;
tho at this time you have nothing to fear from the People, but only from the
Gods themselves. And truly, I could tell of Epicureans that have Reverenced the
very meanest of the The Stars.
Deities: Tho some have said (I know) that Epicurus himself, out of respect to
the Athenian Laws, left a God in Words, but destroyed him in effect. And upon
This account (perhaps) it was, that of those select and brief Sentences of his,
which you term ((...) or) Fundamental Articles: he made this to be the First;
And th^^ particularly, which makes them to be void of all Th^ught or Action.
That what is Blessed and Immortal, has neither any Trouble of its own, nor
creates Others any. Now some do think that he was thus doubtful in the Delivery
of this Principle, out of design: (believe me, they judge hardly of one that,
at the very best, was no great Conjurer) Since it is not clear whether he mean
simply Blessed and Immortal; or because Blessed, consequently Immortal. And
this is observed not to be his only place of Affected ambiguity imputed to
Epicurus, and his Friend Metrodorus.
Ambiguity neither: But that both he and his Camarade Metrodorus, do frequently
speak at That rate, and nothing near so plainly as you e're while did. But he
was (no doubt of it) of Opinion, that Gods there are: All not so f^^ rful of
the (...) as he pre^ends.
And indeed, I never saw any body more fearful, of what he gives out ought not
to be fear d at all; that is to say, Death, and the Deities. These all men's
minds are confounded at, he says; tho the meaner sort of people are not so much
afraid of them: How many Thousands Rob upon the Highway, in the view of Death;
and how many more still, Rifle all the Temples that they are able? The One of
The^e, (I warrant ye) are mighty apprehensive of Death, and the Other, of the
Gods!

But seeing you (now I will speak to Epicurus Ep^curus's Principle of believing
nothing but what is seen or felt, expl^^^ct.
himself) dare not flatly deny that there are any Gods at all; what keeps you
from imputing a Divine Nature to the Sun, Moon, World, or some or other
sempiternal Mind? I could never see (says he) a Rational Soul in any Other then
a Human Figure. What could you never discern any such thing in the Sun, Moon,
or Planets? The Sun, determining his course at the two extreme parts of the
Zodiac, compleats annual Revolutions: The Moon, being enlightened with the
Others Beams, finishes the same Course in the space of a Month: The Five
Planets, within the same Circle, some nearer, others more remote from the
Earth, do set forth as do the Other two, and perfect the like compasses in
different spaces of Time. Did you never see any thing of This, Epicurus? So
that there must be neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars then; because (in your Opinion)
nothing can have a Being, which we have not either seen or felt? Did you ever
see the Gods themselves? Why then do you conceive that there are any? If This
Principle hold good, we must also disclaim whatever History or New Art shall
furnish: Neither are the In-Landers to believe that there is a Sea. Which are
such narrownesses of Thought, that had you been born in Seriphus, and never
stirred out of an Island where you had only seen Foxes and Leverets, you were
not to be persuaded that there could be any Lions and Panthers, when told what
kind of Beasts they are; nor so much as hear mention made of the Elephant,
without taking your self to be played upon.

Now, as for You, Velleius; V^lleius's syl^o gistical gradation examined, and
proved to be irregular.
you have wound up the Bottom of your Disputation, in a course of Argument not
so much like That of your own Party, as of the Dialectiques, whose Epicurus
s^ighte^ Logique, as unpr^fitable
Doctrine few of you are at all acquainted with. First, you assumed that the
Gods are Happy. And I gainsay not. Next, that nothing can so be, without
Virtue. I willingly admit That too. Then, that Virtue cannot be, where Reason
is not. And that must also be allowed. Lastly, you add; Nor Reason abide in any
other then Human shape. But who (think you) will grant That? And, were it True,
you needed not to have come to it so gradually. But what has This last part of
the Gradation to rest upon, other then your own Fancy? From Happiness to
Virtue, and from That to Reason, the descent was natural enough; but how can
you proceed from Reason, to Human shape? That Is not a ^tep but a Precipice.
Rather our Figure is Divine, then that of the Gods Human.
Nor yet, can I see wherefore Epicurus rather chose to fancy Gods to be like
men, then men to be like Gods. Do you find out what Difference there is betwixt
them; for if This Resemble That; That (I think) must needs Resemble This too.
He feigns a Difference, and applies it.
This (indeed) there is, that the Gods borrowed not their Figure from Men; for
they ever were, and never had a beginning; Otherwise, they were not likely to
be Eternal. Whereas We had a Birth; and therefore the Form could not but bear
date before Us, the Gods themselves were of it: Their shape then is not to be
called Human, but Ours, Divine.

His fortuitous concourse of Atoms inquired into.
BUT be This as you will. Now, to an enquiry into that great good Fortune of
yours: For you deny a Divine Wisdom to have assisted in the forming of any
thing whatsoever. But whence came That so lucky Chance then? Whence so happy a
Conflux of Atoms as, in a Trice, to produce Men in the Likeness of Gods? Must
we suppose that the Divine Seed fell from Heaven, and was scattered upon the
Earth, and so Men came to Resemble their Begetters? I should be glad you would
say as much; and very readily acknowledge my Similitude and Alliance to the
Deities. But we hear no It was merely by Chance (the Epicureans say) that Men
came to be like the Gods.
such matter from you: You are Peremptory that This Resemblance was purely
Casual. And must Arguments now be sought, whereby to refell This Assertion?
Truly, would I could as easily find out what is Right, as I can confute what is
Otherwise. The Opinion confuted.
I must confess you have been so Ready and Large in Reporting the Opinions of
Philosophers, down even from Thales Milesius, touching the Nature of the Gods;
that it was some surprise to me to find so much Learning in a Roman. But, Then,
do you suppose them all to have doted and been mistaken, for conceiving that
The Divinity might subsist without Feet, or Hands? Nay, or can you your self
either, in your Reflections upon the Use and Intent of Human Members, avoid a
persuasion that the Gods can have no need of them? No need of Feet, where there
is no Walking.
For what necessity can there be of Feet, without walking? Of Hands, where
there is no Grasping? And so for the whole order of the Other Parts of the Body,
which has nothing Nothing superfluous in Human Bodies; much less in the
Divinities.
Vain in it, Useless, or Superfluous? In so much that no Art is able, by
Imitation, to equal the Handiwork of Nature. Must God, therefore have a Tongue
and speak not; Teeth, a Palate, Jaws, to no manner of purpose; and the
Instruments of Generation too, uncapacitated to employ them? Nay, as great a
Superfluity of Inwards also as of the Other? The Heart, Lungs, Liver and the
Rest; which, abstracting their use, what Comeliness can they pretend to? Since
you make Him to have all These, upon the account of Beautifulness.

The Epicureans twitted for much Wrangling.
And yet, relying upon these Dotages; not only Epicurus, Metrodorus, and
Hermachus, have presumed to grapple with Pythagoras, Plato, Empedocles; but
even that little Strumpet Leontium (the Slut (indeed) had a neat, Attique
style) has dared to Write against Wise Theophrastus. And tho Epicurus's The
School where he taught, which was a little Garden.
Garden has been so Luxuriant in This respect, Being guilty of it themselves,
they ought not to blame it in Others.
you are still complaining, and crying out against it: Not Zeno himself (for
such as Albucius are not worth taking notice of) was free from Wranglings.
Phaedro (I must needs say) was Human and Elegant; the Old man would be offended
at any Tart Word of mine: Epicurus Rude, Contentious,
While Epicurus himself despitefully treated Aristotle; smuttily bespattered
Socrates's man Phaedo; pelted Timocrates, (the Brother of his Crony Metrodorus)
with whole Volumes, only for dissenting from him in I know not what
Philosophical Punctilloes; was And Ungrateful.
Ungrateful to Democritus himself, whom he copied after; and gave not his very
Master Nausiphanes (under whom he profited Little) one jote better quarter. As
for An Epicurean.
Zeno, he not only heapt scandals upon such as were Then Living, as
Apollodorus, Sylla, and Others; but called Socrates himself (who was the Father
of Philosophy) the Attique Buffon, and Chrysippus never other then Chesippus.
Nay, your very self erewhile, in reckoning up a whole Assembly (as it were) of
Philosophers, stuck not to say, that the greatest men doted, talked Idly, and
were beside themselves; tho, if none of them all has hit upon the True Nature
of the Gods, it may be justly doubted whether there be any Gods or no. The
Epicurean Tenets Idle.
For as to what you deliver upon the Point, it is all mere Whimsie, scarce
worthy the Thumbing of old Wives. The Consequence of admitting the Gods to be
of Human shape;
You are not aware what a great deal more you must undertake for, tho you
should prevail for an admittance that the shape of the Gods, and of Men, is one
and the same: For Then, the Divinity would require all the Tricking, and
Tendance, that we bestow upon our Bodies; have his goings, runnings, lyings
down, leanings, sittings, holdings; and, in Brief, be capable of speech and
discourse. And Male and Female.
Neither are the consequences of your making them Male and Female less palpably
incommodious: Insomuch that I can never wonder enough, how that Epicurus.
Prince of Yours should come by these Opinions.

BUT you are continually pressing us to hold This for a Certain, Happiness as
Consistent with the Form of the Sun, etc. as with a God of Human Figure.
that the Deity is both Happy, and Immortal. And why may he not be Happy, tho
not Two-footed? Or, This Beatitude or Blessedness; (they are both of them harsh
Words, but must be mollify'd by use) but be it what it will, why (I say) may
not either That Sun, This World, or some Eternal Wisdom destitute of Human
Shape and Members be capable of it? Epicurus further pressed upon, for not
all^wing any thing to be believed which we do not either See or Feel.
All that you urge to the contrary amounts only to This, that you never saw any
Happiness the Sun or the World had in them. Well! And did you ever see any
Other World then This, either? You Will say No. How durst you give out then, that
there ^re not six hundred Thousand only, but Innumerable of them. Reason taught
as much. And will not Reason teach you The Gods as much exceed us in Form, as
in Mind and Immortality.
This sooner; that since, in our Re-searches touching the Best Nature,
Happiness and Eternity are only to be met with in the Divine, it cannot but as
much surpass us in Excellency of Mind, as in Immortality; and as of Mind, so of
Shape likewise? Wherefore Then, being Inferior in Other respects, do we
pretend to an Equality with it in point of Figure? Our Virtues rather Divine,
then our Figure.
Man's Virtues (one would think) should come near to the Divinity in
Resemblances, then his Form. But to press the Of not Believing, where there is
no seeing, or feeling.
Other Topique yet a little further. Can any thing be more Childish, then for a
body to deny the Being of those Monsters that are generated in India, and the
Red Sea? It is not possible even for the most inquisitive to make a Discovery
of the many Creatures that abide in the Earth, Seas, Fens, Rivers: And none of
these, now, must be allowed to Be, because we never saw them. Like Forms like
Dispositions, no True Assertion.
Nor, again, is your Similitude of Dispositions [inferr'd from likeness of
Shape] that you so highly account of, any thing at all to the Purpose: For is
not the Dog like the Wolf; and That filthy Creature (as Ennius calls it) the
Ape, likest to Man? When as they are not of a Little contrary Dispositions. The
Elephant comes short of no other Beast in Prudence; and yet of how much Larger
a Size is he! Here I speak only of Beasts: But even amongst Men too, find we
not different manners in Bodies much alike; and Dispositions unworthy of their
Forms? Should then your late Velleius's s^phistical gradation.
way of Argumentation (Velleius!) once take place, see what would come of it:
You took for granted that Reason could not be in any other Figure then what is
Human; and another may assume, in any Other but what is Earthy; had a Birth,
Growth, a time of Instruction; but what is compounded of Soul, and a frail,
fading Carcass; In short, but in a Man, a mortal Man. Reason m^^ be in any
form, since Our Bodies are as frail and infirm as any.
Now if you can put over all these hard things, what need you stickle so much
for a bare Figure? You could see (it seems) that Man was indu'd with Reason and
Understanding, tho attended with all these Infirmities that I have advanced:
Which, when taken away, you are nevertheless able to They make God to have the
shadow only of our Bodies, not the Substance.
know God (you tell us) provided the Shadow or Lines of them do but remain.
This is not to speak deliberately, but to talk at a venture. All superfluities
incommodious.
For surely you did not consider what a comber and hinderance any thing useless
or Superfluous is, not in Men only, but even in Trees? How Troublesome is it to
have a Finger too much? And why so? Because there is no need of a Fifth either
for Use or Ornament? Whereas your Deity, now, abounds not in a Finger only, but
in a Head too, a Neck, Shoulders, Sides, a Paunch, Back, Hams, Hands, Feet,
Privities, Thighs. If you suppose These to be contributary to his Immortality;
wherein (I prayed) are any of Them (nay, or even the Visage it self either)
necessary to Life? What M^mbers are Vital, and Essential to Life.
These rather, the Brain, Heart, Lungs, Liver; for They are the seats of Life:
To which, the Features of the Face are no way Essential.

You found fault with The Stoiques, etc. whose Opinions drive to a certain
point.
those who, from the Marvellousness of the Works; upon a view of the whole
World, and its respective Parts, Heaven, Earth, Water, and the Ornaments and
Imbellishments of the same, the Sun, Moon, Stars; as also, upon an Observation
of the Changes, Complements, and Vicissitudes of Times and Seasons, collected
and presumed, that there could not but be some Excellent and Admirable Essence
interested in the Creating, Actuating, Governing, and Administering of them:
Who, though they should be out in their Conjectures, yet a Body may see what
they would be at. Which these of the Epicureans do not.
But as for You, what notable atchievment do you reckon upon, that may seem
worthy of a Divine Wisdom, and afford ground for a persuasion that Gods there
are. I bear in my Mind (say you) an unaccountable prenotion of a Deity. Their
prenotion of a D^i^y invalidated.
Of a Bearded Jupiter, (no doubt) or a Helmeted Minerva. The Gods not such as
the Statuaries represent them to be.
But do you take them to be such then? How much more tolerable are the Phansies
even of the Ordinary sort in This Particular? In that The Opinions of the
Common People adjudged more Rational.
they do not only allow the Deities Human Members, but a capacity to make use
of them too; and therefore assign them a Bow and Arrows, a Spear, a Buckler, a
Trident, and a Thunderbolt: And tho they cannot see what they do, yet will
they not hear of their being altogether Idle. And those of the Egyptians too,
because they only Deifie Beasts in consideration of the good they rece^ve by
them.
Even the so much undervalu'd Egyptians themselves never yet decreed divine
Honors to any Creature from which they received not some considerable Benefit.
Their Ibes destroy multitudes of Serpents; for, being a sort of tall Birds with
rough hard Legs, and a long Horny Beak, they preserve Egypt from the
Pestilence, by devouring those swarms of Winged Serpents that are brought, by
the South-West wind, from the Deserts of Lybia: And so, they neither harm by
their Biting, while alive,; nor by their Stink, when dead. I could show the
advantages they reap by their Ichneumons, Cats, and Crocodiles; were it not,
that I Am unwilling to be over tedious: Yet I will wind up the Topique with this
Remarque; That whereas the very Barbarians Deine Beasts, in consideration of
the good they do them; W^^^^ Epicurus's (...) neither thinks of nor does any
thing.
Your God (contrary-wise) is so far from being Celebrated for any Favor, that
he performs not so much as the least Action. He does nothing at all, says he.
The Gods not (...).
Truly Epicurus, is much of the Humor of those Idle Lads that prefer no
blessing to a Holy Day: And yet even They too, when they have got a Play-day,
do busy themselves in some ^^^^^ve Ex^^^ise or other: Whereas the (...) is to
be reputed so entirely (...) sl^^^h, that should he but Stir, (...) much as his
Happiness is worth. W^^^ The Consequence of making them s^.
Doctrine not only strips the Gods of all divine Motion and Operation; but
tends to render Men Lazy also; since not even the Deities themselves can be
Happy, if they take any pains.

Their Residence, Doings, and the reason of their Happiness, according to the
Epicureans, inquired into.
But yet, be it as you say; that They are of Human shape: Where do they reside,
Then; What is their Course of Life^ and wherefore is it that you term them
Blessed? For it seems necessary, that he who would be Happy, should use and
have all good things within himself. The Order of the Elements.
Now each Inanimate has its proper station assigned it; the Earth, the Lowest;
the Water above That; the Air higher then both; the highest of all is given to
Fire. All Animals have certain places allotted (...).
Of Animals some live upon the Land, Others in the Water, And some again (being
Amphibious) inhabit both: Nay, and there are yet Others, which are thought to
arise from Fire, and may be discerned fluttering about in burning Furnaces. I
demand, First, therefore, Demands.
what is your Divinities place of abode; Then, (if he stir at all) what
Appetites are capable of removing him from his post: L^stly, Since it is proper
to all And covet something or other agreeable to their Natures.
Animated Beings to covet some certain thing or other that is agreeable to
their respective Natures; what is it that God affects; what special End does
the motion of his Mind, and Reason tend to? In a word, how comes he to be
Happy? How Eternal? For a Tripp in any of These Particulars is a Makes him
Mortal.
Blot. Thus we see, that Idle conceits kn^w not where to stop; and Prove
Nothing.
an Ill-grounded Proposition comes to no Issue. Epicurus's means of discerning
the Figure of the Deity.
For you (moreover) delivered, that the Figure of the Deity was only
discernable by the Mind, not by Sense; That it was neither Solid, nor
Invariable; That a Perception of it was affected by a Similitude, and
Transition of Images that incessantly proceeded from Innumerable Atoms, upon
which our Fancy being intent, we So came to discern and presume that That
Nature is Blessed and Eternal. Charged with Vnintelligibleness, and
Imaginariness.
Now what, in the Name of those owers, that are the subject of this Dispute, do
you mean by all This? For, if the Gods do only exist in Thought; in
Imagination; and are absolutely void of Substance and Solidity; what is the
difference betwixt Imagining, Thinking of a Divinity and a Hippocentaur? The
Agitation of Mind by which it is supposed to be effected, asserted to be vain,
fantastical Motion.
Other Philosophers term all such Effigiations of the Mind Vain Cogitation; but
You, an Approach and Entry of Images into them. An Example of such Idle Motion.
Thus, I call my conceipting my self to behold T. Graechus Harangueing the
People in the Capit^l, and collecting Voices against his Colleague M. Octavius,
Idle Motion; while You affirm, that the Images both of Graechus and Octavius do
persevere, and, from the Capitol, are brought to my Remembrance. That the Case
of Divine Images is not Unlike Tois; by an earnest Intention, whereupon our
Minds are stirred up; and so we come to understand, that the Deities are Happy
and Immortal. Images, being void of substance, ^an^^t (...) a^^for^e u^^n the
Mi^^: (...) here, (...) images themselves are objected) Or, if the^ could, yet
Happiness would not be any consequence of it.
Now, supposing that any such Figures there should Be, whereby the Mind might
be affected; yet it is only a certain naked Species of them that is represented:
And how comes That Violence either to be Empharical of a Blessedness and
Eternity? The First author of them.
But what are, and whence came these your pretended Images? You have this
Conceit from Democritus, who is himself very much reprehended for it: And you
find no Consequence upon it neither; but the whole Cause it self halts and
staggers. The Pre^ence of them ma^e out to be Improb^^^e.
For, what can be of harder Demonstration, then how the Images of all men, of
Homer, Archilochus, Romulus, Numa, Pythagoras, Plato, should come into My head?
Not in the self same Forms that they were of neither. So that how should they
be Theirs then? Or, Whose Images are they? Aristotle writes, that there never
was any such Person as the Poet Orpheus; and Others say, that the sort of Verse
usually called Orphique was invented by one Cecrops a Pythagorean: And yet
Orpheus (or, (according to Your way) the Image of him) has often run in my
Thought. Whence is it (also) that one kind of Figure of the same man appears to
me, and another to You? Wherefore have we Representations of things that never
either were, or could be; as Scylla, Chimaera? Or, of such Men, Places, and
Cities, as we never beheld with our Eyes? How happens it that I command them at
pleasure: Or, that they come even of their own accord, while I am sleeping? The
whole Pretext (Velleius!) is pure Triftle. You do impose Images not upon our
Eyes only, but upon our Minds too; so great a Privilege have you to talk Idly:
But how Inordinate you are in the Particular; your pretended frequent occurring
of such a Epicurus's Transition of Visions Exploded.
Transition of flowing Visions, that the same Thing may be seen by Many, at One
and the Same time, speaks out. I should blush to acknowledge that I understand
not any thing of all This, were but your very selves, who maintain them, a
whitt more knowing, in the matter. For how do you make out that No Images
because n^ Atoms to furnish them.
Images whirle about Incessantly? Or, if so; how come they yet to be Eternal?
They are supplied by Innumerable Atoms, (you say) But do These same Atoms cause
then that they should be all Sempiternal? Here you run to your And his
Aequilibration.
Equilibration, (for so, with leave, I Will express your (...)) and tell us, that
since Epicurus made Innumerable Atoms to rise and perish every I^stant: And at
this rite to h^ld on to Eternity.
Nature is Mortal, it is consequently Immortal too. By This Rule, because Men
are Mortal, they must some of them be also Immortal; and seeing they spring
from the Earth, they spring from the Water likewise. And you say further, that
as there are that destroy, there cannot but be that preserve. Admit That: But
then let them conserve Things that Are: For I cannot make out these Gods to
have any Because they cannot be made up of Atoms; as the Epicurears seem to
conce^pt.
Being at all.

But how comes this whole Mass of things to proceed from, and consist of His
pretended power of Atoms denied.
Atoms? Were there, (as there are not) any such; they might jostle one another
perhaps, and be jumbled together; but could never be able to Make, Shape,
Color or Animate. So that This is in no wise a sufficient And so the
Immortality of the Gods not proved by them.
proof of the Immortality of the Gods. Now, then, to their Happiness. It is
unquestionable that nothing can be Happy without Virtue: But then Virtue
consists in Action; whereas your Deity is always Idle; so not Virtuous; and
therefore he cannot be Nor their Blessedness.
Blessed neither. What kind of Life leads he now? He enjoys a constant supply
of all Good things, without any Bad intermixed. But what are those same Good
things? Pleasures that relate to the Flesh no doubt; for you acknowledge no
other delight of the Mind, then what arises from, and returns to the Body. I
hold not You (Velleius!) to be any of those Epicureans who Because not
thoroughly seen ^^ the Grounds and Re^s^ns of his Doctrine.
blush at those words of Epicurus that express his inability to conceive of any
Good, separate from the Delights of Sense, and the Palate; all which he sticks
not to reckon up one by one. What Diet therefore; what Liquours; what Varieties
of Music and Flowers: They are not capable of se^su^l Pleasures.
What Scents or Touches will you Administer to the Deities, to fill them with
Joy and Delectation? The Poets indeed have provided them Nectar and Ambrosia,
to make merry with, and an Hebe or a G^nimede to fill them Tipple: But what
will You allow them, (Epicurus?) for I neither see now your Divinity should
come by any such, nor know what to do with them if he had 'em: So that Human
Nature seems better accommodated then the Divine, toward Living happily; as
being possessed of sundry kinds of Pleasures. But these you hold to be only
superficial ones, that barely Tickle ('it is Epicurus's own word) the Senses, as
it were. Will there be no End of This Fooling? For even our Philo himself,
could not away with making sport with the Esseminate Epicureans, and their
Luscious Pleasures. He had (indeed) at his Fingers ends, diverse of Epicurus's
Sentences in the very words that they were Originally couched in: And repeated
yet more sluttish ones of Metrodorus's, who was Epicurus's Fellow-Philosopher
every Inch of him. Metrodorus's scandalous Opinions.
This same Metrodorus taxes his Brother Timocrates for scrupling the certainty
of all things constituent of a Happy Life, to be measured by the Belly; and
This not one single time neither, but diverse. I see you allow of what I say;
for you know it to be True: And if you did not, I could produce the very Books
themselves. To oppose the redu^ing of all things to Pleasure as their Vltimate
end, foreign to the present question.
But it is not my business, at This time, to impugn the Referring of all things
to Pleasure; That being a Question apart, but only to show that your Gods enjoy
not any; and therefore (even according to your own Doctrine) cannot be Happy.
Epicurean Re^sons for the Happiness of the Gods confuted,
But They are free from Pain. And is That enough to complete your most blessed
Life, abounding in all good things? They ever fancy themselves to be Happy,
(you say) as having no other thoughts to trouble their Heads with. Consider
well on it, now, and toss it in your mind, whether the Godhead does nothing
else, thorough all Eternity, but only Think All Is well with me, and I am Happy.
Nor yet can I see which way that God should be Happy, who is continually pushed
and agitated with a Restless incursion of Atoms; and from whom Images do
constantly proceed.

Epicurus's Doctrine destructive of the very Being of a Deity.
But Epicurus has written Books (also) expressly to inculcate Piety and R^verence
to the Deities. True! And how speaks he There? So, as that ^^u would think you
were hearing the Hig^ ^riest Scaevola, or Coruncanus, rather the^ Him that
subverted Religion, and destroyed the Temples and Altars of the Immortal Gods;
not with Hands, as did Xerxes, but with Arguments. For wherefore must we
worship the Deities, when (as you pretend) they neither regard us, nor so much
as Do, or are Solicitous about any thing at all? But their Nature is so
Glorious and Excellent, that it makes its self Venerable to a wise man by its
own Power. He proves not that they are of an Excellent Nature; and therefore
the pretense for Worshipping them falls.
But can there be any thing worthy of Honor in a Nature that only contemplates
its own Happiness, and neither will do, does, or ever yet did any thing? And
then, what Piety can be due to one that we are not beholden to? Or, how can we
stand in the least bound to Him, that we must challenge nothing from? Piety
defined.
For Piety is a Justice toward the Gods. But how should there be a Right, where
there is no Intercourse, nor Communication of Offices? And Sanctity.
And Sanctity is the Skill of Worshipping them. Now why they should be Worshipped
at all, I see not; if we neither receive, nor must hope for any Good at their
hands. Why, again, are they to be Reverenced out of an Admiration of that
Nature: wherein we discern not any thing Extraordinary?

You value your selves upon delivering us from Superstition; Why Epicurus's
Opinions do not only take away Supersti ion, but Religion too; even as much as
do Diagoras's etc.
which is an Easy matter truly, if you destroy all in the Gods, that might
Create it. What more in effect, did those not much less Superstitious men
Dia^oras and Theodorus, who flatly denied that there were any Gods at all; and
the Protagoras I mentioned before, who doubted whether there were or not? All
whose Opinions were not only destructive of What Superstition is.
Superstition, which results from vain Apprehensions concerning the Deities;
but of What Religion.
Religion also, which consists in a pious Adoration of them. Religion no
Politic device.
And what else did Those too, who have given out, that the Whole touching the
Immortal Powers was devised by Politic men, upon Temporal Considerations; and
to keep within compass by Religion, such as were nor to be wrought upon by
Reason? Or, what Religion either did Prodicus's Opinions destructive of a Deity.
Prodicus of Cos leave, in making Inventions beneficial to Man to be Divine?
What of This, moreover, can they pretend to, who assert that Valiant and
Illustrious men are taken up into Heaven after Death; and are the very Gods
whom we commonly Pray to, Worship, and Adore? This Doctrine And Euhemerus's.
Euhemerus (whom our Ennius has Latin'd, and followed) has more especially
appeared in favor of: Who speaks not of the Deaths only, but of the Burials
also of the Gods. And whether then may he be said to confirm, or absolutely
subvert Religion? I pass over that Holy and August The manner of Worshipping
Ceres at Elusine,
Ceres, to whose Temple, at Elusine, People came far and near to pay their
Devotions: And That of hers at And at Samothracia,
Samothracia too: As also those secret Groves (beset with shady Hedges) at The
Groves of Lemnos,
Lemnos which are upon the same score resorted to only in the Nighttime: All
which, if well examined and considered, may be found more expressive of the
Nature of the Things, then of the Gods. Nor, again, have I any good Opinion of
And Democritus's Conjectures, pronounced dangerous, and disallowed of.
Democritus's Assurance and Steadiness in This particular; (tho, indeed, he was
a Great man; and from whose Fountains Epicurus Watered his Little Garden.) For
one while he conceits that there are Images indu'd with Divinity, inherent in
the Universality of Things: Another, that all Seeds and Souls the same Universe
contains, are likewise Deities; Next, that there are Animated Images, capable
either of helping or harming us; And lastly, certain mighty ones, and of a size
so exceeding Large, that they environ the very Outside of the World. All which
Dotages are more worthy of Democritus's He was of Abdera a Town in Thrace, much
noted for the grossness of its Air. Whenc. Juvena; s^s, Abderitanae Pectora
Plebis Habes.
Country, then of his Philosophy; for who can believe that any such ^mages
there are; admire them; or deem them meriting a Religious Veneration?

But for Epicurus, now; Bounty and Goodness Inseparable from the Godhead: and
the Consequences of stripping it of them.
in divesting the Gods of Power and Good Will, he has stricken at the very root
of Religion: For let him be never so earnest for the Divine Nature to be the
Best, and most Excellent; yet, if, at the same time, he denies it to be
susceptible of favorable Inclinations, he takes away that which is peculiar to
it as such; nothing being better, or more excellent then Goodness and
Beneficence: Of which, in supposing the Gods to be destitute, you not only make
them regardless of Men, but of One another; and neither to Love, nor respect
Any Body: How much more commendable seem the The Stoiques commended for making
all Wise men friends to the Wise, be their condition what it will.
Stoiques (whom you find such great fault with) to be in This particular; who
hold, that Wise men do naturally wish well to all Wise men, even to Those that
they never had any knowledge of: For nothing is more Amiable then Virtue; and
whoever is indu'd with it, deserves to be Revered by us, whatever he be. And
The Perniciousness of Epicurus's making good Offices and Benevolence to result
fr m Imbecility of Nature.
then, again, how do you over-shoot your selves in making Good Offices and
Benevolence to be marks of Imbecility? For, to pass over the Natural Propriety.
Power and Nature of the Divine Beings, you hold that even Men, were they not
Frail, would neither be Civil, nor Courteous. But is there not then a Natural
Dearness incorporated in the Dispositions of all Good Men? The very word Dear
is a Term of Affection (Amoris) and ( Amicitia or) Friendship not Mercenary,
Friendship derives from it; which, if it respect our own private profit, and
not the behoof of the Person esteemed, is not Friendsh^ but only a kind of
Merchandise [a matter of Servile Convenience] Pastures, Fields, Flocks of
Cartle, are valued much at the same rate, and in consideration of the fruit we
reap by them. But gratuitous.
If then Man's Charity a (...) Friendship be Gratuitous And so is the divine
favor too.
how much more (...) must the Deities needs be? Who, tho (...) want nothing
themselves, do yet love (...) Another, and take care of Us. What would f^llow,
if it were not so.
Which if they do not, wherefore do we Pray to, or Honor them? Why are Priests
set ov^r the Ceremonies of the Altar; Presidents over the Divinations by the
Flight of Birds? What can we desire of them? Why do we make Vows to them?

No heed to be given to what Epicurus has Written on the behalf of the Gods;
But Epicurus has Treated of Religious Ceremonies too. We are surely made sport
with by a man that was not at all Good That way; and only tainted with an Itch
of Scribbling: And why.
For why should there be any Sanctimonious worship, if the Divinity takes no
care of Human Affairs? Nay, what Animated Being can there be, that regards
nothing at all? So that what our Friend Posidonius has said in his fifth Book
of the Nature of the Gods, seems no way Improbable. Viz. He is presumed to
believe that there were not any Gods at all.
That Epicurus did not believe there were any at all; and that what ever he
said of them was only to save himself To secure himself against the Laws of the
Ath^nians, which were severe against S^eptiques and Atheists.
harmless: Re^sons for the persuasion.
For certainly he could not be so simple as to think that the Godhead has only
the Outward Lines of a Pigmy, separate from all Real solidity; That he has all
the Members of a Man, but not the least capacity to use them; That he is a
certain meager, pellucid Jack a Lent, that neither Obliges nor Rewards; is not
Solicitous for, nor effects ought at all. He left a Deity in Words, but
destroyed him in effect.
For First, there is no such thing in Nature; and Epicurus being aware of as
much, allows of a Deity in Words, but takes him away in very deed. And Then, if
the Circumstances of the Godhead be Truly such, as that he is void of If
favor and bountifulness be marks of frailty, there need be no worshipping of
the Gods.
Favor, and Affection toward Mankind, I have nothing to say to him. What will
it boot me to supplicate his Indulgence? For he cannot be Propitious to any
body: Since All kindness and Benevolence (you say) proceeds from Imbecility.

The End of the First Book.
M. T. CICERO Touching the NATURE OF THE GODS, etc. The Second Book.
WHEN Cotta had thus made an End; said Velleius, The Introduction, by way of
Dialogue.
It was not considerately done of me (I must confess) to engage against an
Academique, and an Orator, both under One; for I should not much have shrunk at
an Academique without Eloquence, any more then at a very fluent Rhetorician
unqualify'd with The Skeptical, or Academical sort; that by a kind of Sleight of Wit ran All into Doubt and Uncertainty.
Your Philosophy: As being neither moved by a Torrent of Empty Words; nor by
Queint Sentences, if the Style be Dry and Heavy. You (indeed, Sir,) have done
passing well, have exceeded in both these respects; only an This Dispute being
menag'd privately amongst two or three Friends, that custom of the Romans of
appointing Judges over the Public Exercises of Prof^ssors of Sciences, to
determine who got the better; and of confe^ring some or other small Marque of
Honor upon the Victor, and of Disgrace upon the Vanquished, could not take
place here.
Auditory and the Judges were not in place. But This by the By, Now (if he be
disposed) let Lucilius speak. I had rather (replied Balbus) that Cotta would
please to go on still; and with the same Eloquence that he has confounded False
Gods, show which are the True: For it is but Fit that a Philosopher, that a
Cotta was High Priest at the time of this Disputation.
Priest, that Cotta should have a Certain and Steady Notion of a Deity, with Us
^toiques; and not a fluctuating and unconstant one, as That of the Academiques
uses to be. Against Epicurus ('it is True) Enough in all reason has been said;
but (Cotta!) you have not yet obliged us with your Own Thoughts upon the
matter. I beseech you, Sir, (Returned he) call to mind what I hinted at the
beginning; that I found it easier to discern, especially as to things of this
quality, what should not, then what should be entertained. Nay, and tho I were
able to advance somewhat that might be Clear; yet having been so Large already,
You ought, Now, to take Your Turn, before me. I submit to you (Answered
Balbus;) and will be as Brief as possibly I can: For, Epicurus's Errors being
Confuted to my hand, my Work will fall within so much the narrower compass.

This whole Question touching the Nature of the Gods usually divided into Four
Parts, by the Stoiques.
Our people do generally divide this Whole Question concerning the Nature of the
Immortal Gods into Four Parts: First, they show that Gods there are; Secondly,
What they are; Thirdly, That the World is administered by them; and Lastly,
that they consult, and interest themselves in Man's Affairs. Now, I think it
will not be amiss to speak only to the Two First of These, and to let the Other
(as being harder to make out) alone till a time of better convenience. I cannot
agree to That, (Rejoined Cotta) for we are absolutely at It was a Holy day they
met upon. He may seem also to glance at Julius C^esar's discharging them from
Public Cares, by usurping and engrossing the Sole Men^gement of the
Common-weal^h, i^ a manner, to ^i^se^f.
Leisure; and tho we were not, yet the Subject in debate is to be preferred even
to Business it self.

. 1. SAID Lucilius, Hereupon; the First Point (methinks) requires not to have
Much spoken to it: For can any thing be more plain and perspicuous, when we look
up to the The first Argument, in proof of the Existence of a Deity, take: from
a Contemplation of the Hea^^ns (...).
Heavens, and contemplate what is over our Heads, then the Existence of some
Power of a Transcendent Wisdom, Th^^ ^^lds Self Evidence (as it were) of his
governing all t^ings in Heaven and Earth.
by which All These are Governed? Which were it not so; how could Ennius have
cried out, Behold yon Deity glittering on high
Whom All term Jupiter --
with an Universal Approbation? But indeed, This is They h^ld their Jupiter
Optimus Maximus to be the Only True ^od, and ^ll the rest in the Nature of
Officers and Ministers of State to him.
Jupiter; the Lord, the Disposer and Ruler of All things as seems good to
himself; -- Father both of the Gods and Men. As the same Ennius has it; a
Divinity that is All-powerful, and still ready to help us. And, if any body
questions This, for ought I see he may as well doubt whether there be a Sun or
no: For wherein is the One more Evident then the Other?

The Second, drawn from Universal Assent.
Nay, and had we not, also, impressed in our minds, an Inward knowledge and
Assurance of This, there could never have remained so Stable a Belief of it;
nor would it have been confirmed by diuturnity of Time, nor grown up and born
Date with the Ages and Original of Men: For such Opinions as were vain, and
faulty at bottom are worn away by length of time (we see) and vanished; As who,
at This day, thinks there is any such Creature as a Chimaera, or an
Hippocentaur? Or, what Old Wife so weak, as to be afraid of those Goblins
below, which once held a place in most peoples Faith, and Phansies? Time eats
out and consumes Fictions, but establishes the Dictates of Nature. And indeed,
there were always in use, in Ours, and Other Countries, certain holy
Institutions of Divine Worship.

The Third, from the P esence an^ Appeari^g f the Gods, upon sundry occasi^ns.
Nor again is This the Result of Chance or Ignorance; Or any more then what the
Gods themselves have often declared by their Presence: As at A Lake in Italy.
Regillus, in the War with the Latins; Where Castor and Pollux were seen
fighting on Horseback in Our Army, when A. Posthumous (the Dictator) vanquished
Octavius Mamilius in the Battle of A Town about 12 Miles from Rome, where
Cicero had a Country house; and from whence his Tusculan Questions derived
their Title.
Tusculum. And it is of fresher Date that the same Offspring of Tyndarus gave
information of the Defeat of King of Macedon.
Perses. For as P. Vatienus (Grandfather to the present Youth of That Name) was
on his way to Rome from his Government of A Town of the Sabines.
Reate, Two Young men on white Horses appeared to him toward the shutting up of
the Evening, and told him King Perses was That day taken Prisoner. This he
Reported to the Senate; and was, at First, Committed upon it, for speaking
rashly of what concerned the Public: But it soon after appearing, by Letters
from Aemilius (the Consul) who took Perses.
Paulus, that he was altogether in the Right; They bestowed upon him Land and
Privil^dg'd him from serving in the Wars, b^aring any part in the public
Taxes, etc.
Exemption. We find it also Written, that the self same day that the Locrians
overcame the People of Croro, near the River In Lucania; upon the Banks whereof
Castor and Pollux had Altars erected to them, upon this a count.
Sagra, in a very great Battle, the Fight was known at the Games of A ^lace and
Country of Pelop^nesus.
Olympia. Nay and the Voices of the Gods of the Woods and Fields.
Fauns have been heard, and the shapes of the Gods seen often enough to extort
from all that are not very heavy or Impious indeed, an acknowledgement of the
Presence of a Deity.

The Predictions and Foreknowledge of future Events too, The Pre^ictions and
Foreknowledge ^f things to come, pressed upon the same score.
what else do They intimate, but that it is signified, made known, portended,
foretold to men what will come to pass? Whence it is, that those things
themselves are called Ostents, Signs, Portents, Prodigies. But tho what is
delivered concerning All mighty Grecian South-sayers, who lived about the Time
of the Siege of Troy.
Mopsus, Tiresias, Amphiaraus, Who, being Outdone in his Art by Mopsus, died
for grief.
Calchas, Helenus should be supposed to have proceeded from a Fabulous License;
whom yet even Fable it self could not have set up for Augures.
South-sayers, had there really been no such People in those days; are we not,
however, sufficiently warned and enstructed, even by domestique Examples, to
rest satisfied of the Divinity of the Gods? Punishments and Judgments inflicted
upon several Persons, for setting l^ght by the South-sayers.
Will not the Temerity of P. Claudius, in the First Punique War, have effect
upon us? who, making merry with the notion of a Deity, when the Pullen were let
out of the Coop, and would not Feed, ordered them to be thrown into the Water,
that since they would not Eat, they might Drink: Which In contempt ^f the
Augurs.
Taunt, upon the Beating of his Fleet soon after, cost him many a Tear, and
occasioned a mighty Overthrow to the People of Rome. Or, what think you of his
Fellow-Consul.
Colleague Junius either, in the same War? Did not he Lose his Fleet in a
Tempest, by not obeying the Auspicia.
Tokens? Whereupon, P. Claudius was Sentenced by the People; and Junius killed
himself. Antipater; he was a Citizen of Rome, and an Annalist.
Coelius writes, that it was through neglect of Religion that C. Flaminius Fell
at A River by Petu^ia in Italy; where Hanibal Li^l'd Him, and 23000 Romans
more, and took 6000 Pris^ners.
Thrasimenus, with a grievous wound to the Commonwealth. Now, by the
Destruction of These men, it may be presumed that it was under the Conduct of
such as would give heed to Religionibus Paruissent.
Religious Presages that the State has been enlarged. And if we take the pains
to compare our own Circumstances with those of our Neighbors about us, we may
see our selves to be Equal, or, (perchanee) Inferior to them in Other matters;
but much above them in Religion, or the Worship of the Gods. Is That Lituus, an
Augural Instrument. For the manner of Taking the Augury see Godwyn 's Roman
Antiquities (Impr. an. 1655.) Page 49, 50.
wreathed, hookt Staff of A famous Roman South-sayer; who cut a Whetstone in
Two with a Rasor in sight of Tarquinius.
Actius Navius's, with which he Quartered out the Regions of the Vine, in order
to the finding of a Sow that was Lost, to be despised? I might have phansy'd so
perhaps, if King Hostilius had not menag'd the greatest Wars according to His
Augury. But through the Negligence and Indifference of our Noblemen, the
Discipline of the Augury is (now) omitted; the Veritas Auspiciorum.
Authority of the Auspicia is dis-regarded, and only a bare Species of it
retained. Insomuch that the most considerable Affairs of the Commonwealth,
even to the very Wars themselves, which have so great an Influence upon the
Public safety, are administer d without consulting any Auspicia at all: The
So these Auguries were t rm^', which were taken, by the Consul or Praetor; upon
the passing of a River.
Peremnia are not performed; no part of the The whole Military part of the Art
of Divination.
Acumina is observed; no The Augurs used to be Assembled upon the Nones of
every Month.
South sayers are convened; and so the If a Soldier, in time of War, ready to
give battle, called out 2 or 3 of his Fellows, and, in their hearing,
pronounced his Last Will and Testament, it was h^ld good for a great while; but
in the Au^hour's time, (it seems) not. See Godwyn (23 ab^ve) P. 233. And
Rosinu^ 's Romans Ant. (Impr. 1645.) P. 1014. 1267. 1556.
Testamenta in Procinctu are come to be Lost, to be quite out of Use: For our
Captains do usually give the Onset as soon as ever they have placed the Sea
Rosians P. 440, and deinceps.
Auspicia. The Devotion of former ti^es opposed to the Negligence of His days.
Whereas so great was the Power of Religion in the days of our Forefathers,
that some even of our very Generals have not stuck, with a Veil over their
Faces, and in a certain Form of Words, to make themselves The Manner how, and
the Occasions on which This was do^e, are at large set down by R^sinus Page
1584. 1585.
Devotes to the Immortal Gods, for the good of their Country. I could produce
diverse Prophesies of the Sibyls, sundry Answers of the Aruspicum; Diviners by
the Entrails of Beasts.
Priests, in proof of those things which no body ought to make any Question of.
But indeed, the Discipline of Our, and the Etrurian Diviners by Birds, and
Beasts, was confirmed, even by matter of Fact it self, in the Consulships of P.
Scipio, and C. Figulus. For when T. Gracchus (the Consul) sought to have them
chosen again, the An Offi^er (some^hing in the Nature of our Town-Clerks) that
collected the Peoples Vote^, in t^eir Assem^lies. See This at Large in R^sinus
P. 1046, 1047, etc.
Chief Rogator, upon To be Designed Consuls.
Nominating them, Died suddenly on the place: Gracchus, however, Upon what
accounts these Assemblies used to be broken up, or adjourned, See Godwyn, p.
142. And Rosinus, page 1049.
went on with the Assembly; but, perceiving that the Of the Regators sudden
Death.
Accident stuck with the People, as a matter of Religion, he brought it before
the Senate; and They ordered it to be Referred, according to To the College of
Southsayers.
Custom, in the like Cases: The South-sayers being Introduced, delivered in
Answer, that he was no Rogator Comitiorum.
Due Speaker of the Assembly. Gracchus being Nettled at This; (as I have heard
my Father tell the story) Say you so? (Cried he) Was not I duly qualified, who
Presided There as Consul, as Augur, and with the Auspicat^*
Approbation of the Auspicia too? Do you that are Thuscians and Barbarians,
because entrusted with the Roman Auspicia, pretend also to be Interpreters of
Assemblies? And so he presently commanded them forth. But not long after, he
wrote to the Of Augurs.
College out of his Of Sardinia.
Province, that, upon reading the Of Augural Ceremonies.
Books, he found he had committed a fault in the matter of his Taberna^ulum;
which the C^nsuls ^lwayes had wi hout the P merium, for the performance of
their Au^ural Duties upon the Assem^ly-dayes. How Super^titiou^ they were about
it, may be seen in R^sinus Page 1044.
Tent for South-saying; in that, entering the A Place without the City,
appropriated to the Use of the Augurs, and whereon it was not L^wful to Bu^^.
Pomaerium upon account of holding a Senate, as he passed, (in his Return) over
the same Pomaerium again, he forgot to Perform such Augural Ceremonies as were
prescribed by the Institutions of their Religion.
Auspicate; and that Therefore the Consuls were not duly Because he had not
observed the Rites of the Auspicia, at the time of their Election.
Elected. The Augurs laid the whole business before the Senate, that so the
Election might be made void; which was done accordingly. What greater Instance
can we desire then This? where we see one of the Wisest, and (if I may so say)
most excellent of men, choosing rather to confess an Error that he might have
concealed, then that the Guilt of such an Oversight should stick upon the
Government; and the Consuls to quit an Office of the highest Authority, then
hold it one moment in offense of Religion. The Dignity of the Augurs is
Illustrious; and for the Mystery of the Aruspicum Ars.
Altar, what is it but a Divine Art? Now when a man beholds Innumerable
Examples of the same quality, how can he choose but acknowledge that Gods there
are? An Argument drawn from Correlatives.
For since the Deityes have their Interpreters, the Being of Themselves is not
to be denied. An Objection supposed; and answered by a Physical Allusion.
But all things come not to pass (you will say) that are Foretold. At This rate,
because all Sick Folk do not recover, Therefore there can be no skill in
Remedies. A pretty Come off, about the Uncertainty of future Event.
The Gods show signs of what will fall out; and if any one Mistake them, it is
not the Nature of the Divinity, but the Conjecture of the Man that is to blame.
Therefore has the Persuasion been entertained amongst all People of all
Nations: For it is a Principle that is innate, and as it were engraven in all
our minds, the Essence of a Deity. What he is, Opinions are Various; but his
Existence is not gainsaid by any body.

Our Cleanthes assigned Four Causes, Cleanthes's Four Causes of a Natural
Impression of a Deity.
why there cannot but be a certain Notion of a Deity fashioned in the Hearts of
us all. First, he laid down That which I was just now speaking of, that might
be drawn from a For where there are Effects, there cannot but be a Cause too.
Foreknowledge of future Events. His Second, he took from the greatness of
those Advantages that we receive by the Temperature of the Air, the
Fruitfulness of the Earth, and the mighty store of other kinds of Benefits. The
Third, he inferred from the Terror and Astonishment that is wrought in us by
Thunder, Storms, Tempests, Snow, Hail, Desolation, Pestilence, Quakings, and
oftentimes Roarings of the Earth, Petrified Showers, and drops of Wet, that are
Bloody as it were; by Stones, and sudden Openings of the Ground; by Monstrous
and Praeter-natural Births in Man and Beast; by the sight of Blazing Stars in
the Firmament, and those which the Greeks term Cometae, the Latins, Crinitae;
[Hairy and Bearded] Such as, not many years since, in the The Civil Wars
betwixt O^tavi^s and Ciana; who slew the Former (the Fellow-Consul with him) in
his First Consulship, and in his F^urth, was himself stoned to death at Ancona.
Octavian War, were the Forehoders of great Calamities; by a Double Sun, which
happened (I have heard my Father say) when Tuditanus and Aquilius were Consuls;
and that very year also P. Africanus (another Sun) was Extinguished: At all
which, people being Affrighted, do entertain an Imagination of the Existence of
some certain Divine and Celestial Being. His Fourth (and That the weightiest of
all too) is drawn from the Uniformity of the Motion, and the Conversion of the
Heavens; the Distinction, Variety, Beauty, and Order of the Sun, Moon, and all
the Stars, the bare sight whereof is enough to satisfy that they are not the
works of As the Epicureans conceipted.
Chance. A Simile.
For as, upon entering any House, School, or Court, and observing the Fashion,
Manner, and Appointment of all things there, a body cannot judge These to have
been effected without any Prime Agent.
Cause at all, but presumes some One to be over them, and to whom Obedience is
paid: So, in the Case of such wonderful Motions and Vicissitudes of so many,
and of the Orders of so great things, which Boundless and Infinite Age has not
any way prejudiced; he must needs much sooner conclude, that these mighty
Agitations of Nature, are governed and directed by some or other (...).
Providential Wisdom.

Chrysippus, (truly) was a most Sharpwitted man; and yet such is the quality of
what he delivers, that it rather seems to have been taught him by pure Nature,
then found out by himself. Chrysippus's Argument, drawn from a Collation of
Effects.
If there be any thing in the Universal World (says he) which is above Human
Art, Skill, or Ability to Accomplish; certainly, whatever does Atcheive That,
cannot but be Better then Man: Now things Celestial, and Those that are of
Sempiternal Order, are not to be made by Man; That (therefore) which does
effect them, is more Valuable then He: And what can This more fitly be called,
then a Deity. The Reason of the Collation.
For, if there be no Gods at all, Wha^ in Nature can be more Considerable then
Man? Since He (alone) is indu'd with Reason; then Which, nothing can be more
Excellent. But for a body to conceit that not any thing in Nature is
Preferable to Himself, were a most Fond Piece of Arrogance: Something or other
Better there cannot (then) but be; Consequently, there is undoubtedly a God.
Another Simile, to know the Lord of Nature.
When you behold a fair and stately House either, you are not to be wrought
into a Persuasion that it was built for Mice, and Weasels; even tho you see not
the Master of it. And would you not show your self miserably Weak indeed
(then,) should you Compute upon so admirable an Appointment of the Universe, so
great a Variety and Beauty of Celestial things, so mighty a Bulk and Power of
Land and Water to be All matter only of Your Accommodation, and not the
Mansions of the Immortal Gods?

Is not This Plain enough also; A Collation of Higher things with Lower; to
insinuate that Man's Mind derives from Ab^ve, and is Demonstrative of the
Existence of a Deity.
that what is Higher, is still more Perfect: And that the Earth is Lowest of
all, and compassed about with a very thick Air? Whence, as we observe it to
fare in such sort with diverse Cities and Regions, that the Wits and Faculties
of the People are the Duller, because of the Fogginess of the Climate; the self
same thing happens to Mankind in General, for that they are placed upon the
Earth, which is the grossest Quarter of the World: And yet, from the force even
of Human Policy, may the Existence of a certain Wisdom, and That more profound
too, and divine, be presum d upon; For Where (as says Socrates in Who
represents Socrates teaching that it came from Above.
Xenophon) did Man get This of his? Moreover, if any one ask how we come by
that Humor and Warmth which is diffused through the Body, that terrene
solidness of ^arts, and (in short) that Vital Spirit of ours; it is manifest,
that some of These we derived from the Earth, some from the Water, some from
Fire, and some again from the Air, wherein we Breath. But Then, for That, which
far exceeds the Other, Reason, (as I term it) or (in more Words, if you please)
the Mind, Understanding, Cogitation, Prudence; Where found we it? Whence had we
it? The World inferred, as upon a Consequence, to be in^u'd with a Reason every
way Complete and Perfect.
Shall the World have all the rest, and yet want This one thing, which is of
the greatest Value? Unquestionably, Nothing is, and not only is, but can so
much as be imagined to be Better, Fairer, or more Excellent then the Universe.
And, if Wisdom and Reason are most to be accounted of; That which is
confessedly the Best, cannot but be indu'd with them.

The Harmonious Relation of Natural things urged in proof of a Deity.
How comes there to be so agreeable, consentient, and persevering an Natural
Communication.
Alliance of things? (surely no man can deny what I say!) Could the Earth come
to be covered, ar one time, with Flowers; and, at another, with Ice and Snow?
Or the Approches and Retreats of the Sun be known, amids such a Number of
things that are in continual self-variation, by the In Capricorn, and Cancer.
Solstices, and Winter-seasons? Or the The Tides, that by coming and going,
seem as it were to Breath.
Breathings of the Deep, and Compressions of the Waters be moved by the Wax or
Wain of the Moon? Or yet, the Different Courses of the Stars be maintained by
the same Rolling of the whole Heaven? That all This (I say) should come to
pass; that there should be so harmonious a Concert of all the Parts of the
World amongst themselves, could not (certainly) but be Impossible; were they
not bound up and contained by One Divine, and Constant Spirit.

These things, when handled in the free and distinct Method that I have in my
Thought, will be the less obnoxious to the Cavils of the Who Quarreled all
things.
Academiques: Tho, indeed, at The Founder of the Stoical S^ct.
Zeno's scant and straight rate of Couching them, they lie the more Open to
Exception. For as a Running Stream is seldom or never corrupted, but standing
Water easily: So, by a flowing Vein of Expression, the Errors of the
Reprehender are washed away; whilst the Narrowness of a Pincht course of
speaking is scarce able to B^ Reason of its Obscurity.
defend it self. For Thus did Zeno Press all that I dilate upon. Whatever Acts
by Reason, (says he) is to be preferred to that which does not: But nothing is
Better then the World; Consequently, it makes use of it. By the same way of
Reasoning, may it also be proved to be Wise; to be Blessed; and to be Eternal:
For all these things being more Valuable, then are those which want them; and
naught Preferable to the World; it necessarily follows that it is a That
produces and conserves all things.
God. And That, Thus too. No part of any thing that wants Sense can be Capable
of Perception, But some Parts of the Universe are Sensible; Therefore is not
the World destitute of sense. He proceeds, and urges yet more Closely. An
Argument drawn fr m the Definition of Generation.
Nothing (says he) that has neither Sense nor Reason of its Own, can generate
what is qualified with Both: But the World produces things indu'd with Life and
Reason; And Therefore it must needs, it self, be Animated, and participate of
Reason. He also concludes the Argument with a Similitude, (as his Manner is)
Thus. If well-tuned ipes are made out of the Olive Tree, it is not to be
doubted but there is a certain Innate skill of Piping in the Tree it self. Or,
if the Plane Tree produce good Fiddle-strings, the Presumption is the same;
Viz. That a Natural Musical Virtue is inherent in those Plane Trees. And why
then may not the World be deemed Animated, and Wise; when such as are indu'd
with Life and Wisdom do come forth of it?

The First Topique, (The Existence of a Deity ^pr^^'d by Argumen^s drawn from
Nature.
BUT since I am fallen into a different way of Proceeding, from what I spoke of
in the beginning; (For I denied that this First Topique required to have much
said upon it, in regard every body could not but see that Gods there are) I will
confirm the Point it self by Arguments drawn from Nature. For so it is, that
whatever is capable of Nourishment and Increase, contains within it an Efficacy
of Natural Heat; without which, it could neither be Nourished, nor Grow. For
things that are Hot and Fiery, are agitated and impelled by their proper
Motion: But such as are nourished and increased, are indu'd with a temperate
and convenient Fervency; which, so long as it abides in us, Sense and Life do
remain also; but when This is chilled, and extinguished, we our selves are
immediately put out and perish. Now, by Reasons much of a sort with These it
is, that our Cleanthes shows what a great proportion of Heat is inherent in all
Bodies: For he will not allow that there is any Food so gross, as that it is
not to be Digested within the compass of a Day and a Night; and those very
Excrementitious parts of it that Nature rejects, are not without some degree of
Warmth too, any more then the rest. Even the Veins and Arteries have a kind of
sparkling in them, as of a Spiritous and Fiery Motion: And it has been often
observed, that when the Heart of any Creature is new plucked forth, it pants
with such a Quivering, that it seems to have the Activity of Fire. Whatever
therefore, ( Animal, or Vegetable,) has any Life at all; derives it from the
Warmth that is included in it. Whence it may be gathered, that That Nature
wherein this Heat is Embodied, has within it a certain enlivening Virtue, that
conveys it self thorough the whole World.

And This will better appear upon a more Acute Explication of this General
Fiery Property, that pierces into all things. I will therefore take a view of
the several parts of the World, which are sustained by means of the greatest
Heat. An Exemplification ^f the Matter, by the Earth; which is supposed to be
Lower then the Water, and the Lowest of all the Elements.
And First, Thus much may plainly be discerned in things of an Earthy
substance; For we see that Fire is produced by the striking of one stone
against another; that Earth sends forth a kind of smoke, when new turned up;
And that Water is drawn Warm (in Winter time especially) out of Well-springs.
This happens by reason of the Heat that is shut up in the Caverns of the Earth;
and which, upon the Contraction of the Water in Frosty Weather, is kept the
closer in. There might a great deal be said, and sundry Proofs urged to
demonstrate, that all things that spring out of the Earth, and those Seeds
themselves, which, being There generated, and inherent in Plants, are contained
in the same, do receive their Rise and Growth from the temperament of Heat.

That there is also a certain Mixture of Heat in the Water; both the Fluidness,
and the Effusion of it, do declare; for it could neither be turned into Ice by
Cold, nor Thickened by Snow and Frost, did it not dilate it self into Flowings,
upon being Thawed and made Liquid by the Heat that is mingled with it. Thus
does it become hard, by Northern and other Cold Blasts; and it softens again,
and is dissolved by the Contrary. The Heat of the Seas supposed to be Natural,
not adventitious.
The Seas too, when tossed by the Winds, are Warmed to such a degree, that it
is easy to apprehend, that even this great body of Moisture it self is not
without a certain Heat included in it. Neither yet, is this Warmth to be
reputed only external and adventitious; for it is raised up out of the Inward
parts of the Deep, by Agitation: This happens to Our Bodies also, when they are
heated by Stirring and Exercise.

The very Air it self, tho Naturally the Coldest of all, is (however) in no
wise destitute of Warmth; much Heat being mixed even with It also. It proceeds
from the Exhalation that arises from the Water; of which, some of it may be
taken for a kind of Vapor; deriving its Being from the Motion of that Heat
which is contained in the same. A Resemblance of This may be seen in Liquors
made boiling hot by the putting of Fire under them.

Now, as for the Fourth Part, or They held the Whole Universe to be a kind of
F^fth Element.
Element, that is yet behind; it is altogether fervid, the whole Nature of it;
and communicates vital and salutary Heat to all other things. Whence I
conclude, that, since the several Quarters of the World do subsist by means of
The Force of Heat.
Heat, it cannot but be thorough a certain Propriety of equal and moderate
Warmth, that the Universe it self has for so long a time been sustained: And
this so much the rather too, in regard it may be presumed, that this hot and
fiery Quality is infused into every Nature, to the intent that it might be
capable of breeding and begetting its Like; For it is from This, that Living
Creatures, and whatever is fixed in the Earth by the Root, must necessarily
receive Birth and Augmentation.

So that it is Nature that binds together the Four Parts of the World, and
preserves it; and that not without the Assistance of Sense and Reason neither:
For every Being that is not Single, and void of Qualities, but annexed and
conjoined to Another, must needs be indu'd with some one Virtue of an
Excellency paramount to all the rest; As, Reason, in Man; in Beasts, something
Analogical to it; from whence the Appetites of things do take their Rise. As
for Trees, and all that grow out of the Earth, Their Principality is supposed
to be contained in their Roots. Now That I term Principality, which the Greeks
call (...); then which, nothing, in its respective Kind, can, or even ought to
be more Valuable. That (then) wherein the Principality of Universal Nature
resides, cannot but be the most Excellent, and deserving of Authority and
Dominion over all things.

From the Parts, to the Whole.
We see that Parts of the Universe (for there is nothing in the whole World that
is not a Portion thereof) are furnished with Sense and Reason: And therefore,
that Particular of it wherein its Sovereignty abides, is (surely) indu'd with
them likewise; and That too, in a more large and admirable proportion. So that
it inevitably follows, that the World is qualified with Wisdom; and That Nature
which holds all things in its Embrace, with a Perfection of Reason:
Consequently, the World is a God, and the Powers thereof are contained in
Universal Nature; ^t being termed both the World, and a God.
Divine Nature.

As for the Heat also of the Universe; Heat in Universal Nature.
it is more Pure, Clear, and Lively, and so more apt to move the Senses, then
is This Warmth of Ours, whereby those things that are Familiar to us, are
continued, and increased. Since Man and Beast (then) have This Heat in them,
and so come to be Sensible, and Animated; it were Absurd to affirm that the
World, which is indu'd with a more complete, bright, free, with a most quick
and volatile Ardour, is without any Sense at all; especially since the Heat
that appertains to the Universe is not agitated by Another, or by outward
force; but is spontaneously moved of it self. For is any thing of greater Might
then the World; that it should be able to force and stir up the Heat that it is
furnished with? Plato's Authority pressed in confirmation of what he delivers.
Plato (who passes for a little God among the Philosophers) is of opinion that
there are Two sorts of Motion, the One Proper, the Other External; and that
That which of its own accord, is actuated by its self, is more Divine, then the
Other, that is moved from Without. This Voluntary sort he places only in our
Minds, and conceives that from Them the The Motion of Universal Nature.
Original of Motion is derived. Wherefore, since all Motion arises from the
Heat of the World; and this Ardour it self moves freely, and not upon any
foreign Force; it must needs be (Animus) a Spirit: And so it follows, that the
World is Animated. And that it is also provided of an Understanding, may be
inferred from Hence, that the Universe is certainly more Excellent then any
other Natural Being: For as we have never a Limb at all that is not Inferior
to our whole Body; so likewise cannot Universal Nature but be of greater Value,
then any one Part of the same. Which, if so; it must necessarily be indu'd with
Wisdom: For, were it not; Man, (who is a Part of the World) because furnished
with Reason, could not but be more worthy then the whole World it self.

Thus either, if we think fit to proceed from the Minerals and Vegetables.
Last and Imperfectest Beings to the Highest, and most Absolute, we shall
undoubtedly come up to the Nature of the Gods: Four Degrees of Nature.
For in the First place, we find that Nature As by a kind of Essence put under
them.
upholds those things which spring from the Earth; whereunto She has extended
her Bounty no further, then barely to provide for their Growth and support. On
Beasts she has bestowed Sense and Motion; and a certain Appetite that inclines
them to what may be for their Health, and to shun that which is Hurtful. To Man
she has been the more Liberal, in This; that she has given him Reason, whereby
to govern his Passions; which are sometimes to be curbed in, and otherwhiles
remitted. The Fourth, and Highest Degree, belongs to those Powers that are Good
and Wise by Nature; and who had, from the Beginning, a Reason Constant and
Rectified beyond the Pitch of what Humanity can pretend to; and, Therefore, it
is to be ascribed to a God; that is, to the World. Wherein this perfect and
absolute Reason cannot but be inherent, in regard there is not any Ordination
or Appointment of things, but (undeniably) has somewhat Final and Consummate:
For as Nature, if at Liberty, fulfils her Course (we see) even in a Vine, or in
a Sheep, by a peculiar way of her own; and as Painting, Architecture, and the
rest of the Arts, are not without a certain End of Perfection: So is it much
more needful that in Universal Nature there be something or other Complete and
Absolute. For, Particular Natures are liable to sundry external Accidents, that
may obstruct their progress to Perfection; but Universal Nature naught can be
able to hinder; because it does it self contain and bind up all Single ones.
That therefore must needs be the Fourth, and Highest Degree, whereunto no
contrary Force can reach. And in This Degree it is, that the Nature of all
things is placed; The World.
Which, since such it is, as to Influence all things without any Impediment, it
must necessarily be indu'd with Understanding, and also with The highest
Perfection.
Wisdom: For what could argue more Ignorance then either a Denial of that
Nature to be the Best, which Comprehends all others; or, being the most
Valuable, not to suppose it, First, to be Animated; Then to participate of
Reason and Understanding; and Lastly, of Wisdom? For how Without partaking of
the respective Excellencies of all the Four Degrees.
else could it be the most Considerable? Were it only Qualified after the
Manner of Trees or Brutes, it might be taken rather for the Least, then for the
Most Excellent: Nay, and tho it did partake of Reason, and yet were not
Originally Wise; the Condition of the Universe would, in some sort, be
Inferior to That of Ours: For it is possible for Us to come to be Wise; but if
the World was, for an infinite space of time past, destitute of Wisdom, it can
never (certainly) attain to it. And therefore, it will be Worse then Man. But
since it were absurd to think so, it must be accounted Wise from the Beginning;
and a God. For, excepting This, there is nothing but what is defective in some
respect or other, and not every way apt, full, and perfect in all its Degrees
and Proportions: For, as the ^overing (as Chrysippus wittily hints) was made
for the Buckler, the Scabbard for the Sword; so, bating the World, all things
else were created for the sake of Others: As the Grass, and productions of the
Earth, for Beasts; They, for the Use of Man; the Horse, for Carriage; the Ox,
for the Plow; The Dog for the Chase, and to keep Watch; And Man himself was
born, to Contemplate That Power in the Universe, and to Imitate it; not being
absolutely Complete, but only a certain Being in the Third Degree, which is
next to the Highest of all.
Particle of Perfection: Whereas the That is, the Circle of the Sky, that
envirous all things.
World, in that it comprizes all the Parts, and every thing is contained
therein, is entirely Perfect. What (then) can be wanting to That which is the
Best of all? But nothing is more Estimable then Reason, and Understanding:
Consequently, it cannot be destitute of These neither.

The same Chrysippus, therefore, did very Well again, in proving, by way of
Similitude, that the Abilities of each Individual are generally the greater,
when come to its full Growth; As of a Horse, then a Colt; a Dog, then a Whelp;
a Man, then a Boy. And Then too, whatever is Best in all the World, must needs
be inherent in some or other Complete and Absolute Nature: But nothing is more
Perfect then the Universe; nor Better then The Perfection of all Powers.
Virtue: Consequently, Virtue properly belongs to the As being a Complete
Essence; resulting from all its Po^enci^s
World. An Argument from the Min ur.
For Human Nature is not Consummate; and yet Virtue is effected even in It. How
much more easily may it be so (then) in the Universe? Virtue, Therefore, is
Inherent in it; Consequently, it is That is; indu'd with a Divine Nature; for
Plato said the Epithete Wise was only Proper to the Divinity.
Wise; and so a God.

HAVING thus thoroughly Viewed the Divinity of the World; you are to attribute
as much to the Stars: For they are generated out of the most pure, and noble
parts of the Sky; have no mixture in them of a Contrary Nature; are of a
substance altogether Fiery, and Transparent: And therefore even They also may
most justly be presumed to be indu'd with That is; with Animal, Sensitive,
Intellectual Faculties; which are the respective Excellencies of the Three
Degrees before reckoned upon.
Life, Sense, and Intelligence.

Now, that they are absolutely of a Fiery Nature, Cleanthes is of opinion may
be confirmed by the Testimony of Two of the Senses, the Sight, and the Touch.
For the Heat and Brightness of the Sun, cannot but far exceed all material
Fire; in that it shines so far and wide over the face of the whole Earth; and
as to its Touch, it has a power not only to Warm, but many times to Scorch:
Neither of which it were able to do, if it were not of a Fiery Property.
Seeing, therefore, (says he) that the Sun is Fiery, and fed and nourished with
the Vapors of the Ocean; (For no Fire can subsist without some Nourishment or
other) it must necessarily either be like that Fire which we make use of for
profit and sustenance; or That, which is contained in the Bodies of Animated
Beings. Now, as for This Fire of ours, which is requisite to the Convenience of
Life, it is a Consumer and Devourer; Confounding and Ruinating whatever it
catches hold of: Whereas the vital and salutary Heat of the Body conserves,
cherishes, augments, sustains all things; and indues with Sense. Wherefore, he
makes it to be obvious Which of these two sorts of Fire the Sun is of; in
regard It likewise occasions All to flourish, and every thing in its respective
Kind, to come to Maturity.

Since the Heat (then) of the Sun is of the same Temper with that Warmth which
abides in Living Creatures; the Sun it self must, Consequently, be indu'd with
Life: And also the Stars, that are constituted of that Celestial Ardour which
is termed the Sky. The Better the Part of the World, the more Noble the
Creature that is bred in^^.
And whereas some Creatures are bred in the Earth; some in the Water; some in
the Air: Aristotle holds it very absurd to conceit that no Animals at all are
generated in that Part of the World, which seems to be most Because a Fiery
Quality causes Life.
proper to produce them. Now the Stars do abide in the Firmament; which, being
the most subtle part, and still vigorous, and in agitation, whatever Animal
proceeds from it cannot but excel in Quickness of Sense, and of Motion.
Wherefore, since they are generated in the Sky, it is but meet that they should
be indu'd with Sense and Understanding: Whence it will follow, that they are to
be To have a Divine Nature.
reckoned in the number of the Gods. For it may be observed, that such as live
in Countries of a clear and thin Air, are commonly sharper Witted, and of
better Intellectuals then those that are born in a Thick and Foggy Climate. And
the nature of the Diet also is held to have some effect upon the Wit, which
proceeds from Heat.
Edge of the Mind. Probable therefore it is, that the Stars are of an Excellent
Understanding; because they both inhabit the Ethereal Quarter of the Universe,
and are fed with the Humors of the Water and the Earth, purified and
extenuated thorough so great a Distance.

But the Order and Constancy of the Stars are yet more eminently Declaratory of
their Sense and Understanding: For naught can be moved according to In a
Regular and constant Order.
Rule and Number without Advice, and such a Consideration as has nothing Rash
in it, Various or Fortuitous. Now the Course, and eternal Stability of the
Stars, cannot be expressive of Some held her to be (...), and without Reason.
See more of This in Page 120, and 121, of this Book.
Nature, because they are perfectly Rational; nor of Fortune neither, which,
being a Friend to Change, will not away with steadiness: It follows (therefore)
that they are moved of Themselves, and by virtue of their own Sense and *
Divinity. and Conse^^tly, are ^mated, Sen^, and Ra^al. ^atural, Un^ral, and
^ntary Mo^^^
Nor is Aristotle (again) unworthy of Commendation, for conceiving that
whatever is capable of Motion is moved by Nature, by Force, or by Will. Now the
Sun, Moon, and all the Stars are moved. As for those things that are moved by
Nature, they are either carried Downward by their Weight; or Upward, by reason
of their Lightness: Neither of which happens to the Stars, for Their Motion is
Circular. Nor yet can they be said to be moved against Nature, by means of some
greater Force; for what can be more Powerful then she? It Remains (then) that
the Motion of the Stars is Voluntary.

Now, if a man be satisfied of This, it would not only argue in him Ignorance,
but Impiety, to Deny that Gods there are. And truly, there is not much
difference betwixt gainsaying it, and depriving them of all Procuration.
Intention, and As the Epicureans did.
Action: For, I take it, one that does nothing, cannot properly be said to Be.
The First Point concluded with an Asseveration of the Existence of a Deity.
Wherefore the Existence of a Deity, is a matter so clear, that no body in his
Wits can well make any Question of it.

The Second Topique, Begun from Attention, and Difficulty.
. 2. WE are (Next) Therefore to Examine what kind of Nature they are of: In
which Consideration, it is very hard to carry our i. e. advance them from Sense
to Reason.
Thoughts from the Appearances of things to our Eyes. This Difficulty has so
far wrought upon the more Vulgar sort, and upon some The Epicureans, who judged
by Sense, as well as the Common People.
Philosophers (also) that are little above them, that they cannot take in any
notion of a Deity, but from the Idea of a Man. Which light and unsound Opinion
having been confuted by Cotta, there is no need for me to say any thing to it.
The Former Hypotheses repeated, and accommodated to the Prenotion of a God.
But, since, by a certain Impulse of Spirit, we are prepossessed with an
Assurance that Such God is, as, First, to be Animated; and Then, not to be
surpassed by ought in Nature: I see not what may be more accommodable to This
Presension and Notion of ours, then ( First of all) to take the World it self
(then which nothing can be more Excellent) to be indu'd with Life, and to be a
Deity. Epicurus (who truly was far from being Lucky at a Jest; Or worthy of his
Athens, whi h was the Emporium of neat Speaking; but Epicurus (who was of it)
was a plain and vulgar spoken man.
Country) may make as merry with This as he pleases; and avow himself unable
to conceive what a Round, Voluble God should be: Yet shall he never beat me out
of The belief of a God.
it: Nay, and his very self too, Proves as much: For even He allows that Gods
there are, because there must needs be some or other admirable Nature, then
which nothing can be Better. Zeno's Argument Repeated.
Now, then the World there is not any thing Better, sure: And it is moreover
unquestionable, that whatever is Animated, and partakes of Sense, Reason and
Understanding, is more valuable then that which has them not: Whence it
follows, that the Universe is Animated, and participates of Sense, Reason and
Understanding. And the same Argument is Conclusive of its Divinity, likewise.

But This shall (anon) be made Plainer out, by the Which manifest an Efficient
Cause.
Works themselves that the World effects: In the mean time, I wish (Velleius!)
you would forbear bewraying the great want of Learning in your The Epicureans.
Party. The Sphere pleaded for, against Epicurus.
To You the Cone (you tell us) the Cylinder, or the Pyramid, seem to be
Handsomer then the Sphere. Truly you have set up a new opinion, even of what is
agreeable to the Sight. But let it be so then, that these are more Beautiful,
to the Eye alone: Tho yet, I do not think they are. For what can be more
Taking, then That only Figure, which contains all other Forms Because of its
Circumference.
within it self; and which can have nothing of In-equality in it, nothing to
give Offense, nothing cut into Angles and Breaches, Nor any Swelling or
Hollowness? And whereas there are Two sorts of Figures that are preferable to
the Rest, the Globe (for so I am for expressing (...)) in Trina Dimensione
comprehensis.
Solids, and the Circular or Orbicular (the Greeks term it (...)) in Duas
Dimensiones hab^ntibus.
Planes; it is these Two Forms alone, that have all their respective Parts
Equal to one another, and the Extreme as far off from the Center as That is
from the Top: Then which, nothing can be more Perfect.

But if you understand not These things, in regard you never touched that That
the Mathematicians drew their Schemes in. That is through your great Ignorance
of the Mathematiques.
Learned Dust: Yet will not even Physiques teach you Thus much, that this
Uniformity of Motion, and Constancy of Order could not have been maintained in
any other Figure? So that it is most Unlearnedly done of you to give out (as
you usually do) that it is not certain whether the Universe it self be Round or
no; because it is possible for it to be of another shape; and that there are
Innumerable Worlds, some of them of a different Form: Which, had but Epicurus
learnt how many Understood Mathematiques
Two and Two makes, undoubtedly he would never have delivered. But while he i.
e. pronounces upon the Supreme Good.
judges what is Best, by the Palate; he considers not (as Ennius says) the
Palace of Heaven. Heaven and Heavenly Bodies proved to be Round.
For, there being Two kinds of Stars, One whereof pass from East to West by
Innumerable Spaces, without ever directing their Motion any other way; but the
The Planets.
Other, in the same Latitudes of the Zodiac.
Compasses and Courses, fulfill Two Constant From Rise to Set, and from Set
(again) to Rise.
Turnings: From both These, as well the Volubility of the World, (which could
not consist with any other then a Round Form) as the Circular Circumferences of
the Stars, are understood.

And First, for the Sun; Day and Night, Summer and Winter caused by the Sun.
(which is the Prince of the Stars) it is moved in such manner, that, sending
forth a great deal of Light upon the Earth, sometimes one part of the same,
Otherwhiles, Another, comes to be By the Interposition of the same (...).
darkened; For the very shadow of it Interposing, causes Night; the Intervals
Whereof, are Equal to those of Day. By the moderate Approches and Retreats of
the same Sun are the Proportions of Heat and Cold tempered: For the Circuits of
it, in 365 i. e. 365 days and nights, and 6 hours (which days etc are measured
by the Course of the Sun) do make up a year.
Defects of the Orbs, (a Fourth part of a day being commonly added) do complete
an Annual Conversion: And bending its Course one while to the North, and
another to the South, occasions Summer and Winter; and those two Spring and
Autumn.
Seasons likewise, One of which is adjoined to the End of Winter, the Other, of
Summer. Thus, from four Mutations of Seasons, are the Beginnings and Causes of
all things, that are bred upon the Land, or in the Water, derived.

The Moon finishes the Yearly Courses of the Sun in the spaces of a Month; and
still casts the Dimmest Light, when she comes nearest to it; and the fullest,
when she is furthest off. Neither does she suffer a Change in her Form or
Figure only, one while by Waxing, another, by Lessening again, in a i. e. when
in conjunction with the Sun.
Recourse to her Original: but in her Site and Region too; which is sometimes
Southern, and at other times Northern. In the Course of the Moon (also) there
is a certain Resemblance of a Summer and As having its Ascensions and
Descensions, as well as the Sun.
a Winter-Solstice: And many things do flow and proceed from her, that
contribute both to the Nourishment of Animated Beings, and to the Increase,
Growth, and attainment to Maturity of whatever arises out of the Earth.

But most especially admirable are the Courses of those Five Stars, which are
untruly termed Wandering: For nothing can be said to Wander, that, thorough all
Eternity, preserves its Advances and Retreats, and other Firm and Constant
Motions. Now, that which is chiefly wonderful in the Stars we speak of, is,
that one while they Abscond; Appear another; Sometimes go away, otherwhiles
come again; Now run The Sun.
before, By and By follow after; One while are moved swifter; Another slower;
and sometimes (also) stir not at all, but, for a certain space And Then, they
are termed Stational.
stand quite still. From the unequal Motions of These, the Mathematicians have
Nominated the Plato's Common Period of all the Planets, and Restitution of them
to the state they were in at the beginning of the World.
Great Year; which is Then effected, when the Sun, Moon, and Five Planets,
having all finished their Compasses, are brought about to the same state and
proportion amongst themselves, that they were in at the Beginning. In how long
a time This comes to pass, is much Disputed: Tho yet it cannot but be certain
and Determinate. The necessity of a definite Conversion proved.
For that which is called the Star of Saturn, ((...), by the Greeks) and is the
farthest off from the Earth, usually compleats its Period in about Thirty
years. In its Course it working a great deal, after a Transcendent manner; some
times preceding, at Others, following behind; one while Hiding it self, at
Night; another, Appearing again, toward Morning; alters not one jote in
Sempiternal spaces of time, but still produces the same Things, within the same
Compasses. Below This, and nearer to the Earth, is the Star of Jupiter (termed
(...)) moved; which fulfills the same Orb of the Twelve Signs, in Twelve Years;
and in its Course, effects the like Varieties with the Star of Saturn. The Star
of Mars ((...)) holds the Orb next below This; which Surveys the same Circle
with the Two Higher in the space of four and twenty Months, wanting six days,
as I take it. Below This, is the Star of Mercury, (called (...), by the Greeks)
which commonly surrounds the Sign-bearing Orb in about a Years Compass; and
never departs further from the Sun, then the Distance of One Sign; going before
it, at some times, and Otherwhiles following after. The lowest of all the Five
Wanderers, and nearest to the Earth, is the Star of Venus, which is termed
(...), in Greek; and, in Latin, Lucifer, when it goes before the Sun, and
Hesperus, when it follows it: It finishes its Course in a Year; views the
Breadth and Length of the Sign-bearing Circle, as do the other Above it; and
never goes further off from the Sun, then the space of Two Signs; some times
preceding, otherwhiles coming behind it. Now, how there should be this
Constancy in the Stars, so great a Concordance of Seasons, throughout all
Eternity, amids such various Motions, without a Mind, Reason, Advice; I am not
able to conceive: Since (therefore) we see that the Stars are indu'd with
These; we cannot but reckon even Them too, to be of the number of the Gods.

The Fixed stars of equal Divinity with the Planets.
The same Prudence, and Understanding, is likewise discernible in those Stars,
which are called Fixed: For their Conversion is Daily, Uniform, and Constant:
and they neither have their The Stoiques would not allow them to be fixed in the
Sky; but supposed them to be Animated, and moved Voluntarily.
Courses in the Firmament; nor are fastened in the Heaven, as most, for lack of
Natural knowledge, do affirm: Since the Sky is not of such a Nature, as, by its
own power, to force about the Stars that it environs: For being Thin,
Transparent, and indu'd with a Suffusion of Heat, in the Temper of it, it seems
not to be of a Composition proper for the containing, holding of the Stars. So
that They have a Sphere of their own, that is Free, and Separate from Etherial
Conjunctions. And their Courses, being Indeficient and Perpetual, do speak out
that there is in them a Divine Mind and Virtue. In so much that whoever
perceives not These very Stars (also) to be Divinely qualified; seems to be
without any Sense at all.

In Heaven (then) there is nothing of Chance, Temerity, Inconstancy or
Falsehood; but Contrariwise, perfect Order, Verity, Reason, Stability: And
whatever things have none of These, being Vain, Counterfeit, and full of
Error, have their Course nearer the Earth, beneath the Moon, which is the
Lowest of Heavenly Bodies.
all, and Versatur.
borders upon the same. Wherefore, he that conceits the admirable Order, and
Incredible Constancy of the Heavens, from whence all Health and Conservation do
arise, to be without Understanding; is to be deemed void of Understanding
himself. So that I cannot (I think) do better, then, (a Principe) from the (...)
Luckiest of Men at finding out the Truth, to derive (Principium) the Beginning
of this Dispute.

Zeno (therefore) Defines Nature af er such a manner, as to make her to be
(...) kind (...) (...)
Artificial Fire, proceeding M^th ^^^ually to Generation. For he holds it to be
highly Consonant to Art, to i. e. To act and perfect Generation.
Create and Beget: And that such Operations as, in the Exercise of Our Arts,
are wrought by the Hand; are by Nature, or (as I have expressed it) by
Artificial Heat, (which holds the Mastery over all the rest of the Arts) much
more dexterously effected. And indeed, This way, every Particular Nature is
Artificial; in that it advances in a kind of Path or Tract (I may say) peculiar
to it. As for the Nature of the Universe, it self (which binds up and comprizes
all things) it is (by the same Zeno) termed not Artificial only, but a Complete
Artist; purveying for whatever may be Commodious, and letting slip no
Opportunity to That end. And as each Single Nature (respectively) derives its
Being, Growth, and Support from its proper Seed; so, the Nature of the World is
Voluntary in all its Motions, and has those Affections and Appetites which the
Greeks call (...); exerting Actions consonant to the same, in such manner as do
we our selves who are i. e. Placed under the Rule of a Necessity.
moved by Mind and Sense. Since the Mind of the Universe (then) is such as
This; and so, may rightly be termed Providence, (in Greek (...);) To these ends
(chiefly) it is that her Care and Foresight are directed; Viz. First, that the
World be in the Of a Form most apt.
best condition (possible) to persevere: Then, that it stand not in Be not
obnoxious to any Necessity, whence Deformity is contracted.
need of any thing: But most especially, that it have all the Advantages of
Beauty and Ornament, in Perfection.

Thus much, for the Universal World; The World and the Stars insisted upon, to
the End that the Works and Actions of the Gods might be understood.
as also, for the Stars: Because, now, it is even clear enough, that there is a
great Number of Deities; and not such neither, as do nothing at all; nor yet
effect their Enterprises with Toil and Labor. The Quality of the Bodies of the
Stars (which he terms Gods) Described.
For they are not made up of Veins, Nerves and Bones; do not use a Diet that
might occasion the Contraction of Humors, either too Sharp, or too Gross; nor
are they of That Temper of Body as to be afraid of Falls or Blows, or in Danger
of Diseases through a Defatigation of their Limbs: (all which Epicurus being
mightily concerned about, feigned the Gods to be only (...).
Lineal, and to be void of Action) But, being of great Brightness, and
Excellency of Form, and placed in the purest Region of the Heaven, their
Courses are after such a fashion disposed and modified, that they seem to move,
as by Consent, for the Support and Conservation of all things.

IT was not without Ground neither, Thus far, of the Quality of the Heavenly
Gods; Now, he treats of That of Men, who, for the great good they did in their
Lifetime were reckoned upon as Deities.
that the Wise men of the Grecians, and Our own Ancestors too, have Canonized
and set up many Upon This point, see Godwyn's To. Ant. p. 35, 36, etc.
other sorts of Deities, in consideration of the greatness of their Benefits:
For they were of Belief that whatever happened to become eminently Advantageous
to Human kind, proceeded from the Goodness and Bounty of the Gods toward Men:
Men and Things of any Extraordinary Virtue, Canonized for Deities.
And therefore they both applied the Name of the God to the Invention that he
was the Author of; [Thus Corn is termed Ceres; and Wine, Liber; whence That of
Terence, Without Bread,
Ceres, and Wine,
Liber Lust.
Venus Starves;] And also to Things, wherein any transcendent Virtue is
contained, gave such Appelations, as to bespeak the Virtue it self, to be a
Deity. Thus we find Faith and Wisdom Dedicated in the Capitol; the Latter by
Aemilius Scaurus, for Faith had been Consecrated before, by Atilius Calatinus.
You see the Temple of Virtue, and that of Honor also repaired by M. Marcellus,
having many years ago, in the War with the Lombards, been erected by Q.
Maximus. And so for Help, Safety, Concord, Liberty, Victory; of all which, the
Efficacy being so Excellent, that they could not but be under the Dominion of a
God, therefore the very Thing it self obtained the Name of a Deity. Upon the
same score are the Appellations of Lust.
Cupid, Sensual Pleasure,
Volupte, and Willing; she was so ca^'d either a lubendo, or a libidine.
Lubentine Venus Consecrated; tho they be things Vicious, and (whatever The
Epicureans held Pleasure to be Natural.
Velleius may think) Unnatural too; But yet, by means even of These Vices, is
Nature often times excited and transported after a very Extraordinary manner.
Thus, in regard of their Profitableness, were those set up for Gods, from whom
the respective Benefits (first) proceeded. And indeed the Names that I have now
been speaking of, are themselves Declaratory of the Particular Virtue of each
Deity. By Practice, and Common Custom also it has been so ordered, that Heroes
and Demigods asserted.
Men Eminent for the Benefits they have brought to Mankind should, by Common
Consent, be advanced in their Reputation among the Gods. This was the Case of
Hercules; of Castor and Pollux; of Aesculapius; of Bacchus.
Liber; [the Liber I mean, that came of Semele, not that Liber who, together
with The Earth,
Ceres and The Moon.
Libera, was, with much State and Devotion, Consecrated by our Forefathers;
the difference betwixt which two Libers may be gathered from the i. e.
Religious Ceremonies. The Mysteries were of Two sorts; the Greater, in honor
of Ceres; the Less, of Proserpina.
Mysteries: Now, because we call those of our own begetting Liberi (Children)
therefore is the Issue of Ceres termed Liber and Libera. This is kept (Libero)
in the Male only, not (Libera) in the Female:] And of Romulus also, whom some
take to be the same with A God of War.
Quirinus. Now in regard the Souls of all These do persevere, and enjoy
Immortality, they are justly held to be Gods; both for that they are the Best,
and also Eternal.

Upon Another Consideration, and That a Physical one too, has a multitude of
Deities likewise proceeded: who, in that represented under Human shape, have
furnished matter for Poetical Fables, and involved Mankind in the greatest
Superstitions. [This Of Fictitious Deities.
Topique was (first) handled by Zeno, and (afterward) more at large explained
by Cleanthes, and Chrysippus.] Vulgar Fables Rehearsed, in order to the Removal
of that Impiety which the Poets had introduced, by making the Gods to be like
Men.
For the Old Story of Caelum's being Gelt by his Son Saturn, and Saturn
himself, cast into Bonds by his Own Son Jupiter, passes for Current throughout
all Greece. There is a Philosophical Reason, Pleasant Enough, at the bottom of
these For a Son to G^ld his Father.
Impious Fables: For they would have that Celestial, High and Etherial (that is
to say, Fiery) Nature, which, Without Commixture with any thing else.
by it self, generates all things, to be destitute of The Privities.
those Parts of the Body that are necessary to Procreation, by Conjunction with
Another. They were also for Saturn to be Him that contains the Course and
Revolution of Times and Seasons. And indeed, the Greeks have given this God a
Name, that imports as much: For they call him (...), which is as much as to say
(...), a space of Time. He is termed Saturn, because (Saturetur Annis) he is
full of Years: And Phansy'd to use to devour his own Children, for that Age
consumes the Compasses of Time, and is insatiably replenished with past years:
He is Fettered by Jupiter, to the end that his Courses should not be
intemperate; and that He (again) might bind Jupiter.
Him (as it were) in Bonds of Stars. Now for Jupiter himself, (that is, (Juvans
Pater) a Helping Father;) in Adversity we call him Jove (a Juvando) from
assisting: The Poets, The Pater Divumque Hominumque.
Father of Gods, and Men; and our Ancestors, the Optimus, Maximus.
Best, and the Greatest God; and Best (or, most Beneficent) before Greatest,
because it is more Noble, and unquestionably more Agreeable to do Good to All,
then to be Master of great Possessions. Him, now, it is, that In his Thyestes.
Ennius (as In Page 73. of this Book.
Above) Expresses; saying, Behold yon i. e. Fire, in the High Heaven, Surveying
all things.
Essence glittering on High,
Whom All term Jupiter --


And more clearly in Another place, Thus; For whose sake, all that e're I can
I Will Curse
This shining Thing here, be it what it will.


It is Him also that our Augurs mean, when they say, Jove Fulgente, Tonante.
by Thundering and Lightning Jupiter: For [instead of That] they use Coelo
Fulgente, Tonante.
by the Thundering and Lightning Sky. And Euripides, as he has spoken many
things excellently well, so (briefly) This; You see the Lofty, Spread, i. e.
Without Mixture, and so Incorruptible.
Vntemper'd Sky,
That in its soft Embrace enfolds the Earth:
Held This the Chiefest God; This, Jove to be.


The Air that is cast between the Sea and the Firmament, is (as the Stoiques
argue) Honored with the Appellation of Juno, (the Sister and Wife of Jupiter)
A Natural Reason why the Air was termed Juno.
because it is both of a Resemblance, and in strict Conjunction with the Sky.
Now, it was supposed to be Feminine, and appropriated to Juno, for that nothing
is more soft and gentle then it. But Juno (I believe) came (a Juvando) of
Helping.

There still remained the Water, and the Earth, to be, by Fable, divided into
Three Kingdoms. To Neptune therefore ( Jupiter's Brother, as they will have it)
was assigned the Dominion of the Sea. And the Original of the Name, was This;
as Portunus (the God of Harbors) a Portu, (from a Port;) so was Neptune (the
God of the Sea) derived a Nando, (from Swimming;) the first Letters of the word
being a Little Changed. The Sovereignty and Jurisdiction of the Earth was
Dedicated (Diti Patri) to Father Dis; which Dis, by the Greeks, is styled (...)
(Rich;) because all things do arise out of the Earth, and return again into it.
He stole Proserpina: Which is a Greek word; for this Proserpina is the same
with Their (...), which they take to be the Seed of Corn; and, being hidden, to
be sought by her Mother, Now This Mother, (a gerendis Frugibus) from bearing
Inventer of Corn and Tillage.
Grain, is called Ceres, tanquam Geres: The first Letter of the word happening
to be altered; according to the Greek way; for, by That People, she is also
termed (...), quasi (...), (the Mother of the Earth.) Again, He (qui magna
verteret) who causes mighty Changes, is styled Mavors; (Mars, the God of War.)
And Minerva had her name either (quia Minueret) from Diminishing, (vel
Minaretur) or from Menacing. And whereas the Beginnings and Ends of all things
are generally of greater Power and Virtue: Therefore would they have all their
Sacrifices to Begin with He being the First that erected Templ^s, and
Instituted Rites of (...) in Italy; they beli^' (...) the Way for the (...) And
there^^^^ (...) Him First of all, in all their Devotions and Sacrifices. See
Rosinus, p. 206, 207. 210, 212, etc.
Janus. This Word is derived (ab eundo) from Passing: Whence, Thorough Passages
are called Jani; and the Outward Doors of Profanarum Aedium.
Common Houses, Januae. The Name of Janus (to whom the more Outward Places were
Dedicated) being now Done with; Vesta (His Wife, as some think; who presided
over the Secret and Inward) is spoken to, as bringing up the Rear of their
Devotions. See Rosinus Page 331, 332, 333, 334, and deinceps.
Vesta comes from the Greeks; (being the same with Their (...)) and she
presides over Hearths, and Altars. With this Goddess (therefore) who has the
Tutelage of the more Inward things, are all Prayers and Sacrifices Concluded.
[The ( What These were; why so called; and how many Sorts there were of them,
may be seen in Rosinus, Page 344, 345.
Dii Penates) Houshold-Gods, who had their Name either from Penus, (for Penus
is all sorts of Provision that men eat) or, for that (Penitus insident) they
Reside Within, (whence, they are by the Poets termed (Penetrales) Deities of
the Closet,) have also some Affinity with This Power] Now, as for Apollo, the
Name is Greek; and he is taken to be (Sol) the Sun: Likewise Diana [Ordinarily,
the Maiden Goddess of Woods and Hunting] and (Luna) the Moon, are held to be
one and the same: He is called (Sol) the Sun, either for that (Solus) He alone
is so Eminent, above all the Stars; Or, because, upon His Rising, the rest of
the Stars are put out, and he appears (Solus) single. Luna (the Moon) has her
Name (a Lucendo) from shining: And she is also termed Lucina. And therefore, as
the Greeks do use to call upon Diana Lucifera, so do our People, in the time of
In pariendo.
Travel, upon Juno Lucina. She is (otherwise) styled Diana Omnivaga, not (a
Venando) from Hunting; but, because she is one of (Septem quasi Vagantibus) the
Seven Stars that seem to Wander. She is termed Diana, in that (Noctu, quasi
Diem efficeret) she turns By her shineing.
Night into a kind of Day: And is set over Human.
Births, Human.
in regard Those do come to Perfection in Seven, sometimes; but, for the most
part, in Nine Courses of the Moon; Which, because they make (Mensa) Determinate
Spaces, are termed (Menses) Months. [ An Historian.
Timaeus is And yet Plutarch says, the Jest was Frigid enough, to have
extinguished the very flames that consumed the Temple.
Witty upon This, as well as many other Occasions: For, having Recorded, in his
History, that the self same Night that Alexander was Born, the Temple of Diana,
at Ephesus, was consumed by Fire; he subjoined, that 'twas not much to be
wondered at, since Diana, being willing to be at the Labor of Alexander's
Mother.
Olympias, was not Then at home.] And because this Goddess ( ad res omnes
venerit) has an Contributes toward the Generation and Production of all things.
Influence upon all Creatures, therefore have our People bestowed upon her the
Appellation of Venus. And then, it is more fit that Venustas (Beauty and
Comeliness) should derive from Venus; then she, from Venustas.

THUS may you see how, from Physical matters of sound and profitable Invention,
occasion has been taken to set up Fictitious and Imaginary Deities. In
Consequence of which proceeding, False Opinions, Turbulent Errors, and
Superstitiousness to a most idle and wretched degree, have arisen: For both the
Forms, Ages, Ornaments and Apparel of the Gods, are become Familiar to us:
Moreover, their Pedigree, Marriages, Kindred; and every thing brought down to
the Measures of Human Weakness: And they are likewise represented to have their
Perturbations, and Passions; for we hear tell of their Lusts, Griefs, Angers:
Nay, and according to Fable, they have not been without their Wars neither, and
bloody Conflicts: And That too, not only when, ( His Iliads.
as in Homer) upon the Engaging of Two Armies, some defend the One side, some
the Other; but they have also, in the Case of the The Offspring of That Titan,
who was the Son of Coelum and Vesta, according to Fable.
Titans and the Giants, menag'd Wars of their Own.

These things are both Delivered and Believed with equal Folly; The Conclusion
of the Second General Head, the Quality of the Gods.
and are little else, beside pure Vanity and Emptiness. But yet, (These Fables
apart) a God there is, that shows himself in the Nature of every thing: As
Neptune in the Water, Ceres in the Earth; and Others in Other Cases; whence may
be understood both What, and by what Name Custom has delivered them over to
us: And what Deities we ought to Adore and Worship. Now the best, the most
Chaste, Holy, and Devout Worship of the Gods is This; to Reverence them always
with a Pure, Upright, and Unpolluted Mind and Voice. For not Philosophers only,
but our Ancestors also, have separated Religion from Superstition. For Those
who Prayed and Sacrificed whole Days together, that their children
(Superstites essent) might Outlive them, were termed (Superstitiosi)
Superstitious People: (which Word came (afterward) to be taken in a Larger
signification.) But, they that made it their business, duly to Treat of, and
(quasi Relegerent) as it were to Collect matters belonging to Divine Worship,
were called (Religiosi) Religious, from Relegendo: So as were Eligentes, from
Eligendo; Diligentes, from Diligendo; and Intelligentes, from Intelligendo: For
in These, and Religiosus, the force of Reading is one and the same. Hence it is
fallen out, that the Words (Superstitiosus) Superstitious, and (Religiosus)
Religious, are come to be, One of them, a Term of Scandal; and the Other of
Commendation.

And Thus, I persuade my self, I have plainly made appear, both that there Are
Gods; and What they are.

The Third General Head Introduced by an Insinuation of the Importance of it.
. 3. I am Now, in Course, to make out, that The World is governed, by the
Providence of the Gods. This is a Great Point, truly; and hard laid at by Your
Party, Cotta: And, in very deed, the whole Contest about it, is with You; for
Your People, Velleius, are not much acquainted with it; any more then they can
be said to be with any thing else: For you only Read, you only Love what is your
own; and condemn All men beside, without Examination. Thus did your self tell
us, Yesterday, that a Conjuring old Gypsy ((...), or) Providence, was
Introduced by the Stoiques. Which you said upon This mistake, that you conceit
them to feign a Providence, as a kind of Goddess of her self, that should rule
and govern the Whole World: But This is spoken Particularly; For as, upon a
Bodies saying, the Commonwealth of Athens is governed by the Council; of the
Areopagus is to be understood: So, when We deliver, that the Universe is
administered by a Providence, we intend, (I take it) That of the Gods: And you
are to hold, that to speak fully and perfectly, is to say, The World is
governed by the Providence of the Gods.

Forbear (then) at least, The Epicureans taxt with a Proneness to abuse every
body at a venture; and with want of Wit and Learning: Especially Epicurus
himself.
to waste that Wit, which your Tribe has so little of to spare, in Scoffing at
Us: Nay, in Troth, if I may advise you, do not so much as try to do it: For it
does not become you, it is not your Faculty; you are not Good at it. But
indeed, This has not so much relation to You, (who are well accomplished, as to
the Velleius was of Lanuvium, in Italy.
Roman Breeding, and Civility;) as to all the rest of you, and to Epicurus.
Him especially, who was the Author of these things; a Person of no Logique.
Art, no Grammar.
Learning; Insulting over every Body, without either Wit,
Edge, Reason.
Authority, or Gracefulness.

I affirm (Now) that the Whole World, The Influence of a Divine Providence
asserted; and the Proof of it distributed into Three Parts.
and every Part of it, was Originally Made, and is Eternally Governed by the
Providence of the Gods. And This Disputation do our People usually Distribute
into Three Parts: The First whereof is drawn from That Course of Argument,
which Evinces that Gods there are; For, This being granted, it cannot but be
acknowledged, that, by Their Counsel, is the World Administered. The Second is
That, which proves the subjection of every thing to Sensitive Nature; and that
by Her is All menag'd after an admirable manner: Which being proved, it
follows, that she is generated out of Animating Principles. And, That is the
Third, which is derived from the Admiration of Heavenly, and Earthly things.

The First Branch made out by many, and different Arguments.
FIRST, then; either the Being of any Deity at all must be denied; (which
Democritus, by setting up his Simulacra, shadowy.
Resemblances, and Epicurus, his Lineal.
Images, have as good as done;) A Dilemma.
Or, they that admit there are Gods, must likewise confess them to do
something; and That too, Great, and Illustrious. But nothing is more Noble then
the Administration of the World: Therefore is the Universe Administered by the
Counsel of the Deities. Which, if Otherwise; then the Gods, there cannot but
undoubtedly be something Better, and of greater Power: (Whatever This be;
whether an Inanimate Nature, or a So they termed Irrational Motion.
Necessity agitated by a mighty force, atchieving those most beautiful Works
which we behold.) And, in That Case, the Nature of the Gods would neither be
Almighty, nor Transcendent. But naught is more Excellent then the Deity. By Him
(therefore) must the World needs be Ruled. Consequently, He is not Obedient, or
Subject to any Nature. And Then, he does himself govern every Nature. For, if
we allow that the Gods are indu'd with Understanding; we do grant, in
Consequence, that they also Tend, and are Foreseeing even of the Greatest
things. Do they not know, then, What are the Greatest; and How these are to be
menag'd and disposed? Or, have they not Strength enough to support and direct
such weighty Matters? But, both an Ignorance of things is Unbecoming the
Nature; and an Inability, by reason of Weakness, to sustain the Charge,
Inconsistent with the Majesty of the Divinity. Whence, is effected what We
contend for; Viz. That the World is Administered by the Providence of the Gods.

And, as there are Gods; The Gods Animated, and indu'd with the same Reason
that Men are.
(in case any there be, as there certainly are;) it is necessary that they be
Animated; and not only so, but that they likewise participate of Reason; and,
holding a Civil Communication and Society (as it were) one with another, to
Govern one Single World, as a kind of City, or Common Republique. It follows,
Then, that there is the same Reason in These, as in Mankind, the same Verity to
both; and the same Law, that is to say, a Perception of what is Good, and a
Depulsion of that which is Evil. From whence it may be gathered, that Reason
(also) and Prudence came from the Gods to Men. And upon that Consideration were
the Mind, Veracity.
Faith, Virtue, Concord, Consecrated, and publicly Dedicated by our
Ancestors. Which, how can they be denied to be in the Capacity of Gods, since
we pay Adorations to their August and Holy Images? Now, if, in Human kind,
there be Understanding, Faith, Virtue, Concord; from whence could these flow
down upon the Earth, save from the Gods Above?

And make use of their Reason to the most Excellent purposes.
And, in regard there is in Us Counsel, Reason, Prudence; it is but fit that the
Gods have These in a more Eminent degree: And not Have only, but Employ them
also, about the Best, and the Greatest Works. But nothing is either Greater or
Better then the Universe: Necessary therefore it is, that it be Administered by
the Counsel, and Providence of the Gods.

A Providence proved, from a Collation of Benefits.
Lastly, Since we have sufficiently made out, that These, whose Transcendent
Power, and Glorious Countenances we behold, are Deities; The Sun, (I mean) the
Moon, the Planets, the Fixed Stars, the Sky, the World it self, and the Virtue
of those things which are contained in the Universe: In Consequence, they are
All governed by a Divine Reason, and Providence.

And This may suffice for the First Part.

The Second Branch of the Division.
IT follows, for me to prove that All things are subjected to Nature; and that
they are Governed by her, in an Admirable manner.

The several Definitions of Nature.
But what this Nature her self is, is First of all, briefly, to be explained; to
the end that That which I purpose to inculcate may the better be understood.
For some do hold Nature to be a certain Irrational Power, Stirring up necessary
Motions in all Bodies. And Others, That it is a Virtue partaking both of Reason
and Order, proceeding, as it were, in a Track, and declaring what the Cause of
every thing is, and what the Effect: Whose Skill, no Art, no Hand, no Artist
can attain unto, by Imitation: For as much as, tho Seed be exceeding Small of
it self, yet is the Virtue of it so great, that, if it fall into a Nature
proper for Conception, and to contain it, and get but matter, whereby it may be
sustained and increased, it so forms and fashions every thing in its respective
kind, that Some are nourished only by their Roots; Others, indu'd with Motion,
Sense, and Appetite, and a capacity out of Themselves to beget their Like.
Again, there are yet Others also, who apply the word Nature to every thing; As
Epicurus, who Divides Thus: All Natures that are, (says he) do consist of a
Body, and a Void, and the Accidents that accompany them. Nature (according to
the Stoiques) consists of Or^er, and Art.
But as for Our People, when we say the World is supported, and governed by
Nature, we do not understand after the manner of a Clod, a scrap of a Stone, or
any thing of the like sort, that is without a faculty of sticking together;
But, of a Tree, an Animal; in which there appears nothing of Temerity, but
Order, and a certain Resemblance of Art.

Now if those things which subsist by their Roots, A Course of Argument, to
m^ke out that a^l things are subjected to, and governed by Nature, after an
admirable manner.
do live and flourish by the skill of Nature; The Earth it self is undoubtedly
sustein'd by the same Art and Power of Nature; as one that, being Impregnated
with Seeds, produces, and brings all things forth of her self; embracing the
Roots, she augments them; and is her self again nourished by higher, and
external Natures; And by the Exhalations.
expirations of the i. e. The Earth.
same, is the Air (also) fed, the Sky, and all the Stars: Wherefore if the
Earth be upheld and nourished by Nature, the same Reason holds (too) for the
rest of the World; For Roots are fixed in the Earth; Animated Beings are
sustained, by breathing the Air; and the Air it self sees, hears, sounds
together with Us; (for, without it, none of these could be done:) nay, and it
is moved with us too; for wherever we stir, wherever we go, it seems, as it
were, to give place, and to yield. And whatsoever things are carried in the
Middle (which is the Lowest) part of the World; or from the Center to the
Superficies; or, (by a round Conversion) about the Middle; all These do
constitute One Entire Nature, that holds the whole World together. And, whereas
there are Four sorts of Bodies; by the Vicissitude of Them it is, that the
Nature of the Universe is continued: For, the Water arises out of the Earth;
the Air out of the Water; the Sky out of the Air: And so backward again; the
Air proceeds from the Sky; the Water from the Air; and from the Water, the
Earth, which is Lowest of all. Thus, by the moving upward and downward, back
and forward, of These Natures, whereof all things do consist, is effected a
Conjunction of the several Parts of the World: Which must necessarily be either
Sempiternal, and of the self same Garniture, and Appointment, that we now see
it to be; Or certainly, of an exceeding long standing, and likely to remain for
a great, and almost Immense space of time. Now, whethersoever of these it be;
it follows yet, that the World is administered by Nature. For what sail of
Fleets; what Embattlement of Armies: Or, on the Other hand, (to make a
Collation of the things that Nature effects,) what shooting up of a Vine, or a
Tree; Moreover, what Figure of any Animated Being, and Compaction of Members,
is significatory of so great skill of Nature, as is the World it self? Either
there is nothing at all (therefore) that is governed by Sensibilis
Sensitive Nature; or, it must be confessed that the World so is. For, that
which contains all other Natures, and their Seeds; how can it self but be
administered by Nature? If a Body should allow that Teeth, and the Beard, do
proceed from Nature; but not, that the Man himself, out of which these grow,
exists by the same Nature; he could not be thought to understand, that, what
produces any thing out of it self, is of greater perfection, then the thing so
produced. Now, the Which the Stoiques held to be Universal Nature, and a Deity.
World, is the Seedsman, Planter, Begetter, (as I may say;) and the Educator
and Nourisher of all things that are administered by Nature; and cherishes and
sustains every one of them, as its Parts and Members. But, if the Parts of the
World be administered by Nature; by Nature also cannot the World it self but be
governed: And indeed, with the Administration thereof, is no fault to be found:
For of those Natures that Were, the Best that could be is effected. Let any one
show how they might have been Better. But That no body will ever be able to do.
And, whoever would mend any thing in it, will either make it worse, or desire
that which is not possible to he done. But, if all the Parts of the World are
so constituted, that they could neither have been more convenient for Use, nor
fairer to the Eye; let us examine whether they be Casual; or, else, in such a
State, that they were no way able to Cohere, but under the Influence, the
Direction of Sense, and a Divine Providence. If, then, the things that are
perfected by Nature, are Better then such as are wrought by Art; and that Art
effect not any thing, without the help of Reason: Assuredly, Nature her self is
in no wise void of Reason. How (therefore) can it be Proper, when you cast your
Eye upon an Image, or a Picture, to conclude that there went Art to the framing
of it: And, upon Making, at a great distance, a Ship under Sail, not to
question its being Steered by Skill and Reason; Or, when you see a Clock either
of Brass, or of Water, Scipio was the First that Invented the Water-Clock, in
Rome.
to understand that the Hours are Told by Art, not by Chance: And yet, to think
the World, which contains these very Arts themselves, the Masters of them, and
all things, to be destitute of Counsel and Reason? Should any body carry the
Sphere, lately invented by our Intimate Friend Posidonius, (each Conversion
whereof, effects the same thing in the Sun, the Moon, and the Five Wandering
Stars, that, in the Compass of every Day and Night, is wrought in the Heaven,)
into They were accounted to be Barbarous Countries.
Scythia, or Brittany; what one even of those very Barbarians would doubt, but
there went Reason to the framing of it? Whereas, The Epicureans etc. Greek, and
Latin; who appropriated all Learning and Civility to their respective Countries.
These People are, at great Uncertainties, as to the very World (out of which
every thing arises, and wherein All is made) whether it was effected by Chance,
by some or other Necessity, or by a Divine Wisdom and Reason: And conceit that
A famous Geometrician of Syracuse; who made an admirable Art^ficial Sphere of
Glass, wherein the Motions of the Sun, Moon, and the Other Planets were
Represented, to the astonishment of the Beholders. He said he could remove the
whole World, had he but Where to place the Foot of his Engine.
Archimedes did more in Imitating the motions of the Spheres; then Nature, in
Causing of them: Notwithstanding that the Perfection of the One is by many
degrees more Curious then the Counterfeit of the Other. So (too) for That of
the Shepherd; in A Tragique Poet.
Actius: Who, (having never seen a Ship before,) When, at a great distance, he
discry'd the divine and new Vessel of the So those 54 Worthies were called who
accompanied Jason in the ship Argo, to fetch the Golden-Fleece from Colchos.
Argonauts; at First, wondering and being astonished at it, he speaks in This
manner.

So huge a Bulk a float! with horrid noise'
It from the Deep turns up the Sea before it;
Whirls 'loft the Billows, and then Down again;
Dashes, and throws about the Waves: As if
A Broken Cloud were rolled along; Or, some
Torn Rock were Hurried on high, into the Air,
By a Tempestuous Blast; Or, else some Whirlwind
Pressed in The Encounter of two Raging Seas;
Unless (perchance) some Island be cast up;
Or In Fable, Neptune 's Trumpeter.
Triton, Or Thus, either -- 'bout to overturn his Den, At th'bottom of the Wavy
Ocean, Has, with -- etc.
Rising from his Watery Den,
Has, with his Trident, loosened at the Roots
Some Mass of Stone, and tosst it into the Air,
At First, he is at a loss what kind of Nature That should be, which he sees,
but knows not what to make of. And the same Person, upon beholding the Young
men, and hearing the Singing of the Mariners, cries, They keep a Din (now)
with their Rostris.
Snouts, like That
Of Sharp-set Dolphins --


And so on.

It Is such a Song I hear (methinks,) as if
The God of the Woods.
'Twere our Sylvanus --
The Example accommodated to Philosophers.
Now as He, at First sight, thinks he Eyes something Inanimate, and void of
Sense; but afterward, upon a fuller view, begins to Imagine the Quality of that
which he doubted of: So ought Philosophers, if the first appearance of the
World happen to confound them, to Resolve (yet) at length, upon observing the
Certainty and Equality of its Motions, and all things in the same to be
governed by established Orders, and an Immutable Constancy, that there is not
only some certain The Existence of a Deity gatherable from a Contemplation of
the Universe.
Inhabiter in this Divine and heavenly Mansion, but a Superintender also, a
Disposer, an Architect, (I may say) of so great a Work, so weighty a Charge.

But (truly,) to Me The Epicureans, etc.
They seem not so much as to take into their Thoughts the Wonderfulness of
things Celestial and Terrestrial. The Order, and Continuation of the World,
according to its Parts.
For, first of all, the Earth is placed in the Middle part of the Universe, and
every way surrounded with that Nature whereby we breath and live, called the
Air. [The word is Greek, (I confess;) but yet it is now entertained amongst Us,
and as common as if it were Latin.] This again is encompassed by the boundless
Sky, (Ether,) which consists of the Fire above, [We shall borrow i. e. Ether.
this word also, for Ether may be used in Latin, as well as Aer: Tho Pacuvius
enterprets it Thus: What I am speaking of, by Us, it termed
Coelum; and Ether, by the Greeks --
As if (now) he were not a Greek that says This; But he speaks Latin. Yes; But,
like a Grecian.

His very Speech bewrays him t'be a Greek
By Birth, --
As the same man elsewhere has it. But, to return to greater matters.] In the
Sky (then) there are innumerable Starry Lights, whereof the Sun, (enlightening
All with its bright beams, and being many degrees bigger and larger then the
Earth) is the Chief: And, after Him, the other Stars, of vast Proportions. And
yet These many and mighty Flames are so far from harming the Earth, and the
things that are therein, that they are of advantage to it; and So, that were
they removed from their Stations, were the Temperature of them withdrawn, it
must needs be burnt up with such great Heats.

Ep^curus 's Atoms confuted.
May I not (Here) admire that any one there should be, who can persuade himself,
that certain Solid and Individual Essences are carried about by Force, and
Weight; and that this exquisitely adorned, and beautiful World was made by a
fortuitous Concourse of the same? Whoever phansies This could be; for ought I
perceive, he may as well think, that, were a great many sorts of the The Romans
had no K. W. (...) in the^r Alphabet.
One and Twenty Letters (either of Gold, or any thing else) thrown somewhere
together, it were possible for Ennius's Annals to be, by a shaking of These
down upon the Earth, composed so, as to be ever after Legible; When, it is a
question, whether Fortune could have so much effect, as to one single Verse of
them. with what Face (then) can these People affirm the Universe to have been
perfected by little Bodies, without either Color, Quality, (which the Greeks
term (...),) or Sense; but flocking together at random, and by Chance? Or, that
there are Innumerable of i. e. Worlds.
them either; some Rising, Others Dissolving and Perishing every Instant of
time? But, if a Concourse of Atoms be able to frame a World; why can it not
make a Porch, a Church, a House, or a City? Which are Works (surely) of much
less Toil and Difficulty? Trust me, The Epicureans.
They babble so inconsiderately concerning the Universe, that I cannot think
they ever meditated upon this admirable Adornment of the Heavens; Which is the
The Third Point, the imbellishment of the Sky.
Next Point.

Now, A Passage out of Aristotle, to insinuate, that the World is governed by
Reason.
Aristotle delivers himself excellently well. If any there were, (says he,)
that had always dwelt under ground, in lightsom and convenient Habitations,
beautified with Signs and Pictures, and provided of all those things that such
as are reputed Happy do abound in; And tho they never stirred forth, had
received (yet) from Fame and Hearsay that there is a certain Divine Power and
Majesty: After This, (upon the Opening of the Earth) should they be able to
make an Escape, and go out of those secret Abodes, into these Seats wherein we
live; When, all on a sudden, they should see the Land, the Water, and the
Firmament, and come to a knowledge of the Magnitude of the Clouds, and the
Force of the Winds; should behold the Sun, and understand the Proportion,
Beautifulness, and Efficiency of the same, that it occasions Day, by spreading
its Light over all the Sky: And further, when Night had darkened the Earth,
they should view the whole Heaven, diversified and embellished with stars, and
the various Lights of the Moon, both Waxing and Waining, the Risings and
Settings of them all, and their Courses Certain and Immutable throughout
Eternity: When (I say) they should see all This, they would undoubtedly presume
both that Gods there are, and that these so mighty Works were of Their
effecting. And Thus far He.

Another Allusion, to the same purpose.
Let us also Imagine Darknesses as great as were Those, upon the Eruption of the
Fires of Aetna, that are said to have obscured the Countries near about to such
a degree, that for two days one man could not know another: And when, upon the
Third, the Sun appeared again, they seemed to one another, as if they had been
a new restored to Life. And, did it so fall out (now) in Eternal Darknesses,
that, on a sudden, we should see the Light; how strange would the face of the
Sky appear to us? But now, by the daily use, and custom of our Eyes, our Minds
are wonted to it; and neither Admire, nor search into the Reasons of what they
have always before them: As if the Novity, rather then the Bulk, and Worth of
matters, ought to incite us to an Enquiry into their Causes. Could he be judged
deserving the shape he wears, who, upon viewing the so constant Motions of the
Heavens, such Immutable Three things in every Order, the Efficient, Form, and
the End.
Orders of the Stars, and all things so apt and compacted among themselves,
should deny that, in These, which are governed by a Wisdom above the Reach of
all Counsel, there is not any Reason at all; and averr them to have been made
by Chance? When we see any thing (as a Sphere, a Clock, or the like,) moved by
some or other kind of Ingenious Device, we make no question of its being the
Result of Reason: And can we, then, upon Observing the Powers of Heaven to be
turned, and carried about with a wonderful Celerity, and most constantly
completing Yearly Revolutions.
Anniversary Vicissitudes, to the perfect Health and Conservation of all
things, but be satisfied, that These come to pass by Reason, and That too, a
Transcendent and Divine?

BUT let me, Now, A Demonstration of the Order throughout every part of the
World; whereby, a Divine Providence is plainly discernible.
(waving subtilty of Dispute,) take a kind of speculative Survey of the
Beautifulness of what we affirm to be administered by a Divine Providence. And
First, of the Earth, and Earthly things.
And First, of the Universal Earth; which is seated in the Middle Quarter of
the World; is solid, round, and every way conglobated, as to its proper
Inclinings, within it self; clothed with Flowers, Herbs, Trees, Fruits, the
Incredible Multitude of all which, are distinguished by an insatiable
Diversity. Ad to This, the gelid Perseverings of Springs, the Crystal Waters of
Rivers, the most virdent Clothings of Banks, the hollow Depths of Caves, the
Cragginesses of Rocks, the Heights of impending Mountains, and the
Spaciousnesses of Fields: As also, the hidden Veins of Gold and Silver, and the
infinite store of Marble: What, (likewise) and how Various are the kinds of
Beasts, both Wild and Tame; the Flyings and Singings of Birds; the Grazings of
Cattle; and the Life of Forrest-Beasts? What (now) shall I say to the Race of
Man? Who, being ordained (as it were) to Till the Ground, suffer it not either
to be made desolate by the Salvageness of Wild Beasts, or turned into Desert by
the Roughness of Trees: And, as the Effects of whose skill and pains, do Fields
appear, Isles, and Coasts diversified with Houses and Cities. All which, were
it but as easy to be taken in by the sight of the Eye, as it is by the
Contemplation of the Mind; no body could so much as look upon the Earth, and
doubt of a Divine Reason.

Next, of the Sea, and the things of the same.
And then again, how great is the Pulchritude of the Sea? How Taking, the Form
of the Universe? The Numerousness and Variety of Islands? The Emenities of
Coasts and Shores? How Many, and Different are the Kinds of Creatures; some
Under the Water, others floating on the Top of it; Some Swimming, and Others
again in Natural shells cleaving to Rocks? And the Sea it self, coveting the
Land, does, in such a manner, play along, and bound its Coasts, that they may
seem to be but One, made up of Two Natures.

Then, of the Air.
Next to This is the Air, (bordering upon the Sea) distinguished into Night and
Day sorts of Air.
Day and Night: Being sometimes rarified and extenuated, it is carried on high;
and, Otherwhiles Thickened, is driven into Clouds; And, collecting Humors,
enriches the Earth with showers: As also, extending it self at large, it
produces the Winds. The same Air causes the Annual Vicissitudes of Heat, and
Cold, enables Birds to Fly, Relieves by Respiration, and susteins every
Animated Being.

There yet remains the Last of all, Now, of the Sky.
the Highest from our Abodes, the All-embracing and containing Circle of the
Heavens, (Coelum.) which same is also called (Ether) the Sky, the utmost Bound
and Determination of the World. In This, the The Stars.
Fiery Figures do fulfill their appointed Courses, after an admirable manner:
Amongst which, the Sun, The Sun spoken to.
being sundry Degrees Larger then the Earth, is carried about the same; and it,
Rising, and Setting, occasions Day and Night: As also, coming nearer the same
Earth, Some times, at Others withdrawing farther off, it makes, each Year, two
Reversions Contrary from the Extreme: i. e. Two Digressions from his Ordinary
Stage.
In the Interval of which, it (sometimes) affects the Earth with a kind of
Sadness, (as it were;) and (Otherwhiles) again, chears it in such sort, that it
looks as if it were pleased, and gladdened with Heaven.

As to the Moon, The Moon.
(which, as Mathematicians show, is bigger then one Half of the Earth) it i. e.
Runs the same Stages.
wanders in the same spaces with the Sun; and, one while going along with it,
another, turning from it, it imparts to the Earth the Light that it derives
from the Sun; and changes its Light into several Forms: And moreover, being (
some times) under, and Opposite to the Sun, its Beams and Light are darkened;
And, at Others, interfering with the shadow of the Earth, when right over
against the Sun, it is, by the Interjection and Interposition of the same
Earth, suddenly Ecclipsed, [and put out for a season.]

The Planets.
Those Stars (also) usually termed Wandering, are carried about the Earth in the
same Circle.
Spaces; and, after the like manner Rise and Set: Moving sometimes Quicker;
Otherwhiles, flower; and Often again, not When Stational.
stirring at all. Then which Spectacle, nothing can be more Admirable, nothing
more Beautiful.

And the Fixed Stars.
Then, come on the According to Ptolomy's Computation, the most notable and
visible of them, as being reduced to the six vulgar Degrees of Magnitude,
amount but to 1022. (Pliny, yet (l. 2. c. 4.) reckons them to be 1600.) But the
absolute number of all the Stars in the Zodiac are ( Brunus says Infinite, but)
Innumerable, at least to Human calculation; either as locked upon by the bare
Eye only, or by a Telescope.
vast Numbers of Said to be So, because they always keep (at least seeming)
the same Invariable distance from one another, and from the Ecliptic: And, in
regard of the Unalterable Order observed in their Intervals, (or Interstitia,)
the Sphere wherein they are conceived to be ranged, is called (...), i. e.
Inerrans.
Fixed Stars; the Figuration whereof is so plain and distinct, that, being
Represented to us under the Resemblance and Similitude of Forms wellknown,
Names have been applied to them accordingly. And Here, I will make use of A
Greek Poet, and Astrologer.
Aratus's His Phenomenon; which Piece Tully made a Latin Poem.
Verses; Those which You, Sir, (said he, casting his Ey toward Me,) Turned,
while very young; and which I am so Taken with, because in Latin, that I can
say many of them by Heart. We daily see therefore, that, without any sort of
Change or Alteration, The Rest of the i. e. The Stars.
Heavenly Bodies speed along
With a swift Motion; And Nights, and Days,
Are born about together with the As being only different sorts of the same,
and coming and going with it.
Air.
Which is a Contemplation that no Mind, coveting to behold the Constancy of
Nature, can ever be satiated with.

Now the Extreme i. e. The Extremity of the Axel-tree of the Mundane Globe.
Top (these Points are The Arctic and Antarctic, or Northern and Southern
Points, or Poles: The like Stars, and Constellations, turning about the
Southern Pole-point, as about the Northern; as is supposed, for to Us they are
Inconspicuous.
Two in number)
Is termed the Pole --
About The Northern
This are the Two Two Constellations, without the Zodiac, of the Northern
Hemisphere.
(...) turned; and never Set.

Of These the Grecians The Lesser Bear.
Cynosura call
The One; the Other, The Greater Bear.
Helice --
And indeed, the most bright Stars of i. e. Ursa Major.
This may be seen all night long; Which same, The Romans.
Our people usually do name
The Northern Wayn; Or, the 7 Stars in the North.
Septentriones --
The Little Ursa Minor.
Cynosura does also They are moved Back to Back, and Head to Tail (as it were.)
Survey the same Point of the As to the Mundane System; Johannes Baptista
Turrianus, and Fracastorius, make 14 Heavens; i. e. 7 Spheres or Orbs, counting
from the primum mobile, to the (...), or Sphere of the Fixed Stars; and 7 of the
Planets.
Heaven, with Stars distinguished much after the like manner: And The Lesser
Bear.
This, the A People famous of old, for Navigation: Who, with the Carthaginians,
lying more Southerly, and part of the greater Bear (which to the Greeks, who
sailed the Pontic and Euxine S^ts, was all of it still apparent) being either
by the position of the Sphere, or some other Accident, sometim^s depres'd and
obscured, chose the Lesser (as the Greeks the Greater) for their Directress
Phoenicians, in their Voyages,
Take for their Guide, by Night. It Is True, the Stars
Of the The Greater Bear; which is a Constellation of 35 Stars. According to
the Computation of Ptolomy, Alphonsus, Copernicus, and Clavius; (which I shall
follow throughout;) but That of Griembergerus from Clavius, Tycho, and
Pirferus; That of Bayerus from diverse Others; and That of Kepler and
Bulialdus, differ from This, and from one another.
Other are more Splendid and Distinct;
And do appear with the First of the Night:
And The Lesser Bear; only of 7 Stars; and much less both of Bulk and Light.
This but Small is, (and yet Mariners
Make use of It;) it being turned about,
With a more Inward Course, in a Less Orb.


And these Stars are of the more Admirable appearance, in that Betwixt them the
grim Draco; a Northern Constellation, (also,) of 31 Stars.
Dragon stretches on,
As swift as th'Current of a Rapid River;
Winding himself up and down, and Warping
His fiery Body into sinuous Bends.
He is of an excellent Form, All over; but the Figure of his Head, and
Fieryness of his Eyes, are more especially to be regarded: For's Head glitters
not with the Ornament
Of One Star only; but his Temples are
Graced with a Double Fulgour; out of his
Fierce Eyes Two sparkling Lights flash; and his Chin Mentum. Properly, his Jaw.

Shines with One Radiant Star: His Head's bowed down,
And his Round, Full, Smooth Neck bent, just as if
He fixed his look at the Tail of the Greater Bear.
Moreover, the Rest of the Dragons Body may be seen all night long; But's i. e.
Part of it, (by a Synecdoche;) for it never wholly Disappears to the
Macedonians.
Head In Macedonia; where Aratus wrote This Poem in Greek, that Tully
translated into Latin.
Here soon it self a little hides,
Where its Apparent and Absconded Parts
Meet, and Unite in one and the same i. e. In the Sea; which the Head does not
absolutely dive into, but only licks (us I may say) the Superficies of it: And
which (also) the Ancients made to be the Horizon of the World.

I had my Light to the Understanding of these Two Nice Verses of Tully, hoc
capu^, etc. Ortus ubi, etc. from the truly Learned and Ingenious Captain
Sherburn.

diagram depicting the position of stars in relation to the horizon. Suppose A.
B. a Portion of the Visible Horizon, in that Part of Macedonia, where Arat^s
wrote his Poem. C. the Stars in that Part of the Head Ascendant above the
Horizon. D. the Stars absconded in that part below the Horizon. A. B. is the
meta alterna (to use Avienus his Expression) in which they both meet.


Term.


The same Head, also, Is touched by Hercules on his Knee; a Northern
Constellation of 28 Star^.
Him who, in a Posture of
Sorrow, and Weariness, is moved round:
Him, the Grecians Engonasis do name; because he is carried
Kneeling upon his Knee. Then, comes the The Crown of Ariadne; a Northern
Constellation, of 8 Stars.
Crown,
Refulgent to an Eminent degree.


i. e. The Crown.
This, now is at the Back of i. e. Hercules.
him: But, near his Head is the Anguitenens; a Northern Constellation, of 29
Stars.
Snake-holder; Who, by the Greeks, is (...).
Ophiuchus called:
(That famous Name!) With both his Hands he grasps
The Serpent, and's himself (again) bound fast;
For the Snake begirts the Man below the Subter Praecordia. Our Globes
represent Serpentarius, with his Arms stretched out, the Snake under his Twist,
over his Left Hanch, and so to his left hand; but not at all about his Middle.
Chest:
But yet he (Glittering) passes gravely on,
And plants his Feet upon the Breast and Eyes Of The Scorpion.
Nepa --


The Septentriones is followed by The Wayn-driver; a Northern Constellation, of
23 Stars, following the Wayn of Ursa Major.
Arctophylax; who commonly, in Greek,
Is termed Boots; 'cause he drives before him
The Greater Bear, yoakt (as't were) to a Wayn.
(And yet further; For, In the Vitruvius places it media Genuorum Custodis
Arcti; Others, in the Knot of Arctophylax his Girdle.
Bosom of Boots there is fixed
A Star of glittering Rays, It is a Star of the First Magni ude.
Arcturus named.)
Underneath i. e. Arctophylax.
Him, is The Virgo;) a Northern Sign, ( the sixth in the Zodiac,) of 32 Stars.
Virgin, of a shining Body; holding
A Bright A Kiind of Ear of Corn it is, that she holds in her hand.
Spike --
And in Truth, the Signs are ranged and planted in such sort, that the Wisdom
of Divine Providence shows it self in all the Figures and Descriptions.

Below the Head of The Greater Bear.
Arctus you may see
The Gemini () a Northern Sign too, (the third) of 25 Stars.
Twins; Under his Belly, The Crab-fish; () a Northern Sign, (the fourth,) of 13
Stars.
Cancer is;
And, at his Feet, 's the mighty Leo; () a Northern Sign (the fifth,) of 35
Stars.
Lion placed,
Breathing a Trembling Flame out of his Mouth.
The (...), Auriga; a Northern Constellation, of 14 Stars.
Chariotiere At the Left side of Gemini is moved.
Against the Head of him's fierce Ursa Major.
Helice;
And, to's Left shoulder the bright Capra Amaithaea; a bright Star of the First
M^gnitude.
Goat is fixed.
(And, so on: But, Capra, (sure.)
This is a most bright and glorious Star;
On the Other side, the Hoedi; They are Two Stars in the Left Arm of Auriga;
observed in their Rising, and Setting, to cause Storms and Tempests.
Kids only discovers
A duskish, slender Light, to mortal View.)
Behind, at The Chariotiere's.
his Feet, Is the Horned Taurus; () a Northern Sign, (the second,) of 44 Stars:
The Plei^des being of the Number.
Bull (most strong of Body) placed.
His Head is all besprinkled with Stars;


These, the Greeks usually call The 7 Stars in the Head of Taurus; which, in
their Rising, and Setting star up Rain.
Hyades, from Raining; for (...) signifies to Rain. The Latins.
Our People have unlearnedly called them Suculae; as if they had derived their
Name (a suibus) from Sows, not from Showers. Now, just at the Hinder parts of
(and with his Back toward) the Lesser Ursa Minor.
Septentrio comes A great Astronomer, (Once, a King of Aethiopia) made a
Northern Constellation, of 13 Stars.
Cepheus, with his Hand spread abroad; For Behind, at the Hinder parts of the
Ursa minor; Or the Lesser of the Constellations that bear the Name of (...).
Cynosura
Of Arctus, he is turned. --
Before Cepheus, or, Cephus.
him goes Wife of Cepheus; who, comending for Beauty with the Nereides, was, as
a punishment, and in Memorial of her Arrogance, placed in Heaven with her Heels
upward. She is a Northern Constellation, of 13 Stars (also.)
Cassiopeia, of a dark kind of Stars:
And, just by Her, is bright Daughter of the Two aboven^^'d; who, for her
Mother's Pride, (likewise) was tied to a Rock, to be devoured by a Sea Monster;
but delivered, and married by Perseus. She is a Northern Constellation, of 23
Stars.
Andromeda;
Shunning the sight of her Lamenting Mother.
The famous Pegasus; (Perseus's Flying Horse) bred of the Blood of Medusa;) a
Northern Constellation, of 20 Stars He is cut off by the Middle.
Horse, shaking his glittering Mayn,
With His Fore-parts touches the Top of Andromeda's
her Head:
And, a Star joining, he thus comes to have
A A Winged Horse.
Double Figure in One Common Light;
Affecting to make up an Everlasting
The Cluster of Stars in the Head of Andromeda mingle Their Light with His.
Knot, out of the Stars. Behind him, also,
The Princely Aries; () the first of the 12 Signs, (a Northern one,) of 18
Stars.
Ram, with his wreathed Horns, is placed:
Hard by Whom, The Pisces; () a Southern Sign ( the last of the 12) of 34 Stars.
Fishes; They are a^ a good distance One from the Other; One lying to the
South, the Other to the North.
One of them Cuts it away
Somewhat before the Other; and lies near
To the more chilly Blasts of the North Wind.
At the Feet of Andromeda The Son of Jupiter, by Danae: a Northern
Constellation, of 29 Stars.
Perseus has his Scat; And is exposed to all the most violent storms
That from the North Quarter blow --
Not far from Perseus 's.
whose Left Knee, You see the small The 7 Stars behind, in the Neck of Taurus.
Virgiliae, with their
Dim Light; Thence,'s Fides, the Fiddle; I know not what it should be, unless
(Lyra) the Harp; which is at a good distance from the virgiliae; and spoken of
in Page 145. of this Book.
Fides, slightly joined and Fixed;
And Then, the Ales Avis; perhaps This may be Cygnus the Swan; which is hard by
Lyra, and noted upon in Page 145.
Winged Bird, under the broad Canopy
Of Heaven --


Toward the Head of the i. e. Pegasus.
Horse lies, First, the Right Hand; Then, the whole Body of the Aquarius, () a
Southern Sign (the eleventh) of 45 Stars.
Water-Bearer.

Then, in a spacious Circle, Capricornus; () He follows at the Hanches of
Aquarius; and is a Southern Sign, (the tenth,) of 28 Stars.
Capricorn,
With His He is half Goat, half Fish,
Half-wild Body; breathing from's strong Breast
The extremest Colds: And Him when The Sun; which, when it is in Capricorn, the
Days are at the Shortest; and when in Cancer, the Longest.
Titan in
The Winter-solstice, has invested with
His Constant Light; he turns his Chariot,
And wheels about again --
Not far from Hence, may be seen How the Scorpius, () a Southern Sign (the
seventh) of 24 Stars.
Scorpion, Rising 'bove Water, shows
Himself aloft: And, near His Tail, the Sagittarius, () (Or, the Centaur; there
being Two of them; the Sign, and the Constellation.) a Southern Sign, (the
eighth) of 31 Stars.
Archer
With his Bent Bow: hard by whom, does the Avis, the Bird; but what Bird it is,
I Am at a Loss: The Phoenix, which is near Him, was not known to the Ancients;
nor yet the Peacock, which Bayer makes to be a Southern Constellation of 16,
Kepler of 20 Stars.
Bird,
Most Gorgeous of Feather, spread her self:
And, over's Sagittarius 's, and Aquarius 's too.
Head the Fiery Aquila, (Jupiter 's Bird) a Northern Constellation, of 15
Stars, ( says Ptolomy.)
Eagle flies.


The Delphinus, a Northern Constellation of 10 Stars.
Dolphin is Next, Hence, (now;) He was a great Hunter, and stung to death by a
Scorpion: Made a Southern Constellation, of 38 Stars.
Orion, Rising Obliquely, shines.

And he is followed by The Canis Major; a Southern Constellation, of 29 Stars.
Dog, Refulgent with the Light of Stars.

Then, for the Lepus; a Southern Constellation, of 12 Stars.
Hare Tempering his Course, and never being tired.
At the Tail of the Dog does The Ship, that carried Jason, and his Companions,
to Colchos; made a Southern Constellation, of 45 Stars.
Argo glide along;
( Her (now,) the The two Signs, so named.
Ram, and The two Signs, so named.
Scaly Fishes cover;)
With her bright Body touching the Banks of the Eridanus ( Otherwise, Padus,
(Po) in Italy,) made a Southern Constellation, of 34 Stars.
River.


One may behold her stretching and extending her self a great way: And also,
see the mighty Fetters, that
Are fastened to the Tails of the Fishes: Then,
Near to the side of shining i. e. the Scorpion.
Nepa, view
The smoking Ara; a Southern Constellation, of 7 Stars.
Altar, which the South Breezes cool.


Not far from It, is the Centaurus, The Centauri were a people of Thessaly,
near the Mount Peleon; who first broke Horses for War; and were thought, by
their Neighbors, to be both One Creature: The Poets feign they were begotten
by Ixion, on a Cloud, which he Embraced instead of Juno. The Centaur in
question; some will have to be the Minotaur; Others, Chiron the Son of Saturn,
who taught Physic to Aesculapius, Music to Apollo, Astronomy to Hercules. He
is a Southern Constellation of 37 Stars.
Centaur; Speeding to Hide i. e. His Horsy-part.
one part of himself
Under the Cley.
Chelis of the Scorpion:
Then stretching forth his Right Hand, where the vast
Four-footed Creature is, he lets fly,
And before the Ara.
Altar slays The Scorpion.
him bloudily.
Here, The Serpent; a Southern Constellation, of 27 Stars.
Hydra raises up his Lower Parts:


The Body of him is extended to a very great length; On the Middle Winding often
the Crater, Vas; a Southern Constelation, of 7 Stars.
Goblet stands,
And the shining-feather'd Corvus; a Southern Constellation, of 7 Stars. The
Fable of this Constellation is, That the Crow, being sent by Apoll^, to fetch
water, for a Libation, st^id till a Tree of Figgs were Ripe: (which Fable, says
Bochart, (in Hierozoie. l. 2. c. 13) seems to be derived from Noah's sending
the Crow out of the Ark) And, having satisfied his Longing, went to the
Fountain accordingly; But, coming There, he meets with the Serpent before
mentioned: Wh^reat affrighte^, h^ returns ba^k with the empty Pitcher; telling
Apollo there was no Water in the Fountain. This Untruth being discovered by
Apollo, he prohibited the Crow from ever Drinking at That time of the Year;
and, in memorial of the Fact, placed the Crow, Snake, and Pitcher, in the
Heavens. The Crow is Sacred to Apollo, (the President of Divinations;) for as
much as This Bird, by its diff^rent Notes, is said to foretell fair and foul
weather: Or, for that Ap^llo, fearing the persuit of Typhon, is said to have
assumed the Figure of That Fowl: Or yet, in allusion to the Sun's Departure,
causi^g darkness and night; (of the same Color with the Crow;) as his Return
does the day or light, Representing the Whiteness of the Swan, which is l
kewise Sacred to That God. See Hygious and Bassus, in Germanicum; and Ricciard.
Brixian. Comm^n^ar Symbolic. in Voce, Corvus.
Crow pecks the Extreme.
And Then, (too;) under The Sign so called.
Gemini is He,
Whom Canis M nor; the Little Dog Star; a Southern Constellation, only of 2
Stars. The Poets Fable this Dog to have been Erigone's, which mourned to death
for the loss of his Mistress, who hanged her self for grief that her Father
Icarus was slain by his drunken Paysants.

The Northern Stars and Constellations, (most what) omitted in Thy Poetical
Summary, are, 1. Lyra, the Harp; a Constellation of 10 Stars, according to
Ptolomy; and is seen in the Meridian at Midnight, in the End of July; and
partly at the Beginning, partly at the End of the Year. 2. Cygnus, the Swan; of
19 Stars, says Ptolomy; two of them being Inform: It may be seen hovering in
the Meridian at Midnight, in the Month of July. Possibly, this may be the
Winged Bird, mentioned in the Verses. 3. Sagitta, the Arrow; which Ptolomy
makes to consist of 5 Stars. It transpierces one of the Eagle's Wings; and
passes the Meridian at Midnight, about the End of June. 4. Antinous, or
Ganimede; placed between the Eagle and Sagittary; consisting of 7 Stars, say
Griemberger and Kepler; of 11 (or o) according to Ptolomy, and Bayer; and
coming to the Meridian at Midnight, about the middle of June. 5. Equiculus, or
the Lesser Horse; made up of 4 Stars in form of a Horses Head and Neck. It
comes to the Meridian at midnight, about the Beginning of August. 6.
Triangulum, the Triangle; (Deltoton in Greek;) of 4 Stars, says Ptolomy. This,
at Midnight, comes to the Meridian in the Mouth of October. 7. Coma Berenices,
Berenices's Hair; which Proclus and Stoester make to consist only of 7, but
Kepler of 15 Stars. P^iny (Lib. 2. C. 27.) Seems to make This a Sou hern
Constellation; but Ptolomy places it to the North of the sign Leo, not far from
the Tail thereof.


To these Northern Constellations some late Astronomers have added several
Other Asteris^ns, composed out of the Inform Stars, or Sporades: As, of those
between the Greater Bear, and the Sign Leo, they have formed the River Jordan;
Of those between the North Pole, Perseus, and Auriga, an Aster^s^n called
Camela Pardalis, and Gyraff^; Of the 4 Stars interposed betwixt the Triangle,
and the Tail of the Ram, Another, called Vispa, by some Apes, the Wasp or the
Bees; Of the Tract of Stars running betwixt the Swan, and the Eagle, as far as
Serpentarius, the River Tigris, or, Euphrates; And, to a single Star of the
second Magnitude, placed in the midst between Charles's Wayn, and Coma
Berenices, Sir Charles Scarborough has given the Name of Cor Caroli, in memory
of the most Glorious Prince and Martyr, Charles the First.

The Southern Signs, and Constellations, (mostly) omitted, are, 1. Libra, the
Scales; () the seventh Sign in the Zodiac, consisting (says Ptolomy) of 17
Stars; and mounting the Meridian at Midnight, in the Beginning of May. 2.
Cetus, the Whale; a Constellation, wherein Ptolomy reckons 22 Stars: Two
whereof are in his Hands; for This Fish is conceived to be the same with Dagon,
(or, Dorceto) the Syrian Idol, which was Represented, in the Upper part, after
Human shape, in the Lower, after That of a Fish. It is seen in the Meridian at
Midnight, from the Beginning of October, to the End of December. 3. Eridanus,
or Padus; which some will have to be made a Constellation, in memory of
Phaeton, who was drowned therein. It was called, by the Greeks, (...),
(Fluvius,) and (...), (Fluvius Orionis,) because it springs from the Left Foot
of Orion, and runs from Thence, in a fluxuous Course, Southward. It passes the
Meridian at Midnight, in November. This is Po, the River mentioned in the
Verses above. 4. Lupus, the Wolf; an Asterism between the Dart of the Centaur,
and Scorpius: Ptolomy will have it to consist of 19 Stars. 5. Corona Australis
(sive, Notia) the Southern Crown; consisting, according to the Joint
Computation of Ptolomy, Bayer and Kepler, of 13 Stars; and coming to the
Meridian at Midnight, (but not Visible in Our Hemisphere) in the Beginning of
July.


These Southern Constellations were known to the Ancients: But there are
several Other Southern Asterisms, lately Invented by Modern Astronomers; some
whereof were composed out of diverse Inform Stars heretofore Known; Others, out
of such as have been Newly Discovered, and were never Known in any Former Ages.
Of the First Sort, are, 1. Monoceros, (or, Unicornus,) placed between Orion,
the Greater Dog, and Hydra. 2. Alector i. e. Gallus, the Cock, between the
Greater Dog, and the Ship Argo. Which Stars (yet) Bayer, and Others, reckon as
belonging ad scutulum Navis. 3. Columba, the Dove of Noah, with an Olive Branch
in her Beak; not far from the Greater Dog; which appears not above, tho it runs
near Our Horizon.


Of the Other Kind are the Constellations ( Found out and Denominated by
Frederic Houthman, and other Eminent Navigators, sailing beyond the Line,)
following. 1. Grus, the Crane; seated under the Southern Fish; and consisting
of 13 Stars, (3 of them of the second Magnitude,) according to Bayer and
Kepler. 2 The Phoenix on her Spicy Pyre; between the Southern Fish, and
Eridanus, sub Cauda Ceti; and, say Kepler, and Bulialdus, of 15 Stars. 3.
Toucan, the American Goose; in the midst betwixt the Phoenix, and Indus; and
consisting of 8 Stars, according to Bayer, and Kepler, (jointly): But then, the
First makes 4 of them to be of the Second, the other, only of the Third
Magnitude. 4. Indus, (the Indian) in the Figure of an Indian, holding in either
hand a Dart, and therefore called Sagittifer: Seated between Toucan, and the
Constellation named Pavo; and being, according to the joint Computation of
Bayer, and Kepler, of 12 Stars. 5. Pavo, the Peacock; placed near Indus, under
Sagittary; of 16, says Bayer; Kepler reckons 23 Stars. This one might have
taken to be the same with what the Verses above call Avis ( the Bird) by way of
Emphasis; but that it was not known to the Ancients. 6. Apous, the Bird of
Paradise; following after the Peacock, with its Tail toward the Antarctic Pole;
and consisting of 11 Stars, according to Kepler, Bayer says of 12. 7. Apis,
Musca, the Fly; under the Feet of the Centaur; of 4 Stars, according to the
Joint Account of Bayer and Kepler. 8. Triangulum Australe, the Southern
Triangle; sub fera Centauri, and Ara; of 5 Stars, say both Bayer, and Kepler.
9. Chamaelion, placed directly opposite to the Lesser Bear; (whose Form
(according to the Disposition of the Stars that Compose it) it represents;) and
under the Constellation Musca, into which (as Bartscius describes it) Linguam
vibrat. Kepler makes it to consist of 10 Stars; Bayer only of 9 (or, 8.) 10.
Piscis Volans, Passer Marinus, the Flying-fish, or Sea-Sparrow; seated under
the Ship Argo, next to Dorado, or the Sword-fish. 11. Dorado, (as the Spaniards
call it;) Piscis Auratus, the Golden Fish; consisting of 5 Stars, says
Bartscius, Others reckon 6, Bayer and Kepler (Jointly) 7; with which it
describes and circumscribes the Pole of the Ecoliptic. 12. Hydrus; consisting
of 15 Stars, according to Bayer; Kepler (yet) reckons 20. (or, 21.)


To These may be added Two Nubeculae, the Greater and the Less; and, between
them both, Rombus, which Habreltus has formed, in his Globe, out of 4 Stars,
constituting each Angle thereof.

Sum Total of the Number of the Fixed Stars.
Ptolomy. Griemberg. Bayer. Kepler. Magnitude 1 015 015 017 015 2 045 055 063
058 3 208 201 196 218 4 474 456 415 494 5 217 304 348 354 6 049 186 341 240
Obscure, and Nebulous. 014 008 003 013 Inform, or Sporades. In the Zodiac,
Northern, Southern. 1225. 045 In All 1022 200 081 1709 1392

And Thus much shall suffi e, upon This Subject.


Antecanis, We; the Greeks call (...). (Procyon.)


An Epiphenemical Conclusion; proving, that the Stars were Made, and are
Governed by God.
Now, can any man in his Wits Imagine that this whole Description of the Stars,
and the so Admirable Adornment of the Heavens, could have been produced by
Little Bodies, whirling up and down at Random, and without Order? Or Moreover,
what Other Nature, destitute of Wisdom and Reason, were able to effect these
things, which not only required Reason to the Making of them; but, without a
Consummation of it, are not, as to the bare Quality, to be Comprehended.
Neither yet are These Wonderful only; but naught can be even Greater, or more
Firm: In that the Universe is so Stable, and so compacted for Duration, as not
any thing can so much as be conceived to be more Convenient. For the several
Parts thereof, surrounding on every side the The Earth, the Center.
Middle Quarter, do cohere Equally. And more especially, the Parts of the
World, the Elements.
Bodies continue, bound up one within another; as also, being girt about as it
were with a Cord, are tied together. This is done by i. e. The Sky.
That Nature, which, effecting every thing with Judgment and Reason, is
diffused through the whole World; draws to the To it self, as the Center of
Heaven.
Middle; and i. e. reconciles its Parts.
converts Extremes.

Wherefore, The Contiguity of ^he Parts of the World; and First, of the Earth.
if the World be of a Globose Figure, and for that Reason all its Parts
contained in like Proportion by, and among themselves; It must happen to the
Earth, by necessary Consequence, seeing all its Parts press and tend to the
Middle, (now the Middle in a Sphere is that which is Lowest,) that nothing can
possibly interpose, which may be able to weaken or hinder so great a Contention
of Weights, and Gravity.

And Thus too, the Sea, Then, of the Sea.
tho it be higher then the Land, yet, compassing the Middle Part of the Earth,
it is every way equally Conglobated, and without any Redundancy, or Overflowing.

The Comprehending Air is next to This: Next, of the Air.
It is (indeed) of a Sublime Levity; but yet it conveys it self into all Parts:
Therefore is it Continued, and in Conjunction with the Sea; and naturally
carried toward the Heaven; by the Tenuity and Heat whereof it being Tempered,
yields Vital and Salutary Breath to living Creatures.

Lastly, of the Stars.
Now the highest Part of the Firmament (called the Sky,) surrounding This, does
both retain its own Ardour pure, and not thickened with any mixture; and is
joined to the Extreme part of the Air. In the Sky are the Stars moved; which
both preserve themselves Conglobated, by their own Power, and also sustain
their Motions by means of their very Form and Figure; For they are Round: Which
Forms (as, I take it, I have made out before) are the least subject to
Violence. The Stars are likewise of a Fiery Nature; and therefore, are fed with
those Vapors of the Earth, Sea, Rivers, that are exhaled by the Sun, out of
the Warmed Fens, and from the Waters: And when the Stars, and the whole Sky,
are nourished and refreshed with them, they send them forth, and draw them up
again; so, that little or nothing is lost, or consumed by the Fire of the
Stars, or the Flame of the Sky. The Stoique's General Conflagration, and
Renovation of the World.
From Hence, Our People judge That likely to come one day to pass, which A
Stoical Philosopher, that Writ several Books of Morals.
Panaetius is said to have made some doubt of, Viz. That, at the Last, the
World would be in a General Conflagration; when, upon the Consumption of
Moisture, neither the Earth could be fed; To its Original, the Water.
nor the Air return again, the very Spring of it being gone, when there is no
longer any Water: Thus would nothing be left, save only Fire. Acting by a Soul,
and (so,) a God.
From which Reanimating Power, the World would be Renewed, and in the same
Order, and Beauty.

I will trouble you but with One word more, concerning the Stars: Of Those too,
The Virtues of the Planets convenient for the Birth of things.
that are said to Wander. Of These there is so great a Consonancy, from Motions
very much unlike, that when the Top of Saturn would Chil, the Middle of Mars
Heats, and Jupiter, placed between, Illustrates and Tempers them: Those Venus,
and Mercury.
Two that are below Mars, are assistant to Sol; and the Sun himself fills the
Universe with his Proper Light; and Luna (the Moon) being Illuminated by him,
conduces to Gravidness, Birth and Maturity. So that if any one there be that is
not affected with this Connection of things, this as it were Agreeing
Cimentation of Nature, I take for granted that he never Reasoned with himself
upon any of these matters.

WELL! A Transition from Celestial to Terrestial things; and First, Vegitibles
spoken to.
to descend from Heavenly to Earthly things; what is there in Them, wherein the
skill of an Intelligent Nature does not appear? In the First place, as to
things that spring out of the Ground; the Trunks do both afford Stability to
what they sustain; and draw Juice from the Earth, whereby those that subsist by
their Roots may be nourished: The Bodies of them are also covered over with a
Rind or Bark, to the end that they might be the more secure against Heats and
Colds. As for Vines, now, they lay hold of Props with their Tendrels, as with
Hands; and erect themselves, just as if they were Animals: Moreover, if they be
planted near Cabbages, or Colworts, it is said they will not touch 'em in the
least, but avoid them as things hurtful and pestiferous.

Then, Animals; their Constitutions, Food, Coverings, etc.
What a wonderful Variety is there (likewise) of Living Creatures? How strangely
are they capacitated to this end, that they may, every one, in their respective
kind, preserve themselves? Of Them, some are covered with Hides, others clothed
with Fleeces, and some Overrun with Bristles: Some (we see) are clad with
Feathers; Others, overcast with Scales: Some are Armed with Horns; Others have
the Help of Wings. The same Nature has in a large and plentiful manner provided
Food (also) proper to every one of them. And I could say: What, and how
Ingenious a disposition of Parts, and how admirable a Composure of Members,
there is in the Figures of Animals, for the Receiving, and Digesting of it: For
all Within, is so fashioned and placed, that there is not any thing
superfluous, or not necessary for the Detention of Life. She has (likewise)
bestowed upon Beasts, Sense and Appetite; that, by the one, they might be
incited to an endeavor of getting Natural Food, and, by the Other, distinguish
the Hurtful from the Salutary. Moreover, some of them come to their meat Going;
Others, Creeping; some Flying; and Others, Swimming: And, They, some of them
(also) take it by opening the Mouth, and by the Teeth; Others hook it in to
them with Claws; and some again, by the Crookedness of their Beaks. Some
(likewise) Suck, Others Peck; Some swallow whole, Others Chew; And some (too)
there are so Low, that they can easily feed upon the Ground: While such as are
Taller, as Geese, Swans, Cranes, Camels, are assisted by the longness of their
Necks. i. e. A Trunk.
Hands were given to the Elephant, because the Bulk and Vnwieldiness of his
Body, rendered his coming to Food the more Difficult. As for such Beasts as
Live, by preying upon Creatures of another kind, Nature bestowed upon them
either strength, or speed: Upon some (also) a sort of Contrivance.
Machination, and Cunning: As Spiders, some whereof do (I may say) Weave Nets,
that so, if any thing lights into them, they may destroy it; Others again,
stand upon the Watch, and seize and devour whatever drops. But then, for the
Pinna, a Fish with a rugged brown shell, ending narrow.
Nacre-fish, (Pinna, as the Greeks term it) with its two great shells wide
open, it holds a kind of Combination with the Sprawn, to the end of getting
sustenance. So that, when little Fishes swim into the Gaping shells, the Pinna,
having notice of it, by the Biting of the Sprawn, shuts them in. Thus is there
a Society between Creatures very much Unlike, upon account of procuring Food.
And Herein, it is matter of Wonder, whether these Natures came to Associate, in
consequence of any familiar Congress betwixt one another, or did so even from
i. e. from some Original Principle.
the very Beginning.

There is something (also) to be admired, Amphibious Creatures: and the
Policies,
in those Water Creatures that are bred upon the Land; (...) of (...) ^^^rs'd
of.
as Crocodiles, and the River Tortoises; and some Reptils, (too,) that, tho not
generated in the Water, make to it, (yet,) as soon as able to stir. Moreover,
it is usual with us to set Ducks-Eggs under Hens; by Which, the Ducklings being
Hatched, are for a while fed, as their Damms; but, at length, they forsake
those that produced, and brought them up, and, upon sight of the Water, betake
themselves to it, as their proper and Natural ^lace. So great a Care of
preserving it self, has Nature implanted in every Creature. I have likewise
read of a certain Bird called (Platalea,) the Shoveler, that lives, by watching
of such Fowl as dive into the Water: For, when they have duckt, and caught a
Fish, he flies to them, presses their Head with his Beak till they let fall the
Prey, and then, seizes upon it himself. It is further Written of this same
Bird, that he will fill himself with shells; and, when concocted by the heat of
his Stomach, cast them up again: And thus he extracts out of 'em matter of
Nourishment. Now, the Sea-froggs are said to Ob^^ere; or else, cover themselves
in the Sand, etc.
throw themselves upon their backs on the Sand, just by the Water side; and,
when Fish approach them, as to Baits, kill and devour them. There is a kind of
Natural War between the Kite and the Crow; in so much that the One breaks the
Others Eggs, whenever he lights upon them. Aristotle has noted a great many
things; but a body must needs admire at what he has observed in the Cranes.
Viz. that when, in quest of Warmer places, they cross the Sea, they fly in the
Form of a Triangle; by the highest Corner whereof, they cut and beat back the
Air; the slopings of both sides, as by Wings in the nature of Oars, advantage
them in their flight: And then, the Basis of it is, like a Ship, befriended
with the Winds. They also rest one another Heads and Necks upon the Backs of
those that fly foremost; and, because he that Leads, as having nothing to lean
upon, cannot do This; he, at length, gets behind, that so he (likewise) may
repose himself; the next, of those that have rested, succeeding in his place:
And so they take their Turns, throughout their whole Course. I could produce
sundry other Instances, much of a sort with This; but This may suffice upon the
Main.

But, to come to more familiar matters; The Care, and Impulses of Beasts,
toward keeping themselves in a state of Health.
how solicitous are Beasts to secure themselves? How do they cast their Eyes
round about, while Feeding; and take shelter in Dens? With many other strange
things! And then, how wonderful are those Particulars, which, were not long,
(that is, not many ages) since discovered, by the Industry of Professors of
Physique? The Egyptian Ibes take care to purge themselves by the Vomit of a
Dog. It is reported, that Panthers, when run Mad, by eating venomous Flesh,
have a certain Remedy that, as soon as they have used it, keeps them from
Dying, and Recovers them. The Wild Goats in Crete, being shot with poisoned
Arrows, seek out an Herb called (Dictamnum,) Dittany; and, having Tasted of it,
the shafts ('it is said) drop out of their Bodies. And Hinds too, just before
they Fawn, do thoroughly cleanse themselves with a small Herb termed (Sesela,)
Hart-Wort.

(...) ^f ^s^ D^^gers, (...) ^^curing (...).
Let us, next, contemplate how every thing, respectively, with its proper
Weapons, defends it self against Fear, and Force: Bulls with Horns, Bores with
Tusks, Lions with Teeth: (...) Black (...); for such (...) That in the ^^agg at
the ^eck of this Fish; and therefore the Romans made use of it for Ink.
Some secure themselves by Flight; Others, by Hiding-Holes: The Cuttle-fish, by
the effusion of * Ink; the Crampfish, by Benumbing: And, there are also sundry
Creatures, that keep off their Persuers, by the Intolerable Odiousness of their
smell.

Providential Provisions, for the Perpetual adornment of the World.
Moreover, to the End that the Beauty of the World might never Fail, Providence
has been particularly careful that there should always be Kinds, as well of
Beasts, as of Trees, and all things that either subsist i. e. Trees, and Herbs.
by their Roots in the Earth, or are sustained by their Trunks: All which
(truly) have that strength of Seed in them, as to produce Many out of One. Now
this Seed is included in the most Inward Part of those Berries, that proceed
out of each Stock; and with these same Berries are both Men plentifully Fed,
and the Earth furnished with a Renovation, and Supply of Trees, of the same
sort.

Instincts of Nature, toward the G^neration, and Support of Animated Beings.
What shall I say, (either) to the great Reason that Appears in Beasts, toward
the perpetual conservation of their Kind? For First, they are Male; and Female;
which Nature Framed for the sake of Conservation: Then, the Parts of the Body
are most Convenient both for Procreation, and Conception; And, there are (also)
in both Sexes, most strong Desires of Copulation. Now, when the Seed is: fallen
into its i. e. the Sells of the Womb.
places, it draws all the Nourishment, in a manner, to it self; in which, being
Entrenched, it Forms an Animal: Which Birth, when slipped out of the Womb, the
greatest part of the Damm's Food, in such Creatures as are nourished by the
Dugg, turns to Milk; and, the New-fallen, without any other Directer, then the
pure Instinct of Nature, covets the Teat, and Thence draws sufficient
nourishment. And, to show that there is nothing of Chance in all this, and that
it is the work of a Solertis Naturae.
Wise and Provident Nature, those that bring Many Young ones, as Sows and
Bitches, have a Number of Papps given them; which such have fewer of, that bear
but a few at a time.

What, now, Natural Affections of Beasts, toward their Issue.
shall I say to the Tenderness of Brutes in educating and looking to their
Issue, till able to shift for themselves? For tho Fishes, (it is said,) when they
have Spaun'd their Eggs, take no further care of them; the Spawn being easily
preserved, and brought to Life, in the Water: And tho Tortoises, and
Crocodiles, having difcharg'd their Burdens upon the Land, cover the Eggs, and
so, back again; they Quickening, and being brought up of themselves: Yet Hens,
and other Fowl, not only need a quiet place to Lay in; but also, make Holes and
Nests, and strew them as soft as they can, that the Eggs may be the better
kept: Out of which, when they have Hatched Young; they tend them in such
manner, as, with their Wings, do protect them from Harm either by Cold, or the
Sun, if the Weather be Soultry: And, when they came to be Fledged, they see to
their Flight, and are freed from the rest of their trouble.

Man useful to some parts of the Creation; and other parts of it again,
profitable to Him.
Moreover, to the Health and Conservation of some Animals, and of those things
that grow out of the Earth, is Human Art and Application very Useful: For
diverse Cattle as Plants could not be safe, unless as well Men looked after them.
And then, again, other places afford sundry great Opportunities for our own
Advantage and Increase. The Nile Waters Egypt; and, having Drowned and Flouded
it all Summer, it withdraws, and leaves it softened and Manured to the
Seedsman's hand. Euphrates causes Mesopotamia to be Fertile; as, in a manner,
Renewing the Fields thereof every Year. As for Indus, (which is the greatest of
all Rivers,) it not only cherishes and fattens the Ground with its Waters, but
even Sows it too; being reported to bear along with it Seed of Corn, and the
like, in much abundance. Nay, and I might further Instance in yet more
Particulars, elsewhere, highly worthy of Note; in many Countries beside, richly
fertile of other sorts of Fruits. The Bountiful Provisions of Nature, in order
to Human Convenience and Accommodation.


But, how great is the Bounty of Nature, in providing us so many, various and
pleasant things to be Eaten; and This, not at one season of the Year only; that
so, we might still be delighted with Novelty, and Plenty? How Seasonable, and
Salutary to Man, to Beast, nay to whatever springs out of the Earth, are the
Eastern Winds that she has bestowed? by whose Blasts are Excessive Heats
Tempered, as also the Swift and Certain Courses of the Ocean directed. I have
been Large, already; and yet a great deal must be passed over: For there would
be no end of Insisting upon the Advantages of Rivers, the Tides of the Deep,
continually Ebbing and Flowing; Green and Woody Hills; Salt Pits at vast
distances from the Seacoasts; the Earth abounding with Medicaments that
conduce to Health: In a word, Innumerable Arts for the provision of Food and
Raiment: And then, the Vicissitudes of Day and Night conserve Animated Beings;
affording a Time for Action, and a Time for Rest.

Thus is it every way, The Conclusion of the Third Branch of the Argument.
by all Reason Apparent, that there is nothing in This World, but what is,
after an admirable manner, influenced and administered by a Divine Wisdom and
Direction, to Universal Health, and Conservation. An Explication of the Fourth
General Head, That the Gods consult Human Affairs: Beginning with an Assertion,
that the World, and all things therein, were Created for the sake of Men.


. 4. NOW, if it be demanded for whose sake [this Great Work,] this Pile of so
mighty things was made? Whether for the Good of Trees, which tho destitute of
Sense, are (yet) sustained by Nature? It were Absurd to say so. Or, for tho
Behoof of Beasts? Naught can be more Improbable, than that the Gods should have
framed so wonderful matters upon the score of such as are neither able to
Speak nor Understand. For whom then may the World be affirmed to have been
Created? Why, for those Animated Beings that make use of Reason; That is, the
Gods, and Men: For as much as with Them may None Compare; in that Reason excels
All: Whence, it is Credible, that for the sake of the Gods and Men was the
World made, and whatever is in the same.

An Anatomical Survey of the Body of Man; to Insinuate, by the Composure of it,
that the Gods looked upon him as worth their Care, and deserving of a World to
be made for his Convenience.

And indeed, the excellent Contrivance that there is in the several parts of
Human Bodies, and their being so commodiously adapted to their proper uses, is
an Argument so strong to This purpose, that, upon This only Consideration,
Galen himself, (no great Friend to Religion,) could not but acknowledge a
Deity. In his Book de Formatione Foetus, he takes notice that there are, in an
Human Body, above 600 several Muscles; and there are at least 10 several
Intentions, or due Qualifications to be observed in each of these; Proper
Figure, just Magnitude, right Disposition of its several Ends, Upper and Lower
Position of the Whole, the Insertion of its proper Nerves, Veins, and Arteries,
which are each of them to be duly placed; so that, about the Muscles alone, no
less than 6000 several Ends or Aims are to be attem'd to. The Bones are
reckoned to be 284; the distinct Scopes or Intentions in each of these, are
above 40; in all, about 10000. And thus it is, in some proportion, with all the
other parts, the Skin, Ligaments, Vessels, Glandules, Humors; but more
especially, with the several Members of the Body, which do, in regard of the
great variety and multitude of those several Intentions required to them, very
much exceed the Hom^geneous Parts: And, the Failing in any of these, would
cause an Irregularity in the Body; and, in many of them, such as would be very
Notorious.

Thus, likewise, is it, in proportion, with all other kinds of Beings;
Minerals, Vegetibles: but especially, with such as are Sensitive; Insects,
Fishes, Birds, Beasts; And, in These, yet more especially for those Organs and
Faculties that concern Sensation; but, most of all, for that kind of Frame
which relates to our Understanding Power, whereby we are able to correct the
Errors of our Senses and Imaginations, to call before us things Past and
Future; and to behold things that are Invisible to Sense.

So that, to imagine, that all these things, according to their several Kinds,
could be brought into this Regular Frame and Order, to which such an infinite
number of Intentions are required, without the Con^rivance of some Wise Agent,
must needs be Irrational in the highest degree.


But it will be the more easily apprehended that the Gods have thought Us worth
their Care, if we thoroughly consider the whole Frame of Man's Body, and the
Entire Figure and Perfection of Human Nature. For whereas Meat, Drink, and
Breath, are the Three things that keep all Animals Alive; the It is that
Capacity, which, bounded with the Cheeks and Lips, conteins within its
Precincts the Teeth, Tongue, and the beginning of the Throttle and Gullet: The
Use of it is, to contein the Tongue, and serve it in the fitter performance of
its Actions.
Mouth is most Apt for the Receiving of every one of These: In that, by the
help of the Nostrils, it draws in Air. And the In most practical Constitutions
they are 32 in Number; 16 in each Jaw: viz. 4 Cutters or Fore-Teeth in each
Jaw, which have but One Root; 2 Canine, or Dog-Teeth, These also have but One
Root, but then it is far longer than the other have; and 10 Grinders, on each
side 5; the upper ones having most commonly 3 Roots, and sometimes 4; the lower
only 2, and sometimes 3.
Teeth, that are set and raised in the same, serve to Eat withal, the Meat
being bruised and extenuated by them: The. Fore-Teeth, opposite one to another,
cut it asunder; and the Hind, (termed the Grinders,) Chew it. The It is of a
fleshy, rare, loose and soft substance, and of a flesh different from the rest
of the flesh; so that some have made a fourth kind of flesh proper to it, and
unlike the rest, viz. the fibrous, musculous, and that of the Bowels: It is of
a Triangular figure; and composed of a Membrane, Nerves two on each side; of
Veins and Arteries on each side; and of ten Muscles, on each side five. It is
hot and moist of Temper, like all other flesh: And its Actions are three; to be
an Organ of the Sense of Tasting; an Instrument to distinguish the Voice; and
to help to Chew and Swallow the Meat.
Tongue seeming to contribute somewhat toward this Confection. To the Roots i.
e. of the Tongue.
Hereof cleaves the (...); properly the Ventricle; but, Here, it may seem to be
used for (a part that reaches to it) the Meat pipe or Gullet; which is of a
substance betwixt flesh and sinew, as consisting of one nervous Membrane, and
another fleshy; and which is placed between the Backbone and the Weazon, from
the Roots of the Tongue even to the Ventricle or Stomach. In Swallowing, the
Gullet is drawn downward, and the Weazon upward; which is the cause that we
cannot sup and blow, swallow and breath, together, at the same time.
Stomach, and is next below it: Into which what is taken into the Mouth
descends first: And, reaching to the Two These are two Glandules called the
Almonds, (because like Almonds in figure and magnitude,) which Nature has
placed opposite to each other, at the Jaws, near the Roots of the Tongue, and
close to the Gullet, in the end of the Throat: Their Office being to receive
the spittle falling down from the Brain, both that the too violent falling down
of the humor might not hinder the Tongue in speaking; and also, that the
Tongue might always have moisture as it were laid up in store, lest by
continual speaking it should grow dry, and fail.
Tonsils, on either side it, determins at the lowest and innermost i. e. The
lowest part of the Mouth, the Throat. Now, the Palate, or (as it is commonly
called) the Roof of the Mouth, is nothing else but the upper part of the Mouth
bounded with the Teeth, Gums, and upper Jaw: In which place, the Coat Common to
the whole Mouth is made rough with diverse Wrinkles, that the Meat put up and
down between the Tongue and the Palate might be the better chewed and broken.
This same Coat is woven with nervous Fibers, that, like the Tongue, it may
judge of Tastes: And these Fibers, again, compose a Coat that has a middle
consistence betwixt Soft and Hard; for if it should have been any harder, like
a Bone, or Gristle, it would have been without sense; and if softer, hard, acid
and sharp Meats would have hurt it.
Palate: And, having received the Food put, or (as I may say) thrust into it,
by the rolling and agitation of the Tongue; it sends it down: In which Action,
the parts of it i. e. Of the Gullet.
that are below what is swallowed, are dilated, but those above, contracted. As
for the Aspera Arteria, the Weazon, or Windpipe; whose superior part, from the
Larynx to the Bronchi, is one single Trunk contrived of many round (or rather
sigmoidal) Cartilages connext by intermediate Ligaments, that, by this
Structure it might be kept open, and we secured from Strangulation, which
immediately succeeds its Concision; but the Inferior is divaricated into
Innumerable smaller Branches or Disseminations (by Hippocrates surnamed
Syringae) and distributed into all the quarters of the Lungs, for their total
Impletion with Air; which the Vessels extended from the Heart receive, and
convey into the Ventricles of the Heart.
Rough Artery, (as Physicians call it,) in regard the i. e. the Larynx, or
Head, or Extremity of the Throttle.
Orifice of it is joined to the Roots of the Tongue somewhat higher than where
the i. e. the Gullet.
Stomach is annexed; and that it reaches as far as the Lungs, taking in the Air
that is drawn by Breathing, and, by Respiration, returning the same back again
from the Lungs; it is covered with a kind of i. e. the Epiglottis, Throatflap,
or After-tongue closing the Larynx: It is a soft cartilaginous flap in figure
representing a Tongue, or (if we applaud the phansy of Hippocrates) an
Ivy-leaf; and when we swallow down our Throat, shuts the chink of the Aspera
Arteria, (or Weazon;) for every Morsel that descends this forbidden way, has a
dangerous hautgust of Anacreon's grape (with a stone whereof getting in here,
that Topeing Poet is said to have been choakt) and denounces the same Harsh
Fate. And yet this Body does not so wholly shut up the Throttle, but that some
small quantity of moisture still runs down by the Inner sides, as the Walls
thereof, to moisten the Lungs: for were not This so, Eclegma's were of no use
in the diseases of the Chest.
Lid as it were, which was contrived to the end lest any Morsel should chance
to slip into it, that might stop the Breath. Now, whereas the Capacity of the
Natura Alvi, the Stomach or Ventricle; the more proper Connection whereof is
with the Gullet and Guts, by its two Orifices; with the Brain, by its Nerves;
with the Liver and Spleen, by its Veins; with the Heart, by its Arteries; and
with all the Natural Parts, by its Common Membrane.
Paunch, that is below the i. e. the Gullet.
Stomach, is the Receptacle of Meat and Drink; and that the Lungs, and the The
Heart is of a figure Pyramidal; composed of the most dense flesh of all the
body, by the affusion of blood at the divisions and foldings of the Vessels,
and there concrete, as it happens also to the rest of the Vessels; and is the
Chief Mansion of the soul, the Organ of the Vital faculty, the beginning of
Life, the fountain of the Vital Spirits and so cons^quently the continual
nourisher of the vital heat; the first Living and the last Dying: being made of
a more dense solid and compact substance than any other part of the Body,
because it must have a natural Motion of it self.
Heart draw in breath from without; the Composure of i. e. the Paunch.
This (which almost wholly consists of The Ventricle is of a Substance rather
spermatick than sanguine, in that for one fleshy Membrane it has two nervous;
and is the seat of Appetite by reason of the Nerves dispersed into its upper
Orifice, and so into its whole Substance.
Nerves) is very admirable. It is full of Folds and i. e. on the Inner side of
it.
Wrinkles; and so presses and reteins what it admits, whether Dry or Liquid, as
that it becomes easily changed, and concocted: By being sometimes bound in, and
relaxt at others, overcoming and confounding whatever is The Stomach, by the
ministerial contraction of oblique fibers, welcoms the Meat sent down from the
Mouth with with close Embracement and Coarctation; and firmly retains it
until, by its concoctive faculty and proper heat, it be transformed into a
Mass or Consistence not much unlike the Cream of a decoction of bla^ch'd Barley.
within it. So that both by Heat, (much whereof it is indu'd with, for the
attenuating of Meat) and likewise by Breath, all things being refined and
digested, are conveyed into In re iquum Corpus. The Meat being thus exquisi ely
cook^, is, by the Pilorus Janitor or Inferior Orifice of the Stomach,
discharged into the Intestines or Guts, (which are Double, or rather of Two
sorts, the Thin three in number, and the Thick three also,) and by their
Immutative Action atteins one degree more of elaboration and fermentation.
other parts of the Body. And then, for the The Lungs have a peculiar power to
dilate and contract themselves; are moved at one and the same Instant with the
Thorax; and, in magnitude, proportionably exceed any other of the Viscera, that
a plentiful proportion of air might be sucked by, and contained in them.
Lungs, they are Rare, and of a Softness like a Sponge; and so, most convenient
for the drawing in of Air: And they also contract themselves in taking in
breath, and dilate in returning it back; to the end That Animating Nourishment
whereby living Creatures do more immediately subsist, may be frequently drawn.
Now That i. e. The Chyle, (or rather the Blood,) which, the first concoction
being finished, is, by the vermicular exuction of the Mi kie slender Veins that
are in infinite numbers with open Orifices inserted into the Intestines,
attracted, pre-dispos'd to sanguification, and by distribution conveyed to the
Liver: To which, that the Milky Liquour may arrive more pure and defecated, in
its journey thither, the feculent part, together with the Laxiviated serosity,
is extracted, and, by the Spleeny Branch, derived into the Spleen, which
converts as much of it as its Haematopoietic power can conquer, into Blood, for
the maintenance of it self; and the remainder is excluded partly into the
Haemorrhoid-veins, partly into the Trunk of the Port-vein, and partly by the
Splenetick Arteries.
Juice, by which we are sustein'd, being, by the Guts and Ventricle, severed
from the i. e. The Grosser part thereof.
rest of the Meat, flows to the The Liver, (in Galen's opinion) is the first,
of all the parts of the Body, that is finished in Conformation. It is the Shop
and Author of the Blood: and the Original of the Veins: Gibbous of figure;
Rising up, and Smooth toward the Midriff; toward the Stomach is the sinous or
hollow side of it somewhat unequal and rough by reason of the Distance of the
Lobes, the Original of the Hollow-vein, and the Site of the Bladder of the
Gall: And its chief Connection is with the Stomach and Guts, by the Veins and
Membranes of the Peritonaeum; by the Hollow-vein, and Artery, with the Heart;
by the Nerve with the Brain; and, by the same Ligatures, with all the parts of
the whole Body: Being hot and moist of Temper; and converting the Chyle into
Blood; the work of the second Concoction.
Liver, through certain open and direct passages, that, from the Media
Intestina, which is between the Paunch and the Lower parts.
Middle Entrail, run along to it, even as far as the very i. e. The Vena Porta,
or Gate-vein; which is situate in the sinous or hollow part of the Liver; and
divided into six branches, four Simple, and two Compound: Its Action being, to
suck the Chyle out of the Ventricle and Guts, and so to take and carry it unto
the Liver, unill it may convey back the same turned into Blood for the
Nutriment of the Stomach, Spleen and Guts.
Ports thereof, (as they name them,) and cleave i. e. to the Liver.
thereunto. And from Thence, are Other Veins propagated; through which, the
Nourishment has its Course, when slipped out of the Liver. Now, when the As in
every Concoction, so in This of Sanguification, there redound two invincible
superfluities, Choler, or the Fiery Excrement; and a salt Whey, or lixiviated
Serosity.
Choler, and those Humors that are poured forth of the The Reins or Kidney^
are of a substance fleshy, dense, and solid, lest they should be hurt by the
sharpness of the Urine; in number Two; lie upon the Loins at the sides of the
great Vessels, on which they depend by their proper Veins and Arteries; hot and
moist of Temper; and their Action is, to cleanse the Mass of the Blood from the
greater part of the serous and choleric Humor.
Reins, are separated from this consistence; the Residue turns to Blood, and
flows to the above-named Ports of the Liver; whereunto, all its other i. e.
Veins.
Passages do extend: And, through Them, the Food being, from this same place,
brought into the Vessel termed the Vena Cava; which rises out of the Gibbous
part of the Liver; and, going forth like the body of a tree, is divided into
two great Branches, the Lesser of which goes to the Vital and Animal parts, the
Greater descends from the back-part of the Liver, above the Vertebra's of the
Lions, to the parts beneath. This same Vena Cava is an ample and patent
Orifice, that looks into the Right sinus of the Heart; and drops blood into it,
for the generation of Arterial Blood, the Vital Spirits, and provision for the
Lungs. Some Opinion, that the Blood re-distill'd and elaborated in this
Preparatory is immediately distributed through the whole Body.
Hollow Vein, it is mingled together; and, being now clarifi'd, and elaborated,
is, through it, carried to the Heart; and, from Thence, distributed into every
part by a great many Veins spread all over the There are four conspicuous
Vessels (as Sluices) ordein'd in the basis of the Heart; viz. Vena Cava, and
Vena Arteriosa, (which is the derivative of blood from the Right Ventricle of
the Heart to the Lungs, for their Nutrition, and the principal Material of the
Vital Spirits and Blood) in the Right; and Arteria Venosa, (which conducts the
Air extrinsecally advenient, and prepared in the Lungs, and the blood effused
by the Vena arteriosa from the Right into the Left Ventricle, and expels the
fuliginous Exhalations, and at the same Instant conveys a parcel of the Vital
Spirits into the Lungs;) and Arteria Magna (which dispenses the Vital Spirits
and Arterial Blood, after their exaltation in the Left Ventricle, into the
whole Body) in the Left. -- But more to the point. -- When the Chyle is
clarified by the official selection of the Spleen, it is delivered up to the
Liver, and, by the Transubstantiating Haematopoiesie thereof, perfectly
Metamorphoz'd into Blood; which from Thence, by the ascendent and descendent
Trunk of the Hollow Vein, and its capillary Disseminations, is, by universal
Distribution, communicated to all the parts of the Body.
Body. It were no hard matter to say after what manner the Excrementitious
parts of the Food are detruded, by girding and relaxing the Guts: but That must
be passed over, for Ne quid habeat Injucunditatis Oration. I shall venture to
say, for all This piece of Modesty, that the Choler, being collected into the
Bilous Receptacle or Gall; is, after a convenient Interval of time, from
Thence, through the Choleric Chanel, excern'd into the Duodenum-gut, and
becomes the Bodies Natural Clyster, by its acrimony extimulating the Bowels to
the Exclusion of Ordure. And then, the Salt Whey is, through the Emulgent
Veins, sucked in by the Kidneys; in Them percolated; and from Them discharged,
through the Vreters, into the Vrinary Receptacle, or Bladder; and Then, called
Urine: For Urine is nothing else but the Aquosity or serous Humidity of the
Chyle impregnated or satisfied with the superabundant and indigestible Salt of
our Diet.
Good manners sake. And I shall rather proceed to Treat of this Wonderful
Fabrique of Nature. For the Air drawn into the Lungs in Breathing, is made In
regard the Inspired Air must part with its Intense frigidity, before it
penetrate to the Heart; the Prudent Conformator has provided Respiratours,
Lungs, as the precipuous Organs thereof: For tho the Thorax, and other
neighboring parts may be allowed Causes sine qua non, and contribute their
Inserviency to Respiration, modo secundario; yet, primarily, as from its
Causator, this Motion flows from the Lungs, to which, as well as to the Heart
and Brain, by the Inviolable Charter of Nature is granted a peculiar Innate
quality to dilate and contract themselves.
warm, First, by the Breath it self, and Then, by the Coagitation of the same
Lungs; and, of it, part is sent forth again, by Respiration; and part also,
taken into a certain place of the Heart, called the i. e. The Left; which is
for taking in Air into the Heart.
Ventricle of the The Situation of the Heart is, in the Center of the Body;
(if, in our measure, we except the Thighs and Legs;) and its Basis or Center,
fixed in the middle of the Thorax or Chest, or middle Region of the Body; that
from It, as from a plentiful Fountain, the Vital Heat, and Spirits, may be
promptly diffused into the whole Body. Now, all the Appetitions or Irascible
and Concupiscible Motions cannot be executed, but by the Agitation of the
Heart, Arteries, and fervent Spirituous Blood: Which may satisfy, why the
facultas (...), of necessity, has its residence assigned it, in a Part, of the
hottest Temperature, and indu'd with the power of Perpetual Agitation.
Heart, which has i. e. The Right.
another of the same belonging to it, whereinto, through the aforesaid Hollow
Vein, the Blood flows from the Liver: And Thus, from These Parts, is it
conveyed all over the Body, by A Vein is the Vessel, Pipe, or Chanel of the
Blood, or bloody Matter; it has a Spermatick Substance, and consists of one
Coat composed of three sorts of Fibers.
Veins; and Breath, by An Artery is (also) the Receptacle of Blood, but That,
spirituous and yellowish; and it (likewise) consists of a Spermatick Substance:
But it has two Coats, with three sorts of Fibers. It contains a serous Humor
too; which we may believe, because there are two Emulgent Arteries, as well as
Veins. And then, the Anastomasis of the Veins and Arteries, (that is, the
Application of the Mouths of of the one to the other, by benefit of which, they
mutually communicate and draw the matters contained in them) is very Remarkable.
Arteries: The great numbers of both which, so disseminated every where, do
manifest a certain Inconceivable Virtue of an Artificial and Divine Work. What,
now, shall I say of the Bones; which, supporting the Body, are strangely tackt
together, and apt as well for stability, accommodate for bending the Limbs, as
for Motion, and every Action. Add to This the A Nerve, is a Simple part of the
Body, bred and nourisht by a gross and phlegmatic humor, such as the Brain,
(the Original of all Nerves) and also the Spinal Marrow; indu'd with a faculty
of Feeling, and often times of Moving too. It is covered with a Double Cover,
from the two Membranes of the Brain; and besides also, with a Third, proceeding
from the Ligaments which fasten the hinder part of the head to the Vertebra's,
or else, from the Pericranium.
Nerves, (whereby the Joints are contained;) and the winding Extension thereof;
for They, like the Veins, and Arteries that derive, and proceed from the Heart,
are run along into all the Body.

To This so exact and curious Providence of Nature, might a great deal be
adjoined, The Particular Favors of the Divinity to Human Nature; and, the
Convenient Situation of the Senses.
to insinuate, how many, how valuable things have, by God, been conferred upon
Men. For, First of all, he constituted them Raised, Upright, and Erect from the
Ground; that, by beholding the Heavens, they might conceive an Apprehension of
the Deity: Man being, upon the Earth, not as a Dweller, and Inhabitant; but as
a Contemplatour (I may say) of matters Celestial and Above; the prospect
whereof, is not vouchsafed to any other kind of Animal. And then, the Senses,
(the Interpreters and Distinguishers of things) are, in a wonderful manner,
for necessary uses, both framed, and seated in the Head, as in a Tower. For,
the Eyes, The Eyes.
being as Sentinels, do hold the highest place; by which means, seeing further,
they perform their Function. It being the business of the Ears The Ears.
to take in Sounds, (which naturally Ascend) they are rightly fixed in the
Uppermost parts of the Body. So too, the Nostrils, The Nostrils.
in that all Scents are carried upward, are properly placed Above: And, since
they have much judgment of Meats and Liquours, it is with good Reason that they
are near the Mouth. The Taste, The Taste.
being to discern the quality of what we feed upon, abides in That i. e. The
Inward part of the Mouth, near the Throat. The Touch.
Part wherein Nature has opened a Passage for the Receipt of things fit to be
eaten or drunk. But the Touch is, proportionably diffused thorough the whole
Body; that so, we might be sensible of Blows, and the more violent Approaches
of The precipuous Organ of the Touch is the Skin; chiefly that part wherewith
the Hands are lined, as destined to the Common Apprehension of all things
Tangible: But the Adaequate, are the Membranes; by the benefit whereof, all
other parts (the Skin excepted) obtein the Sense of Feeling.
Heat and Cold. And, as, in Buildings, the Architect averts from the Eye and
Nose of the Master, things that, in their Course, were of necessity to be
Offensive: so (likewise,) has Nature placed at a distance from the Senses, All
that is of that kind.

The Exquisit Frame of the respective Organs of the Senses: And, first, the
Eyes, and their appertenences d^scours'd of.
But, what Artificer, save only Nature, (than whom, none is more Skillful) could
ever have attein'd unto and discovered so much Art, as is in the Senses? First,
she has overcast and bounded the Eyes with very Thin Membranes; making them
both Transparent, (that the Sight might work thorough them,) and Firm, (to keep
them in.) She likewise framed the Eye Balls slippery and rolling; that so, they
might avoid what would hurt them, and readily turn the sight any way they
pleased. Nay, and the very Aristotle's Opinion is generally subscribed to; That
Vision is made, by the Recep^ion of Visible Images into the Eye; and, tha^
neither Ra^lii, nor Light, or Spirit, (as so^e (...)) before him) (...) the
Orga^ toward the Object.
Acies, (called the Pupil,) whereby we See, is so Little; that it can easily
shun what may harm it. The Lids (the Coverings of the Eyes) are most soft of
Touch, that they should not offend the Sharp; and, conveniently contrived, as
well for shutting up the Pupils, (to keep things from falling in) as for
Opening them: she providing, that This may ever and anon be done, with great
quickness. These Eyelids are (also) fortified with a Palisade (I may say) of
Hairs; that, when the Eyes are open, may beat off any thing that falls thereon;
and, when closed up with sleep, and no need of 'em to look with, be as a shade,
for them to rest under. Moreover, they are commodiously lodged; and fenced on
all sides with Rising Parts: For, first, the Upper, being overshadow'd with the
Eyebrows, ward off the Sweat, that falls down from the Head and Front: Then,
the Cheeks, (underneath, and somewhat Rising) secure all below. The Nose is in
such manner planted, as if it were a Wall raised between the Eyes. Now, the
Hearing is always Open; The Ear, and the other Instruments of Hearing, spoken
to.
there being need of it, even while we sleep; for, upon the entrance of Sounds
into the Ear, we awake; Its Passage is flexuous, lest any thing should slip
into it; as might be, lay it simply and directly Open: Care (also) is taken,
that if an Insect any way attempt to get into it, it may be laid fast in the
Ear-wax, as in Birdlime. On the Outside, stand erect those, which we term Ears;
framed both to cover and protect the sense, and to keep the sounds, brought
into them, from slipping out again, and vanishing, before the sense be struck
thereby. Their Entrances are Hard, almost Horny; that so, the Sounds, being
repeated by these i. e. Natural Qualities of Hardness and Wreathedness.
Natures, might be amplified in the many Windings of the same: And therefore,
as well in Wind, as Strung Instruments, the Tone is resounded in the Bellies,
and, from those tortuous and recluse places, returned much As to the manner of
Hearing; the Air, being impregnated with a Sound, conducted and conglemerated
by the external Ear, first strikes upon the most dry and resounding Membrane
the Drum-head, (a round Parchment (so named) in the end of the Foramen of the
Ear, to exclude the external from rushing in, and concorporating with the
internal or congenite Air.) This, thus stricken, justles and impells the Three
small Bones, (viz. the Anvil, Stirrup and Hammer, (they borrow these
appellations rather from their Figure, than Office) that are found behind the
Drum-head, in the second Cavity of the Ear,) and impresseth the character of
the sound on them: They immediately glance it forward to the Implantate Air;
(there being in the Ear an Aerial substance, generated of the most pure and
rarifi'd portion of the Generative Materials the Seed, and Maternal Blood;
which, by reason of Cognation, does welcome and embrace the dilated Species of
Sounds, and become the praecipuous Instrument of Hearing.) This shoes it,
through the Windows of the Os petrosum, (or, Stony Bone,) into the Winding
Buroughs; Thence, wafts it into the Labyrinth; Thence, into the Snail-shell;
and, at last, surrenders it to the Auditory Nerve; (This is a production from
the fifth Conjugation of the Brain, running, through the perforation of the
stony Bone, into the Ear; and there, by a particular constitution, determined
and continued for the special and determinate comprehension of Audibles;) which
presently transmi^s it to the Common Sense, as unto the Censor or Judge.
louder. Thus too, have the The Nostrils (as the Means of Smelling) mentioned:
As also, the Taste.
Nostrils (which are still open for needful occasions,) their Entrances
somewhat more contracted, lest any thing hurtful should get into Concerning
the Instrument of Smelling, in a licentious acceptance, all men agree upon the
Nose; but in a more satisfactory and s^vere, the best Physicians have
determined that the Two Mammillary Processes of the Brain are the principal
Censorium. -- But more Particularly -- The Spungy Bone of the Internal Nose
(for Anatomists distinguish the Nose into External and Internal) is the
Muniment of the two Mammillary productions, dril^'d full of slender holes or
Spongiosities, through which, the inspired Air immediately conveyed to the
Brain, and, in which, the Air qualified with Odours, undergoes a praerequisite
alteration and preparation, before it be presented to the prime Organ of
Smelling: Which are, two long, white, nervous productions of the Brain, situate
within the Cavity of the Skull, invested (as all other Nerves are) with a cr^ss
and thin Membrane, and derived to the Basis of the Nose,
'em; and are never without an humor not improper for repelling Dust, or any
such thing. So, is the The Taste d^s^erns the difference of Sapours: and the
proper and approximate Instrument thereof, is the Tongue; and, in Particular,
(not the Investing Tunicle, as Gal^n, and of er him Vaselius opinio^'d; nor the
Gustatory Nerve, expans'd into the Investment, as some conceive by tradition
from Columbus, but) the pulp or carn^ous substan^e of it; which, being of a
peculiar and unparalled constitution, sof^, lax, rare, and spongy, does
imbibe the Sapours comprehended in their own liquid principles and
conser^atories, and impregnated by the salive humidity of the Mouth.
Taste admirably planted; being seated in the Mouth; and That, too,
conveniently both for Use, and Security.

Each Human Sense (too) far surpasses the Senses of Brutes. Human Senses more
Excellent than those of Beasts; proved in sundry Instances.
For, first of all, the Eyes, in those Arts that fall under the Judgment of
Sight, in Painted, Framed, or Carved Images, as also, in the Motion and Gesture
of Bodies, discern many things much more subtly. They likewise judge of the
Neatness, Order, and Decency (as I may term it) of Colors, and Figures: Nay
and of greater matters than any yet: for they take cognizance of Virtues and
Vices, and know whether a man be Cholerique, or Gentle, Merry or Sad, Active or
Sluggish, Stout or Timorous. There is, moreover, a certain admirable, and
artificial Judgment in the Ears; by which, in the Tunes of the Voice, of Pipes,
and of Strung Instruments, we distinguish the Variety of Sounds, the Stops and
Articulations of the same Voice, and the sundry kinds of Tones, as the Shrill,
Hollow; Smooth, Harsh; Sharp, Flat; Trilling, Firm; All which are observed only
by Human Ears. So too, in the Nostrils is there much judgment upon the Matter
of Taste, and even of Touch; for the emprovement, and fruition of which Senses,
are more Tricks invented, than I could wish there were. For every body sees to
Or else, from when e proceeded the, etc.
what degree the Compounding of Unguents, Saucing of Meats, and the Delicacies
of Corporal Pleasures are arrived.

We stand indebted to the Gods for our Reason, the Faculty of Speech, and all
our Abilities of Mind.
And then again, whoever clearly discerns not, that the very Soul and Mind of
Man, his Reason, Understanding, Prudence, were Perfected by a Divine Care; I
hold him to have no claim to any of them. But while I handle This Point I wish
(Cotta!) I were Master of your Eloquence: For how would You illustrate, First,
what an Understanding we have of Matters; Then, how we lay together and confer
Premises and Consequences; by such means collecting what may be concluded from
each several; and This we find out by i. e. Syllogism.
Reason: We (moreover) Define things apart, and then take them all together by
Comprehension; and so, come to understand Knowledge, the Power thereof, the
Quality, and that then It is not ought more Excellent, even in God himself.
Further, how valuable are those things which You There can be no Art without
Science; and They held the very best Philosophy to be no better than Inscience.
Academiques either think slightly of, or utterly exclude! which tho they are
without us, yet the perception and comprehension of them fall both under the
Senses, and the Mind, and of which, (also) when examined and compared one with
another, we make up Arts, partly necessary for the Convenience, and in part for
the Pleasure of Life. And, now, for the Mistress of all the rest, (as you are
wont to term it) the Faculty of Speech, how Illustrious, how Divine is it! In
that, it enables us to Learn what we were Ignorant of, and to instruct others
in what we know: And then, by This we Exhort, Persuade, Comfort the Afflicted,
deliver the Affrighted from their Fear, moderate Excessive Mirth, and assuage
Lust and Anger. This it is, that has brought us over from a Wild and Salvage
course of Life, and bound us up in the Fellowship of Civil Institutions, Laws
and Cities. Nor yet will ye believe unless you mark it well, how exquisite the
Work of Nature is, in order to the use of Speech. For, in the first place, an
i. e. Aspera Arteria; or, the Weazon.
Artery runs along from the Lungs even to the Inward part of the Mouth;
thorough which the Voice, drawing its Original from the i. e. The Brain, which,
as I said before, Plato held to be the Seat thereof.
Mind, is conveyed, and sent forth. Next, in the Mouth is placed the Tongue,
bounded by the Teeth, and This modifies and terminates the Immoderate Effusion
of the Voice, and so renders the Sounds thereof distinct, and articulate; by
driving it to the Teeth and other parts of the same Mouth. Hence is it, that i.
e. The Stoiques.
Our Party usually Resemble the Tongue to the Used in playing upon the Cittern,
and other Musical Instruments. The Aptitude, and Usefulness of the Hand; and
the Works produced by the some.
Quil, the Teeth to the Strings, and the Nostrils to those Cavities that, in
Tunes, resound to the Strings.

Thus too, how apt, and ministerial to how many Arts, are the Hands that Nature
has given to Man! For the Fingers are easily bent, and with as little trouble
stretched, by reason of the Supple Commissures; nor is there any pain at all in
either Motion. Therefore is the Hand, by Application of the Fingers, fit for
Painting, Turning, Carving, and Playing upon Pipes, and Strung Instruments.
These, now, are Works of Delight; the Next, of Necessity; as Tilling the
Ground, Building of Houses, Coverings for our Bodies both Woven, and Knit; And
the whole Workmanship of Brass and Iron: Which may give us to understand, that
it is by the Activity and Invention of the Mind, the Perception of the Senses,
together with the address of Artificer's hands, that we come to have whatever
may be needful either to our Clothing, Ornament, or Security; to have Cities,
Walls, Houses, Temples. By the Industry, (likewise) that is to say, by the
Hands of Men, has great, both variety and plenty of Meats been prepared; the
Fields, with their help, producing many things as well of present use, as that
are ripened by time: And we also feed upon Flesh, Fish, and Fowl; Catching
some, and bring up others. Moreover, we Back Four-footed Beasts, and make them
fit for Carriage; by their strength and speed augmenting our Own: On some of
them we lay burdens, and impose Yokes; and we turn the Understanding.
Quick Senses of Elephants, and the Quickness of scent.
Sagacity of Dogs, to our proper advantage. We dig Iron, (a Metal necessary
for Tilling the Ground) out of the Caverns of the Earth. And find out the most
secret Veins of Brass, Silver, Gold; as being both Convenient for Use, and
graceful for Ornament. As for Trees, and all Timber, Planted and Forest, with
some thereof we make Fires to warm us, and dress meat; and some, again, we
Build with, that, by Houses over our Heads, we may be protected against Heats
and Colds. The same (also) is highly Useful for Making Ships; By whose Voyages
we are, from every Part, plentifully supplied with all Conveniences for Life.
Furthermore, it is We only that Command the most Violent things that Nature has
ordein'd; the Sea, and Winds; by means of the Art of Navigation: And we hold
the possession and benefit of a great deal of what the Ocean produces. In Man
(too) is the Dominion of all the Goods of the Earth: We enjoy the Fields and
the Mountains, the Rivers and the Lakes are Ours; We sow Corn, and plant Trees;
render the Ground Fruitful by Inductions of Water; bound, direct, or divert
Rivers, as we think good; In a word, we endeavor, in the i. e. The Part^ of
the World.
Nature of Things, with our Hands to effect (as it were) Another Nature.

The Excellencies and Per^^^ions of Human Reason.
What, either, shall we say to Human Reason? has it not penetrated even into
Heaven it self? For it is We Alone, of all Earthly Creatures, that have
understood the Risings, Settings, and Courses of the Stars: By Man are the
Days, Months, Years determined; and the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, (What,
How great, and When they will be,) Noted and Foretold for all time to come.
Now, the Mind, contemplating these things, receives Thence a Knowledge of the
Deity: from That springs Piety, to which is annexed Justice, and the rest of the
Virtues: And from These, results a Happy Life, Like and Equal to that of the
Gods; falling short of the Celestial Beings in no other Particular, save only
(what is not necessary to Happy Living,) Immortality.

The Conclusion of this Branch of the Argument.
Now, in setting forth these things, I take it I have fully made appear how far
Human Nature exceeds That of all other Animals. From whence should be
collected, that neither such a Figure and Location of Members, nor This
strength of Wit and Understanding, could ever have been effected by Chance.

The 2d Branch of the Subdivision; proving, that All things in the W rld, that
are of Human use, were, created for the good of Man. The whole World in General
made for the Benefit of Men: And, particularly, first, the Sun, Moon, and
things above.
IT remains, for me to make out, by way of Peroration, that whatever in this
World is of Human use, was made and provided for the sake of Man.

In the First place, then, the whole Universe it self was created for the sake
of the Gods and of Men; and, whatever is therein prepared and invented for the
Behoof of Man. For, the World may be said to be the Common House of the Gods
and Men, or the City of them both: It being They alone, that, acting by Reason,
do live by Rule and Civil Institutions. Wherefore, as it is to be presumed,
that Athens and Lacedemon, were built upon the score of the Athenians, and
Lacedaemonians; and, as all things in those Cities are rightly affirmed to
belong to the said People: So, is All that the Universe contains, to be held to
appertain to the Gods, and to Men. Thus, the Circuits of the Sun, Moon, and the
rest of the Stars, tho they be undoubtedly necessary to the Cohesion of the
World, yet are they (also) exposed as a Sight, to Men: For there is no
Representation more Beautiful, more Congruous to Skill and Reason, or that is
less apt to Sat us; In as much as their Courses being Definite, we, so, come
to know the Maturities, Variations, and Vicissitudes of Times and Seasons: And,
if These are only understood by Men alone, for Their sake must they be supposed
to have been Ordered and Appointed.

And then, for the Earth, Then, that the Earth, and the Productions thereof,
were made for the lawful use of Men only; and not of Beasts also.
which is so fertile in Fruits, and various sorts of Grain, sending them forth
in great abundance, can It be thought to produce these things for the sake of
Brutes, or of Men? What need I mention the Vine, or the Olive Tree, whose most
plentiful and exhilerating productions are of no use at all to Beasts; neither
do These know how either to plant, or dress them, or gather in due season and
store up their Fruits: The Benefit and the Care of all That, belonging to Man
alone. As Pipes, (therefore) and Strung Instruments, are presumed to have been
invented upon the account of such as can make use of them; so, must what we
speak of be acknowledged to have been provided for the only behoof of those
that know what to do with them. Nor yet will it hold, that because other
Animals pilfer or snatch away some of These, therefore were they produced for
Their sakes also: for Men store not up Corn for the benefit of Mice or
Pismires, but of their Wives, Children, and Dependents. Beasts then, (as I said
before,) take these things by stealth; but the Owners of them, openly, and
freely. So that, it is not to be denied but that these great stores of things
were provided upon the score of Men. An Irony.
Unless, perchance, such a plenty, and variety of Apples, and their
pleasantness both of Taste, Smell, and Sight, should raise Doubt, whether or no
Nature caused them for the good of Man alone.

Next, that the Beasts themselves were made for the sake and service of Men.
Nay, in truth, so far were any of These from being made for the behoof of
Beasts also; that, we see even Beasts themselves to have been generated for the
service of Men. For, what are Sheep, (which could neither get food, subsist,
nor bring forth their Young, without the Human care and assistance) good for;
but only to furnish us with Clothes, by their Fleeces shorn, and woven? And
then, for the fidelity and watchfulness of Dogs, their affectionate Fawnings
upon those they know, and so great hatred against Strangers; their Incredible
Sagacity and wonderful Cheerfulness at the Sport, what does all this speak,
but that they were bred for the Convenience of Men? What need I mention the
Ox; whose very Back plainly shows, he was never framed for Carriage; but his
Neck made for the Yoke, and his strong, broad Shoulders for drawing the Plow?
[To which Creature, in the Golden Age, that Poets tell of, when the Ground was
to be Tilled by a cleaving of the Glebe, no sort of Violence was even offered:
But then, at length, came on that Iron i. e. Race, or Generation.
Age,
That, First, dared Hammer out the Fatal Sword,
And kill and eat the Tamed and Broken Ox:
So Useful and Beneficial were Oxen Then held to be, that it was deemed an
Impiety to eat any of their Entrails.] It would be Long to recount the
Advantages we receive from Mules and Asses; which (questionless) were Created
for the use of Men. But, as to the Swine, what else serves it for, but to be
Eaten? And Chrysippus says, that its Soul is instead of Salt, to keep it from
Putrefaction. And, in regard the Flesh of it was very good Man's-meat,
therefore did Nature make it one of the most Fruitful of Creatures. What shall
I say to the Multitudes and Deliciousness of Fishes, or of Birds; which are in
so many respects grateful and delightful to us, that, sometimes, one would
almost think i. e. The Stoique's Providence had, with Epicurus, held Pleasure
to be the Supreme Good, in that she made such plentiful provisions for the
Gratification of the Senses; especia^ly of the Touch, and Taste.
Our (...) had been Epicurean. Neither yet are these to be Caught, but by Human
Art and Cunning: Tho it is not to be forgot, neither, that some Fowl, both Et
Alites, and Oscines.
Wild and Tame, (as our Augurs speak) are to be presumed to have been Created
for matters of Divination. Moreover, we give Chase to Wild and Savage Beasts,
as well to the end of feeding upon them when Run down, as of exercising our
selves in Hunting, as in a kind of Military Discipline; and also, of making use
of them, ( Elephants, etc.) when Tamed and Instructed: And we (likewise)
extract out of Their Bodies, (and not only from certain Plants and Herbs,)
sundry Medicines for Wounds, and Diseases; The benefits whereof we have
perceived, by long, and frequent Experience.

All things as well within, as upon the Earth belong to Man.
With our Minds, as with Eyes, may we survey the Earth, and the whole Sea;
observe the Seasons, occasioning the perfection of all things, the spaciousness
of the Fields, the thick Woods that grow upon Mountains, the Grazings of
Cattle, as also the Fluxure of the Waters with incredible Swiftness and
Rapidity. Neither is it only upon the Ground, but even within the most Inward
Caverns of it, that an Infinite number of profitable things are to be found;
which, in that they were only made for the good of Man, The Art and Benefits of
foretelling things to come, urged in proof of the Gods taking care of Mankind
in General.
therefore can they by Him alone be discovered.

But, as to what you will both of you (possibly) take occasion to find fault
with, Cotta, because Of whom Cotta was a Follower.
Carneades was very free of his Invectives against the Stoics, and Velleius,
for that Epicurus had not so low an Opinion of any thing as of the Prediction
of future Events, to me it appears to be one even of the greatest
Confirmations, that Human Affairs are consulted by the Providence of the Gods.
For, doubtless, a Divination there is, that discovers its self in sundry
places, things, and seasons, in matters of Private, but more eminently of
Public moment: The Aruspices.
Priests foresee many things; so do the Augurs too; much is declared by
Oracles, by i. e. Their Spirit of Prophesying.
Vaticination, by Dreams, and by Portents, and Prodigies; the knowledge
whereof, is (oftentimes) a means of our acquiring things highly to our
Advantage and Satisfaction, and (not seldom) of escaping Dangers. So that, be
This what it will, (whether Power, Art, or Nature,) it is questionless bestowed
only upon Man, and to none else, by no Other, than the Immortal Gods, to the
end of discerning things to come.

Now, How these Arguments are^^^ be used.
tho you may chance to withstand any of these Arguments, single; yet, take them
laid and bound up all together, and they must needs (surely) have effect upon
you.

Nor, again, And not in General only, b^ of Particular Men too; as proved in
sundry Instances of famous Men, that could not have come to be so Great, (he
says,) had they not been specially assisted from above.
is it only of Mankind in General that the Gods are wont to take care; but they
provide (likewise) for each Individual thereof. So that, we may Contract the
Race of Man in the Universality, and (gradually) reduce it to Fewer, till (at
last) we bring it to Particulars: For if, for the Reasons already given, we
presume that the Divine Powers consult the Weal of all Men, wherever they be,
in whatsoever part or quarter of the Earth, at the greatest distances from this
Portion of it which we Inhabit; they must needs take care of those People that
dwell upon the same parcel of Land, in common with Us, from East to West: And,
if they Interest themselves in the Affairs of all that live in the great
Island, (as I may call it) which is usually termed the Circle of the Earth;
they must necessarily have a concern for those, that abide in the several
Quarters of this same Island, as There were only these t^ree known Quarters of
the World in the Author's days; the discovery of America, bearing no higher a
date, than the Reigns of Henry the VII. of England, and Ferdinand and Isabella
of Spain.
Europe, Asia, Africa; and Consequently, they show kindness to all the Branches
of these Quarters too, as Rome, Athens, Sparta, Rhodes: and Then, they respect
the particular Men of these same Cities, separate from the Universality, as,
Curious, Fabricius, Coruncanus, in the War with Pyrrhus; in the First
Carthaginian, Calatinus, Duillius, Metellus, Lutatius; in the Second, Maximus,
Marcellus, Africanus; and, next after These, Paulus, Gracchus, Cato; or, in our
Father's Memory, Scipio, Laelius: Nay and many Eminent men beside, has, not our
City only, but even Greece too, produced; none of which ('it is to be presumed)
could ever have come to be such, had they not been specialy assisted from
above. Upon which consideration it was, that the Poets, and particularly Homer,
became moved to join to those Chiefs among the Heroes, Ulysses, Diomede, The
Presence and Appearance of the Gods (again) inculcated, in proof of their
having a Concern for what passes here below.
Agamemnon, Achilles, some certain Deities, as Companions, in all their Perils
and Dangers.

Furthermore, the Presence and often Appearance of the Gods themselves, (as I
have noted above) speaks out, that, by Them are both Cities, and Particular
men, regarded: So (likewise,) may as much be gathered, from the significations
of things to come, portended to diverse, as well sleeping as waking. We are
(moreover*) forewarned of many things, by strange sights, by the Entrails, and
sundry other ways; which daily Custom has taken such notice of, that Thence has
been made up an Art of Divination. Never, therefore, came any man yet to be
Mighty, without some Divine Impulse.

Neither is it sufficient to overthrow This; The Objection of Particular
Casualties, in derogation of a Divine Providence, Resolved.
that, if Storms do Hurt to the Corn or the Vineyard of any man, or Fortune
deprive him of some Conveniences of Life, we should then presume one that
suffers under any such accidents, to be either out of the Favor, or the Care
of the Deity. For, the Gods are taken up about Great matters, and let pass
Smaller: Beside that, to men of approved Worth, i. e. Nothing comes amiss.
all things (still) fall out prosperously; as has been sufficiently proved, by
Our Party; as also by the very Prince of Philosophers, (Socrates) in his
Discourses upon the Fullness and Perfections of Virtue

This is what I could think of, The Conclusion; by way of Exhortation to, and
Preingagement of Cotta.
on the sudden, as proper to be said touching the Nature of the Gods: But, if I
may advise you, (Cotta!) do You undertake the same Argument; and Reflect, that
you are a Principal Citizen, that you are Pontifex. Since Your Party may take
which side they please, rather let This be your Choice; upon This bestow all
that Power of Disputing, which you acquired by Rhetorical Exercitations, and
the Academy has improved: For, it is a Lewd, an Impious Custom, to Argue
against the Gods, be it either in Jest or Earnest.

The End of the Second Book.
M. T. CICERO Touching the NATURE OF THE GODS, etc. The Third Book.
LVCILIVS having in This manner Concluded; Cotta, Smiling, Cotta's Reply to
Balbus's Exhortation.
it is with the Latest, Balbus, (said he,) that you Praecipis.
bespeak me what to Defend: For, thoroughout the Course of your Argument, I
still bethought me how to object against it; not so much in Contradiction to
You neither, as of Informing my self in those things that I did not so
perfectly Comprehend. Tho, to deal plainly, since every man may use his own
Judgment, it were hard to make Me Think just as You would have me.

Here Velleius Interposing, As also, to Velleius, in preference of the
Reasonableness of the Stoiques Doctrine, upon this Topique of the Nature (or
Essence) of the Gods, to That of Epicurus: ^o, to insinuate the greater
difficulty to confute it.
you cannot Imagine, Cotta, (said he,) with how great Expectancy I shall attend
you; for, our Friend Balbus was very well pleased with your Disputation against
Epicurus; and therefore, now, in My Turn, I will as diligently listen to what
you say against the Stoiques: And, I hope you come well provided, as usually. I
had need be so truly, Velleius, (Replied Cotta;) for, I cannot deal with
Lucilius as I did with You. Pray'e, why? (said Velleius again.) Because, in My
Opinion, (Returned the Other) your Epicurus does not over earnestly contend in
behalf of the Divine Beings: Only, he durst not flatly deny their Existence,
for fear of incurring Censure: For, while he delivers that the Gods neither
Act, nor so much as Intend any thing at all, and that they are indu'd with
Human Members, but yet incapable of employing them, he seems to Rally with us;
and thinks it enough, if he write, that there is a certain Blessed and Eternal
Nature. Whereas, I presume, you observed how many things were spoken by Balbus;
and such, as that, tho they should not be absolutely True, they agree, yet, and
are Consistent one with another. And therefore, I am thinking, (as I told you)
not to proceed by way of direct Answer to his Oration, but of Enquiry, rather,
touching such Particulars as I did not so well understand. His Proposal to
Balbus, (by way of Deliberation) as to the Method of his proceeding in Dispute
against him: With the Other's Reply, thereupon.
Now, Balbus, I leave it to you, whether you will Resolve me severally to what
of scruple I shall propose, or stay till I have gone thorough All. Why truly,
(Replied Balbus,) if you want to have ought Explained, I am for answering out
of hand: But, if you Interrogate, to the end rather of Pozing, than of
Understanding me, even which you please; I will either Reply immediately to
each Demand, or, when you have done, Rejoyn to all in Gross. Very well, (said
Cotta;) Then, let us proceed as the Method of the Oration directs. Cotta's
previous Rejoinder to Balbus's admonishing him, in the Close of his Argument,
to reflect that he is a Chief Citizen, and the High Priest: He Thence taking
occasion to deliver his thoughts concerning the Opinions of their Ancestors as
to matters of Religion, and the Established Rites and Ceremonies of their
Religious Worship.
But, before I speak to the Matter, a word concerning My self: For, I bear
great regard to your Authority, Balbus; and particularly, to that passage, in
the Close of your Discourse, which exhorts me to Remember, I am both Cotta, and
Pontifex: Whereby (I judge) you would Intimate, how much I stand obliged to
uphold the Opinions handed down to us from our Ancestors concerning the
Immortal Gods, and the established Rites and Ceremonies of Religion. Now, in
very deed, These I both Will, and ever Did, Defend: Nor shall what can be
alleged by any, ( Learned or Unlearned,) Remove me from that Persuasion
touching the Worship of the Immortal Powers which I have entertained upon the
Credit of our Forefathers. For, when Religion is the Question, I follow the
High Priests T. Coruncanus, P. Scipio, P. Scaevola; and not Zeno, Cleanthes, or
Chrysippus: And, I give more heed to my Friend C. Loelius, (the Augur, and a
Wise man,) Treating of Religion in that famous Speech of his; than to any He
whatever amongst the Stoiques. And, as the whole Body of the Roman Worship is
divided into the Mysteries of the Altar, and of the Observation of Birds;
whereunto may be subjoined a Third Branch, in the Case of any thing signified
by the i. e. The Quindec^mviri, amongst the Romans; part of whose office it
was, as well to expound as to keep the Oracles of the Prophetesses, etc. Ten,
of which ( Persica, Libyca, Delphica, Cumaea, Erythraea, Samia, Cumana,
Hellesponta, Phrygia, and Tiburtina,) were so famous of Old throughout the
World.
Sibyl Interpreters, or by the Southsayers, in way of Prediction upon Portents
or Monsters; I never held, any of These were to be slighted: But still
concluded with my self, that Romulus, by Instituting the Art of Divination by
Birds, and Numa, the Religion of the Altar, laid the Foundations of our City;
which, had not the Gods been rendered in an especial manner propitious, could
never (certainly) have arrived at such a degree of Extent.

The Division of Balbus's Argument stated.
Thus, have you (Sir,) the Thoughts of Cotta, and of Pontifex: And therefore,
please, now, to let me understand what Your Opinions are; For, from You, a
Philosopher, I am to hear the Reason of Religion; but, to believe our
Ancestors, even tho they give no Reason at all. What Reason (Pray'e Sir,
Replied Balbus,) do you require of me? Your Division (said Cotta) consisted of
Four Parts: First, you undertook to show that Gods there are; Secondly, What
they are; Thirdly, that by Them is the World Governed; and Lastly, that they
Consult Human Affairs. Very Right! (Returned Balbus.) But I expect your Demands.

His First Demand of Balbus, why so Large upon a point that he said was evident
of it self.
Let us, then, Examine them, (cried he) one after another. Now, tho, in the
first place, you tell us it passes for Current with all that are not highly
Impious indeed, nay, and tho it is never to be beaten out of my Mind but that
Gods there are; yet, this very point of the Existence of a Deity, which I am
persuaded of, upon the Authority of our Ancestors, do not you show me in the
least Why it should be. If you be satisfied of it, (Replied Balbus,) why would
you learn it of Me? Because, (said Cotta,) I come to This Disputation, as if I
had never heard, never thought any thing at all, of the Immortal Gods: Take me
as a rude and perfect Novice, and Resolve me in what I ask. Say but what you
require then, (cried the Other.) Under Favor, (answered Cotta,) First, I would
know why, upon a Point that you told us was, in it self, Clear to a degree of
not needing much to be said upon it; so Evident, as that all men were convinced
of it; why, upon this very Point (I say,) you were so Large. Balbus's Solution
of the Quaere,
Because, (Replied Balbus,) I have observed even your self, many a time, (Sir,)
when Pleading in the Forum, to charge the Judge with all the Arguments you
could think of, if so be the Cause would allow the Liberty: Now, the same Thing
do Philosophers; and, This (also) did I attempt, so as I might. Wherefore, you
had even as well have asked, why I look upon you with Both Eyes, rather than
with One, when I may attain the same end with either of them. and, Cotta's
Demonstration of the Impropriety, and Insufficiency of it.
You shall see, now, (Replied Cotta,) what proportion there is in all This.
For, neither is it my Custom in Pleading, to dilate upon what is in it self
Evident, and all are agreed upon; for so, the Perspicuity would be
disadvantag'd by the Argumentation: Nor yet, tho I did thus at the Bar, would
it follow, that I were to use it (likewise) in This Accuracy of Speech. As for
your seeing only with One Eye; there could be no reason for it, since it is as
easy to look with Both; and that, the i. e. The Power that Operates in the
Universality.
Nature of things (which you will have to be indu'd with Wisdom,) has pleased,
that we should have Two i. e. The Two Optic Nerves, (possibly;) that have
their Original from the inferior and posteriour part of the Brain; and, in a
long Tract or Production, travel to the Forepart of the Head, and are There
inserted into the Eyes.
Lights perforated from the i. e. The Brain, which Plato held to be the seat of
the Mind.
Mind to the Eyes. So that, because you mistrusted the Existence of a Deity's
being a matter so Perspicuous as you talked of; therefore thought you fit to lay
your self out in Argument, to prove it: For, to Me This One was sufficient,
that our Ancestors have so delivered to us.

A Preparatory to an orderly Examination of Balbus's Arguments in proof of a
God.
. 1. WHEREFORE, since you wave Authorities, and Contest by Reason; give me
leave to set my Reason against yours. You heap a great deal together, to make
us think that Gods there are; and, by Argumentation render Questionable a
thing, in My Opinion, not any way Dubious.

Your First Argument, Balbus's first Argument, in proof of the Existence of a
Deity, repeated;
(for I have kept in Memory as well the Order, as the Number of them,) was
This; That, if we looked but up to the Sky, we should presently conceive that
some or other Divinity there is, whereby i. e. All things.
These are Governed. And so came on

See ye not you Bright Substance spread on high? What is it but That, which All
name Jupiter? As if, now, that any of Us are for calling him Celestial, rather
than Capitolin Jupiter? And confuted, by the Different Epi^hetes affixt to
Jupiter, and the Disagreement of Ph^l^sophers, as to what are Gods, and what
not.
Or, that it could be Manifest, and pass for Current with every one, that i. e.
The Sky, Sun, Moon, Planets, etc. The second enervated.
Those are Gods, which neither You, (Velleius,) nor a great many more, will
allow to be so much as Animated.

You, (likewise) held it a weighty Argument, that the Belief of the Immortal
Gods was both Universal, and daily got more Credit. And will you (then) have so
Important a Matter determined by the Opinion of i. e. Of the Multitude, whom
Cotta (untruly) makes the Stoiques still to Appeal from, as Incompetent Judges,
in most Cases. The Pretenses of the Gods App^aring, that B^lbus set up as his
Third Argument, denied place in the field of Reasoning.
Fools? You especially, that call those Fools Unsound too.

But we see the Gods Appear to us. As did Posthumous at Regillus, and Vatienus
in the i. e. The Rode of Salt; the Sabines bring Salt from the Sea, to Rome,
^long it.
Salarian way: and then your Story about the Battle of the Locrians at Sagra.
Think you, now, that Those, whom you Named i. e. Castor and Pollux.
Tyndaridae, (that is, Men come of a Woman;) and, whom Homer (that lived in the
Next age after them) says were buried at Lacedaemon;) that Those (I say) on
white Geldings, and not so much as a Snap-sack-boy along with them, should have
met Vatienus; and rather acquainted Him (a plain, Country Man) with the Victory
of the Romans; than M. Cato, who, at that time, was Both in that he was so
Eminent for the Gravity of his Manners; and, that he had the Privilege of
Delivering his Opinion the First of any in the Senate.
Chief of the City? Do you give heed to That Impression upon the Stone, at this
day to be seen at Regillus, as the Print of Castor's Horse-hoof? And, had you
not better entertain This, (which is almost Demonstrable too) that, the Souls
of Famous Men (as were these Sons of Tyndaris) are They are Immortal; but,
properly speaking, can never be proved to be either Divine, or Eternal.
Divine, and Eternal; then, that such as had been once i. e. Dead; because,
after Death, they used to burn their Bodies upon Funeral Piles.
burnt to ashes should be able to ride on Horseback, and fight in an Army? Or,
if you say This was Possible; it will rest upon you to show which way; not to
bear us in hand with old Wives Fables. Said Lucilius to This; Count you These
Fables then? Was not a Temple Dedicated, in the Forum, by A. Posthumous, to
Castor and Pollux? Is there not a Decree of Senate, concerning Vatienus? For as
to the business of Sagra; it is become even a Byword amongst the Greeks; who,
in Affirming any thing, (...).
it is as Certain, (they cry) as what happened at Sagra. Ought not i. e. Ought
you not, by These Testimonies, test and obl g'd to allow, that the Twins really
appeared?
such Authorities, now, to work upon you? You bring Rumors, (Balbus!) Replied
Cotta, but I would have Reasons.

[Here the Original is somewhat Imperfect.] Presension made out to be
Insignificant as to This purpose.
Then, for things Future: None can avoid what is to As the Stoics held: For,
they usually joined Fate and Necessity together.
come. And, often, it does us no good at all, to know what shall be: an
Aitiology.
For, it is unhappy, to be afflicted to no purpose; and not have left so much
as the least, tho Common Comfort of Hope. Since you say, by the same Fate All
comes to pass; and that, A Stoical Defi^ition of Fate. Upon This Topique, more
may be seen, in hi^ Fragment upon the Subject of Fate. And all kinds of
Divination objected against.
what has ever, through all Eternity, been True, Fate is That. Now, what boots
it, what of Caution can it be, to understand any thing Future; when its falling
out is Inevitable. Moreover, whence came your Divination? Who was the Author
of Dividing the That, from the Condition of it Conjectures might be made of
things to come.
Liver? Who first observed the Note of the i. e. Who was the first Author of
taking the Augury.
Crow? Who Invented the Minerva, as Didymus says; and, that Jupiter, out of a
Complement to Apollo, took away their Virtue and Effect.
Lotts? And yet These have their weight with me; neither despise I that Staff
of Actius Navius's you mentioned: But a Philosopher is to show how These came
to be understood: Especially, since i. e. The Augurs, and Southsayers.
the men themselves are often out in their Conjectures upon Sundry Matters. So
are Physicians mistaken too, you told us. But what Resemblance is there,
betwixt Physique, the Ground whereof I apprehend; and Divination, which whence
it proceeded, I am wholly Ignorant. The Roman way of Devoting justly
reprehended.
You likewise thought, that the Gods were appeased by the These were 3 Valiant
Romans, who offered up their Blood for the sake of their Country; the Father in
the Latin War, the Son in the Tuscan, and the Grandfather in That against
Pyrrhus.
Decii's Devoting themselves. How highly Unjust were They, if nothing could
expiate for the People of Rome, but the Fall of those Brave men? But This was a
Device (a Stratagem, ((...)) the Greeks term it) of Council; (of such, tho, as,
for the Good of their Country, made nothing of throwing away a Life,) who
computed, that, the Commander of the Army, Riding full Speed, and throwing
himself amongst the Enemy, would be followed: And it fell out accordingly. Now,
for the The Pretense of the Voice of the Fauns made Merry wi^h.
Voice of Faunus; truly, I never heard it: If you say you have, I Will believe
you; tho, I conceive not what Faunus should be. These Argumen s of the Stoiques
denied to be suffi^ient to prove the Matter they were produced f^r.
So that, by all you have said hitherto, (Balbus,) I cannot see that Gods there
are: Whose Existence, yet, I am fully persuaded of; tho the Stoiques are not
able to prove it.

Two of Cleanthos's four Causes whereby we are led to a knowledge of the Deity
shown to be of no force.
Cleanthes (you told us) gave Four Causes of Forming the Notion of a Deity in
our Minds. One was derived from (what I spoke to a little before) the
Foreknowledge of things to come: Another, from the Perturbations of Tempests,
and the rest of the i. e. Of the Earth and Sea.
Motions: Another from the Plenty, and Usefulness of the Benefits we receive:
And the Fourth, from the Order of the Stars, and the Constancy of the Heavens.
The Topique of Presension has been handled already. As to the i. e. Tempests.
Perturbations of the Sky, Sea, Earth, I deny not but, when they happen, many
are affrighted at them, and fancy they were occasioned by the Immortal
Powers. But, here the Question is not, whether any Think there are Gods; but
whether really there be Gods, yea or no. The Other Two referred, to be examined
in another place.
As for the Other Causes assigned by Cleanthes, (That drawn from the Plenty of
Blessings conferred upon us, and That also from the Order of the Seasons, and
the stability of Heaven;) they shall be taken notice of, when I discourse
touching the Providence of the Gods; a Point that you (Balbus) have been very
Large upon.

So, are Chrytippus's Arguments too.
Thither will I (likewise) remit what you named Chrysippus as Author of; That,
in regard many things were not to be effected by Man, there could not but be
somewhat or other Better than he: And the Simile (too) of a Fair Edifice, and
the Pulchritude of the World; as also, the Harmony and Agreeableness of the
Whole Universe.

And to the same place, And Zeno's (loc.)
I refer Zeno's Brief, and Queint Conclusions.

THUS (too) shall what you have delivered Physically, A^ also, Balbus'^
Physical Arguments.
concerning the Power of Fire, and touching that Heat whereby all things (you
said) were Generated, be examined in its due Place.

As also, that which, And, his pretending the World, etc. to be indu'd with
Reason. Cotta's Demands of Balbus; as if he had brought no Arguments at a^l, to
assert a Deity. And Balbus's Exception to the Conduct of his Argument; and
Averment, that he has given the Reasons Cotta required.
in Proving the Existence of a Deity, you alleged to make out the Universal
World, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to be indu'd with Sense and Understanding. But
I will again and again ask it of you, How you satisfy your self that there are
Gods. Methinks (Returned Balbus) I have given i. e. To Pr^ve a Deity.
Reasons for it: Only, such is your way of opposing them, that, when I believe
you are Interrogating me, and am preparing to Resolve you, presently you divert
the Discourse, and allow no time for an Answer. Thus, come weighty Matters
touching Divination, and Fate, to be silently passed over: Upon which Topiques
You (indeed) have been Brief; tho our Party use to say a great Deal: (But, (I
must confess,) they are The Questions of Divination, and Fate, Different from
this in hand, of the Existence of a Deity; And Tully his hardled them apart
indeed.
Separate from the Question in hand.) Wherefore, pray'e don't proceed
Confusedly; that so, the Point in Debate may be Cleared.

. 2. WELL! (said Cotta) Then, A Transiti^n to the second Branch of the Dispute,
the Quality of the Gods. Where the Stoiques are Charged with showing, that
there are no Gods at all, while they endeavor to prove What they are.
since you divided the Whole Question into Four Parts, and that I have spoken
to the First of them; I will, even to the Second: Which (methought) was such,
that in endeavoring to show, What the Gods were, you effectually concluded
there are none at all. For tho it was hard (you said) to carry the i. e. Keep
it from judging along with the Eye. Cotta's Exception to the Stoiques way of
using the word (Melius, Better) in their Syllogistical Sophistries touching the
D vinity of the World, etc.
Mind beyond what we are used to see; yet nothing being more Excellent than the
Deity, you thought there could little question be made but that the World was a
God; in as much as we know not ought in Nature to be Better than It: So that we
might Imagine it to be Animated; or rather, take such a knowledge of This with
our Minds as we do of things with our Eyes. But, when you deny any thing to be
Better than the World; pray'e, what mean you by Better? If Fairer; I Grant it:
If, more apt for our Convenience, I allow That too: But, if you understand by
it, that naught is more Wise, I do by no means agree to This: Not, because it
is so hard to take off the Mind from the Appearances of things to the Eye; but,
the further I withdraw it, the less able am I to comprehend what you conclude
upon. Nothing in Nature is Better than the World. No, nor in the Earth, truly,
than Our City. But, is this City therefore, indu'd with Reason, Cogitation,
Prudence? Or, in that it is not; is a Pismire (think ye) to be preferred to it;
since in It there is no Sense at all; in This not only Sense, but Foresight
(too) Reason, Memory? You must see, (Balbus) what may be allowed you; and not
take As for Undoubted and Certain, Zeno's Sophistries to prove the Universe to
be a God, made merry with, and Repelled.
matters, as you please your self.

But it is the so well known brief and (as you thought) subtle i. e. Syllogism,
Argument.
Conclusion of Zeno's, that gave you occasion to amplify This Topique: For,
Thus argued he; That which has the Use of Reason, is more Valuable than what
has not: But nothing is Better than the World; Consequently, it is indu'd with
Reason. Now, if This pass, you may even prove the World to Read a Book (too)
the best of any: For, in Zeno's Method you may Frame your Argument Thus. That
which understands Letters, is to be preferred to what does not: But nothing is
Better than the World; Therefore does it understand Letters. At the same Rate
(also) shall it be Eloquent; nay a Mathematician, a Musician, versed in all
kinds of Learning; and lastly, a Philosopher. You have often said, that i. e.
That God is the Author of all things. But yet I do not remember where Balbus
ever said so, in These Books.
Nothing comes to pass, but by God; and, that there is no such power in any i.
e. Seed.
Nature, as to be able to form a thing unlike it self: An Ironical Concession.
Wherefore, I Will even Grant the Universe not only to be Animated, and indu'd
with Wisdom; but to be a Fiddler and a Piper too; since, out of it are
procreated men skilled in those Arts. Thus, does not this same i. e. Zeno.
Founder of the Stoical Sect produce ought to persuade us, that the World makes
use of Reason; no, nor that it has any Life neither. So that, the Universe is
no Deity: and yet, then It is nothing Better; For, naught is Fairer, more
Salutary, Glorious to behold, or Constant in Motion. The Certain Cour^es of the
Heavenly Bodies, no Argument of their Divinity.


And then, if the Universal World be no God; nor are the Stars neither; which,
(Innumerable,) you placed amongst the Deities: You were much delighted (too)
with their Certain and Persevering Courses: And not without Reason; for
(indeed) they are steadfast to Admiration, to Incredibility. But then, Balbus,
all things Certain and Invariable in their Courses, are not (therefore) to be
ascribed to God, rather than to Nature. What can be more Constant, (think you,)
than the i. e. Seven tim s a day.
frequent Ebbings and Flowings of A Narrow Sea between Boeotia and ^u^oea;
where Aristotle is said to have drowned himself, because he could not find out
the Cause of its Ebbing and Flowing; but he Died a Natural Death.
Euripus at Chaleis? What, than the i. e. Tides of the Sea betwixt Sicily and
Italy.
Sicilian Tides? What, than the Fervor of the Ocean, in those parts,

Where the Rapid Current Europe does divide From i. e. From Africa: That part
of the Ocean is called the Mediterranean Sea.
Libya?

What, than the Heats of the Spanish, or of the i. e. English.
British Seas; and their Flux and Reflux at Set Times? Could not These be,
without a God? If all Some held Motion to be Eternal.
Motion, and every thing that preserves its Order Certain, must be reckoned
Divine; see whether even Tertian and Quartan Agues, (than the Off's and On's of
whose Fits what can be more Constant?) be not so (too) to be accounted of. Now,
in that a Reason was to be given for all such things; and you were unable to
do it, you betook your selves to a Deity, as to an i. e. Last Shift; Or, for
San^tuary: An Altar being the Common Refuge of all Desperate Persons.
Altar.

Chrysippus, (questionless, Chrysippus Nimble Witted; and ^xc llent for
Distinctions and Evasions.
) was a man very Nimble, and Crafty; [I term such Nimble as have a Readiness of
Wit to turn every thing; and those Crafty, whose Minds are grown Callous, by
Habit and Use, as men's Hands are by Working; But his Arguments (upon this
Point) shown to be raised upon a False Bottom; and to be Insignificant.
] but you thought him highly Subtle indeed, in Arguing Thus. If there be any
thing above Human Power to Accomplish; He that effects That, is Better than
Man. But Man is not able to make such and such things in the World; Therefore,
who so was, is more Excellent than He: And, who can exceed Man, but God?
Consequently a God there is. Now these Arguments are raised upon the same False
Bottom with Zeno's before: For there is no distinction betwixt Better, and more
Excellent; By Nature, (...) here meant a Virtue without Reason, stirring up
Necessary Motions in all Bodies
Nature, and Reason. The same Person suggests, that, if there be no God at all,
naught in Nature is Better than Man: But for any body to think nothing Better
than Man, is a high piece of Arrogance. Well! say it were Arrogant, for a man
to conceit himself more Valuable than the Whole World: Yet is it so far from
Vanity, that it is rather Prudence in him to understand he is indu'd with
Sense, as also both with Reason, and Speech; and that a Whelp can pretend to
Neither of these. He urges further; that when we see a Fair Building, we
conclude it to have been built for (by) the Owners, not for (by) Mice: And
therefore, that we are, in like manner, to judge of the World, as the
Mansion House of the Gods. And so I should, (truly;) did I think it had been
Built; not (as I Will make out) Formed by i. e. Made or it self: Or, by an
Inarimate^ Nature.
Nature. But Socrates (also) in Zenophon demands, Socrates's Demand touching
the Soul, matched with one of Cotta's about Speech, etc.
if there be no Sense in the World, Where we had Ours: And I ask too, how we
came by Speech, by Numbers, by Singing? An Irony. Nature defined another way
than Zeno's.
Unless (perhaps) we are to fancy that the Sun holds. Conference with the
Moon when drawn nearer him; or that the World Sings in Tune; as Pythagoras
thought. These (Balbus) are the Works of Nature; not of the Nature proceeding
artificially neither, (which I Will take into Examination by and by,) that Zeno
talks of; but of a Nature that stirs and agitates every thing by its i. e. by
Sympathy.
Proper Motions and Mutations. Upon This Consideration, was I well pleased with
that part of your Discourse touching the Consonancy and Agreement of Nature;
(which moved in Concert, (you said,) as if it were continued by a kind of
Cognation:) Tho, (yet) I approved not of your asserting the Impossibility of
This, were it not contained by One Divine, and Constant Spirit. For, in very
deed, it holds together and perseveres by the Powers of Nature, not of the
Gods: And there is in it that sort of Consent, ^ympathy asserted.
that the Greeks term ((...)) Sympathy: Which, how much the Greater it is of Of
its own Power, without any Aid from Without* Carneades's Arguments against the
Doctrine of the Stoiques, upon this Topique of the Divinity of the World.
it self, so much the Less ought it to beheld to be an Effect of a Divine
Reason.

But, now, how get you Clear of what Carneades urged against you? Viz. If no
Body be Immortal; neither can any be Sempiternal: But not any one Body is
Immortal; nor so much as Individual is not, Here, to be understood
Substantially, but Adjectively.
Individual, and that may not be broken, and beaten in Pieces. And, since every
Animal has a Passive Nature; None can avoid the Necessity of receiving somewhat
from without: (which is to say, in effect, of bearing and suffering.) So that,
if each Animal be Mortal, there is none Immortal: If every Animal may be cut in
Two, and Divided; none can be Individual, none Eternal: But, all Animals are
liable to receive, and bear external violence; Necessary therefore it is, that
every Animal be Mortal, Dissoluble, and Dividual. For as, if all Wax be
Mutable, there can be nothing of Wax but may be Changed; any more than of
Silver, or Brass, if the Nature of Silver and Brass be Variable: So, in like
manner, if the Substances that i. e. The Elements.
are, whereof all things are compounded, be Alterable, no Bodies at all can be
Unchangeable. But, (as you teach,) those Elements whereof each thing consists
are Mutable: Therefore, is every Body so too. For, were any Bodies Immortal;
All would not be Mutable: So that, in Consequence, all Bodies are Mortal. For,
all Bodies are either Water, Air, Fire, Earth; or, what is constituted of
These, or of some of them. But there is nothing of these, that perishes not:
For, both whatsoever is Earthy, may be Divided; And, Water is so Fluid, that it
is easily pressed, and parted: As for Fire, and Air, the least Impulse makes
way through either of them; as being highly yielding by Nature, and subject to
Dissipation. Moreover, they all not only perish, but are changed (too) into one
another Natures: as, when Earth turns to Water, Air, arises out of That; the
Sky, out of Air; and so, for their Course i. e. When a Higher, and Better
Nature, is changed into a Lower, and Worse; as, Fire nto Air, Air into Water,
etc.
backward again. Now, if those things, whereof every Animal is Constituted, be
Perishable, no Animal can be Sempiternal. H^vi^g Thus destroyed the Divinity of
the Wo^ld, he Now sets about overthrowing its Eternity,
Nay, and tho This were not Insisted upon; yet, can no Animal be sound, that
had not a Beginning, and shall be for ever: For, they are all indu'd with
Sense; Consequently, they feel Hot things and Cold, Sweet and Bitter; and
cannot by any sense enjoy what is Grateful to them, without being liable to
that which is otherwise: Wherefore, if they be sensible of i. e. Of the
Impression that Pleasure makes upon the Sense.
Pleasure, so are they of Pain; And whatever is subject to Pain, must
necessarily be liable to Dissolution: So that it is to be acknowledged, that
every Animal is Mortal. Moreover, whatever feels not Pleasure, and Pain, That
can be no Animal; since, as an Animal, it must needs have a sense of such
things: Now, what does feel them, cannot be Eternal; and each Animal does; In
Consequence, not any Animal is Eternal. And yet further; there can be no Animal
without a Natural Appetition, and Aversion: What Is Agreeable to Nature is
Coveted; and the Contrary Declined: Now, every Animal covets Some things, and
shuns Others; And, what it does avoid, is Opposite to its Nature; and that
which is so, has power to destroy it: Necessary therefore it is that all
Animals Perish. Innumerable reasons might be produced, to infer, and conclude,
that there is nothing partakes of Sense, but must Die: For, the very Things
themselves that we are sensible of, as Cold, Heat; Pleasure, Pain; and the
like; when they are in Excess, Kill. Now, no Animal is without Sense;
Consequently, none is Eternal. A New Argument, to prove no Animal to be Eternal.
For, the Animated must needs be of a i. e. Substance.
Nature either Simple; as an Earthy, Fiery, i. e, Spirable, or, Airy.
Animal, or Watery; (And what such a thing should be, there can be no
apprehending;) or Compounded of more i. e. Elements.
Substances, every of which has a place (the Highest, Middle, or Lowest,)
proper for it to be moved in by the Power of Nature: And These may hold
together for a time; but that they should Always, is Impossible; forasmuch as
each of them must necessarily be taken again to its own Place: And Therefore,
no Animal is Sempiternal.

But, Your Party, (Balbus, Exceptions against the Stoiques, for placing all the
Power of Nature, and the Life of Animals, in Fire; and then, making That Fire
Eternal, and a God.
) use to ascribe All to the Virtue of Fire; (following He was, by the Greeks,
Nick-nam'd (...), (s enebrosus.)
Heraclitus, I presume; a man that every one interprets not the same way; tho,
since he would not have understood what he wrote, I Will pass him by:) For Thus
you say; that, all i. e. Life. Now, Heat is the Native Instrument, made use of
by the Soul, whether Animal, Sensitive, or Vegetible.
Power is Fire; and therefore, that both Animals Die, as soon as this Warmth
fails them; and also, that, in every Nature of things, such live, and flourish,
as are indu'd with Heat. Now, I see not why, if Bodies perish when Heat is
extinguished, they should not Die too, upon the Loss of i. e. Radical Moisture:
Upon the Consumption of which, Animals Dissolve.
Moisture, or of Breath; especially, since over much As, in the Case of a
Fever, or the like Disease. But then, This is a Death Contrary to Nature.
Heat kills them likewise: So that This holds good in the Other, as well as in
Heat: But let us see the i. e. The Conclusion of the Disputation; and, whither
it Tends.
Issue. This you would have, I suppose; that, there is not, in Universal
Nature, and the World, any i e. That is an Animal of it self, even from without
( i. e. placed without) the Bodies of Animated Beings; save only Fire: Which
same Fire is an Animal of it self, without the Mixture of any Other Nature; (
i. e. without any other Nature* that may Join it self with it.)
Animal from Without, beside Fire. And why so, now, rather than, save only the
i. e. Wherefore would you rather have no Animal from without, in the World, but
Fire, then, but the Soul: ( i. e. but the Air, which we draw in Breathing.)
Soul; from i. e. Of which Soul, (i. e. of which Air,) the Life of Animals does
also consist: (as Anaximenes and other Phil^sophers held.)
which (too) the Life of Animals proceeds; and upon that consideration it is
termed In Another place Tully makes Anima to be so called from Animus: so that,
u^less we suppose so great a man to have Contradicted himself, it were better
(perhaps) to sa^, upon which Consideration it is termed Animal.
Anima. But how take you as for Granted, that Life is nothing else but Fire?
One would think it likely, to be somewhat Compounded of Fire and Soul together.
But, if Fire be an Animal of it self, without the mixture with it of any other
Nature; Since, when in our Bodies it makes us to be Sensible, it cannot be
without Sense it self. And, if so; the i. e. That were delivered in the
foregoing Paragraph.
same things may be said over again: For, whatever has Sense, must necessarily
feel Pleasure and Pain; and, that which is liable to Pain, is subject to Death
also. And thus, can you not prove even Fire neither, to be Eternal. For what?
Do not You, (the very same People,) teach, that all Fire needs Nourishment, and
cannot any way subsist, unless it be supplied; and, that the Sun, Moon, and all
the Stars, are fed partly with Fresh Waters, and partly with Salt: Cleanthes
making the Reason of the Suns becoming Retrograde, and not going Forward in the
Summer i. e. In the Tropic of Cancer;
Solstice, as also in the as also, of Capricorn.
Winter, to be, least he should be too far from his Sustenance? But This shall
be examined by and by: For, Now, we'll Conclude that, what may Die, is not
Eternal by Nature; But, Fire will Die, unless it be fed; Therefore is not Fire
naturally Sempiternal.

But, No Deity; because, as such, none of the Virtues can take place in him,
(he says,) any more than Reason, and Understanding.
what kind of Deity can we understand that to be, that is indu'd with none of
the i. e. Of those usually called by the name of Cardinal Virtues.
Virtues? For, shall we attribute Prudence, (which consists in a Knowledge of
both Good and Ill, and of things i. e. Indifferent.
neither Good nor Ill,) to the Godhead? What signifies the Choice of Good and
Ill to one, that neither does, nor can suffer any manner of Ill whatever? Or
yet ascribe Reason either, or Understanding? These we employ to the end of
getting a knowledge of things Uncertain, by means of those that are more
Familiar to us: Whereas to the Divinity, naught can be Obscure, or Hidden. As
for Justice, (which gives to every man his Own,) what relation has it to the
Gods? For, (as You say) it was The Stoiques held that there could be no Justice
without Community: And Cotta denied in the First Book, that there could be any
Obligation of Justice upon Men toward the Gods, since they had no Community
(as Epicurus tought) with the Gods.
Human Intercourse, and Society, that produced Justice. Temperance results from
a pretermission of Corporal Pleasures. Now, if in Heaven there be any place for
It; so must there be, for Pleasure likewise. And then, for the Fortitude of the
Gods, in what can it be thought to consist? In Affliction; in Labor; or in
Danger? Wherein a Deity cannot be concerned at all: What Conception (therefore)
can we make of a God, that has neither the use of Reason, nor is qualified with
any Virtue?

The Stoiques Theology as Extravagant and Irrational, as That of the Common
People, and the Barbarians. He observes Lucilius's Order; and begins, first,
with their Natural Theology.
Now, cannot I (truly) so much blame the Ignorance of the Common People, and of
the less learned part of the World, when I consider what has been delivered by
the Stoiques. As for the Unlearned; the Syrians worship a Fish; the Egyptians
have consecrated almost all kinds of Beasts: and then, the Grecians have made
sundry Gods, of Men^; the City Alabanda, He was the Son of Caris, or
Callirrhoe, or both; and, leading a Colony out of Greece into Caria in Asia,
built a City There, called it by his own Name, and h^d Divine Honors
consecrated to him, by the Citizens thereof, of er his Death.
Alabandus; That of Tene, Tenis was the Son of Cygnis; and as well himself as
his Father, slain by Achilles; so that, l^st Achilles's Name should ever be
uttered in Tenis's Temple; the Inhabitants of the City so called for bad any
Fiddler or Piper so much as to enter in^o this Temple.
Tenis; All Greece worship The Fable of her is; that, seeing her Husband
Athemas kill her Son Learchus, she ran away with her other Son Melicertes, and
thr^w her self headlong into the Sea; and was, by the pity of the Gods, turned
into the Goddess Matuta, and he into Palaemon, or Portunus.
Leucothea, (otherwise called Ino,) and her Son Palaemon; as also, Hercules,
Aesculapius, and Castor and Pollux; Our People, Romulus, and many more, whom
they conceive taken into Heaven as new, and The word Ascriptitii, is here used
in some Con^empt; he alluding to such meaner Senators, (to whom the Romans gave
that Name) who used, without any great Formality or Choice, to be admitted
amongst those Fathers that were First-Conscript, or Enrolled.
Ascriptitious Citizens. And thus goes it with the more Illiterate sort. But,
what say you Philosophers now? What more Rational have we from you? I Will pass
over those Masterpieces of yours. A Rhetorical Dissimulation.
Even let the World it self (for That, I suppose, is what you would have
understood by*

The high, bright i. e. Heaven; or Sky.
Thing, which All term Jupiter be a God: Why then have we More of them? That
they are Many, I believe: But what a Multitude do You compute upon? For, you
count every one of the Stars a Deity; and call them by the Names either of
Beasts, as the Goat, the Wolf, the Bull, the Lion; or of Inanimate Things, as
Argos, the Altar, the Crown.

WELL! but, The Thing Invented, no Deity, because it bears the Name of its
Author.
tho These were admitted; How yet, should the rest be Granted; nay even so much
as Understood? In calling Bread Ceres, and Wine Liber, we make use of a common
way of Speaking; but, is there any man so Mad, (think you,) as to believe what
he Eats to be a Deity?

For those who, of Men, He now comes to Confute the Stoiques Civil Theology:
And, in the first place, shows the Consecration of Hercules to be very
uncertain.
have (as you say) attained to be Gods, do but tell which way That could be
done, or why it should be done no The Custom of Consecrating Men was Ceased
long before Cicero's Time.
longer, and I Will be beholden to you. But truly, as the case stands at present,
I see not how i. e. Hercules.
he that had i. e. Torches.
Lights i. e. That burnt himself upon a Funeral Pile on Mount Oeta.
brought for him in the Hill Oeta, (as Actius writes,) should from those
Flames, pass to the Eternal Mansions of his i. e. Jupiter.
Father: Beside that Homer makes Ulysses to have met him Below, as well as the
rest that had departed this Life. Nay, I would fain be satisfied too, which of
the Hercules's it is, that we are to worship: For, those that search into the
more recondite, and hidden Mysteries deliver, that there have been several of
them. The Ancientest, is he that was gotten by Jupiter; (by the Elder Jupiter I
mean, for, in the old Greek Histories, we find many Jupiters also:) Of A Nymph.
Lisyto, and Him, (then,) came that Hercules, who is said to have Hercules,
being T^ld, by the Priestess, upon goi^g to Consult the Oracle, that the God
was not within, and so, he could have no Answer; in a Passion, k^^kt down the
Tripos, and took it away with him: Which was the ground of the Contention.
contended with Apollo about the Tripos. The second is reported to have been an
Egyptian, got by Nilus; and he, (they say) invented the Phrygian Character.
The Third came from the These are supposed to be the: First I venters of Brass
and Iron-work. They are fabulously talked of by Mythologists.
Idaei Dactyli, who Inferi^s Afferunt. These Sacrifices use to be offered to
Infernal Deities, or Ghosts. See Rosinus, page 994.
Sacrifice to him: The Fourth, was the Son of Jupiter and Astraea; (Latona's
Sister;) and him the i. e. Carthaginians.
Tyrians more particularly Worship, and tell that From whom their Chief City
had its name.
Carthago was his Daughter. The Fifth is worshipped in India, and there called
Belus: The Sixth, Whom the Romans worshipped.
he that was begot on Alcmena by Jupiter; but he the Third of the Name; for, as
I will show presently, we read of more Jupiters than one. And, since the
Argument has brought us upon This Point, I shall let you see (too) that, the
The Books of Church Ceremonies.
Pontificial Rites, the Customs of our Ancestors, and those Capedunculae. They
were little Earthen Bowls. He would intimate by them the Modesty, and Frugality
of the Old Romans. (See Rosinus, page 510.)
little Sacrifice-bowls left us by The Second King of the Romans.
Numa, that A Roman Augur.
Laelius in his excellent Speech makes mention of, have better informed me, as
to the Worship of the Immortal Gods; than all the Reasons of the Stoiques: For,
should I trust to You, what answer were I to make such as interrogate me Thus;
If there be Gods, are there any The Rural Nymphs u^'d to be worshipped by the
Rusticks in the Fiel^.
Nymph-Goddesses too: If Nymphs, are there Panisci; that is, Gods of the Woods.
Inferior Pans and Satyrs? Now, no such there are; Consequently, nor
Nymph-Goddesses neither. But, they have their Temples Publicly Devoted, and
Dedicated. What then? Not any of the rest that have Temples erected to them,
will prove to be Deities. For, look ye, You reckon Jupiter and Neptune, as
Gods. Therefore, is their Brother i. e. Pluto.
Orcus one too; as also, All these Four are either Rivers or Lakes of Hell, as
the Poets say.
Acheron, Cocytus, Styx, Phlegeton, that are said to have their Course Below;
nay, and The Ferryman of Hell.
Charon, and The Three-headed Dog.
Cerberus must be Deities likewise: But In that it were Impi^us to Da^^ a God
to Hell.
That cannot be admitted: So, not Orcus's Divinity neither: And, what say you
then to the i. e. Jupiter, and Neptune, who are no longer Gods, (he would
insinuate) if Orcus be none.
Brothers? These are things that Carneades handled, not with Intent to destroy
the Gods; (for what would less become a Philosopher than That?) but, to show,
that the Stoiques make nothing Clear concerning them. Therefore, he went on
with it, thus. If those Brothers (said he) are of the Number of the Deities,
can there be any doubt but He was First worshipped in Italy, then, in Africa; the
Carthaginians sacrifi^'d Men to him.
Saturn (whom they chiefly worship generally throughout the West) is one too?
And, if He be a God; then must His Father Coelum be confessed a Divinity
likewise. But, if That be so, Coelum's Parents ( Ether and Dies,) are such
too. As also, Their Brethren and Sisters, who by ancient Genealogists are named
Thus; Love, Wile, Fear, Labor, Envy, Fate, Old Age, Death, Darkness, Misery,
Lamentation, Fraud, Pertinacy, the i. e. Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos; Bearing,
S^i^ning, and Cutting the Thread of Man's Life.
Destinies, the i. e. Egle, Ar^thusa, and Hesperethusa.
Hesperides, Dreams; all which, they say, are the Issue of Erebus and Nox.
Therefore, must either These Monsters be made out, or Those i. e. Of the G ds.

The Idleness of the Stoiques Doctrine, in That particular.


Originals taken away.

What? will you say that Apollo, Vulcan, etc. came of Gods both by the
Father-side, and Mother side: Hercules, etc. only by the Father-side.
Apollo, Vulcan, Mercury, and the Rest, are Gods; and yet, doubt of Hercules,
Aesculapius, Liber, Castor, Pollux? But These are worshipped as much as the
others; nay, in some parts, a great deal more. So that those are to be reckoned
as Gods, that had Mortal Women for their Mothers: And what say you (then) to
Apollo's Son Aristaeus; (who is reputed to be the Inventour of the Olive;) to
Theseus, the Son of Neptune; and to the others, that had Gods for their
Fathers? Shall not They be of the Number of Deities also? And, those much
rather, I presume, that had Goddesses to their Mothers: An Irony.
For, as in the Civil Law, He that comes of a Free Woman, is Free. So, in the
Law of Nature, he that was of a Mother-Goddess must needs be a God himself: And
upon This account, the Isle It is one of the Cyclades; but which of them is
here meant, is Uncertain.
Astipalaea most Religiously worships Achilles; who if he be a Deity, such too
are both Orpheus, and A King of Thrace.
Rhesus, as having Musa for their Mother: An Irony.
Unless perchance, that Marriages with Sea-Goddesses are to be preferred to
those with Land ones. But if These be no Gods, because no where Worshipped; how
come the i. e. Arist^us, Theseus, Achilles.
Other to be so? Look again, therefore, whether these Honors be not ascribed
to the Virtues of the Men, not to their Immortality; and truly, even your self
(Balbus,) (as I took it,) said somewhat to the like effect. Now, if you hold
Latona for a Goddess, how can you but think She was chiefly worshipped in Boeotia.
Hecate (whose Mother Asterea was Latona's Sister,) one too? Is She a Goddess,
then? (and she has her Temples and Delubra. See Rosinus, page 187.
Altars in Greece.) For, if she be, why are not the i. e. The 3 Furies of Hell,
Alecto, Megaera, Tisiphone.
Eumenides Deities? And, if so; (for They (too) have not only their Fane, at
Athens, but even amongst Us there is the Lucus Furinae, Caius Gracchus was
slain in it: Furina was the Goddess of Thieves, or of Lots: Though yet, by This
it appears they did not rightly know what to make of her.
Grove of Furina, which I understand the same way;) Then, the Furies are
Divinities; that Note, (I warrant,) and Punish wicked Actions. Nay, and if the
Gods be such, as that they concern themselves with Human Affairs, Natio, (to
whom, after we have made our Supplication at her Temple and Shrines, in the
Fields of It was a Field in Italy; where the Ancientest Temple of That Goddess
stood.
Ardeatum, we usually offer Sacrifice,) must be reputed a Goddess likewise:
Who, because she takes care of Women in Travel, (a nascentibus) from Nativities
had given her the Appellation of Natio. Now, if she be one; Then, are every of
those Deities that you reckoned And that were Consecrated by our Ancestors.
up; as Honor, Faith, the Mind, Concord; and Consequently, Hope, (also)
Moneta. Why Juno was so called, may be seen in Rosinus, page 249.
Monition; and All, that by a like liberty a man may feign to himself: But, if
This be a thing improbable; so too, is i. e. That nearer Opinion, that some
Gods do Interest themselves in Human Affairs; which said Opinion was the
Occasion of Those now rehearsed, as Honors, Faith, etc. being by us accounted
Deities.
That from whence These proceeded.

Nay further, if those whom we Worship, and have Entertained, i. e. Upon the
Credit of our Ancestors.
be Deities; what have you to say against our reckoning Isis, and Serapis, in
the same capacity? Which, if we do; why reject we the Gods of the Barbarians?
Therefore, may we account as in the Number of Deities, Oxen, and They worshipped
no Horses but the Sea ones, called Hippotami.
Horses; Ibes, Hawks, A sort of Venomous Serpent, so called.
Asps, Crocodiles, Fishes, Dogs, Wolves, Cats, and sundry other Beasts: which,
if we reject; so must we likewise the All Popular ( or National) Religions.
Originals from whence they proceeded.

Now, shall Ino, (whom the Greeks call Leucothea, In the Method of the
Stoiques, the Genealogy of the D^ities may be carried on, ad Infinitum.
We, Matuta,) be counted a Goddess, as being the Daughter of Cadmus, the Mortal
Father of Ino, opposed to the Immortal Parents of Circe and Pasiphae, and
Medea; who yet, vulgarly, were held to be no Deities.
Cadmus: And yet, not She was a notable Sorceress, who poisoned her Husband, (a
King of the Sarmatians;) and, being expelled by her Subjects, fled into Italy;
where, she turned Ulysses's Companions into Swine, and for his sake restored
them aagain; and bore him Telegonus.
Circe, and Pasiphae, (begot, by Sol, on Perse, the Daughter of Oceanus,)
placed in the same number? But Circe (too) is Religiously Worshipped by our
Colony of It is a Promoutory in Italy; now called Monte Circello.
Cercaeum. Wherefore, according to You, she must be a Divinity. And what say
you, then, to This also was a Sorceress, (the Daughter of a King of Colchis)
who entertained Jason, assisted him in getting the Golden Fleece; and, fl^ing
away with him, she tore her young Brother Absyrtus in pieces, and threw 'em in
the way, to stop her Fathers pursuit of her.
Medea? (whose Uncles were Sol, and Oceanus; her Father, Aeetes; and Idyia her
Mother.) Or, to her Brother, Absyrtus either? (who, in He was a Latin Tragic
Poet.
Pacuvius, is called Aegialeus; but the Other name is more Common in ancient
Authors.) If These be no Deities, I Am afraid Ino will not prove one, neither:
For, they All flowed from the i. e. From the Religion of the Multitude.
same Fountain. Is He was a Grecian Prophet.
Amphiaraus a Divinity, and A Southsayer, (also,) dwelling in a Cave, into
which, whosoever came, could never Laugh more. The Boeotians worshipped him.
Trophonius? Because, when certain Fields of the i. e. Of Amphiaraus's, etc.
Immortal Gods, in Boeotia was a Province of Greece.
Boeotia, were exempted from the Jurisdiction of the i. e. Were excepted from
paying Tribute,
Censors, our Publicans, (truly,) Denied any to be Immortal, that had once been
Men. But, if These be Gods; A King of Athens; who upon the Oracle's saying that
Athens should get the better of the Thracians, if he sacrifi^'d one of his
Daughters, sacrificed first, one of them, voluntarily offering her self, and
afterward all the Other.
Erechtheus (who has his Temple and his Priest at Athens) must needs be one
too: And, if we make Him such, what doubt can there be either of He was the
17th and Last King of Athens; who, in a Disguise, exposed himself to, Death for
his Country; because the Oracle said, the Lacedaemonians should overcome, if
they did not Kill him. Though he seem to join Codrus here with those that were
not Consecrated; yet, he was worshipped at Athens.
Codrus, or any of the Rest, that Fell Fighting for the Liberty of their
Country? Now, if there be no Probability in This; no more can those higher
matters be made out, from whence These arise. And, we may take notice, that it
was to stir up Valor, that each Worthy might the more freely hazard himself,
in the Cause of the Public, that diverse Cities Consecrated the Memory of
Brave Men with the Honors of the Immortal Gods. For, upon This very account,
at Athens is Erechtheus, and his Daughters, placed amongst the Deities. As
also, at the same Athens, there is the Monument, of Because (being the Son of
Orpheus) he sacrificed his three Daughters to appease the Gods, and divert a
great Plague.
Leus's Daughters, called by the name of Leocorion. Thus too, do the People of
A City of Caria.
Alabanda more devoutly worship Alabandus (who built That City) than any of the
Nobler Gods. Upon which Occasion, Stratonicus (a Native thereof) was Pleasant
enough, (as he used to be upon sundry Others,) in Replying to a Troublesome
Fellow, that would needs have Alabandus to be a God, but Hercules, not; A
Jocose Imprecation; he holding neither of them to be Gods.
May I (Then) have Alabandus's Anger; you, Hercules's.

He speaks a little again to their Natural Theology, blaming it for making the
Gods to be Infinite, in that it places Natural Things in That number.
BUT, now, for what was inferred from the Heavens, and the Stars; you are not
aware (Balbus!) how far that will run on. i. e. The Sun.
Sol, and The Moon.
Luna, (the One, Apollo, (according to the Greeks) the Other, Diana,) are
Deities. But, if Luna be; i. e. The Morning Star, (Venus.)
Lucifer (too,) and the rest of the i. e. Planets.
Wanderers, must be in the same number; and Consequently, the Fixed Stars also.
Why then, may not the Figure of the i. e. It is, the Rainbow.
Bow be thus accounted of? (For, it is Beautiful; and, in consideration of
That Shape, and the Wonderfulness of the Cause thereof, it is feigned to be
come of i. e. Admiration.
Thaumante:) And, if it must; What will ye do with the Clouds? (For, the Bow it
self is made of These Colored This as it were, shows he did not hold the many
Colors of it to be True ones.
as it were: nay, and This Points to the Fable of Ixion.
one of them (too) is said to have brought forth the Centaurs;) But, if you,
reduce the Clouds into the number of Divinities; so must you, the Seasons also;
(which are Consecrated, in the i. e. Sacred Ceremonies.
Rites of the People of Rome:) And Then, Jupiter Imbrifer I have read of; but
never, that Showers were Deities.
Showers, Storms, The Goddess Tempestas had her Temple in the City, and was
s^crific'd to before the City was built.
Tempests, Whirlwinds, will (likewise) come to be Deities. (And indeed, our
Generals, when they put to Sea, were wont to offer a Sacrifice to the This
Custom derived as high as Aeneas; and Scipio observed it.
Waves.) Nay, further; If Ceres come (as you tell us) a Gerendo, (from
Bearing,) the Earth it self is (also) a Divinity: (as it is held to be; for,
what else is Tellus?) And, if That; so is the Sea (too;) ( The Romans
Consecrated the Sea, under the Name of Neptune.
Neptune, in Your way:) Consequently, Rivers, and Fountains, likewise: [Upon
which Consideration, not only Papyrius Maso, first, Triumphed over the Corsi,
in the Hill Albanus.
Maso, out of An Island on the Ligustic Sea, between Italy and Sardinia.
Corsica, dedicated the Delubrum of This Fons (or Fountain) must surely be the
same with that which Numa Consecrated; assigning the Water thereof to the use
of the Vestal Virgins.
Fons; but, we meet with It is the most famous River of Italy; once c^ll'd
Albula; and named Tiberis, upon (a King of Albania) Tiberinus Sylvius's being
drowned in'^.
Tiberis, Spinon, Anemo, Nodinus, and the Names of Other Neighboring Rivers,
in the Precatione. They had diverse Set Forms of Prayer, but to which this
refers Antiquity is Silent.
Formulary of the Augurs.] So that, either This will run on, without end; or,
we are to receive nothing of it: But, that Infinite Progress of Superstition
can never be approved; Wherefore, we must not allow ought of it at all.

Come we Then, Another kind of Civil Theology feigned and Confu^ed.
(Balbus!) to such as make the Gods, so religiously and devoutly Reverenced,
not to have been from Mortal Men, in very Deed translated into Heaven, i. e.
The Onion of Men.
but only in * Opinion. First of all, those that have the Title of i. e. Such
as have treated of the Subject of the Gods. Three Jupiters to be found in
ancient Story.
Theologues, compute upon Three Jupiters: Two of them to have been born in
Arcadia; and had, the One, (reported to have begot Proserpina, and Liber,)
Ether for his Father; the Other, (said to have got Minerva, reputed the
Goddess, and Inventour of War,) Coelum: The Third, in It is now called Candia.
The several Ranks of the Male Issue of Jupiter.
Crete, (in which Island his Sepulcher is to be seen,) and, the Son of Saturn.
Thus too, the (...), ( Issue of Jupiter) are of several Appellations amongst
the Greeks: The Three, First, (Tritopatreus, Eubuleus, Dionysius, (by the
Athenians called Anactes) came of (the most Ancient King) Jupiter and
Proserpina; Two more, ( Castor and Pollux) were begot on Leda, by the Third
Jupiter. Those of the Third Rank are by some called Aleo, Melampus, Emolus,
(the Sons of Both Kings of Peloponesus. And, of the Female.
Atreus, whose Father was Both Kings of Peloponesus. And, of the Female.
Pelops.) And then again, the First Muses were Four; (Thelxiope, Mneme, Aoede,
Melate;) begot by the Second Jupiter: The Second, Calliope, Clio, Erato,
Thalia, Melpomene, Terpsicore, Eut^rpe, Polyhymnia, and Eurania.
Nine; on Mnemosyne, by the Third Jupiter: The Third (by the Poets usually
termed Pieridae and Pieriae) were born in A Mountain of Thessaly cons^crated to
the Muses, called from Thence Pierides. The Number of the Sols.
Pierius; of the Third Jupiter, and Antiopa: being of the same both Names and
Number, with the other last mentioned. And, whereas you told us Sol was so
called, because he is Solus, (Single:) What a many even Sol's themselves, do
the Theologues reckon up? One, begot by Jupiter, the Nephew of Ether; Another,
by The Son of Coelus, and Brother of Saturn; he first found out the Motion of
the Stars.
Hyperion; A Third, (whose City the Egyptians hold that to be, which is called
Heliopolis) by Vulcan, (the Son of Nilus;) A Fourth, that, in the i. e. In
those most Ancient Times, when those Heroes and Demigods lived upon the Earth.
Of the Vulcans.
Times of the Heroes, Achanto was brought to bed of at Rhodes; (he being the
Grandfather of Jalysus, Camirus, and Lindus;) And, a Fifth is said to have
sprung from Aetes and Circe, at Colchis. There are Several Vulcans also; The
First, (of Whom, and Minerva came That Apollo, under whose Tutelage the Ancient
Historians made Athens to be,) got, by Coelum; the Second, (Opas, as the
Egyptians Name him, making him (also) to be the Protector of Egypt,) by
Nilus; The Third, (the same that is delivered to have been Overseer of the
Smith-works at An Island of the Aegean Sea heretofore Consecrated to Vulcan.
Lemnos,) by the Third Jupiter, on Juno; And, the Fourth, by I remember not to
have met with this same Menalius, in any other Author.
Menalius; (who Governed the Islands, hard by Sicily, called Vulcaniae.) One
Mercury, Of the Mercuries.
(he whose Nature is feigned to be somewhat obscenely i. e. To have had the
Punishment of a Perpetual Priapism inflicted upon him.
erected, because he was moved, at the sight of Proserpina,) was the Son of
Coelum, and Dies; Another, (the same that is held to have his abode under
Ground, called also Trophonius) of Valens is not any where else to be met with
neither (I think;) perhap^ he may mean by ^im Jupiter.
Valens, and i e. Io, (possibly,) the Daughter of Inachus, (King of the
Argives,) and Sister of P^oronius, who af er his Father's Death, was (^ls^)
King of the Argives. Every body kn^ws the Pranks of Jupiter, and Io.
Phoronis; A Third, (of Whom, and This is not the same Penelope, with her, that
was Ulysses's (...).
Penelopa, Pan is written to have been descended,) was begot on Daughter of a
King of Atlantis.
Maia, by the Third Jupiter; A Fourth, (so much as to utter whose Name, the
Egyptians count an Impiety,) had Nilus for his Father; And, a Fifth, (whom the
People of i. e. The Arcadians; called Phenea^ae, from Pheneum, or Phenea, a
Town in Arcadia.
Pheneum Worship,) is said to have killed The Son of Arestor, feigned, to have
an Hundred Eyes, whom Juno made Keeper of Io; and was slain by This Mercury,
and turned into a Peacock.
Argus, and, thereupon, Presided over Egypt, and given Laws and Letters to
That Country: The Egyptians calling him Thoth; the very Name they ascribe to
the i. e. September.
First Month of their Year. Of the Aesculapii.
The First of the Aesculapii, (he, whom the Arcadians Worship, and who is said
to have Invented the Specillum.
Probe, and been the First that bound up Wounds,) was the Son of And the Nymph
Coronis.
Apollo; the Second, reported struck with a By Jupiter; because he brought to
Life again Hippolitus, who had been killed by H^rses.
Thunderbolt, and buried in A Prem^ntory of Arcadia.
Cynosura) the Brother of the Second Mercury; and reputed the First Giver of
Clysters, and Drawer of Teeth; whose Sepulcher, and Grove, are to be seen in A
Country of Greece.
Arcadia, not far from the River Lusium;) came of Arsippus and Arsinoa. The Of
the Apollo's.
Ancientest of the Of the Apollo's.
Apollo's, (he that had the Tutelage of Athens,) was, (as before,) begotten by
Vulcan; Another, was the Son of One of the Curetes, or Idaei Dactyli.
Corybas, and born in Crete; (for the Tutelage of which Island he is said to
have contended even with Jupiter himself;) A Third (who is reported to have
come to A City of Boeotia, sacred to Apollo; and famous for an Oracle of His,
there. Others make it to be a City of Phocis, in Achaia, by Parnassus.
Delphi, from the A very Northern People, beyond Scythia.
Hyperborei) was got on Latona, by the Third Jupiter; And a Fourth, born in
Arcadia; the People thereof calling him Not (...), (a Lege,) as Tully here
would seem to intimate; but (...), (a Pascuis;) either in that the Sun
nourishes all things; Or, that Apollo, (or Sol,) when driven from Heaven, (as
in Fable) fed the Cattle of Adm^tus King of Thessaly.
Nomio, and Telling they received their Laws from him. Of the Diana's.
There are several Diana's also; The First (reputed the Mother of the Mercury
got him on her.
Winged Cupid,) came of Jupiter, and Proserpina; The Second is better I
suppose, in that she was the Daughter of the Third Jupiter, (the Greatest of
all the Gods,) and Sister of Sol; as also, in regard of her own Virtue, and
Perpetual Virginity.
known, written to have been got on Latona, by the Third Jupiter; The Third is
delivered to have sprung from I read nothing of either These, in any other
Author.
Vpis, and I read nothing of either These, in any other Author.
Glauce: And, it is usual with the i. e. The Lacedaemonians more especially.
Greeks to call her (by her Father's Name) Vpis. Of the Bacchus's.
We have More Dionysii likewise: The First, the Son of i. e. The Infernal
Jupiter; or, Pluto.
Jupiter, and Proserpina; the Second, (who is writ to have killed She was his
Nurse. But some Authors expound this Nysam Interemisse to have been either the
Building, or being brought up in, and Governing a Flourishing City of that
Name, either in India, or in Arabia Faelix.
Nysa,) of Nilus; the Third, (he that is said to have Ruled (as King) over
Asia, and to whom the i. e. Certain Feasts (or Sacrifices) of Bacchus commonly
celebrated in the Nightime.
Sabazia were Instituted) had Who this Caprius was, History is Silent.
Caprius for his Father; the Fourth, (to whom the i. e. Sacred Rites Instituted
by the Elder Orpheus.
Sacra Orphica are thought to have been erected) came of Jupiter and Luna; And
the Fifth, (he that is supposed to have Instituted the i. e. Bacchian
Solemnities celebrated every Three Year.
Trieterides,) of Nisus was a King of Megare, famous in Fable; but, here, it
should seem, he is put for Jupiter.
Nisus, and Some will have this Thyone to be Semele, (a Theban Woman;) of whom,
all Poets (Greek and Latin) poice Bacchus to have been come.
Thyone. The First Of the Venus's.
Venus (whose Delubrum is to be seen at A Town of Peloponnesus.
Elis) sprang from Coelum and Dies; the Second, (of Whom and Mercury the second
Cupid is delivered to be come,) was procreated of i. e. Of the Froth of the
Sea, as the Poets feigned.
Froth; the Third (she that was married to Vulcan, and on Whom, Mars (for all
That,) is reported to have got Anteros) was the Daughter of Jupiter and A
Nymph; the Daughter of Oceanus, and Thetys.
Dione; the Fourth, (writ to have been Wedded to Adonis is Fabled to have been
the Gallant, as well as Husband of Venus.
Adonis,) was a This Syrian Goddess is supposed to have been the some with
Semiramis, that most Potent Queen of the Assyrians.
Syrian Goddess, brought forth by Tyro was the Daughter of Salmoneus King of
Thessaly.
Tyro, and called Astarte. Of the Minerva's.
The First Minerva (as I told you) was Apollo's Mother; the Second (whom the
Egyptians of It is a City of Egypt, near one of the Mouths of Nilus; Minerva
was called Saitis, because the Saitae worshipther.
Sais Worship) descended from Nilus; the Third, she that (we said above) was
generated of Jupiter; the Fourth, (whom the Arcadians name Coria, and report to
have Invented Chariots) was got by Jupiter, on Coryphe the Daughter of Oceanus;
And, the Fifth (the same that is said to have killed her Father, attempting to
Deflour her, and to whom they have given Taliaria Pinnarum.
Heel-wings) was the Daughter of This Pallas is thought to have been one of the
four Sons of Pandio King of Athens.
Pallas. And lastly, of the Cupids.
And then, the First Cupid is delivered to be the Son of Mercury and the Eldest
Diana; the Second, of Mercury and the Second Venus; and the Third, (the same
with Anteros,) of Mars, and the Third Venus.

These now, and the like, are collected from the Ancient Stories of Greece: And
are to be opposed, (you know,) Balbus!) or all Religion will be overthrown:
Whereas, your Tribe are so far from Confuting, that they as good as Confirm
them, in Interpreting to what they appertain. But, to return from the
Digression; Can you think, now, there needs a Subtler Course of Reasoning, to
Confute all This?

AS for Faith, Cotra has well restored Hope, (omitted by Balbus,) and placed it
next to Faith; in that he knew it was Dedicated by the same Calatinus that
Consecrated Faith.
Hope, Virtue, Honor, The Divinity of the Mind, Faith, Hope, etc overthrown.
Victory, Safety, Concord, and all the rest of this kind, they are of the
Nature of Created things, not of Deities: And, either Inherent in us, as the
Mind, Faith, Prudence; or to be acquired by us, as Honor, Safety, Victory: The
Vtility of all which, I am sensible of, and behold their Consecrated Images;
But, why there should be in them the Virtue of Divinities, I shall understand
when I i. e. When you tell me.
know. For, in This Number is The Greeks and Romans accounted of Fortune as a
Goddess; though yet I remember not that the Grave Stoique ever did.
Fortune to be more particulary reckoned; and yet to her do all ascribe
Inconstancy, and Temerity; Qualities (certainly) that are little becoming a
Deity.

Moreover; The Stoical way of Expounding the Old Fables of the Poets, and
Unridling the Names of the Gods, reprehended.
what delight can ye take in that way (of yours) of Expounding Fables, and
Originizing Names? Coelum was Guelt by his i. e. Saturn.
Son; and this Saturn (again) cast into Bonds by His i. e. Jupiter.
Son. These, and the rest of this sort, do You in such manner defend, that, one
might think the Feigners of them not Mad, and Idle, but very Wise men. But, in
your Vnridling of Names, you took pains about what a body would pity you for.
Saturn, for that Saturetur Annis, (he is full of Years;) Mavors, (Mars,)
because magna verteret (he works mighty Changes;) Minerva, either quia
minueret, (in regard she Diminishes,) vel minatur, (or Menaces;) Venus, because
venit ad Omnia, (she has an Influence upon all Creatures;) Ceres, a Gerendo
(from Bearing.) What a Dangerous Custom is Supp. of Drawing the Originals of
all the Names of the Gods.
This? Beside, that there are several of the Names that you will be at a loss in.
What say you to Or, V^jupiter, a Roman Deity; Worship^, not for any Good, but,
that he might not Hurt them. See Rosinus, p 232.
Vejovis? Or, to Vulcanus either? Tho, since you Think Neptunus was so called a
Nando, (from Swimming,) there can hardly be any Name, that you may not draw an
Etimology of from some one Letter: In i. e. That of Derivi^g Neptune, a Nando.
which Particular, (truly,) to Me, You appeared to i. e. To Fluctuate, or be
more Uncertain than Neptune, himself; than whom, nothing is more Uncertain.
Swim, more than Neptune himself. Zeno was the First, that took this Great and
Unnecessary Trouble upon him; Cleanthes, the Next; and, after Him, Chrysippus;
to show the Reason of Commentitious Fables, and from the Names unfold the
Ground, why every of them was so called. In doing which, You confess Thus much,
(in Troth;) that, the matter is quite Otherwise, than the General Opinion of
it. For, those that are called Gods prove to be mere Natural Things only, not
Deities. Nay, so far is the Error advanced; that even to what is Really
Pernicious are both Divine Names applied, and Religious Ceremonies Instituted.
For, Febris: The Ancients Worshipped some Deities, that they might do them Good;
and Appeased Others, lest they should do them any Hurt: In which Number, was
this Febris. See Rosinus (concerning her) page 416.
Fever has her Temple in the Palatine Mount; and we see the Altar of The
Goddess that used to deprive them of their Children. See Rosinus, of her, page
385.
Orbona, near That of the Houshold-Gods. See Rosinus, page 597, 614, and 667.
Lars; as also, one consecrated to Malae Fortunae. See Rosinus, from page 353.
to 360.
Bad Fortune, on the Esquiline Hill.

Let every such Error, therefore, be expelled Philosophy; that so, when we
Dispute concerning the Immortal Gods, we may utter things worthy of Eternal
Beings. In relation to which, I know what to i. e. I have my Self, a Certain
and Steady Opinion of the Gods; though I cannot consent to Your Arguments and
Doctrine concerning them.
think my self; but not, how far to agree with You. You make Neptune to be a
Spirit with Intelligentia.
Understanding passing thorough the Water; and Speak after the same manner of
i. e. That she is a Spirit with Understanding (Influencing in, or) passing
through the Earth. A Transition to the Third Part of the Dis^pute.
Ceres also. While, I am so far from comprehending this same Intelligence
either of the Sea, or Earth, in my Mind, that I cannot so much as take it into
my Imagination. So that I must Try somewhere else, to learn as well that Gods
there are, as What they are; before I be able to understand what You would have
them be.

. 3. LET me, Now, proceed to the Rest: And, Examine, First, whether the World
be Governed by a Divine Providence; Then, if the Gods take any care of Human
Affairs: For, These are the Two Branches of your Division, that are yet Behind.
Now, I am thinking, (if you will agree to it; Gentlemen,) to Discourse somewhat
more accurately upon them. With all My heart (Replied Velleius;) For, I both
expect yet Greater Matters; and very much approve of what you have already
delivered. Said Balbus, Then, Well! and I shall not Interrupt you Cotta: But,
we will take Another Scil. To Confute him.
Time; and then, I doubt not but to Convince you. But --

[ By the Injury of Time, (in concurrence (possibly) with That Fervent Zeal of
some, in the Dawn of Christianity, that could not brook the Profane (or rather
Blasphemous) Tendency of such Sophistications, how Witty soever,) the whole
Disputation of Cotta (the Academique,) against the Arguments brought by the
Stoique Balbus, in Proof of a Divine Providence, is utterly lost and perished.

. 4. THIS Last Section, (that pretends to represent Balbus's Disputation as
Inconclusive of the Gods consulting Human Affairs,) is Maimed, and Imperfect:
Insomuch that, the Sense of the First Lines of what of it is left, is somewhat
hard to be made out. But, the Intent of his Citing Passages out of the Profane
Tragedies of those Times, is, to Insinuate, that Reason (which the Stoiques,
and Other Philosophers, accounted so highly of, as distinguishing Men, from
Brutes,) is not of Divine Original; that, in the Ordinary Use of it, it is
rather a Curse, than a Blessing; and that, Mankind had better been wholly
without it, (or however, had Less of it,) than so exposed to the Perniciousness
of its Effects: He, thinking by the following Examples of Niobe, Medea, Atreus,
and Thyestes, to overthrow that Assertion of Balbus's, (in the Second Book,)
Whoever is not Convinced, that the Mind, Understanding, etc. of Man is an
Effect of the Divine Care, must needs be destitute of these Things themselves.]

No, no; i. e. Which you (some Poet or other) Advise, says Niobe.
that shall not Do: I Will stand it i. e. With the Goddess Latona; with whom
this Niobe, (the Daughter of Tantalus, and Sister of Pelops,) for that she bore
her Husband Amphion (King of Thebes) seven Sons, and a^ many Daughters,
presumed to Compare.
out. Must A Queen!
I go supplicate i. e. Apollo, and Diana; wi h whose Shafts, because Niobe's
Haughty Spirit would not Submit, Latona got all her Children Killed.
them like a Slave?

Now, would not one think Niobe Reasoned notably; and contrived how to bring a
heavy The Poet; Fable her to have been carried, by a Whirlwind, into Asia,
while Railing at Latona, and turned into a Stone.
Judgment upon her Self? So too, how shrewdly was That Scil. by Medea.
Spoken?

Who joins his Hand, and Will, does what he Pleases. An Expression, that
contains in it the Seed of all Yes; and of all Goodness too!
Wickedness!

That spiteful Perhaps, she means her Father Aeetes, (King of Colchis) who,
suspecting her for her too great Kindness to the Argonauts, (particularly, to
the Prince of them, Jason,) who came to steal the Golden Fleece, Imprisoned her.
Man has clapped me under Bolts.
I Will keep my anger close; but he shall Rue it.
What though it be Grief and Exile to my Self?
It shall cost Him his Peace, and Kingdom too.
This Reason, (Forsooth,) which, you tell us, is, by the Divine Goodness,
bestowed only upon Men, Beasts must have none of: See you not (now) what an An
Irony.
Advantage we have by this Bounty of the Gods? The same Medea, Being got at
liberty again; she assisted Jason in stealing the said Golden Fleece, and ran
ran away with him, when she had done.
Flying her Father, and her Country, Her Father in Pursuit, ready to catch her;
She first Beheads the i. e. Her Brother Absyrtus; touching the manner of whose
Death, (yet,) Authors vary.
Child, Then tears him
Scattering the Limbs Some make her to have Fled by Sea; others, by Land.
about: that so, while he Piecemeal:
Should slack his pace, to gather up the Parts;
She might the better 'scape him, clogg^d with sorrow,
And save her self, by' her And yet, we meet with no Murder (of any kind) that
she had committed before This: Nay, some deny her to have committed even This
either; and make her a Good, and Wise Woman.
wonted Parricide.


This Woman (believe me!) had a pretty stock of Sense and True! but, not in the
Sense intimated; it being no fault of the Divine Bounty, that some Abuse it, to
their Destruction.
Reason, as well as of Wickedness. Thus also, for Atreus, the Son of Pelops,
and Hippodamia; and Father to Agamemnon, and Menelaus.
Him that prepared that Horrid Entertainment for his Brother: Did not he turn,
and agitate things in his Thought, in a way of Reason?

My Wrong is Great; and Great must be the Says Atreus, touching his Brother
Thyestes; whom, first be Banished, for vitiating his Wife Aerope; and afterward,
Recalled; and Banqueted, with the Two Children he had got of her, dressed in a
Dish: And Thyestes, having no other way to be Revenged, lay afterward with his
own Daughter Pelopeia, and got of her Aegystus, who killed Aetreus's Son,
Agamemnon, after his Return from the Siege of Troy.
Mischief,
To press and break Thyestes's Cruel Heart.
Neither yet, is i. e. Thyestes.
he himself to be passed over; who could not be Content with having enticed the
i. e. Atreus's Wife Aerope; with, whom, after he had vitrated her, he consulted
how to wrest the Scepter out of his Brother's Hand, either by Killing him, or
at least getting from him, by her means, (the Lamb (...) a Golden Fleece) the
Signum Arcanum of the Realm.
Wife into Adultery. Of Scil. Adultery.
which, Atreus rightly and most truly speaks, It Is horrid i. e. The whole
Course of Thyestes's Practices.
All; but yet the chiefest stress
Lies upon This: the Whoring of a Mother,
The Royal Stock Defiled, and Blood So, that the Issue would be Uncertain.
Confounded.


Now, how Subtly did i. e. Thyestes.
he act, in seeking the Kingdom by Adultery?

i. e. Add to this Incest.
This further ( says i. e. Atreus.
he,) that, when, Pater Coelestium.
Jove had sent me
As a Portent, and And Palladium, as it were; it being in the Fates, that He
should Reign over the Country, who had this Portentous Lamb in his keeping.
Guardian, of my State,
Among my Flocks a Lamb with Golden Fleece;
This Lamb Thyestes stole, (once) from my Palace,
And my i. e. Aerope; he enticing her thereunto, by Wiles, and Incestuous
Freedoms.
Wife helped him out in the i. e. In the Theft.
Exploit.
Did not i. e. Thyestes.
This man, now, make use of a great deal of Reason, with a great deal of
Wickedness, together?

Nor is it the Stage only that abounds in These Villainies: From Tragical
Examples, he now passes to Civil Wickednesses, to show how hurtful Reason is
to Man.
For we ever and anon meet with Greater (almost) in the common Course of Human
Life. Every Family, the The Place where all their Controversies touching Meum
and Tuum were determined.
Forum, the Here the Senators sat to Consult the Affairs of the Public.
Curia, the The Campus Martius is here meant which was the most stately part of
the City, and here Assemblies were hel^^, and Public Officers chosen.
Campus, our Confederates, and Provinces can witness, that, as we make use of
Reason to Good purposes, so, to Ill too; This, Few of us, and Seldom; the
Other, Often, and Most: Insomuch that it were better, none at all had been
bestowed by the Immortal Gods, than given attended with such Mischief. For, as
Wine, in that it rarely does Sick Folk Good, very often Hurt, is better not
administered, than, out of hope of an Uncertain Cure by it, to run the hazard
of killing the Patient; So, do not I see, but it might have been as Well, for
Mankind, had that Nimble Motion of Thought, that Sharpness, that Quickness,
which we call Reason, since it is Hurtful to Many, Beneficial to very Few,
been wholly withheld from us, than conferred in so free and ample a Proportion.
Wherefore, if it must be an Argument that the Divine Mind and Will has a Care
of Man, because it has indu'd him with Reason; it can have had a regard for
those only, on whom it bestowed Right Reason. And, Few such, (if any at all)
are to be met with, (we find.) Now, i. e. Stoiques.
You will by no means allow, that the Eternal Beings, have a Concern but for
Few. So, in Consequence, they regard none at all.

But, Thus are you wont to Oppose This same Argumentation; that, He produces
the Answer of the Stoiques to the foregoing Argument, and endeavors, in vain,
to invalidate it.
it Concludes not the Gods to have provided Ill for us, that many abuse their
Scil. the Divine Providence, upon the consideratition that some abuse Reason.
Benefit. Not a few make bad use of their Patrimonies; but yet, there is no
gainsaying, that their Fathers were Kind in leaving them. Now, who Denies This?
Or, what Similitude is there in the Scil. Of a Patrimony, and Providence, as to
Reason.
Collation? For, She was the Daughter of Oeneus King of Aetolia, betrothed
first to Achelous, and afterward to Hercules; she slew her self, because he
burnt himself to avoid the Torment caused by the Shirt she gave him to gain his
Love, being presented her by the Centaur Nessus, when he was wounded by
Hercules's Arrow, for attempting to Ravish her, when he had carried her over
the River Evenus.
Deianira Intended not Hercules any Harm, when she gave him the Coat dipped in
the Blood of the Centaur; nor he, Jason of It is a Town of Thessaly; where this
Jason was born, who when no Physician could cure his Imposthume, went into the
Army with an Intent to fight till he was killed; but a Soldier of the Enemy
chancing in a Skirmish to give him a cut upon this Tumor, opened it, and so he
got well on it.
Pherae Good, who with his Sword opened his Impostume, that no Surgeon could
Cure. For many have helped even when they thought to have harmed; as well as
hurt, under an Intention to have befriended. So that the Thing Given does not
show the Mind of the Giver; neither follows it, that, because a man makes a
Good use of what he Receives, therefore the Bestower meant him Kindly. Now,
what Lust, what Avarice, what Villainy is either set upon, without Deliberation;
or accomplished, but by that motion of the Mind, that Cogitation, termed Reason?
For, every Opinion has Reason in it; Right, if it be a True, and Corrupt, if a
False one. It Is bare Reason, that we have, (if so be we have it at all,) from
the Deity; but Right, or not Right, That Is from our selves. It is not that, as
a Patrimony is left, so, Reason is given to men out of the Good Will of the
Gods: For, what would they have sooner bestowed, had they designed to do them
a Mischief? How could there be any seeds of Injustice, Intemperance, or
Timidity, were there not Reason, to support such Vices?

Instances of Perverse Reason, out of Comedy; as before, out of Tragedy.
I even now showed you Medea and Atreus (Persons of Illustrious Condition)
projecting Monstrous Wickednesses, upon a way of Inita, Subductaque Ratione.
Reasonable Computation. And so for the Jocular Parts of Comedy too, have they
not in them a Course of Reason? How subtly does i. e. Young Phoedria.
he, in the It is a Comedy of Terence's.
Eunuch, argue with himself, What must I do now? i. e. The Harlot Thais.
She has shut me out:
She calls me back again: shall I Return,
Or not? No, tho she would fall upon her Knees for it.
And then, Some body or other in a Comedy of Coecilius Statius's, entitled
Synephebi, (the Twins.)
he in the Twins makes no scruple of opposing a Common Opinion, with Reason, in
maintaining it a Happiness to be at the same time, in great Love, and in great
Want.

To have a Father Covetous, Morose,
Harsh to his Children, and that neither Loves you,
Nor takes the least Care of you --
And he Colors this Incredible Opinion with Pretense of Reason.

You may Cozen him of part of's Income:
Or, forge a Letter in his Name, and take up
Some Debt; or else, Supp. With the story of some Fit of Sickness, or other
Mishap befaln you.
affright him, by a Servant:
And Then, what you so hardly draw from the
Close-fisted Churl, more freely send a going.
The same Person argues for a kind and liberal Father to be Troublesome to a
Wenching Son. Whom I neither know which way t'Impose upon,
Nor Cheat, nor put Tricks on; so much his Bounty
Prevents all my Plots, Fallacies, and Arts.
And what, now, are these same Wiles, Tricks, Fallacies and Shams? Could there
be any of them, if there were no Reason? O! the Noble i. e. Reason!
Present the Gods have made us! The Parasite, in one of Terence's Comedies,
that bears the Title of Phormio.
Phormio may well say Now let the i. e. Demipho.
Old man come when he will: For I Have
Bethought me what to do; am Scil. to I^pose upon him.
ready for him.


From Theatral, he passes to Judicial Examples; to show, that the Gods have not
provided well for Man.
But, let us from the Theater, to the Forum. Pray'e step upon the Bench.
Wherefore? To try who burnt the Records. How 'Twas never known who, till the
Man confessed it voluntarily.
secretly was that Piece of Roguery done? But, Q. Socius a Splendid Roman
Knight, of the A Country of Italy, where this Socius was born.
Picene Field, confessed 'twas himself. Who Transcribed the Public Registers?
That, L. Alenius did; after he had Counterfeited the Hand of the These were a
sort of Collectors of Tribute, amongst the Romans; and stood bound to make good
out of their own Purses all Damages in the Treasury.
Sex-primi. Could any thing be Cunninger than This Fellow? Take notice of the
other Inquisitions touching the Gold of This is a famous City of France; and
out of all the Churches in it did Q. Coepio take all the Gold he could find, to
the Quantity of above one hundred and ten thousand pound of Gold, and fifty
hundred thousand pound of Silver: but suffering a great Overthrow of his Army,
afterward, his Commission was taken from him, his Goods sold Subhasia, by an
Order of Senate, and himself condemned to a perpetual Prison; where dying, his
Carkase was dragged thence, and torn in pieces at the Common Place of
Execution. And Thus was he rewarded for his Sacrilege.
Tholosa; the Or rather, the Corruption of Jugurtha. For, Salust writes, that
C. Manilius Limitanus preferred to the People a Bill of Inquisition touching
such, by whose Advice Jugurtha, (the King of Numidia in Africa) was encouraged
to slight the Decrees of the Senate; as also, those that, in their Embassies,
and Commands, had taken Money of him; and such as had bargained with the Enemy,
about the War.
Conspiracy of Jugurtha: Call to mind that former Inquest concerning Tubulus,
for These he took (when Praetor) so openly; tha^, the year after his Pretorship
was expired, he was fain to fly for it; as not daring to stand a Trial.
Bribes; and then, the Later, grounded upon the Peducaeus, ^he Proposer of this
Bill, is the same (possibly) with that Peducaeus that our Author makes such
kind and honorable mention of in one of his Epistles to Atticus.
Peducaean Law, touching i. e. Tubulus's, as I understand it; for, though we
read of no such Crime of his; yet had Clodius, or any body else, been meant
here, he would (surely) no more have forborne mentioning Their Name, than he has
his.
his Incest. Think upon what daily happens, Assassinations, Poysonings,
Cheating of the Public, as also, the Decrees, relating to Wills, even upon
the Furius, and diverse Others, made New Laws to strengthen and improve that old
one of the 12 Tables, Paterfamilias uti legassit super Familia, Tutelave suae
Rei, ita jus esto.
New Law; Next, the Accusation made in This Form of Words, I say the Theft was
Committed with your Privity, and Assistance. Then, the many Laws touching
Breach of Trust, Tutelage was of Larger extent amongst the Romans, than our
Wardship once amounted to; the Women, there, being in Perpetual Wardship, etc.
Guardianship, Violation of Contract, Partnership, Fiduciary Commissions; and
other foul Dealings in Buying or Selling, Lending or Borrowing. Then, Private
Cases made Public, by the The Letorian Law provided against the Cozening of
Pupils; and enacted, that no Bargain or Obligation of any under 25 years of
age, should be good in Law.
Laetorian Law. And Lastly, that Purger of all Cozenage, the Law proposed by
our Intimate Friend C. Aquilius, touching Dolus Malus; by which they understood
all manner of Arts and Devices used toward the Cozening or Circumventing a body.
Fraudulent Dealing: which he takes to be the Case, when One thing is
Pretended; Another, Done: Are we now, to think, the Immortal Gods the No; God
is not the Author of Sin; neither is it any fault of his, that Men make an ill
use of his Bounties.
Authors of this Bed of Wickedness? For, if they bestowed Reason upon Men,
they gave Subtilty also; for this depraved Subtilty is only a slyer and more
deceitful way of applying Reason, to do Mischief. The same Deities likewise
bestowed Fraud, Treachery, and the rest of this quality, none of which could
have either Beginning, or Perfection, without Reason. Wherefore, as the old i.
e. Medea's Nurse, in a Tragedy of Ennius's Enti led Medea; which, it is said,
was, for the greater part, a Translation out of Euripides.
Woman wishes, that Th'Ax had near been laid to th'Root of Firr,
Growing in the Wood upon Mount Pelion;
So may I, that the Gods had not conferred this same Callidity upon Men; which
so very few make a good use of; (nay and whosoever does, is many times ruined by
those that do not;) and such a great many, a bad: Insomuch that, one would
think this Divine Gift of Reason, and Consideration, were conferred upon us, to
Cozen, not to The meaning of all This is; that, as the Old Woman in the Tragedy
ascribed all Medea's troubles to the Ship of the Argonauts; So, does the
Academique impute all the Crimes and Evils of Man, to Reason only. And
therefore, they wish, She, that the Ship Argo had never been built, because it
brought such Misfortunes upon her Mistress; and He, that no Reason at all had
been given to Man, in that it is the daily Author (he says) of so much
mischief to him.
do well with.

But, you Answer further; He produces another Answer of the Stoiques; and does
what be can to weaken it.
that i. e. The Abuse of Reason.
This is the Fault of the Men, not of the Gods. As, now, should the Physician
lay the blame upon the Greatness of the Disease, or the Pilot, upon the
Violence of the Tempest; they were not only weak, but deserved to be laughed at:
For, who would have made use of you, might a body tell them, were there no such
i. e. Diseases or Tempests.
things at all? We may press This much more Closely upon the Deity. The Fault,
i. e. You God.
you cry, is in the Viciousness of Men. Why, then you should have given them a
Reason free from Vices and Imperfections. Now, what place was there for the
Error, in the Divinity? For Patrimonies we leave, in hope of having placed
them well; wherein we may be mistaken: But, how could the Godhead be deceived?
What, so as Phoebus was, when he took up his Son The Son of Sol and the Nymph
Clymene; who, having prevailed upon his Father to swear by the River Styx to
grant him a Wish, desired the guiding of the Chariot of the Sun for one day;
and, his Father not being able to deny it, at a less penalty than the loss of
Nectar and Ambrosia, (the Food of the Gods, according to Poetical Fable,) nor
to dissuade him, by representing the danger, from pressing it, he mounted, set
the World on fire, and was struck with a Thunderbolt, into the River Eridanus,
by Jupiter.
Phaethon into his Chariot? Or, as Neptune, when Theseus, having obtained leave
of this his Father, to ask i. e. That he might Return from Hell, get out of the
Labyrinth, and that Neptune would accelerate his Son's Death.
three Things, was the Destruction of He was torn in pieces by his Chariot
horses, as he fled from his Father Theseus, when he was accused of Adultery by
his Mother in Law Phoedra, whose Solicitations he refused.
Hippolytus? These are Sol and Neptune, as well as the rest of the National
Deitie^, were feigned by the Poets, the Divines of the Heathens.
Poetical Deities: But, let Us be Philosophers, the Authors of Truths, not of
Fables. But yet, these very Gods of the Poets, had they been aware of their
Concessions proving Hurtful to their Sons, must have been thought to blame, to
make them. And if, what A Philosopher of Chios in the Archipelago.
Aristo of Chios used to say, were Right; that Philosophers do harm to such of
their Disciples, as make a wr^ng Interpretation of what is well Delivered; for,
it is no new thing, for A Philosopher that placed Beatitude in Pleasure.
Aristippus's School to produce men Though the Masters themselves never meant it
so.
Voluptuous; and Zeno's Though the Masters themselves never meant it so.
Morose: Absolutely, 'twere better, if the Auditors be likely to go away
Tainted, because they will understand the Disputations of Philosophers amiss, that
they held their Tongues, than be Hurtful to those that Hear them. So now, if
Men turn the Reason given with a good Intent by the Immortal Gods, into Fraud,
and Subtilty, it had been better to withhold, than to bestow it: For, as, if a
Physician allow Diluted Wine, to a Patient that he knows will, then, take it
unmixt, and presently Die upon it, he is much to blame; so, is that Providence
of i. e. That you Stoiques Defen^, in the Deity.
Yours worthy of Reprehension, for giving Reason to those she foresaw would
make a perverse and wicked use of it. Unless, perchance, you say she was not
aware of This. I wish you would; but you will not dare: For, I am not Ignorant
how highly you account of her They called her Providence, fr m Foreknowing and
Foreseeing.
Name. But, we may now bring this Disputation to an Issue. For, if Philosophers
are agreed, that Folly is an Evil weighing heavier than all the Incommodities
of Fortune and Body together, in the Other Scale: And, if none attain to The
Stoiques held all to be Fools, that attained not to that Supreme Wisdom that
they feigned in their Minds. So that, according to Their Opinion, the Number of
the Wise was a very slender one. He proceeds to Impugn Providence; by Examples
of Good men Afflicted, and Bad, Prosperous, in this World.
Wisdom: We all of us, whom you pretend to be so admirably well provided for
by the Eternal Beings, are Conversant in the greatest Miseries. For, as it
comes all to a point, whether no man Living be in Health, or no man Living can
be in Health: So, do not I see any great difference betwixt no man's being
Wise, and the Impossibility of any man's being so.

But I say too much, upon so clear a matter. The Son of Aeacus, King of the
Isle Salamis, one of the Argonauts, Companion of Hercules in taking of Troy,
and Father of Ajax: whose unhappy end he bewailing, in a Tragedy, (not now
Extant,) brake forth into Blasphemous Expressions, (as not unusual with
Desperate persons,) which the Academique has, here, served himself of, against
Providence.
Telamo, in a Verse, concludes the Whole Question, whether the Deities neglect
Man: For, took they care of him, it would go Well
With the Good; Ill, with the Bad: which, now, it does not.
Regarded they Human kind, they ought to have ordered, (truly,) that all had
been Virtuous; Or, if not thus much, certainly, provided for the Just. Why
then, were those most Valiant and Excellent Persons the two i. e. Cneius and
Publius, (Brothers;) who, being sent into Spain, wrested the greater part of it
out of the hand of the Carthaginians: But, soon after, lost it again; being
b^th st^in by the Punique Treachery.
Scipio's destroyed by the i. e. Asdrubal, General of the Carthaginian Army in
Spain.
Carthaginian, in Spain? Why lost i. e. Q Fabius, surnamed Cunctator.
Maximus his Son the Consul? Why killed i. e. The Carthaginians under the
Conduct of Hannibal.
they Paulus Aemilius, the Consul
Paulus, at A Village of Apulia, where Hannibal slew forty thousand Romans; and
so many Gentlemen, that he sent 3 Bushels of Gold Rings (which none under the
degree of Knight might wear, at Rome) to Carthage, as a Token of his Victory.
Cannae? Why was the Body of Marcus Attilius Regulus, a Roman Consul; who,
being taken Prisoner by the Carthaginians, in the First Punique War, and sent
back to Rome, to be Exchanged, with Others, persuaded the Contrary; and, chose
rather to return and be Cruelly put to Death: for, they put him into a Hogshead
stuck full of Iron Spikes, cut off his Eyelids, that he might never be able to
Sleep, and starved him over and above.
Regulus exposed to the Cruelty of the Carthaginians? Why could not his own
Roof i. e. From a Violent Death; he being killed at his Countryhouse, either by
his Wife's means, or by himself.
protect i. e. Scipio, the Son of Scipio Cornelius, the First of the Family of
the Scipio's: He was called Africanus, from his Victories over Hannibal, in the
second Punique War.
Africanus? But, These, and a great many more, are of Ancient Date; come we to
what is of Later. Why is the most Innocent, most Learned of Men, my Uncle P.
Rutilius Rufus, being Accused of Bribery by M. Scaurus, by the Conspiracy of
the Publicans, upon whom he had been very strict, in Asia, for their Rogueries,
was, by the Knights that sat upon the Accusation, sentenced to Banishment; to
the great loss and grief of his Country: Which Exile yet, he bore so
magnanimously, that, when the Dictatour Sylla called him home, he was so far
from accepting the favor, that he removed further off. He wrote the History of
his own Life, and of the Numantine War.
P. Rutilius, in Banishment? Why was my i. e. In the Pontifice.
Colleague i. e. Marcus Livius Drusus; who was stabbed by Varius, a Turbulent
and Ruffianly kind of a Fellow.
Drusus murdered in his own House? Why was the very Pattern of Moderation and
Prudence, the High Priest i. e. Q. Mutius Scaevola; who, as Paterculus writes,
was stabbed by Dam^sippus the Praetor, because he s^em'd to favor Sylla's
Interest: Others, that he was slain by the Sergeants of Marius's Guard, as he
was flying to the Altar of Vesta.
Q. Scaevola, stabbed at the Feet of the Image of Vesta? Nay, why were so many
i. e. The Consul Octavius, Lucius Cornelius Merula the Fl^men Dialis, Marcus
Antonius Chief both of the City, and of Eloquence, etc. who were murdered by
the Appointment of this Cinna.
Prime Citizens, before him, butchered by Cinna? Why was the most Perfidious He
overcame Jugurtha in Numidia, and afterward Troubled the Commonwealth, by the
Divisions between Him and Sylla.
C. Marius able to shorten the days of An Orator, and Consul with Marius; who,
hearing that Marius ^aim'd at his Life, shut himself up in a Room
new-Plaister'd, with a Fire made in it, and Choakt himself with the Steam, and
Smoke; so, preventing the bloody Insolenc^es of his Enemies.

Upon the whole matter; had b^t this E^hnique been aware of the Immortality of
the Soul, and the Certainty of a Future Retribution; he would never have
c^nfin'd the Felicity of Man within the Narrow Circle of the Cradle, and the
Grave; nor thought hardly of Prov^dence, for such its Conduct of Sublunary
Affairs.


Q. Catulus, so Illustrious of Degree?

The Day would be Spent stood I to reckon up the many Good men, that have
labored under Afflictions. And, as soon, Still, against Providence; by
Examples of Wicked men 's^aping Unpunished, and Dyi^g in P^ace.
if I recounted the Prosperities of the Wicked. For, why Departed Marius so
Historians make him to have been for ^r m H^ppy, when he Died; at least in his
own Thoughts.
happily, Aged, at his Own House, and in his Seventh Consulship? Why did the
Cruel Cinna Domencer so Being made Consul in the 667. year of the City, and
seeking to Em^r^il the State, he was exp^ll'^ by his Colleague Octavius; but,
drawing in M^rius, Carb^, and Settorius to his Party, by force of Arms he put
himself into Rom^, and the Re-exercise of the Consulship: but yet, h s Tyranny
was not l^^g lived; for, before the ^^ming of L. Syll^, ^e was killed by his
own Soldiers, at Ancona, in a Mutiny.
long? But, he was punished at last. Had it not been better, tho, to have
hindered and prevented his Murdering so many Eminent Citizens, than cut him
off afterward? But, the Bloody Varius By Sylla, possibly.
Died under the most Expuisite Torments. After he had killed Drusus by the
Sword, Perhaps this was the Metellus, Sirnam'd Numidicus.
Metellus by Poison: Better, to have preserved Them, than meted Him at length
the Reward of his Villainies. Forty all but two Years Tyrannized Dionysius over
a most Opulent and Flourishing i. e. Syracuse, in Sicily.
City: and, before Him, how many, I can hardly allow him to have been a Tyrant;
being so Illustrious, both for his Stock, his Eloquence, and Moderation, that
the Athenians seemed to prefer so free a Servitude to their former Liberty.
Pisistratus, in the very So, by an Antonomasia, he calls Athens.
Flower of Greece. But, A Tyrant of Agrigentum in Sicily, who first burnt
Perillus in the Brazen Bull that he had made and presented him, for the
Tormenting of Others; and, afterward, a great many more: But, was himself, at
last, (possibly) Tortured to death in it, by his Subjects.
Phalaris, and Some make him to have been a Tyrant of Cassandria (otherwise
called Photidia) in Macedonia: Of what manner of Death he Died, I read not.
Apollodorus expired by Torture? True, but they had Murdered and Destroyed
great numbers first. Pirates are often put to Death: And yet, no denying but
more Captives, than Pirates, have Died miserably. We read, that He was born at
Abdera in Thrace.
Anaxarchus (the He heard Diomenes (also) of Smyrna, and Metrodorus of Chius;
as Laertius writes.
Scholar of Democritus) was Pounded to death by the i. e. Nicocreon, who
pounded him to death in a Mortar, for saying, at one of Alexander's Feasts,
(where his Wit and Learning had made him a Guest,) there wanted nothing at the
Treat, but the Head of this Tyrant of Cyprus: Now he happening to be present at
that time, bore him a Grudge ever after; though he durst not touch him as long as
Alexander lived.
Tyrant of Cyprus: And, that Zeno of Elea A City of Lucania, in Italy.
Elea, Died in Some say he was not Tortured to Death; but, that being put upon
the Rack for animating the Young Nobility to recover their Liberty, he so
Incensed the Agrigentines against Pha^atis, that they presently stoned the
Tyrant to Death, and saved Zeno.
Torments. What shall I say to A Philosopher of Athens, pronounced the Wisest
of Men, by the Oracle: Being Condemned to Death,, upon the Threefold Charge of
Destroying the Divinity of the Gods of his Country, setting up Others in their
places, and corrupting the Youth, he died by a Glass of Poison given him in
Prison.
Socrates? Whose Death when I read in In his Book entitled Phoedo.
Plato, I can never hold Weeping. See you not, now, that, in the Judgment of
the Gods, if so be they Tend Human Affairs, there is no difference at all
betwixt the Good, and the Bad? He was the Scholar of Antisthenes (the Founder
of the Sect) who left him his Staff for a Legacy.
Diogenes (the A Sect of Philosophers called, (...); from their Impudence;
(whereof the Dog was a Symbol, with the Ancients;) they Treating Princes and
Peasants, nay and he even God himself, at one and the same course rate.
Cynique) used to say, that Harpalus, (counted the most Fortunate Robber of
those Times,) was a Living Testimony against the Immortal Gods, in that he
lived so long, following that Course of Life.

After the beforementioned Dionysius had pillaged the Temple of Proserpina,
Dionysius's Sacrileges Unrevenged, produced against Providence, still.
at A City in Magna Grecia.
Locri; he set sail again for Syracuse: And steering his Course with a
favorable Wind, See ye not, Friends, (said he, Smiling,) what a good Voyage
the Gods give Church-Robbers? And, being an Acute man, when he saw scil. That
his Voyage was all along prosperous.
This well, he persisted in the Opinion: For, having brought his Fleet to It is
now called Morea; and is the famousest Peninsula of all Europe, joined to
Greece by a very narrow Isthmus (or Neck of Land) between the Aegaean and
I^nian Seas.
Peloponnesus, and entered the Temple of Jupiter, at A City of Peloponnesus,
where Ju iter was worshipped.
Olympia, he dis-rob'd his Statue of a Golden Mantle of great weight, (which
Gelo the Of Sicilia.
Tyrant had, out of the Spoils of the Carthaginians, bestowed upon it,)
Jeasting thus, that a Coat of Gold was Heavy for the Summer, Cold for Winter;
and threw over a Woollen one, That being proper (he said) for any Season of the
Year. The same Person Ordered the Golden Beard of Aesculapius, at A City of
Peloponnesus, where Aesculapius was mo^e particularly worshipped.
Epidaurus to be plucked away: in that it was not Decent (he cried) for the Son
to have a Beard, when the i. e. Apollo; whom they used to paint without a
Beard, in reg^rd of the Perpetual Youth (as it were) of the Sun; But,
Aesculapius with one, designing thereby, that Prudence, so Necessary for the
Practicers of Physique, (wher^of he was the Inventour,) was the Effect of much
Time, and Ex^erience. And yet, Pausanias says, that the Phlyasii painted
Aesculapius without a B^ard; and, the Syrians Apollo with one; upon other
Considerations.
Father, in all Temples, had none at all. Moreover, he commanded the Silver
Tables, whereon, according to the Custom of Ancient Greece, these Words, OF THE
GOOD GODS were stamped, to be Removed out of all Vestries; saying, he would make
use of their Goodness. Further, he scrupled not to take away all the little
Golden Images of the Goddess Vict^ria, the Cups, and the Coronets, which the i.
e. Of the G^ds.
Statues held in their hands stretched out; crying, he did not scil. Against
their Will.
Take, but sc. Of the Gods, freely offering them with the r stretched out hands.
Receive them: For, 'twere Foolishness, to refuse what is held out and given by
them, to whom we pray for Favors. It Is also Written, that he had what was thus
taken out of the Churches brought into the Market; called in Chapmen, by the
Crier: And, having got the Money, that he, by Edict, commanded the Buyers to
convey all the things again, to their respective Temples, by a Certain Day.
Thus, did he accompany the Impiety to the Gods, with a Wrong to Men. Him, now,
neither Olympian Jupiter smote with a Thunderbolt; nor, Aesculapius sent out of
the World, languishing under any Grievous, and Cronical Disease: But Dying in
his Yet Justin says, that, being at length overcome by the Carthaginians, he
was killed by his Domestiques. Plutarch, and Probus, write, that he Died upon a
Dose of Poppy, given him to that end by his Physician, at the desire of the
Tyrant's eldest Son, called also Dionysius.
Bed, he was attended to the Pile with the Mournful sound of As was sometime
practiced, by the Greeks, at the Funerals of Great Persons.
Bells; and left his so Ill-got Power, as Just and Lawful, for an Inheritance,
to his Whose whole Life afterward, and End, were most miserable; he being not
only stripped of all his Father had left him, but four times banished; ending his
Days in Exile, no body knows where, or how.
Son.

It is with some Unwillingness, Conscience set up in the Place of Providence.
The Stoical Doctrine, that the Gods neglect smaller matters confuted by their
Other Tenet, that nothing is Great, but Virtue; he laboring to show, that they
do not give Virtue to Men, according to the Common Judgment of the Pagans, any
more than Wisdom.
that I Discourse upon This Topique; for, it may seem to give Encouragement to
Evil-doing: And so might it Justly be thought, were it not that the Conscience
of every man, without any Divine Providence, has great Authority over him, in
the matter of Vice, and Virtue: Which same Conscience, if once it be Dethroned,
we then no longer care what we do. For, as neither a House, nor a
Commonwealth, can well be deemed Modeled according to Reason, and Prudential
Institutions, if there be no Rewards for Honest Actions, nor Punishments for
Transgressions: So, can there not (surely) be any Divine Governance of the
World with respect to Men, if no Distinction be made betwixt the Good, and the
Wicked. But, the Gods neglect Smaller matters, and regard not the little
Fields, or Vine-Plants of Particular men: Neither, if i. e. The hurt-foil p^r^^
of H^at or Cold, wher^by Plants are ^^orcht.
Blasting, or i. e. The hurt-foil p^r^^ of H^at or Cold, wher^by Plants are
^^orcht.
Hail do harm to ought, is This taken notice of by Jupiter. Even Kings Tend not
every little thing within their Dominions. For so i, e. B^lbus.
You told us. As if, now, I had before complained of the loss only of P.
Rutilius's Farm near A City of Campania, in Italy.
Formiae, not of his Wh^le A Sentence of Banishment, amongst the Rom^ns,
involved in it the l^st of G^ods and Chattels, Pr^vileges of ^ Ci^^zen, etc.
Estate. And indeed, it is a General Opinion, that, External Benefits,
Vineyards, Crops of Corn, Olive yards, Plenty of Grain, and Fruits; in short,
all Blessings and Advantages of Life, we are beholden for to the Gods; but
Virtue, none ever thought they received from the Deity. And, upon Reason, This:
For, in consideration of Virtue, are we worthily Commended, in It do we rightly
Glory; which would not be, stood we indebted to the Divinity, for the Gift, not
to our Selves. In the Case of an Augmentation of Honor, or of Estate; or the
Acquisition of any Accor^ing to the Doctrine of the Stoiques, it is only Virtue
that is Great; all things else, as Riches, Pleasures, Honors, etc. are to be^
placed amongst things of Smaller Concernment.
Fortuitous Good, or Depulsion of Evil; we return God Thanks, and assume
nothing to us of Praise. Did ever any body Thank the Deity, for his being a
Good man: But only, a Rich, Honorable, in Safety? Therefore, give we the
Epithetes of Optimus Maximus.
Best, Greatest, to Jupiter, not that by Him we are Just, Temperate, Wise; but
Safe, in Health, Wealthy, and Plentiful. Never any offered their As some
Wealthy Romans w re wont to do; though, for what Reason I Am as much to seek, as
Plutarch himself.
Tenth part to Hercules, if he happened to be Wise. Pythagoras, upon making
some New Discovery in Geometry, is said to have killed an Ox to the The
Learned Deities.
Muses: Tho, I don't believe it; because he would not Sacrifice even to Apollo
at The most famous of all the Ciclades in the Aegean Sea, where Latona is said
to have brought forth Apollo (whose most Famous Temple was there) and Diana:
Whence it is also thought to be Consecra^ed to them; which Opinion kept the
Persians from attempting any thing against it in their War with Gree^e: They
brought up no Dog in the Island, nor Buried any one in it, nor suffered any
Woman to Lie In there.
Delos, lest he should pollute the Altar with His Transmigration of Souls kept
him from spilling any Blood wh^tever.
Blood. But, to return to my Purpose; This is the Persuasion of all men, that
Fortune is to be had from the Gods, Wisdom from our Selves. Although we
Consecrate Temples to the Mind, to Virtue, and to Faith, yet These (we see) are
placed in our selves: The Matter of Hope, Safety, Wealth, Victory, is to be
sought of the Deity.

Wherefore, the Prosperity, He Resumes the Impious sayi^g of Diogenes: And
seeks, as well as he can, to elude the Objection that some Good men are
som^time Fortunate, by two Answers of Diagoras's.
and Good Luck of the Wicked, disprove, (as Diogenes said) the Power and
Providence of the Gods. But Good men are sometimes Fortunate also. And This we
ascribe, and attribute to the Immortal Beings, without any manner of Reason.
Upon Diagoras (called the Atheist,) his coming to An Island in the Aegean Sea,
near Thrace; called heretofore, Dardania: Or rather, a City thereof, of the
same Name with the Island it self.
Samothracia, and a Friend's saying to him, You, Sir, that think the Gods
neglect Human Affairs, see you not, by all those Pictures i. e. In the Temple;
as was the Ancient Custom of Greece, and Rome.
there, what a many, by Vows, have 'scap'd the Violence of Tempests, and got
safe into It had the B^st Harbors in it, of any Island in that Sea; as Pliny
Witnesses.
Harbor? He Replied, That Is only a Custom; For, there are None hung up, of
such as suffered Shipwreck, and perished in the Sea. The same Person being told
by the Mariners, in a Storm, that the Judgment befell them Justly, since they
had taken Him on Board; he poynted to Others, under the like predicament, in
the same Voyage; and asked if they thought Diagoras's were in those Vessels
also. Now, so it is; that, An Impious Expression. Exceptions against the
Resembling of the Divine Providence to that of Kings: against their making the
Son to Suffer, by her, for the Sins of the Father, as Unjust. And, an
Assertion, that Men are the Authors and Inflicters of Punishments, not the
Gods.
as to Good or Bad Fortune, it is all one, What you are, or How you live.

The Gods (said i. e. Balbus.
he) Animadvert not All things: For, neither do Kings. Now, what proportion is
there in the Comparison? Kings, if they knowingly fail in their Care, it is ill
done of them: But, God has not so much as the Excuse of Ignorance. And truly,
you Defend him Stoutly, while you affirm the Power of the Deity to be such,
that, tho one should, by Death, escape the Punishment of his Wickedness, yet,
those Sins are Visited upon his Children, his Nephews, or his Posterity. O the
wonderful Equity of the Gods! Would any City tolerate the Enacter of a Law
that should Condemn the Son, or Nephew, for the Crimes of the Father, or
Grandfather?

When will an End be put Says some Poet or other, bemoaning their Hard Fate.
to the Cutting off
Of Tantalus was the Son of Jupiter and the Nymph Phlota, and King of Phrygia;
who, Entertaining some of the Gods, and, to make trial of their Divinity,
serving up his Son Pelops at the Feast; was punished by being made to stand up
in Water to the Chin, with pleasant Apples at his Mouth, yet unable to compass
either.
Tantalus's Or rather, Pelops's Race: For, it was he that killed Myrtilus, not
Tantalus.
Race? Or, Punishment
Enough had for the Death of A Son of Mercury; Drowned, instead of being
Rewarded, by Pelops; (whom Jupiter had revived, and, for his Shoulder that
Ceres had eaten up, given him an Ivory one;) for whom, at a Race, for
Hippodamia, (when 13 had run and lost their Liv^s,) he left the Chariot-wheel
loose, and brake the Neck of his Master Oen^maus, a King of Elis, who was told
by the Oracle that his Son-in-law should occ sion his death, as i^ fell out.
But, the Kindred, and P^steri^y of Pelops, (Thy^stes, Aegisthus, Agamemnon,
Niobe, Orestes, etc.) were ever after Unfortunate, and came to Untimely Ends.
Myrtilus?
Whether the Poets have depraved the Stoiques, or They given Authority to the
Poets, is not easy to say: But, Monstrous and Incredible things are delivered
by them both. Now, neither was the Vexation of whom the Iambicks of Hipponax
hurt, An Ephesian Poet, so Deformed, that Bupalus drew his P^cture to be laughed
at; which so Incensed him, that he wrote an Invective against him, and made him
hang himself.
or, or of him wounded by the Verses of A Parian P^et, who wrote such Iambicks
against his Father in Law Lycambes (for Espousing his Daughter Neobule to him,
and afterward refusing to give her,) is forced him to hang himself, and that
his Daughter also.
Archilochus, occasioned by the Deity; but, it proceeded from themselves. Nor,
when we reflect upon the Lust of Aegisthus, or of The Son of Priamus, who stole
away Hellene, and so occasioned the Destruction of Troy, and of all his Family.
Paris, derive we the Cause from God, while we hear the Voice, (I may say) of
the Crime. Nor yet, do I impute the Recovery of so many Sick to The God of
Physique.
Aesculapius, more than to A Famous Physician of Cous, who died in the 104.
year of his Age.
Hippocrates: Or, think the Laoedemonian i. e. Laws.
Discipline was given the i. e. The Citizens of Sparta, the Metropolis of
Lacedemonia.
Spartans by Apollo, rather than by A King of Sparta, who having made many
Severe Laws, pretended he Established them by Divine Inspiration, and the
advice of Apollo himself.
Lycurgus:

Two more Examples, to confirm his Thesis that Men, not the Gods, are the
Occasion of all Evils and Misfortunes to Men; in that the Deity cannot be
Angry. An Objection, that they could have prevented them, not answered as one
would expect. He concludes, there is no Providence at all, with Relation to
Human Affairs.
I say, that General of the Achaians; who turned the Liberty allowed by the
Romans to their Hurt, and offered Violence to their Ambassadors; which
occasioned the War, that ended in the destruction of Corinth.
Critolaus i. e. Occasioned the Overthrow, and Destruction.
overthrew The Capital City of Achaia in Greece.
Corinth; The Carthaginian General, who, for the Cruelty he used to the
Soldiers under the Scipio's in Spain, was the Cause of Carthage's being burnt,
and utterly destroyed by Publius Cornelius Scipio, the Proconsul.
Asdrubal, The Metropolis of Africa.
Carthage: 'Twas They, put out those two Eyes of the Seacoast, and not that
the Divinity had taken Offense against any; You saying, he cannot be moved to
Anger at all. But, Undoubtedly he was able to have relieved, and And so, after
a sort was the Occasion of their Overthrow, may some Stoique object.
preserved such Great and Famous Cities; there being naught that God cannot
do, (as You Teach,) even without any labor: For, as the Members of Man's
Body, are easily moved by the Mind, and The Will is the Mistress of the
Faculties.
Will; so, is every thing possible to be done, moved and changed, by the
Divinity of the Gods. Neither say you This in a way of F^ndness, and
Superstition, but Physically, and upon Rational Assurance: In as much as the i.
e. The Materia Prima.
Matter whereof All is made, and i. e. Of it self, and not by Accident.
Is, is so yielding and malliable, that not ought but may, in an Instant, be
fashioned out of it, and changed; And, that, it is the Divine Providence, that
has the Command and Disposure of this Universal Matter: And therefore, turn she
which way she will, she can effect whatever she pleases. So The Academique's
Inferences from this Doctrine of the Stoiques. A Gradation, from Particulars to
all Mankind, in Denial of Providence. The Stoical Tenets Clash one with
another. He concludes with denying it to be his Meaning, to Destroy the
Divinity of the Gods.
now, either she knows not what she is able to do, Neglects Human Affairs, or
cannot Discern that which is Best.

She takes no Care of Particular Men. Well! Nor of Cities. Not So: Nor of
Countries neither, and Nations. Now, if she slight even These, what marvel, if
the Whole Race of Man be neglected by her? But, how can you say the Gods attend
not all things; and yet affirm, that Dreams are imparted to, and distributed
amongst Men, by the Immortal Beings? Much good may't do ye with these same i.
e. Providence, and other Stoical Tenets.
Dreams then; since Your Opinion stands for the Truth of Dreams. You say,
further, that Vows are certainly heeded by the Deity. Now, Individuals make
These. Consequently, the Divine i. e. Providence.
Mind regards Particulars. Observe ye her not, therefore, to be less busy than
you speak of? But, suppose her very much taken up; turning about Heaven,
Overseeing the Earth, Governing the Water; Why yet, lets she so many Deities be
Idle, and do nothing at all? Why sets she not some or other Vnemploy'd Gods
(for You, Balbus, have expounded them to be Innumerable) over Human Affairs?
This is in a manner all I had to Deliver, concerning the Nature of the Gods;
not to the Intent of Destroying it, but only of letting you see how Intricate a
Point it is, and difficult to be Explained.

When Cotta had thus spoke, he made an End. The Conclusion
And, Balbus Returned upon him. You have born very hard (indeed) Cotta, upon
the Disputation with so much Religion and Foresight And, by Arguments Confirmed.
instituted, by the Stoiques, touching the Providence of the Gods: But, since
Night is coming on, you shall allow me some other day, to Argue against what
you have said. For, the Contest must be for Pro Aris and Focis. A Proverb.
Religion and Pro Aris and Focis. A Proverb.
Sacrifices, for the Temples and Holy Places of the Gods, and for the very
Walls of the City, which you Highpriests account upon as So the Romans held
them to be; Romulus being ^hought to have kill'^ his Brother R^mus, because he
Profaned the low and now built Walls of Rome, by Leaping over them: But yet
they Consecrated not the Gates, in that they were of Common Use.
Sacred, and are more careful to Fence the City with Because Religion is a
stronger Safeguard to a City, than either Walls or Bulwarks. The Little Island
of Delos was not afraid of any body, though so v^st a Treasure was in it, and it
had no manner of Defense belonging to it.
Religion, than even with Walls. Now, Scil. Temples, Altars, etc.
These to i. e. Not to stand up in the Defense of.
Desert, while I have Breath in my Body, were surely a Great Wickedness. Truly
Balbus, (Replied Cotta to This,) I should be glad to be Confuted; am rather for
Discoursing of, than Pronouncing upon what I have Delivered: And well aware,
how much you are too strong for me. No This is sp ken Ironically.
Doubt of it, Interposed Velleius, as one that believes even Dreams to be sent
us from No, the Stoiques, and Romans held not Dreams to be sent by Jupiter, but
some other Deity, as Persius Intimates in his Second Satyr.
Jupiter: Which same Dreams yet, are not so Vain and Idle, as is the Discourse
of the Stoiques touching the Nature of the Gods.

Judgm^nts upon the Two Disputations.
THIS having Passed, we gave our Opinions. Velleius looked upon Gotta's Dispute
to be Acording to the Positive Epicurean way.
Truer than Balbus's; but, to To Cicero, who was the Auditour.
me, Balbus's Argument seemed of a Nearer Spoken after the manner of the
Academiques; (of which Sect Tully was;) who hel^ that our Grea^est Certainties
were only more Probable Appearances of Truth, nor Truths de facto.
Resemblance to truth.

THE END.

