The Snare is broken. Wherein is proved by Scripture, Law and Reason, that the
NATIONAL COVENANT and OATH was unlawfully given and taken: And whatsoever may
be probably pretended or objected for it, is fully answered, and refuted. HERE
ALSO Is vindicated the PARLIAMENTS later proceedings: Showing the Grounds and
Principles of the LONDON MINISTERS to be weak and unsound, and so their
Accusations and Charges against the State, false and scandalous. Moreover
something is said Against Violence in Religion, and the duty of the Civil
Magistrate about Worship and Church Government.

By JOHN CAN.

1 Samuel 15. 22, 23. Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better then
sacrifice: and to hearken, then the fat of rams.

For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity
and idolatry.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for M. Simmons in Aldersgate street. 1649.

To the Right Honorable the COMMONS of England Assembled in Parliament.
SIRS,
As ave observed the several Actings of some men against you: so I have
endeavored to find out the rise and ground of their evil working to blast and
dis^oner your lawful and good proceedings. With one particular I have here
dealt, and done you and the Nation (I hope) some good service in it: and (by
the good band of God assisting me) the rest shall speedily follow. For it would
be a great shame and dishonor to the well affected party, if they should not
manifest as much zeal to God, thankfulness and love toward you, by letting
the people see the justness of your Administrations: as ill men, and
disaffected, are studious and diligent to make You and your well-deserving
services odious and distasteful to the Nation. The truth is, the desire of the
upright and meek ones every where, and their fervent prayer daily poured forth
to God, is, that seeing many do watch for your halting, the Lord in mercy will
be pleased, so to direct, guide and counsel You, as You may cut off occasion
from them that desire occasion, and all iniquity may stop her mouth.

For the National Covenant which is the subject of this Discourse: I have
only one request to move unto You about it. How You are traduced and vilely
abused by some men's loose tongues and pens, for not advancing it more, and more
pressing the keeping, in their sense, I need not speak of it, You know it too
well: And therefore I humbly conceive seeing it is here manifestly proved, that
the Oath was unlawfully given and taken, and so not binding the Conscience,
neither to be kept, there is great cause and reason that the whole Kingdom from
your House should publicly understand so much: For so doing, God shall have
much glory by men's repenting of it, You cleared from many foul aspersions, many
treacherous and dangerous designs prevented, and such ^ have not taken it,
preserved from the snare thereof.

You know well enough, and are very sensible, what a stir is kept, what a
controversy and ado there is made, between party and party, Kingdom and
Kingdom about this Some have compared the Covenant to an old Almana^k out of
date but it was never in date: not good the first year when it was made.
Nothing, every side justifies it self, and charge the other with a breach:
And without doubt the contention about this Covenant will continue, yea I fear
rise higher, and break out into a greater flame, if the right way be not wisely
taken: for so long as the lawfulness of the Oath is not questioned, but rather
a pleading for the keeping of it, the differences can never be reconciled or
taken up: But if the other way (which is Gods way and so to follow him) be
practiced, there is reason to hope that a blessing and much good will speedily
follow.

I am the more encouraged to speak thus unto you, because among other abuses
reformed, You have In the Oath mini stred to the present Lord Mayor.
lately (and very well) done some thing this way; But under favor this Oath
being National^ and more preju^^ciall, it should therefore be rather minded,
and something the more done in it, to remove so great an evil and crying sin
from and off the Land.

You have formerly declared and still do, that your House and heart shall be
ever open to receive and hear P^^itious: Gentlemen (...) Address here to you
is for God, for Christ, for So^^s: and ^sy^ hear me* (...) f^^fil my joy.

It is said of one Terenti^^ a great Commander under Va^e^s a^ Arrian Emperor,
being returned from Armenia with a mighty victory, Theod. li. 4. c 32. hist. E
cc.
Emperor bid him ask what he would for a reward of his service: Whereupon he
desired, that the Orthodox Christians might have a public place in the City of
Antioch to meet in, for the worship and service of God: the Emperor displeased
hereat rent the Petition, and cast it to the ground, wishing him to ask some
other thing. Terentius first gathered up the pieces, then afterward replied: I
would (says he) have accepted this as a full reward, but being denied I shall
defire no other thing. I have no fear nor cause to fear, that this Petition of
mine shall be denied: But if it should, and lie torn and seattered in Your
House, and I were bid to ask some thing for my self, I would even take up the
pieces and be silent: and not speak there for my self, where I could not be
heard for my God. But how soever it be, this shall be my comfort, I have herein
discharged my duty, and quitted my self from the guilt of blood.

Neither let the weakness, meannesse, unworth^nesse, or what else may be
applied to your Petitioner be any cause that You should the less respect the
matter which is not his but Christ's. Great wise men in times past have not
disdained to follow the advice of simple men. It is reported of Zenophon, that
be Zenoph. Expeded. Cyr. 3. and Cyr. 4. d Salust. bell. Iugurth. ^ Philip.
Comin* li. 7.
gave order to his Attendants to awake him if he were asleep, whenever any one
brought him news: and he would never refuse to hear the counsel of any private
Soldier. And of Marius it is said, d that taking the advice of a common
Soldier, he won a strong Castle in Numidia. Whereas on the contrary, Charles
the last Duke of Burgundy frefusing to hear a prisoner, and doing all things
upon his own head, without admitting any relation or counsel of others, fell
into the traps of Campo^achos treason, was defeated by the Switzers, and by
them miserably slain at Nancy.

For conclusion, were I not confident and most certain of the truth by me here
asserted, I should not du^st have moved this matter to You with so much
boldness: and for the proof I refer You to the Arguments and Reasons in the
Treatise: and so I rest, and am

Yours, to serve You in and for the Truth: John Can.
Bow, April 21. 1649.
The Snare is broken. Wherein is proved, That the Covenant-oath was unlawfully
imposed and taken, and not to be kept, as binding the Conscience.
IT is a saying of Pro. 14. 12.
Solomon, There is way which seems right unto a man; but the end thereof are
the ways of death. That the Covenant given and taken through the two Kingdoms,
has seemed unto many a way right, lawful, religious, it is granted on all
sides: the thing therefore which I have undertaken (and by the good hand of God
assisting me) shall fully and clearly prove, is, that the same, is the way of
death: a Covenant contrary to Religion, Law and Reason.

And first to begin with the general definition of an Oath, which according to
Alsted. Theol. cas* c 15. Quest. 2.
Divines, is a religious and necessary attestation of Gods holy Name, whereby
we invocate him as a witness to confirm the truth of our speech, and as a
Judge if we speak falsely. And Arist. in Rhetor. ad Allex. c. 18.
Aristotle, and Cic. ^r. 3. offic.
Cicero speak to the same effect, de^^ning an Oath, to be A religious
attestation, taking God to witness.

It is said to be A religious attestation, because an Oath is Dent. 6. ^3. and
10. 20. Psalm. 62* 12.
part of Gods worship: That the Covenant-oath was not so, is apparent. For, 1.
It is an enemy to Gods worship and true Religion; under the name of heresy
and schism, a mere design to stop the passage of many precious truths, and to
hindr the Saints from Church Fellowship, and walking in the faith and order of
the Gospel.

2. It cannot be religious, because it contains a contradiction, and so
enforces the taker, necessarily to be ^ Covenant-breaker one way or other. In
the third Article he swears to preserve the Kings Majesty's Person and
Authority, etc. here (as it is generally interpreted) the Convenanter promises
not to touch the person of the King, as to have him corporally punished, should
he be the greatest Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer upon the face of the earth. Yet a
little after he swears he will endeavor that ALL SUCH as shall be
Incendiaries, Malignants, and evil instruments, may be brought to public
trial, and receive condign punishment, etc. here neither King, Queen, Prince,
etc. are exempted, but whosoever shall show himself an Incendiary to the
public peace, and safety of the two Kingdoms, he will endeavor to have him
punished, as the degree of their offense shall offense require or deserve. That
rule is well known, Aristot. de Interp. l. 2. c. 2.
Impossible est due contradictiora vere reddi de eodem. Thus he is snared by
the transgression of his lips; and whiles he shuns one rock, he makes shipwreck
upon another.

3. It cannot be a religious action to Lev. 19. 14.
put a stumbling block before the blind: and Pro. 28. 10.
to cause the righteous to go astray in an evil way. But this Covenant does
so, and thus I prove it.

1. When the Covenant was commanded to be taken through the Kingdom, the people
generally held (and for the most part do still) that the Government by
Archbishops and Bishops was lawful: and therefore to be required, yea forced
to swear with their hands lift up to heaven, that they will endeavor the
extirpation of Prelacie, howbeit at the same time it was well known, they
thought it a lawful and good government: it was an hard case, and showed
little pity. The Digest. l. 2. Tit. 14 de pa^tis; Cicero* l. 3
Law says, Pactum si tolletur jus publicum tune non valet, etiam si fuerit
juramento confirmatum: A Covenant if it take away public right it cannot
stand, yea though it be confirmed with oath. For my part I know not in what
particular a free people may more groundedly and properly challenge public
right then in matters of Religion: and therefore quo jure, by what power may
their Representatives require them, and that by oath, to change one form of
government for another, until they be informed touching the lawfulness of
such a change.

2. No less was it a snare to many poor souls, who must swear that they will
really and constantly endeavor the preservation of the doctrine; worship,
discipline and government in the Church of Scotland: but what these things
were, poor wretches they knew not: not good they thought, because contrary to
their present practice. Ea certo oportet esse cognita and perspecta, say the
Synopsis pr^ disp. 20. p. ^20.
Leiden Professors: What men swear to* they must have a certain, full and clear
knowledge of: not to Pro. 20. 25.
vow, and afterward make inquiry. Observe the late Pourtract. pa. 78.
Kings Speech (if that book be his) I am prone (says he) to believe and hope,
that many who took the Covenant are yet firm to this judgment, that such later
Vows, Oaths and Leagues can never blot out these former gravings and characters
which by just and lawful oaths were made upon their souls. He takes it as
granted, that many when they swore against Prelacie, and for Presbytery, it
was against their Conscience, and so not binding.

3. To what use are these words in the Covenant, viz: Schism and heresy? but
another snare to deceive the simple, and suppress the godly. It was decreed in
a certain General Council held at Rome under 3 Volum: Conc. cop Excomm^^de
haeret.
Innocent the third, in the year 1215. that no Heretic should be chosen King:
confirmed before under 2 Volum: Conc. F. 136. 2. 15. 216. 530.
Theod sius the younger, Valentinian the third, and Martian; and afterward
recited by L. Manich. l. quicunq: in l. fine. C. de haeret.
Justinian the first, in the first Council of Constantinople inserted in his
last Code. But mark the mystery of iniquity, who must define heresy, and
judge who is an heretic: this is the Popes work alone. We believe, says Def
c. 3. l 4. de Romans Pont. Sect. tertius.
Gretzer, the judgment of him who succeeds Peter in the Chair, Non secus ac
olim Petri infallibile, to be no otherwise then the judgment of Peter was. Who
reject the Popes judgment in a cause of faith, are Heretics, says Canus. Now
the like is this Covenant for all the world: Lib 3. de verb Dei. c. 8. Sect.
Excutimus.
first an oath must be taken for the extirpation of heresy and schism, not
that it is determined what is heresy or schism, or that the Covenanter shall
know before hand what is meant by it: but being blindly brought into the pit,
then come our Brethren of Scotland with a cathedral infallibility in defining
causes of faith, and tell him that Brownists, Anaboptists, Independants with
others, such and such are intended: And howsoever he be not able to apprehend
either herefie or schi^me in them, yet he must judge them heretics and
schismatics, for that he has taken the Covenant, and our brethren say they
are so.

We shall in the second place consider the ends of an oath: Now men swear
unlawfully, when in taking an oath they do not respect, 1. Gods glory: 2. their
own good: and 3. the good of their neighbors.

First for Gods glory: it could not by the generality of people in this Kingdom
possibly be aimed at. 1. Because as Explicat. decalog. 3. praec. p. 90*
Rivet: truly says, Nemo juramento cogi debet ad aliquid inique perpetrandum.
No man ought to be constrained by oath to do any thing unjustly: his reason is,
Quia obedientia erga divina mandata (que inter se nunquam pugnant) omnibus est
praeferenda: Because obedience to Gods Commandments (which never disagree
amongst themselves) is to be preferred before all things. Now the Law says,
Genesis 9. 6.
He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Number. 35. 31.
Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of
death: but he shall surely be put to death. Deuteronomy. 19. 13
Thine eye shall not pity him, etc. To covenant therefore to preserve the
Kings Person, that is, to swear he should not be put to death, though a
murderer, etc. it was an oath against a divine precept, and so not binding,
neither was there a due respect had unto Gods glory.

2. Romans 14. 23.
Whatsoever is not of faith is fin, and consequently tends not to Gods glory.
But those who swore to things either doubtingly, or ignorantly, or forced
through fear to escape bodily punishment, or to enjoy their calling, estates,
credit, places, etc. could not swear in faith; But this was the condition of
the people every where, and cannot be denied. As one Johan. Bapt. Foleng in
Psa. 64. pa. 236.
says, Verior ^e statim is perjurus efficiatur, qui Monachum profiteiur. So
there was cause enough to believe, that when this Nation swore against the
Government by Archbishops and Bishops, they forswore themselves, I mean the
greatest number both Priests and people, as doing a thing against their
Conscience, and never meant to keep the oath if they could otherwise choose.
And to make this good, mark a passage in Mr. December 27. 1643. pa. 18.
Hendersons Sermon before the House of Commons. It fears me (says he) that a
great part of the people of this Land are still fond of a form all Service, and
a proud Prelacie.

3. Men have respect then unto Gods glory, when they do lawful and just
actions: and can show Gospel precepts and presidents for the justification
thereof: For as Fest* Christ. ca* 3 pa* 14.
Hospinian rightly says, Non statim omnia quae pio animo and bono zelo
instituuntur, and absque omni inquisitione recipienda sunt. We may not
presently receive all things which are instituted with a godly mind and good
zeal, without any examination. So we should be like little children, put every
thing to the mouth which is given into the hand. What the Composers and
Imposers of the Covenant at first intended, I shall not here touch upon, but
this I affirm, and will stand to it, the same had never any Scripture bottom:
policy perhaps it had: but piety not: And for the Covenant and Oath which
some fetch from Asa, Josiah, Nehemiah, etc. it holds not forth any thing either
for matter or manner to prove the lawfulness of this Covenant. Similibus
similia convenire consentaneum est, says the Logician. But except it be in
name, as that is called a Covenant, and so this, there is no proportion or
likeness between them, as relating either to persons or things.

2. It is against the true end of a lawful Oath, when a man respects not his
own good, specially not the good of his soul: But what good could any man
imagine he did to his soul, whilst he was swearing to the particulars in that
Covenant. For instance: 1. Touching the Scots Church discipline, when the
swearer knew not what it was; or if he did, yet thought it not to be lawful:
or if lawful, yet saw no reason or just cause for him to swear to endeavor
the preservation of it, was such a course profitable for his soul? 2. When any
worship or form of Church Government is settled in a Land by Authority, and the
people by oath have received it, howsoever I grant the State may remove the
same: nevertheless to require an oath of the people for to reject it, until
they themselves do see the thing unlawful, and are willing to take it, there
is no warrant in Scripture for it. De haer* a Civil. mag. p^nicn^is.
Beza confesses (although no friend to liberty of conscience, yet) That God
never gave power to man for imposing Laws upon the Conscience, nor can endure
that any besides himself should bear sway or dominion over the minds of men.
Now if this be not to impose Laws upon the Conscience, and to bear a lordly
sway over the mind, viz: to compel men to swear against Prelaeie, to which
they had before many times sworn, yea, and that before they saw the thing
unlawful, or could do it of conscience, then was there never an humane law
imposed upon the Conscience. 3. When the Ministers of Aphrick were tendered an
Oath, Victor: de persecut. vandalic.
Nunquid bruta irrationalia (said they) nos putatis ut juremus nescientes quid
charta c^ntineat? Do ye think us such senseless beasts, as that we will swear
not knowing what the writing does contain? If men had duly regarded their souls
good, they would have refused the taking of the Covenant with the like answer,
and upon the same ground, that is, have known first what the heresy was and
schism, that should be extirpated, before they would swear to any acting
against the same. Quod just fit, scienter fit: quod vero injuste ignoranter,
says Topic. l. 2. c. 23.
Aristotle: That is justly done which is done knowingly: but what ignorantly,
that is done unjustly. And to say the truth, I hardly know the thing wherein
the people of England, specially this present generation, have showed
themselves more irrational and stupid then in this particular, for they have
taken even the Oath ex officio, sworn to do that thing which they know not to
this day what it is, nor how, or which way to act in reference to the oath
which they have taken.

3. It is against the end of a lawful Oath, when men respect not the good of
their neighbors. Explicat. decalog. 3 prae. pa. 90.
Rivetus says, Non est servandum juramentum cujus executio cum salute publica,
cum honestate, and bonis moribus pugnaret. That Oath is not to be kept, the
execution whereof fights with public safety, honesty and good manners. And a
little after, Si quis ergo errore deceptus, vel affectibus abreptus, aut metu
victus, jurando pr mittit se aliquid facturum, quod vel in haec tria, vel in
unum ex tribus impingat; jurando quidem peccat, sed si juramentum servaverit,
peccatum peccato addit. If any one therefore deceived through error, or led
aside through affection, or overcome through fear, promises by oath, that he
will do something which is against these three, or any one of the three, he
offends indeed by swearing; but if he keeps the Oath, he adds sin to sin.

This Covenant must needs be against public safety, because it occasioned a
general commotion, and set the people of the Land causlesly to destroy one
another. The Presbyterian party think themselves bound to engage against the
Church and people of God, and to seek their utter ruin, under the name of
schism and heresy: the Independents taking the way of the other to be
superstitious, conceive they have as much reason by the Covenant to oppose
them: and the Cavileers, swearing to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's
Person: conclude they may lawfully destroy them both. I mention not here our
Brethren of Scotland, who challenge by the Covenant a power to settle our
Church and State, and to spoil us in our persons, estates, consciences, if we
refuse to conform to their rules and orders: thus is the Covenant become an
Achan, a troubler, a firebrand in the Nation, and serves for no other use, but
to make division, keep open the breach of differences, and to strengthen the
opposing parties one against another, till in the end they are quite undone on
all sides. The L. Non dubium C. de Ll. l. Iubemus nulli.
Law says, Contractus vel pacta contra legem prohibiti, nam sunt ipso jure
nulla. Contracts or Covenants against a prohibited Law are void by right. It is
against the Law of God, Nature and Nations for any people to enter into a
solemn League and Covenant to destroy their own safety. But the wit of an
Enemy could not have devised a thing more pernicious and destructive to our
pub^ick peace and safety then the Covenant: for it is not possible that ever
this Commonwealth shall be settled according to what the Parliament has lately
declared, and the Covenant duly observed; so incompatible is the one with the
other.

2. There is in the Covenant as little honesty: the late Pourtract. page 38.
King spoke true enough; I see the Imposers of it are content to make their
Covenant like Manna (not that it came from heaven as this did) agreeable to
every man's palate and relish, who will may swallow it: they admit any men's
senses of it, though diverse or contrary with any salvoes, cautions,
reservations, etc. And as it admits of equivacotion and mental reservation, so
corrupt men and hypocrites have liberty enough there granted, to carry forth
their designs and private interests, in deceiving and wronging others. Ier. 7.
4. 9.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, was the cry of the
hypocritical Jews in the Prophets time. And when Hambleton brought the Scots
into this Kingdom, to steal, murder, and commit adultery, did they not then
trust in lying words, saying, The Covenant, the Covenant? Ambrose in li de Virg.
Venena non dantur, nisi melle circunlita, and vitia non decipiunt, nisi sub
speeie, umbraque virtutum: Poison is not given but mixed with honey; and vices
deceive not but under a show and pretense of virtue. The Covenant indeed is a
pretty cloak to cover any knaverie, villainy, treachery; and if our Brethren
shall once more attempt to oppress the stranger, the fatherless, and the
widow, and shed innocent blood in this Land: I make no question but they will
pretend to do all this by virtue of the Covenant: who is ignorant of rebellion
and treason frequently taught in City and Country, and the people provoked to
a new war, Authority despised, Magistracy contemned, lawful and just
commands of superiors rejected, and no other texts for all this but the
Covenant. Offic l. 3.
Cicero says, Nihil honestum esse potest, quod justitia vacet. If it be
according to justice, that men shall shed innocent blood, rob their neighbors,
and for Subjects to despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, make
insurrections and mutinies in the Commonwealth, press the Magistrates to
persecute the Saints, and suppress the truth, then has the Covenant honesty
in it, otherwise it is a most dishonest thing, if it be understood as the
Presbyterian Scots and English give their sense and interpretation of it.

From the definition of an Oath and ends, we come next to the properties, which
are three, laid down by the Prophet: Thou shall swear, the Lord lives in
truth, in judgment, Ier. 42.
and in righteousness. First in truth, which is, that the speech agree with
the thing, and the mind with the speech: so that we swear unlawfully when we
swear a thing that is false or falsely: a thing false when we swear an untruth,
the speech disagreeing with the thing: falsely when as we swear the truth but
deceitfully, when we purpose to deceive, the heart and tongue not agreeing
together.

1. It was a false thing, when the Covenanter swore to endeavor the
extirpation of schism and heresy, for howsoever not expressed so in words,
yet this he vowed to do, that he would persecute the godly, and not suffer them
peaceably to worship the Lord. Comment. in Mat. 10. v. 17.
Pareus commenting on these words, They will scourge you in their synagogues,
says, Damnati non argumentis, aut scripturis refut abuntur: sed flagris
coercebuntur: They are condemned not with arguments, or confuted by Scriptures,
but forced by whips. And quoting some examples for it, concludes, Plurima
deinceps suppeditavit histori^ Ecclesiastica, and hodie inquisitio Hispanica,
ubi similibus argumentis doctrina Christi refutatur. The Ecclesiastical
History shows many the like instances, and so the Spanish Inquisition at this
day, where the doctrine of Christ is confuted with such kind of arguments: And
in truth this Covenant may be added to the number: for there is not one word in
it, of confuting heresy and schism by Scripture, the Covenant binds no man to
do this: extirpation, that is, fining, silencing, imprisoning, banishing, and
murdering the Saints, and that for the Gospels sake.

But 2. be it granted the Covenanter is no way mistaken about heresy and
schism, the question then is by what Gospel precept or example he is obliged
to swear, that he will pluck up these tares, and not suffer them to grow in the
world until the harvest? where has Christ or his Apostles taught him, to
judge them that are without? The Italians have a Proverb, that whosoever runs
beyond his Commission, must run the hazard of it upon his own account. Calvin
howsoever he wrote a whole Tract about punishing of Heretics: yet he could not
choose but acknowledge so much truth in a few lines, as confutes the whole
Treatise: for Ins^itut li 4. c. 11. ^ect. 5. and 15.
having showed how the holy Bishops of ancient time, did not exercise any
Authority, in fining, Imprisoning, and civil punishment, gives his own
opinion thus, that as the Church has no power of forcing of her own, Neque
expetere debeat, de civili coercitione loquor. Neither may she require it, I
speak of the Civil Magistrate to employ his authority in a civil way. And
this Bern. in Cant.
was Bernards opinion before him, Fides suadenda est, non imperanda: Faith is to
be persuaded, not forced. So August. Epist. 65.
Augustine, Docendo magis quam jubendo, monendo quam minando: Rather by
teaching then commanding, by admonishing Amminiamus li* 25.
then threatening. Amminiamus writes of Valentinian thus: Hoc moderamine
prin^ipatus sui inclaruisse, quod inter religionum diversitates medius
steterit, nec quemquam inquietaverit, neque ut hoe ant illud coleretur
imperaverit, nec interdictis minacibus subject^rum cervicem ad id, quod ipse,
inclinaverit. With this moderation his principality shined, that amongst
diversities of Religion he stood in a mean, troubled no man, nor commanded
either this or that should be worshipped, nor by threatening Edicts forced his
Subjects to bow their necks to do what he himself did. What Maximilian would
usually say, it is well known, Nullum enormius peccatum dare posse, quam in
conscienti^s exercere velle. Qui enim conscientiis imperare volunt, eos areem
coeli invadere and pleramque terrae possessionem perdere. And much like this,
was his answer to the King of France returning out of Polonia, and threatening
the extirpation of heresy and schism, (meaning the Huguonots:) Those (
Histor. Fr. l. 1 Hen. 3. p. 14.
says he) who seek to rule over men's consciences, supposing to win heaven, do
^ft* times loose their possession on earth. The truth is, violence in Religion,
and through compulsion and fear to drive men to act things involuntarily and
against their conscience, is so unnatural, absurd, unreasonable, as the very
heathen saw it to be unlawful. Seneca de ira
Errantem per agros ignorantia viae, melius est ad rectum iter admonere quam
expellere: says Seneca. A man going astray through ignorance of his way, it is
better by advise to lead him into his way, then to drive him thither by force.
Sen. de cle.
Again, Ingenianostra, ut nobiles and generosi equi, melius facili fraeno
reguntur. Our wits are as noble and generous horses, best ordered by an easy
bridle. So Ex Themistii dicto apud Socrat. Eccl. hist. 3 c. 21.
another, Purpuraetuae cultores aliquos efficies, non Dei: Thou may cause
them to be worshippers of thy purple robe, not of God. Mr. Discourse about
Tolerat. p 53. 54.
John Owen in a book lately come forth, says, Cain seems to me, to have laid
the foundation of that oruelty, which was afterward inserted into the Churches
Orthodoxies, by name of hereticidium, we find the four famous Empires of the
world to have drunk in this persuasion to the utmost, of suppressing all by
force and violence that consented not to them in their way of worship. And this
he proves afterward in that learned discourse.

3. The hearts and tongues of many agreed not together, neither could it
possibly be in most things, seeing the things to which they swore, were
contrary to the mind and liking of the people every where. Juravi lingua,
mentem injuratam gero. I have sworn against the calling of Archbishops and
Bishops (might one say) but in my heart I believe their standing is lawful and
good. I have vowed and covenanted (might another say) to discover Malignants,
etc. but in my heart I never purposed so to do. The like in relation to
Scotland, could it sensibly be thought when this Nation took the Covenant, they
regarded that Kirk, or really meant (as they swore) to endeavor the
preservation of the discipline and worship of that Church? Many ^^^styeelded
unto it (says the late Pourtract p. 78.
King) more to prevent that eminent violence and ruin which hung over their
heads in case they wholly refused it, then for any value of it, or devotion to
it. He speaks doubtless the truth, it was taken to shun the odious name of
being reputed otherwise malignants, enemies to the great work of Reformation,
or to escape some outward danger, not religiously and in the fear of God, for
the oath abounds with such ambiguous expressions, impossibilities,
contradictions, and things so contrary to the opinion of men in all places,
that conscientiously in some particulars it could not be admitted by any person
whatsoever.

And therefore no marvel, that Dr. Burgess howsoever the first man who Sermon
before the House of Commons. Nov. 17. 1640. upon Ier. 50. 5
openly desired and urged a Covenant to be entered into, yet when he saw this
Covenant was the first (as I have heard) that opposed it in the Assembly, and
for refusal, he and Mr. Price were both suspended; Besides many godly men,
perceiving what a snare it was, withdrew and obscured themselves for a time: It
was so bestuft with selfish Interest, so disagreeing for matter with those
Covenants which we read of in Scripture, and to those qualifications which
according to Gods Word ought to be in every Oath, that I have stood in
admiration, it has not been more opposed by judicious and pious men.

The second property of a lawful Oath, is to swear in judgment, that is,
confiderately, as knowing the thing to be true, and most certain: for though it
may be true, yet if uncertain to the swearer, he takes an unlawful Oath. Non
temere prosiliendum esse: sed etiam atque etiam cogitandum, quid sit jurandum:
item an res ita habeant, quemadmodum dicturi sumus. Not rashly (says In lib.
Josh. c. 2. hom. 11. p. 13.
Lavaret) but it must be considered again and again, what the Oath is, and
whether the things are so as we say. So Syntag. Theol. l. 9. c. 23. p. 628.
Polanus, Juramentum licitum est, de rebus veris, certo cognit^* The Romans
had an use, that he which would swear by Hercules, should go forth of the
doors, that he might be well advised, and take some pause before he swear. For
they held that Hercules did swear but once in all his life, and that was to the
son of King Augeus. This deliberation in their idolatrous Oaths (says Comment.
on Exo chapter 20. quaest. 4 p. 294.
Willet) should admonish Christians to be well advised in swearing by the Name
of God. And now for application, here is more cause of mourning for a sinful
Covenant, then proving the unlawfulness of it in this particular.

1. It does not appear, that the imposers of it were so religiously affected,
as to have the Oath advisedly and understandingly taken: for surely if they
had, it would not have been so ambiguously, darkly, wrappingly given forth,
neither pressed so hastily, but every man allowed time and means sufficient, for
a clear and full satisfaction in every point. The 1. Confide^emus in aur* de
tri^nte.
Law says, Turpe est sine lege loqui. Ad Plausitum l. 3.
Likewise, Factum a Judice quod officium ejus non pertinet, ratum non est. Now I
demand whether it can stand with the Law of God, with pure reason, with the
liberty of a free people, add that liberty which Christ has purchased for
us with his own blood, that the civil Magistrate may require an oath of any man
in a matter which he understands not, neither can speak certainly to it; and in
case he refuse (not of wilfulness, but of conscience) whether such a one may
suffer in person or estate. For,

2. Were I a Papist, and did believe the doctrine of blind obedience and the
Coliars faith, and could approve Confut. Petti c. 14. p. 18.
Hosius, saying, Ignorance in most things is best of all: to know nothing is to
know all things. And what Cusan. Exercit. l. 6.
Cus^n says, Obedientia irratisnali^, est consummata and perfectissima,
seilicet quando obeditur, fine inquis^tione rationis: sicut jumentum obedit
domino suo: and could receive Bellarm. de Just l. 1. c. 7.
Bellarmines tenet, who will have faith to consist in the assent, not in
knowledge; and that the Pope in things belonging to faith, Bellar* de Pont l.
4. c. 3.
Nullo casu errare potest: he can by no possible means err. When he sets forth
a Decree, Divinitus illi praeclusa est omni^ via: says Th: Bozius l. 18. de
sig. Ec. c. 16.
Bozius. God stops every way unto him which might bring him into error. And
in making such Decree, Boz. l 16. c. ^
Nunquam valuit aut va^ebit facere contra fidem; He never was, he never shall
be able to do ought against faith. I say let this be granted, the Popes Canons
and Institutions may tolerably be subscribed to: But seeing Protestant Divines
are of a contrary judgment, and hold that Assemblies, Synods, Councels, may
err* and are not infallible in points of faith, yet notwithstanding will
require men to swear to Articles of their own framing, and not satisfied
touching the lawfulness of them, it is too absurd, and the Papists herein are
truer to their principles then they: A blind Papist, I confess, walks by some
rule, when not knowing the thing to be lawful, yet receives it, in regard he
believes the Church cannot err. But what has a poor blind Protestant to
help himself in point of conscience, when he shall be compelled to swear to
such things as he knows not what they are, whether good, bad, and is taught
that the framers and imposers for ought he knows, may err, and be deceived
therein.

3. That the Covenanters knew not the things to be true and most certain to
which they swore, and therefore took an unlawful oath, it is as clear as the
Suns that shines, for many particulars in the Covenant are still ridles and
dark sentences, and it is not yet known whereto they have relation. I remember
what De ^ivi^. Dei. li. 21. c. 26. and in Enchirid* c 69.
Augustine writes of Purgatory, Forsitan verum est: non est (...) ^n sit quaeri
potest. Perhaps it is so, it is not altogether incredible: it may be a question
whether there be any such place or no. The like might most Covenanters have
said, Forsitan verum est, perhaps it is true what I now swear; but it is a
question: the Scots discipline and Church Government for ought I know may be
Antichristian and false, and the Bishops calling, Christian and lawful. So for
heresy and schism, can any man to this day tell what is intented thereby. I
do not regard what Mr. Tailor or Mr. Jenkins say of it, for as Mr. Ley
defensive doub^s* p* ^9. 100.
one speaks very well: A private interpretation of a public act cangivs no
satisfaction, unless it be expressly or ver^ually allowed by the highest
Authority, that does impose it, and then it is made public. Private men though
learned, if they take upon them the interpretation of public Dictates, may be
more like to light on mutual contradictions, then of the true and proper
construction of the text they interpret. So did Vega and S^to, Soto and
Catherinus* etc. commenting on the Council of Trent. I do not know that the
high Court of Parliament has any where declared what they mean by heresi^ and
schism, and therefore for private men to determine of it, I take it to be
beyond their calling. And for the fourth Article in the Covenant, namely, who
is to be reputed a malignant, and what makes a man to be so, and how far the
Covenanter is bound by oath in point of discovery, etc. here needs another
Oedipus to unfold the mystery. Comment. upon Exo. Chapter 20. quest. 7. p 295.
Dr. Willet showing for what things an oath is not to be taken, the second is,
of things doubtful and uncertain: for it were presumption to call God to be
witness, of that which he is uncertain, whether it be true or not.

The third property or qualification of a lawful Oath, is, Rightcous^esse,
that it be a just and lawful thing which he swear^th. Juramentum non sit
vinculum iniquitati^: An Oath ought not to be the bond of iniquity: and
therefore an oath is unlawful when as thereby we promise any thing that is
unjust, or unhonest, wheth^r it appear unto us presently when we make the oath,
or afterward finding i^pietie and injustice in it, which we did not discover at
the making of it: then such an oath is rather to be broken then observed, for
we sin not in breaking, but in making of it; whereas he that performs such an
oath, adds sin unto sin: that is to say, rashness in swearing, wickedness
in performing, according to that saying, Quod male juratur, pejus servatur.
Juravit David temere* sed non implevit jurationem majore pietate, says August.
in Ser. de collat.
Augustine: David swear rashly, but kept not his oath with greater piety.

Howsoever the Covenant was at first (as we have before showed) by many
judicious and godly people refused, and the impiety and injustice in it
observed and protested against: nevertheless the unlawfulnes of it has since
more clearly and abundantly appeared; Per sequentia praecedentia declarentur,
as Lawyers say. To show the impiety and injustice of the Covenant, take these
few instances.

1. A man swearing not to do his office and duty, Non t^^tum, non obligat:
(says Ames. cons. l. 4. c. 22.
Amesim) sed si observetur, auget reatum. Not only binds not, but if he keep
it, he increases his sin. When the Covenanter swares to preserve and defend
the Kings Majesty's person, he being then a Tyrant and Traitor, and having
before shed much innocent blood, was not this an oath taken (at such a time)
against his office and duty? Let the action since, and swearing then, be
compared together.

2. The jumbling of this Nation and the Scots together in the Covenant, the
taking of them in to settle Religion here, and to endeavor the extirpation of
Prelacie, Popery, schism and heresy amongst us, it was (under favor) a
practice (I think) never before heard of Hence that Army under Hamilton
pretended cause and ground to conquer us: and to this day our dear Brethren
talk of coming in again to suppress the Sectaries; thus the Covenant is become
a snare to the Nation, and of a free State and people, would make us subjects
and vassals to another Kingdom. The L. non dubium* C* de 11. l. Iubemus nulli.
Law says, Contractus vel pacta contra legem pr^^^biti, nam sunt jure nulla. De
verb. o^* ligat.
Again, Conditio ^^rpi^ ^el impossibilis vitiat actum. Likewise Contractus vel
donatio legata non valent in fraudem legis. If our Brethren of Scotland think
the Covenant sets them into the Chair, to determine of our affairs here in
matters of Religion, and to suppress all such as they call Sectaries: we must
tell them such a Covenant is most unrighteous, against Religion, Reason, Law,
and Conscience. Instit l. 4. c. 13. Sect. 20.
Calvin says, Absurdum est ad ea praestandum nos adigi, quae a nobis minime
Deus requirit. It is an absurdity that we should be driven to the keeping of
those things which God does not require of us. Again, Vota inc^nsiderate
suscepta, non modo nihil obligant sed necessario sunt rescindenda. Vows
unadvisedly made are such as not only do not bind, but are necessarily to be
broken. But where does God require a free State to give up their Authority and
power into the hands of strangers: and if forreiners shall judge them to be
Sectaries, whom the State knows to be godly and sound Christians, where is that
Law to bind up the hands of our Parliament and Army, whilst these of another
Country shall cut the throats of honest men. You will say the Covenant will
justify all this: then I say, the Covenant is a pernicious and wicked thing.

3. Some say, The impiety of Impunity.
By this Covenant-oath all Independents ought to be expelled from the House of
Parliament, yea not to sit in any Court of Judicatorie, to bear Votes, and
determine the weighty causes of Religion and Church Reformation, but as
offensive rubs and remoras to be removed; and only sound Presbyters, Lords and
Commons to rule. A pretty Oath, to swear men out of their rights, privileges,
liberties, and to make them incapable est.
of all place and trust in the Commonwealth, because they are honest. How does
such an Oath agree with the holy 1 These. 4. 4. 6.
Scripture? This is the will of God, that no man go beyond and defraud his
brother in any matter: but this (if it be so as it is before said) contains the
highest and vilest deceit that can be: Ovid. de A^te Amand. l 3.
Heathens have taught otherwise and better.

Reddite depositum, pietas sua foedera servet,
Fraus absit, vacuus coedis babete manus.
Restore the pledge, piety her leagues keeps still,
Let fraud depart, beware ye do not kill.
4. It is an untigbte^us oath for Magistrates (deceitfully drawn in) to promise
by oath (to accommodate bloodthirstie men) to hinder Gods people from
submitting to the sweet and easy yoke of Christ, to suppress the order and
way of the Gospel, and to stop the propagation of the truth, but so much and
more too, is gathered from the Covenant, and nothing now more frequently
complained of, then that the Parliament Men to be Covenant-breakers, because
they suffer such things to be practiced amongst the Saints. Mr. Discourse about
Toleration, p 51.
Owen well observes, If they close with them (says he) they are Custodes
u^tiusquae tabulae, the Churches nursing Fathers, etc. what they please. But if
they draw back for want of light or truth to serve them, logs and storkes find
not worse entertainment from frogs, then they from some of them. Sum: Theol:
Compen: Alt: part. 2. part. cap. 89. p. 222.
Aquinas speaking of an Oath, says, Sivero boni impoditivum: tuno juramento
deest justitia, and non ost servandum. If this Covenant comprehends such
things, as some say it does, yea and publicly avouch to be the main and
principal of it, surely it wants justice, unless it be justice to oppose the
chiefest good, even Christ in his Church, Ministry, Worship, Government, and
to countenance preposterous, rash, and headie men in violence and persecution.

Next let us consider the use of an Oath, which is, Vt lites and controversiae
f^niantur, says Comment. ad Heb. c. 6. v. 16.
Pareus: that debates and controversies may cease: so the Heb. 6. 16.
Apostle, An Oath is an end of all strife. The taking of an Oath (says Mr. On
the Com. 3. p 75.
Elton) serves to further brotherly love, and to confirm lawful peace and
society between party and party, country and country, Kingdom and Kingdom And
a little before, That controversies which hinder love and Christian charity may
be ended. So Confut. of Anabapt.
Bakewell word for word. I marvel how any man could imagine, that this Oath
was for peace, or that the present differences and strife between party and
party; could be ended by it, but rather necessarily continued and increased. I
have read some where, about Heraclea in Pontus, there should grow a tree over
the Tomb of Amycus King of the Bebrycians, the Natives called it the raging or
mad Laurel, and for this cause, for if a branch or twig thereof (never so
little) should be cast into a ship, all the Mariners and passengers would brawl
and quarrel each with other, neither would there be any quietness and peace
in the vessel till that mad wood was thrown overboard. Whether this Covenant
be not like that raging and mad tree, let the Reader judge, having duly weighed
these particulars.

1. It is an Apostolical precept, that Philip. 3. 16
whereto we have already attained we should walk by the same rule: and the Romans
15. 1.
strong to bear with the weak; and nothing better beseeming Saints, then a due
regard had unto tender Consciences. But there is nothing in the Covenant that
looks this way: The difference between party and party (though brethren in
the faith) is referred there to the Sword, and no reconciliation, but the
extirpation of one, or both.

2. As the Oath comprehends many things of several kinds, (and diverse of
them unknown what they are) which makes it both Mr. John Ley Defensive
doubting. page 11.
superfluous and perilous: so it has this for an accommodation to the taker,
that he is left to take it in his own sense, and having so taken it, now he
must fight: but against whom? Against every one contrary to his judgment and
practice. And howsoever the Presbyterians challenge a proper interest in the
Oath, as if the same stood for them, and their design and cause alone:
nevertheless the truth is, others may claim as much as they, and though they
make not the like noise, crying, The Covenant, the Covenant, yet from the
Covenant have as much to say for themselves and against them: and why the
Magistrate should tolerate and countenance their Church, ministry, worship,
and government, I say from the Oath may as fairly claim the approbation of the
State, and the extirpation of them, as they can clearly gather any thing out of
it against the other.

3. It cannot with truth be denied, but this Covenant has been a principal
cause to hinder union and peace between the Congregationall and Presbyterian
Churches: and if a full reconciliation touching their differences could not
have been made, yet such an accommodation and pacification easily settled, as
both parties might have well satisfied, and brotherly love continued between
them: but by this means they have been the more divided, and contention
increased on both sides. Add hereunto in the last place, the many rebellions
and treacherous designs carried forth from time to time under the Covenant: As
the rising in Surrey, Kent, Essex, Wales: and no marvel, for the Oath having
in it, so many things, and so ambiguous, doubtful, uncertain, contradictorie,
etc. it must needs own almost any thing, specially ^eeing the sense of it, has
never been plainly demonstrated, but left to men's own interpretation in
several particulars. The Divines of Aberdene said well, The Minist. and
Professors of Aberdene in their general Demands, page 14.
That the words of an Oath should be clear and plain, and if they be any way
ambiguous, the true sense of them should be so declared and manifested, that
all may know it. But this Oath was so obscure and dark, as it gave men occasion
to take it in several and different senses, and hereupon strengthened
themselves in opposing and striving one against another.

Object: If it be said, that in those days there was such division and
distraction among us, that there was need to fasten us together by such a
sacred bond as that of the Solemn League and Covenant.

To this I answer, or rather will here set down Mr. Ley his words for answer:
Defensive doubts, touching the late Oath of the sixth Canon, page 6. 7.
That neither the want of such an Oath was the cause of the distempers of the
times, nor that the urging of it will be a convenient cure thereof: but rather
the contrary: since there is more agreement betwixt peace and love which may be
best preserved where offensive things are not urged, then betwixt love and
compulsion, especially, if (as of this Oath it is conceived) it incroach upon
the conscience, etc. And we see by the operation of it already, daily
producing more and more dislike of it, that it is not likely to be aremedie
against any malady already discovered, but rather a means to exasperate the
disease.

There be other means more effectual for holding out of Popery ( General
demands of the Ministers of Aberdene. page 29.
say the Divines of Aberdene) in which we ought to confide more then in all the
vows and promises of men; yea also, more then in all the united forces of this
Land: to wit, diligent preaching and teaching of the Word, frequent prayer to
God, etc. whereby we may increase in the knowledge of the truth, and in ability
to defend it against the enemies of it: So for heresy, schism, superstition,
and other unlawful things, and to advance the doctrine of truth, and
discipline of manners; these have been the chief means, and will be still the
best means, with them there is no need or use of swearing; and without them,
Covenants and Oaths will do no good.

Moreover we have against the Oath, this, Alsted. ^as c. 15. page 288.
Si factum sit juramentum de rebus quae non sunt nostrae potestatis, etc. A man
taking an oath to do an impossible thing, the same is not binding: ^ ^^on.
Syntag l 9. c. 2 3.
Vt si quis amico juret se ipsi bona alterius donaturum: As if a man should
swear to his friend he would give him another man's goods. It is a maxim in Law
and Nature, Nemo plus juris ad alium transfer potest, quam ipse baberet.
Tyrannicum est adres impossibles alios adstringere: says Comment. in Genesis 24.
v. 8
Pareus. The Ministers of London in their Letter to his Excellency, do much
press these words in the Solemn League and Covenant: namely, The preservation
and defense of the Kings Majesty's Person: and do infer from the same, a
violation of the Oath if he should be put to death. But they would have showed
more genuity and candor as becoming the Ministers of Christ, to have proved the
lawfulness of such a promise: where is it required in the holy Scripture, that
men should swear not to put to death a tyrant, traitor, murderer: will they rob
God to give unto men? or do they think if men have sworn not to give unto God,
the things that are Gods? they are bound to keep such an unjust and rash Vow,
or otherwise they shall provoke the Lord to wrath, as they instance in
Zedekiah, Saul, and others. It is well known amongst all the Subscribers; not
one of them has hitherto undertaken to justify that clause in the Article
taken according to their sense; yet doubtless they might with as much safety
have given Reasons against the Parliaments proceeding with the King, as cast
forth from time to time raylings against them.

Besides do not men take an Oath to do an impossible thing, when they swear to
do a thing which they know not what it is? Zeal without knowledge (says Mr.
Defensive doubts, p. 36.
Ley) is not sufficient, but it is necessary men should first know what Popery
is; and what is not, before they renounce it by swearing: And is it not as fit
they should first know, what is schism and heresy, and who are meant by
Malignants, before they swear to suppress the one, and punish the other? For
it cannot be imagined, that an Oath otherwise can be kept, or that it is taken
with any such intent. Again, Conscience (says Exposition on Com. 3. p. 79.
Mr. Elton) cannot be bound, where understanding cannot discern what is done,
and where he that swears wants reason and understanding to discern what he
does. So Alsted cas. c. 15. p. 288.
Alstedius, Conscientia enim obligari non potest, ubi intellectus, quid factum
sit, aut fieri debeat discernere nequit. And a little after, Ad legitimum
juramentum requiritur, ut intellectis integro, vel saltem non ablato, fi^t. He
that swears rightly (says Mr. Confut. of the Anab^p.
Bakewell) ought to know the nature of an Oath, and to be able to judge of the
matter before whom, and to whom, and of time, and place, and other
circumstances. We ought (say the The general demands of the Ministers and
profess. of Aberd p 37.
Professors of Aberdine) to judge of those things we are to swear to, with the
strict and inquisitive judgment of verity, and to ponder duly, and to propound
particularly and fully to others (especially to those who require our oath) to
satisfy our consciences there anent, and to answer all the doubts and reasons,
which make us unwilling and afraid to give our assent thereto. That this Oath
was imposed upon many men who wanted reason and understanding to discern what
they did, and so consequently the conscience not bound: thus I prove it.

1. It was not long before this National Covenant came forth, that the Oath of
the sixth Canon was enjoined, and the Clergy were to swear that they did
heartily, willingly, and truly upon the faith of a Christian, approve the
doctrine and discipline or government established in the Church of England, a^
^ontaining all things necessary to salvation, etc. Nor will they ever give
their consent to alter the Government of this Church by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, and Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now established, and us by right it
ought to stand. A little after this is published, a book entitled, Dr. Hall of
Episcop. par. 2. p. 47. ibid. par. 1. p. 63.
Episcopcaie by divine right. Wherein it is affirmed; That there is not the
tenth part of the plea for the Lords day from the writings of the Apostles
which Bishops have for their Episcopacie. And that there be diverse points of
faith (weighty points) which have not so strong evidence in Scripture: so
strong evidence, that Heaven may as soon fall, as that fail the Bishops.
Neither was this his opinion alone, but the people generally thought so too,
and for any other government (I speak of the greatest number) they knew none:
so far did they want reason and understanding to discern what they did, when
they swear down Episcopacie, and covenanted to maintain and preserve another
kind of Church Government when it shall be found out, and set up by the States.

2. The Covenanter swears against Popery, but knows he what he does? or what is
intended by it? Luther (as Mr. Child: his Answer to Charity maintained. p. 82.
some report of him) was wont to say, That himself, and almost every man else,
had a Pope in his belly: yet few have it in their heads to tell what Popery is.

Many hold that diverse of the Arminian Tenets are nothing else but Popery
blanched over with Kings large Declarat. p. 319.
a specious subtlety: and for holding them, some have been Peltius in Harmon.
Remonstr. and So ^in. Excus. Ludg. Bat. 1633.
publicly censured as Popish. Whitg. repl. to T. C. p. 299 559.
Whitgift, Episcop part. 3 p. 34.
Hall, and Defense of his Sermon. l. 1. c 8. p. 139.
Downal conclude Popery upon the Presbytery: and the Presbyterian
disciplinarians condemn all Episcopal jurisdiction as Papisticall. And many
censure both these, as Popish and Antichristian.

3. So touching Superstition, what does the Covenantor take it for? The
Conformists formerly have imputed superstition unto the Defense of the three
Innocent Cerem. Epistle to the Non-conform
Nonconformists in forbearing and forbidding the use of the Ceremonies: some
charge the Parish-meeting places with superstition, and to be pulled down, as
the high places and idol temples. yea, and by the Covenant-oath they say it
should be so. Tithes likewise is held superstition, and all Ainsw. on Exo. 20.
v. 5.
contributing to the maintenance of an unlawful Ministry: yea, there be some
of opinion, that all Ordinances, (as Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, etc.) are
supra Statutum superstition. Briefly, the Papists charge the Protestants with
superstition in diverse things. I had almost forgotten how some told me of late
in Westminster Hall, that the red cross which hangs there by the wall at the
Kings Bench is superstition, and the same (with all others the like) ought to
be broken to pieces, and such things to be no in use amongst us, and the
Covenanters sworn so to do.

4. For heresy it is well known, that this is charged by Papists upon
Protestants, and they again upon the Papists: and the Lutherans upon them both:
and the In a Book called, Mercy and Truth, or Charity maintained. See Mr.
Chillin. Preface in Answer to it, page 12.
Professors of Protestantisme they specially of greatest worth, learning and
authority, count Calvinisme heresy, and little less then treason.

5. For Schism I shall not mention it here, it is a secret and mystery, and
therefore to be left alone: The dweller between White Hall and White-chappell
imputes it Vindication of the London Ministers, p. 6.
to Mr. Price, and men of his faction and humor. But the Law says, Testes
singulares non probant. We have next Malignants: and riddle me, riddle me, what
is this? In the first Centurie of scandalous and lewd Ministers, I find
commonly malignitie applied to such, as had spoken reproachfully of the
Parliament, as saying, Centarie p. 4
The House of Commons in Parliament was an unjust Court, Page 9.
hypocrites, schismatic, and pragmaticall fellows, Page 26.
a company of factious fellows, no Parliament, that their Page 18.
proceeding against the Earl of Strafford was wrong full and unjust etc. For
such expressions formerly men indeed have been reputed Malignants, and so
censured. And is it less malignitie, or does the Covenant exempt such from
being malignants (because from Episcopacie turned to Presbytery) who speaking
of the Parliament, call it an apostatizing Parliament, a Covenant Breaking
Parliament, a Parliament at whose doors may be laid all the errors, heresies
and blasphemies of the times; a Parliament that has wrought a great
Reformation amongst us in Church and State, taking away High Commission Court,
Star Chamber, Council Table, etc. and bringing in the room thereof several
Committees, whose little fingers in the way of oppression, were heavier then
the loins of the former Courts; a Parliament suppressing Popery, Ceremonies,
Crucifixes, Crosses, Service Book, etc. and in the room thereof giving liberty
of conscience, otherwise called, a cursed Toleration of errors, heresies,
blasphemies, and all manner of licentiousness; a Parliament that has taken
away Ship Money, Coat and Conduct money, Monopolies, etc. and in the room
thereof bringing in Taxes, Assessements, Freequarters, and the heavy burden
and bondage of Excize: which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear.

And because some people might think, that such vile and malicious speeches
could not possibly proceed from their lips, who style themselves The Ministers
of Jesus Christ within the Province of London: I desire it may be well
observed, that whereas Mr. John Price in his book entitled, Clerico Clas. p. 7.
8.
Clerico-Classicum, has charged them with this great malignitie against the
Parliament, and in particular, names Mr. Cauton, Mr. Cranford, Mr. Case, Mr.
Love, Mr. Jenkins, and Mr. Tailor, as authors and actors. In the Answer which
i^ lately come forth to the said book, not only there is nothing said to it,
(and so granted to be true,) but withal he adds more calumniation and
slander: yea, and more dangerous and destructive to the State.

Your faction ( Vindication of London Minist. from the aspersions of John Price
pa. 70.
says he) have offered violence to the two Houses, forcing them to vote and
unvote at your pleasure. Ibid p. 31.
They cannot in their conscience believe that the Members sitting at
Westminster are a free Parliament, seeing they are under the Sword: nor a full
Parliament, in regard 200. Members of it are forced away; nor a complete
Parliament where two States are abolished. As for the late King, he was not (
Ibid. 47.
says he) either an idolater or a Tyrant: the P. 68.
Army and Council of justice, did put him to death by the impulse of that
spirit that now works mightily in the children of disobedience, because 'twas
done without and against the Word of God. P. 46.
The guilt of that innocent blood which has been spilt must be expiated and
avenged on some of the chiefest of the Incendiaries: As for themselves they
have Page 39.
an holy indignation against so horrid a fact.

I could take out diverse other things from the Covenant, to show, that he who
swears to it wants understanding to discern what he does. But this shall
suffice for the present. And I desire it may be noted, that the Oath is
quidlibet ex quolibet, all things, and nothing: it makes every man popish,
superstitious, heretical, schismatic, malignant; and yet makes no body so:
he that shall speak disgracefully and scandalously against the Parliament, and
the proceedings thereof: is a malignant by the Covenant, and yet not a
malignant: for the Covenant admits of a diverse and contrary sense in one and
the same thing. A malignant, an Incendiary, etc. if he stands for the Bishops,
but if a Presbyterian: no malignant then, no Incendiarie, and why? not but that
it is all one thing, or that he rails less, or speaks less falsely against the
State; but because, he being his own Interpreter, he takes it otherwise.

Object. If it be so, a man may the more willingly take the Oath; for though he
understand not what is meant by the particulars in it, yet taking liberty to
himself to make such a sense of it as may most conduce to his own interests,
whether for advantage, or for avoiding of danger and damage no hurt can follow;
specially seeing by equivocation and mental reservation, he can save himself
from being discovered in any dangerous design.

Answ: 1. An Oath cannot lawfully be taken, till the doubts and scruples be
resolved and cleared, which might any way trouble the conscience of them who
are indeed rightly religious. The Divines of The Minist. and profess. of
Aberdine in their general demands. p. 14.
Aberdene said well, That the words of an Oath should be clear and plain: and
if they be any way ambiguous, the true sense of them should be so declared and
manifested, that all may know it. And if most of these doubts before proposed
should be found to be frivolous (which we do not conceive of any one of them)
and but one of them contain a just ground of ambiguitie, Mr. Ley Defensive
doubts. p, 109.
That one is enough while we are in suspense concerning the meaning of the Oath
to suspend our dissent from taking thereof. For the comparison (brought by the
prudent composer of the History of the Council of Trent) we take to be true,
and of much importance to this purpose, which is, Hist. Council. Trident. l. 2.
p. 212.
Sicut enim particularis universalem contradictoriam falsam efficit: ita
particularem ambiguam, incertam reddere universalem. For as one particular
makes false the contradictorie universal: so one ambiguous particular makes
the universal uncertain.

2. It rests not in the power of an inferior (whether he be the taker or
minister of the Oath) to put his private conceit for the sense (which is the
soul) of a public constitution; and if he do so, we cannot but doubt of it
(though it seem never so plausible) unless it be allowed by the Authority
which charge the Oath upon the conscience. And this construction we are
taught to make by the explanation of the Oath in Scotland, published by
Marquess Hamilton the Kings Commissioner there, in these words: The
explanation of the Oath in Scotland in the Kings large Declar. p. 328.
Oaths must be taken according to the mind, intention and commandment of that
Authority which exacteth the Oath. Again, The Kings Declaration of the Tumults
in Scotl. p. 177
An Oath must be either taken or refused according to the known intention of
him that does minister it, Ibid. p. 347.
especially if it be a new Oath. To the same sense, though in different words,
say the Aberdene Divines, The Minist. and Professors of Aberdene in their
general Demands, page 14.
An Oath is to be given according to the mind and judgment of him that
requires it. The old rule (which is a maxim) says, Regul. juris. ^^.
Is committit in legem, qui legis verba complectens, eontra legis nititur
voluntatem. He offends against the Law, who cleaving to the words of the Law,
leaves the will of the Law, that is of the Lawmakers. For men therefore to
take an Oath contrary to the mind of them that require it, or before their
mind is known, and the plain and common sense and understanding of the Oath
resolved and cleared, from whose authority and power it proceeded, and to put
their own private conceit for the sense, it is a very unlawful act, both in
point of Law and conscience.

3. Note what misery and mischief some men have brought upon themselves and
others, in taking the Covenant in their own sense, and not knowing the
intention of that Authority which exacted the Oath. It Is urged, that
Vindication of the London Ministers, p. 36
the Covenant binds to preserve the doctrine, worship, discipline, and
government of the Church of Scotland: but who knows here, the mind and
judgment of the State? For it is said a little after, according to the Word of
God: and therefore unless the Parliament had resolved and declared in a plain
and common sense, that the worship, discipline and government of that Church
was according to the Word of God: It is only a Presbyterian private conceit
for the sense, to say that the Covenant binds to preserve the worship,
discipline and government of that Church. Again, the Covenant (says he in the
same place) ingageth to extirpate heresy and schism: it does so: and popery
and superstition likewise, though he names it not: but must not this be taken
according to the intention of that Authority which gave the Oath? and where is
that thing as yet declared? The Covenant (says he) ties us to endeavor after
a uniformitie in Religion and form of Church Government: it would have been
plain dealing to have set down the rest, to wit, according to the Word of God,
and the best reformed Churches. But what is this for the Presbyterian way? the
Parliament has not any where (to my knowledge) acknowledged it to be jure
divino, neither is any man tied by that Covenant to submit to it, or to
endeavor the promoting thereof.

Again, be it granted (as he says) the Covenant binds to preserve the
privileges of Parliament: yet there is no breach of the Oath to resist such
men who proceed extra judicialiter: because while the Magistrate does against
his office he is not a Magistrate: For L. Meminerint 6. C unde vi.
law and right, not injury should come from the Magistrate. L. Prohibitum C.
de Iur: fife. L. quemadmodum 39. S: Magist: ad L. Aquil. l. Nec mag 32* de
injur.
The Law gives every private man power to resist, if the danger be
irrecoverable, yea though it be recoverable. So Marantius dis. 1. n. 35.
Jurists say, that a private man has the same Law to resist, and in a
recoverable loss, they say, every man is holden to resist: D. D. Jason n 19.
dec n. 26. ad l. ut vim de just. and jur.
Si evidenter constet de iniquitate; if the iniquity be known to all.

It adds much to the unlawfulness of this Oath, that men were compelled to
take it: for if it had been left to every man's choice and liberty, whether he
would have sworn to the particulars, or not, there had been more reason for
that, and less danger in it. At Geneva both Minister and people Mr. Hookers
Preface before his Eccles Pol. fol. 5. p. 1.
took an oath, for shutting out of Popery: but were not urged unto it, by any
commination of danger, that so their swearing might be with a free will, not
mixed with reluctancie of conscience, or with fear of penalty.

It has been by some much complained of, and held to be a great oppression,
when under the Prelate one was to devise a form of Prayer (plain enough for the
sense) and another constrained under a great penalty to observe and use the
same. Here is a stinted Oath stuffed with ambiguitie, dark and doubtful terms:
it is devised by one, imposed upon another; and though the taker be not
satisfied in point of conscience touching the lawfulness of it, yet he shall
be fined, sequestered, put out of his place, calling, livelihood, etc. if he
refuse to take it: Reader be thou judge where lies the greatest oppression.

The Parliament has lately, truly, and piously declared, Answer to the Scots
Commis. p. 16.
As for the truth and power of Religion, it being a thing intrinsecall between
God and the soul, and the matters of faith in the Gospel such as no natural
light does reach unto; We conceive there is no humane power of c^ertion
thereunto, nor to restrain men from believing what God suffers their judgment
to be persuaded of. Exposition on Jude, v. 8.
The civil Authority (says Mr. Perkins) has no power, or rule over the
things of God. This being so, I cannot see, any Scripture-rule or warrant, that
the Magistrate has, to compel any man to swear that he shall endeavor the
preservation and establishment of such a worship, doctrine, discipline, and the
extirpation of this or that Church Government. I speak not of what doctrine,
worship and government the higher Powers may think fit to settle in a Kingdom,
what to permit, and tolerate, or what not: But to require an oath of the
people that they shall embrace this way, or oppose that thing in matters of
Religion, this I humbly conceive is a business wherein they are not concerned.

Object. But we read in Scripture, that a Covenant has been imposed by the
Magistrate upon the people, and they have been required by oath to take it;
yea, and in case any should refuse to bind themselves by oath to observe the
same, they were to be punished: and for this there are sundry instances: as in
Nehemiah, Ezra, Hezekiah, Josiah, Asa.

Ans: That nothing can be truly gathered from such examples, to justify this
Covenant which we oppose, or to prove the lawfulness of it, I shall here
clearly demonstrate by these Reasons.

1. For that which was done in Nehemiahs time, with whom I also join Ezra in
the work of Reformation: first it appeared that none were constrained to go up
to Jerusalem, for the building of the Lords house, but such Ezra 1. 3, 4. 2 Chronicles 36. 23.
among the people as would, and with whom their God was: such indeed (and none
else) had liberty granted, and means allowed them, to return: but as for
compulsion or violence, there was not any used.

2. Touching that Covenant which they made, wrote, sealed, and swore unto: let
it be observed: 1. That Ezra and such as went with him, before their journey
Ezra 8. 21.
humbled themselves by fasting before the Lord for direction. 2. When they were
come to Jerusalem, not only was there much weeping and wailing Ezra 9* 1, 2, 3.
by him for the fins of the people, but also great Ezra 10. 1, 2. 10, ^1, 12.
18, 19, etc.
manifestation and practice of repentance, and amendment of life by all the
Congregation.

3. As the Covenant tied them only to the keeping of the Law, so when all Neh.
8. 1. 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12.
the people were gathered together as one man, they had the Law read and
expounded unto them, to the great humbling of all the people at the first, but
afterward to the great rejoicing of them all, BECAUSE THEY HAD UNDERSTOOD THE
WORDS THAT WERE DECLARED UNTO THEM: And in the last place, and for the shutting
up of all, Neh. 9. from v. 1. to 38.
confessing their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers, with fasting, and
with sackcloths and earth upon them; Ch 9 39.
the Princes, Levites, Priests, Neh. 10. 28, 29.
and all they that had separated themselves from the people of the Land,
voluntarily and freely covenanted (not through compulsion and fear) to walk in
Gods Law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do
all the Commandments of the Lord their God, and his judgments, and his
statutes, every one having knowledge (mark it well) and having understanding.
There needs no application, the setting down of these things, with the Readers
bearing in mind what I have formerly manifested, is conviction sufficient of
the other Covenant, or at least to find nothing there for it is justification,
no not so much as a leaf to cover the nakedness of it:

2. For Hezekiahs time, I find nothing in the History of his life, in relation
to this business: It is said, they 2 Chronicles. 30. 5. 11. 1.
made a Proclamation throughout all Israel, that they should keep the Passover
at Jerusalem, and diverse of Asher, and of Manasseh, and of Zebulun came
thither: but this was willingly, not by any compulsive law: for 1. he had no
authority over them at all. 2. It was Ver. 12.
the hand of Gid (upon them and) Judah to give them one heart to do the
commandment of the King. 3. Whether they were of Israel or of Judah, Ver. 25.
the whole congregation rejoiced in the work, and good reason too; for they
well knew what they then did, it was their duty to do, and no more but what
they had formerly by Covenant obliged themselves unto.

3. And for Josiahs time, it is written, 2 Chronicles. 34. 30, 31, 32.
he made a Covenant before the Lord (all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and the Priests, and the Levites, and all the people great and small
being present) to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, etc. And
he caused, or appointed (for the word signifies no more) all that were present
in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. 2 Kin 23. 3.
And all the people stood to the Covenant. Note 1. 2 Chronicles. 34. 30.
it is said, he read in their ears all the words of the book of the Covenant,
that was found in the house of the Lord. So there was nothing that he tied them
unto, but what they certainly knew to be just, holy, and good. 2. He causes
them not to stand unto any thing, but what before they had covenanted and
promised to do: and therefore here was no new Oath, or properly any making of a
Covenant, but a renewing rather of their Covenant: no solemn League and Oath to
bring in, and establish amongst them, a new worship, discipline, and Church
Government, but a public engagement to continue in such a religion to which
they had before submitted.

Now Reader wipe thine eyes, that thou may see, how Josiahs Covenant, and
ours, do look in the face one like the other.

1. Josiah reads the words of the Law to the people, and to this only would
have them promise obedience: Our Covenant requires some thing against the Law
of God, as that a murderer, traitor, tyrant, etc. if a King, shall not be put
to death: so the Presbyterians expound one clause of it.

2. Josiah obliges them by Covenant, only to stand, for and to such things,
as they knew what they were, and to be lawful: for there was nothing
propounded to them but the very Word of God. Our Covenant has much in it not
only so doubtful and ambiguous, as no man knows what is meant by it, but also
what is apparently disagreeable to the Word of God.

3. There is nothing in Josiahs Covenant as tying the people to the practice
of, I say not any one particular thing, but what before they had promised to
do: our Covenant requires an oath to endeavor the preservation of the Scots
worship, discipline, Church government, etc. and (some say) to settle
Presbytery tho^ow all the three Kingdoms: a thing before never promised by us,
nor by our forefathers: never allowed before by Authority in the Land, or
practiced by the people.

4. Josiah did not cause the people to swear against a former Oath, but obliged
them to keep the oath which formerly they had made. By our Covenant men are
sworn to endeavor the extirpation of Church government by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. howbeit many times before See the oath of the late 6. Canon.
without and equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation they had
taken a solemn Oath never to give their consent to alter the same.

5. Josiahs Covenant took in only the members of that Church, and although
many took the Covenant yet they were the Jews only, and amongst them, Judah
and Benjamin. But out Covenant takes all in, even three Kingdoms at once,
England, Scotland and Ireland: not in reference to a visible Church*estate: for
it puts no difference between people within or without, the taking of the Oath
is all the condition of the person no way considered of.

6. Josiahs Covenant was such as all the people stood to it: but this was so
unlike to that, as many conscientious and tender hearted Christians, utterly
refused it, and showed the unlawfulness of it, and not a few who took it, did
it merely to prevent danger.

4. And in the last, of Asa it is said, ^ Chron. 15. 9. 12, 13.
He gathered all Judah, and Benjamin, and Manasseh, etc. and they entered into a
covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers, etc. That whosoever would not
seek the Lord God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great,
whether man or woman. It may be some will think the Covenant is warranted by
this example: but here it has no relief nor countenance: and thus I prove it.

1. This Covenant of Asa is the very same with that of Josiah mentioned before,
and so cannot justify ours, upon the aforesaid reasons and grounds.

But 2ly, if Asas example be the ground of our Covenant, then whosoever should
refuse to take the Covenant, ought to be put to death: For any other
punishment, as sequestration, finement, imprisonment, etc. it is not just, nor
comes up rightly to the thing: for if a man undertake to prove any act
punishable, by this precept or that example in Scripture, he cannot appoint to
it any other kind of punishment but what the place mentions (it being there
plainly determined) that same (I say) must be inflicted, and no other.

And here (to make a little digression) there is a fit occasion offered me to
discover the great deceit of some men, in abusing the Magistrates, pressing
them by civil punishment to suppress Sectaries and Heretics, and to prove
that it is their duty so to do, these Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9. Exodus 22. 20. and
31. 14. Levit. 24. 16. Deuteronomy. 17. 23. 45.
Scriptures are commonly cited, which is punishing with death: but perceiving
that to urge the execution of the Law in such a way, would not relish, nor
well take with them, here they are silent; but in the mean time show the more
hypocrisy, for if the Parliament be to act according to these Scriptures
against Brownists, Anabaptists, Seekers, Arminians, why do they speak only of
silencing them? and would rest if they were restrained of liberty? Certainly
either these Scriptures taken from the Law, give the Magistrate no power to
punish such men at all for their conscience, or if they do, it is to put them
to death. And therefore the Papists (being truer to their grounds) upon these
Scriptures hold it not only to be no fin, but good service to God to extirpate
by fire and sword all that are adversaries to, or opposers of the Church and
Catholic Religion, and that heretics should be delivered to the Civil Sword,
and without mercy put to death. So write In 2 am, 2 ae, disp. quaest 11.
punct. 3.
Gregorius de Valentia, De Tripl. virtut. Tract 1. disp. 23 sect. 2.
Suarez, Inst. moral: Tom. 1. l. 8 c. 14.
Az^r, Summa part. 3. Tract. 1. quae. 6. and 9.
Becan: In 2 am, ^ ae, disp. 56. dab* 1.
Turrian. And that Schismatics may be punished with almost all the punishments
of Heretics. So De Trip virt. Tract 3. disp. 12. Sect. 12.
Suarez.

3. To come again to the matter in hand, whereas it is said, 2 Chronicles. 15 15.
All Judah rejoiced at the Oath; and the reason is added, For they had sworn
with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire. This shows, that
as the Lord had chosen this whole Kingdom to be his people, and raised up this,
and the like notable instruments of Reformation amongst them, so did he upon
this and the like occasions work a most wonderful and extraordinary work upon
them, bowing their hearts universally to the love of his Word for the present,
and to the receiving of the same with joy, together with all readiness to the
obedience of his Commandments: The like unto which never was, nor shall be seen
to the end of the world, in a whole Kingdom, except the Lord do again choose
one Nation from all other Nations, to be his people as then he did.

4. Howsoever the Kings of Judah according to the dispensation of those times,
were to destroy and put to death Idolaters, blasphemers, etc. and so to weed
all such wicked ones out of the Church by the Sword: yet I deny that any King
now upon earth is by the Word of God, to draw all people under his Dominion
into a Solemn League and Covenant with the Lord, (how much less before they be
conveniently taught) and to confirm the same by Oath, and to inflict death upon
all them that ^efuse it, (for there is no other punishment if the practice be
taken up from the example of the Jews) or remain wicked and unrepentant, as the
Kings of Judah were to do by the people of that Nation.

That godly Magistrates are by compulsive Laws to repress public and notable
Idolatry, as also to provide that the truth of God in his Ordinance be taught
and published in their Dominions, I make no doubt: It may be also, it is not
unlawful for them by some penalty or other, to provoke their Subjects
universally unto hearing, for their instruction and conversion: but if they
should hold it their duty as the Kings of Israel held it theirs, to Psalm. 101.
8:
destroy all the wicked of the land, and to slay all that would not seek the
Lord God of Israel, with all their heart, and with all their soul, whether
great or small, man or woman: and should practice accordingly, they would have
very few Subjects to rule over.

To these considerations let this be added, that when David the famous King of
Israel, and a man acquainted with the mind of God, had subdued the Nations
round about him, and made them 2 Samuel 7. 1, 2, 3, 6.
Tributaries, and reigned over them: he did not, that we read of, by compulsive
Laws, require them to take an oath that they would endeavor the ex^irpation of
any false worship, and embrace the doctrine, worship and discipline of the
Jewish Church. But you will say, those Nations were Heathen, and Infidels, and
such as made no profession of Religion, nor were circumcised. To which I
answer: 1. Amongst the rest over 1 Ver. 14.
whom David ruled, the e Edomites are named, which were the posterity of holy
Abraham, as well as the Israelites, coming of Esau, as they of Jacob: who did
also (besides many main truths) retain circumcision, and that true also, as
well as some retain true baptism: and by which they might (for ought I know)
as truly be deemed the Lords people, though in a postacie, as Atheists and
Papists by the other. 2. The grosser the error is, the easier it is to be
discerned, and so the less danger to impose an Oath against it. 3. If a
Magistrate have under his power Infidels and Christians, I see no reason why he
should more trouble the Christians conscience, then the other in matters of
Religion.

And as the Word of God gives no allowance to force men involuntarily, and for
fear of such and such penalties to take the Covenant, so it is against Law and
reason that any compulsion should be used, but people ought to have been left
to their own liberty and choice, as we said before. It is well known that the
Law says, Tex: in C. quando iure^ur m* 6. tandem l. 1.
Edicto Praet ris rescinditur, quod me^^ gestum est: By the Edict of the Praetor
what is done through fear is of no force: Quod non tam ve^ bum ess^ hominis,
quam Dei vocem, says a great Bl: cons: 133 Col 2.
Lawyer. Juramenta vi extorta, non eru^t praestanda, Isidor etiam C. non est.
22. q. 4 In C. cum contingat 20. jus.
says the Canon Law. Decret. l. 2* c. 2 fol 157. p. 2. col. 2.
Again, Juramento meticuloso abs^lutio per judicem Ecclesiasticum. So among the
Imperial Laws, there are these words of Frederick the Emperor: Auth Sacram*
publ. C. si advers. vendit.
Sacramenta per vim vel per justum metum extorta, etiam a majoribus (maxim ne
quaerimoniam maleficiorum Commissorum faciant) nullius esse momenti ju emus.
And that it is against pure reason too, I prove thus.

1. This is a natural principle, Quod tibi jus fieri, hoc alteri fac; and quod
nolis tibi fieri, alteri ne facias. Now who is there, making it his own cause,
would willingly be compelled to take an Oath, in a matter which he thinks is
either false, or doubts of the truth of it; or if true in his understanding,
yet makes question whether he have any reason or ground to swear: and yet must
either swear or suffer. But so it was here in many men's cases.

2. Pure reason teaches a man so to consider his neighbor, as not only not
to cast him down; or if fallen, not only help to recover him, but to keep him
up what he can, that so he fall not. Basil (as Baron. Annal. Tom. 6. an* 449.
nu. 12. col. 83.
Baronius reports) would not have Bishops to swear in respect of the peril of
an Oath; And the The Coun of Challons, Can. 18. p. 560. Symps. of the Church.
Council of Challons inhibited and discharged the Clergy from a certain Oath
which formerly they had been compelled to take, in regard it was perilous: how
perilous this Covenant is, we have showed already in many particulars: so that
to speak the truth, there was no reason it should be taken at all; but less
reason that any man should be forced to take it: this was not the way to
prevent our brothers falling, but rather with both hands to throw him down.

3. There is no reason that a man should accuse himself, the Word of God
requires two or three witnesses unto every lawful eviction and condemnation.
Which Mr. Lambert stood upon when he was examined about the Oath ex officio,
whether he thought it lawful or no: Act: and Mon. p. 1021. 1022.
It is not lawful (says he) for a man to swear when a man knows not what
they will demand of him, or whether it be lawful to show them the truth of
their demands or no, or whether the matter will bear an Oath, or if it will,
whether there be no other means left to bowlt out the truth. If the Judge
require an Oath in lawful and convenient manner, as in controversies which
cannot otherwise be decided betwixt neighbor and neighbor, I think my self
bound to swear: but if he put me to my oath to bewray my self, or to bewray any
other, this being contrary unto charity, I count it expedient to hold me still.
If a man have acted contrary to the things contained in the Covenant, though
his mind gives him he has done well in it, yet being by Oath obliged to
discover so much, how can he dispense with his Oath in concealing it? and if
not, how can he fulfill that Commandment, which requires him, not to destroy,
but to save himself? Thus he falls into a snare, and either necessarily must
break his Oath, or Gods Law.

4. If a Magistrate be to impose an oath which may be diversely accepted, and
what is truly intended cannot be known, unless the proper sense be plainly
given, there is no reason that a man should take it, till he directly know in
what acceptance or sense he shall take it; and therefore to be compelled to
take it before he knows so much is very unreasonable.

If there were nothing but this to be objected against the Oath, it were
sufficient to manifest the unlawfulness of it, and to prove that it wanted the
essential part and property of a true Covenant, and so binds not any man's
conscience to keep it. I shall not here make repetition of things before
spoken; this only I add, that the Covenant is such a strange thing, as when a
man keeps it he breaks it, and breaking it he keeps it. I could multiply
instances here, to let men see the weakness, absurdity, contradiction, etc.
of it in this particular, but it is not worth the labor and time.

It is a question disputed by Divines, and Lawyers, whether it be lawful to
impose an oath, to be taken by such an one, as we think making no conscience of
it, will not stick to forswear himself, if he be put to it: And it is usually
answered by distinction, that for a private man to impose upon such a man an
Oath for his gain and private respect, it is altogether unlawful; because we
are bound to prefer the glory of God which by such an oath is impeached, and
the salvation of our neighbors soul which hereby is endangered, before any
gain and advantage. And consequently we ought rather to lose any worldly
benefit, then that by such an Oath we should suffer God to be dishonored, and
our neighbor lose himself.

Again, howsoever it be granted, that the Magistrate may lawfully put such an
one to his oath; yet so: Thomas 22. Quaest. 8. Art. 4 Selnec. part 1. paedag.
p 75.
1. if the truth may not by other possible means be cleared, and justice
executed: Martyr. in Loc. com. p. 240. LL. minime peccat.
and 2: it must be in a necessary, weighty and great cause.

1. For the last Article in the Covenant which is indeed the plainest and
clearest of all, and concerns personal Reformation; howsoever I grant every
wicked man should repent and amend his life, yet I deny that the Civil
Magistrate has any Authority to make him swear, that he shall become a
spiri^uall and religious man: there are many things both civil and divine
which men ought to do, yet there is no warrant for the Magistrate that he shall
by oath compel them thereunto: newness of life is a supernatural thing, and
only by the Spirit of God wrought in us, and therefore the less reason to put
a poor ignorant soul to his oath that he shall do it. What have thou to do
(says the Psalm 5 ^
Psalmist) that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth, and hate to be
reformed? Mr. Bakewell speaking of such men as may lawfully take an oath,
describes them thus: Mr. Bakewel against the Anabaptist.
He that swears ought to see in his own conscience that he is fit to take an
oath* and thereby to worship and glor fie God: for he that swears aright,
ought to have his heart smitten with fear and aw toward God, as in all the
parts of his worship: and therefore a profane man that has no fear of God in
his heart, ought not to swear. So he.

To impose therefore such an Oath as this, upon three Kingdoms, and to have it
taken by profane men, who had no fear of God in them, and by such as it was
well known beforehand would make no conscience of the Oath, but forswear
themselves if they were put to it, let the Reader consider upon what ground
(whether pious or politic) the business was taken up and carried on. H^nr.
Velsten Po^. deca. 6. Qu 9 p 192
Qui ju^amentum a malo viro postulat insanus est, says Apollodorus. He shows
himself a mad man that would have a wicked man to swear: he means when he knows
beforehand that he will forswear himself.

2. Howsoever there be some reason to think, that the Scots (at least many of
them) meant indeed as they swore, to maintain and preserve the worship and
discipline of their own Kirk: and to endeavor the extirpation of Prelacie. Yet
there is no reason that any man should think, that the English and Irish
conformable Protestants, generally ever meant to promote the one, and suppress
the other. Oh what a number both here and there took the glorious Name of God
in vain, when they were compelled through fear, to swear against the Government
by Archbishops and Bishops: I confess it was the less binding, because the
Law says, L. 11. Sect. circa de except. doli tes^em.
Promissio and juramentum sine causa factum est inefficax. Now certain it is,
there was no cause, I mean necessary, weighty, just, to require such a thing:
It is one thing for the Magistrate to put down a public worship and National
Church Government, finding it unsafe or unwarrantable: and another thing to
compel the whole Nation by oath, to consent to it, and approve the same.
Oleaster in Exodus 20. v. 7.
Oleaster, observing how the Name of God is taken three ways in vain, makes
the second to be thus: In rem quam non intendis impleri, upon a matter which
thou do not purpose to fulfill. They must needs be blind, that did not
foresee, that many would forswear themselves, if they should be put to swear
against the Government by Bishops; and therefore so much being foreseen, it
showed the less pity and compassion to put it upon them.

3. When one malignant swear to discover another, and to bring forth his
brother malignant unto condign punishment: was not this to impose an oath upon
one, of whom the imposer could not possibly but think that he would forswear
himself, and play the Fox?

Astutam vipido gestans sub pectore vulpem,
Ore aliud retinens, aliud sub pectore condens.
Being a subtle Fox, under a stinking breast,
One thing in heart, another is expressed.
Augustine to this purpose speaks well: August: in decollatione Johan. Bapt:
and habetur 22. Q. 5, ille qui.
Qui hominem provocat adjurationem, and scit eum falsum juraturum esse vincit
homicidam, quia homicida corpus occisurus est, ille animam; imo du^s animas,
and ejus animam quem jurare provocavit, and suam, etc. Ecce jurat, e^ce
perjurat, tu quid invenisti, imo and tu periisti qui de illius morte satiari
voluisti. Whosoever (says he) provokes another to swear, knowing that he will
swear falsely, he is worse then a murderer; because a murderer kills but the
body, this the soul, yea two souls at once; his whom he provokes to swear, and
his own. Behold he swearech, forsweareth, and perishes; and what have thou
found thereby? yea thou have lost thy self, who would no otherwise be
satisfied but by his destruction. And in another place, Sermon* de perjuriis.
He that inforceth one to swear whom he knows will swear falsely, is a
murderer. Ille enim suo perjurio se interimit, sed isle manum interficientis
pressit and impressit. For he kills himself with his pe^jurie, but the other
thrusts and helps forward the hand of the self-murderer.

I wish these places may be well considered: for so some men would the better
see their own evils and sins: The breach of the Covenant is much complained of:
but upon whom does the guilt chiefly lie? truly on the composers and promoters
of it. Isa. 9. 16.
The leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are led of them
are destroyed. If the matter of the Oath with the condition of the Takers be
duly weighed, it could not otherwise be expected, but that the people for the
most part would forswear themselves, if they should be put to it. Now to
conclude this point, what the Covenant is in a short account I will here show
the Reader: it has two parts, the one contains a number of uncertain, dark,
doubtful and ambiguous words, the meaning when eof no man knows, but like the
Heathen Oracles may diverse ways be interpreted and taken: The other part
contains some things so clear and manifest against most men's opinion, that it
was altogether unseasonable at that time, (if it had been lawful at some other
time) to impose it: neither could the people then of this Land without sinning
against their conscience swear to it.

I shall only now speak a few things to some objections, and so will end this
present Discourse.

Object. 1. This Covenant by many godly and learned Divines, is much pleaded
for, many places of Scriptures Levit 26. 25 Isa. 24 5 and 33. 8. Ier 11. ^0,
11. and 34. 18, 19, 20 Ezekiel 16* 59* and 17 16. 18, 19. Amos 1. 9* Mal 2. 10.
Matthew. 5 33. Romans 1. 31.
cited in their Sermons pressing the careful keeping thereof, a great deal of
mourning in their Prayer at Fasts and other times, because it is neglected, and
Gods judgments terriblie threatened against the whole Nation for it. In brief,
as for themselves they sav* In th Ministers of London their Letter to his
Excellency* p. 6.
Though some may esteem it no more then an Almanac out of date, yet we look
upon it as the Oath of God, religious, sacred, and inviolable, in whose Name we
have sworn, and who will certainly require it at our hand. We know with what a
jealous eye, and severe hand, the Ezekiel. 17. 14, 15. 18. 19.
Lord avenged the quarrel of his Covenant made by Zedekiab to the King of
Babylon though extorted from him, and prejudicial to him. We dare not
therefore (when we have lift up our hands to the most high Gad) by the
violation of a more righteous Oath provoke the wrath of the Lord against us,
who is the searcher of all hearts, and to whom we must give an account at the
great day.

Answ. 1 When the Protestant deals with Papists against their humane
inventions, and the Puritan against him, commonly use this argument as a full
and solid refutation. Ambr. de virg l. 3.
Nos nova omnia quae Christus non docuit jure damnamus, quia fidelibus Christus
est: si ergo Christus non docuit quod docemus nos illud detestabile judicamus.
We justly condemn all new things which Christ has not taught* because Christ
is the way for faithful men: If therefore Christ has not taught what we
teach, we hold it worthy to be detsted. That this Covenant is a new thing, an
earthly creature, not warranted by the Word of God, but sprung out of man's
foolish brain, I have formerly proved at large: and so the same reason here is
every way, and altogether as effectual and forceable to condemn it.

2. What the opinion is of these learned and godly Divines touching an
unlawful Oath and Covenant, I know not; but this I know well, that men as
lea^ned and godly as they, teach that such ought to be broken, and not kept.
Explicat. C tech. par. 3. pa. 655.
Qui servat juramentu^n illicitum, bis peccat, semel male jurand, and iterum
male juratum servando, says Vrsinus. So Comment. in Matt. 14. 10.
Pareus. Four Treat. page 54.
Those Oaths are laudablie broken (says Mr. Downam) which are unlawfully made.
And to this both Chemnit. harm Evang. c 74. p. 1071.
Lutherans and Corn. A lapid: in Mar. c. 6. v 26
Papists consent. Philo speaking of those Vows and Oaths whereby men bind
themselves contrary to that which God has commanded, thus writes: Philo de
leg. special.
Quasi non melius Deoque gratius sit tale perjurium modo serventur leges, etc.
As though (says he) to forswear in such a case for the keeping of Gods Laws
were not much better and more acceptable (...) God. For a man adds sin to sin
whilst he abuses his oath; whereas he should rather forbear from evil doing.
Let him therefore forbear, and humbly entreat God, that of his mercy he will
pardon the unadvised rashness whereby he was led headlong to swear: For to
double the fault when thou may disburden thy self of the one half, is very
great madness, and scarcely possible to be cured. So he.

2. Howsoever I hear these men professing Letter to his Excel p. 1.
not to be wanting in that ingenuity and candor which become the Ministers of
Jesus Christ; And among themselves to rise up and call one the other
Vindication Epistle.
blessed, and such as make the glory of God, and the good of souls the mark
they aim at, in the course of their ministry: Men that will not suffer the
sins of the times to be quiet, whose names are as precious ointment poured
forth, spreading the sweet savor of the knowledge of Christ in many places,
etc. Howsoever (I say) I hear them thus to say of themselves; and each of
other; nevertheless if their sayings and doings about this Covenant be well
observed, they will not appear to be such men in some things: but rather to
hearten and harden sinners, pleading for the sin of the Nation, and keeping the
people in their ignorance and error, that they should not return from their
wicked way. And that this is so, thus I prove it.

1. By their abusing and misapplying the holy Scriptures: because the Word of
God approves of just oaths, and reproves all breakers of lawful Covenants, is
this a good ground to justify the Solemn League and Covenant, that it was The
Oath of God, religious, sacred, etc. and the violation of it provokes the wrath
of the Lord against the Land? Suppose a man should read these Texts, 1 Cor 6.
10. Jude 8. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 13. Ezekiel 13. 10. Matthew. 7. could he hence fairly
gather, that Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Love, Mr. Tailor, etc. are raylers, despisers of
Government, traitors, heady, high minded, seducers, false prophets? Every man
would say, such an inference were to corrupt the Word of God, for the places
prove no such thing against the men: but if they indeed were such men, and so
much could be proved against them, they fall then under the censure and reproof
of such Texts. And is the Word of God handled otherwise then so, when men are
acc^s^d to be Covenant breakers, and for-sworn, and thereby have highly
displeased the Lord? And to prove this there is brought, Ezekiel. 17 14, 15, 11,
19. Zach. 5. 4. 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 6. as if these places did prove their
accusation and charge: Whereas there is nothing held forth in the Texts, but
that for breaking lawful Covenants, and for rash and sinful oaths (as this
was) a Nation may justly fear Gods displeasure: but not one word in reference
to the National Oath, as if God should be ang^y with this Nation for breaking
it: That some Covenants have been religious, sacred, inviolable, we grant: and
for the violation thereof God has showed his displeasure, this is true also:
but does this prove ours to be so? and for the breaking of it G^d will do so?
Indeed hitherto it has been in this manner and way proved: Such a
Scripturecovenant was sacred and religious: Ergo ours: For breaking such an
oath or league the Lord was angry, etc. Ergo he is displeased with this Nation
for breaking theirs. But you will say this proves nothing; What? no proof? then
has not the Covenant to this day been proved lawful; and if any one among
them all (what ingenuitie and candor they profess to have) can yet prove it
otherwise and better, Erit mihi magnus Apollo.

2. For their complaints and groans on Fast days, and ^^ed commonly in their
Pulpits before or after Sermon, because the Covenant is not kept: this
skuthropoi, sour faced, and covering the Altar with tears, with weeping and
crying out, is a thing which the Lord regards not, nor receives it with good
will at their hands: Are they not afraid to bring a corrupt thing before the
Lord, and to speak and plead for it? does their heart never smite them for
this? that is strange, considering in that prayer which Christ has left us to
be a rule and platform of all our prayers, there is nothing for the justifying
of the Covenant, but in every Petition something clearly against it: As for
eXample.

1. What more directly against the hallowing of Gods Name? then when men take
his dreadful and most glorious Name in vain, by swearing neither in
righteousness, in truth, nor in judgment: For this I refer the Reader to what
has been said, pa. 9. to 18.

2. What is a greater impediment unto the coming of Gods kingdom then that,
which 2 These. 3. 1* 2 Act. 13. 46.
stops the Gospel, whereby all the elect may be truly converted: suffers not
Churches to be 1 Chronicles. 28 12. Hebr. 3. 2. Isa 35. 8.
gathered and constituted according to the pattern of the New Testament: nor
that Psalm. 2. 8. Col 1 18.
Christ as King, Priest and Prophet may exercise power and authority only in
Sion: permits not the Mat. 28. ulc.
whole counsel of God to be freely and truly taught, and all inventions and
traditions of men powerfully confuted? nor the Mat. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11 28. Matt.
7. 6.
Sacraments which are the seals of Gods promise, administered and received in
that purity and sincerity as by Christ is prescribed? nor the 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5.
etc.
censures of the Church to be executed according to the Apostolical
Institution? yet all this, does the Covenant as the great sticklers for it,
expound some part of it.

3. Is there any thing more obvious and apparent against the doing of Gods
will, then to oblige men by oath not to do their duty, and the very thing which
God requires of them? which is, Genesis 9. 6.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: yet this Letter to
his Excellency, pa. 6. Vindication of the Ministers of London. pa. 28.
(some say) the Oath prohibiteth.

4. Is not this against asking our daily bread? when men shall be restrained
from preserving their bodily life by lawful and good means, unless they will
swear to such things as they know not what they are? or taking them to be
unlawful will swear against their conscience. For this see page 16.

5. When we ask forgiveness of sins, and yet take the Covenant, what is this
but a mocking of God? it being a sin, and unlawful so to do.

6. When we desire the Lord, that we may not be given over to the temptation of
the devil, the world, or our own lust, as to be overcome thereof: but
contrariwise that the Lord will strengthen us against all assaults of every
enemy, and grant us such holy means as may further us in our true obedience
toward him? it is no otherwise then to ask power and grace to refuse the
Covenant*

7. And in the last place, when we entreat the Lord to set us free from the
power of Satan, and from all the policies and deceit which he exercises
against the soul for its ruin and destruction, either by prosperity or
adversity; and that he will give us strength to overcome all corrupt
affections, and preserve us in well doing to the end: here we desire, that we
may not fall into the evil of the Covenant: or if fallen, that God will take
us out of the evil of it, and keep us that we do so no more.

This being so, my desire and prayer to God is, that all people in all places
may take warning, that under a sad countenance, long prayer, great crying, deep
sighing, and some tears they be not beguiled, and (like the simple who believes
every thing) brought in to say Amen to a lie, and so offer the sacrifice of
fools.

3. From this root of bitterness, some have taken occasion to vomit out their
own shame, against Authority: And as Absalom by slandering his Fathers
government, sought to steal away the hearts of the people; and make rebellion:
so these casting aspersion upon the supreme Magistrates of the Land, charging
them with Covenant breaking, perjurie, etc. would have all people (like
themselves) disaffected to them and their proceedings.

But mark (Reader) their unfaithfulness and falacie: for their groundwork the
Covenant is laid, and some Parliament Ordinances, and hence they raise their
invectives and bold charges against the State. Now was it ever before known,
that men who make the glory of God and the good of souls the mark they aim at
in the course of their ministry, and will not suffer the sins of the times
quiet, to build upon so sandy, uncertain and weak ground? Men of ingenuitie and
candor formerly, would not durst to have charged their equals, no not their
inferiors with any small crime, much less their superiors with murder,
treason, oppression, injustice, etc. without clear and apparent proof; and
showed what Commandment and Law of Christ they had broken, not fetch their
proof either from another weakness and failing, or from an absurd and false
conceit of their own. Suppose by the Covenant the King was not to suffer,
Presbytery to be settled, and all others otherwise minded not be tolerated: yet
this will not follow, that the Parliament having since done otherwise, they
have therefore done unjustly, and sinned against the Lord.

I observe this the rather, because in that book lately come forth, entitled, A
Vindication of the London Ministers, etc. the Author shows him an evil worker,
in abusing the Reader: for howsoever he charge the Parliament with many vile
things, nevertheless shows not at all wherein they have acted against the Law
of God, of Nations, Nature, or pure reason, only objecteth the Protestation,
the National Covenant, and some Collections of Parliament, as if this were
enough to prove them so, and himself no false accuser.

Object. 2. Letter of the London Ministers to his Excel: page 11 6.
You have an example of Gods severe judgment for the violation of an Oath in
Saul: so Zedekiah for breaking the Covenant made to the King of Babylon was
extremely punished.

Ans. 1. Howsoever the Gibeonites were a people formerly accursed, and
fallaciously procured a Covenant from Jos^ita: yet that Covenant was lawful.
Lavat in lib. ^o^uae, c 9. hom 39 p 42.
Josuem jussu Domini u Judge 2 ^2. 14. 2 Samuel 2^. 1, 2. 9. 14. 1 King. 9 20.
secisse quod fecit (says Lavater) and proves in the same place by two
reasons, that the Lord approved that Covenant. Besides it appears by several
Scriptures, that they only of the Canaanites were devoted to destruction who
would not seek for peace; for if they sued for it, it was to be granted them:
so In D^u: 20* n 4 In Ios 9 n 9*
Junius, Pet. Martyr, and others, etc. And the sew Doctors thus understand it,
as Annot: o^^ Dent 20 1^.
Mr. Ainsworth notes.

2. That the Covenant made by Zedekiah to the King of Babylon was extorted from
him, and prejudicial to him, it is the Petitioners own gloss, the history
shows no such thing: But let that pass; sure I am the Covenant was lawful.
For, 1. Nebuchad-nezzar 2 Chronicles. 36. 10.
made him King. 2. The Lord calls it, Ezekiel. 17. 19, 20.
his Covenant; and breaking it, a trespass that he had trespassed against him.
3. He was by the Prophet Jeremie counseled to keep his Oath; and doing
otherwise, threatened by him and Ezekiel (for his perjurie, infidelity and
rebellion) to be severely punished. So then this is the close, when the London
Ministers shall prove, that the Sea a book entitled, Justice Advanced, wherein
the Parliaments proceeding against the King is justified by Scripture, Law and
Reason.
Parliament and people of England, obliging themselves by oath not to put their
King to death, what murder and mischief soever he should commit, doing so,
make as just and lawful a Covenant as Joshua made with the Gibeonites, and
Zedekiah with the King of Babylon, and are bound as strictly to keep it: it
shall be acknowledged that these examples speak something to the matter they
are brought for: but till then, they must be contented to lie under the just
censure of perverting and wresting the Scripture.

Quest: 3. But may not the Civil Magistrate taking the counsel and consent of
a Synod, or Assembly of Divines, set down what doctrine, worship, and Church
discipline shall be extirpated, and not tolerated or suffered: and what shall
be established and maintained through the Nation, and then require all the
people of the Land, therein to join with them, and by Vow and Oath to promise
so much, and in case any refuse, to suffer for it.

Answ: Howsoever this work properly belongs to the party interested, and for
them to prove the lawfulness of it: yet seeing here, they are altogether
silent, I shall speak thus far to the objection. That it becomes not the
Magistrate so to do, neither has he any warrant or calling for such a
practice, thus I manifest.

1. For doctrine, worship, and such things, as they are spiritual, and concern
the inward man, so it is God alone who carries forth the work in him, and for
him; shows him by his Word what he should embrace, and what refuse, and helps
him by his Spirit when his time and pleasure is accordingly in it. And this in
Scripture is every where showed, that there is See a Declar. of the Parl in
Answ: to the Scots Commis. page 16.
no humane power of coertion called for here, the Magistrate is to leave the
Lord to persuade the heart. Compare these Scriptures. Psalm. 110. 2. Act. 2. 41.
1 Cor. 7. 22. 2 Cor. 1. 24. Romans 14. 23. 1 John 4. 1. 1 These. 5. 21. Joh. 18.
36. Act. 4. 17. 20. Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 20. 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5. Romans 10.
17. 2 Timothy 3. 5. Prove. 30. 6. Rev. 22. 8. Matt. 28. 20. Act. 18. 15. 28. Joh.
6. 44. Matt. 16. 17. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13 Mat. 17. 5. 1 Cor. 3. 6. 2 Timothy 2.
25, 26. 1 Cor. 9. 20. 21, 22.

2. To bind a Nation by oath to such a practice, shows the Imposers to be
either absurd, or uncharitable, or tyrannical. 1* Absurd and irrationable, if
they should think the people generally in a capacity to take such an Oath: Or
2. Supposing otherwise, then uncharitable to compel any unto it against their
conscience. Or 3. If they should think that some would not swear lest they
should forswear themselves, then cruel and tyrannous to require such a thing
at their hands; and refusing it, to punish them for it.

3. I confess we read in humane Histories, that among the Gentiles it was
enacted, that no worship should be admitted, no Religion exercised, but what
received Estab ishment and approbation from them who supposed themselves to be
entrusted with Authority over men in such things: And their Reasons for it
were; partly because sundry ways of worship, and several relig ons Suos
deos, aut novos aur (...) (...) (...) Cic^^o^li. a de ^egibus.
tends to the disturbance of the Commonwealth, and that civil society which men
under the same government do, and ought to enjoy: And partly because the Gods
whom they owned and worshipped were dishonored and provoked to plague them.
And having thus made a Law, and supported with such reasons as these, they
proceeded to the execution of the penalty of that Law, as unto banishment,
imprisonment, burning, drowning, torturing in sundr^ kinds according to the
pleasure of the Judges: It Is true this the Heathen did, and this Rev. 13. 16, 17.
power of the Dragon was given over to the Beast and false Prophet, and to this
day many walk in the same paths with them. But I do not read where a Covenant
was to be taken, and men enjoined to swear unto their worship and religion, and
to suffer punishment if they should refuse: such a practice for ought I know,
was not once named among the Gentiles; darkness it seems had not so overtaken
them as to act so unreasonablie.

4. Seeing the Church of England resolves, that all Councels, and Synods,
whether Provincial, National or Oecumenicall, Article 21.
they may err, and have erred in things pertaining to God. And the same
professed by all Protestant Churches: I would know, what reason and ground the
Magistrate has to swear himself, much less to force another by oath to
embrace, without all doubt and suspicion of error (for so it is presupposed he
does when he swears) any constitutions of men? Me thinks it is no fair dealing
of Ministers, to tel^ the people, Synods and Assembly of Divines may err, and
yet to thrust upon them their decrees and devises in such a way, as if they
were Apostolical and infallible, and could not err.

5. Not only is this putting of men to oaths and vows in points of Religion
contrary to Gospel way, rule and walking, but a subtle stratagem and plot used
by Heretics, Idolaters, and such vile wretches, the better to promote and
advance, their errors, lies and blasphemous tenets. Of Novatianus it is
reported, that Baron Annal: some: 2. an 254. nu: 75. Col. 504.
before he would give the Sacrament, he caused his Adherents to put their hands
betwixt his and to swear by the body and blood of the Lord they would not
forsake him, and turn to Cornelius. And did not the Prelates usually make their
Clergy and others to swear Canonical obedience to their Articles,
Injunctions, Cannons? and why was it? but to uphold their superstition and
false worship, and to hinder the power of godliness? One would have thought
that the perilous Oath which the Bishops made them to take, and the trouble of
spirit which some of them ever had for it, would have made them for the time to
come, more careful and tender hearted, and not again have run themselves, and
forced others, into the like snare and danger.

To conclude all, seeing it has been proved, that the Covenant both given and
taken was unlawful, whosoever therefore has had a hand either way in it, he
ought to repent truly of it: and by this take warning, and learn Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
to fear this glorious and fearful Name, JEHOVAH THY GOD.

FINIS.

