The Protestant Schoolmaster. CONTAINING, Plain and Easy Directions for
spelling and Reading English, with all necessary Rules for the True Reading of
the English Tongue. TOGETHER WITH A Brief and True Account of the Bloody
Persecutions, Massacres, Plots, Treasons, and most inhumane Tortures committed
by the Papists upon Protestants, for near six hundred years past, to this very
time, in all Countries where they have usurped Authority to exercise their
Cruelties: That is, The Persecutions of the Protestants in Piedmont. Bohemia.
Germany. Poland. Lithuania. France. Italy. Spain. Portugal. The Low Countries.
Scotland. Ireland, and England.
With a Description of the Variety of their Tortures, curiously Engraven upon
Copper Plates. And several other useful Particulars. By Edw. Clark. B. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. And are to be sold by John How at the Rose and Crown
in Sweetings Alley near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1680.

The Protestant Schoolmaster. CONTAINING, Plain and Easy Directions for
spelling and Reading English, with all necessary Rules for the True Reading of
the English Tongue. TOGETHER WITH A Brief and True Account of the Bloody
Persecutions, Massacres, Plots, Treasons, and most inhumane Tortures committed
by the Papists upon Protestants, for near 600 Years past, to this very time, in
all Countries where they have usurped Authority to exercise their Cruelties:
That is, The Persecutions of the Protestants in Piedmont. Bohemia. Germany.
Poland. Lithuania. France. Italy. Spain. Portugal. The Low Countries. Scotland.
Ireland, and England.
With a Description of the Variety of their Tortures, curiously Engraven upon
Copper Plates. And several other useful Particulars. By Edw. Clark. B. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. And are to be sold by Enoch Prossor at the Rose and
Crown in Sweetings Alley near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1680.

TO THE Protestant Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty of ENGLAND.
SINCE we may Daily observe, That the Romish Foxes, both Jesuits, Priests, and
Layity, do lay out the utmost of their strength and Policy, to introduce their
cursed Principles and Practices into this Kingdom, it concerns every Man to be
upon his Guard, and to endeavor as much as possible to secure and forewarn all
Protestants of the danger of the return of that medly of Nonsense, Blasphemy,
and Slavery; And young Persons especially ought to be truly informed thereof,
since the design of these Sons of Belial, is to debauch the Youth of this
Nation; and therefore upon all occasions you shall hear them vilifying all
Religion, and abusing the Holy Scriptures; there being none fitter to be Roman
Catholics (as they non-sensically call themselves) than Atheists; because they
find little or no difference between the Popish Religion, (if it deserves that
Name) and none at all, since Treasons, Rebellions, Murders, Rapes, Burnings,
and all manner of the most Horrid Cruelties Hell it self can invent, are so far
from being Crimes or Sins, that they are many times counted meritorious, and a
Man shall deserve Heaven for committing them, according to the Doctrine of that
Church; there being no sin unpardonable, but that which they falsely call
Heresy, or the true Worship of God according to the Scriptures; and for this
it is that they would have murdered our Gracious Sovereign, turned our Land
into Blood, Slaughter, and Confusion: For this they would have overthrown our
Religion, enslaved our Consciences, or else have burnt our Bodies to Ashes, as
they did our Ancestors; It is difficult to give a draught of this bloody Beast
of Rome, it would be a horrid sight to draw him in his full proportion, yet
take a short view of him, so as to tremble at the thoughts of what others have
suffered, and what he yet hopes to inflict upon us, if Divine Providence
prevent him not; though no doubt but the Almighty will save and deliver us out
of his Hands: His Eyes are Flames that have consumed the Bodies of many
Thousand Martyrs, His Mouth is like Hell gaping for his Prey; Blood gushes out
of his Jaws like Rivers, his bloody Tuskes are the Racks and tormenting Engines
wherewith he grinds the Bones of Gods Saints, His Tail is Armed with the stings
of Scorpions, wherewith he lashes Kings and Kingdoms; from his Throat he
belches forth Curses and Excommunications, and denounces Judgments and Death
upon all that oppose him, It is this Monster of Persecution and Cruelty that
the Slaves of Rome endeavor to advance in all places where they have Power and
Authority, and by this you may Judge of their Principles and Religion; by these
evil Fruits you may Judge of the Tree, and what Spirit they are of; their hopes
are very great, and their confidence mighty, but we trust Heaven will blast
their designs, and overthrow their Machinations, and yet save his People.

So that we may have cause to bless the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and to praise
him in the Congregation; Let us therefore have no disagreement among
Protestants, but let us as one Man by all justifiable and lawful methods, in
our several Places and Stations, oppose this armed Beast of Persecution; And
let us instruct our Youth both in their Principles and Practices, that so they
may avoid and fly from them, as from that which will certainly ruin Soul,
Body, and Estate for ever. This is the design of this little Book, which will
give a brief Account of the Mischiefs and Villainies committed by that Man of
sin upon the Servants of God, ever since he appeared in the World, the like of
which were never acted by Heathens, Turks, or Infidels; and since they make so
ill use of Pictures upon many accounts; I have endeavored to draw in Picture
some short strokes of the variety of their Tortures, practiced upon
Protestants, a Volume not being able to contain the whole of their Horrid
Massacres, and Inhumane torments.

Here are likewise Rules for teaching young people to read English, so that
this may serve instead of any other Book of this kind; and youth may at the
same time reap both profit and Delight; and thereby learn in time to read their
Bible, that Great Enemy to the Popish Church, and which they formerly have, and
would again burn as well as our Bodies, if it were in their power. Therefore
let us Conclude in the words of the Royal Psalmist, Psalm 5. Destroy thou the
wicked and mischievous Persecutors O God, let them fall by their own Councils,
Cast them out in the multitude of their Transgressions, for they have rebelled
against thee, but let all those who put their Trust in thee rejoice, let them
ever shout for Joy, because thou defendest them, let them also that love thy
Name be Joyful in thee; For thou O Lord wilt bless the Righteous, with favor
will thou compass him as with a Shield. Amen.

So Prays he who is an hearty Well-wisher to the Protestant Religion Edw. Clark.

The Alphabet of several sorts of Letters.
Roman small Letters.

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z, and.

Italick small Letters.

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z, and.

English small Letters.

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z and.

Roman Capitals.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z.

Italick Capitals.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V V W X Y Z.

English Capitals.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z.

The five Vowels.

a e i o u y.

The Consonants.

b c d f g h j k l m n p q r s s t v w x y z.

Double Consonants.

ct sb sh sk sl fl ffl.

Other Double Letters.

fi si ffi ssi and ae oe.

Easy Syllables for young Beginners.

a e i o u. a e i o u. ab eb ib ob ub ba be by bo bu by ac ec ic oc uc ca ce ci
co cu cy ad ed id od ud da de di do du die af of if of uf fa fe fi fo fu fie ag
eg ig og ug ga ge gi go gu gy ak ek ik ok uk ka ke ki ko ku ky al el il ol ul
la le li lo lu ly am em im om um ma me mi mo mu my an en in on un na ne ni no
nu ny ap ep ip op up pa pe pi po pu py ar, er, ir or ur ra re ri to ru ry as es
is os us sa se si so su sy at et it ot ut ta te ti to tu ty ax ex ix ox ux va
ve vi vo vu vy wa we wi woe wu wy bat bet bit bot but bra bre bri bro bru cad
ced cid cod cud cha che chi cho chu dap dep dip dop dup dra dre dri dro dru fall
fell fill fol full fla fle fli flo flu. gad ged gid god good hac hec hic hoc huc
lap lep lip lop lup

The Vowels are sometimes written short, as a^ for an or am; e^ for en or em;
i^ for im; o^ for on or om; u^ for un or um; As in the following example: Keep
the Commandments of the Lord, so shall thou be out of danger, of eternal
Destruction.

A Vowel has of it self a complete sound as for example; The Eyes of (A) wise
Man are in his Head (I) wish we had many such; (O) How happy might we be?

Some observe that there are Seven mute or dumb Letters, and they are B, C, D,
G, P, Q, T. So called because they borrow the Vowel E at the end to help their
sound; Their are Eight half Vowels; F, L, M, N, R, S, X, Z. All which begin
their sound with an E, and end in themselves; The several Letters are sometimes
thus distinguished, b f m p ph w, are Lip-Consonants, because the lips are
necessary in their pronunciation; Ce, ch, ge, je, s, sh, z. are Teeth
Consonants, d, l, u, r, t, th, are Tongue Consonants; C, g, k, q, x, are
Palate Consonants; Gh, h, ug, y, are Throat Consonants.

If Consonants are without Vowels they will make no sound at all; gl, ss, ch,
st, dr, uk, gd, mst; but if a Vowel be added to each of them, then they make a
perfect sound, as by adding a to the first word makes it glass, e to the second
chest; i to the third drink; o to the fourth God, u to the Fifth must; If a
Consonant happen between two Vowels, it is usually joined to the latter, as
de-fe-ba-nish, ba-son, de-sire; If a double Consonant happen in the midst of a
word, one of the Letters is joined to the first syllable, and the other to the
latter, as kil-ling, suf-fice, suc-cess; And so it is likewise if two
Consonants come between two Vowels; as tram-ple, short-ly, ob-scure, per-fect;
But if three Consonants which are proper to begin a word come between two
Vowels, then the Consonant must not be separated, but joined to the next Vowel,
as di-stract-ed, not dis-tracted, nor dist-racted, because str are proper to
begin a Word. The Consonants following of two Letters may likewise begin words,
cr, dr, dw, fl, fr, kn, pl, pr, sc, sh, sl, sp, st, sk, sm, sn, sq, sw, th, tr,
tw, wh, wr. There are Consonants of three Letters also to begin words; as scr,
pher, str, squ, spr, shr, thr, thw, spl.

There are some who reckon Eighteen Dipthongs in the English Tongue, but
usually we count Fourteen, Eight of which are called proper Dipthongs; as ai,
ei, oi, au, eu, ou, ee, oo: Six are named improper, ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow; Now
though they differ not much in sound, yet they do very much in writing, for the
proper Dipthongs are to be used in the beginning and middle, as in Oister,
fair, Air, neither, but when you have the same in the ends of words, you must
write; ay, ey, oy, as prey; may, joy.

The Lords Prayer.
Our Fa-ther which art in Hea-ven, Hal-low-ed be thy Name. Thy King-dom come.
Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Hea-ven. Give us this Day our Day-ly
Bread. And for-give us our Debts, as we for-give our Debtors: And lead us not
in-to Temp-ta-ti-on, but de-li-ver us from E-vil: for thine is the King-dom,
and the Pow-er, and the Glo-ry for e-ver and e-ver A-men.

The Creed or Christian Belief.
I Be-lieve in God the Fa-ther Al-mighty, Ma-ker of Hea-ven and Earth: And in
Je-sus Christ his on-ly Son our Lord, which was con-cei-ved by the Ho-ly Ghost,
born of the Vir-gin Ma-ry, suf-fe-red un-der Pon-ti-us Pi-late, was
Cru-ci-fi-ed, Dead and Bu-ri-ed, he de-scend-ed in-to Hell, the third Day he
a-rose a-gain from the Dead, he a-scend-ed in-to Hea-ven, and sits on the
right hand of God the Fa-ther Al-migh-ty, from whence he shall come to Judge
both the quick and the dead: I be-lieve in the Ho-ly Ghost, the Ho-ly
Ca-tho-lick Church, the Com-mu-ni-on of Saints, the For-give-ness of Sins, the
Re-sur-re-cti-on of the Bo-dy, and the Life e-ver-last-ing. Amen.

The Ten Com-man-de-ments.
Exodus 20.
GOD spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee
out of the Land of E-gypt, out of the House of Bond-age.

I. Thou shall have no o-ther Gods be-fore me.

II. Thou shall not make un-to thee a-ny gra-ven i-mage, or a-ny like-ness of
a-ny thing that is in hea-ven a-bove, or that is in the earth be-neath, or that
is in the wa-ter un-der the earth; thou shall not bow down thy self to them,
nor serve them: For I the Lord thy God am a jea-lous God, vi-si-ting the
i-ni-quity of the Fa-thers up-on the Chil-dren; unto the third and fourth
Ge-ne-ra-ti-on of them that hate me: and shew-ing mer-cy unto thou-sands of
them that love me and keep my Com-mand-ments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guilt-less that tak-eth his Name in vain.

IV. Re-mem-ber the Sab-bath day to keep it holy; six days shall thou la-bour
and do all thy work; but the se-venth day is the Sab-bath of the Lord thy God,
in it thou shall not do a-ny work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daugh-ter, thy
man-ser-vant, nor thy maid-ser-vant, nor thy cat-tle, nor the Stran-ger that is
within thy Gates. For in six days the Lord made Hea-ven and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is; and rest-ed the se-venth day, wherefore the Lord bles-sed
the Sab-bath day, and hal-lowed it.

V. Ho-nour thy Fa-ther and thy Mo-ther, that thy days may be long up-on the
Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII. Thou shall not com-mit A-dul-te-ry.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false wit-ness a-gainst thy Neigh-bour.

X. Thou shall not co-vet thy Neigh-bours house, thou shall not co-vet thy
Neigh-bours wife, nor his man-ser-vant, nor his maid-ser-vant, his Ox, nor his
Ass, nor a-ny-thing that is thy Neigh-bours.

Useful Instructions for young Persons Alphabetically in Verse.
A Verse may find him whom a Sermon flies.
And turn delight into a Sacrifice:
To get and fix these Rules in memory,
There needs no Art, but to mind A, B, C.
A.
At Table guard thy Tongue, a Civil Guest,
Will no more talk all, than eat all the Feast.
B.
Be well advised, and wary Council take,
E're thou do any Action undertake.
C.
Command thy self in chief; He Life's Wa, knows,
Whom all his Passions follow as he goes.
D.
Dare to be true, nothing can need a Lie,
A fault which needs it, must grow two thereby.
E.
Eclipsed the Sun; Earthquakes, rent Vail, dark Sky,
Nature must needs be sick when God can dye.
F.
First Worship God, He that forgets to pray,
Bids not himself good Morrow, nor good Day.
G.
Give to all something; but to a good poor man.
Bestow as liberally as you can.
H.
How dare thou sin in secret? God does see,
And will alone thy Judge and Jury be.
I.
If a Son make his Fathers Heart to bleed,
He may a Child have to revenge the deed.
K.
Keep thy self humble, pride has ruined many,
The Proud Man's seldom well-belov'd of any.
L.
Live Jesus live, and let it ever be,
Our life to live, yea dye, for love of thee.
M.
Man's Life's a flower, that fades in an hour.
Who is so vain to dote upon a flower?
N.
Not House nor Land, nor measured heaps of wealth
Can render to a dying man his health.
O.
Oh my Dear God, though I am quite forgot,
Let me not love thee, if I love thee not.
P.
Pleasure is fleeting still, and makes no stay,
It lends a smile or two, and steals away.
Q.
Quietly learn all Crosses to endure,
Repining does more misery procure.
R.
Reach Heaven thou can not here; yet still aspire,
And climb, if not in deed, yet in desire,
S.
Swear not; an Oath is like a dangerous Dart,
Which shot, rebounds to strike the shooters heart.
T.
To all alike be courteous meek, and kind,
A winning Carriage with indifferent mind.
U.
Use Patience what e're haps, though bad it be,
Take it for good, and it will be so to thee.
W.
Wise Men speak little we, scarce know of any,
Undone by hearing, but for speaking many.
X.
Xerxes with tears surveys his Mighty Host,
Thinking how soon they would all be dead and lost.
Y.
Youth think old men are Fools, but Old men know,
By dear Experience that Youth are so.
Z.
Zealously practice what is good, and then,
Great will be thy reward in bliss. Amen.
Deuteronomy Chap. 13.
IF there a-rise a-mong you a Pro-phet or a Dream-er of Dreams, and gi-veth
thee a sign or a wonder.

And the sign or the won-der come to pass, where-of he spoke to thee, say-ing;
Let us go af-ter o-ther Gods (which thou have not known) and let us serve them.

Thou shall not heark-en un-to the words of that Prophet, or the dream-ex of
dreams, for the Lord our God proves you, to know whe-ther you love the Lord
your God with all your heart, and with all your soul.

Ye shall walk af-ter the Lord your God and fear him, and keep his
Com-man-de-ments, and o-bey his voice, and you shall serve him and cleave un-to
him.

And that pro-phet, or that dream-er of dreams shall be put to death (be-cause
he has spo-ken to turn you a-way from the Lord your God, which brought you out
of the Land of E-gypt, and re-deem-ed you out of the House of Bond-age, to
thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God com-mand-ed thee to walk in)
so shall thou put the e-vil away from the midst of thee.

PSALM. 97.
THE Lord reign-eth, let the Earth re-joice, let the mul-ti-tude of Is-rael be
glad thereof;

Clouds and Darkness are round a-bout him, Righ-te-ous-ness and Iudg-ment are
the ha-bi-ta-ti-on of his Throne.

A Fire go-eth be-fore him end burn-eth up his E-ne-mies round a-bout; His
Light-nings en-light-en-ed the World, the Earth saw and tremb-led.

The Hills mel-ted like wax at the pre-sence of the Lord, at the pre-sence of
the Lorn of the whole Earth. The Hea-vens de-clare his Righ-te-ous-ness, and
all the Peo-ple see his Glo-ry.

Con-found-ed be all they that serve gra-ven I-ma-ges, that boast them-selves
of I-dols, wor-ship him all ye Gods; Si-on heard and was glad, and the
daugh-ters of Ju-dah re-joy-ced be-cause of thy Iudg-ments O Lord.

For thou Lord art high a-bove all the Earth, thou art ex-alt-ed far a-bove all
Gods; Ye that love the Lord hate e-vil, he pre-ser-veth the souls of his
saints, he de-li-ve-reth them out of the hand of the wick-ed.

Light is sown for the Righ-te-ous, and glad-ness for the up-right in Heart.
Re-joice in the Lord ye Righ-te-ous, and give thanks to the re-mem-brance of
his Ho-li-ness.

PSALM 124.
But that God for us fought may Israel say,
But that God for us fought in that sad day,
When men inflamed with wrath against us rose,
We had alive been swallowed by our Foes.
Then had we sunk beneath the roaring waves,
And in their horrid Entrails found our Graves,
Then had their Violence, like Torrents poured,
From melting Hills, our wretched lives devoured.
O blessed be God who has not given our blood;
To quench their thirst, nor made our flesh their food,
Our Souls like Birds have escaped the Fowlers Net,
The snares are broke, which for our Lives were set,
Our only confidence is in his Name,
Who made the Earth, and Heavens Immortal frame.
Psalm 115.
NOT to us O Lord, not to us, but to thy Name give the glo-ry; for thy Mercy
and for thy Truths sake.

Where-fore should the Hea-then say, Where is now their God? But our God is in
the Hea-vens, he has done what-so-e-ver he pleas-ed.

Their I-dols are sil-ver and gold, the work of Men's hands, They have mouths,
but they speak not, Eyes have they but they see not.

They have Ears but they hear not, No-ses have they but smell not; They have
hands but they han-dle not, Feet have they, but they walk not, nei-ther speak
they through their throat.

They that make them are like un-to them, so is e-ve-ry one that trust-eth in
them.

O Is-ra-el trust thou in the Lord, for he is their help and their shield. O
house of A-ron trust in the Lord, he is their help and their shield.

Ye that fear the Lord trust in the Lord, he is their help and their shield. He
will bless them that fear the Lord both small and great.

The Lord shall in-crease you more and more, both you and your Chil-dren: You
are bles-sed of the Lord, which made Hea-ven and Earth.

The Hea-ven e-ven the Hea-vens are the Lords, but the Earth has he gi-ven to
the Chil-dren of Men.

The dead praise not the Lord, nei-ther a-ny that go down in-to si-lence. But
we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for e-ver-more. Praise the Lord.

DANIEL Chap. 3.
NEbuchadnezzar ehe King made an Image of Gold, whose height was Threescore
Cubits, and the breadth thereof six Cubits, he set it up in the plain of Dura,
in the Province of Babylon.

Then an Herald cried aloud. To you it is commanded, O People, Nations, and
Languages, That at what time ye hear the sound of the Cornet, Flute, Harp,
Sackbut, Psaltery, Dulcimer, and all kinds of Music, ye fall down and worship
the Golden Image that Nebuchadnezzar the King has set up.

And who so falls not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into a
burning fiery Furnace.

Therefore at that time when all the People heard the sound of the Cornet,
Flute, Harp, Sack-but, Psaltery, and all kinds of Music, all the People, the
Nations, and the Languages fell down and Worshipped the Golden Image that
Nebuchadnezar the King had set up.

Wherefore at that time certain Caldeans came near and Accused the Jews, They
spoke and said to the King Nebuchadnezar, O King live for ever.

Thou O King have made a Decree that every Man that shall hear the sound of the
Cornet, Flute, Harp, Sackbut, Psaltery, and Dulcimer and all kinds of Music
shall fall down and Worship the Golden Image.

And who so falls not down and Worshippeth that he should be cast into the
midst of a Burning Fiery Furnace.

There are certain Jews whom thou have set over the Affairs of the Province of
Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. These Men O King have not regarded
thee, they serve not thy Gods, nor Worship the Golden Image that thou have set
up.

Daniel Chap. 3. Ver. 13.
THEN Ne-bu-chad-nez-zar in his Rage and Fu-ry. com-mand-ed to bring Sha-drach,
Me-shach, and A-bed-ne-go, then they brought these Men be-fore the King.

Ne-bu-chad-nez-zar Spoke and said, Is it true O Sha-drach, Me-shack, and
A-bed-ne-go? do not ye serve my Gods, nor Wor-ship the Gol-den I-mage that I
have set up?

Now if ye be rea-dy that at what time ye hear the Sound of the Cor-net, Flute,
Harp, Sack-but, Psal-te-ry, and Dul-cimer, and all kinds of Mu-sick, ye fall
down and Wor-ship the I-mage which I have made, well; but if ye Wor-ship not,
ye shall be cast the same Hour in-to the midst of a Burn-ing Fi-e-ry Fur-nace;
and who is that God that shall de-li-ver you out of my hands?

Sha-drach, Me-shach, and A-bed-ne-go, an-swe-red and said un-to the King, O
Ne-bu-chad-nez-zar, we are not care-full to an-swer thee in this matter.

If it be so, our God whom we serve is a-ble to de-li-ver us from the Burn-ing
Fi-e-ry Fur-nace, and he will de-li-ver us out of thy hand O King.

But if not, be it known un-to thee O King, we will not serve thy Gods, nor
Wor-ship thy Gol-den I-mage which thou have set up.

Daniel, Chap. 3. Ver. 19.
THEN was Nebuchadnezzar full of Fury, and the form of his Visage was changed
against Shadrach, Meshack, and Abednego, therefore he spoke and Commanded that
they should heat the Furnace one seven times more then it was wont to be heat.

And he Commanded, the most Mighty Men that were in his Army to bind Shadrach,
Meshack, and Abednego, and to cast them into the Burning fiery Furnace.

Then these Men were bound in their Coats and Hosen, and their Hats, and their
other Garments, and were cast into the midst of the Burning Fiery Furnace.

Therefore because the Kings Commandment was urgent, and the Furnace exceeding
hot, the Flame of the Fire slew those Men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego; And these three Men fell down bound into the burning fiery Furnace.

Then Nebuchadnezzar the King was Astonished, and rose up in have, and spoke
and said unto his Counselors, did not we cast three men bound into the midst
of the Fire, they answered and said unto the King, True O King.

He answered and said Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
Fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.

Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the Mouth of the Burning Fiery Furnace, and
spoke and said Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, the Servants of the most High
God come forth and come hither, then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came
forth of the midst of the Fire.

And the Princes and Governors and Captains, and the Kings Counselors being
gathered together saw these Men, upon whose Bodies the Fire had no Power, nor
was an hair of their head Singed, neither were their Coats changed, nor the
smell of Fire had passed on them.

Daniel 3. Ver. 28.
Then Ne-bu-chad-nez-zar spoke and said Bles-sed be the God of Sha-drach,
Me-shech, and A-bed-ne go, who has sent his An-gel and de-li-ve-red his
Ser-vants that trust-ed in him, and have chang-ed the Kings Word, and yield-ed
their bo-dys, that they might not serve nor Wor-ship any God ex-cept their own
God.

There-fore I make a De-cree that e-ve-ry peo-ple, Na-ti-on and Language, which
speak a-ny thing a-miss a-gainst the God of Sha-drach, Me-shach, and
A-bed-ne-go, shall be cut in Pie-ces, and their Hou-ses shall be made a
Dunghill, be-cause there is no o-ther God that can de-li-ver af-ter this sort.

Then the King pro-mo-ted Sha-drach, Mashach, and A-bed-ne-go in the Pro-vince
of Ba-by-lon.

Some Verses Written by Mr. John Careless Martyr in Queen Mary's Reign, and
presented to a Gentlewoman who came to Visit him in Prison.
My Sister Dear God give you Grace,
With steadfast Faith in Jesus name;
His Gospel always to Embrace,
And live according to the same.
To Dye for Christ think it no Shame,
But hope in God, and in him trust,
And you shall have Eternal Joy,
When you shall rise out of the Dust.
For which most sweet and blessed Day,
To God with Faith your Prayer make,
And in your Prayers pray that I,
May of that Heavenly Joy partake.
And thus to God I you Commend,
Who is your Castle and Defense,
Let him protect you from all ill,
Until to Heaven you go from hence.
Amen.
1.
Have Lord; from such as would devour,
Defend by thy Almighty Power,
Delay not in so feared an Hour.
2.
But let Confusion seize on those,
Who would destroy, to Shame expose;
Be sudden in their overthrows.
3.
Let those with Infamy return,
Dejected, and unpitied Mourn,
Who would thy Gospel overturn.
4.
Who love thy name, with Joy Invest;
Let them in Shades of safety Feast,
And ever say, The Lord be Blessed.
5.
But we are poor and full of need,
Have Lord, deliver us with Speed,
Our strength, our help from thee proceed.
Jeremiah, Chap. 10.
HEar the word of the Lord which speaks to you, O House of Israel. Thus says
the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the Signs of
Heaven; for the Heathens are dismayed at them.

For the Customs of the people are vain, for one Cutteth a Tree out of the
Forest (the work of the hands of the Workman) with the Axe. They deck it with
Silver and with Gold, they fasten it with Nails and with Hammers that it move
not.

They are upright as the Palm Tree but speak not, they must needs be born
because they cannot go; be not afraid of them, for they cannot do evil, neither
also is it in them to do good.

For as much as there is none like to thee O Lord, Thou art great and thy name
is great in Might; who would not fear thee O King of Nations? for to thee does
it appertain, for as much as among all the Wise Men of the Nations, and in all
the Kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.

But they are altogether Brutish, and Foolish, the Stock is a Doctrine of
Vanities, Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish, and Gold from
Vphaz, the work of the Workman, and of the hands of the Founder; Blew and
Purple is their Clothing, they are all the work of Cunning Men.

But the Lord is the True God, he is the Living God and an Everlasting King, at
his Wrath the Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide
his Indignation.

Jeremiah, Chap. 10. Ver. 11.
THus shall ye say un-to them, The Gods that have not made the Hea-vens and the
Earth, even they shall pe-rish from the Earth, and from un-der these Hea-vens.

He has made the Earth by his Pow-er he has E-sta-blish-ed the World by his
Wise-dom, and has stretch-ed out the Hea-vens by his dis-cre-ti-on.

When he ut-te-reth his Voice there is a Mul-ti-tude of Wa-ters in the
Hea-vens, and he cau-seth the Va-pours to As-cend from the ends of the Earth,
he mak-eth Light-nings with Rain, and bring-eth forth the Winds out of his
Trea-sures.

E-ve-ry Man is Bru-tish in his Know-ledge, e-ve-ry Found-er is Con-found-ed by
the Gra-ven I-mage, for his Mol-ten I-mage is fals-hood, and there is no Breath
in them.

They are Va-ni-ty, and the Work of er-rors in the time of their Vi-si-ta-ti-on
they shall Pe-rish.

Those helpless Gods Adored in popish Lands,
Are Gold and Silver; wrought by Humane Hands.
Blind eyes have they, Deaf Ears, still silent Tongues,
They draw no Breath from their Unactive Lungs.
Who make them are like to them; such are those,
Who in these Senseless Stocks their hopes Repose.
O praise the Lord you who from Israel Spring,
His praises O you Sons of Aaron Sing.
You of the house of Levi praise his Name.
All you who God Adore, his praise proclaim.
From Sion praise God only Good and Great,
Who in Jerusalem has fixed his Seat.
I. Kings 18.21.
ANd E-li-jah came un-to all the Peo-ple and said, How long halt ye be-tween
two O-pi-ni-ons. 2. If the Lord be God fol-low him, but if Ba-al then fol-low
him, and the Peo-ple an-swer-ed him not a Word.

Then said E-li-jah un-to the Peo-ple, I, e-ven I on-ly, re-main a Pro-phet of
the Lord, but Ba-al's Pro-phets are four Hun-dred and Fif-ty Men.

Let them there-fore give us two Bul-locks, and let them choose one Bul-lock for
them-selves, and cut it in pie-ces, and lay it on Wood, and put no Fire un-der,
and call ye on the Name of your Gods, and I will call on the Name of the Lord,
and the God that an-swe-reth by Fire let him be God; and all the Peo-ple
an-swer-ed and said, It is well spo-ken.

And E-li-jah said un-to the Pro-phets of Ba-al, Choose you one Bul-lock for
your selves, and dress it first, for ye are ma-ny, and call up-on the Name of
your Gods, but put no Fire un-der.

And they took the Bul-lock which was gi-ven them, and they dres-sed it, and
cal-led on the Name of Ba-al from Mor-ning un-til Noon, say-ing, O Ba-al hear
us, but there was no Voice, nor any that answered, and they leapt up-on the
Al-tar which was made.

And it came to pass that at Noon E-li-jah Mock-ed them, and said, Cry a-loud,
for he is a God, ei-ther he is talk-ing, or he is per-su-ing, or he is in
ajour-ney, or per-ad-ven-ture he sleep-eth and must be a-wa-ked, And they
cry-ed a-loud, and cut them-selves af-ter their man-ner with Knives and Lan-ces
till the Blood Gush-ed out up-on them.

And it came to pass when Midday was past, and they Pro-phe-sy-ed un-till the
time of the Of-fering of the E-ve-ning Sa-cri-fice, that there was nei-ther
Voice, nor a-ny to an-swer, nor a-ny that re-gard-ed.

1 Kings 18.30.
ANd Elijah said unto all the People, come near unto me; and all the People
came near unto him, and he repaired the Altar of the Lord that was broken down;
and Elijah took Twelve Stones according to the Number of the Sons of Jacob,
unto whom the Word of the Lord came, saying, Israel shall be thy Name.

And with the Stones he Built an Altar in the Name of the Lord, and he made a
Trench about the Altar, as great as would contain two Measures of Seed, and he
put the Wood in order, and cut the Bullock into Pieces and laid him on the
Wood, and said, Fill four Barrels with Water, and pour it on the burnt
Sacrifice and the Wood.

And he said, do it the second time and they did it the second time, and he
said, Do it the third time, and they did it the third time, And the Water ran
round the Altar, and he filled the Trench also with Water.

And it came to pass at the time of the Offering of the Evening Sacrifice, that
Elijah the Prophet came near and said, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of
Israel; let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy
Servant, and that I have done all these things at thy Word.

Hear me O Lord, hear me, that this People may know thou art the Lord God, and
that thou have turned their heart back again.

Then the Fire of the Lord fell, and Consumed the burnt Sacrifice, and the Wood
and the Stones and the Dust, and licked up the Water that was in the Trench.
And when all the People saw it they fell on their Faces and they said, The Lord
he is the God, the Lord he is the God.

And Elijah said unto them, Take the Prophets of Ba-al let not one of them
escape, and they took them, and Elijah brought them down to the Brook Kishon
and Slew them there.

PSALM 79.
O God the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance, thy holy Temple have they
Defiled, they have laid Jerusalem in heaps.

The dead Bodies of thy Servants have they given to be Meat unto the Fowls of
the Heaven, the Flesh of thy Saints unto the Beasts of the Earth. Their Blood
have they shed like Water round about Jerusalem, and there was none to Bury
them.

We are become a Reproach to our Neighbors a Scorn and Derision to them that
are round about us. How long O Lord, will thou be angry forever? Shall thy
Iealousy burn like Fire?

Pour out thy Wrath on the Heathen that have not known thee, and on the
Kingdoms that have not called on thy Name, For they have devoured Jacob, and
laid wast his Dwelling place.

O Remember not against us former Iniquities, let thy tender Mercies speedily
prevent us, for we are brought very low: Help us O Lord our Salvation for the
Glory of thy Name, and deliver us, and purge away our Sins for thy Names sake.

Wherefore should the Heathen say, where is their God? Let him be known among
the Heathens in our sight, by the Revenging the Blood of thy Servants which is
shed. Let the Sighing of the Prisoners come before thee; according to the
greatness of thy Power, preserve thou those that are appointed to Dye.

And render unto our Neighbors Sevenfold into their Bosom their Reproach
wherewith they have Reproached thee O Lord. So we thy People and Sheep of thy
Pasture will give thee Thanks for ever; we will show forth thy Praise to all
Generations.

11 Kings 10.18.
And Je-hu ga-the-red all the Peo-ple to-ge-ther, and said unto them, A-hab
Ser-ved Ba-al but a lit-tle, but Je-hu shall serve him much.

Now there-fore call un-to me all the Pro-phets of Ba-al, all his Ser-vants,
and all his Priests, let none be want-ing; for I have a great Sa-cri-fice to do
un-to Ba-al, who-so-e-ver shall be want-ing he shall not Live. But Je-hu did it
in Sub-ti-li-ty to the in-tent that he might De-stroy the Wor-ship-pers of
Ba-al.

And Je-hu said, Pro-claim a So-lemn As-sem-bly for Ba-al; and they
pro-claim-ed it; and Je-hu sent through all Is-ra-el, and all the Wor-ship-pers
of Ba-al came, so that there was not a man left that came not; and they came
in-to the House of Ba-al, and the House of Ba-al was full from one end to
a-no-ther.

And Je-hu said un-to him that was o-ver the Vest-ry, bring forth Vest-ments
for all the Wor-ship-pers of Ba-al, and he brought them forth Vest-ments.

And Je-hu went, and Je-ho-na-dab the Son of Re-chab, in-to the House of Ba-al,
and said un-to the Wor-ship-pers of Ba-al, Search and look that there be here
with you none of the Ser-vants of the Lord, but the Worshippers of Ba-al on-ly.

And when they went in to offer Sa-cri-fi-ces and burnt Of-fe-rings Je-hu
ap-point-ed Four-score Men without and said; If a-ny of the Men whom I have
brought in-to your hands es-cape, he that let-teth him go, his Life shall be
for the Life of him.

And it came to pass as soon as he had made an end of Of-fe-ring the
Burnt-Of-fe-ring, That Je-hu said un-to the Guard and to the Cap-tains, Go in
and Slay them let none come forth, and they Smote them with the Edge of the
Sword; and the Guard and the Cap-tains cast them out, and went to the Ci-ty of
the House of Ba-al, and they brought forth the I-ma-ges out of the House of
Ba-al and Burnt them.

And they brake down the I-mage of Ba-al, and brake down the House of Ba-al,
and made it a Draught House un-to this Day. Thus Je-hu de-stroy-ed Ba-al out of
Is-ra-el.

Jehu Crowned King, Jehu the King must fall
To Ahabs God, Jehu must Worship Baal.
The God Divided people must go call,
Baals Sacred priests, Jehu must Worship Baal.
None must be left behind, they must come all,
Jehu must burn a Sacrifice to Baal.
The priests come puffing in both Great and Small.
Must wait on Jehu and must Worship Baal.
Baal's house is filled, and crowded to the Wall,
With people that are come to Worship Baal.
What must there now be done, what Odours shall,
Perfume Baals Nostrills? Even the Priests of Baal.
Baal's holy Temple's now become a Stall,
Of priestly flesh, of fleshly priests to Baal.
How would our Gospel flourish if that all,
Princes like Jehu would but Worship Baal.
St. Matthew Chap. 10. Ver. 16.
BEhold I send you forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, be ye therefore Wise
as Serpents and Harmless as Doves. But beware of Men for they will deliver you
up to the Councils, and they will Scourge you in their Synagogues.

And ye shall be brought before Governors and Kings for my sake, for a
Testimony against them and the Gentiles, but when they deliver you up, take no
thought how or what you shall speak, for it shall be given you in that same
Hour what you shall speak, For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father which speaks in you.

And the brother shall deliver up the brother to Death, and the Father the
Children, and the Children shall rise up against their Parents, and cause them
to be put to death. And ye shall be Hated of all Men for my Names sake, but he
that endures to the end shall be Saved.

But when they Persecute you in this City, Flee ye into another; for verily I
say unto you, ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel till the Son of
Man be come. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his
Lord.

And fear not them that can Kill the Body, but are not able to Kill the soul,
but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.

Whosoever therefore shall Confess me before Men, him will I also Confess
before my Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before Men,
him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven.

Think not that I am come to send Peace on Earth; I came not to send Peace but
a Sword. For I am come to set a Man at Variance against his Father, and the
Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter in Law against her Mother in Law,
And a Man's Foes shall be they of his own Household.

He that Loves Father or Mother more then me is not worthy of me, and he that
loves Son and Daughter more then me is not worthy of me. And he that takes
not his Cross and follows me is not worthy of me. He that finds his Life
shall lose it, and he that loses his Life for my sake shall find it.

St. Luke 3.23.
AND Je-sus him-self be-gan to be a-bout Thir-ty Years of Age, be-ing (as was
sup-po-sed) the Son of Jo-seph, which was the Son of He-li, which was the Son
of Mat-that, which was the Son of Le-vi, which was the Son of Mel-chi, which
was the Son of Jan-na, which was the Son of Joseph.

Which was the Son of Mat-ta-thi-as, which was the Son of A-mos, which was the
Son of Na-um; which was the Son of E-li, which was the Son of Nag-ge, which was
the Son of Ma-ath, which was the Son of Mat-ta-thi-as, which was the Son of
Se-me-i, which was the Son of Jo-seph, which was the Son of Ju-da.

Which was the Son of Jo-an-na, which was the Son of Rhe-sa, which was the Son
of Zo-ro-ba-bel, which was the Son of Sa-la-thiel, which was the Son of Ne-ri,
which was the Son of Mel-chi, which was the Son of Ad-di, which was the Son of
Co-sam, which was the Son of El-mo-dam, which was the Son of Er.

Which was the Son of Jo-se, which was ehe Son of Eli-e-zer, which was the Son
of Jo-rim, which was the Son of Mat-that, which was the Son of Le-vi.

Which was the Son of Ma-thu-sa-la, which was the Son of E-noch, which was the
Son of Ja-red, which was the Son of Ma-le-l^-el, which was the Son of Cai-nan,
which was the Son of E-nos, which was the Son of Seth, which was the Son of
Ad-am, which was the Son of God.

St. Matthew Chap. 24.
AND Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you, for
many shall come in my name Saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many and ye
shall hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars; see that ye be not troubled for all
these things must come to pass but the end is not yet.

For Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and there
shall be Famines and Pestilences and Earthquakes in diverse places. All these
are the beginning of Sorrows.

Then shall they deliver you up to be Afflicted and shall Kill you; and ye
shall be hated of all Nations for my Names Sake. And then shall many be
offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.

And many false Prophets shall arise and shall deceive many. And because
Iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that endures
unto the end shall be Saved.

When ye therefore shall see the Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel
the Prophet, stand in the Holy place (who so reads let him understand) Then
let them that be in Judea Flee unto the Mountains.

For then shall be great Tribulation, such as was not since the Beginning of
the World to this time, no nor never shall be; and except those days should be
shortened, there should be no Flesh Saved, but for the Elects sake those days
shall be shortened.

Then if any Man shall say unto you, lo here is Christ, or lo there, believe it
not, for there shall arise false Christ's and False Prophets, and shall show
great Signs and Wonders, insomuch that if it were possible they shall deceive
the very Elect. Beloved I have told you before.

PSALM. 74.
Great God of Gods forget not those,
Who thee Reproachfully Despise,
Remember Lord the Blasphemies,
Cast on thee by Frantic Foes.
O! to the wicked Multitude,
Surrender not thy Turtle Dove,
Nor from thy tender care remove,
The Poor by powerful Wrong persu'd.
Thy Covenant bound by Oath Maintain,
For Darkness overspreads the Face,
Of all the Land; in every place,
Destruction Rape and Slaughter Reign.
Let not the Oppressed return with shame.
But Crown thee with Deserved Applause,
O Patronize thy proper cause,
Remember, Fools Revile thy name.
O! Let their Sorrows never cease,
Who blast thee with their Calumnies,
The Tumults of their Pride, who rise
Against thee, every day Increase.
The Protestant Instructed, and the Errors of Popery Discovered.
Question. WHat ought to be the great Design of all Men in this World?

Answ. So to Serve and Honor God in this Life, that we may for ever enjoy
eternal happiness in the World to come.

Quest. This indeed is the Interest of every man; but since there are so many
Religions in the World, which of these do you profess?

Answ. The Christian Religion; which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, and which is commonly called the Protestant Reformed
Religion.

Quest. Why is it called the Protestant Religion?

Answ. It is called the Protestant Religion from a solemn Protestation of
several Princes and Cities of Germany, against the errors and Usurpations of
the Roman Church; but yet it is no new Doctrine brought into the World, but
the truth of Christianity, Confessed, Asserted, and purged from the Corruptions
of Popery, and has the very same grounds to prove the Truth thereof, which the
Christian Religion it self has.

Quest. How do you prove that the Protestant Religion professed at this day is
the pure and Ancient Christian Religion.

Answ. 1. Because of its exact Conformity to the Scriptures, and the genuine
and clear sense thereof. 2. In that the Protestant Religion is the very same,
and exactly agrees with the Faith of the Christian Church in the first three
hundred years after the death of our Savior. 3. From the confession of the
Papists themselves, who own that there have been some in all Ages, even in the
darkest times of Popery, who have Owned, Asserted, and Died in Defense of the
same Doctrines which we now profess, as the Waldenses, Albingenses,
Berengatians, and others.

Quest. Has not the Romish Church, the Decrees, Canons, Councils and the Pope
himself as their Head, to prove the Truth and Certainty of their Religion.

Answ. Though they boast very much of Infallibility yet. 1. They never were
agreed, nor are ever like to agree who this Infallible Judge is, whether in a
General Council, or the Pope himself, 2. They have no Rational Certainty of
what they believe, since they wilfully neglect the Holy Scriptures, and with a
Biind Obedience entrust their Souls with those Men whose Credit and Testimony a
Man would hardly trust with a Sum of Money without better Security. 3. They
have no Bible, nor other Authentic Record to prove their Religion, but a Mass
of dead Traditions that have no Voice, nor Sound to be understood, until the
Romish Clergy put a sense upon them; So that a Man can hardly embrace Popery,
except he first turn Atheist, yea, quit all his Religion and Reason at once.

Quest. But do not the Papists damn all the World but themselves, confidently
affirming that Rome is the Catholic Apostolic Church, out of which there is
no salvation?

Answ. Their confidence is not at all to be wondered at, since it is one of the
greatest Arguments they use, to prove the most ridiculous Assertions, but that
the Romish Church can have no possible claim to their being only saved, is
unanswerable from these Arguments. 1. Because we know of no Church which
consists of all Christians Subjected to one Humane Head, nor do we read that
our Subjection to the Pope is made a condition of Salvation. 2. It is evident
that in the Apostles time, and for diverse Ages since, there was a Christian
Catholic Church which had no dependence upon the Sea of Rome. 3. There are a
greater number in the World who embrace and profess the Christian Religion, and
have no Communion with Rome, than there are Papists. 4. It is the prerogative
of Jesus Christ alone to be Head of his Church, for as there is one Faith, and
one Lord Jesus Christ, so there is but one body, which is his Church, united to
him as her head, Ephesians. 4.3, 4. Psalm 2.6.

Quest. What are some of those Errors brought in by the Pope and his Clergy,
which occasioned the Protestants departure from their Communion?

Answ. There were several Errors and Extravagancies Introduced, both in
Doctrine and Discipline, one of their Doctrines was that of Purgatory, which
they affirm is a place next door to Hell, where the Torments are as extreme as
those of Hell it self, but not eternal; in this place they say the Souls of the
Faithful are purged, some for a hundred, some for five hundred, or a Thousand
years, till they are delivered by the Prayers, Masses, Popes Pardons, but
especially by the Money of their Friends or Relations.

Quest. What say the Protestants to this?

Answ. They say it is Blasphemy to believe that Men are purged from sins in
this place, since the blood of Christ is the only purgatory for our Sins.
Besides, there is no ground in Scripture for any such belief. St. Luke 16.23.
In Hell he lift up his Eyes being in Torment, etc. St. Matt. 28.12. They shall
sit down with Abraham, etc. in the Kingdom of Heaven, but the other shall be
cast into utter Darkness, where shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth. Mark
26.16: He that believes shall be Saved, and he that believes not shall be
Damned.

Quest. What other Errors do they maintain?

Answ. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation; for they say that in the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, Jesus Christ is corporally present, and that there is a
change of the Substance of the bread and wine into the natural body and blood
of Christ.

Quest. What answer the Protestants?

Answ. That this Doctrine is contrary to many plain Testimonies of Scripture,
it overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has given occasion to very
gross Idolatry, and great Superstition; and besides, it contains a multitude of
absurdities and contradictions: For 1. Then must our blessed Savior hold
himself in his own hands, yea devour and eat up himself, and yet still sit
whole and entire at the Table with his Disciples. 2. The body of Jesus Christ
must be in a Thousand places at the same time. 3. His whole body must be in the
mouth of every Communicant at once. 4. His whole body must be less in quantity
than the least Limb of his body. 5. His body must at the same time be broken
and unbroken, and must at the same time ascend and descend; and lastly, must be
subject to putrefaction, and many other Absurdities. And therefore those words.
This is my Body, are to be understood, that this does signify and represent my
body; and upon the same account Christ is called a Rock, a Door, a Vine, and
yet none can be so senseless to think that Jesus Christ was turned into any of
these.

Quest. What other Errors are they charged with?

Ans. That the Scripture ought not to be set forth in the Common Tongue; but
that it is dangerous for the people to read the Bible, lest they fall into
Heresy.

Qu. What do the Protestants answer to this?

Answ. That the true Reason of this is because if they suffer the People to
read the Scripture, it would make them abhor the Popish Religion, as being
absolutely contrary thereunto. For the Scriptures exhort all to be diligent
Readers thereof, and our Savior says, what say the Prophets and Apostles
concerning this? Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. Seek ye the Book of the Lord
and read, Isa. 34.16. They were more noble in that they searched the Scriptures
daily, Acts 17.11. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, Luke
16.29. Let the word of God dwell richly in you, Col. 3.16. Take the sword of
the Spirit, which is the word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. From a child thou have known
the Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. Except you utter Words easy to be understood,
how shall it be known what is spoken? 1 Cor. 14.9, 16.

Qu. What other erroneous Doctrines do the Papists hold?

Answ. The praying to Angels, to the Virgin Mary, and the Apostles and Saints
departed.

Quest. What say the Protestants to it?

Answ. They say, That the Papists by praying in that manner, do give to the
Angels and Saints departed the highest religious Worship and Adoration that is
possible, and so are guilty of fearful Idolatry, and that we ought to go to God
in the mediation of Christ alone; neither have we any ground to believe that
the Saints in Heaven know our particular Persons, wants, necessities or
desires; and the Scripture seems contrary to all this; Call upon me in the day
of trouble, Psalm. 50.15. Say, Our Father which art in Heaven, Luke 11.2. Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only, Mat. 4.10. Let no man beguile you
into a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. There is one
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5. Through him we
have access unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. Do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
Col. 3.17. Whatsoever you shall ask in my name I will do it, John. 14 3.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
know us not, Is. 63.13. Thou sendest man away, his Sons come to Honor, and he
knows it not, they are brought low, but he perceives it not. Job. 14.21. St.
John fell down to worship before the Feet of the Angel, then says he, see thou
do it not, for I am thy Fellow Servant, worship God. Rev. 22.8, 9. Cornelius
fell down at St. Peter 's feet and worshipped him, and Peter said, stand up I
my self am also a man, Act. 10.25.

Quest. Do not the Papists affirm that we ought to pray for the dead?

Answ. Yes but the Protestants answer, They that dye in the Lord need not our
prayers, and they that dye in their sins can have no benefit by them; and that
the reason, why the Popish Priests uphold this Error is, because they get so
much money by it. Lastly; we have no Command from God; no promise to be heard;
no Example in Scripture for praying for the dead, or praying to Saints, Read 2 Samuel 12.21. Now the Child is dead, why should I fast and pray. Blessed are they
that dye in the Lord, Rev. 14.13.

Qu. Do the Papists hold that all that dye without Baptism are undoubtedly
damned, and shut out of Heaven?

Answ. Yes, But Protestants say that is false; for then 1. The Penitent Thief
could not be saved; contrary to that of St. Luke 23.43. 2. A multitude of
Infants must be damned for the neglect of their Parents, which is a cruel and
uncharitable censure, contrary to Genesis 17.7. 1 Cor. 7.14. Romans 4.11. Mat. 19.14.

Quest. Is water the only visible substantial sign to be used in Baptism?

Answer. Read that of Saint Mat. 3.11. I Baptize you with water; and Acts
10.47. Can any forbid water that these should not be baptized? But the Papists
use Salt, Oil, Spittle and many other Superstitions and Additions, which they
have made to the Institution of Jesus Christ in Baptism. King James of Famous
Memory, in his Apology, has these Words, The Queen my Mother at my Baptism,
although I was Baptized by a Popish Archbishop, sent him word to forbear to
use the Spittle in my Baptism; which was obeyed, it being indeed a Filthy and
Apish Trick: Her own words were, That she would not have a Pocky Priest to spit
in her Child's Mouth.

Quest. What do the Papists mean by the Mass, which they so often talk of?

Answ. It is the same which the Protestants call the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and the Papists call it the Mass, thereby intimating that the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper is made a Sacrifice and offered up to God, which as it is
used by them is both Vain and Idolatrous. 1. Because by the Death of our
Blessed Savior, who was Sacrificed for our Sins, Divine Justice is
sufficiently satisfied, and the Sinner who returns and Repents is fully secured
as to his everlasting State. Heb. 10.12. This man after he had offered one
Sacrifice for Sins for ever, sat down at the Right Hand of God. 2. The Papists
Worship their Mass not only as God, but trust in it for Salvation instead of
Christ our Savior: Neither does it excuse them to say, that they worship not
the Bread, or a breaden God, but Jesus Christ, whom they suppose to be present;
for this Argument cannot free them from Idolatry, no more than it will the
Heathen Idolaters, who though they worshipped the Sun, yet supposed it to be
God; and so they did Jupiter, whom they worshipped: And therefore if Papists be
not Idolaters, there never were any such in the world.

Qu. Are these all the Points wherein the Papists and Protestants differ?

Ans. No, for a Volume would hardly contain the Fopperies of that Apostate
Church; as, denying the Cup in the Lords Supper to the people, Pardons,
Indulgences, Pilgrimages, and Jubilees; their seven Sacraments, instead of two
appointed by our Savior; forbidding Priests to marry, Justification by Works,
Merit, Equivocation, and abundance more; which if truly understood, would make
every Protestant abhor both their Church and Doctrine.

Qu. But is the Apostasy of the Church of Rome such, as there is no safe union
with her, or being saved in that Religion?

Ans. If Rome be that spiritual Babylon mentioned, Rev. 18.4. as it is there
very plain and evident, then are we absolutely commanded to come out of her,
lest being partakers of her sins, we be partakers of her plagues.

Qu. But though the Roman Church in her Doctrine be directly contrary to
Scripture, yet how can all this demonstrate that the Pope is the Antichrist, so
expressly foretold in 2 These. 3.4.?

Ans. To resolve this question, let us consider: 1. That the Holy Ghost in
Scripture has been very exact in pointing out Antichrist by such notorious
marks and characters, as after-Ages might easily know him if they do not
wilfully shut their eyes. 2. Unless we deny our Senses, (as Papists do in many
things) we cannot be ignorant that the Popish Church clearly answers all those
marks which are given of him in Scripture, even him, whose coming shall be
after the working of Satan, with all power, signs and lying wonders, forbidding
to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has appointed to be
used with thanksgiving; who sits in the Temple of God, and exalts himself
above all that is called God; who bewitcheth the Kings of the Earth with his
Enchantments, and is drunk with the blood of the Martyrs of Christ Jesus: yea,
whose Traffic and Merchandise is not only silver and gold, but the Souls of
men, Rev. 18.13.3. This Mystery began to work in the time of the Apostles, and
he who for a time did withhold his coming, (that is the Heathen Emperors of
Rome) has been long since taken out of the way: And 4. It is undeniable, that
this Adversary can be no single person, or of a short continuance, but is a
Politic Body or Kingdom, united in one Supreme Head, and with a succession
for many Ages. 5. It is apparent, that these express characters of Antichrist,
can be applied to no other Enemy of Jesus Christ or his Church, under the New
Testament, either Pagan or Mohammedan.

Qu. But it is said of Antichrist that the Lord will consume him by the breath
of his mouth; and how can this be applied to the Pope or Church of Rome?

Ans. 1. We know that the Fall of Antichrist must be by degrees, as his Rise
was, and not all at once. 2. How have these last Ages of the World been cleared
from Antichristian darkness, in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany,
Sweden, Denmark, the Low Countries, etc.

Qu. But do we not see Popery prevail now in a more than ordinary way in
several Countries where the Gospel has been clearly preached?

Ans. This is not so strange, if we consider: 1. That where the truth is not
received in love, God does many times give up men to strong delusions, to
believe lies. 2. Observe, that such as embrace Popery do not do it from
Principles of Reason or Conscience, but it is the visible effect of a
Licentious Age, and from an unusual growth of Atheism and Ignorance: for it is
not to be admired, if those who never really had any Religion, Espouse any
Religion that may serve their Interest or Lust. 3. There is no such great
slavery exercised over the body under Turkish bondage, as there is over the
Reasons and Consciences of men under the Popish Yoke; so that they have no way
to be convinced of their Errors, since they must not see with their own eyes;
the most clear discoveries of truth that can be made to them, either in the
Scriptures, or any other Books. Lastly, though Popery seem to increase, yet
it is clear, that they get but little advantage thereby, and it seems only to
make way for its utter ruin and destruction: So that if the Pope be not
Antichrist, yet we may challenge Antichrist to do worse and wickeder things
than he.

Qu. Certainly there can be but little encouragement for men to turn Papists,
if they rightly understand what Popery is,

Ans. No question but there is great blindness upon their minds, since the
whole frame of it is but the driving on of a Politic Interest: They shut up
the Scripture to keep the people in the dark, their Religion not being able to
endure the light; they set up an Infallibility to hold them under a blind
obedience; they pick their pockets by their Doctrines of Merit and Purgatory;
yea, notwithstanding their high pretenses to Charity, it is such a Religion,
that no man can be damned except he be poor, neither can any rich man miscarry,
if he will part with his Silver to save his Soul; so that it is fitted for a
most wicked and licentious life, since men may sin at the highest rate, and not
endanger their souls; for if they have money, the Popes Pardon clears them from
the greatest Villainies; so that though they are never so guilty, they can with
their last breath solemnly call God to witness, that they are as Innocent as
the Child unborn.

Qu. Since the Popish Religion is such a compound of Humane Policy, and framed
to make men depend upon the Pope, and be subject to his power, though against
their Sovereigns Interest, we may wonder that so many Princes do with one
consent join their power to support his Throne.

Ans. This indeed seems to be a very strange infatuation, and we can give no
other reason for it, but that it is the secret Judgment of God to give them
thus up, according to what was foretold in Rev. 17.17. For God has put it into
their heart to agree and give their power to the Beast, until the words of God
be fulfilled: for else there is nothing more destructive to their Power and
Interest, than such a Spiritual Sovereign as the Pope pretends to be.

Qu. How does it appear that the Popish Religion is so destructive to the power
of Princes, and the Interest of their Kingdoms?

Ans. It is undeniably clear from their own Doctrines and Principles. 1. They
assert, that the Pope may dethrone Kings, and give their Kingdoms to others;
that he can absolve and free their Subjects from all Duty and Allegiance to
them, yea, he can bind and loose their Consciences at his own pleasure. 2. It
is such a Religion as expressly frees and exempts all Ecclesiastical persons
from the Laws of their Natural Prince, so that they cannot be judged for the
most horrid and notorious Crimes that can be committed by them. 3. It makes the
Princes and Rulers of the world, to execute with a blind obedience whatsoever
the Pope commands them, not leaving them the liberty to judge whether it be
right or wrong. 4. It strikes at the very Foundation of all Religion and Piety
(which is the greatest security to Government, and the strongest obligation to
all Civil and Moral Duties) for if a man commit the most horrid acts of
wickedness, such as Murder, Adultery, Incest, Rape, Sodomy, etc. yet an
ordinary Priest, by the Almighty power of the Pope, can dispense with them all,
the price of them being rated and appointed, which being paid, the Priest can
give full pardon and absolution for the same. 5. It is a Religion that expressly
teaches, that a man is not bound to repent presently of the most heinous sin,
it being sufficient if it be done before the last moment of his life. 6. It
destroys truth, righteousness and honesty among men, since it allows and
warrants Equivocation and Perjury both in Oaths and words; and that a man may
swear in such doubtful terms as may be directly contrary to the intent of him
that gives the Oath, whereby an Oath cannot be an end of Controversy. Lastly,
it is a Religion which in its Principles is destructive to Humane Society, for
it triumphs, delights and glories in those monstrous Prodigies of mischief,
Blood and Cruelty, which we would think Humane Nature would tremble at, and
which seem rather to have been acted by Devils transformed into the shape of
men, than by any who have the least pretense to the name of Christians; witness
the Massacres of France and Ireland, and the bloody Persecutions in the,
Netherlands, Germany, Spain, Piedmont, and most Countries in Europe. Therefore
from such a Religion, and all the cursed effects thereof, let us beseech
Almighty God to deliver us and our Posterity for ever, Amen.

PSALM 64.
THou, great Protector, hear our cry.
Save from our dreadful Enemy:
O vindicate
From their close hate,
Who for our Souls in ambush lie;
From their blind rage protect,
Who Truth and thee reject.
Who whet their tongues more sharp than Swords,
Their Arrows draw even bitter words,
To wound the upright
With fierce delight,
When time to their desire accords:
They on a sudden shoot;
Nor fear Divine pursuit.
Confirmed in skilful malice, they
Conspire, and Nets in secret lay;
And say, what eye
Can this discry?
First counsel take, and then betray;
On mischief set their hearts,
Pursued by wicked Arts.
But God shall let his Arrows fly,
Wound in the twinkling of an eye;
Each shall be stung
By his own Tongue;
And with that fatal poison die.
The Image Of Antichrist
six images representing: I. a pope being carried aloft in a sedan-chair; II
Pope Adrian IV riding the horse of the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick I
Barbarossa; III King Henry II of England kissing the knee of the Papal Legate;
IV King John of England kneeling and offering his crown to Pandulphus the Papal
Legate; V Holy Roman Emperor Henry VI of Germany bowing to take his crown from
between the feet of Pope Celestine III; VI a king kneeling to kiss the feet of
a pope

The Image of ANTICHRIST, Or, The Usurpations of the Pope and Church of Rome,
over Kings Emperors, etc.
ABOUT Five Hundred Years after the death of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, one Phocas (who had Murdered his Master Mauritius Emperor of
Constantinople, and his Children) first Advanced the Bishops of Rome, to be
Universal Bishops and Heads of the Church; at which time they were endowed with
these large Possessions and Donations which they call St. Peter's Patrimony, and
which they falsely assert to be the Gift of Constantine the Great.

After this the Church of Rome growing Great, Mighty, Rich, and Proud, at once
lost its Humility and Purity of Religion, and assumed Politic and Tyrannical
Principles, which caused her Defiled hands to lay afide the Sword of the
Spirit, and to make use of the Temporal Sword, which she used to the Deposing
and Murdering of diverse Kings, Princes, and Emperors.

I. For after they had once tasted the Sweetness of Wealth, Ease and
Prosperity, the Popes began to swell in Pride and Pomp, and the more they
Flourished in this World, the more the holy Spirit of God forsook them, so that
in a short time those Bishops who were Poor, Mean, indigent, persecuted, and
wanting all things, began to Triumph over Princes, to tread upon the Necks of
Emperors, and to bring the heads of Kings under their Usurped Authority. They
were carried upon Men's Shoulders in all manner of Magnificence, as if the earth
were not good enough to bear them; they were honored as Gods on earth; and
Sovereign Princes, Dukes, and Lords, etc. went Bare-headed before them. And not
only so, but through their Pride and Ambition they grew so great Apostates from
Christians, that of being Persecuted they became Persecutors of others, and at
last were so Great enemies to God and Religion, that the Pope may now be justly
Reckoned and Accounted the Antichrist or Man of Sin, so long before spoken of
by St. Paul in Thessalonians 2.2.

II. This pride and insolency of the Pope and his Clergy, appeared in several
Instances which might, be given of it, but out of the Multitude we shall only
Collect some few, to show what Slavery and Bondage both Princes and people were
formerly subject to, under this Antichristian Yoke. About the Year 1158.
Frederick Emperor of Germany, Marching into Italy, the Pope hearing of it went
with his Clergy to meet him; As soon as the Emperor saw the Pope, he Alighted
from his Horse to receive him, and held the Popes Stirrup while he Alighted
also, but it seems he mistook the Left Stirrup instead of the Right, at which
the Pope seemed to be very much offended, which the Emperor observing, he
smilingly told the Pope, That he desired to be excused, since he was not
accustomed to hold Stirrups, with which acknowledgment the Pope seemed to be
satisfied. After this there happened some difference between the Pope and the
Emperor, whereupon the Pope curses him, and sends his Letters out against him
to all the Princes of Christendom, declaring, that he was an accursed person,
and ought to be avoided, and cast out of all Christian company: He likewise
stirred up his Subjects in Rebellion against him. The Emperor then marched to
Rome to chastise his pride, but the Pope fled to Venice, and the Venetians
being required to send him to Frederick, refused it; whereupon the Emperor
sent his Son Otho against him, with men and Ships very well furnished, but
withal, charged him by no means to attempt any thing against the Venetians,
till he himself came: But the young man being full of heat, and desire of
glory, ventured to engage the Enemy, and was by them overthrown, and himself
taken prisoner. Upon this misfortune, the compassionate Father, to release his
Son from captivity and misery, was forced to submit to whatever Conditions of
Peace the Pope should demand; whereby it was at last agreed, that the Emperor
should come into S. Marks Church at Venice, and there kneeling down at the
Popes feet, he should receive Absolution and forgiveness. This the Emperor
performed; and the proud Pope setting his foot upon the Emperors Neck, said
that verse in the Psalm, Thou shall tread upon Lions and Adders, the young Lion
and the Dragon shall thou trample under foot; which the Pope applied to the
Emperor; but the Emperor answered, Not to thee, but to Peter this power is
given. The Pope replied, Both to me, and to Peter. The Emperor fearing further
quarrels, durst say no more, but was absolved, and his Son was restored to his
liberty.

III. Not long after this, that is, in the time of that famous King Henry, the
Second, one Thomas, Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, was by his extraordinary
pride and insolence the occasion of very great disturbance to the King and
Kingdom: for the King calling his Nobles and the Clergy together, desired that
some Clergymen might be called to answer for some Villainies by them committed;
for it was proved that several persons had been murdered by their means: This
Thomas Becket would not consent unto, without a Clause of seeing this Order;
which very much displeased the King; but by the persuasion of his Brethren,
Becket afterward consented; yet being encouraged by the Pope, he again fell
off, and repented of what he had done, which the more enraged the King against
him: This quarrel continued many years, and the King was so tormented by this
proud Prelate, that he once passionately cried out, Will no body avenge me of
this Becket? These words were spoken in the Hearing of some Gentlemen, who
thereupon guessing at the Kings mind, four of them presently went to
Canterbury, and finding the Archbishop in the Cathedral, there, they fell upon
him, and killed him upon the Stairs of the Altar, every one striking him over
the head with his Sword, and then made their escape. This Murder was charged
upon the King by the Popes Legate, and though the King swore that he was
neither aiding nor consenting to his death, yet he was forced to kiss the
Legates Knee, and submit to such Penance as he should appoint him; one part
whereof was, that he should absolutely submit to the Pope in all spiritual
matters. And it is likewise recorded, that King Henry coming out of France,
went to Canterbury, and as soon as he was in fight of Thomas Beckets Church, he
got off his Horse, and pulling off his Shoes and Stockins, he went barefoot o
Beckets Tomb, the ways being so sharp and stony that his feet bled as he passed
along; and when he came there, every Monk in the Cloister whipped the Kings Back
with a Rod; which shows (says the Historian) what slavery Kings and Princes
were at that time brought into, by the Popes Clergy. The same year the City of
Canterbury was almost burnt down, and Beckets Church was utterly consumed. This
Becket was afterward Canonized for a Saint; but a Popish Historian says of
him, That he was worthy death and damnation, for being so obstinate against
Gods Minister, his King.

IV. King John, the Son of Henry the Second, was likewise made sensible of the
danger of offending the Pope; for in the year 1205. the King being incensed
against the Clergy who possessed great Benefices, and yet neglected their
Charge, he endeavored to rectify this and some other great miscarriages about
Electing Bishops, and several other things: But the Pope fearing he would
entrench upon his privileges and gain, stirred Heaven and Earth against him,
Excommunicating and cursing him, giving his Kingdom to the French King, and
stirring up his own Nobility and people against him; so that the King being
compassed about with Enemies on every side, was forced to submit to the Pope,
promising to do whatever he should command him: Nay, the King took his Crown
off his head, and kneeling upon his knees, in the midst of all his Lords and
Barons he gave it to Pandulphus the Popes Legate, saying, Here I resign up the
Crown of the Realm of England to the hands of Pope Innocent the Third, and lay
my self wholly at his mercy and appointment. Pandulphus took the Crown from
King John, and kept it five days; and the King giving then all his Kingdoms to
the Pope, to be held in Farm from him and his Heirs for evermore, his Crown was
restored again, King John engaging to pay seven hundred Marks a year for
England, and three hundred for Ireland; half of it at Easter, and half at
Michaelmas, as Rent for the said Kingdoms. This King John was afterward
poisoned by a Monk, which was judged such a Meritorious Act, that the Murderer
had a Mass appointed to be said for his Soul for ever after, by his
Fellow-Monks.

V. Pope Celestine the Third, standing upon the Stairs of S. Peter's Church in
Rome, he there received an Oath of Henry the Sixth, Emperor of Germany, and
then had him into the Church, and anointed him, and sitting in his Pontifical
Chair, held the Crown of Gold between his feet, and the Emperor bowing down
his head to the Popes feet, received the Crown; the Empress likewise was
Crowned in the same manner: The Crown being thus put on, the Pope immediately
kicked it off the Emperor's Head with his foot to the ground, declaring
thereby, that if he pleased he could depose him again: Then the Cardinals took
up the Crown, and again put it on his Head.

VI. Nay, to such a height did the Popes at last arrive, that they governed all
things; Emperors and Princes have been forced to kneel and kiss their Toes;
nay, they asserted, that all Kings were Slaves, and in subjection to them; and
that all must be judged by the Pope; but he by no man.

Psalm 88.
LOrd, sit not still as deaf unto our Cries,
For lo! Our Enemies in Tumults rise,
Even those who thy Omnipotence deny,
And hate thy Name, advance their Priests on High;
Dark Councils take, and secretly contrive
Our slaughter, whom thy mercy keeps alive,
Come, say they; let us with incessant strokes,
Hew down this Nation like a Grove of Oaks,
Till they no longer be; and Israel dye,
Both in his Race, and Ruined Memory.
They all, in one Confederacy, have made,
A solemn League, supply d with foreign Aid.
Hence Idumeans who in Gomades stray,
And Shaggy Ishmaelites that live by prey,
The incestuous race, that bred are on the Lake,
Of salt Asphaltes, savage Thieves who take,
Their Name from servile Hagar; they who dwell,
In Geba; Ammonites who peace expel,
Oh! say they, let us these Israelites destroy,
And all the Cities of their God enjoy;
O! let them like a Wheel be worried round,
Like chaff which whirlwinds ravished from the Ground,
As Woods grown dry with Age, embraced with Fire,
Whose Flames above the singed Hills aspire,
So in the Tempest of thy wrath pursue,
And with thy Storms thy troubling Foes subdue;
O fill their Hearts with Grief, their Looks with shame,
Till they invoke thy late blaphemed Name,
Confound them with eternal Infamy.
That they through anguish of their Souls may dye:
That Men Jehovah's wonders may rehearse,
The Great Commander of the Universe.
eight panels representing various methods of execution and punishment Men's
Brains fried and eaten

Children torn in Pieces

Infants thrown to ye dogs and swine

Women Carried on Piks

Roasted alive

Some tied and slain

Hanged by ye Privitie

Burnt in a barn



A Brief and True Account of the Cruelties and Persecutions Committed by the
Papists, upon the Waldenses and Albingenses, and other Protestants in Piedmont,
Savoy, and the Valtoline, from the Year, 1160, To the Year, 1656.
When by the just Judgment of the Almighty, All the World wondered after the
Beast; and the Kings and Princes of Christendom, established the Authority of
the Pope and Church of Rome, appointing to slaughter and destruction such as
denied the horrid Blasphemies and Errors maintained by them; It occasioned many
good Christians to detest their Superstitions, as unknown to the Apostles, and
the Primitive Church: And the first we read of, was one Berengarius, who boldly
and faithfully published the True Religion contained in the Scripture, and
discovered the falseness of the Romish; He lived about the time of William the
Conqueror his coming into England, about which time his Followers being taken
notice of, as dissenting from many of the Common received Opinions of those
times, they were branded with the odious Name of Heretics.

About Twenty years after this one Peter Bruis was a famous Preacher among
them, who taught them publicly a long time at Toulouse in Savoy; In a short
time after they were grown to so great a multitude, that the Popes of Rome were
resolved, if possible, by any means to extirpate and destroy them, To which
end, they at first incited several of the most learned of their Party to write
against them, and warned diverse Princes to have a care of them, and to banish
them out of their Territories.

The first then that flung away the Spiritual Keys, and began valiantly to
brandish the bloody Sword of Persecution against them, was Pope Alexander the
third, who began therewith to hack, hew, and murder the poor Waldenses, so
named from Peter Waldo, or Waldo of Lions in France, who appeared very
courageous in opposing the many Corruptions of the Romish Church; as Holy Oil,
Consecrated Images, Popes Indulgences, Candles, Merits, Auricular Confession,
the Supremacy of the Pope, false Miracles, Purgatory, Praying for the Dead,
Prayers to Saints, extreme Unction, and many other Fopperies of the Popish
Communion: This Persecution of Waldo and his Followers (who were increased to a
very great number) began in France in the Year 1060. Waldo being compelled to
fly into the Mountains of France, among the Savage Inhabitants, to whom he
taught his Doctrine, others fled into Picardy, from whence they were called
Picards, several into Flanders and Alsatia, and thereby (for the safety of
their Lives) they spread their Doctrine into all places.

King Philip of France being incited by the Ecclesiastics, raised Arms against
them, and destroyed Three Hundred Gentlemen's Houses, and likewise several
Walled Towns: And those that fled into Flanders escaped little better, for they
were persued, and many of them for their Religion put to Death; And the Bishops
of Mayence and Strasburgh, raised great persecutions against those which fled
thither, there being Five and Thirty Citizens of Mayence burned in one Fire,
and Eighteen in another, who suffered Death with very great constancy: and at
Strasburgh, at the instance of the Bishop, Fourscore were likewise burnt for
professing the same Truth, and yet by the exhortations constancy, and patience
of these Martyrs, there were such multitudes who entertained their Doctrines,
that in a few Years after in the County of Passau and in Bohemia, there were
above Fourscore thousand persons that made profession of the same Faith. Some
of them likewise fled into England for shelter, but were more barbarously and
cruelly put to death at Oxford, by the Papists there, than ever any Christians
were before that time, for matters of Religion: and Three years after Pope
Alexander the Third, made a Decree in the Council of Tours in France, that
these Gospellers, and all their Favorers should be Excommunicated, and that
none of them should buy or sell, according as it was foretold in Revel. 13.17.

At Colen in Germany, Four Men, and Two young Women were discovered hid in a
Barn, and the Papists not being able to diswade them from the Truth, The Men
were all tied to the Stake to be burnt, but the Romanists pretending to pity
the young Women, persuaded them to recant, but they perceiving their design,
got out of the hands of those that held them, and voluntarily leapt into the
Fire, where they were burned with them: about this time a Proclamation was
published in Aragon, whereby it was made Treason to relieve these poor
Christians, or to suffer them to live in that Country, and liberty was given to
all people to abuse them at pleasure, without being punished for the same. But
these people still increasing, the Pope was resolved to suppress them by all
means possible, and therefore about the Year, 1201. He set up the Bloody
Inquisition, which with its Racks Tortures, Fire, and all manner of Cruelty,
has destroyed an innumerable company of Good and Holy Men. And in the same
Year a noble Knight called Eunandus, and one of the Waldenses, was burnt at
Paris: and the persecution still continuing, the people of Daulphine flying
from their barbarous Enemies, sheltred themselves in the Caves upon the
Mountains, but their cruel Adversaries having notice thereof, persued and
destroyed many of them, and the rest fled higher into the Mountains (which were
all covered with Snow) together with their Wives and Children, the Mothers
carrying some in their Arms, and others in Cradles, and the Night coming on,
and having no means to make a Fire for their tender Infants, they were so
benumbed with cold that in the morning above Fourscore of them were found dead
in their Cradles, and most of their Mothers died likewise: Many also were burnt
in the same Country of Dauphin, and the Fire of persecution raged through the
whole Land, so that there was scarce a Town or City in Piedmont, but many were
put to death therein, and at Turin one of them had his Bowels taken out of his
Belly, and put into a Basin, and was afterward cruelly Martyred, One Gerard
being at the Stake to be burnt, requested the Hangman to give him Two or Three
Stones, which he at first refused, thinking he would have thrown them at some
body, but afterward did, and Gerard taking them into his hands said. When I
shall have eaten up these Stones, then shall you see an end of our Religion,
for which you now put me to death, and then throwing them on the Ground, he
cheerfully died. These Countries being so hot with the Fire of Persecution,
many of these poor People fled into Calabria where they began to plant and
build Towns, as Saint Xist La Guard, and diverse others, where they continued
till the year, 1560. at which time they were most grievously persecuted by Pope
Pius the Fourth, and were forced to leave their Houses and Habitations, and to
fly into the Woods for the saving of their Lives but being there pursued by
order from the Viceroy of Naples, most of them were cruelly and barbarously
murdered by the Soldiers, and some flying into fortified places, were so
straightly besieged, that they died with Famine: And at the same time one Charlin
was rackt in so horrible a manner, that his Guts came out of his Belly: Another
was tormented upon the Rack Eight hours together, to force him to confess what
they pleased against himself and others, which yet he refused to do: Some were
stripped stark naked, and whipped to death with Rods of Iron, others were drawn
through the Streets, and burnt with Firebrands, some thrown down from an High
Tower, and some cut to pieces with sharp Knives. By order of the Inquisitor
Panza, Fourscore persons had their Throats cut, as Butchers do Sheep, and then
causing them to be divided into Four Quarters, he made their Limbs to be set
upon Stakes for the space of Thirty Miles as a bloody spectacle: A young Man
was thrown from an High Tower, because he would not confess himself to a
Priest, and the Vice Roy passing by at the same time, and hearing him implore
Gods Mercy not being quite dead. he kicked him on the Head and said Is the Dog
yet living, Take him and cast him to the Hogs. Threescore Women were so cruelly
rackt, that the Cords pierced their Arms and Legs to the Bones, and then being
cast into Prison all there dyed, except Nine of the handsomest, who being
delivered to the Fathers of the Inquisition were never heard of afterward: Many
more were delivered to the Secular Power to be burnt, and if any interceded for
them, they were presently put on the Rack as Favouters of Heretics. One of
their Ministers was famished in Prison, another was carried to Rome, and burnt,
the Pope and Cardinals being present at that pleasing spectacle, but the
Minister spoke so many things out of Gods word against them, that the Pope
gnashed his Teeth for Anger, and afterward promised the Marquess of Butiana to
make his Son a Cardinal, if he would clear Calabria of these Waldenses, which
was then no hard matter for the Inquisition, and the Vice Roy of Naples, did by
all manner of Cruelties destroy Man, Woman, and Child, so that in a short time,
they were utterly rooted out of that Country.

The Waldenses who fled out of Piedmont into Provence, increasing daily, and
their Habitations being near to Avignion (many times the Popes Seat) he soon
raised an horrid Persecution against them, but the greatest was in the Year,
1360. In the time of Lewis the Twelfth, wherein many suffered, which continued
for some time more and less furious to the Year, 1540. About which time the
Inhabitants of Merindol, Cabriers, Posin, and other places in Piedmont, were by
means of the Popes Agents cruelly Burned, Massacred, and Destroyed, The Towns
were fired and laid wast, and the Country round about made desolate; The poor
People were slain, the young Virgins ravished, and barbarously abused, Children
were pulled alive out of their Mothers Bellies, the Breasts of many cut off, so
that the Infants died of Famine: There were only Threescore and six weak men
left in the Town of Cabriers, who offered to deliver it up, so that they might
go to Geneva or Germany, but the Enemy entering, caused them all to be brought
into a Field and cut to pieces, the Soldiers striving who should show the best
Manhood in cutting off Legs, Arms, etc. The Women they put into a Barn with
their young children, and some great with Child, and then firing a great
quantity of Straw, they were barbarously burnt together; and some endeavoring
to escape through the flames, were knocked on the head by the bloody Papists;
many fled into Caves and Cellars, who being brought forth stark naked into the
Fields, were there slain: others being bound back to back were in sport run
through with one Sword. As soon as any were found, the Villains cried, Kill,
kill, destroying all they met with; so that above a thousand men, women and
children were slain in this place: some desired leave to depart to some other
place, but one Opede, a chief Commander amofig the Papists said, That he would
send them to dwell in Hell, among the Devils. At Costa, another Town, they
committed great slaughter, and many of the Inhabitants flying into an Orchard,
the Soldiers ravished diverse of the Women and Virgins, and abused them in so
filthy a manner for a day and a night, that the women with-child, and younger
Maidens, died immediately after Many more were the outrages committed by the
Soldiers in this Country, but the Tremendous Justice of God did not suffer
some of the most violent persecutors to go unpunished: For Opede, the Commander
of these Villains, was struck with a strange kind of bleeding in the lower
parts, that he was not able to make any Urin; so that his Guts rotted within
him, and Worms bred in his bowels, which continually gnawed him; and so he lay
raging and blaspheming, saying, that he felt a fire within him, which burnt him
from the Navel upwards: which was accompanied with a most filthy stink from his
lower parts: and in this miserable manner he ended his wretched life. There was
likewise one John de Roma, a Monk, who used horribly to torment these poor
Protestants: and among the rest, he would fill Boots with boiling Oil, and put
them upon their Legs over a soft fire. Thus he tormented many: but at last,
Francis the French King being informed of his Hellish cruelty, sent to the
Parliament of Provence to apprehend him, who condemn him: but he having notice
of it, fled to Arragon, where a while after he was robbed of all he had by his
own servants, and then fell into an horrible disease, unknown to the
Physicians, being intollerably tormented with pains all over his body, so that
he had not one minutes rest, and no creature was able to endure him, for the
intolerable stink which proceeded from him, nor he himself, for his body was
full of nasty sores and ulcers, which swarmed with Vermin, and rotted away from
the bones by piecemeal. In the midst of his torments, he would in a great rage
cry out. Oh! who will deliver me? who will rid me out of these intolerable
pains which I now suffer, for oppressing and tormenting those poor men?
endeavoring several times to kill himself, but had not power: and in this
horrible anguish and despair he fearfully died, no man being able to bury him,
for some time, by reason of the loathsome smell proceeding from him, till at
last a poor man with an Iron Hook dragged his Carcass into a Hole he had dug
for him.

During this Persecution, the Bishop of Aix, with some other Bishops, walking
with some of their Wenches through the Streets of Avignion, they saw a man
selling bawdy Pictures, Images, and Songs, which they presently bought up: but
going a little further, they found a man selling of French Bibles, at which
being extremely enraged, they asked him how he durst be so bold to sell such
Merchandise in that Town; the Bookseller answered, Is not the Holy Bible as
good as these goodly Pictures you have bought for the Gentlewomen? The Bishop
of Aix said, I renounce my part in Paradise, if this Fellow be not a Lutheran:
The Attendants cried out, a Lutheran, a Lutheran, to the fire with him, to the
fire with him: one giving him a blow with his Fist, others pulled him by the
Hair and Beard so that the poor man was all embrued in blood before he came to
Prison. The next day he was brought before the Judge, where by the instigation
of the Bishops he was burned the same day with two Bibles tied about his Neck,
one before, and another behind, where he made a most Christian end.

This long and bloody Persecution of these Waldenses lasted near five hundred
years in which time the Gospel spread into Bohemia, Austria, Germany, Flanders,
England, Poland, Italy, Spain, Dalmatia, Croatia, Solavonia, Salmatia,
Bulgaria, and in other places to which they were driven, where they were
tormented and persecuted according to the power and influence that the Pope and
his Agents had over the Princes and Governors of those Countries.

The Albingenses were the same with the Waldenses, professing the same
Doctrines and Principles, and differing only in name, their Country being
called Albi, the chief Preacher among them being one Arnold, from whom they
were sometimes called Arnoldists. Pope Alexander the Third began with them,
condemning them for Heretics; and Pope Innocent the Third raising a War
against them, calling it the Holy War, giving the same Pardons and Indulgences,
and promising Paradise to all that would fight against the Heretics, with the
same encouragement, as those which went to the Holy Land, against the Turks and
Sarazens. In this War he so thundered out Excommunications, and used Temporal
Arms against Reymond. Earl or Prince of Toulouse, that he was forced to submit;
and his Nobility were much astonished to see their Lord, not only divested of
his Possessions, but led to the Church to be reconciled to it, where the Popes
Legate commanded the Earl to strip himself stark naked, all but his Linen
Drawers; they then put a Rope about his Neck, and led him nine times round the
Grave of one Peter an Hermit, who was killed in that War, scourging him with
Rods all the while; of which the Earl complaining, the Legate told him, That he
must submit, if he would be reconciled to the Pope; yea, he must be thus
scourged before his Earls, Barons, Marquesses, Prelates, and all the people. He
made him likewise swear to be obedient to the Pope, and Church of Rome, all his
life, and to make irreconcilable War against the Albingenses.

The Legate then acts the part of a General, and besieges Bezier, and the
Albingenses desiring to come to Terms, the Legate would admit of nothing but
the renouncing of their Religion, and embracing Popery; which they absolutely
refused, upon those Conditions, saying That God was able to defend them; but if
he would please to honor them to die for his sake, they would rather displease
the Pope, than God Almighty. In a short time the City was taken by Storm, being
assaulted by above an hundred thousand Papists, the Enemy entering and slaying a
great multitude, killing all they m t without distinction, the Popes
Legate-bidding them kill all, both Catholics and Heretics, for the Lord
knows who are his: So that there were threescore thousand persons slain in
this City, the Priests and Friars going about the Streets in the mean time,
with Crosses and Banners, and singing Te Deum Laudamus: after which, they set
the whole City on fire, and burnt it to Ashes.

They marched next to a Town called Carcasson, which these bloody Villains (who
called themselves Holy Pilgrims) took by Storm likewise, killing, burning, and
destroying all before them, as they had done before at Beziers. They next
proceeded to the City of Carcasson, which was about two miles from the Town,
and was defended by the Earl of Pez^ers: when they offered to capitulate, the
Legate would grant no other Conditions, but that the Earl, and twelve more,
should come forth with their Baggage, but all the rest, both Men, Women, Maids
and Children, should come forth stark naked, without any covering, either of
Shirt or Smock, and humble themselves before him: but the Earl disdained such
unworthy Conditions, upon which the Legate assaulted the City; but they that
were within threw down Stones, Fire, Pitch. Brimstone, and Scalding Water from
the Walls, which so galled the Legates Soldiers, that the Earth was covered,
and the Ditch filled with their dead bodies

The Legate sinding Force would not avail, used Policy; and therefore, upon
pretense of Parley, he persuaded the Earl to come out of the City, with great
Oaths and Execrations for his safe return; but having him in possession, they
kept him Prisoner, and then instantly stormed the City, to the amazement of the
poor Citizens, who expected nothing less: but there being happily discovered a
Vault in the Town which went to a Castle some miles from thence, the Citizens
in the Evening began their Flight, with their Wives and Children, carrying
Victuals with them only for some few days: the next morning they arrived at the
Castle, and from thence dispersed themselves, some one way, some another,
leaving the City, and all therein to the fury and rage of the unholy Pilgrims.
They then surprised the Castle of Bezon, where they pulled out the Eyes, and
cut off the Noses of an hundred Albingenses, leaving only one with one Eye to
guide the rest to Calaret.

They took likewise the Castle of Menerly, defended by the Lord of Terms, whom
they flung into a filthy Prison till he died; his Wife, Sister, and Daughter,
who was a Virgin, and likewise diverse Noble Women, after they had in vain by
frowns and threats endeavored to draw them to Popery, were burnt in an huge
fire all together: And after that, they burnt an hundred and fourscore more in
another great fire, who embraced the flames with joy, giving God thanks that he
was pleased so to honor them, as to die for his Name. Simon Monford succeeded
the Legate in his Generalship, and at the taking of the Castle of Lavaur, all
the Soldiers were put to the Sword, except fourscore Gentlemen, whom that
cruel Earl caused to be hanged, and the Lord Almery on a Gibbet above all the
rest: the Lady his Sister was cast into a Ditch, and covered with Stones: the
rest of the people, who were about four hundred persons were forced into a
great fire made purposely for them, and so all burnt, except those that would
forsake their Religion, which were very few.

About this time there was one Reynard Lollard, a godly and learned man, who by
his preaching stirred up the English in Guiene to assist the Albingenses, which
they did accordingly, but this worthy man was afterward burnt in Germany: They
say he he foretold many things by Divine Revelation, which came to pass in a
short time. In the year 1213. near Muret, upon the Gavon, there was a Battle
between Simon Montford, and the King of Arra on, who assisted the Albingenses,
in which Fight the King of Arragon was slain and the Enemy reported, above two
Millions of Albingenses with him, which the Albingenses attributed to the too
great confidence of the King, who depended much upon his numbers, and was
feasting while his Enemies were in Council.

Friar Conradus of Marpurg, the Popes Inquisitor, made terrible havoc of all
that professed the Gospel, under the names of Heretics, whom he tried by
making them pass over red hot Irons laid at an unequal distance blindfold, and
those that were burnt were accounted Heretics, few escaping the hot Irons; so
that neither Noble, nor Ignoble, Clerks, Monks, Nuns, Burgesses. Citizens, nor
Country people, escaped the Flames, by means of this bloody Inquisitor. Prince
Lewis of France took the Town of Miramond, and therein destroyed five thousand
men, women and children of the Albingenses: And in the year 1234 many of them
being fled into France, the Pope caused a Crusado to be preached up against
them whereby a great Army of Pilgrims assembled together and were sent against
them by Pope Gregory, who slew the poor Protestants, with their Bishops and
Ministers burnt their houses, destroyed their Towns, and plundered and car ied
away their Goods: And about the same time, some who had retired into Germany.
Millain and other parts of Italy, were likewise burnt and destroyed: A while
after, four hundred and twenty of these Albingenses were burnt at Toulouse,

A great Persecution was raised against the Protestants of Albi in the year
1281. so that they were almost all extirpated, and rooted out, and forced to
fly to all parts for safety of their lives; and at the same time, by the Popes
Order, the Bones of several famous Ministers among them were dug up and
burnt, twenty or thirty years after they were buried. In the year 1315. the
Friars Inquisitors raised an hot Persecution against these Gospellers in
Pashaw, and burnt many of them, who died cheerfully and constantly in the
Faith; and one of them who was burnt at Vienna confessed, that there were
fourscore thousand of them in Bohemia and Austria at that time. In the year
1332. Lollard Walterus, a famous Preacher (from whom his Followers were called
Lollards) was taken and burnt at Collen: But notwithstanding all these horrid
Cruelties used by the Papists against these Saints and Servants of God, yet
they could never prevail to a total extirpation of them, but they still
increased and revived, and their Posterity profess the same Faith to this very
day.

In the year 1620, in a Country called the Valtoline, or the Grisons Country,
the Papists committed very great cruelties: those poor people had for a long
time enjoyed the freedom of their Religion; but about the time aforementioned,
when the Minister of a Town, called Tell, was preaching to his Congregation,
the bloody Papists rose in Arms and set upon them, beating and killing several
of them: and among the rest, there was an Honorable Lady who was exhorted to
change her Religion, if not for her own sake, yet out of pity to her young
Infant that she held in her Arms, which otherwise, together with her self,
should be immediately slain: But the Lady with an undaunted courage answered, I
have not departed out of Italy, my Native Country, nor forsaken all the Estate
that I had there, to renounce the Faith of my Lord Jesus Christ; No, I will
suffer a thousand deaths, if it be possible, rather than do it: And why in this
case should I have so much regard to my Infant, since God my Heavenly Father
spared not his own Son, my Lord Jesus, but delivered him up to death in love to
me, and such sinners as I am. And then giving her Child to one that stood by,
she said, Behold, my Child, the Lord God, who has care of the Birds of the
Air, is much more able to save this poor creature, although it should by you be
lest in these wild Mountains. Then unlacing her Gown, she opened her Breast,
saying, Here is the Body which you have power to kill; but my Soul, on which
you have no power to lay your hands, that I commend to my God. And then these
Bloodhounds presently slew her, and cut her to pieces: The Infant being a
lovely sweet Child they spared, and delivered to a Popish Nurse to be brought
up. These Villains carried diverse Women and Children to the tops of high
Mountains, and if they would not promise to go to Mass, they were thrown down
headlong, and torn to pieces.

One Dominico Berto, a young man of sixteen years of age, because he would not
turn Papist, was set upon an Ass, with his face to the Tail, and the Tail in
his hand for a Bridle, and with many scoffs and mocks was brought into the
Market place: there they cut off his Nose, Ears and Cheeks, and then burnt many
holes in diverse parts of his body with hot Irons; and thus they barbarously
continued to torment him till he died.

They likewise seized upon a Noble young Virgin, and carried her through the
Streets with all imaginable disgrace: They put a Miter of Paper upon her head,
besmeared her face with dirt, and busseted her on the Cheeks with their Fists,
and then bid her to call upon the Saints; but she smiling said, My trust and my
salvation is only in my Savior Jesus Christ, and upon him only will I rest; as
for the Virgin Mary, though see be blessed above all women, yet she is not
Omniscient, and therefore knows net our requests; yea, she her self has need
of the Merits of her own Son, without which she could not have been saved. But
they reviling and abusing her, she courageously said, I willingly endure all
this, as it becomes me to do, desiring no better usage, since the same was done
to my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and to his Apostles, and to thousands of
the holy Martyrs. Upon this they carried her away, and murdered her in the
Fields.

In one house they slew a man and his Wise; and there being a little Girl in
the Cradle of about three years old, of a very amiable countenance, the poor
Child seemed to smile upon them, whereupon one of these bloody Villains took
her by the Heels and dashed out her Brains. From thence these Wretches went to
a Town called Bruise, where they murdered many, by shooting some, drowning
others, burning others, and grinding their very bones to powder. Amongst
others, they found an ancient Woman of fourscore years old, whom they earnestly
persuaded to hear Mass, and that she would respect her age to whom with a
worthy resolution she answered, God forbid that I who now of a long time have
had one foot in the Grave should forsake my Lord Jesus Christ, who has so long
preserved me in the knowledge and profession of his truth, and that I should
now put my trust in Creatures and should receive the Traditions of men, instead
of the holy Word of God. Upon these words they immediately slew her.

The sufferings of the poor Protestants in Piedmont continued still; they are
under the Government of the Duke of Savoy, and are the Offspring of the old
Waldenses which inhabited there, and have ever since professed the same
Religion; they have Evangelical Churches in the several Valleys of Angrognea,
Bobio, Villaro, Valguicharda, Roras, Tagliacetto, and diverse others; in all
which, most of their Inhabitants are Protestants, and had been long indulged in
their Religion by the Princes of Savoy, to whom they were Subjects: but in the
year 1565. a cruel Edict was published, that all such as would not comply with
the Church of Rome, and go to Mass, should within ten days be banished from
their Country, and Habitation; but by the Intercession of the French King, and
the Elector Palatine of the Rhine, this Edict was recalled, and they continued
quiet till the year 1655. wherein that late horrible Massacre was committed
upon them for the sake of their Religion.

The Papists had all along by many cunning Plots and contrivances endeavored
their subversion, by using all Arts to stir them up to Rebellion, and by
planting Jesuits Colleges among them, which like Goads in their sides still
annoyed them, and proved a great trouble and affliction to them; for they often
procured some cruel and harsh Edict, or Proclamation, by their Complaints and
Lies which they raised in the Duke of Savoys Court against them: As in the year
1602. they got an Edict for banishing all private and public Protestant
Schoolmasters, as Enemies to the Government, and disturbers of the Peace: and
likewise another Edict 1622. that no Strangers, either Ministers or others,
should be entertained among them. In 1634. an Edict came out, that all the
Protestants of Compiglione should be banished; and in 1654. the same was done
against those of Martino, and Perosa. These Missionary Fathers behaved
themselves among them more cruelly than Turks or Barbarians. But at last
resolving utterly to root out the Protestants from among them, and thoroughly to
perform the will of their Unholy Father the Pope, they procured an Order in the
midst of Winter, that is January 25. 1655. (which is very sharp in those
Countries) for the banishing of all Protestants out of the Valleys of Lucerna,
Lucernetta, and seven other places, within three days after publication, unless
they would turn Roman Catholics; and this extended to all in general, none
being excepted, of what Rank, Degree, or Condition soever they were. And thus
these poor Creatures were forced in compliance with this cruel Edict, to fly
for the security of their Lives and Consciences in the depth of the Snow, and
when all the Valleys were covered with water, there being among them some Women
with-child, others newly delivered, young children crying and lamenting, old
women, and decrepit men, leaning on their Staves, all dragged over the Ice,
through Rain, Snow, Waters, and a thousand inconveniences and hardships; so
that it would have grieved the heart of a Barbarian, to have seen them leaving
their Goods behind them, or selling them for little to the Papists, who took no
pity of their bitter tears, sighing, ringing of hands, beating of Breasts,
mourning, complaining, and lamenting: but all these calamities were but as the
bleating of Sheep, or the lowing of Oxen to Popish ears, and they rather
rejoiced than commiserated the condition of these poor Wretches: They were no
sooner gone, but their houses were pillaged, rifled, and ransackt of all that
was left, and then pulled to the ground; yea, the Trees were cut down, and such
havoc and devastation made, as all was turned into a Wilderness.

This cruel Edict was put in execution by one Gustaldo, and others; but this
was not all, the Design was for the utter extirpating and roofing out
Heretics, as they called these Religious Souls: it would not satisfy them to
have banished these few, and the poor Protestants could have no redress at
Court, for all their humble Petitions and Remonstrances could not be heard. The
Papists had yet more wicked and bloody Designs against them; and to that
purpose, they employed some Romish Agents who had great influence over the Duke
and Duchess of Savoy.

It is next to impossible to reckon up the variety of Cruelties and Murders
committed upon these poor Innocent Souls; we shall therefore only give a brief
Abstract of some remarkable passages that happened therein

Upon the seventeenth of April, 1655. whilst the Protestant Deputies were
detained at Turin, and delayed with hopes of redress, some Soldiers were sent
on purpose to fall unexpectedly upon the Protestants, who peaceably attended
the issue of their Petitions, which caused some bustle; for the poor people
being prompted by the Law of Nature stood upon their defense and the Papists
lost fifty men, the Protestants only two. Wednesday April 22. the Marquess of
Pianessa, the Popish General, came to the Valley of Lucerna, and promised them
there should be no violence offered to them, provided they would but quarter a
few Soldiers as a token of their obedience, which the well-meaning people
consented to; but no sooner were these Troops entered, but they put all to Fire
and Sword, slaying all they met with that had but the likeness of mankind, and
that in the most barbarous manner they could possibly devise.

There joined immediately to this Army a great number of Outlaws, Prisoners,
and other Offenders, who thought to have saved their Souls, and filled their
Purses by killing Heretics: Six Regiments of French, besides Irish, likewise
helped them in this good work the Country being promised to the Irish when
cleared of Protestants. With these, and several other Troops of Highway-men and
Vagabonds, by the License of their General, and the encouragement of Popish
Priests and Monks, the most unheard of Villainies were committed upon the poor
Protestants: So that there was nothing to be seen through the Protestant
Valleys but Churches burning, Towns smoking, Houses flaming, Men, Women and
Children massacred and murdered; nothing to be heard, but the confused cries of
people flying, the piercing groans of others dying, and the horrid shrieks of
others that were tormented: and indeed so dreadful was their usage, that it is
scarce to be expressed. In one place they most cruelly tormented an hundred and
fifty Women and Children, and afterward chopped off the Heads of some, and
dashed out the Brains of others against the Rocks; they took multitudes of
Prisoners, and such of them who were fifteen years of age and upwards, if they
refused to go to Mass, some of them were hanged up, others had their feet
nailed to Trees, with their Heads hanging down, all which they constantly
endured. A Franciscan Friar, and another Priest, set fire to all the Churches
and Houses at S. Giovanni, La Toure, and other places, so that they left not
one standing.

In these Desolations the Mother was bereaved of her sweet Child, the Husband
of his dear Wife, those which were richest among them were forced to beg their
bread; yea, they lay weltring in their own blood, and the pretense for all
those bloody Massacres and Cruelties was, that they were Rebels to their
Princes Commands, in not performing an absolute impossibility, by immediately
departing from their Habitations in so short a time; and likewise for their
frequent Petitioning to the Duke to take pity upon them.

The truth is, the Cruelties which were executed would exceed the belief of
man, but that they are so fully proved by the Attestations of Eyewitnesses, by
the woeful cries of so many poor desolate Wretches who have been miserably
robbed and despoiled of their Relations, Friends Lands and Houses: yea one of
the chief Commanders of their own Army that acted these cruelties, made a
formal Oath of the reality thereof, and Signed it with his own hand before two
sufficient Witnesses, and likewise the voluntary confession of one of the
Soldiers who told some of his Fellows, that during the heat of the Massacre,
he had diverse times surfeited with eating the boiled Brains of Protestants.

The barbarous cruelties following, which were exercised upon those poor
people, are likewise attested by diverse Persons of Honor and Integrity, who
were for the most part eye or ear-witnesses of the same.

One Sarah Vi^ues, about threescore years of age, was commanded to say her
prayers, and because she refused to say Ave Maria, they ripped her up alive, by
putting a Sickle into her privy parts, and so slit up her Belly; after which
they dragged her about, and at last cut off her Head.

Other Women had their Breasts, Noses, Privities and Hands cut off, and so left
to perish miserably; another they stab d in the soles of his feet, then cut off
his Privities and fried them, giving them their Comrades to eat as a delicate
Dish; then they seared his Wounds with flaming Candles, cut off his Ears, and
tore off his Nails with burning Pincers, to make him renounce his Religion; but
he still continuing constant, they tied one of his Legs to a Mule, and so
dragged him about the Streets till he was almost dead: and after all this, they
bound a Cord about his Head, and twisted it with a Stick till his eyes and
brains burst out, and then cast his body into a River.

One Peter Simond of Angrogna they bound hand and foot, and then flung him down
a dreadful Rock, or Precipice; but he happened in his fall to hang upon the
stump of an old Tree, where he continued alive several days in a miserable
languishing condition before he died, not being able to help himself, and the
Precipice being so high, that no other could come at him.

They cut the body of an old man of ninety years of age into small pieces, and
then cut off his head. Others had their bodies torn and cut in pieces, and
their limbs strowed in the highways, and hung upon Hedges. An old Woman had
her Hands and Nose cut off, and so was left alive. The body of another Woman
was found in a Cave with all the flesh sliced from the bones, and chopped like
minced meat. These bloody Papists took many little Children, and tender
Infants, and threw them down the sleep Rocks, whereby they were dashed to
pieces.

They took a Gentleman's Daughter, and put a long Stake into her body, and then
carried her upon their shoulders, till at last being weary, they stuck the
Stake into the ground and so left her as a miserable Spectacle. Andrea Michalin
being taken Prisoner, made his escape strangely, having first seen three of his
own Children torn limb from limb, and the fourth and youngest had its brains
beaten out against the Rocks. They woefully tormented others, by fleying off
their skins alive in long slices, of which they made Points.

The Daughter of one Peter Fontana, a beautiful Girl of about ten years of age,
being surprised by some of these lecherous Bruits, because they could not
ravish her in an ordinary way, they so inhumanely abused her, that they left
her for dead. The Daughter of one Moses Long they spitted upon a Pike, and
roasted her alive, with a fire made upon a broad stone. One Jacob Michelino
they took, and binding his hands to his Privities, hanged him upon a gate, and
there left him in exquisite torments in that shameful manner, as they like wise
did by many others in the same kind. Four Brothers, and a man and his Wife, all
at one time had their mouths crammed full of Gunpowder, and so being fired,
their heads were torn to pieces.

The Schoolmaster of Roras being stripped naked, after they had torn off his
Nails with Pincers, and made a thousand holes in his hands with their Daggers,
they dragged him through the Town of Lucerna, and at every turn, one Soldier
cut off a Collop of his flesh from one side, and another from another, crying,
What say thou, will thou go to Mass, thou Dog? To which with admirable
constancy he answered, Much rather death than the Mass, dispatch me quickly for
the love of God. At last they cut off his head, and flung him into the River.

One Giovanni, with his Wife and Child, were thrown down from a very high Rock,
the Mother holding the Child in her arms, and three days after they were found
dead, only the Child was alive, and clasped so fast in the dead Mothers arms,
that they could hardly get it out. They took another at the same place, and put
out his Eyes, and then cut off his Privities, and thrusting them in his mouth,
exposed him some time as a miserable Spectacle, and he being yet alive, they
flead off his skin, and hung it in the Windows of four principal houses in
Lucerna, after they had divided it into four pieces. They took out the brains
of Daniel Cardon, and frying them in a Pan, eat them up like Canibals, and then
cut open his breast also, that they might eat his Heart, but were frighted by
some Protestant Troops that were marching that way. They burned four Women of
between eighty and ninety years old alive; they cut diverse to pieces, and gave
their flesh to Dogs. In another place, having taken eleven Protestants, they
heated a Furnace, and forced them to throw one another into it, till it came to
the last man, whom they threw in themselves.

They stabbed some with impoysoned Knives in the legs and feet, and so left
them in torment, till they died. One Gros, a Ministers Son, being taken by
them, they cut off his flesh in small Gobbets while he was alive, and in the
presence of his Wise and Children, whom they murdered likewise before his eyes.
A Woman with seven Children were all barbarously murdered in their Beds: One
Daniel Rambout, because he refused to say Jesu Maria, or pray to the Virgin
Mary, they first cut off one finger, then another, till they had cut them all
off; then they cut off his hands and arms, till after this manner they had
cruelly mangled him to death: Others they shut up between two Stone-walls and
starved them to death. And to conclude, there was no manner of death no kind of
cruelty or torment, that these Firstborn of Hell could invent or devise, but
they were exercised with the utmost severity upon the poor miserable
Protestants; and it would be almost endless, to give a particular account of
all that we murdered, drowned, burnt, shot, starved, smothered, knocked on the
head, and cut in pieces by these barbarous Papists.

These horrid and inhumane practices made the rest of the Protestants fly to
their Arms in the natural defense of themselves, and their Families, against
the rage and fury of Lions, Tigers, and Bears, in the shapes of men: But those
that were so brisk at massacring and murdering such as did not resist them,
were mere Cowards at fighting, and the Protestants prevailed against them with
small numbers, and defended themselves against their Cruelty.

But at last by the Mediation of the Switzers, Hollanders, and other Protestant
Princes, and especially the English, who contributed above thirty thousand
pound to the relief of their wants and miseries, the breach was made up; but
yet so made, that the poor remaining Protestants live under the Tyranny of
their Popish Taskmasters, being forbid all manner of Traffic, wronged of
their Estates and Goods, their Ministers banished, their Virgins ravished, the
women affronted, the men beaten and abused, and the Valleys are become like
Dungeons, in which they are kept as Slaves, and secured by strong Forts and
Garrisons of Papists; so that they are even dying whilst they live, and have
cause to cry out, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and
avenge our blood, etc. Rev. 6.10.

eight panels representing various methods of execution and punishment (...)

(...)

Melted Lead poured on their heads

Killed in a Church

Men's heads cut of with Scythes.

Some Heads of Men burst with Gunpouder

A woman and her 2 Children murdered

Some flayed alive



The Persecutions and Cruelties of the Papists upon the Protestants in Bohemia,
Germany, Poland, and Lithuania.
THe Persecutions of the Papists against the Bohemians began very early, even
about 9^7 years after the death of our blessed Savior: Pope Hildebrand
(otherwise called Hell-brand) was the first that fell upon them, and afterward
Pope Celestine; and Persecution continued upon them for many years, and John
Huss, and Jerome of Prague, were burnt in defense of the Gospel at Constance,
notwithstanding they had the Public Faith of the Empire of Germany given them
for their security.

At a Town called Cuttenburgh there are many deep Metal Mines, into one of
which, in the year 1420. the Papists threw one thousand and seven hundred
persons at one time, for their Religion; into another, one thousand thirty
eight; and into a third, a thousand three hundred and thirty four persons.

In the year 1421. one Pichel, a chief Magistrate of the City Litomeritia,
having taken twenty four of the chief Citizens, and among them his Son-in-law;
put them in an high Tower, and being there almost famished, they were at last
brought out, and condemned to be drowned, their Wives, Children and Friends
following them to execution with cries and tears; yea, the Magistrates own
Daughter came with prayers and tears to her Father, beseeching him to spare her
Husband; but he like a hard-hearted wretch only said, Cannot you have a better
Husband than this? To whom, seeing his cruelty, she answered, You shall never
marry me to any but this: And so going along with them, when she saw her
Husband thrown into the River, she leapt in after him, and embracing him,
endeavored to save his life; but being unable to do it, they both perished
together, and the next day she was found with him fast in her Arms, and they
were both buried in one Grave.

A while after a Minister, four men, and four Boys, were all burnt together in
one fire at Prague, because they received the Sacrament in both kinds: and
indeed many and almost innumerable were the murders, torments, and inhumane
barbarities committed both publicly and privately on these poor Christians.

About the year 1523. Martin Luther began to shine as a great light in Germany,
and his Doctrine soon overspread Bohemia, and all the parts adjoining; which so
enraged the Pope and his Clergy that they continually raised very violent
persecutions against them, wherein multitudes of good Christians lost their
lives by means of Ferdinand the First, and Charles the Fifth, Emperors of
Germany. There were no less than two hundred Ministers banished out of Bohemia
at one time, and the Lord of Schanow, because he was a Lutheran, was accused of
a Conspiracy, and laid upon the Rack; but he courageously cut out his own
Tongue, and being demanded the reason of it, he wrote, That it was lest the
torments of the Rack should make him speak falsely against himself, or others.

In the year 1617. Ferdinand the Second was obtruded upon the Bohemians, who
joining with the Papists, raised up a very terrible Persecution against the
Protestants, which was the cause of the Electing of Frederick, Prince Palatine
of the Rhine, to be King of Bohemia, upon which there followed those cruel Wars
and troubles in that Country, wherein many godly Ministers, and other pious,
holy, and good men, suffered such barbarities and inhumanities from the Popish
Soldiers, that the Ears of a Christian cannot hear, nor his Tongue relate
them, without the greatest abhorrency and indignation: for some of them were
stoned to death, others hanged upon a Beam, and with a soft fire made under
them were roasted to death, others were cut piecemeal: One Minister they laid
on his back, and ramming his mouth full of Gunpowder, set fire to it, and blew
his head all to pieces: Another they hanged up by the Privy Members, being
seventy years old, and burnt his own Books under him, and at last shot him to
death, after he had endured all manner of torment and pain.

In the year 1621. all the Ministers were banished out of the Kingdom of
Bohemia, and all the Provinces thereunto belonging, never more to return; and
it was made death to harbor or conceal any of them. About the same time twenty
one Ministers were banished from Cuttenburg: A Popish Captain caused a
Ministers hand first to be stricken off, and then his head, his bowels to be
taken out, and wrapped in his shirt, and his four quarters to be set upon four
Stakes, and his head on another. At the same time likewise fifty of the
Nobility were condemned, some to death, some to banishment, and others to
perpetual imprisonment; twenty seven were executed, who all died with great
constancy of mind, and fervency of spirit, sealing the Protestant Cause with
their blood, the heads and right hands of some of them were hung upon the Tower
of the Bridge, but when the Valiant Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, came
into Germany, their heads and hands were by his Order taken down and solemnly
buried.

Not long after there was an Edict published in Bohemia for the banishing of
all Protestants in general, and that their Children should be taken from them
that they might be brought up in the Popish Religion. Another Edict was
published, that all Protestant Women who had married Popish Husbands, should be
banished and removed away from them, unless they would turn Papists, and
likewise that no Papists should have any Commerce with Protestants.

And upon this there followed a cruel Persecution, so that there was scarce a
City, Town, or Village in the whole Country, but the poor Protestants suffered
very great torments and barbarities. In one City they slew the Mayor, together
with sixteen hundred men, women, and children, and suffered their bodies to lie
unburied several days in the dirt and mire, and the remainders of the Citizens
they cast into Prisons, where they lay in a miserable condition: Bibles, and
all manner of Religious Books were prohibited, and likewise Marriages, Burial,
and Baptism, were denied to all that would not turn Papists.

Some Protestants were thrust into Dungeons and Vaults full of Snakes, Toads,
and other filthy Vermin; others were put into places full of Iron Spikes, so
that they could neither sit nor stand; others were laid upon narrow Beams over
deep waters, that if they did but stir their bodies, they were in danger to be
drowned. They put Gags into the mouths of some, and then thrust their Host or
Wafer Cake down their Throats: others were beaten on the Calves of their Legs,
so that they could not stand nor go, but were forced to fall down on their
knees, that they might adore their Host. And thus briefly of the multitude of
cruelties committed by the Papists on the Protestants in Bohemia, the whole
whereof would not be contained in a large Volume.

The next Theater where we may behold these bloody Papists acting their
Tragedies is GERMANY, which was miserably torn and rent to pieces by their
cruelties, they endeavoring by all manner of severity to have extinguished the
light of the Gospel, which was discovered by Martin Luther, and others, who
were stirred up of God to expose the corruptions and superstitions of the
Romish Church: whereupon in the year 1523. the Pope excited the Emperor
Charles the Fifth to destroy all the Protestants as Heretics, and allowed him
two hundred thousand Crowns toward the raising of Soldiers to that purpose,
the Pope likewise further engaging to raise twelve thousand Foot, and six
hundred Horse, at his own charge, for carrying on the work: and thus he began
with the Sword, that he might end with the Faggot.

The Duke of Saxony, and the Lansgrave of Hessen, stand up for the Protestants,
and are taken Prisoners, in the year 1547. And where ever the Papists got the
better, all sorts of cruelties, murders, racks, tortures, fire and faggots
followed upon the Protestants, so that all Germany was as it were in a flame
and combustion at once, all places being in a lamentable condition, some
flying, and others suffering death on every side for their Conscience and
Religion.

At a Town called Meldorp, they took a godly Minister, named Sutphen out of his
Bed, and forced him to go miles on foot in Frost and Snow upon the Ice,
barefooted and bare-legg'd, beating, cutting, and flashing him, and pricking
him forward with their Halberts, and at last they barbarously roasted him to
death. Many were drowned at Vienna, and put to several sorts of death.

Ladies and Gentlewomen were yoakt together like Beasts and so were turned out
into the Woods, where they were ravished and abused, and then had their Hair
and Ears cut off, and disfigured. In Pomeren they forced the people to eat
their own Excrements, and if they refused them, they thrust them down their
Throats till they were choked: They crammed the secret parts of several women
with Gunpowder, and so setting fire to it, most barbarously tore their Bellies
and Wombs.

Diverse were hung up by the privy parts; they plained the faces of others with
Chisels; others they caused to draw on Boots filled with scalding Oil, and so
roasted their legs over the fire: some men they gelt in the presence of their
wives and children: others had their bodies hung up by Cords, and by tying
great weights to their limbs, all the joints of their body were put out of
joint; some had Gags put in their mouths, and had stinking water and piss
powered down their Throats through a Tunnel till their bellies swelled like a
Tun, whereby they died in most cruel torment: They sawed off the legs of some
alive, and one Minister they bound upon a Table, and placing a great Cat upon
his belly, so provoked the Cat, that she scratcht his guts out of his belly
with her Teeth and Nails, till he miserably died.

At Magdenbur, they ravished the Wife and Daughter of a famous Minister before
his face, and then violently snatched a sucking Infant from its Mothers breast,
and stuck it on the top of a Lance; and when they had tormented his Eyes and
Heart with these horrid Spectacles, they brought the Minister into the Street,
and burnt him with his own Books.

Yea, such was their abominable filthiness in Pomeren, that they ravished the
fairest Virgins before their Parents faces, forcing them to sing Psalms the
while: one beautiful young woman they ravished, and then cut to pieces, hanging
up her quarters in the Church: Girls of ten years old, and under, they ravished
and abused, till they killed them; nay, so monstrous beastly were they, that
they committed filthiness with the dead Corpse of those women whom they had
murdered. At Basil and Friburg they did the like, neither pitying old nor
young, men, women, nor innocent Babes, whom sometimes they most barbarously
used to eat, even when other meat might be had, yea such inhumane cruelty they
used, that in many places they left none remaining alive to relate the
sufferings of those that were murdered.

Thus these Massacres and bloody murders defiled the whole Land, and Germany
groaned under the oppression, till the peace of Munster and Osnaburg in the
year 1648. which put a stop to this cruel Persecution, the Papists being
compelled thereto, by Gods bringing in the King of Sweden, who overran Germany
in a short time, and thereby revived the Protestant Cause, which was almost
overrun and destroyed by so many thousand violences and miseries, as it had
lain under for many years.

These bloody Tyrants vented their rage and fury not only in Germany, but also
in Hungary, and other Countries, for they committed the same Villainies in all
places where they had power, the Ministers were generally banished, and put to
death, and the same Picture of their cruelties which has been represented to
you in Germany, was acted over again in this Kingdom, which we have not room to
insert, only a new sort of death was invented there; they tied Hens Geese,
Ducks and Hares to the naked body of a worthy Minister in that Country, and
then set the Dogs upon him, who tore and rent his flesh till he died.

You have beheld many sad and doleful Spectacles, (and Reader, if thou art a
Christian, thy heart must almost bleed at the relation of them) we will
therefore Epitomize the bloody cruelties of the Papists in POLAND.

All the same things, or worse if it be possible, which we have related to be
done in other places, were likewise acted in Poland; many thousand Protestants,
and good Christians have been destroyed in that Kingdom, and especially at
Karmin, Dumbuick, Shochy, Carienzin, and Lesna, all which Cities and Towns were
destroyed and burnt to the ground for the cause of Religion.

The City of Lesna was one of the most ancient and flourishing Cities in all
the Kingdom of Poland, which was wholly laid in ashes, being three whole days
in flames err it was consumed, in which there perished many hundred
Protestants, besides inestimable wealth and treasure, no man resisting or
opposing the fire: Here they pulled off the Noses of some, and put out the eyes
of others, and cut off the tongues, hands, and feet of diverse, giving quarter
to none, but killing and destroying all that came in their way. They cut off
the hands of a pious Matron of Lesna, and then murdered three of her Children
before her face, cutting off their heads, and laying one at each breast, and
the other by her side. Another woman having her hands and feet cut off, and her
tongue cut out, they sowed up in a Sack, and so left her for two days in which
she lived, making a most miserable lamentation.

In the Lower Poland a multitude suffered, whole Families were butchered, and
men and women, young and old, murdered without distinction. And in the year
1654. there was an horrible slaughter amongst them, the Papists putting to
death all the Protestants they could meet with to most exquisite tortures: One
Mr. Samuel Cardus, a Minister, they used with extreme cruelties, first putting
out his eyes, and leading him about as a miserable Spectacle; then they pulled
off his fingers with Pincers, and powered melted Lead down his throat, and while
he was yet half alive, they put his Neck between two folding doors, and so
violently severed his head from his body.

They used the Minister of Dembuick, and another Minister, very barbarously;
for after they had several ways tormented them, they cut their throats with a
Razor, and while they were breathing, flung them into a Pit, and covered them
with filth and dung.

The same Cruelties the Barbarous and bloody Papists acted against the
Protestants in LITHUANIA, in the year 1648. slaughtering all that were not
Roman Catholics, without distinction of Age or Sex. Here many had their skins
flead off while they were alive, others their hands and feet cut off, some
their bowels taken out alive, others had their Shinbones bored through; they
powered melted Lead into the wounds of some whom they had cut in the head, and
other parts of their bodies: some had their eyes pulled out, and those that
were hanged up in all places were such a multitude, that they are hard to be
numbered, It was counted a great mercy and kindness to be shot, beheaded, or
killed outright, without any other torment.

The Wives and Daughters of the Protestants were every where ravished, their
Houses and Goods burnt and destroyed, all their Country and their Churches laid
wast, so that there was nothing to be seen in every place but Murders and
Massacres, and the blood of the poor suffering Protestants ran like Streams
through the Streets of Towns and Cities, and those that were left alive, and
escaped the slaughter, were banished their Country for ever.

The Ministers were chiefly aimed at, and always cruelly tormented, among the
rest one Adrian Chilmiskie, (who was famous for his great Piety and Learning,
and likewise for his Reverend Age) was by these barbarous wretches roasted
alive, and this they did leisurely, with a few Chips and Straw, that he might
be the longer in torment. In another place above forty suffered death by
several sorts of tortures: Near Vilna, the chiefest City in Lithuania, one
Smolskie, and his Son, both Ministers, had their Heads cruelly sawed off with a
Sickle. Another Minister had his flesh sliced off by piecemeal, till he
died-And to conclude this Field of Blood, there were no less than fifteen
hundred poor Protestants, Ministers as well as others, who were bound to Stakes
on the tops of Mountains in the Winter, and there miserably starved to death
with hunger and cold. In a word, no Age nor History can parallel all the
several tortures and miserable deaths which these poor Protestants suffered
from the hands of bloody Papists, for no other Crime but professing and
asserting the Truth and Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Psalm 74.
Lord why have thou abandoned,
O why! for ever shall thine Ire
Consume, like a devouring Fire,
The Sheep, within thy Pastures fed?
Come, O! come quickly and Survey
What Spoil the Barbarous Foe has made,
Lo! all in heaps of Ruin laid:
Thy Temple their accursed Prey.
Like Lions with Sharp Famine whet,
They in the Sanctuary roar
All Purple in thy Peoples gore;
And there their Conquering Ensigns set.
It was esteemed a great renown
With Ax to square the Mountain Oaks,
Now they demolish with their strokes,
And hew the Carved Fabric down.
Who lo! with all-infolding Flame
The Beauty of the Earth devour;
Profanely Prostrate on the Floor
That Temple sacred to thy Name.
Now said they, with a sudden hand,
We Will give a General end to all;
By Fire, thy Holy Structures fall,
Through this depopulated Land.
Ah! how long shall our Enemies
Triumph and glory in our shame?
How long shall they blaspheme thy Name
Great God, and thy slow Wrath despise?
Thy hand out of thy bosom draw,
Nor longer thy revenge withold?
Our God thou art our King, The Old
Amazed world thy wonders saw.
eight panels representing various methods of execution and punishment Hanged
in the Water

Drawn up with a puller

Brained on an Anvil,

Children, cut asunder

A Famine in Rochel

Adm: of France murdered

Massacre of Paris

Broken on a Cross



The Persecutions and Cruelties of the Papists upon the Protestants in France;
with an Account of the Bloody Massacre at Paris.
ABout the year 1209. There were diverse Learned men in France, the Disciples of
our Almericus at Paris, who being taken notice of, to hold other Opinions then
those commonly heard of at that time; Six of them were brought upon
Examination, who freely declared, that they did believe, That God was no
otherwise present in the Sacramental Bread, than in any other Bread; That it
was Idolatry to build Altars to Saints, or offer incense to their Images: That
it was rediculous to kiss or Worship Relics. They said, that the Pope was
Antichrist, and Rome, was Babylon. These being counted horrible Errors in that
dark time of superstition, they were persuaded to recant; and upon their
refusal so to do, were condemned and burnt at Paris; And the bones of their
Master Almericus, which had been buried in the Churchyard, were dig'd up, and
buried in the Fields.

In the year 1524, One John Clark set up a Bill on the Church door, against the
Popes Pardons, and called him Antichrist; for which being apprehended, he was
ordered to be whipped several days, and then burned in the forehead; His Mother
a Religious Woman, standing by, encouraged him, saying with a loud voice,
Blessed be Christ, and welcome be these marks for his sake. After this he went
to Mitz; and there being some Images without the City which the People used to
worship once a year, the Evening before John Clark abhorring their Idolatry,
went and brake down all their Idols; the next morning when the Clergy and
People came to their Worship, they found their Image lie all broken on the
Ground, upon which there began a great Tumult, and John Clark was suspected and
taken; who presently confessed the Fact, and gave Reasons for his so doing; for
which he was condemned to a most cruel death, His Right hand was first cut off,
then his Nose was violently pulled off, and after that his Arms and Breasts
with sharp Pincers all which he sustained with admirable Patience, uttering all
the while the words of the 115 Psalm. Their Idols are Silver and Gold, the work
of men's hands. Lastly, he was thrown into the Fire, and burnt to Ashes.

A while after a great number of Protestants at Paris, Melda, Linosin, and
diverse other Cities and Towns in France were burnt, rackt, whipped; beaten, and
otherways tormented to death. At Melda one was burnt for saying That the Mass
was a plain denial of the death and passion of Christ. He often meditated on
the word of Christ: He that denies me before men, him will I also deny before
my Father. He was burned in a slow Fire and endured much torment.

One Stephen Brame, being condemned to be burned for the Constant Profession of
his Faith, when the Fire was kindled, a great wind drove away the Flame from
him, so that he stood for an hours space instructing and exhorting the People:
They then brought Oil Vessels, and more Faggots, yet still was the flame driven
from him, whereupon the Hangman struck him on the head with a staff, to whom he
said, I am condemned to be burned, and do you strike me with Staves like a Dog;
after which the Hangman run him through the Belly with a Pike, and then threw
him in the Fire, and scattered his Ashes in the wind.

Four Protestants were condemned at Roan and were carried to the Stake in a
Dung Cart, at which they rejoiced saying, Blessed be God we are reputed as the
Excrements of this World, but yet our death is a sweet savor unto God.

Aymond de Lavoy, a Godly Minister was burnt at Burdeux; and likewise one
Vercote another Minister, who was imprisoned in such a narrow place, that he
could neither stand nor lie down, in which they kept him seven weeks, whereas
before no other Malefactor could endure that Torment above fifteen days without
dying, or growing mad, afterward they cut off his Tongue, and lastly they were
so merciful to execute him.

One Thomas a young man of Eighteen years old coming from Geneva to Paris,
rebuked one for swearing, whereupon he was apprehended for a Lutheran and
carried before the Inquisition, who committed him to Prison, and rackt him so
cruelly to confess his Companions, that one of the bloody Inquisitors turned
back his head and wept, yea the Hangman self was weary; He was then carried to
be burned and was let down into the Fire by a Pully, and afterward pulled up
again, and asked if he would yet turn, To whom he said, He was in his way to
God and desired them to let him go, and so he quietly slept in the Lord.

The Duke of Guise a great Instrument of Persecution, committed many Barbarous
Cruelties upon the Protestants, and among the rest at a place called Vossy, he
murd ed several Hundreds of Men, Women and Children who were assembled to hear
a Sermon, mangling their Limbs, and strewing them about the Seats and Galleries
of the Church, and at another Town called Seulis, some were beheaded, some
whipped, some beaten, others sent to the Gallys, the poor women being likewise
made Slaves. Among the rest one Fournia a Minister was tormented by having his
Thumbs strained with a small cord till the blood issued out at the ends of
them, and with another Cord was hoisted up by the Thumbs, and then twitcht down
again, having great Stones tied to his Toes, and so was hanged till his Spirits
failed him, and then they suddenly let him fall with his Face on the hard
Floor, with which Barbarous Usage he in a short time dyed, being near fifty
years old.

In the year 1559, in the Reign of Henry the second of France, there was one
Ann du Bourg, a Nobleman, and of admirable wisdom and understanding, who when
the King came one time into his Parliament at Paris, made a bold Speech before
him, wherein he gave hanks to Almighty God for moving the Kings Heart to be
present at such a weighty matter as that of Religion, (which it seems was then
to be debated) humbly entreating him to consider well thereof, it being the
Cause of Christ himself, which of good Right ought to be maintained by Princes,
but the King was so far from harkning to him, that being enraged he commanded
him to be committed to Prison, and protested to him in these very words, These
Eyes of mine shall see thee burnt. And a while after he was condemned to dye.
In the mean time great Triumphs were preparing for the marriage of the Kings
Sister and Daughter, and the day being come, He spent all the morning in
Examining matters against Du Bourg, and some others charged with the same
Doctrines, intending to glut his Eyes with their Execution; and then went to
Dinner; After Dinner the King ran at Tilt near the Prison where Du Bourg was,
and brake many Spears against the Count Montgomery and others, and all thinking
he had done enough, desired him to give over with praise; But the King being
inflamed with their Commendations would needs run another course with Count
Montgomery, who upon his knees begged his Majesty pardon, but the King being
resolved, commanded him to do it upon his Allegiance, Montogomery, being
compelled addressed himself to it, and the King and he meeting broke their Spears,
and the Kings Helmet falling down at the same Instant, one of the Splinters of
Montgomeries Spear entered just into his right eye, and so pierced his head,
that his brains were perished, which wound being incurable, he dyed thereof,
within Eleven days after; whereby his great hopes of seeing the Death of Du
Bourg were frustrated; And the Execution of Du Bourg was deferred for six
Months longer, all which time persevering constantly in the truth, he was first
degraded, and then accompanied with six or seven hundred Horse and Foot well
armed, he was guarded to Execution, being first hanged, and then burnt to Ashes.

At Amiens in France all the Bibles, Testaments and Psalm Books were burnt, the
Ministers Pulpit, and several Men and Women: At Abbevilla they slew the Lord of
Harcourt, and dragged some along the Streets with their faces in the Kennel. At
Meux above Four Hundred Religious Citizens were slain, the Women and Maids were
openly ravished in the Streets, and marketplaces, Men, Women and Children
were Massacred, the very Popish Priests themselves slaying diverse with their
own hands. At a place called Bar, the same if not worse Villainies were
committed, for the Papists pulled out the hearts of these poor Protestants, and
most barbarously gnawed them with their Teeth, rejoicing that they tasted of an
Hugonots heart. At another place seven Hundred Protestants were inhumanely
massacred, and their naked Bodies thrown into the River; Their Houses and
Church being likewise plundered and Burnt.

At Angies they murdered a Godly Minister and many others and finding a Fair
Bible guilt, they hung it upon an Halbert, and carried it in procession,
blasphemously crying, Behold Truth hanged, the Truth of the Hugonots, The Truth
of all the Devils; behold the Mighty God, behold the Everlasting God will
speak, and when they came to the Bridge, they threw it into the River; crying
louder, Behold the Truth of all the Devils drowned. At Tours an hundred and
forty were murdered and cast into the River, and neither Man, Woman nor Child
spared; nay the President of the City being only suspected to be a Favourer of
the Protestants, was first beaten with Staves, then script to his shirt, hanged
up by one Foot, his Head in the water up to the Breast, and whilst he was yet
alive, they ripped up his Belly, plucked out his Guts, threw them into the River,
and sticking his heart on a Lance, they carried it about, saying, This is the
Heart of the President of the Hugonots.

A Poor Woman whose Husband was a while before drowned, having a young Infant
sucking at her Breasts; and a beautiful Daughter of about sixteen years old in
her hand, these bloody Villains drove them to a River, and taking the Daughter
aside, some of the Rascals endeavored to seduce her to Popery, and one of them
who was finer then the rest, promised to marry her, so that the poor Maid began
to doubt, which her Mother who was just going to be thrown into the River
perceiving, she earnestly exhorted her Daughter to persist in the Truth
whereupon the Daughter cried out, I will live and dye with my Mother, whom I
know to be a Virtuous Woman, and as for your Threats and promises I regard them
not, do with me what you please: Before the Mother was quite drowned, the
Daughter was likewise thrown in, who making toward her Mother, they mutually
embraced each other, and so yielded up their Souls into the hands of God.

In the same City of Yours, there was a very Religious Woman, who being brought
before the Captain, she there gave an Account of her Faith, which she confirmed
by Scripture, insomuch that the Friars who discoursed with her, could not
return any answer, but only told her, That she was in a damnable condition: It
seems so indeed (said she) being in your hands: And being then committed to
prison, she declared her mind freely, and comforted the other Protestant
Prisoners; she was afterward condemned to be hanged, and the Rope being put
about her neck, she kneeled down praising and magnifying the name of God in
showing her so much mercy as by that death to deliver her out of this wretched
world, and that she was so far honored as to dye for the Truth, and to wear
Gods Livery, as she reckoned the halter to be; she then brake her fast with the
rest of the Company, and exhorted them to be of good courage and to trust in
the free mercy of God to the end. As she went to Execution one of her kindred
brought her own little Children to see her, and persuaded her to recant and
save her life to provide for these Innocent Babes: This was a very great
Temptation, and wrought so upon her Motherly Affection as drew plenty of Tears
from her Eyes; But a while after refusing her former Courage and Constancy, she
said, I love my Children dearly, yet neither for love to them, nor for any
thing else in this World will I renounce my God, or his Truth; God will be a
Father to these my Children, and will provide better for them then I could have
done, and therefore to his Providence and protection I commend and leave them.
After which she went cheerfully to the place of Execution, and having there
prayed to, and praised God, she quietly resigned up her Spirit to him.

A while after the City of Roan was besieged and two of the Forts taken,
wherein they put all the Protestants to the Sword, and the Queen Mother being
at the Siege, she led the young King Charles the Ninth, who was then but twelve
years old, to show him the Naked Bodies of several poor Women; who weltred in
their Blood; At last the City was taken, wherein all sorts of monstrous
Cruelties were used, massacring all they met with, and diverse English and
Scotch Soldiers were hanged, and the Sick and wounded were cast into the River.

In Valogues diverse Persons of good Quality were massacred, and among the rest,
a Godly Minister whose body they stripped, and with many scoffs and scorns
dragged it about the House, and at last bringing it into a Room, where he used
to preach, they kicked and spurned his Corpse, saying, Now pray to God and preach
if thou can; The Popish Priests that were present, stuffed his Mouth and
likewise his wounds with the Leaves of his Bible; crying, Preach the Truth of
thy God, and call upon him now to help thee. In a place called Again many were
massacred, and two young Children were roasted: In the Castle of Rheims there
was great Cruelty used, many young Children being murdered in their Mothers
Arms; and the Mothers also shamefully abused, and afterward killed. Above five
hundred men were hanged upon Gibbets, among whom was a grave Counselor in his
long Gown and square Cap.

In the City of Blois the Murderers hearing there was a Sermon, brake
violently into the house, thinking to have taken the Minister, but being
disappointed, they dragged several Women that were there, by the hair of the
head, and beating them severely threw them into the River, but by the
Providence of God, they had so much skill as to swim safely to an Island, but
presently after some VVatermen finding them there, stripped them stark naked, and
threw them again into the River, yet still they endeavored to save themselves,
and Swum toward the Suburbs of a Town called Vienne, and were they cruelly
knocked on the head by the bloody Papists. The French General having taken
several Protestants Prisoners, he hanged most of them, but especially the
Ministers; among the rest, there was a Captain, called La mothe to whom the
General gave diverse stabbs with a Dagger, and thrust him thorough with a Sword,
saying, Villain thou shall dye in despite of God; But he proved a Liar; for
the Captain was carried away, and though extremely wounded, yet was
wonderfully cured, and lived afterward.

Many horrible Murders were likewise committed upon the Protestants, and
amongst others one of their Practices was to throw them down from the top of
St. Michaels Abbey, which was built upon an high Rock, under which there ran a
deep and swift River, and by the way there was another Rock which stood far
out, upon which their bodies falling were dashed and torn to pieces: Among the
rest there was a young man, who seeing they were resolved to murder him,
requested that he might thus cast himself from the top of the Abbey, and if it
pleased God to preserve him in the fall, he might escape with Life, this they
promised, whereupon having made his Prayers to God, he fetched a leap from the
top of the Abbey and flew so far, that missing the Rocks under him, he fell into
the River, and endeavored to swim out for his life, but these perfidious
Villains knocked him on the head, and killed him.

A Captain and his Soldiers entering the House of a Religious VVidow, they
bound her with Cords, and then put a Rope about her neck, whereby she was
halled up and down, till she was almost strangled, they then asked her, How
often she had played the whore with those of her Religion, she answered, That
in the Christian Meetings there were no such Villainies committed. The Captain
then dashed her head against the walls till he had almost beaten out her brains,
and required her to give him Seven Hundred pieces of Gold which she had hidden,
she told him she was a poor woman, and had only one French penny, this enraged
him the more, and he thereupon applied hot burning Coals to her Armpits, till
they were all blistred, bidding her in derision, to cry to her Father which was
in Heaven, She replied, I will not cry aloud for thee, and yet my God can hear
me well enough, and when his pleasure is, he will deliver me out of thy hand.
This made him swear and blaspheme extremely, which more afflicted the poor
Woman than her pains or sufferings; and then he called her Hugonote whore,
saying that these were but the beginning of her sorrows, and except she fetched
him out her Gold, he would draw her Cheeks and Breasts with Lard and roast her
alive, and afterward throw her body headlong from the highest Steeple in the
Town, well (said she) if you throw my body never so low, that shall not hinder
my Soul from ascending into Heaven: This her courage did further inrage him,
and thereupon he opened her Mouth with his Dagger, and crammed Lime down her
Throat, and afterward forced her to drink a glass of Urine which he had made
before her, throwing the remainder with the glass in her Face, they then
carried her to their Quarters, and threatened to kill her with strange
Cruelties; but some pitying her condition redeemed her for ten Crowns, and
conveyed her home, where she soon dyed.

Some of these Hell Hounds constrained one Peter Roch to dig his own Grave, and
then bid him try how it fitted him, which whilst he was doing, they buried him
alive. They stripped a Gentleman's Wife stark Naked, and would have abused her,
but she resisting, they cruelly whipped her, crowned her with Thorns, wounded her
with their swords, and then shot her to death. In another Town six of the chief
men had their heads struck off, and others were diverse ways put to death. In
Toulouse some Counselors made Proclamation that they should kill and destroy
all those of the Protestant Religion, and spare none, since they were Licenced
to do it both by the King, and the Pope: This soon spread through all the
Villages, and the Papists rang the Bells to the slaughter, and there presently
began a most horrible Massacre in those parts; There were above Thirty Thousand
Protestants in the City of Toulouse, so that the Prisons were Immediately
filled, and many knocked on the Head because they would hold no more, the River
was quickly covered with murdered bodies; some Protestants got into the
Townhouse, and made an agreement to depart quietly, but the perfidious Papists
destroyed most of them.

At a Town called Carcasson they pulled out their Eyes, and cut off their Ears
and Noses; They took one and blacked his Hands, Face and Feet; and then said he
had a Devil, afterward they hanged him, and threw his body to the Dogs; One
being commanded to blaspheme God, upon refusal was presently hewn to pieces. A
Blacksmith because he would not give himself to the Devil, they laid his head
upon his own Anvil, and beat out his brains with hammers. A young Woman was
found hid in a house with her Husband whom they ravished before his Face, and
then forced her to take hold of a Rapier, wherewith one of the Villains
thrusting her Arm, made her kill her own Husband.

In Foix and Aurang, some had their hands and legs cut off, and were afterward
beheaded, others were carried upon Halberts, some were burnt in Churches, some
had their Privities cut off; Girls of Five and Six years old were Ravished and
spoiled. In Cisterno the men being fled, the Papists fell upon the Women and
Children, and slew Three or Four Hundred of them; Some Women with Child were
ripped up, and many buried alive, some had their Throats cut like Sheep, others
were drawn through the Streets and beaten to death with Clubs, and in brief the
Protestants were murdered, without distinction of Age, Sex or Quality, neither
Old, Bedrid, nor the diseased in Hospitals being spared.

In Masion the bloody Papists apprehended an honest Godly Minister, whom they
carried along the Streets, with a Thousand Scoffs and Scorns, and beating and
abusing him, and then they made Proclamation, That whosoever would hear this
Holy man Preach, should come to the Slaughter House: At which place they abused
him two hours together; He then desired that before his death, they would
permit him to pray to God; upon which a Villain stepped to him, and cut off half
his Nose, and one of his ears, saying, Now pray as long as thou will, and then
we will send thee to all the Devils: And then this holy man kneeling down,
prayed with such zeal and fervency of Spirit, as drew sighs from some of the
Murderers, and afterward speaking to him that had cut off his Nose, he said,
Friend I am now ready to suffer what thou have to inflict upon me, but I
entreat you and your Companions to consider seriously of the Mischiefs and
Outrages committed by you against this poor City, for there is a God in Heaven,
before whose Tribunal you must shortly give an Account of these your Cruelties:
Just then a Captain passing by, cried, send that wretched man to the Devil;
which one of them hearing took him by the hand, pretending to lead him to the
River to wash off his blood; but when he came thither, he threw him into the
water, and then battered him with Stones till he was drowned.

In the year 1571. after the end of the third Civil War in France, great means
were used to draw the chief of the Protestants to Paris under the pretense of a
Marriage that was between the King of Navar, who was a Protestant, and the Lady
Margaret, Sister to the French King, but in the mean time several Protestants
were murdered in the City of Roan, as they came from a Sermon, which seemed
very much to displease the King, and diverse were Executed for the Mutiny; then
were the Articles of Marriage agreed upon at Paris, the Admiral Coligni was
invited to the Wedding, and those that belonged to the Family of the Duke of
Guise, were forbid the Court, which was very acceptable to the Protestants, as
judging it an assured pledge of the Kings fidelity, since he declared much
satisfaction in the Marriage, saying, That it was not so much for the Wedding,
as that it was a strong knot of Peace, and would be for the good of the whole
Nation.

The Admiral for his security was allowed to bring with him fifty Gentlemen
armed; and being come to Paris he was honorably received of the King, who
called him Father, and protested that in his whole life, he had not been better
pleased, as judging this day would end all his troubles, and settle firm peace
and quietness in his Kingdom: Notwithstanding this, the Admiral had several
Intimations of some Treachery intended against him, but though very wise, yet
he took little notice of it. The Queen Mother likewise entertained him with
great favor, and the King sent him One Hundred Thousand Franks out of his
Treasury for the loss which he had received in the Wars: And the King to
delude the People spoke publicly, That he did not give his Sister in Marriage
to the King of Navar only, but as it were to the whole Church of the
Protestants to join with them in an indissoluble union and as a tie to their
peace and safety.

The Seventeenth of August, the King of Navar, and the Lady Margaret were
married with great Solemnity before the great Church of Paris, on a Scaffold in
the sight of all the People, by the Cardinal of Bourbon, the King of Navars
Uncle, and the Wedding was solemnized with Banquets, Dancing and Masks, with
a strange mixture of Protestants and Papists together, after which the Bride
was led into the Church to hear Mass with great solemnity, but the King of
Navar her Bridegroom, the Prince of Conde, and other Protestant Noblemen walked
without the Church door, till her return, as misliking their Religion and
Ceremonies.

In the mean time the Queen Mother, and her bloody Counselors, together with
the Duke of Anjou and Guise contrive the Murder of the Admiral, and the
dividing the Protestants.

The Admiral after the Marriage moved the King for his departure home, but the
continual complaints of the Protestants still detained him at Court, and going
some days after th there, in his return home while he was reading a Petition
with diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen about him; He was shot by a Harquebuzie, the
Bullet taking off the forefinger of his right hand, and hurting him in the
left Arm, he feeling himself shot, said, without alteration of Countenance, It
came through yonder Window, what kind of Treachery is this? The door of the
House being broke open, they understood that he which shot, presently mounted
upon a Spanish Jennet at a back door, and made his escape, leaving his Gun
behind him, and upon Examination it was found, that the Harquebuz was brought
to the house the day before, by one Chally Steward of the Kings House, and an
acquaintance of the Duke of Guise.

The King having notice of this Villainy, seemed to be extremely concerned,
causing all the Gates of Paris to be presently shut, and swore to the Admirals
Friends, that those that had committed this horrid Fact should not escape: the
Queen Mother likewise seemed much discontented at it. The King went to visit
the Admiral, assuring him of his love and care over him. However the King of
Navar, Prince of Conde and other Protestants had private advice to depart
speedily out of Paris, and to look upon this but as the beginning of the
Tragedy which was to follow; but they, trusting to the Kings word, would not go.

The Dukes of Guise and Anjou employed some to go to every house, and bring
them a Catalogue of all the Protestants, and the King set a Guard of Fifty
Harquebuzies at the Admirals Gate; and abundance of Arms were sent into the
Kings Palace of the Louvre, and in the Evening of the same day, all the
Papists were in Arms; the Protestants observing all this, many of then
assembled at the admirals Lodgings, where it was advised that the Admiral
should be Immediately conveyed out of Paris, and the rest should change their
Lodgings, but this was again refused they still relying upon the Kings word,
who promised them Justice.

In the Evening, diverse Protestant Gentlemen offered to watch with the Admiral,
but he refused it, and the same night the Duke of Guise sent for the Captain of
the Switzers, and showed him his Commission to kill the Admiral and the rest of
the Protestants, and exhorted him and his Soldiers to be courageous in
shedding their blood; At midnight the Provost, Sheriffs, and Captains of every
Ward had the same Orders given them, with assurance, that the like should be
Executed upon the Protestants through the whole Kingdom of France, and that the
Signal for the General Massacre, would be the ringing of the Bell in the Kings
Palace, which would be about break of day, and that the Murderers should have
a white handkerchief tied about their Arms, and a white Cross in their hats,
and Candles to be lighted in every house: At the time appointed, the Bell rung,
and the Duke of Guise hasted to the Admirals Lodgings with his Cutthroats, and
knocking at the Door, he that opened it was murdered; the Admiral hearing the
noise, got out of his Bed, and there being a Minister in the Room, they both
went to Prayers, and the Admiral fervently commended his Soul to God, and then
said to those about him, It is long since I disposed my self to dye, save your
selves if it be possible, for you cannot save my life, I commit my soul into
the hands and mercy of God. The Minister, and the rest of his attendants got up
to the top of the house, and crept out of the Windows to save themselves, yet
most of them were slain in the next House.

Presently seven or eight men broke into the Admirals Lodgings, and one of them
set his Naked Sword to his Breast, saying, Art thou the Admiral? To whom with a
Christian Constancy he answered, I am called so, and withal said, young man
thou ought to consider my Age and the weak condition I am now in, but do
what thou will, for thou can not shorten my life but a very little: But the
Wretch blaspheming God, thrust him through the Breast, and afterward struck him
on the head, another shot him with a Pistol, and a third wounded him in the
Thigh, so that he lay gasping for life; the Duke of Guise was below, and with a
loud voice cried, Have you done? It was answered, Yes; the Duke replied, Our
Chevalier (which was the Kings Bastard Brother) will not believe it, unless he
see it; which being done, his Face was all bloody, which the Duke of Guise
wiping, said, Now I know it is he, and then kicked him on the Face with his
Foot, whom all the Murderers of France feared so much when he was alive.

Then the Duke and his bloody Train went into the Streets, crying Arm, Arm, we
have had good success, and a happy beginning, Let us now proceed to the rest,
for it is the Kings Command, which words he repeated often, This is the Kings
Commandment, this is his Will, this is his express pleasure, therefore courage
my Fellows.

Then the great Bell of the Palace which was the bloody token of the General
Alarm, began to ring out alowd, and presently a Report was spread, That the
Protestants had conspired against the King; Queen and Court, and were just
going to Execute their Design; After this the Admirals head was cut off, and
sent to the King, and Queen Mother, and being by them preserved with Spices, it
was sent to the Pope, and the Cardinal of Lorrain at Rome as a very grateful
present. The Pope when he first heard the News of the Massacre, appointed a day
of Public Thanksgiving to God, where Te Deum was sung for joy in the Church of
St. Jews; He likewise Published a Bull of Pardons and extraordinary Indulgence
to such as should pray for the Heavenly assistance to the King and Kingdom of
France for rooting out of Heretics.

The Rascally Rabble cut off the Hands and Privy Members of the Admiral,
dragging his mangled body besmeared with blood and filth, through the Streets
three days together, and then hanged it by the Feet upon the Gallows; All the
Attendants of the King of Navar, and Prince of Conde which lay in the Kings
Palace were murdered, and likewise all the Lords and Gentlemen about the
Admiral's Lodgings, and among the rest his Son Teligny, and then through all
the City and Suburbs were the poor Protestants Massacred with all manner of
Cruelties; Nothing was then to be heard but the Terrible noise of Horses and
Arms, Guns and Pistols, mingled with the doleful, sad and woeful Schreeches and
miserable complaints of Men, Women, and Children, Rich and Poor, crying for
mercy to these bloody Hell Hounds, howling and lamenting at their miserable
Condition, to bet hus wretchedly murdered for they knew not what: And all this
intermixed with the groans of the dying, and the merciless shouts of the Cruel
Murderers, continually crying, kill, kill, for the King commands it, that it
seemed as if Heaven and Earth had met together, or as if the Heavens had rent
with Thunder.

So that in that night, and the Two next days there was slain in Paris above
Ten Thousand Persons of both Sexes, and all Ranks and Ages, the bloody Papists
not sparing the Children in the Cradle, nor the Infants in their Mothers wombs,
insomuch that the Streets, Marketplace, and Rivers were dyed with Blood, and
the Murderers boasted that they had in a few days put an end to that Quarrel,
that neither Pen, Paper, decrees of Justice nor open War could accomplish in
Twelve years.

This horrid Massacre was committed on St. Bartholomews day, being the 24. of
August 1571. which was the Sabbath day, and is made famous for ever, by the
Effusion of so much precious Innocent blood, as no Age nor time can parallel,
for there were at this time in Paris Threescore Thousand men, with Pistols,
Poinards, Swords, Knives, and such other Bloody Instruments, who ran up and
down, swearing and blaspheming the Sacred Majesty of God, cruelly massacring
all they met, so that the Streets were covered with mangled Bodies, and the
Gates and Doors defiled with blood, the Lords and Gentlemen were Inhumanely
murdered, some in their Beds, others on the top of their Houses, and in all
other places where they were found, and such a multitude of dead Bodies, were
thrown into the River Se-Sin, that the water was dyed Red with their Blood.

In the Hellish Assembly wherein this bloody Massacre was concluded on, it was
debated whether the King of Navar and Prince of Conde should not be destroyed
with the rest; the Duke of Guise pleaded for it, but others were against it,
and argued how abominable it would be to destroy two young Princes of the
Blood, in the Flower of their Age, and one of them in the embraces of his young
Bride, and the Kings own Sister, and therefore it was concluded, That they
should be threatened violently with death and all manner of Torments if they
would not turn Papists,; And thereupon the King commanded them to be brought
into his presence, and told them, That now he had cut off all the Instruments
of the late Civil Wars, which he hoped would prevent future troubles, for by
his Command the Admiral was slain, and all the rest of the Heretics and that
the like should be Executed in all other places throughout the Kingdom, and
that if they would now save their Lives they must turn Catholics, for he was
resolved to have but one Religion in his Kingdom.

The King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde humbly beseeched his Majesty to
Remember his Oaths, Promises, and solemn Vows and Protestations that they
should have the free Exercise of their Religion, and withal told the King, That
he might do as he pleased with their Bodies and Estates, but their unspotted
Souls were in the hands of God; and that they were resolved to remain steadfast
in their Religion, though with the loss of their lives; which answer so enraged
the King, that he called the Prince of Conde Rebel, and the Son of a Rebellious
Person, horribly threathing him, That if within three days he did not obey his
Command he should dye for it, and then with a furious Countenance left them
with these three Terrible Words, Death, Mass or the Bastile.

Many Gentlemen that were attendants upon them, as likewise their
Schoolmasters and Tutors, were thrust out of the Chamber among the Murderers,
that is among the Kings Guard of Switzers who stood in two Ranks with their
Swords drawn ready for Blood and Cruelty. These Gentlemen crying out of the
Kings Oaths, Promises and Fidelity, were yet by the Kings Command, and in his
own Sight unmercifully hewn and cut in pieces.

In this Butcherly Massacre at Paris there were above four Thousand Houses
robbed and plundered, and above Five Hundred Barons, Knights and Gentlemen, who
were chief Officers in the War, with abundance of Noble young Gentlemen,
Ladies, and Gentlewomen Inhumanely murdered, who little expected such a bloody
Fate, for they came from all parts to rejoice, in honor of the marriage of the
King of Navar, and instead of Jollity and pleasures, they here met with an
untimely death, from Bloody and Cowardly Papists, who murder like Devils, but
dare not fight like men.

The King and his Confidents fearing that this Massacre would not end the
Quarrel, but rather stir up the Protestants in other places to stand upon their
own defense; He therefore sends Messengers by Poast to all parts of the
Kingdom, often shifting Horses for more speed, with express Commands to the
Governors of all other Towns and Cities in France to follow the Example of
Paris, and to destroy and kill all the Protestants which were amongst them; and
yet at the same time, the King writes other Letters wherein he laid the fault
of the murder of the Admiral, and the rest upon the Duke of Guise.

As soon as this Command was published, and that the Kings Letters came, the
Papists fell with all imaginable fury upon all the Protestants at Meaux, Troys,
Orleans, and other places, murdering them without any matter of pity and
Compassion.

And among the rest Mounsier De la Place, President of the Court of Requests
being in his house, a Captain came to him, and told him, that the Duke of Guise
had killed the Admiral by the Kings Appointment, and many other Hugonots, but
however he was willing to secure him, but desired to see his Gold; The Lord De
la Place observing his Impudence asked him whether he thought there were a King
or no; the Captain blaspheming bid him go to know the Kings pleasure; The Lord
De la Place thinking there was danger near, went from him to secure himself,
and the Captain thereupon plundered his House. The poor Gentleman seeking
shelter in three Houses for his life, was denied, and was at last forced to
return home again, where finding his wife very sorrowful, he rebuked her, and
discourst with her of the Promises of God, telling her, That through many
Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God; and then calling his Family
together, he made an Exhortation to them, went to prayer, and then read a
Chapter in Job, with Calvin's Exposition, and then praying again, he resolved by
Gods assistance to suffer all Torments rather than to fly for it.

Presently after the Provost of the Merchants comes to his House with many
Archers, and an Order to bring him to the King, and would not admit of any
Excuse, whereupon the Lord supposed what would happen, and therefore embracing
his Wife, he desired her never to forsake the truth of God; And so going toward
the Palace, some Murderers waited for him, and Immediately stabbed him with
their Daggers, so that he fell down dead, and then stripping him, cast his Body
into the River.

After this, there followed the like Cruelties and Murders upon the Protestants
in the Cities of Lions, Toulouse, Burdeux, Angiers, where the Protestants were
most barbarously killed and destroyed, as likewise in most other Cities and
Towns, so that in a few Months there were murdered above threescore Thousand
Protestants in France, for no other Crime, but only for being Protestants.

Yet in the midst of these dangers it pleased God to provide some places of
refuge for them, as Rochel, Montalbon, Wismes, Saucerre, Privas, etc. whither
many Protestants fled from other places. In the year 1573, the Town of Saucerre
was besieged by the Lord of Chastre, who with his Canon played incessantly upon
the place, so that the Stones, Pavements, and Splinters of Timber flew about
continually, and yet it pleased God that only one young Woman was slain
thereby, though sometimes the Coats, Breeches, and Hats of the Inhabitants were
shot thorough; The Siege being long, there was great scarcity, insomuch that
the People were forced to eat Horses, Asses, and Mules, which lasted a Month;
Afterward they eat all the Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice and Moles that they could
get; and then they were forced to eat Parchments, Horses, and Beasts-Hoofs,
Horns, Lanthorns, Halters, Girdles of Leather, Herbs, wild Roots, and Furniture
for Horses; this being all spent, and no bread in the City, they made bread of
Linseed, Herbs mixed with Bran, Straw-Meal, Powder of Nut-shells; yea Slates,
Sewet, Old Ointments, and other Grease served to make Pottage; and therewith,
they likewise fried the the Excrements of Horses and Men, which they eat, yea
the very filth in the Streets was not spared.

During this Extremity, a labourer and his wife were put to death for eating
the Head, Intrials and Brains of their own Child, a Girl of three years old,
who died with Famine, having likewise dressed the rest of her body to eat at
other times. Those that went out of the City VValls, were forced to live upon
the Spriggs of Vines, Black-beries, Snails, and Herbs; and many of them were
killed by the Enemy. And among other lamentable Spectacles, a poor man and his
Wife were found dead among the Vines, and two of their Children crying by them;
the youngest being not above Six weeks old, whom a Charitable Widow took home
and relieved, etc.

Many dyed of this terrible Famine in their Houses, and others fell down dead
in the Streets; Most of the Children under Twelve years old dyed, and most
lamentable it was to see their poor Fathers and Mothers lamenting their misery,
and yet could not relieve them; yet most of them did wonderfully encourage
themselves in Gods help and assistance, as may appear by this strange Example.

A Boy about five years old being famisht for Hunger, running along the
Streets, fell down for dead in the presence of his Father and Mother, who wept
over him, and felt his Arms and Legs, which were as dry as a Stick: To whom the
Child said, Why do you weep to see me dye of hunger? I ask you no Bread Mother,
for I know you have none, but since it is Gods will that I should dye in this
manner, I must take it thankfully; Had not the Holy man Lazarus Hunger, have I
not read it in my Bible? and saying thus, he yielded up his Spirit.

And that which preserved the rest from perishing was, because there were six
Cows kept alive to give Milk to some few Infants, and some Horses of service
referred for extremity were killed, and their flesh sold, and some little Corn
was brought into the Town by stealth, which was sold for half a Crown a pound.

There dyed by the War but Eighty four Persons, but the Famine destroyed Five
Hundred, and the rest were brought so low, that they hardly recovered. Diverse
voluntarily went out of the Town choosing rather death then such misery, whereof
some were slain, and others Imprisoned, and Executed.

And now when all humane help failed, the King having sworn, He would make them
eat one another, and the Papists threatening to Massacre them all; it Pleased
God strangely to deliver these poor Protestants. For Ambassdors coming from
Poland to fetch the Duke of Anjou the Kings Brother thither, whom they had
chosen for their King; They having notice of this terrible siege, obtained by
their Solicitations, that all the Towns in France which were molested for
Religion should have their Liberty, by which means the poor Saucerreans half
dead with hunger obtained their fredom, and were quietly suffered to depart
with their Arms and Goods, and those that would stay not to be questioned for
what was past.

About the same time the Town of Rochel was likewise besieged, the Townsmen
often sallying out, and diverse hot skirmishes past; among the rest a young
Gentleman boasted with horrible blasphemies, that he was one of the horrible
Murderers of the Admiral, showing his Sword, which he said he brought from that
exploit, to slash the Rochellers, but upon Trial his heart failed him and he
ran away, and one of the Rochellers pursuing him slew him, stripped him, and left
his body in the Field, and before next morning the had torn his Face.

In one Months space the Papists discharged above Thirteen Thousand Shot
against the Town, and made many assaults, but always came off with loss, The
Siege continued two Months, and the Famine much increaseh upon them, but by
Divine Providence, when all other Provision failed them, there came a multitude
of small Fishes into the Haven, which were never seen there before, and was a
very great relief to them, who continued during the siege, but presently after
the publishing the Edict of Peace, they went away and were never seen more. A
while after the Rochellers were likewise freed from the siege by means of the
Poland Ambassadors and enjoyed their ormer Privileges: It is very remarkable
that most of those Persons which were employed in the Massacre of Paris and
other Places, were killed at this siege, for there were slain before this Town
Three Masters de Camp, diverse Lords and Gentlemen, above Threescore Captains,
as many Lieutenants and Ensigns, and above Twenty Thousand Common Soldiers.

The next year after, the King himself, who was at least the Countenancer of
all these horrible Massacres, being in the prime of his Youth, not above Twenty
five years old, fell sick of a languishing disease; his Physicians let him
blood and purged him to no purpose; for he consumed away so strangely, as
astonished many. He long strugled against his Disease, but at last betook
himself to his Bed for about fourteen days before his death, and was sore
tormented with a great Effusion of blood, which issued from all parts of his
body, and one time, to the terror of those about him, he rouled himself in his
own blood; A while before he died he desired his Mother to pursue his Enemies
to the utmost repeating the same, and with great eagerness, and saying Madam I
pray you heartily to do it, and so expired May 30. 1574.

And it was observed that the rest of the Chief Agents were strangely cut off;
The Duke of Anjou the Kings Brother, afterward King Henry the Third was
stabbed by a Jacobine Monk in the same Chamber where he sat in Council for
contriving the late Tragedies. The Duke of Guize was murdered in the Kings own
Chamber, Five and Forty Persons waiting with Swords and Daggers to do it; The
Queen Mother broke her heart, and dyed the first of January after: And in
short, it has been observed by a good Author, that since the year of our Lord
1560 of a Thousand Murderers that remained unpunished by men, there was not ten
who escaped the Divine hand of God; but came to deserved and wretched Ends,
suitable to their bloody and wicked Lives.

At a Town called Sansay in France in the year 1593, one Margaret Pieron was by
her maid accused to the Jesuits for not going to Mass, and for keeping a Bible
in her house, who complaining thereof to the Judges, they sent for her, and
said, Margaret, are you not willing to return home to your house, and there
enjoy your Husband and Children? Yes, said she, if it may stand with the good
will of God; Then said they, If thou will do but a small matter thou shall be
set at Liberty; If, said she, if it be not contrary to Gods glory and my own
Salvation, you shall hear what I will say to it. No such thing, said they, for
all that we require is but this, That a Scaffold being set up in the chief part
of the Town, you shall there crave pardon for offending the Law, and a fire
being made you shall burn your Bible in it without speaking a word. I pray you
my Masters said she, tell me is my Bible a good Book or no? Yes, said they, we
confess it is, only to please the Jesuits we would have thee throw it in the
Fire, Imagine it to be but Paper, and then you may burn it, and you may buy
another at any time, and thereby you may secure your Life. They spent two Hours
in persuading her that she might commit a less Evil to do a greater good. But
she courageously answered them, That by the help of God she would never do it.
Will not the People say said she, This is a wretched Woman indeed, that burns
the Bible, wherein all the Articles of Christian Religion are contained? I will
certainly burn my Body, rather then I will burn my Bible. Upon this she was
committed to Prison, and fed only with bread and water, and her Friends forbad
to come to her, but continuing steadfast in the Truth, she was thereupon
condemned to be set upon a Scaffold, to have the Bible burnt before her Face,
her self to be strangled, and her body to be dragged through the Streets to a
Dunghill, which Sentence she willingly and cheerfully underwent.

In the year 1628. The City of Rochel was again besieged with a great Army by
the French King, whereby the Inhabitants were in such extremity for want of
Victuals, that rhey eat Horses, Dogs Cats, Rats, and Mice, and after that the
poor Protestants lived Two Months upon Cow-hides and Goat Skins boiled. They
likewise eat old Gloves, and whatsoever was made of Leather, yea the poor
people cut off the buttocks of the dead and eat them, young Maids of Fourteen
or Sixteen years old looked like old Women of an Hundred years old, a Bushel of
Wheat was sold for Twenty Pound, a Pound of Bread Twenty Shillings, a Quarter
of Mutton above six Pound, An Egg eight shillings, An Ounce of Sugar Half a
Crown, a dried Fish Twenty Shillings, a Pint of Milk Thirty Shillings. After a
while the City was taken, and some English that were therein, when they came
aboard, looked like Anatomies or dead Bodies.

And since that to this very day the Protestants have suffered very great
hardships and Persecutions in France by having their Churches pulled down, by
Fires and Imprisonments, and Banishments, by being excluded from all Officer
and Employments of Trust or Profit, and by all manner of discouragements
whatsoever, and that only upon the Account of their Religion; and all this
contrary to Oat, hs Protestations, Edicts and Proclamations, which have been
solemnly made, and granted to them for the free Exercise of the Protestant
Religion.

Psalm 68.
LEt God arise, let his Enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him flee
before him.

As smoke is driven away, so drive them away, as wax melts before the Fire,
so let the wicked perish at the presence of the Lord.

But let the righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God, yea let them
exceedingly rejoice.

Sing unto God, sing praises to his Name, extol him that rides upon the
Heavens, by his Name J A H; and rejoice before him.

A Father of the Fatherless, and a Judge of the Widow, is God in his Holy
Habitation.

God sets the solitary in Families, he brings out those that are bound
with chains, but the Rebellious dwell in a dry Land.

To him that rides upon the Heaven of Heavens, which were of old, lo, he does
send out his Voice, and that a mighty Voice.

Ascribe the strength unto God, his Excellency is over Israel, and his strength
is in the Clouds.

O God, thou art terrible out of the holy places, the God of Israel is he that
gives strength and power unto his People: blessed be God.

Psalm 94.
GReat God of Hosts revenge our wrong
On those, who are in Mischief strong,
Upon thy Foes
Inflict our woes,
For Vengeance does to thee belong:
Judge of the world, prevent
The Proud and Insolent.
How long shall they the just oppress,
And Triumph in their Wickedness;
How long supplant!
Ah! how long Vaunt
And Glory in their dire success!
Thy Saints they kill and break,
And Insult over the weak.
They Strangers and poor Widows kill,
And Blood of wretched Orphans spill;
And say, can he
Or hear, or see?
Does God regard what is good or ill?
Brute Beasts, without a mind,
O Fools in knowledge blind!
Shall not the Almighty see and hear,
Who formed the Eye, and framed the Ear,
Who Nations slew
Not punish you?
For he all knows; to him appear
Dark Councils, secret Fires
Vain hopes and vast desires.
eight panels representing various methods of execution and punishment One
burnt for throwing down ye Chest

P: Orange murdered

Racked ye Inquisition.

Tortured in ye Inquisition

80 had their Throats Cut

Some beheaded.

Some stond to Death

Others thrown upon Pikes



The Cruelties of the Papists in Italy, Spain, Portugal, and the Low Countries.
LEt us next proceed to look into Italy, which being under the Inspection of
the Pope, it may well be supposed not to harbor many Protestants, at least
such as dare openly appear to be such, by reason of the Inquisition, which was
first Instituted against the Moors and Jews in Spain, but is now only used for
the discovery, and Tormenting of good Christians; yet not withstanding all
this, there have been diverse who have owned the Gospel even in the City of Rome
it self, and several other places in Italy.

For in the time of Pope Adrian the Fourth who was an Englishman, one Arnald of
Brixia came to Rome and preached publicly and boldly against the Corruptions
of the Romi h Church; and found great favor among the Senators and People,
insomuch that when the Pope commanded them to drive Arnal, out of the City for
an Heretic, they resisted his command and defended Arnald, upon which the Popo
thundered out an Excommuncation against the whole City of Rome; so that upon the
importunity of the Clergy they were forced to send him away; but he was
entertained by the Lords of Campania who were subject to the Emperor, of
Germany with whom he remained, and preached the Gospel to them.

The Emperor coming afterward into Italy to be Crowned the Pope desired him
to deliver up Arnald into his hands; whereupon the Emperor seized upon one of
the Lords of Campania, which so terrified the other, that he delivered up
Arnald, who being sent to the Pope he used him most cruelly, and then ordered
him first to be hanged, and then burnt as an Arch Heretic; His Chief Heresies
were, That he preached against the Pride and Covetousness of the Monks and
Clergy, that he inveighed against the Errors in the Sacrament, that he
expounded the Scriptures, etc.

In the year 1546. there was one Eucenas or Driander, a Spaniard born, who
being bred up in Rome, yet came at last to the knowledge of the Truth, and
having discovered his dislike of the false Doctrine of Popery, he was betrayed
by his own Countrymen and Acquaintance, and being brought before the
Cardinals, he was committed close Prisoner, and was afterward brought forth to
declare his Judgment where he gave a Notable Testimony to the Truth, upon
which, when he refused to recant the same, he was condemned to be burnt, and
suffered Martyrdom with great patience and constancy.

In the year 1550, One Faninus of Ferrara in Italy being by the Grace of God
and reading of good books converted to the Gospel, and began to Instruct others
privately therein, but this coming to the ears of some of the Popes
Bloodhounds, they seized him and committed him to Prison, where by the earnest
Importunities of his Wife, Children and Friends, he was persuaded to deny the
Truth, and was thereupon released out of Prison; He had not been long at
liberty, but he was extremely troubled in mind, for preferring the Love of his
Relations and Friends before the service of Jesus Christ, neither could he by
ny means be free from these Tortures till he had fully resolved to venture his
Life for the Gospel; Being thus inflamed with holy Zeal, he went about the
Country teaching and Instructing the People wherever he came.

VVhereupon he apprehended and cast into Prison, and was condemned to be burnt,
but he told his Judges, That his time was not yet come, and so it happened for
he was removed to Ferrara where he continued in Prison for Two years, and
afterward Eighteen Months in another Prison, and was again condemned by the
Popes Inquisitors, but still his death was one way or other prevented.

His Wife and Sister came to him in Prison and weeping pitifully entreated him
to remember and consider his poor Family, To whom he answered, That his Lord
and Master had commanded him not to deny the Truth for his Families sake, and
that it was too much that for their sakes he had once fallen already, and
therefore desired them not to solicit him any more in that matter, for he
knew his end drew near, and therefore he commended them to the Lord. In a short
time after the Pope sent word Faninus should be burnt, at which he very much
rejoiced and thanked the Messenger. Being still offered Life if he would
recant, and thereby prevent the misery of his Wife and Children, He said, He
would leave them to a careful and sufficient Overseer; and being asked who that
was, he answered even the Lord Jesus Christ a faithful Keeper of all that are
committed to him. As he was going to Execution, one that saw him so merry and
cheerful asked him, what the reason of it was, since Jesus Christ before his
death sweat Water and Blood? To whom he answered, That Christ sustained all the
sorrows and conflicts with Hell and Death, which were due to us, that by his
sufferings we might be free from the sorrow and fear of them all. At the place
of Execation after having earnestly prayed to God, he went patiently to the
stake, and was first strangled and then burnt.

There was likewise one Dominicus a Soldier under Charles the First, in
Germany, who having received the Gospel, grew so much in knowledge in a short
time, that he able to instruct others, whereupon he returned into Italy, and
taught the People in Naples, Placentia, and several other places: In a little
time after he was apprehended and readily obeyed the Magistrate, saying, That
he wondered the Devil had let him alone so long; And being asked whether he
would renounce his Doctrine, He said, That he maintained no Doctrine of his
own, but the Doctrine of Christ which he was also ready to seal with his blood;
Being therefore condemned to death, he was brought into the Marketplace, where
he most heartily prayed for his Enemies, Instructed the People, and then was
hanged, resting in peace in the Lord.

In the City Paria in Italy, one Galleacius Trecius a Gentleman of good
Quality, very rich, and bountiful to the poor embraced the Gospel, for which
being presecuted he fled from thence, but being afterward apprehended he was
brought before the Lords Inquisitors where he boldly and courageously asserted
the Truth; whereupon he was condemned to be burnt; next morning he was bound to
a stake in the Market place, where he continued till noon to be gazed at by the
People, during which time many of his Friends persuaded him to recant, but
nothing could alter the firm mind of this constant Martyr and Fire being put to
him, be quietly slept in the Lord. A little before his Execution he heard there
were some Differences between the Bishop and the Mayor of the Town, who should
be at the cost of wood to burn him, but to end the Quarrel he sent them word he
would be at the cost out of his own Goods.

In the year 1553 one John Mollius a famous Preacher was hanged and burnt for
preaching the Gospel, and the next year Francis Gamba was condemned upon the
same account, and because he made adm rabble discourses to the People, his
Tongue was bored through, and he was first strangled, and then burnt,
undergoing death with great patience and Constancy. The next year after there
was one Algerius a Student in Padua, a young man of Excellent Learning, who
having attained the knowledge of the Truth, he endeavored by Example and
Instruction to bring in others, for which being accused of Heresy, he was
apprehended at Venice, and was afterward sent for to Rome by the Pope, where
many endeavors were used to tempt him to desert and deny the Truth, which not
prevailing, he was Condemned to be burnt alive; which he constantly suffered to
the Admiration of all that saw him.

In the year 1559. John Aloysius a Minister, being sent from Geneva to
Calabria, was sent for to Rome by the Pope, where he suffered Martyrdom, and at
the same James Bovellus a worthy Minister was Martyred by the Popes Order at
Messina. Pope Pius the Fourth raised an hot persecution against the Protestants
in all the Territories of the Church of Rome, which was the destruction of many
faithful Christians, yea the Persecution was so hot in the Kingdom of Naples
that many Noblemen and their Wives, with diverse others were slain. And a Papist
writing to a Noble Lord about the Cruelties showed to some Christians in
Calabria in the year 1560, has these expressions, when I think upon it I
verily quake and tremble, for their manner of putting to death may be fitly
resembled to the slaughter of Calves and Sheep, for Fourscore and Eight of them
being thrust up together in one House as in a Sheepfold, the Executioner comes
in, takes one and blindfolds him, and then leading him forth to a larger place
commands him to kneel down, and then cuts his Throat; and leaving him half
dead, he takes his Butchers Knife and Muffler all gore blood, and fetches the
rest, and so one after another dispatches them all. How sad this spectacle was
I leave to your Lordship to Judge, for my own part I cannot but weep to think
of it, neither were there any Spectators who seeing one to dye, could endure to
behold another, But truly so humbly and patiently they went to their deaths, as
it almost incredible to believe: All the Aged Persons went more cheerfully; the
younger were something more timorous, I tremble and shake to remember how the
Hangman held his bloody Knife between his Teeth, and his bloody Muffler in his
hand, and his Arms all gore blood up to the Elbows, going to the Fold, and
taking every one of them one after another by the hand and so dispatching them
all, no otherwise then a Butcher does his Calves and Sheep.

The City of Venice kept it self free a long time from this Plague of the
Inquisition so that multitudes of Christians flocked thither from other places;
but in the year 1542, the Pope so far prevailed as to introduce it there
likewise, and then began a Terrible Persecution of the poor protestants there,
and they found out a new kind of death for them, which was to drown them in the
bottom of the sea, in the manner following: when they were condemned to dye by
the Inquisitors there was an Iron Chain fastened round their wast, and a heavy
stone was tied thereto, then they were laid upon a Planck between two Boats,
and so rowed to an appointed place in the Sea where the Boats parting asunder,
the Person immediately sunk into the Sea and was drowned; notwithstanding which
diverse good Christians met together, and had a Minister who preached the Gospel
and Administered the Sacrament to them; but some false brethren creeping in
among them, betrayed them; upon which many of them were apprehended and cast
into the Sea, others were imprisoned at Rome till they dyed.

Among others who were condemned to be drowned at Venice, there was one
Seignior Anthony Ricetto; To whom after his condemnation his son of about
Twelve years of Age came, and with Tears beseeched his Father to recant, for
the saving of his own Life, and that he himself might not be left fartherless,
To whom his Father answered, A good Christian is bound to forgo Children,
goods, yea, and Life it self for the maintenance of Gods Honor and Glory, for
which cause (said he) I am now resolved with Gods assistance to lay down my
Life. When he came to the place where he was to suffer, the Stone and Chain
were fastened to him, whereupon lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, he said, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do, Lord Jesus into thy hands I do
commend my Spirit; And so he ended his Life in the Sea.

A while after one Francis Spinola was apprehended and committed to Prison, and
being called before the Inquisitors, he boldly reproved the Popes Legate and
the other Judges, in that c ntrary to their Consciences they persecuted the
Truth of God, and told them they were the Offspring of the Pharisees, etc.
Whereupon he had sentence passed upon him, That he should be drowned as an
Heretic, to whom he answered, I am no Heretic but the Servant of Jesus
Christ, At which words the Popes Legate bid him be silent and told him That he
lied; The night after he was conveyed into the Sea and there drowned, blessing
and praising God with invincible Constancy.

In the year 1595, There was a young English Protestant at Rome, who going into
a Church, and seeing their gross Idolatry he was so moved that he could not
endure the sight of those impieties, and therefore as the Procession passed by
him, he stepped to him that bare the Host and Sacrament, and plucking it out of
his hands, threw it on the Ground, saying, ye wretched Idolaters, do ye fall
down to a Morsel of Bread? This so provoked the People, that they were like to
have torn him in Pieces, but he escaped death, and was sent to Prison, and
complaint thereof being made to Pope Clement the Eight, he was so enraged that
he commanded him to be burnt the same day, but his Cardinals advised to have
him kept in Prison and Examined with Exquisite Tortures who set him on; This
they accordingly practiced, tormenting him with the utmost severity, but could
get nothing from him, but these words, Such was the will of God; Then was he
adjudged to be led from the Capitol naked to his middle, and to wear on his
head the form of a Devil, his breeches to be painted over with Flames of Fire,
and so to be carried all about the City, and then burnt alive.

This was Executed upon him, and as he passed through the Streets he was mocked
and derided of the People, but he prayed fervently to God, and at last uttered
something against the debauched Lives of the Cardinals, which so enraged them,
that they gagged him; When he came before the Church where he threw down the
Idol, his Right hand was cut off by the Hangman, and set upon a Pole in the
Cart to which he was tied; Then two Tormentors with flaming Torches scorcht and
burnt his Flesh all the way, so that his body was all over blistred and bloody,
having no part free but his head; then was he taken from the Cart, and went
himself to the stake kissing the Chains that should bind him. The Friars urged
him to worship an Idol, but he turned away his Face and showed his Detestation
of it, and when the Fire seized on him, he bowed his head, and quietly resigned
up his Spirit to God.

The same year there was an Ancient Religious man that had layn long in the
Inquisition, who was at last brought forth, and condemned, after which the
Friars brought a Crucifix to him, importuning him to kiss and adore it, He
seeing their Importunity, said to them, If you take not this Idol out of my
sight, I shall spit upon it; The Friars hearing this sent him away immediately
to the Fire, where with great Courage and Constancy he resigned up his Spirit
to God.

Of the Spanish Inquisition.
Since mention is often made of the Spanish Inquisition; It may not be amiss to
give a brief Account of the Original and Practice thereof.

Ferdinando and Isabella King and Queen of Spain having expelled the Moors or
Turks out of the Kingdom of Granada, who had inhabited there Seven Hundred
Seventy Eight years, they res lved to Reform Religion, and granted the
Conquered Moors Liberty to continue there, and enjoy their Goods if they would
turn Christians, and because there were many Jews that had likewise continued
there ever since Titus conquered Jerusalem, they had also leave to remain there
upon the same Conditions, but all that refused were commanded presently to go
out of Spain, Yet afterward observing that those who staid were only
Christians in name, and had submitted merely to save their Estates, instead of
providing Religious men, who with Gentleness and meekness might instruct and
reduce them from their Errors, they by the advice of the Dominican Friars,
erected a Court of Inquisition, whereby the poor wretches instead of
Instruction were robbed of all their Estates, and either put to most cruel
deaths, or else suffered intolerable whippings and other Tortures; and spent
the rest of their lives in shame and misery: neither was this only Inflicted
upon such as blasphemed Christ, but for observing the least Jewish or Moorish
Ceremony, or holding the smallest Error in the Christian Religion. But this
Holy Inquisition (as they call it) which was first erected against Jews and
Moors, was afterward turned against the faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, and
for suppressing the Gospel and the True Professors thereof; and thus you have
briefly the Original of it, let us a little observe the Method of their
proceeding therein.

As soon as Information is given against any Person they do not presently cite
the party to appear before them, but send one of their Informers, who taking
opportunity to meet with him, usually greets him thus, Sir I was yesterday by
Accident at my Lords Inquisitors, who said than they had occasion to speak with
you about certain Affairs, and therefore they command me to summon you to
appear before them to morrow at such an Hour. The party not daring to refuse
goes to the place and sends in word, That he is come to attend them; and being
called in, the Inquisitors ask him What suit he has to them, And when he
Answers That he is come upon summons; they enquire his Name, ( For (say they)
we know not whether you be the man, but since you are come, if you have any
thing to inform the Court of, either concerning your self or any other, you may
let us hear it for the discharge of your Conscience. Now in this Case it is the
safest way constantly to deny that he has any thing to declare to them; For if
through simplicity a man does accuse himself or any other, they rejoice, as
having attained their desires, and so presently commit him to Prison.

If any chance to make his escape, they have many devices to fetch him and find
him again, one of them is by making his picture to the Life, and sending it
about by their Apparators and Promoters, who are commonly the greatest Villains
in the Country, and will swear any thing against the Prisoner.

After the Prisoner has been six or eight Months in Gaol, he is brought before
the Inquisitors who tell him that they have deeply considered his case, and
have found that he does not declare the whole Truth, and therefore they are
resolved he shall be rackt, that they may draw from him by force, what by fair
means he will not acknowledge, and then they advise him rather to confess
voluntarily and thereby avoid that pain and daanger that attends him; but
whether he confess or not, it is the same thing, for to the rack he must go, to
be compelled to confess more.

Then is the poor Prisoner led into a deep and dark Dungeon under Ground where
the Rack stands, passing through many doors before he come to it, because the
terrible cries and schreiks of the tormented should not be heard. Then the
Lords Inquisitors set themselves upon a Scaffold hard by the Rack, and the
Torches being lighted, the Hangman or Tormenter comes in, all clothed from
Head to Foot in black Canvas, and a long black hood likewise, which covers
his Face, having only two holes in it to look out at, which sight does many
times very much affright the poor Soul, to see one in the likeness of a Devil
come to Torment him.

The Inquisitors being seated near him, again perswad him to confess freely and
Voluntarily, and then with very sharp words command him to be stripped stark
naked, yea though it be the modestest Virgin or chastest Matrone in the
Country, whose grief is not so much the pain as to be seen naked by so many
persons, and yet these wicked Villains, without any regard of honesty, will not
by the utmost prayers, or Entreaties of the most virtuous Women or Maidens, be
persuaded to forbear one jot of this barbarous Impudence; As if a Shirt or
Shift could hinder the Rack from cruelly tormenting them.

The party being stripped naked, the Lords Inquisitors signify their pleasure how
they will have him Tormented, and the first kind of Torment is usually the
Gibbet or Pully; First one comes hehind him, and binds his hands together with
a Cord Eight or Ten times about, and then his Thumbs in the same manner, the
Inquisitors bidding him every time to bind them harder then other, and then
both hands and Thumbs are fastened to a Pully which hangs to the Gibbet, they
then fasten great and heavy bolts to his heels, and hung upon those bolts
diverse Iron weights, and so hoise the poor wretch up from the ground: Having
continued thus for some time they let him down, and hang twice as much more to
his heels, and then hosing him up, they let him slip half way down of a sudden,
which rends and tears Arms, Shoulders, Back, Legs, and all his whole body out
of joint, by reason of the sudden lirk, and the weights hanging at his heels.

If the party shreik or cry out, they roar out as fast and call him Heretic
Rogue and Dog, and if in his cruel pangs he call upon Jesus Christ for his aid
and assistance, they mock and deride him, saying, Why call thou on Jesus
Christ? Let Jesus Christ alone and tell us the Truth, etc. After they have
tormented him about three hours; the Inquisitors ask the Hangman whether the
rest of his Instruments of Torment are ready, who to affright the Prisoner
answers, They are, but he has not brought them with him: they then bid him
bring them to morrow, and so turning to the poor wretch which lies in miserable
pain, the Inquisitors cry, How now Sirrah, how do you like this, well, consider
of it against to morrow or else you dye, for what you have felt, is but a
flea-biting to what remains behind.

Then the Jailer plays the Bonesetter as well as he can, three days after
brings him to the Rack again when his joints are most sore, and sometimes they
have another Torment with the Trough, where the Person is laid with his feet
higher then his head, bound hand and foot in the Trough, and then laying a
thick Cloth over his Mouth and Nostrils, they power water thereupon with a long
stream, which falling from on High, drives the Cloth down his Throat, with
miserable Torture and pain, and being drawn out again from the bottom of his
Throat, it draws forth blood with it, and seems as if it tore out his bowels.

They have another Torment with Fire, which is no whit inferior to the former,
and that is by holding the Prisoners Feet over a pan of burning Charcoal, and
that the Fire may have the more force, they bast their Feet with Lard and Bacon.

If after all these and diverse other cruel Tortures they continue constant,
they are then condemned to death, Then he is clothed in a Sambernetto or long
Garment painted over with ugly Devils; he has on his head a high Crowned Hat,
whereon a man is painted burning in the Fire, with many Devils about him,
plying him with Fire and Faggot; upon his Tongue a piece of cleft wood is put
to hinder his speaking, a Cord about his Neck, and his hands fast tied behind
him.

All things being finished, they are delivered by the Inquisitors into the
hands of the Magistrate who presently conveys him to Execution, where several
Friars swarm about him earnestly persuading him to deny the Truth, and when
they cannot prevail upon him, he is tied to the stake, and in an Instant the
Hangman breaks his neck, without being perceived, and then they report among
the Common People, that he recanted at his last hour, and returned to the
Church of Rome, and therefore he felt no pain in the Fire, but took his death
so patiently without any motion, or crying out.

And though by the Terrors of the Inquisition the Professors of the Gospel in
Spain have been but few, they having been so wickedly industrious as to crush
all appearances of Truth in the bud; yet in the year 1545 several Protestants
at St. Lucar, Valedolid, Sevil, and other places in Spain, suffered death, no
less then thirty being Martyred at one time, and five years after, diverse more
likewise were put to death, as one Francis Romans, a Merchant; De Cacalla a
man of Excellent Learning, and one Rochus a skilful Graver of Images, who
turned Protestants and died for the same; also one John Pontio Gonsalvo a
Priest, Juliano, Leon, Arias Losada a Physician; Together with a Lady and
several Women and Virgins who were burnt at several times in diverse places,
and Twenty others besides who were burnt in one Fire: after they had endured
all the horrid torments of the Rack, the Pully, the Trough, the Barnacle, the
Twisting Cord, and the rest of the barbarous Tortures and Inventions of the
cursed Inquisition. Nay diverse English men being betrayed by the Insinuation of
wicked Informers were likewise burnt in Spain, as Nicholas Burton Merchant of
London was burnt at Sevil, and another English man with him, and not long after
two more named John Baker and Villiam Burgate, and about the same time William
Burges Master of an English Ship was burnt there likewise, and one William
Hooker a youth of about sixteen years old, was stoned to death for the bold
profession of the Truth.

As Portugal is but a little Kingdom, and the power of the Pope and his Clergy
very considerable there as well as in Spain, they have wonderfully suppressed the
power of the Truth with their Tortures, yet some have their likewise suffered
for the Gospel, and among others William Gardner an English man, whom they put
to death with most exquisite Tortures at Lisbon in the year 1552, for taking
the Host out of a Cardinals Hand, and stamping it under his Feet; He boldly
asserting to the King himself, That he did it out of Conscience, as not being
able to endure to see the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper irreverently used
to so great Idolatry; and although all manner of cruelty was used toward him,
yet he dyed with extraordinary Constancy, singing Psalms in the Flames to the
very last moment of his life.

The Rage and Fury of Papists in the Low Countries or Netherlands was no less
then in other places. For the Inquisition being introduced there, it was
accompanied with all manner of cruelty. At Antwerp one Nicholas an Holy good
man was bound up in a Sack and drowned. In Holland a Learned Preacher called
Pistorius was burnt, being carried to the stake with a Fools Coat on his back.
Wendel muta a Widow likewise suffered death with much Constancy. Several
Ministers were beheaded, among the rest one George Scherter, who after his head
had been cut off for some time, and his body lying on his Belly, he turning
himself on his Back, and crossing his Right Foot over the left, and his right
hand over the left continued so to the great admiration of the Spectators, and
the Conversion of many.

Several were drowned, others were made away in Prisons, others shut up in dark
and noisome places, and none suffered to come at them; being fed only with Bread
and Water till they were famished; At Lorain several were Martyred, some by
Fire, others beheaded.

There was a very great Persecution all over Flanders about the year 1544; so
that there was hardly a Town or City in all the Country wherein some were not
banished, beheaded, or condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, neither was there
any respect either to Age or Sex, but especially at Gaunt many of the chief
Persons were burned for being Protestants, and several others in Brabant and
Artois, insomuch that Two Hundred Men and Women were cruelly destroyed at one
time, some of them being drowned, some burned alive, and some privately
murdered, so that the Hangman began to be tired and wearied out with such
continual Executions.

At the Town of Mecklin, Dornick and Delden, several were put to death, and
among the rest two Noble Virgins who were Sisters; and likewise a Mother and
her three Sons who all dyed, owning the Gospel, and zealously exclaiming
against the Cruelty and Idolatry of the Papists; And about the same time they
miserably tormented one Bertrand for trampling the Host under his Feet, whom
they thrice put to the Rack, and because he would not recant in the Market
place of Dornick, they put a Ball of Iron into his Mouth to keep him from
speaking, and then crushed his Right hand between two flat Red hot Irons till
the form of it was changed, and then did the like by his Foot, which he endured
with admirable patience, then tying him round the wast by a Pully, and making a
Fire underneath, they hoisted him up and down till he was burnt to Ashes, which
they cast into the River.

There were several Martyred at Valence, and Lisle and one of the Judges
pronouncing sentence against these good People, said, This Day you shall go to
dwell with all the Devils in Hell Fire.

But the greatest Instrument of the Devil in those Countries was the Duke of
Alva, who was sent by the King of Spain to Root the Protestants out of the
Low Countries. This Duke boasted one time at his own Table, That he had been
diligent to root out Heresy; for besides those he had slain in the Wars, He
had put into the hands of the Common Hangman to be Executed within the space of
six years no less then Eighteen Thousand Persons

And to complete this sad Catastrophe we may also remember that William of
Nastaw Prince of Orang was shot by a Villain called Joanville, who was
encouraged by a Jacobine Friar to do it; the Rascal was thrust through with an
Halbert, and the Friar was hanged: But this wound not proving mortal, they
hired one Gerard a Burgundion, who standing behind the Pillar in a Room, shot
the Prince dead as he past by.

PSALM 105.
WE nothing can of merit claim,
Not for our sakes thy aid afford,
But for the Honor of thy Name
Thy Mercy and unfailing Word.
Why should the insulting Heathen cry,
Where Is now the God they vainly Praise?
Our Lord enthroned above the Sky
All underneath at pleasure swayes;
Their Gods but Gold and Silver be
Made by a frail Artificer;
For they have eyes that cannot see,
Dumb Mouths, and Ears that cannot hear:
Fools on their Altars Incense throw,
Who nothing smell, their feet are bound,
Nor have they Power to move or go:
Their throats give Passage to no sound,
Their hands can neither give nor take,
Unapt to punish or defend,
As senseless they who Idols make,
Or to their carved Statues bend:
Your hopes in God O Israel place,
He is your help and strong defense;
Be he you Priests of Aarons Race
The Object of your Confidence;
In him all you that fear him Trust,
He shall protect you in destress:
The Lord is of his Promise Just,
And will his Faithful Servants Bless
He in the Heaven of Heavens resides,
And over all his Creatures reigns;
Among the Sons of men divides
The Earth, and all that Earth contains;
Who sleep within the Vaults of Death
No Offerings to his Altars bring:
O Praise his Name while we have Breath,
And loudly Halelu-jah sing.
eight panels representing various methods of execution and punishment Mr.
Wischard burnt

A 1000 drown in a River

Candles made of Men's fatt

Irish Children Kill ye English.

Some buried alive

A Girl hanged in her mothers hair

Some hanged on tenters

Bibles burnt.



The Persecutions and Cruelties of the Papists upon the Protestants in Scotland
and Ireland.
AS most Kingdoms in Europe felt the rage and fury of Romish Cruelty and
Persecution, so Scotland though in the frozen north was not insensible thereof;
For in the Year 1572. Mr. Patrick Hamilton of an Ancient and Honorable Family,
and called Abbot of Fern, left Scotland and went into Germany, where conversing
with Luther and Melancton, he greatly increased in godly knowledge and learning;
and returning home he publicly Preached concerning Faith and good works, and
against the Supertitions and Idolatry of the Papists.

This so enraged James Beaton Archbishop of St. Andrews, that in the absence
of the King, Mr. Hamilton was seized upon by the Bishops Officers, and carried
to the Castle, and the next day he was brought forth to Judgment, and Condemned
to be Burnt for the Testimony of God; The Articles charged against him, were
about Pilgrimages, Purgatory, Praying to Saints and for the Dead.

After Dinner the Fire was prepared, which some thought was only to terrify
him, but it pleased God to strengthen him against the fear of Death, and so he
was tied to the Stake; giving his Garments to his Servant, and saying thus to
him: These will not profit in the Fire, they will Profit thee; After this thou
can recieve no Benefit by me, except the example of my Death; which I pray
thee to remember; for though it be bitter to the Flesh, and fearful before
men, yet it is the entrance into eternal Life, which none shall possess who
deny Jesus Christ before this wicked Generation. And the Eire being kindled he
cried with a loud voice, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit how long shall Darkness
overwhelm this Realm? and how long will thou suffer the Tyranny of these men? A
Friar troubling him by crying out, Turn thou Heretic, call upon our Lady, say
Salve Regina, etc he replied, Depart from me, and trouble me not, thou
Messenger of Satan: and speaking to one Campbel the chief among them, he said,
Wicked man thou know the contrary, and have confessed the contrary to me, I
appeal thee before the Tribune Seat of Jesus Christ; after which words he
resigned up his Spirit to God; and within a few days (...) Friar dyed in a
Frenzy and desperation.

The Archbishop of St. Andrews likewise called before him two Gentlemen, David
Straton, and M Norman Gomlay: Mr. Straton being accused for Heres^ was much
troubled at it, and thereupon frequente^ the company of Religious men; and
hearing tha^ Text read, He that denies me b fore men, or is ashame^ of me in
this Wicked Generation, I will deny him before m^ Father and his Holy Angels;
he steadfastly lift up his ey^^ and hands to Heaven and burst forth into these
word O Lord I have been wicked, and justly may thou wit^draw thy Grace from
me, but Lord for thy Mercy sake, (...) me never deny thy Truth for fear of
Death or Corporal pain Being afterward together with Mr. Norman broug^^ to
Judgment in Holy Rood-House, where the King himself was present, they were both
condemned to the fire, and in the afternoon were first Hanged and the Burnt,
which they cheerfully suffered.

There was likewise one Dean Thomas Foret, wh^ who used to Preach to his
parishoners every Lords da^ out of the Epistles and Gospels as they came in
orde^ for which being complained of to the Bishop of D^keldon, he reproved him
for it, telling him that (...) was too much to preach every Sunday, since the
People might think they ought to do so likewise; and s^ the Bishop, Is it not
enough for you when you find a good Epistle and Gospel, to set forth and preach
the Liberty of Holy Church, and let the rest alone. Dean Thomas replied, that
he had read them all over, and knew no bad ones among them, But, said he, when
your Lordship shows me any such, I will pass them by; The Bishop answered, I
thank God I never knew what the Old and New Testament was, but go your ways
and repent of these fancies, ere it be too late: The Dean answered, My cause is
good and just in the presence of God, and therefore I care not what follows
thereupon; and so went away; but he was shortly after sent for before Cardinal
Beton, by whom he was condemned and Burned for an Heretic.

The Year after Jerome Russel, and Alexander Kennedy who was not above eighten
years old, were brought before the Archbishop and his Associates, who railed
upon them, and called them Heretics; Jerome Russel replied, This is your hour
and power of darkness, now sit ye as Judges, and we are wrongfully accused, but
the day will come wherein our Innocence will appear, and ye shall see your own
blindness to your everlasting confusion, go forward and fulfill the measure of
your Iniquity. A while after they were sentenced to dye, and as they went to
Execution, Jerome comforted Kennedy, saying, Brother fear not, greater is he
that is in us than he that is in the World; the pain we are to suffer is short,
and shall be light, but our joy and consolation shall never have an end; let us
therefore strive to enter into our Master and Saviors Joy, by the same
straight way which he has taken before us; Death cannot hurt us, for it is
destroyed by him for whose sake we now suffer. And in this manner past reason
they joyfully gave up their Souls unto God in the Flaming Fire.

In the year 1543. Cardinal Beton coming to Edinburgh, caused several Religious
Persons to be brought before him, and when he could prove nothing else against
them: he caused four men to be hanged upon suspicion that they had eaten a
Goose upon a Friday. And a Woman with a Child sucking at her breast, was
drowned for refusing to pray to the Virgin Mary. Many others were likewise
Banished and Imprisoned for the Gospel; and among the rest John Rogers a
learned and Godly Minister, whom he caused to be murdered in Prison, and then
thrown over the Wall, giving it out, that by attempting to make his escape he
broke his neck.

In the year 1546. Mr. George Wischard a Famous Minister was sent for to appear
before Cardinal Beton and the other Bishops at St. Andrews; where a Priest was
ordered to curse him, who called him Runnagate, Traitor, Thief, etc. However
Mr. Wischard gave them an account of his Faith and Doctrine, but they not being
able to answer him, immediately condemned him to be Burnt; and presently a fire
was prepared over against the Castle, and Velvet Cushions were laid in the
Castle windows for the Cardinal and the rest of the Prelates to see him suffer;
and for fear he should be rescued by his Friends, all the Castle Guns were
mounted against the place of his Execution, by the Cardinals order; then with a
Rope about his Neck, and a Chain about his middle he was fastened to the Stake;
and having earnestly prayed, and Exhorted the People, and forgiven his Enemies
and persecutors, he said thus: I Beseech you Brethren Exhort your Prelates to
learn the Word of God, that they may be ashamed to do evil, and learn to do
good, or else there shall come upon them the Wrath of God, which they shall not
eschew: Then the Hangman upon his knees said, Sr, I pray forgive me, for I am
not the cause of your Death. Mr. Wischard called him to him and kissing his
Cheek said, Lo here is a token that I forgive thee, My Heart do thing Office;
and so he was tied to the Stake and the fire kindled.

The Captain of the Castle came to him, and bid him be of good Courage; to whom
Mr. Wischard said, This fire Torments my Body, but no whit abates my Spirits;
then looking toward the Cardinal he said, He who in such State from that high
place feeds his eyes with my Torments, within few days shall be hanged out at
the same Window, with as much shame and Ignominy as he there leans with Pride:
then his Breath being stopped with the Flames, he gave up the Ghost.

This Prophecy was fulfilled in a short time after; for the people being
generally discontented at the Cruelty used against Mr. Whischard; several
persons conspired against him, and killed him in the Castle, and the Provost
raising the Town, came to the Castle Gates, crying, What have you done with my
Lord Cardinal? where is he? To whom they answered from within, Return to your
Houses, for he has received his reward, and will trouble the World no more.
But they cried, We will never depart till we see him. Then was he hanged out at
that very window to satisfy them he was dead, and so the people departed.

Shortly after one Adam Wallace was Burned likewise; and Henry Forest suffered
the same Cruel Death, upon Account of Heresy. One Walter Mill was accused for
Heresy, and being bid to recant, he said, I am Corn and not Chaff, I will not
recant the Truth; and being thereupon condemned to the Fire, and all things
made ready to that purpose, they commanded him to go to the Stake; No, said he,
by the Laws of God I am forbidden to lay hands on my self, therefore do you put
me in the Fire, and you shall see my resolution. Having then made his Prayer
unto God, he spoke thus to the people; Although I have been a Great Sinner, yet
it is not for that, but for Gods Truth contained in his Word of the Old and New
Testament that I now suffer; and God out of his abundant Mercy does honor me
so far, as to make me among other of his Servants to seal his Truth with my
Blood; Dear Friends, as you would escape Eternal Death, be no more seduced with
the Lies of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, etc. but trust only in God:
After he had thus spoke, he was tied to the Stake, and the Fire being kindled,
he quietly slept in the Lord; and was the last person that dyed for the
Protestant Religion in Scotland.

In the year of our Lord 1641. there brake forth a most horrid and Bloody
Rebellion and Massacre of the Irish Papists, committed on the English in
Ireland; a Nation famous for the Birth of diverse worthy persons therein, but
none more renowned than that Excellent, Learned and Religious Person James
Usher, late Lord Archbishop of Armagh, and Lord Primate of Ireland; who
amongst many other extraordinary Gifts and Graces which it pleased the Almighty
to bestow upon him, was wonderfully endued with a Spirit of Prophecy; from
which among many other things he foretold this bloody Rebellion forty years
before it came to pass, in a Sermon which he preached at Dublin in the Year
1601. where from Ezekiel 4.6. discoursing concerning the Prophets bearing the
Iniquity of Judah forty days, the Lord therein appointing a day for a Year, he
made this direct application in relation to the Connivance at Popery at that
time. From this Year, says he, will I reckon the sin of Ireland, that those
whom you now embrace shall be your Ruin, and you shall bear your Iniquity:
which Prediction proved exactly true; for from that time 1601. to the Year
1641. was just forty years, in which it is notoriously known that the Rebellion
and destruction of Ireland happened; and which was acted by those Popish
Priests, Jesuits and other Papists which were then connived at.

For the Jesuits, Priests and Friars were the chief Instigators to this horrid
Massacre, by continual incensing and stirring up the Popish Gentry and
Commonalty to show the utmost of their Zeal therein, and this without any
provocation given by the English: for it was observed, that they had all the
Liberty they could reasonably desire, and that there was not any reason for
such Cruel Proceedings against the English, but only for that damnable and
unpardonable sin of being Protestants: And the Popish Clergy the more to engage
the deluded Papists to murder them, every where loudly declaimed, That they
were Heretics, and not fit to be suffered any longer amongst them; that it was
no more sin to kill one of them, than to kill a Dog, and that it was a mortal
and unpardonable sin to relieve or protect any of them. And when their business
was so fixed that they did not fear any miscarriage, the success of this Great
Design was recommended in their public Prayers, as tending very much to the
advancement of the Catholic cause; and they likewise maliciously represented
to the People the severe proceedings against the Papists in England.

All things being in a readiness, they proceeded to the Execution of this
Damnable Contrivance; but their proceeding therein was various; some of the
Irish only stripping the English Protestants, and turning them out a Doors
naked in the cold and snow, others cruelly Murdering man, woman and child,
without the least compassion; but they all resolved upon this point, that by
all manner of ways and means they would universally destroy and root the
English out of Ireland: Nay the Irish were so inveterately malicious against
them, that they would not endure the very sound of their Language, but punished
those that spoke English, and the names of English places they changed into Old
Irish. In some places they killed the Cows and Sheep, merely because they were
English; and sometimes they cut off their Legs, or a piece out of their
Buttocks, and so left them to live in pain; and in other places those English
Cattle that they could not devour, they killed them, and left them in great
multitudes stinking upon the Ground.

The Popish Priests gave the Sacrament to diverse of the Irish upon Condition
that they should neither spare Man, Woman, nor Child of the Protestants,
saying, That it did them a great deal of good to wash their hands in their
Blood. Some of their Priests Excommunicated all that should from thenceforth
relieve or harbor any English, Scotch, or Welshman, or give them Alms at their
Doors, whereby many were Famished to Death. Yea the Popish Monks and Friars
exhorted them with Tears not to spare the English, but utterly to destroy them;
nay they boasted that when they had made an end of them in Ireland, they would
go over into England, and would not leave the memorial of an Englishman under
Heaven; and their Priests told them, it was as lawful to kill an English man
as to kill a Sheep or a Dog; and that it was no more Pity or Conscience to take
their Estates from them, than to take a Bone out of a Dogs mouth.

The day before this Horrid Massacre began, the Priests gave the people a
dismission at Mass, with full liberty to go out and take possession of all
their Lands, which they pretended were unjustly detained from them by the
English, although they were justly forfeited by their repeated Rebellions and
Treasons against the Government. They further told them, that they might
lawfully strip, rob, and despoil them of all their Goods and Chattels, The
Protestants being (as they said) worse than Dogs, for they were Devils and
worshipped the Devil, and therefore, that the Killing of such was Meritorious,
and an Excellent Preservative against the Pains of Purgatory; since the Bodies
of such Catholics as should dye in this Quarrel, would not be cold before
their Souls should ascend up into Heaven; so that they need not fear the Pains
of Purgatory: which occasioned some of these Murdering Villains to Boast, after
they had Massacred many of the English, that if they should dye presently, they
should go straight to Heaven.

When this Horrid Rebellion first began, several Irish Gentlemen pretended
great kindness to some of their Protestant Neighbors, and persuaded them to
put their Goods and Cattle into their hands; engaging that they would secure
them from the rage of the Rabble; which made the Protestants so confident,
because of former familiarity, that they gave them Inventories of all they had;
nay they dug up some of their best things which they had hidden in the
Ground, and put it into their hands, whereby they got vast Quantities of Goods
into their hands; And yet like True Papists they cheated them of it all; nay
which was more Barbarous, they promised the English that if they would be
contented to lose their Goods, they and their Wives, and Children, should
peaceably depart the Country; and yet when they had got all they had, they
inhumanely murdered them.

In one place there were no less than Twenty two Widows, who were first Robbed,
and then stripped stark naked, and when in an House they had covered themselves
with Straw, the Bloody Papists threw in burning Straw among them, on purpose to
burn them together; And in a while after they broke forth into such abominable
Cruelties, Bloody Massacres and Murders, as would make the heart of any
Christian to ache, and his Ears to tingle at the Relation of them.

In the Castle of Lisgol above an Hundred and Twenty Men, Women and Children
were burnt together: Another Castle was delivered to one of the Popish
Commanders, upon Condition their lives should be saved, but as soon as he
entered he cruelly murdered and destroyed them all without Mercy.

At Portendown Bridge a thousand Men, Women, and Children were drowned in the
River; and it was testified upon Oath, that nine days after there was the
Apparition of a man bolt upright in the water, Breast-high, with his hands
lifted up to Heaven, and that he was seen several times in that Posture, from
December to the end of Lent, at which time some of the English Army passing
that way, saw it likewise: after which it Vanished away.

One Elizabeth Price made Oath, that she with other Women whose Husbands and
Children were drowned in that place, hearing of those Apparitions, went thither
one Evening, at which time they saw a Woman rise out of the River Breast-high,
her hair hanging down, which was as white as Snow, and so was her skin, and
that she often cried out, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge; which so affrighted them,
that they went away.

In Queens County, an Englishman, his wife, five Children and a Maid were all
hanged together, and then cut down and put into a hole; the youngest Child
though it was hanged, was not quite dead when it was put in, but put up its
hand and cried, Mammy, Mammy, and yet these Villains without Mercy buried it
alive.

They stripped a Scotch-man, and knocked him down for dead, but he afterward
recovering went into the Town naked, whereupon they hewed him all to pieces:
They also ripped up his Wives Belly so that the Child dropped out: They likewise
hanged up diverse other Women with Child, and ripping them up, they gave their
Infants to be devoured by Dogs and Swine. In one place they set a Castle on
fire wherein were many Protestants, and then rejoycingly said among themselves,
Oh how sweetly do they fry.

In one place they burnt two English Bibles, and said, it was Hell fire they
burnt; they cut other Bibles to pieces, and burnt them, threatening to do the
like to all English Bibles: and in one place they took a Bible and laid it in a
puddle of water, and then stamping on it, said, A Plague on it, this Bible has
bred all the Quarrel. A Papist would have persuaded a man and his wife to have
joined with them in the Massacre, but they protested, That rather than they
would forsake their Religion, they would dye upon the Swords point; then they
would have had the Woman burn her Bible, but she told him, Rather than she
would burn her Bible, she would dye the Death; whereupon they were both cruelly
murdered.

These Barbarous Villains caused some Children to carry their Aged Parents to
the River, and drown them: some Wives were forced to help to hang their
Husbands; in one Town they caused a young man to Murder his own Father, and
then hanged him up; in another place they forced a Woman to kill her Husband,
and then caused her Son to kill his Mother, and then immediately hanged her
Son: and their cursed malice was thereby shown, that they might as much as in
them lay, destroy Soul and Body together. Yea so detestable was their Cruelty,
that they taught Irish Children to kill English Children, and two Boys boasted
that they had at several times murdered and drowned thirty six English Women
and Children; The Irish Women followed this Army of Murderers, and provoked the
men to Cruelty, crying out, Kill them all, spare neither Man, Woman, nor Child;
and many of them stoned the English Women and their Children to Death; and
cried, Slay them all, the English are fit meat for Dogs, and their Children are
Bastards. Yea so Implacable was their malice, that one of them was very angry
with her Husband because he did not bring the Grease of a Fat Gentlewoman whom
they had slain, for them to make Candles of, which was commonly practiced by
them in other places.

Yea they Boasted that the day was their own, and that ere long they would not
leave one Protestant Rogue living, but would utterly destroy every one that had
but a drop of English Blood in him: yea they vowed, they would not leave one
English Beast alive, nor any of their breed.

Alas! who can comprehend the Sighs, the Groans, the trembling and Astonishment
of these poor Innocent Souls, to find themselves so suddenly surprised, and
that without Remedy; What Shrieks, Cries, and bitter Lamentations were there of
Husbands, Wives, Children, Servants and Friends, howling and weeping, finding
themselves without all hope of deliverance from their present woeful Miseries
and Calamities.

For by these and all manner of Cruelties and Barbarities which Hell it self
could invent, the Irish and English Papists murdered and destroyed in a few
Months near Three Hundred Thousand Protestants, as it is commonly computed,
without any manner of provocation, but only because they were Protestants;
whose deaths the Divine Vengeance in a short time after recompensed upon
several of the chief Murderers, many thousands perishing by the Sword and the
Plague that followed it, and the rest without doubt, unless they heartily
repent will receive the reward of their wickedness.

PSALM 54.
LOrd for thy Promise sake defend,
And thy All-saving Shield extend:
O hear our Cries,
Which with wet eyes
And sighs to thee ascend.
For Cruel men our lives pursue,
And who thy Statutes never knew.
Suppress our Foes;
O favor those
Who to our Souls are True.
With Vengeance recompense their hate,
And in an instant ruinate:
Then will we bring
Our Offering,
And thy great Acts relate.
Thy name for ever Praised be,
Who from those snares have set us free:
For lo! Our Eyes
Our Enemies
Desired Destruction see.
six panels representing various events in the Anglo-Papal conflict Spanish
Invasion

Martyrs burnt

Burning of London

Gunpouder Treason

Sr. Godfry murderd

Traitors Executed



The Cruelties, Plots, and Treasons of the Papists against the Protestants in
England, with a brief account of the late Horrid Plot.
AFter having briefly epitomized the bloody Cruelties and slaughters of this
Monster of Rome, and his Vassals, throughout Europe, let us now return home,
and see if our own Country has escaped better than our Neighbors. Englishmen
are generally accounted to be of a merciful nature, and pitiful disposition,
apt to be touched with the miseries of others, and are not in their own natures
bloody, barbarous or Cruel; what then may be the cause of those dreadful marks
of Rage and Fury that have been seen among us? How has this Fair Island been
made an Acheldama, a Field of Skulls and Martyrs bones? All this we shall find
proceeds from corrupt principles of Religion. I doubt not, (says a worthy
Divine) but Papists are made like other men; nature has not generally given
them such Savage and Cruel Dispositions, but their Religion has made them so;
I am loath to say it, and yet I am confident it is true, that many Papists would
have been excellent Persons and very good men, if their Religion had not
hindered them, if the Doctrines, and Principles of their Church had not spoiled
their natural Disposition. Good God! that any thing that is called Religion
should so presently strip men of all Humanity, and transform the mild and
gentle Race of Mankind into Wolves and Tigers.

It is Popery that alters the Nature of Englishmen, and makes them act like
Turks, Infidels or Barbarians: its principles infect the Blood, and invenome
the Soul; instead of being weak and humble, it makes them Proud and Arrogant;
instead of performing the Commands of Christ, it makes men obey the Pope,
though never so contrary to Religion. If our Blessed Savior says, Hurt no man,
pray for your Persecutors, submit to Magistrates and Governors. The Pope and
his Doctrines say, Kill every man that is not of your Religion; Curse those
that disobey your Commands: Kill, Stab, or depose your Kings or Governors. This
is the Doctrine, and these are the Principles and Commands of the Romish Church.

It is some hundreds of years since this Bloody Beast of persecution began to
show his Fangs and armed Claws in this Kingdom; and it was almost as soon
perceived and testified against by some good men in those times. For in the
Year one Thousand Two Hundred, John of Salisbury declared against the
Corruptions and Superstitions of the Romish Church, and plainly discovered the
oppression of the burden of the Pope and his Ravenous Clergy; and after him
John Grostead Bishop of Lincoln wrote to the Pope, and admonished him, for
which he had like to have lost his life; yet the Pope did only hitherto show
his Teeth, and could not take his full swinge in Blood and Murder, which he
afterward attained to.

But since the Papists impertinently urge against us the Newness of our
Religion, and that it was not known before Martin Luthers days, we shall
produce much more early Testimonies against the Errors and abuses in the Romish
Church: For we find in the Year 884. John Patrick Erigena; a Britan, who was
ordained the first Reader in Oxford by King Alfred, was afterward Condemned,
and Martyred by the Pope, for writing a Book concerning the Sacrament. And in
the year 960. many Ministers and Divines wore the mark of the Beast in their
faces, being by the Popes order Branded in the Faces with hot Irons, for
Dissenting in many things about the Mass, Purgatory, Monkery, and the like; and
for saying, that Rome was Babylon, and that Cloisters were the Nurses of
Sodomy. In the year 1126. one Arnold and Englishman, and a Preacher of the
Gospel, was Butchered at Oxford, for Preaching against the Pride of the
Prelates, and the wicked lives of the Priests. In the Year 1160. the poor
Persecuted Waldenses came hither for succor, but instead thereof they were
Persecuted, Condemned, Burnt, Whipped, and stigmatized for their Religion, both
at Oxford and other places.

After which almost in every Year it pleased God to raise up several Learned
and worthy men to testify against the Horrid Corruptions of Rome, both by
Speaking, Writing and Disputing against them. As in the Year 1170. Gualo, and
Gilbert Foliot, Doctors of Divinity, and after them Silvester Gerald, Alexander
a Divine, Gualter Maxes Arch Deacon of Oxford, Sebald Archbishop of York,
William Stringham Doctor of Divinity, Roger Bacon Fellow of Merton College, a
Divine and Mathematician, John Scotus the Great Scotch-man; and about the same
time Doctor John Wickliff, Jeoffery Chaucer, William Wickham Bishop of
Winchester, and many other Learned men.

All these gave ample Testimonies by their public Writings against the many
Corruptions, evil Doctrines and Superstitious Worship of the Romish Church,
with the hazard of their Lives, Honors, Liberties, Estates and Fortunes; so
that many were persecuted, and some were burnt in the Reign of King Henry the
second, 1174. and in the Year 1380. Vtred Bolton, and John Ashwerly endured
Persecution; and a while after John Ashton, Walter Bruce, John Pateskul, and
Doctor Crump, were persecuted; and William Sawtree a Divine of Oxford was
martyred, and William Swinderly was Burnt in Smithfield. In the Year 1407.
William Thorp was Burnt, and Lawrence Redman and six others grievously
persecuted. In the Year 1417. the Lord Cobham was Burnt in St. Giles Fields:
John Purey and Will. White, and Richard White were burnt. Peter Clark a Divine
of Oxford, for maintaining publicly the Doctrine of Wicklif, was forced to
fly, but was taken beyond Sea, his Tongue cut out, then hanged, and afterward
burnt. Roger Ovely was hanged and Quartered. In the Year 1447. Humfery Duke of
Gloucester was murdered by the Papists, for being a favourer of Wicklif, and
other Preachers of the Truth; and diverse others were many ways persecuted for
the sake of Religion, before the rising of Luther; God having in all Ages
raised up some to Testify to the Truth, and to maintain the purity of the
Gospel.

And besides these Divines, Learned and great men, there were several other
good men of a meaner quality who openly owned the Truth, and suffered for the
same; and as the number of the professors grew greater, who now began to be
called Lollards, so Persecution grew hotter, and the Rage and Malice of the
Papists increased. In the Reign of King Henry the fifth, 1413. Sir Roger Acton,
John Brown, John Beverly, and Thirty six more, were all put to Death in St.
Giles Fields; and John Claydon and Richard Turning, Benedict, Vlman and several
others were burnt, and many Imprisoned. In the Reign of King Henry the sixth,
William Tailor, one of Wickliffs followers, was burnt in Smithfield: Henry Web,
and Henry Florence, were Cruelly whipped, and about an hundred and twenty men and
Women suffered persecution, many of them were burnt. William White was
Martyred; and at the same time two were burnt at Colchester; Richard Hoveden a
Citizen of London was Martyred for the same cause near the Town, and several
more severely whipped and terribly handled; Thomas Baily and Richard Wiche both
Ministers were burnt; one in Smithfield and the other on Tower Hill.

In the Reign of Edward the fourth, John Goose was Burnt; and in H nry the
sevenths Regn, one Jean Boughton of Fourscore years old was burnt in Norfolk;
another person was Burnt in Smithfield; several were likewise stigmatized, and
many did penance. William Tilsworth was Burnt in the Town of Anasham, where
they forced his own Daughter to set fire to Faggots that were to Burn her
Father; and two Years after Thomas Bernard, and John Melton, and one Roberts
were Burnt in the same County of Buckingham. Thomas Chase after many Cruel
Usages and hardships was Murdered in Prison. Thomas Norris: was burnt at
Norwich and Lawrence Guest at Salisbury, and a Woman at Chipping Sadbury, with
several other persons in the Reign of King Henry the seventh.

In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the Flames increased very much, and
abundance Suffered in every place. In the Year 1511. Willam Sweeting and John B
ewster were burnt in Smithfield: the same year William Carder, Robert Harrison,
and Agnes Grebel were burnt, they forcing the Husband and Daughter of the Woman
to come in as Witnesses against her: After this one Mr. Style with his Book of
the Revelations, and twenty five more were Burnt; five other Persons were
accused for reading an Heretical Book, which contained many Damnable Opinions;
and what should this Book be, but only the Evangelists in English. In the Year
1514. Richard Hun was murdered in the Lollards Tower, and afterward burnt;
John Brown, John Stileman, and Thomas Man were burnt in Smithfield; Robert
Cousin was Burnt at Buckingham, Christopher Shoemaker at Newberry, Richard and
Robert Bartlet, and John Scrivener were likewise burnt; and the Children of
John Scrivener were forced to set fire to their Father; For it was usual with
them to compel Children to accuse their Parents, and Parents their Children;
Husbands their Wives, and Wives their Husbands; Intimate Friends, Brothers and
Sisters to accuse one another; and many Hundreds were likewise forced to recant
and abjure against their Consciencies, or else be Burnt.

There were two things about this time that very much increased the professors
of the Gospel in England; One was the appearance of Martin Luther in the World,
who boldly owned the Truth, and loudly Declaimed against the corruptions of the
Romish Church. Another thing was the Art of Printing, which now began to be
common, whereby the True Religion was the more easily promulgated and Dispersed
through every Country, and in all Languages.

This Allarum'd the Pope and his Debauched Clergy, who were afraid to have
their wicked Doctrines and Practices discovered to the people and thereupon
they began to rage, and bestir themselves, raising Persecution, and making
destruction and Slaughter in all places throughout the Kingdom against the
Lutherans, as they were now called. In the Year 1519. several Protestans were
apprehended at Coventry, and imprisoned in filthy and nasty Dungeons, six of
whom were afterward burnt: Robbert Silkeb, and Thomas Harding were burnt
shortly after. One Sigal Nicholson a Stationer at Cambridge, was hung up by the
Privy-members for having Luther's Books in his House: several likewise abjured;
and the Body of William Tracy Esquire; in Gloucestershire, because he had left
nothing for Masses for his Soul, was taken out of the Grave and Burnt two Years
after his Death. Richard Brafield a Monk of Bury, after he had been whipped and
most Cruelly handled in Prison, and Gagged, Beaten, and Bound, and Degraded
after a very shameful manner, was Burnt with much Cruelty in London,
continuing half an Hour alive in the Flames for want of Wood; and when his left
arm was burnt, he rubbed it with his right hand, and it fell down in the Fire;
he continued in Prayer without moving to the last moment: several were
imprisoned, and fed with Bread made of Sawdust; some were set in the Stocks
with Horseleaches on their Legs, and their hands so manacled with Irons, that
the Flesh grew higher than the Irons, and with Iron Collars about their Necks:
and many were Racked till they were Lamed. John Tewsbury, James Bainham,
Valentine Sheafe and his Wife, John Bent, and one Trapnel, were all Burnt about
the same time; three were hanged in Chains for Burning the Image or Rood of
Dover Court. John Frith, Andrew Honor, Thomas Bennet, William Tindall, John
Lambert, William Leiton and Collins a Lawyer, were burnt, and Robert Packington
Murdered: Doctor Barns, Thomas Garret, William Hieron, were burnt in
Smithfield, John Potter was murdered in Prison: Robert Testwood, Anthony
Parker and Henry Filmer, were burnt at Windsor. About five hundred persons in
and about London either dyed in prison, or were burnt in Smithfield. In the
Year 1541. Damlip, Dod, Sary, were Slain. One Henry at Colchester, Kerby and
Clark at Ipswich and Bury were burnt. In the Year 1546. Mistress Ann Askew, one
of the Ladies belonging to Queen Katherine Parr, because she would not confess
any other Ladies, was put upon the Rack, and the Lord Chancellor himself being
more Cruel, he acted then the Executioner, ordered her to be wracked to the
utmost; she was afterward Burnt in Smithfield; and at the same time and place
were likewise Burnt Nicholas Belerrian a Minister in Shrop-shire, John Adams a
Tailor, and John Lacels a Gentleman belonging to King Henry the Eighth; these
beholding the Invincible Constancy and patience of Mistress Askew, were thereby
much encouraged in their Sufferings.

About the same time Sir John Blage of the Kings Privy Chamber was falsely
accused to have spoken against the Mass, upon which he was condemned to be
burnt in Smithfield, whereupon the Earl of Bedford begged his pardon of the
King, who Commanded it to be drawn immediately. After his release Sir George
coming to the King, Ah my Pig, said he, (for so he usually called him;) Yea,
(said Blage) if your Majesty had not been better to me than your Bishops were,
your Pig had been roasted before this time. Presently after Gardener Bishop of
Winchester and his Confederates set forth a Cruel Proclamation in the Kings
Name, for abolishing the Scriptures and all other English Books that discovered
the truth to the people, and having obtained this, they very much rejoiced
therein, hoping that they had now for ever suppressed the Gospel, so that it
should never rise again; and to strike the greater terror into men's minds, they
made a diligent search after the Professors of the Truth, of whom they took the
Names of some, drove away others, and hereby doubted not but to attain their
ends. But it pleased God that in the midst of these subtle Contrivances, for
the destruction of his Gospel and Servants, to take away King Henry the Eighth
within four Months after the Proclamation; and thereby all their hopes and
projects were utterly disappointed.

King Henry the Eighth being dead, his only Son Prince Edward (our English
Josiah) ascended the Throne, under whom the Protestant Religion was
established, and Popery and Superstition abolished; for he caused all Images to
be demolished, and as Idolatrous to be taken out of all Churches within his
Dominions; the Learned men of his time he encouraged, and commanded them to
open and expound the Scriptures, he abolished the Mass, and ordered the Service
to be read in the English Tongue, and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be
administered in both kinds to the People.

But it pleased God in a short time to take him to himself: for in the Seventh
Year of his Reign, and the seventeenth Year of his age, he was taken with a
lingering sickness; during which time a Marriage was concluded between the Lord
Guilford Dudley eldest Son to the Duke of Northumbereand, and the Lady Jane the
Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, whose mother being then alive was Daughter to
Marry King Henry the Eighth's second Sister.

The Marriage being finished, and the King every day more sick than other, so
that he seemed past Recovery, the Duke of Northumberland being ambitious to
advance his Family, persuaded the King that the Church and the True Religion
would be in great danger, if he did not choose a pious Successor; and that it
was the part of a good Prince to set aside all other respects, when the Glory
of God and the good of his Subjects were concerned.

The King partly for his great desire to have the Protestant Religion
confirmed, and partly for the entire love which he bore to his Cousin the Lady
Jane, signed Letters Patents under the Broad Seal to appoint the Lady Jane to
succeed him in the Kingdom, although her Title were excluded by the Lady Mary
(who was always a zealous Papist) and the Lady Elizabeth. This was afterward
confirmed by the Nobility and Chief Lawyers of the Kingdom, and was subscribed
to by all the Kings Council, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Lndon, who upon the
Death of King Edward which happened in a short time after, proclaimed the Lady
Jane Queen in London and Westminster.

The Lady Mary being in Hartford-shire, and hearing of it, presently sent to
the Lords of the Council, commanding and requiring them to Proclaim her Queen;
which if they refused to do, she threatened to recover her Right by force of
Arms. The Lords returned answer, That the Lady Jane was invested, and possessed
of the Crown by just Right and Title, both by the Ancient Laws of the Land, and
by Letters Patents signed and sealed by the late King before his death, and
therefore they declared they would adhere to her and to none other, requesting
the Lady Mary that she would not upon any pretense endeavor to disturb the
peace of the Kingdom, promising her that if she would carry her self as a
dutiful Subject, they would be ready to do her any service.

The Lady Mary having received this answer, withdrew further from the City, and
the Council being sensible of her stout and unquiet disposition, they raised an
Army, which was commanded by the Duke of Northumberland. The Lady Mary went
into Suffolk and Norfolk gathering such aid of the Commons as she could, and
kept her self in Framingham Castle, to whom the Suffolk men first resorted, who
being always forward in promoting the Gospel, promised her their aid and
assistance, provided she would make no alteration of the Protestant Religion as
it was established by her Brother King Edward.

To this she readily agreed, and confirmed it with such Vows and Ptotestations
that none could suspect her; whereupon they joined with her: and thus by the
help of the Protestants she vanquished the Duke of Northumberland and his Army,
and was settled in the Kingdom; but she soon forgot her promises, for these
very Suffolk men observing that Popery would be re-established, they Petitioned
to her to perform her word to them; at which she was extremely displeased, and
told them, Forasmuch as you who are Members desire to rule your Head, you shall
one day find that Members must obey, not se k to rule; Yea one of the chief of
these men, Mr. Dob by name, she caused for the Terror of others to be set in
the Pillory several times, and diverse others that presented Supplications to
her not to set up Popery, she caused to be sent to prison.

Queen Mary being settled in the Kingdom, the Lady Jane, her Father the Duke of
Northumberland, and her Husband the Lord Guilford Dudley, were soon after
Beheaded; and the Queen soon discovered her disaffection to the Protestant
Religion, by displacing all the Orthodox Bishops, as Poinet, Ridley, Scorie,
Hooper, Coverdale; and by releasing out of the Tower Stephen Gardener Bishop of
Winchester, whom she made Lord Chancellor of England, and Bonner who was made
Bishop of London. Then the Queen published a Proclamation that she was resolved
to observe and maintain the Catholic Religion, wherein she was bred up,
requiring all her Subjects quietly to embrace the same.

A while after this Bonner and Gardener begun a cruel and bloody persecution
upon the Protestants, and made them fall in heaps: For Mr. Hooper, Mr. Rogers,
Mr. Tailor, Mr. Bradford, Mr. Saunders, all famous men, were condemned and
burned for Heresy. In the year 1555. Thomas Tomkins (whose hand B. Bonner
burnt in prison to try his constancy) was afterward burnt in Smithfield:
William Hunter was cruelly handled and then burnt. Mr. Higbed and Mr. Causton
were burnt in Essex: William Piggot, Stephen Knight, and John Lawrence were
examined before Bishop Bonner, and then burnt at several places in Essex. Dr.
Farrar Rishop of St. David's was burnt there; and Rawlins White was burnt at
Cardiff, George Marsh at Chester, William Flower at Westminster, John Cardmaker
a godly Minister in Smithfield, and with him John Warn.

About this time came a Letter from King Philip and Queen Mary to Bishop
Bonner, that Heretics were not prosecuted with such severity as they ought to
be; which easily prevailed with Bonner, who was ready enough for Cruelty, and
thereupon condemned John Symson and John Ardeley of Essex, who were burnt
there: Thomas Hawks, Thomas Watts, Thomas Osmund, William Bamford, Thomas
Osburn, all of Cogshall in Essex, being sent up to Bonner, for not receiving
the Sacrament at Easter, they were condemned and burnt in several places in
Essex. John Bland, Nicholas Shetterden, Humfry Middleton, John Frankesh, were
al burnt: And a few days after, Nicholas Hall, Christopher Wade, John Harpole,
and Margery Boley, were burnt in Kent. Dirick Carver, John Launder, Thomas
Iveson, James Abbes, John Denley, John Newman, Patrick Packingham, Richard Hook
and John Newman, were likewise burnt for Heretics.

The Prisons were now full in every place, and six men were condemned and burnt
at Canterbury; and nothing but Cruelty and Oppression was to be seen through
the whole Land: Whereupon the Queens Commissioners for the more quick dispatch
took out ten of the Prisoners, whom they sent to B. Bonner, and being examined
by him about the Sacrament, they constantly adhering to the Truth, were
condemned and burnt in several places. Robert Samuel a Minister suffered
Martyrdom at Norwich; two others at Ipswich; five more in the Diocese of
Canterbury; the famous Ridley and Latimer at Oxford, and Mr. Philpot in
Smithfield.

In the year 1556. their wicked and bloody rage still continued, the Land was
all in a Flame, and Blood and Cruelty reigned in every place: For there were
seven burnt in Smithfield in one fire; four more in Canterbury, and Dr. Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury was burnt in Oxford. And, to conclude, though the
Reign of Queen Mary was the shortest of any Prince since the Conquest, except
King Richard the Third, yet in her days there was more Christian blood spilt
for Religion, than in any Kings Reign whatsoever, since Lucius the first
Christian King established Christianity in this Land; for in the five years of
her Reign, there perished in the consuming Flames, for the Profession of the
Protestant Religion, no less than two Hundred seventy seven Persons, of all
Ages and both Sexes: there suffered five Bishops and Archbishops, twenty one
Divines, eight Gentlemen, four Tradesmen, an hundred Husbandmen, Servants and
Laborers, twenty six Wives, twenty Widows and Virgins, two Boys, and two
Infants; one in the Isle of Guernsey, who springing out of his Mothers Womb as
she was burning at the Stake, was most inhumanely thrown in again and burnt for
a young Heretic. And besides these, there were sixty four persecuted for their
Religion, whereof seven were whipped, sixteen perished in Prison, twelve were
buried in Dunghills, and many more lay condemned, but were saved by the Death
of Queen Mary.

The Succession of Queen Elizabeth put some stop to the cruel rage of the
Papists; for the Power and Authority of the Pope vanished, and Peace, Rest and
Liberty for all the good People of the Nation ensied.

But the Papists, out of their extreme Loyalty to the Pope, thought it a sin to
live peaceably under an Heretical Prince: Especially when two Popes had
thundered out Excommunications against her, cursing her, and freeing her
Subjects from their Allegiance toward her, and threatening them under danger of
the Wrath of God, not to assist her, but to employ all their Power to bring her
to condign punishment, and promising rewards to all persons who should lay
hands upon this proscribed Woman, which was to be paid out of the Treasury of
the Church, together with a full pardon of all their sins who should engage
against her.

But when the Pope and his Accomplices saw, that all this would not effect
their desires, the Queens Subjects being too faithful to engage in any such
villainous designs; they then proceed to secret Plots and Attempts against her:
As that wherein the Duke of Norfolk and Robert Biddulph were engaged, in the
year 1566. and for which Northumberland Suffered at York, and after that
Leonard Davis designed mischiefs against her with the like ill success. In the
year 1578. the Invasion of Ireland at the great charges of the Pope, was
happily prevented. The next year James Fitz-morris is sent into Ireland, with
Saunders, who carried consecrated Banners to them. The next year after San
Joseph was likewise sent thither with seven hundred Spanish and Italian
Soldiers, and the Popes promise of ten hundred thousand Crowns, to carry on
the work of Rebellion; and to them joined the Earl of Desmond and his Brothers;
but they were all happily defeated.

But these projects likewise failing, they conspire the death of the Queen, and
make several Attempts to murder her; first by one Somervile and Hall, Priests;
and one of them being condemned was found secretly murdered, for fear he should
discover others. After this followed the practices of Mendoza the Spanish
Ambassador here, with Throgmorton and Parry, who had Letters of plenary
Indulgence, Pardon, and remission of all their sins sent them by the Pope, for
killing the Queen; And the same year, Savage made the like Vow to murder the
Queen, being instigated thereto by Gifford and Hodgson two Popish Priests.

A while after Babington upon the same principles engaged to commit the like
wicked act, by the procurement of one Ballard a Jesuit, but being happily
discovered, diverse of them were condemned, and justly executed for the same,
and were registered for Saints and Martyrs in the Romish Calender. Yet by the
means of the French Ambassador out Stafford and Moody were dealt withal to
commit the like Villainy, Moody proposing to lay a bag of Gunpowder under the
Queens Bedchamber.

But this like the rest being happily prevented, the Pope stirs up his Dear
Son, Philip the Second King of Spain, openly to invade England, which he did in
the year 1588. who though in Queen Marys time, he pretended great kindness to
the Queen, yet now in hopes of gaining England and Ireland, which the Pope had
bestowed upon him, he comes to take possession thereof, with a vast and (as the
Pope Christened it) Invincible Armada, consisting of an hundred and thirty tall
Ships, extraordinary well furnished, and containing fifty seven Thousand eight
hundred and eight Tun, wherein were Eight Thousand six hundred Seamen, Twenty
Thousand Soldiers, two Thousand Gally Slaves; besides Gentlemen and Volunteers
in abundance, so that there was scarce a Family in Spain, who had not either a
Son, Brother, or Cozen in the Fleet.

There were likewise aboard them two thousand six hundred and thirty great
Ordnance, with Powder, Bullets, Match, Muskets, Pikes, Spears, Swords, and all
things proportionable, with Knives, Daggers, Skeins, Chains and Whips, to
Torment and cut the Throats of the poor English Protestants; and with them came
swarms of those Locusts called Capuchins, Mendicants, Jesuits, and other
Officers of the Sacred Order of the Inquisition, as they profanely call it.

And besides all this, there lay in Flanders, fifty thousand old Soldiers, and
two hundred eighty eight Vessels, ready to transport them, under the command of
the Duke of Parma; all the King of Spains best Soldiers, even as far as
America, being drawn forth for this Holy War: The whole of this Expedition
having cost the Spaniard twelve Millions of Crowns before their setting forth;
the Pope likewise contributing a Million of Gold to so pious a design. But the
goodness and mercy of God at that time defended England from the gaping Jaws of
destruction, and discomfited this Mighty Armada and all its mighty
preparations, and sent them home full of shame, loss and confusion; so that of
one hundred thirty four Ships that set sail out of Lisbon, only thirty three
returned: the Spaniard losing in this Voyage Eighty one Ships, and above
thirteen thousand five hundred Soldiers, and two thousand more taken Prisoners
in England, Ireland, and the Low Countries, the rest of the Navy being lost and
destroyed by the English, the Dutch, the Seas, Rocks, Sands and Tempests, all
seeming to conspire to the defeating of this proud and Insolent attempt.

But these sort of People will never take notice of Gods Judgments upon their
wicked designs and Enterprises, and notwithstanding all this, they shut their
Eyes and will not see that God is against them; for they no sooner recover
breath, but they send over new Commissions, and more cursed Emissaries
disguised in all shapes into England, with new Plots, Contrivances and designs;
Lopez and his Confederates, Cullen, York, Williams, Squire and Hesket, all
enter into a Conspiracy to kill the Queen, being constantly encouraged by the
Jesuits and the Spanish Ministers of State. And these proving abortive, in the
year 1599. the Earl of Tyrone is stirred up to make a new Rebellion in Ireland,
having the same Pardons and Indulgences sent them, as is usually given by the
Popes to those that go to fight against the Turks. And in the year 1601. the
King of Spain sends a great Fleet of Soldiers to Kinsale in Ireland, for the
assistance of the Rebels. But notwithstanding all these wicked and execrable
designs, this glorious and Heroic Queen of blessed memory, having outlived
four Kings and Eight Popes, dyed in Peace, and left her flourishing Kingdoms to
her Successor King James.

And now the Papists being thus disappointed of their great hopes and
expectations, by the succession of a Protestant King to the Crown of England,
and thereby uniting into one Body Scotland, England and Ireland; one would have
Imagined that all their contrivances would have been dashed, since they could
not well think that so long and well settled a Reformation in Church and State,
could very easily be broken and confounded; yet still they give not over, but
encourage one another in their wickedness, and the Pope sent over two Bulls to
deprive King James of the Crown, and sought to raise divisions and dissentions
amongst us.

But God continuing to frustrate all their designs, they now grew as it were
desperate and entered upon the most barbarous and Hellish Plot and contrivance
that ever was hatched in the Brains or Hearts of men, which is that which we
call the Gunpowder Treason, and which we yearly commemorate upon the fifth of
November, they designing to act it on that day in the year 1605.

This horrid design was contrived by diverse Jesuits, Priests, and other English
Papists, who by undermining the Parliament House, and planting there Thirty six
Barrels of Gunpowder, intended by firing the same when both Houses were
sitting, to have blown up and destroyed not only the King as the Head of the
Kingdom, but with him his Queen, the Prince, and all the Royal Issue, together
with the Clergy, Nobility and the chief of the Gentry of the whole Kingdom; all
should have perished together at one Blow, and have become a Sacrifice to the
enraged Lusts of these Bloody minded Papists. A Plot and Villainy that no Age
can parallel, no Country ever could produce the like, and which was as
miraculously prevented and detected, as if it were by the immediate finger of
God, who discovered their treasonable practices, even within their dark Vaults
and Cellars, when the very Train was laid, and fire almost put to it: and in
this horrid Conspiracy Catesby, Piercy, Faux, Digby, Garnet, Hall, etc. all
Popish Priests, were considerable Actors and Promoters, and all sworn to
secrecy, with Horrid Oaths and Imprecations, taking the Holy Sacrament and
engaging themselves one to another thereby, and by their Faith in the Holy
Trinity, never to shrink from the Execution of this their Hellish Intention,
till they had performed the same: They were likewise promised from abroad Ships
and men, and ten hundred thousand Crowns to carry on their work.

And though this horrid Conspiracy has been sufficiently discovered and made
plain, by the confession of some of the Conspirators who were executed, and by
writings under their own hands; yet according to their usual Impudence, which
they learned of their predecessor Nero, (who when he had set Rome on Fire,
charged it upon the Christians) the Papists intended to have laid that wicked
Act upon the Puritans; and since this they have endeavored to make the world
believe that it was a Contrivance of King James, thereby endeavoring since
they could not blow up the King with Gunpowder, to blast his good Name, and to
make him odious to Posterity.

But three Kingdoms are not so easy to be deluded, neither are we so horridly
impious, to mock God so solemnly with yearly Prayers and Thanksgivings; neither
need we think it so strange, since Lies and Impudence are the grand supporters
of the Papal Kingdom, without which such a medley of Nonsense and Foolery would
be hooted out of the world.

And from that time to this very day, the Papists have been and are the Grand
Disturbers of these Nations: and it is sufficiently manifested that they had no
small hand in our late Troubles, since which they have continually sought the
ruin and destruction of all Protestants, by all manner of cursed ways and
methods imaginable.

In the year 1666. Sept. 2. about two a Clock in the morning, there began a sad
and lamentable Fire in a Bakers House in Pudding Lane near Fishstreet-hill,
London, which raged with extreme Violence, being accompanied with a strong
North-east wind, so that despising all means used for its extinguishing, it
spread far and near, sometimes with and sometimes against the wind, and so
continued for the space of near four days, till it had burnt down thirteen
thousand two hundred houses, which stood upon three hundred thirty seven Acres
of Ground within the Walls, and sixty three Acres three Roods without; besides
eighty nine Parish Churches, the most spacious Cathedral of St. Paul, the Royal
Exchange, the Great Guild Hall, the Custom House, Many magnificent Halls of
Companies, several principal City Gates, and other public Edifices; which was
accompanied with the loss of vast quantities of rich Household-stuff, and Goods
of all sorts, but especially four or five; that is, Books, of which alone were
lost near the value of an hundred and fifty thousand pound; Tobacco, Sugar,
Wines, and Plumbs, being heavy goods: So that the whole loss is computed by an
Ingenious Person to be Nine Millions and nine hundred thousand pounds, and yet
not above six or eight persons through Gods Providence were burnt in this vast
desolation.

Upon the Eighteenth of September the Parliament met, and the Commons appointed
a Committee to examine into the Causes of the fire, and to take Informations
concerning it; and in a short time so many and such very considerable
Informations were brought in, that it was no longer doubtful but the Papists
were the Contrivers and Managers of this dreadful Fire.

For among other things it plainly appeared, that diverse of the Popish Party
were made acquainted with it before it happened: for Mr. Light of Ratcliff
deposed, That being in discourse with Mr. Richard Langhorn (since Executed for
High Treason) in February before the Fire, concerning Religion, Langhorn took
him by the hand and said to him, You expect great things in sixty six, and
think that Rome will be destroyed, but what if it be London?

A French man told one Elizabeth Styles, in April before the fire, that the
English Maids would love the Frenchmen better when there was not an house left
standing between Temple Bar and London-Bride: to which she replied, She hopes
his eyes would never see that: he said, This will happen betwixt June and
October.

Dr. Oats in his Narrative, page 22. says, That in July 1678. being in
discourse with one Strange a Jesuit, Strange told him that they had got
fourteen thousand pound by the Fire of London, in 1666. and that they spent
seven hundred fireballs to effect their Villainy; and that when the
Fire-Merchants were at work, then other Papists both men and women were
employed by them to plunder what they could; that they had a Warehouse in
Wildstreet, where some of their stolen Goods were laid, and other Goods they
concealed in Somerset House, as Hollands, Cambricks, Fine Cloth, and some
considerable quantities of Plate, and a Box of Jewels. Dr. Oats asked Strange,
How the King came to escape (for it seems his death was designed then?) Strange
replied, Indeed they were resolved to have cut him off, but seeing him so
Industrious about Quenching the Fire, they could not find in their hearts to do
it; Strange said, there were about Fourscore and six employed in it; and John
Grove since Executed for high Treason, told Dr. Oats that he fired Southwark,
and that the Society of Jesuits got two thousand pound by that Fire.

Robert Hubert a French Papist of Normandy began this Fire in London, being
Hired thereto by Stephen Peidelow likewise a papist; and Hubert observing the
Ruin and desolation that followed, could not be quiet till he had freely
discovered the whole matter; Affirming that by Peidelows directions he put a
Fire-ball to the end of a long pole, and lighting it with a piece of Match put
it into the Bakers window, and stayed till the house was in a Flame. A French
Merchant went to Hubert in the White Lion Prison in Southwark, and told him, He
did not believe him Guilty of what he had confessed: Hubert replied, Yes Sir, I
am guilty of it, and have been brought to it by the instigation of Mr.
Peidelow, but not out of any malice to the English Nation, but from a desire of
reward which he promised me upon my return into France. A while after Hubert
was Tried and Executed for this horrid Fact, owning and acknowledging to the
last his doing thereof, by the Instigation of Piedelow.

But this not doing their work, they took diverse other methods for carrying on
their designs, which they had very near brought to perfection in the year 1678.
had not the Divine Providence most eminently made use of Dr. Titus Oats in the
discovery thereof; who notwithstanding the reproaches of his Popish
adversaries, was liberally Educated in St. John's College in Cambridge, where
he took his Degree, and afterward proceeded Doctor in Divinity at Salamanca in
Spain, no contemptible University. In the year 1672. he was Vicar of Bobbing in
Kent, but the Air not agreeing with him, he left it; and was for some time
Minister near Chichester in Sussex, and afterward came to be Chaplain to the
Duke of Norfolk, with an ample testimony of his sober Life and Conversation;
and whilst he was there, he overheard some whisperings among the Popish
Priests, (who were very conversant in that Family) that there was some Great
Design in hand, but could not learn the particulars. He had heard from his
Protestant Friends, and had read in Sir Hamond L'Stranges History of King
Charles the First, and other Judicious Authors, That the Papists had for many
years carried on a design to Introduce Popery once more into these Kingdoms;
which made him desire to know the bottom thereof, and if it were possible to
prevent it: To this end, he more freely conversed with that Party than he
formerly used to do, and seemed dissatisfied in some things concerning our
Church, and desired to discourse with some Jesuits, who are accounted the most
learned Men of the Popish faction.

This upon some Cautions he obtained, and after diverse Conferences with them
(in which he suffered himself to be overcome,) he was formally reconciled to
the Church of Rome: and a while after seeming to aspire to a higher degree of
Perfection, he desired to be admired into the Order of the Jesuits, which after
three days consideration they consented to; and because he was a man of years,
being about Twenty eight, they would not employ him as a Novice, but made him a
Messenger of the Society.

This being the mark he aimed at, they sent him with Letters to Valedolid in
Spain, which he judging to contain something of their Hellish contrivances,
dexterously opened by the way, and thereby made some discovery of their wicked
Intentions; however he managed their Affairs with so much satisfaction, that in
a short time they made him privy to their most secret Consultations, and
keeping short Notes of all things of Concernment, he was thereby in a capacity
to give an account of so many several particulars as he has discovered; which
have had the happiness to be confirmed by other Circumstances and Evidence, and
have not the least contradicted one another, nor those other Papers which have
been found elsewhere, nor differed from the Informations that have been given
in by Mr. Bedlow, Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Jennison, Mr. Mowbray, Mr. Baldron, and
others, whom God has since raised up, further to clear and unmask this
detestable and bloody Conspiracy.

Dr. Oats was resolved as much as in him lay to prevent their Traitorous
designs upon his Majesty's Life, though he endangered his own thereby, since he
observed that all their Contrivances were ripe, and there only wanted the Fatal
Blow to destroy the life of his Sacred Majesty, and the Religion, and Liberties
of these three Kingdoms; And whereas Father Whitebread the Provincial of the
Jesuits, had engaged Dr. Oats (before his last return into England) to
assassinate and murder Israel Tongue Doctor of Divinity, because he had
translated a Book Entitled The Jesuits Morals, and had promised him Fifty
pound as a reward for the same, Dr. Oats after his coming over became
acquainted with Dr. Tongue, and finding him to be a person of Trust and
Integrity, he gave him an Account of his Assassination, and likewise some Heads
of the Plot in General. After which they both seriously Consulted together of
the best methods for making this necessary Discovery; since they were sure to
meet with great opposition therein.

At last they concluded to acquaint Mr. Christopher Kirby therewith, as a
person whom for his Loyalty Courage, and zeal for the Safety of his Majesty's
Person, and the Protestant Religion, they judged very fit and capable to assist
them; and therefore on Monday, August 12. 1678. Dr. Tongue showed Mr. Kirby
Forty three Articles drawn up in writing, desiring him that without making any
other Person acquainted therewith, he would discover the same to the King: And
Mr. Kirby very generously undertook the same, and accordingly the next morning
in St. James's Park, he humbly acquainted his Majesty, That his Enemies had a
Design against his Life, and humbly beseeched his Majesty to use all Caution,
for he did not know but he might be in danger in that very walk. But his
Majesty armed with his Native goodness and Innocence, seemed more surprised
with the Strangeness of the News, than with the apprehension of the danger, and
only asked, How that could be? To which Mr. Kirby replied, That it might be, by
being shot at: And gave a particular account that there were two men, Grove and
Pickering by name, that watched an opportunity to shoot his Majesty, and that
another Person was hired to Poison him.

His Majesty ordered further Scrutiny should be made into the business; and a
while after Doctor Oats having written fair Copies of his Informations, upon
the 28. of September, 1678. went to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and made Oath of
the truth and reality thereof; Sir Edmundbury desiring to keep a Copy of the
Informations himself, as having never before perused them, which it may be was
the occasion of his horrid Murder, which soon after followed.

The Plot in General seemed to be by Fire and Sword to subvert and destroy the
Protestant Religion, and established Government of these three Kingdoms, and to
reduce them to Popery: The chief Conspirators being Innocent 11th. now Pope,
who in The Congregation for propagating the Faith, held about December. 1677. and
consisting of about 350. Persons, Declared, All His Majesty's Dominions to be
part of St. Peter's Patrimony, as forfeited to the Holy See for the Heresy of
the Prince and People, and to be disposed of as he should think fit; And our
English Cardinal Howard was appointed by the Pope to take Possession of England
in his Name, who was likewise made Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Popish
Priests were made Bishops in England, all the present Bishops being designed to
be removed from their Dignities: Johannes Paulus de Oliva, Father General of
the Jesuits was to give Directions to the Provincial of the Jesuits in London,
how to manage their Affairs.

Mounsieur le Chese, a Jesuit, Confessor to the French King, was likewise
concerned; with whom Edward Coleman held correspondence; Also Strange and
Whitebread Provincials of the Jesuits, and the Benedictine Monks of the Savoy
were in this cursed Conspiracy, and the Jesuits and Seminary Priests, of whom
there were at that time in England about Eighteen Hundred.

Diverse Lay Persons of Quality were drawn in, who were to command Forces, and
to execute the Great Offices of the Realm; as the Lord Arundel of Warder was
appointed Lord Chancellor of England, the Lord Powis Lord Treasurer, Sir
William Godolphin Lord Privy Seal, Edward Coleman Secretary of State; and for
the Military part, Lord Bellasis to be Lord General, Lord Peter's Lieutenant
General, Sir Francis Ratcliff Major General, John Lambert Adjutant General,
Richard Langhorn Advocate General, who had Commissions sent them from Paulus de
Oliva, and directed from Rome to Mr. Langhorn. This was so great and glorious a
work, that the chiefest of the Romish Clergy through Europe were engaged
therein; so that it cannot be said to be the Act or Contrivance of any few
particular Persons, but The unanimous undertaking of their whole Church, and so
to their everlasting Infamy ought to be Recorded.

Now as to the Means whereby this was to be accomplished, the first and chief
was, By Murdering his Sacred Majesty, which was to be accomplished either by
Pistolling of him, wherein Pickering and Grove were engaged; or by Stabbing,
and this to be done by Conyers and Anderton, Benedictine Monks, or four Irish
Ruffians. Or lastly by Poisoning, for which Money was paid to the Undertaker.

2. Another means was by firing London, Westminster and the parts adjacent, and
likewise other Cities and great Towns in England, immediately upon the Murder
of his Majesty.

3. By a General Massacre, to which purpose they had designed to raise an Army,
which was to consist of Fifty Thousand men, to be Listed in and about London:
The Officers to be all Resolute Papists, and for the most part French and
Irish; and these they gave out were enough to cut the Throats of One Hundred
Thousand Protestants, especially being taken upon a Surprise, when the Militia
of London was undisciplined and unprovided. Care was taken likewise about
securing Ireland and Scotland to their Interest.

Great sums of Money were provided for the necessary charge of this mighty
undertaking, and it was discoursed, that the Jesuits in England had purchased a
great Estate per Annum for that purpose; and that they had a great Stock in
ready Money; and were to receive Eleven thousand Crowns from Rome, Ten thousand
pound from Spain, and Ten thousand from France, besides several other very
considerable sums, for promoting this vast design. And this is a brief
Abstract of this bloody and Hellish Popish Plot, abundance of other particulars
being omitted; whereby it appears that this Horrid Plot is hardly to be
paralleled in any History, considering that without any provocation so many
Thousand Protestants were designed for slaughter, destruction and Murder, only
to advance and promote the Holy Catholic Religion, as they falsely call that
Chaos of Blasphemy and Cruelty.

Presently after this Remarkable discovery, happened the murder of that worthy
Magistrate Sir Edmondbury Godfry; who as is before related, having taken the
Depositions of Doctor Oats, which was no more than any Justice of Peace by
Virtue of his Office was bound to do; yet it so enraged the Conspirators, that
they resolved to cut him off, to deterr (as may be supposed) all other
Magistrates from intermedling with any Affairs relating to the Plot.

But it pleased God that the Crafty were taken in their own snare, and they
Mortally wounded their own cause; for this bloody Enterprise allarum'd the
whole Kingdom, and left no doubt whether there were a Plot or no. It is not
certainly discovered how many there were in all, who conspired his Death; but
those that are known, are Father Kelly and Father Girald, two Irish Priests,
Robert Green Cushion-man to the Queens Chapel, Lawrence Hill Servant to Dr.
Godden Treasurer of the Chapel, Henry Berry who was Porter of Somersethouse,
and Mr. Miles Prance a Goldsmith in Covent Garden; these were actually present
at the Murder; two other should have been there, but were not; that is, Father
Lewson a Priest, and one Philip Vernatti, who are since fled. There were
another Party to have done it, but did not, namely, Pritchard, Le Fair, Welsh,
Keins, all Jesuits, and Mr. William Bedlow.

Of those that effected the Villainy, it is Judged that Vernatti, and some other
Popish Priests undertook it, and that they drew in Green, Hill, and Berry
first, and afterward engaged Mr. Prance, telling him, That Sir Edmundbury was
a bitter Persecutor of Catholics, and a particular Enemy to her Majesty's
Servants, (whereof Mr. Prance reckoned himself one:) And that he had lately
examined People against them, and had got Depositions to fix base Crimes and
Scandals on their Religion, and that the Catholics would be ruined, unless he
were taken off; and therefore it was necessary for the Glory of God, and good
of the Church, that it should be effected; and that there should be a good
reward given them for it: And when Mr. Prance scrupled it, the two Priests,
Girald and Kelly told him, It was no sin, but a work of Charity, and so far
from being a Murder, that it was a Meritorious work, and he ought to assist in
it.

Having thus resolved of his Death, they consulted several times how to effect
it; but at last, upon Saturday, October 12. 1678. Hill went to Sir Edmundbury
Godfry's house in the Morning, but what he said to him is not known, and then
taking his leave, went to Girald and Green, and staid with them hard by,
waiting Sir Edmundburys going forth, which was about Ten or Eleven a Clock,
they dogged him up and down all day, till about seven a Clock in the Evening,
and then Green came to Prances house, and told him that they had set him, but
did not name where, only near St. Clements, and that Prance must hasten down to
the Watergate at Somersethouse, where he should find Kelly and Berry; which he
did, and they three waited there till about Nine a Clock at night, then Hill
came in have and told them he was coming, and that they must pretend a Quarrel,
and he would fetch him in; Kelly and Berry began a seeming Quarrel, and just as
Sir Edmundbury Godfry was passing by the Gate, Hill who was acquainted with
him, steps out in a great deal of haste, and entreated him, For Gods sake to
come in, for there were two men a Quarelling, and he was afraid there would be
blood shed: He refused at first, but the other being importunate, he consented,
and Hill entered the Gate first, after him Sir Edmundbury Godfry, and Girald and
Green followed just behind. As soon as they were in, Prance watched at the
Watergate that no body came that way, Berry was to secure the Stairs and
passage by the Chapel, but first he and Kelly who pretended to Quarrel, stood
at the end of the rail by the Queens Stables, and as Sir Edmondbury went down
toward them, Green suddenly threw a twisted Handkerchief, or Cravat about his
neck, and presently all four pulled him down, and throtled him, so as he could
make no noise, then they threw him behind the Rail, and gave him many Violent
punches on the breast with their Knees, and Green with all his force wrung his
Neck almost round.

Having committed this Horrid Murder, they removed the body into Dr. Goddins
Lodgings, and on Monday to another Room, on Tuesday from thence to another, but
on Wednesday night about twelve a Clock they carried his body toward Hamstead,
about two miles out of Town, and laid it at a place called Primrose-Hill,
Girald having run Sir Edmundbury's own Sword through him, and left it in, and
the Scabbard and Gloves they laid at a small distance from him, that it might
be supposed he had murdered himself.

The death of this worthy Gentleman caused great Consternation among the
People, and his Majesty was graciously pleased to publish a Proclamation
promising 500. l. to the Discoverer. And a while after Mr. William Bedlow, came
in, and gave some Account of the Murder, and likewise of the Plot in General;
and upon the 21. of December being in the Lobby of the House of Commons, he
there saw Mr. Prance, whom he knew to be concerned, they two having Viewed Sir
Edmundbury's dead body together at Somerset House, and charging Mr. Prance with
the Murder, he was thereupon committed to Newgate, and a while after confessed
the whole matter as is before related.

Whereupon, Green, Hill and Berry were seized, and upon full Evidence
condemned, and executed, Kelly and Girald fled; there were likewise several
Traitors tried and Executed for the Horrid Plot; that is, Edward Coleman,
William Ireland, Tomas Pickering, John Grove, Thomas Whitebread, William
Harcourt, John Fenwick, John Gaven, Anthony Turner, and Richard Langhorn.

The Papists being still disappointed in their cursed contrivances, yet
resolved not wholly to desist, but endeavored to stifle the Evidence by
promising them great rewards and encouragements not to discover the whole of
what they knew, or to deny what they had deposed; and upon this account Mr.
Reding tampered with Mr. Bedlow; Mris. Price and Mr. Tasborough endeavored to
corrupt Mr. Dugdale; Osburn and Lane designed to invalidate the Evidence of Dr.
Oats: But these ill practices being discovered, some of the persons concerned
were fined and Imprisoned, and others set in the Pillory; after which the
Papists had several other Contrivances to throw off the Plot from their own
party, but all will not do; for certainly he cannot pretend to be a good
Protestant, who (after his Majesty's repeated Proclamations for the discovery
and apprehension of the Plotters, after the Execution of so many of the
Conspirators, upon the clearest Evidence imaginable, and after the Votes and
Proceedings in both Houses of Parliament thereupon) shall in the least doubt of
the reality of this horrid and damnable Popish Plot; as it is fully expressed in
the Vote of both Houses, March 25. 1679.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament Assembled; That they do declare, that they are fully
satisfied by the Proofs they have heard, that there now is, and for diverse
years last past has been, an horrid and Treasonable Plot and Conspiracy,
contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for the Murdering of
his Majesty's Sacred Person, and for subverting the Ptotestant Religion, and
the Ancient and Established Government of this Kingdom.

John Brown Cleric Perliam.



Let us conclude all with the Thanksgiving of the Church of England, set forth
by Authority upon the Discovery of the Gunpowder Treason in 1605.

NOt unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be ascribed all honor and
glory in all Churches of the Saints throughout all Generations; for thou Lord
have discovered the Snares of Death, thou have broken them and we are
delivered; be thou still our mighty Protector, and scatter our Cruel Enemies
which delight in Blood; Infatuate their Counsel, and root out that Babilonish
and Antichristian Sect, which say of Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it even
to the Ground: and to this end strengthen the hands of our Gracious King, the
Nobles and Magistrates of the Land with Judgment and Justice, to cut off these
workers of Iniquity, whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Faith is Faction, whose
Practice is Murdering of Souls and Bodies; and to root them out of the
Confines and Limits of this Kingdom, that they may never prevail against us,
and Triumph in the ruin of thy Church. And give us grace by true and serious
Repentance to avert these and the like Judgments from us. This Lord we
earnestly crave at thy merciful hands, together with the continuance of thy
powerful Protection over our Dread Sovereign, the whole Church, and these
Realms, and the speedy confusion of our Implacable Enemies; and that for thy
dear Sons sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

PSALM 91.
WHo makes the Almighty his retreat
Shall rest beneath his Shady Wings,
Free from the Oppression of the Great,
The Rage of War, or Wrath of Kings;
Free from the Cunning Fowlers Train,
The Tainted Air's Infectious Breath;
His Truth in Perils shall sustain
And Shield thee from the stroke of Death.
No terrors shall thy sleeps affright,
Nor deadly flying Arrows slay;
Nor Pestilence devour by night,
Or slaughter Massacre by day:
Words and Proper Names of two, three and four Sylables both whole, and divided
into Sylables.
ABuse A-buse Adam Ad-am Affected Af-fect-ed Abigail A-bi-gail Activity
Ac-ti-vi-ty Amasia A-ma-si-a Ahasuerus A-ha-su-e-rus Banquet Ban-quet Barak
Ba-rak Backslider Back-sli-der Belshazzer Bel-shaz-zer Bountifully
Boun-ti-ful-ly Barzillai Bar-zil-la-i Beatificial Be-a-ti-si-cal Beeliada
Be-e-li-a-da Cleansed Clean-sed Carmel Car-mel Chastening Chast-en-ing Chorazin
Cho-ra-zin Calamity Ca-la-mi-ty Cyrenius Cy-re-ni-us Cogitation Co-gi-ta-ti-on
Daughter Daugh-ter Dathan Da-than Destroyed De-stroy-ed Dalilah Da-li-lah
Difficulty Dif-fi-cul-ty Dalmatia Dal-ma-ti-a Estrang Est-rang Esther Est-her
Effected Ef-fect-ed Ephraim E-phra-im Election E-lec-ti-on Ebenezer E-ben-e-zer
Frustrate Frus-trate Francis Fran-cis Forreigner For-reign-er Familiar
Fa-mi-li-ar Favonia Fa-vo-ni-a Grudging Grudg-ing Ginath Gi-nath Garnishing
Gar-nish-ing Gomorrah Go-mor-rah Gloriously Glo-ri-ous-ly Gethsemane
Geth-se-ma-ne Genealogy Ge-ne-a-lo-gy Haughty Haugh-ty Huzoth Huz-oth Heretic
He-re-tick Habakkuk Hab-ak-kuk Hallelujah Hal-le-lu-jah Hymeneus Hy-me-ne-us
Habitation Ha-bi-ta-tion Heliopolis He-li-o-po-lis Judgment Judg-ment Jephtha
Jeph-tha Journeying Jour-ney-ing Issachar Is-sa-char Ignominy Ig-no-mi-ny
Illyria Il-ly-ri-a Jerusalem Je-ru-sa-lem Infidelity In-fi-de-li-ty Kinsfolk
Kins-folk Kahath Ka-hath Kindnesses Kind-nes-ses Keturah Ke-turah Laughter
Laugh-ter London Lon-don Languishing Lan-guish-ing Lazarus La-za-rus Lascivious
Las-ci-vi-ous Leviathan Le-vi-a-than Liberality Li-be-ra-li-ty Merchant
Mer-chant Mesheck Me-sheck Magistrate Ma-gis-trate Manasseh Ma-nas-seh
Malefactor Ma-le-fac-tor Neighbor Neigh-bour Nadab Na-dab Nakedness
Na-ked-ness Naphtali Naph-ta-li Negligently Neg-li-gent-ly Nathanael
Na-tha-na-el Offspring Offspring Ophri O-phri Offering Of-fer-ing Oppressing
Op-pres sing Othniel Oth-ni-el Overseer O-ver-se-er Ohemoed O-he-mo-ed
Operation O-pe-ra-tion Preaching Preach-ing Phicol Phi-col Possessor
Pos-ses-sor Phinebas Phi-ne-bas Pal stina Pa-les-ti-na Quenching Quench-ing
Quinzay Quin-zay Quartering Quar-ter-ing Qualified Qua-li-fied Quaternion
Qua-ter-ni-on Roughly Rough-ly Rehum Re-hum Ravished Ra-vish ed Rabshakeh Rab
sha keh Religion Re li-gi-on Rehoboam Re-ho-bo-am Slaughter Slaugh-ter Shushan
Shu-shan Schismatic Schis-ma-tick Synagogue Sy-na-gogue Shelhazzer
Shel-haz-zer Softhenes Soft-he-nes Sanctuary Sanc-tu-a-ry Taphath Ta-phath
Trespasses Tres-pas-ses Thaddeus Thad-de-us Testimony Tes-ti-mo-ny Trogyllium
Tro-gy-lli-um Viewing View-ing Vkrain V-krain Victory Vic-to-ry Vpharsin
V-phar-sin Unadvised Vn-ad-vi-sed Vespasian Ves-pa-si-an Witchcraft Witchcraft
Wrongfully Wrong-ful-ly Wolfgangus Wolf-gan-gus Warsovia War-so-vi-a Xerxes
Xer-xes Younger Younger Youthfully Youth-ful-ly Zealous Zeal-ous Zopheth
Zo-pheth Zealously Zeal-ous-ly Zipporah Zip-po-rah Zeboim Ze-bo-im Zerobabel
Ze-ro-ba-bel Zurishadda Zu-ri-shad-da

Words and proper Names of five, six, and seven Syllables.
Allegorical Al-le-go-ri-cal Alsufficiency All-suf-fi-ci-en-cy Adramytium
A-dra-my-ti-um Beatification Be-a-ti-fi-ca-ti-on Baalathbeor Ba-a-lath-be-or
Bothbaalmeon Beth-ba-al-me-on Consubstantiation Con-sub-stan-ti-a-ti-on
Chederlaomer Che-der-la-o-mer Dedication De-di-ca-ti-on Deuteronomy
Deu-te-ro-no-my Dissimulation Dis-si-mu-la-ti-on Extortioner Ex-tor-ti-o-ner
Excommunication Ex-com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on Elihoenai E-li-ho-e-na-i Familiarity Fa
mi li-a-ri-ty Fortification For-ti-ca-ti-on Gederothaim Gede-ro-tha-im
Glorification Glo-ri-fi-ca-tion Habitation Ha-bi-ta-ti-on Hypocritically
Hy-po-cri-ti-cal-ly Helarazaruus He-la-ra-za-ru-us Helcathhazurim
Hel-cath-ha-zu-rim Jehovashallom Je-ho-va-shal-lom Jurisdiction
Ju-ris-dic-ti-on Incomprehensible In-com-pre-hen-si-ble Jebereheah
Je-be-re-he-ah Kiriathaim Ki-ri-a-tha-im Kireathebaal Ki-re-a-the-ba-al
Languishing Lan-guish-ing Lamentation La-men-ta-ti-on Lusitania Lu-si-ta-ni-a
Meditation Me-di-ta-ti-on Manifestation Ma-ni-fes-ta-tion Melchizedeck
Mel-chi-ze-deck Mesherabeel Me-she-ra-be-el Mathematician Ma-the-ma-ti-ci-an
Mesopotamia Me-so-po-ta-mi-a Multiplication Mul-ti-pli-ca-ti-on Nonconformity
Non-con-for-mi-ty Naturalization Na-tu-ra-li-za-ti-on Nebuchadnezzer
Ne-bu-chad-nezar Onisephorus O-ne-se-pho-rus Predestinate Pre des-ti-nate
Presbiterian Pres-bi-te-ri-an Purification Pu-ri-fi-ca-tion Philosophically
Phi-lo-so-phi-cal-ly Propitiation Pro pi-ti a-ti on Qualification Qua li fi ca
ti on Renunciation Re nun ci a ti on Resurrection Re-sur-rec ti on
Reconciliation Re-con ci li a-ti on Representation Re-pre-sen-ta-ti-on
Satisfaction Satis-fac-ti-on Superiority Su pe ri o-ri ty Sanctification
Sanc-ti-fi-ca-ti on Temporality Tem-po ra li ty Taanathshiloth Ta-a-nath shi
loath Thessalonica These sa lo-ni ca Transubstantiation Tran sub stan ti a-ti on
Vexatiously Vex-a ti ous ly Universality V-ni-ver-sal li ty Unreconcilable
Vn-re con cil a ble

Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors, discovered in some eminent Examples.
1. FRom the First plantation of the Christian Religion in this Nation under
King Lucius, there was never any King or Queen of England in whose reign so
much Christian blood was spilt, as in four years space during the Reign of
Queen Mary; But as she was prodigal of the Lives of the best of her subjects,
and a Persecutor of the Gospel, so it pleased God to follow her with Plagues
and Judgments all her life; for nothing prospered which she took in hand, of
which we shall give some few Instances. The fairest and greatest Ship she had,
called the Great Harry, was burnt by Lightning from Heaven, the Christian world
at that time not affording such another. Then she would needs marry Phillip
King of Spain, thereby Subjecting England to Strangers, yet with her utmost
endeavor, she could never set the English Crown on his head. Then did she
attempt the Restitution of Abbey Lands, and had all the assistance that the Pope
could give her therein, yet she was utterly crossed also in that Design. Then she
lost Calice in France, which had been in the possession of the English during
the Reign of eleven Kings, that is, from the Reign of King Edward the third;
with which loss she was so afflicted, that she told some of her Courtiers, If
they opened her body when she was dead, they would find Calice written in her
heart. She was reported to be with Child, but it came to nothing. Her beloved
Husband left her, in whom she placed her greatest felicity and content. So that
now she could neither enjoy him, nor marry another. About the same time the
Land was grieviously afflicted with horrible Tempests, Famines, Plagues, mortal
Diseases and burning Agues, so that between October and December, there dyed
seven Aldermen in London that had been Lord Majors: and the mortality was so
great, that much Corn was lost in the Fields for want of men to gather it;
whereby great scarcity ensued, and many poor people lived upon Acorns. And
lastly, she was struck with a lingering and pining sickness, whereof she dyed,
having only reigned Five years and Five months, a shorter time than any of the
Kings of England enjoyed since the Conquest, Richard the Third only excepted.

2. In the next place, let us consider Gods Judgments upon some other
Instruments of Cruelty; and among the rest Stephen Gardener, who was a most
Cruel Persecutor of the Protestants; In King Henry the Eighths time he was a
great stickler for the divorce from the Lady Katherine of Spain, and was
therefore made Bishop of Winchester. In King Edward the sixths time he seemed a
Friend to the Gospel, and preached it up; but in Queen Marys days he was the
greatest and most inveterate enemy against it, and the professors thereof, and
continued so to his dying day; For the same day that Bishop Ridley, and Bishop
Latimer were burnt at Oxford, the old Duke of Norfolk came to dine with
Gardener: The Bishop deferred his dinner till about four a Clock in the
Afternoon, at which time came one of his Servants posting to tell him, that
fire was put to these Servants of God; which when he was certified of, he came
out rejoyceing to the Duke, and said, Now let us go to dinner; The Table was
presently set, and the Bishop began to eat merrily, but as soon as he had eaten
a few bits, he was on a sudden struck very sick, and being carried from the
Table to bed, he there continued in such intolerable Anguish and Torment, that
he could void nothing either by stool or urine. His Tongue was black and swollen
so big that his mouth could not contain it, and his body violently Inflamed. In
this sad condition he lay fifteen days, and then ended his miserable life. In
the beginning of his sickness, Dr. Day Bishop of Chichester coming to see him,
began to speak to him about the merciful Promises of God, and free
Justification by the blood of Christ. To whom he answered, What my Lord will
you open that gap now, then farewell all together; Open this window to the
People, and farewell all together; And being by another Person put in mind of
St. Peter's denying his Master, and that he ought not to despair; He answered, I
have denied Christ with Peter, but I never repented with Peter.

3. Bloody Bonner, though he dyed in his bed, yet lay under the Spiritual
Judgment of Impenitency, and as he had been a Persecutor of the Light, and a
Child of Darkness, so in darkness and at midnight his Carcass was tumbled into
the Earth; And as himself had been a Murderer, so was he laid among Thieves and
Murderers, a place by Gods Judgment fitly appointed for him.

4. Dr. Whittington Chancellor having condemned a Godly Religous woman to be
Burnt at Chipping Sadbury, a multitude of People came to see her Suffer, and
among the rest Whittington himself. At the same time there was a Butcher in
another place of the Town killing a Bull, who was fast bound with a Rope ready
to be knocked on the head; the Butcher missing his stroke, the Bull broke loose
just as the people were coming from the Execution of this Holy Martyr; the
people seeing him coming severed themselves, and made a Lane for him, the Bull
passed through them without hurting man, woman or child, till he came to the
place where Whittington was, against whom he ran very furiously, and thrusting
his Horns into his belly, ran him quite through; and tearing out his Guts with
his horns, he trayl'd them about the streets, to the great astonishment of
those that saw his wretched end.

5. One Burton Bailiff of Crowland in Lincolnshire, seemed in King Edward the
Sixths days to be a zealous Protestant, but as soon as Queen Mary came to the
Crown he turned Papist; and being forward to set up the Mass, he went to
Church, and the Curate being then reading the English Service, he went to him
and said, Sirrah, will you not say Mass, buckle your self to it, you knave, or
by Gods Blood I Will sheath my dagger in your shoulder; The poor Curate being
affrighted betook himself to the Mass. Shortly after this Burton and a
neighbor riding together, a Crow flew over his head, and voided her Excrements
upon his Nose, which ran down his beard, and yielded such an horrible stink,
that it caused him to vomit in a most violent manner, whereupon he got home to
bed, but could eat nothing, the stink and vomiting still continuing, which made
him with dreadful Oaths and Execrations curse the Crow that had poisoned him,
and so he continued in extreme pain till he dyed.

A Prayer of King Edward the Sixth a while before his Death
LOrd God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched life, and take me
among thy chosen; howbeit not my Will but thy Will be done. Lord I commit my
Spirit to thee, O Lord thou know how happy it were for me to be with thee,
yet for thy chosens sake send me that in Life or Death I may serve thee. O my
Lord God, Bless thy People, and save thine Inheritance. O Lord God save thy
chosen People of England. O my Lord God defend this Land from Papistry, and
maintain the True Religion, that I and my People may Praise thy Holy name for
thy Son Jesus Christ his sake.

A Speech of Queen Elizabeth to her Army at Tilbury Camp, in the time of the
Spanish Invasion, in the year 1588
MY Loving People, we have been persuaded by some that are careful of our
safety, to take heed how we commit our selves to armed Multitudes for fear of
Treachery; but I assure you, I do not desire to live, to distrust my faithful
and loving People; Let Tyrants fear, I have always so behaved my self, that
under God, I have always placed my chiefest strength and safeguard, in the
Loyal Hearts, and good will of my Subjects; and therefore I am come amongst
you, as you see at this time, not for my Recreation and Disport, but being
resolved in the midst, and heat of the Battle, to live and dye amongst you all,
to lay down for my God, and for my Kingdom, and for my People, my Honor and my
Blood even in the dust; I know I have the Body but of a weak and feeble Woman,
yet I have the Heart and Courage of a King, and of a King of England too; and
think foul scorn that Parma, or Spain, or any Prince of Europe should dare to
invade the Borders of my Kingdom; to which rather than any dishonor shall grow
by me, I my self will take up Arms, I my self will be your General, Judge and
Rewarder of every one of your Virtues in the Field; I know that already for
your forwardness you have deserved rewards and Crowns, and we do assure you in
the Word of a Prince they shall be duly paid you. In the mean time my
Lieutenant General Leicester shall be in my stead, than whom never Prince
commanded a more Noble or worthy Subject; not doubting but by your obedience to
your General, by your concord in the Camp, and Valor in the Field, we shall
shortly obtain a Famous Victory over these Enemies of my God, of my Kingdom,
and of my People.

A Prayer for the Morning.
BLessed and Glorious Lord God, thy Mercies are Infinite, and thy long suff
ring and patience is exc eding great, else had not I poor wretched miserable
sinner been spared so long, considering my manifold provocations aagainst thee.
Blessed be thy Name that thou have been graciously pleased, to preserve me the
night past, and that thou have once more vouchsafed me the Light of the
morning; O Lord preserve me this day, and keep me in all my ways; give unto me
the repose of a quiet Conscience, and the clear Light of the Gospel. Turn mine
eyes away from Vanity, and strengthen me in thy ways; Protect and defend our
Sovereign Lord the King; Bind up his soul in the bundle of Life, and let no
weapon formed against him prosper. Preserve thy Church and the True Protestant
Religion, and discover more and more the snares of death, and Popish Treachery,
and let us never fall into the hands of those men whose mercyes are cruel.
Bless my Relations, kindred and friends, and all others whom I am bound to pray
for; All which I humbly beg in the Name and through the Mediation of Jesus
Christ thy Son our Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
MOst Gracious God, and merciful Father, I wretched sinner do beseech thee to
look upon me with the eyes of thy mercy, and let thy Holy Spirit work in me
such a serious Repentance, as that I may with Tears lament my sins past, with
grief of heart be humbled for my sins present, and with all my endeavors
resist them for the time to come. And now O Lord I bless thee for my health,
food, and raiment, and that thou have defended me this day now past, from all
dangers and Perils; and as thou have ordained the day for man to Travel in, and
the night for him to take his rest, so I beseech thee sanctify unto me this
Nights rest, that being refreshed with moderate sleep, I may be the better
enabled to serve thee, and (...) in the profession of thy True Religion and
(...) Gracious Sovereign, preserve him as the Apple (...) hide him under the
sha low of thy wings, (...) his (...) with shame, and let them never prevail
against him. Protect thy Church, and these Kingdom, from Popery, Superstition
and Idolatry, and unite our hearts in the profession of the True Religon, which
thine own right hand has planted amongst us. Bless the whole People of this
Land, and be merciful to all our Kinsfolks, Families, and Neighbors. These and
all other blessings, we beg of thee for the sake of Jesus Christ, in whose
blessed Name and words we further pray, Our Father, etc.

Grace before meat.
LOrd lift up our hearts to look unto thee for a blessing upon our meats, that
we may comfortably use thy Creatures, as pledges of thy Favor, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

After meat.
AS thou have filled our Bodies, O Lord, with thy good Creatures, far above our
desert, so be pleased to endue our Souls with all Spiritual Blessings, in
Heavenly things, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Before meat.
MOst gracious God, and Loving Father, we humbly beseech thee, to forgive us
all our Sins, and Bless thy good Creatures provided for us, and give us Grace
to receive them as from thine hand, and to use them soberly, as in thy sight,
to thy Glory and our Comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

After meat.
ETernal Thanks and Praise be ascribed unto thee, O Blessed Lord, who have
opened thy hand at this time, and made us partakers of thy Benefits: Lord let
us never cease to Offer unto thee the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

