A DECLARATION To the English Nation, FROM Fardinando the IVth Emperor of
Germany, etc. Lewis the 14th. King of France and NAVARRE. Philip the 5th. King
of Spain and Arragon, etc. Christiern the third King of Denmark, Zealand, etc.
Lodowick Duke of LORAIN, And Adolphina Queen of Sweden,
In detestation of the present proceedings of the Parliament and Army, and of
their intentions of coming over into England in behalf of King CHARLES the
second.

Being Translated out of the true Copy.

Printed by their own appointment, 1649.

WE, FERDINANDO the Fourth Emperor of Germany, etc. LEWIS the Fourteenth King
of France and Navarre, PHILIP King of Spain, Arragon, etc. CHRISTIERN the Third
King of Denmark, Zealand, etc. LODOWICK Duke of Loraine, And ADOLPHINA Queen of
Sweden,
To the English NATION send greeting.
WHereas a Traitorous Party in your unduteous Parliament and their
Army Officers, to carry on the Polonian design against Monarchy (brought thence
by Lesley and some other unto that sedicious Earl of Argile in Scotland, and
from thence transmitted into England) have by wicked craft, to bring a general
odium upon them, aspersed their Clergy with Innovations in Religion, and the
Privy Council with too burdenous Taxes, as if the Affairs of a Kingdom could
be managed with nothing; And by Petitions framed among themselves for that
hellish end, and sent abroad for complyances to exasperate the giddy people,
have drawn many well-meaners to join with them in the blood of their Kings
faithful subjects, whereby they have winded themselves into the strength of the
Kingdom: And since, contrary to their Oaths of Allegiance, their National
Covenant, and the Laws of God and man, most insolently and wickedly (for his
place and means) murdered at his own doors, our Royal brother of happy Memory
Charles the First; and done it by a pretended Court, as upon a Malefactor;
thereby to hide, if it were possible, under color and pretense of Law, that
most villainous Act; and to make seem just their most unjust intentions toward
his undoubted Heir Charles the Second, in denying him his Fathers Crowns and
Fortunes, yielding no hops at all of his admission into his just Birth right,
or of restoring you his good people unto your Religion, Laws, and Liberties;
nor of amendment of your decayed Trade, the only subsistency of your
Corporations; nor ending of the numerous and heavy Taxes, wherewith they daily
load you, till vanquished by the sword: We the said Christian Princes thought
meet, before our Entrance into your Country, to give you notice of our zealous
and just intentions for the relief of our young Brother, and your selves, whose
hearts were not in the blood of your King; least you should by subtle devices
be drawn aside, again to withstand your own and your Princes welfare: We refer
the Censure of those Traitors Cause (so much preached for just) unto your
selves; you know to kill your King, is the higest sort of Treason in your
Statute Law. And whereas, there has been an Originallity of Power in the
People, much preached up amongst you, and your Kingdom to be Elective, whereby
to usher in, and hide from vulgar view that worst of Acts; We ask you one
question: What Lord of a Manor among you gives his servants leave to choose him
a Steward, or to meddle with his accounts? much less gives he them leave to
kill his Steward, or take his place themselves; yet those two veiles have been
hither unto sufficient mask, to keep from your sight, those ugly sins of blood
and Usurpation: You might confider you be, or should be Gods Husbandmen; and
that he (as you) is both worthy, and will choose his own Deputy, that shall
command you in your several places, and will have you to be underlings and
obey, not preach it up above, and question, much less kill him, or take his
place: We preach a little to you, and in plainest language; because we see the
fruits of your boasted Reformation, that stupid blindness you have contracted
from the erroneous Doctrine of Sheepcloathed Wolves, that have rent in sunder
your Shepherd, and will (if let alone) devour you also. Consider, when your
Sovereign is murdered at his own doors, for his place and fortuns, and his
children turned out; how think you yours shall be secure unto you and yours?
they will (as they have done hitherto) be still sending for part, by way of
Contribution, and borrowing the rest by force, till you have nothing left: Do
you now get a penny beforehand* which they do not streightway send their
Plunder masters for? while you stuck unto your King, what wanted you? was your
Trade so bad as now? were your Taxes so heavy? was Ship money, and a few
Imposts, equivalent to sixty Millions, cheated and spent you in this sevenyears
War by your good Publicans? or to ninty thousand pounds a Month, with
Excise, Customs, Free quarter; six hundred thousand pounds now charged upon
your Kings Lands, and sixscore thousand pounds upon Loan, now demanded from
your City, and likely to be reiterated year by year, till the King be settled?
Were your late Kings Offices so corrupt, as these amongst you? yet say the
Traitors, what need of a King, that Government is useless and chargeable: We
wish you to take your own welfares into more serious consideration: You have
been often, and long enough deluded by them to learn wit now at last, if God have
not designed you for utter ruin; how often have you been promised a settlement
of your Religion, and your Laws, and a preservation of your (since slaughtred)
Kings Person? which now (we hope) you see were but devices to draw you into the
blood of your Kings faithfuls, and into a coldness of affecton and neglect of
duty toward him, that they might get power by murdering them first, to
murder him after, and to lay a gripe upon his just rights, the only earthly
preserver of yours: and we advertise you again of their now tempting you with
the Presbyterian interest to draw your thoughts from off your Kings dissundred
body on the Scaffold which we desire you to keep in mind till vindicated: and
understand you that upon Our approach they will endeavor to fright you into a
new rebellion against your now Prince, with fears of our Foreign forces, and
of Popery; by those wilds if it be possible, to continue the Crown upon their
own heads: But what religion is intended you, judge you by their late Votes to
shut up your Church doors for a year, by their taking into possession the
houses of God in your Land. And by their putting the Turkish ALKARON to the
Press to be your future Common Prayer Book; a trim Liturgy for Christians:
they have made you forsake your King, and now least you should receive his
Son, you must forsake Christ too: And what Laws you shall have we leave you
to ask the Levellers who have often met to that purpose, though without this
Summers victory, that design must be yet smothered: as stiffely was that
against the King and his Crown denied a year ago, and a fained treaty invented
to fobbe the people; yet upon the success of the second War, suddenly acted:
We remember you of these things because we will let you know, that when we come
we will expect from you the duty which God requires toward his deputy,
appointed by a long series of lawful line to Reign over you, which where we
shall find shall not go without reward, nor where it is wanting without due
punishment: We will not (out of tenderness of the honest among you) because of
your growing scarcities invade your Country at first with more then a
considerable host to balance the field Armies of the Rebels, but will try your
zeal to vindicate your late Sovereigns death, and to enthrone his Son; which
if we find not in you, we will strain all Christendom but we will lay you
waste as a forsaken wilderness; and we will trust (not as those amongst you,
in the arm of flesh, but) in the justice of our cause: And as for the spawne
of hell, those salse perjured Rakeshames that have slain the Lords Anointed,
the ordinary mulcts of your gentle Laws shall not satisfy that bloody
insolency; we will make their houses as the House of Riviliacke that Murdered
his Master HENRY the FOURTH of FRANCE, and their Bodies will we dragge at our
horses heels through the streets where they have triumphed in their
wickedness, and we will after hang them upon common dunghils, and give them
dead to hungry dogs; which we will forthwith hang on the same trees, in the
same halters, and bury in the deepest boggards of your Cities; if it be
possible to make their future resurrection as abominable, as their present
Conversation; and the other Officers and Soldiers which we shall take with
weapons drawn against us, we will so use, as that we will make the flesh of
those Arms that were lifted up against their late Sovereign their owners last
food: Hereof whosoever shall take notice, and forthwith upon our approach
repair unto us, shall be in their several ranks provided for; who so does not,
we shall take to be, and so deal with as the Enemies of your Kings and Country.

Sir, I am commanded to suit this Declaration unto vulgar Capacity, which I
have endeavored; that if the people will be any more drawn into Rebellion by
our malicious Enemies, they may be left without all excuse: the juditious we
are sure of; keep your courage; Babell again begins to totter; we are ready for
them; and where we find best advantage, there we shall begin: as you understand
of them, so conclude of our Motion, and get you that way, and you will shortly
see,

Hague April 28. 1649. Stilo novo. Your faithful Friend R. CLARE.

FINIS.

