Mr. John Mackenzyes NARRATIVE OF THE Siege of Londonderry A False LIBEL: IN
DEFENSE OF Dr. George Walker.

Written by his FRIEND in his Absence.

LONDON, Printed for R. Simpson at the Harp in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1690.

Mr. John Mackenzyes Narrative OF THE Siege of Londonderry A False Libel, etc.
AND indeed is it come out at last? Have the zealous Hammer-men at length
beaten it into some shape? Is this the accurate Journal of the Siege, which by
the unanimous Verdict of the Club, was Voted to be Published in the
Mock-Apology, for the Failures in Mr. Walkers Narrative? Or, is it a Comment on
Mr. Boys's Vindication of Mr. Osborn? In which he pretending Moderation, and a
Calmness of Spirit, with sly Insinuations, detracts from the Credit of Dr.
Walker, and lessens his Reputation, while he commends his Care and Fidelity, in
over-seeing the Stores, and distributing the Provisions of Derry, and being a
notable Marks Man, at one shot, he knocks down the ambitious Governor, and the
credulous Gentleman, who writ the Observations on the Narrative.

Just so, when Dr. King, and Peter Mamby were picqueering, he took up a Flaile,
and thresht them both; and while the Dr. was engaged in a Duel, with a
pernicious Apostate from the Protestant Religion, he came behind his back, and
stabbed him, only because he incidentally reflected on that Persuasion, of which
Mr. Boys is ambitious to be thought the celebrated Champion; with the same
dexterity he manageth the Vindication of Mr. Osborn, that by the Privilege of
that Opportunity, he may with ingenious Sarcasms, disparage Dr. Walker, and
vilify his Friend; but if he has no better luck at his Lectures, than he has at
writing of Prefaces, (for I am persuaded there was no other part assigned to
him in Mr. Mackenzyes Farce, but to speak the Prologue) he will have just
Reason to wish he had been better informed, and not suffered his Zeal to
transport him beyond the Limits of Truth.

As for the malicious and satirical Pamphlet, which passes under the Name of
Mr. John Mackenzy, (but at best, can be but a Translation, since he is not
capable of writing so many Leaves in true and proper English) though it pretend
to be a true and exact Diary of the Siege; it is really intended for an
Invective against Dr. Walker. It would fain be accounted an impartial Narrative
of the particular Actions of those Gallant Men, who defended the Place, but it
insensibly degenerates into a palpable partiality, and an ungenerous design, to
magnify a Party, and exclude the rest; it is a long-winded Paraphrase upon a
short Text, and the whole Substance of the Book may be resolved into two Lines,
viz. All the brave and glorions Actions in that Siege, were performed by the
Dissenters, and Colonel Murray at the Head of them; all inglorions Actions and
treacherous Attempts, are to be imputed to the other part of the Garrison, and
principally to Dr. Walker.

I do not intend to set out an Anti-Narrative, or to trouble my self with a
Confutation of many passages in that scurrilous Account, wherein the Chaplain
takes upon him, the place of a Field Officer, and recites the particular
Proceedings of particular Men in the Management of their Sallies, directly
contrary to what has been related by those very persons who were engaged in
them. I shall only apply my self to demonstrate to the World, what a dangerous
Spirit of Lying is in the Mouth of this small Prophet, and how this Chaplain in
Quirpo, does piously obtrude upon us such things, as are evidently and
inexcusably false, in point of Fact.

I shall, according to due Method, begin with the Preface, and take the
Liberty, under the Protection of Innocence and Truth, positively to contradict
the most material Points in it, howsoever it be ushered in, under a bold
Asseveration, with a brassy Impudence: The Penner of the Preface, personating
Mr. Mackenzy, will have the poor Man to say, I have offered this Part of the
Narrative to be reviewed by such of the Officers of Derry, as are now in Town,
several of whom, as, Colonel Crofton, Colonel Murray, Lieutenant Colonel
Blair, Captain Alexander Sanderson, etc. having heard it read, etc. freely
professed their Assent to it: I admire that men who pretend to Integrity and
strictness of Life, can presume thus grossly to prevaricate.

The Word Such is commonly used by way of Exception, but in this place it must
be meant by way of Comprehension, Such of the Officers as are now in Town, i.
e. the Officers now in Town. I have spoke with them all but five at most, and
am fully satisfied, that that part of the Preface is a studied and deliberate
Lie; for as to the four Persons who are particularly named, two of them did
solemnly aver in my hearing, and in the hearing of many Credible Persons, that
they did not hear that part of the Narrative wholly read, and what was read,
they did not approve of; and a third has ingenuously certified under his hand,
as follows, and one of the three has descended to Particulars.

We the under-subscribers, Officers of Londonderry in the following List
mentioned, do hereby declare, That Mr. John Mackenzy, or any for him, never
read all that part of his Pamphlet, Entitled, A Narrative of the Siege of
Londonderry, etc. to them that related to Londonderry, before the same was
Printed, as in the Preface to the said Pamphlet is set forth, nor did the said
Subscribers assent to what they heard read, but on the contrary, objected
against several things they heard read, and having seen the said Pamphlet since
it was Printed, do not assent to, or approve of it. As Witness our Hands this
9th. day of April, 1690.

Richard Crofton.

I the underwritten did not assent to two particulars in Mr. John Mackenzy's
Book, viz. the Articles against Dr. Walker, and the discouraging Sermon, not
knowing any thing of them.

Alex. Sanderson.

And if by his, etc. he means such of the Officers of Derry as are now in Town,
I shall for the satisfaction of the Reader, and the everlasting shame of the
Preface Monger, present first a List of the Londonderry Officers now in
London, who are in Number Twenty Four, and then a Certificate under the Hands
of Seventeen of them, in perfect contradiction to that Paragraph in the Preface.

A List of the Londonderry Officers that are in London.
Col. Hamills's Regiment. Col. Hugh Hamil. Capt. Rich. Aplen, Capt. Rob.
Rogers, Ensi. Oliver Aplen, Serje. James Linsy.
Col. Bakers Regiment. Capt. William Ruxton, Capt. Archib. Maculloch, Lieut.
Michael Reed, Lieut. Robert Lowther, Lieut. Thomas Keise.
Col. Crofton's Regiment. Col. Rich. Crofton, Lieut. Mich. Boyer, Ensign John
Brush.

Col. Murray's Regiment. Col. Ad. Murray, Capt. Sa. Murray, Q. M. W. Anderson
Q. M. Alex. Heron, Capt. Alexander Watson, Captain of the Gunners, and Chief
Engineer. Richard Skamon, Gunner.

Col. Lance's Regiment. L. C. Tho. Blayer, Cap. Steph. Godfry, Lieu. Mat.
Clarck, Edward Carling, Store-keeper of Provision.

Col. Walker's Regiment. Capt. Alex. Sanderson

We the under-named Subscribers, Londonderry Officers, in the above List
mentioned, do hereby declare, That we never saw a Pamphlet, Entitled, A
Narrative of the Siege of Londonderry, etc. or any part of it published by Mr.
John Mackenzy, until after it was Printed; and having perused it since, do not
approve of it, as Witness our Hands this Nineth Day of April, 1690.

Edward Curling, Robert Rogers, Michael Reed, John Brush, Oliver Aplen, Richard
Skamon, Richard Aplen, Robert Lowther, Thomas Baker, James Linsy, Stephen
Godfrey, Hugh Hamill, Alexander Watson, William Ruxton, Michael Boyer, Archib.
Macullocb.
But good Mr. Mackenzy, or whosoever else was so courteous to Write that
elaborate Preface, did you really find it necessary to expose Dr. Walker at
such a rate, by taking notice of the Articles against him? Did you find it
requisite so bluntly to scorn and ridicule him to represent him as a
Jack-a-lent, a Sancho Pancha, or a fabulous Hero? This is rudeness in the
abstract, this is a Language that deserves a more severe reprehension, than the
lash of a Pen.

As for this latter Part, wherein you so Magisterially degrade him from his
Station of Governor, and so spitefully detract from his Fame and Reputation, I
shall presently confront you with the concurrent Testimonies of many of the
Officers of the Garrison, acknowledging and owning him to be Governor from the
very beginning of the Siege, as well as attesting his singular Prudence and
Circumspection in the management of the Provisions and Stores.

For the other part of the Libel which impeacheth him of Treachery, and
asperseth him with a Train of Articles, which never were exhibited but in Mr.
Mackenzy's defamatory Narrative, it is a matter of too great Importance to be
answered, only with a bare denial, it touches to the quick, and it will
concern Dr. Walker to labor in the Justification of himself, and I am fully
persuaded that Mr. Mackenzy and his Accomplices will find to their cost, that
though Dr. Walker do not arrogate to himself the Title of a Hero, yet he will not
be found so tame and insensible an Animal, to suffer himself to lie under such
intolerable Calumnies, but will use all legal means to obtain a Reparation,
and a competent Recompense for the exorbitant damages he sustains by a scandal
so highly injurious.

I say, that though Dr. Walker do not arrogate to himself the Title of an Hero,
yet I can tell who they are that would have made him one, when they advised him
to enter the City of London publicly, that so he might be Huzza'd into Town
like a Champion indeed; which he modestly declined, ordering the Coachman to
drive him to his Lodgings by all the private ways he could, which accordingly
he did, by going out of the usual Road, and so disappointed the expectation of
many; for the Truth of which, I appeal to that worthy Gentleman, Sir Robert
Cotton Knight, of the Shire of Chester, in whose Coach he was conveyed into
Town.

I can tell further who that Noble Lord was (for I was present) who next
Morning after the Dr's coming to London, would have made him a Hero indeed, and
of his own party, by advising him to wait on His MAJESTY in a Soldiers Habit,
and as became the Governor of Londonderry; but the Dr. begged his Pardon, and
quickly crept into the Black-Coat, which disappointment has occasioned all this
cry; and ever since, that party have proclaimed open Hostility against him, and
are not to be reconciled upon any other Terms, than a compliance with their
extravagant Humors, and verifying what they writ from Scotland to their
Brethren in England, upon the Dr's first Arrival there from Derry, that
Governor Walker had laid aside both his Gown, and his Principles of the Church
of England; this was inserted as well in public as private Letters.

I must retreat again to the Preface, for there the Venom lies. In the body of
the Narrative; I find no positive assertion, that Dr. Walker was not Governor
of Londonderry, he seems to be past over in silence, and we are to believe him
not to have been so from the negative Authority of the Narrator; for so page 30
th. speaking of the Council met for Electing of a Governor, he tells us what
Persons were Nominated, and Major Baker had the Majority of Votes, and was
chosen their Governor, and this, according to his Journal, was on the 19 th.
of April, besides a brief insinuation, page 62. that he was not Governor, though
he was wont to crowd in his Name.

Now I shall produce a Certificate under the Hands of Seventeen Officers
actually in service in Londonderry, during the whole Siege, and now in London,
who in all reason may be presumed to know who was the Governor of that
Garrison, wherein they so Frankly Adventured their Lives, as well as he who
fosters the Narrative, or as he who penned the Preface; and it is thus;

These are to Certify, That Dr. George Walker, during the whole time of the
Siege of the City of Londonderry, and until Major General Kirk came into the
said City, Executed the Place and Office of Governor of the same, joint with
Colonel Henry Baker, until the said Bakers sickness (whereof he died) and
after with Col. John Michelbourn (who was in a General Meeting of the Field,
and other Officers of the said Garrison Elected to Act as Governor in the said
Col. Bakers Place during his sickness) as well in all things, relating to the
Military Affairs of the said City, as in seeing the Provisions gathered and
distributed, the management of the Provisions being a great means by which the
said City held out so long. Witness our Hands this Nineth of April, Anno
Domini, 1690.

Edward Curling, Robert Rogers, Michael Reed, John Brush, Oliver Aplen, Richard
Skamon, Richard Aplen, Robert Lowther, Thomas Baker, James Linsy, Stephen
Godfry, Alex. Watson, Hugh Hamill, Alex. Sanderson, William Ruxton, Michael
Boyer, Archib. Maculloch.
In the next place I will show you a Certificate from Captain Joseph Bennet,
who commands a Company in his Majesty's Army, whose Declaration ought to be
regarded as much at least as Mr. Mackenzy's.

These are to Certify, That I being in the Garrison of Londonderry, in the
beginning of the Siege laid before that Town, by the Late King James and his
Forces, and when Col. Robert Lundy absconded, the Forces in the said Garrison,
chose Dr. George Walker, and Col. Henry Baker their Governors, who were in
pursuance of such Election, sworn Governors of the said Garrison, to Defend and
Hold out the same for Their present Majesty's KING William and QUEEN Mary, and
the Protestant Religion, that after the said Governors were sworn, I saw Dr.
Walker, and Col. Baker, Sign several Writings as Joynt-Governours, some of
which writings were sent out of the Town to Col. Richard Hamilton, then
Lieutenant General of the late King James his Forces in that Province, in
answer to some Letters of his, directed to the said Governors, for the
Releasment of Capt. Darcy, Mr. Blacker, and Lieut. Twinihow, then Prisoners in
Londonderry; and afterward I was sent by the said Governors to KING William,
for Relief to the said Garrison, and made my way through the Enemies Camp, but
being first taken prisoner, was brought before the said Col* Richard Hamilton,
and heard both the Duke of Berwick, and him, call the said Dr. Walker, and Col.
Baker, Governors: I further Certify, That at my leaving Londonderry, the said
Dr. Walker gave me Money to bear my charges in the presence of the other
Governor Col. Baker, and upon my coming to London, acquainted the KING with
the same, and never heard that the said Dr. Walker was denied to be one of the
Governors till of late. Witness my Hand this Thirteenth day of April, 1690.

Jos. Bennet.

But to drive the Nail home, take the Testimonial of Gervase Squire, Esquire;
present Mayor of Londonderry, and who Acted and Suffered in it during the
whole Siege, a Person of that Integrity and Candor, that his bare asseveration
would influence and sway a Jury in his own Country.

I do hereby Certify, That Dr. George Walker, during all the time of the Siege
of the City of Londonderry, and until Major General Kirk came into the said
City, Executed the Office and Place of Governor of the same, joint with Col.
Henry Baker, until the said Bakers sickning (of which he died) and after, with
Col. John Michelbourn who was in a General Meeting of the Field, and other
Officers of the said Garrison Elected to Act as Governor in the said Bakers
Place during his sickness) as well in all things relating to Military Affairs,
as in seeing the Provisions gathered and distributed: the Management of the
Provisions to the best advantage was a great Means by which the said City held
out so long; and I do also Certify, that it being agreed upon by the said
Governors and Council, that I should administer an Oath of Fidelity, (then
agreed upon to be taken by the said Governors and Council) I administered the
said Oath to the said Dr. Walker and Coll. Baker as Governors of the said
City, (the said Dr. Walker having the precedence) as well as to the Members of
the said Council, all which I am ready to depose upon Oath, if required: And I
farther certify that I never saw a Pamphlet entitled A Narrative of the Siege
of Londonderry, or any part of it, published by Mr. John Mackenzy, until after
it was Printed, and having perused since, I do not approve of it. Witness my
Hand the 9 th. day of April, 1690.

Ger. Squire, Mayor.

I do not think it either necessary or requisite to multiply any more instances
in this Case to confirm what I have undertaken, and to disprove the unjust
Scandals suggested in Mr. Mackenzy's Libel, nevertheless I shall ex abundanti,
subjoyn two or three Passages in Letters formerly written, which are now in my
Hands, the first is from Alex. Saunderson, one of the Captains in Londonderry.

Londonderry, 8 th. of August, 1689. SIR,
UNderstanding that you were at London, I give you these from this sad Besieged
Place: It were long and tedious to give you a full Account of all our
Tragedies, seeing you may have a full Account of the whole particulars from our
Noble and Worthy Governor Walker, which I am sure will much astonish you, when
you hear of it, of the streights and difficulties we endured, and yet by the
Providence of God, who was on our side, and the extraordinary good guidance of
our Worthy Governor, who managed Affairs in this Garrison to a most
extraordinary advantage for our preservation and subsistence, which the end
has proven, etc. -- My Pen would fain lead me on to give you a farther Account
of particulars, but as I said before, he only can give it you at large, being
privy to all by Night and by Day.

Yours,etc. Alex. Sanderson.

The next is from Thomas Blayre, a Lieutenant Colonel in Londonderry.

Londonderry, the 20th. of October, 1689. SIR,
I Understand by the Kings Letter, that of the four Regiments Major General
Kirk left unreduced, at Londonderry, there is now but three of them to stand,
etc. I humbly entreat that you would among the rest of your many Favors add
this one, of being an instrument of preserving us, by dealing effectually with
the King that we may be continued, which we doubt not by your Care therein, and
by giving an account of our more than ordinary Necessity, you will prevail to
the relief of the whole Regiment, and also put a singular Oblgation on

SIR Your Obedient and Humble Servant, Tho. Blayre.
To the Reverend George Walker, Governor of Londonderry, at Old-Jury, London.
The other is from the Officers in Colonel Lance's Regiment.

Strabane, the 16th. of November, 1689. Worthy SIR,
WE your fellow Sufferers of Coll. Lance's Regiment, have sent over to wait on
you Capt. Stephen Godfrey, one of the Captains of our Regiment, to give you to
understand, how thankful we are to God, that he has been pleased to give you
Favor in their Majesty's eyes to reward and promote you according to your
deserts, which is to our knowledge but part of what you deserve, and it shall
always be our Prayers, that you may continue in that Favor, that you and yours
may flourish to all Eternity, etc.

Your own Servants, Signed by Order of the whole Regiment Tho. Blair. Stephen
Miller. George Holmes.

To the Honorable Coll. George Walker, Governor of Londonderry, at his
Lodgings in Old-Jury, London.
These things I have the rather mentioned, because Lieutenant Colonel Blayr,
and Captain Alexander Sanderson are two of the four persons, who are so
confidently mentioned in that Religious Preface, to have freely professed their
assent to the Narrative; and being well known to be Men of approved Honesty and
Integrity, it can be looked upon as no other than a malicious Libel against
their Credit, of which I presume, they will be so tender, as to consult a
proper Vindication of it.

Nay, what is very fit to be taken notice of, I can show a Certificate in
favor of Coll. Hamil, subscribed by 16. Officers in Londonderry, whereof 5.
are Colonels, August the 4 th. 1689. wherein they testify, that the said
Hamil was made a Colonel of Foot, by Colonel Henery Baker, and Colonel
George Walker then Governors of that City, and among them, not only Colonel
Crofton, and Lieutenant Colonel Blair, and Captain Saunderson, but even
Colonel Adam Murray himself has Subscribed his Name.

There is no need to say any more on this occasion, but because in that
Libellous Narrative, page 37. one of the Articles against Doctor Walker, is for
selling or embezling the Stores, and that this supposed Article, occasioned an
Order of Council, that Mr. Walkers note, should not be accepted by the Keepers,
till Signed by the Governor, or Major Adams, I shall produce a Certificate
under the very Hand of the Keeper of the Stores, who in a very indifferent Man's
Judgment, will be allowed to know, and presumed to speak the truth.

THese are to certify, that whereas in a late Pamphlet written by Mr. J.
Makenzy, entitled a Narrative of the Siege of Londonderry; It is mentioned
(amongst other things) That Dr. Walker late Governor of the said City, did
fell and embezle the Stores of the said Garrison, and that the said Dr. was so
inconsiderable there, that his note was not accepted by the Store-Keepers of
Provisions for delivery of any out, unless the same was first signed by the
Governor and Major Adams, thereby insinuating that the said Dr. was not
Governor of the said City: I do hereby declare, that the said Dr. neither did
or could fell or embezle any of the Stores, the same being in the Custody of
the Store Keepers, and never delivered out to any, but for the necessary use of
the Garrison, by Order from the Governors; and I do further declare, that I
was made Store Keeper of the Provisions at the beginning of the Siege, and
continued so to the end. And did from time to time deliver out Provisions upon
the said Dr. Walkers Order as Governor, in which Station he continued in great
esteem among us, until the said City was relieved by Major General Kirk, and I
never knew his Orders disputed (as in the said Pamphlet is expressed,) during
the whole time of the Siege, and I do look upon the said Pamphlet, as to what
relates to the said Dr. to be not only false, but Scandalous and Malicious: And
lastly, I do declare that some persons (concerned in putting out this Pamphlet,
as I presume) since I came to London, did come to me, and would have drawn me
by great promises to have bespattered and abused the Reputation of the said Dr.
Witness my Hand the 25 th day of April. 1690.

Edw. Curling.

And now do not your ears tingle? are not your faces covered with a blush, who
have Plotted, Caballed, and contrived such a Scandalous Libel, and a more
calumniating Preface? and now to hear that some of you have been tampering to
pervert truth, and to add Subornation to bearing false Witness?

To use the words of the Narrative for once, I should not take notice of so
trivial a thing as Mr. Walkers Signing first; but that it is improved into an
Argument of his forward Temper, to crowd in his Name: And this is instanced in
the Case of Robert Lowther, page 62. I cannot tell whether he crowded in his
Name above Mitchelbourn, or whether Mitchelbourn in Modesty left room for him
to write over his Name: But this I know, that Robert Louther is one of those
who have attested Dr. Walkers being Governor, and since Colonel Baker dyed,
in June, I cannot in my small reason apprehend, what should move Dr. Walker to
expunge the mention of Baker being Governor in November following.

I have said enough to satisfy all manner of persons, but such as are resolved
never to be satisfied, that Dr. Walker was from first to last one of the
Governors of Londonderry, and principal Overseer of the Stores and Magazines:
by the before mentioned Certificate and Letters, it evidently appears, that he
was not a Nominal or Titular Governor, but an Active and Successful manager of
his Trust; and therefore it can never be enough wondered at, that Men who
profess the Protestant Religion, who pretend Meekness and Moderation, who pass
as Teachers of Flocks (as the Writer of the Preface, and the owner of the
Narrative) should with so much Bitterness, Malice and Scorn, not only taunt and
satyrize at random, and by Conjectures, upon a Protestant, a Clergyman and a
Gentleman of a good Family in Yorkshire; who cannot be denied to have been an
Actor and Sufferer in that memorable Siege, but by loose and uncertain
Suggestions, by false Asseverations, and downright untruths degrade him from
his Station, eclipse his Reputation, and unchristianly grudge him common Right
and Justice.

And now if any Man desire to be farther satisfied in the Reality and Truth of
the Certificates, Testimonials, and Letters before mentioned and Transcribed,
he may be pleased to repair to Joseph Wilkinson Clerk, at his Lodging at the
Sign of the Harp in St. Pauls-Church-yard, where he may view the respective
Originals, which will sufficiently vouch for the truth of what has bin said.

What I have said, was purely designed to undeceive ordinary persons, and
credulous people, who are often imposed on, by incoherent Cant, Antic
gestures, a whining tone, and Distorted face: As for men of better Judgments,
and of the best Quality in the Kingdom, I am very well assured, they never
believed Dr. Walker to be an Impostor.

Can any one of Sense imagine, that the King and Queens Majesty's are such
easy persons, as to give Dr. Walker thanks for his good Service, and reward
him so highly as they have done, if he were a Cheat?

Nay, would the King have again employed him, as now he has done within these
few weeks, in sending him to Ireland, by his positive Orders, to Negotiate
public Affairs? at which happy Juncture, very Courageously appears on the
Stage, Mr. John Mackenzy's new Farce, when the Gentleman was not in Town to
answer for himself.

No, No, never believe it, the King did not send him, he is run away, and
absconds for shame, or for fear of a Halter, or the Pillory; which he, (or some
body else) deserves.

But what think you of the Lords of the Privy Council, who gave him Solemn
thanks for his excellent Management of Affairs, as Governor of Londonderry?
were they likewise imposed on? I never yet heard that they were called or
reputed weak Men.

But Oh! This Villain Walker, he trickt the Honorable House of Commons, who in
a full Assembly, returned him thanks by their Speaker as Governor! will not
after Ages say, There was not one Wise Man among them to detect the Fraud?

But how came the City of London to be caught in the Noose, how came they to be
thus bubled? Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, Society of the Plantation in the County of
Londonderry, all Congratulate his Arrival, and Treat him afterward as
Governor of Derry.

The English Rogue, Spanish Gusman, and crafty Clansy, are all Fools to this
Walker, Sileat miracula Memphis.

Scotland had once the Name of a Sagacious People, but now to their everlasting
Infamy, they must be reputed no better then Idiots, for Walker has cajoled
them, at Edinburgh he was received as Governor of Londonderry, Created and
made free of that City, as you may perceive by what follows, and which is more,
some part of that Instrument written in Letters of Gold.

Edinburgh the fourteen day of August, One thousand sex hundred eighty nine
Years.
THe which day in presence of the Right Honorable Sir John Hall of Dunglas
Knight and Barronet, Lord Provost of the City of Edinburgh, Charles Chartery,
James Maclurge, Andrew Bruce, and John Robertsone Bailiffs, Thomas Crauford
Dean of Gilde, and Guilde Council, Colonel George Walker Governor of Derry,
Compeer, and is made Burgess, and Gild Brother of this City, in the most Ample
Form, extract it forth of the new Lockit, Gild-Book of the City of Edinburgh,
be me Aeneas Maclod, Conjunct Clerk thereof. Witnessing hereunto my Sign
Mannual, like as the common Seal of the said City is hereunto appended.

Ae. Maclod.
For Colonel George Walker Governor of Derry, Burgess and Gild Brother of
Edinburgh.
Nay and Glasgow is in no better Circumstances.

Apud decimo tertio die Mensis Augusti, Millesimo sexentesimo octogesimo nono.
THe which day in presence of the Honorable the Magistrates of the City of
Glasgow, William Nappier Dean of Gilde thereof, and the said Dean of Gild his
Council, Colonel George Walker, Governor of the City of Londonderry, within
the Kingdom of Ireland, is admitted and received Burgess and Gild-Brother of
the foresaid City of Glasgow, and the hail Liberties, Privileges and
Immunities belonging to, and Burgess and Gild-Brother thereof, are granted to
him in most Ample Form, who has given his Oath of Fidelity, as use is:
Extracted forth of the Gild-Books of the said City, be me George Andersone,
Town Clerk thereof: Witnissing hereunto my Sign and Subscription Manual.

G. Andersone.

But pray how came the Universities of England to be so gulled? it is
unaccountable that they should unanimously conferr on him the honorable Degree
of Doctor in Divinity. Cambridge begins, and presents him with his Degree,
though absent; it was done when the King was there last Summer at the
Commencement. Oxford makes him a a solemn Invitation to give them a Visit, and
on the 26 th. of February, 1689. he is created Doctor in Divinity, and since
his going to Ireland, the University has sent him a Diploma, wherein are these
Words,

REverendus Vir, Georgius Walker, strenuus ipse ac invictus Civitatis Derensis
propugnator, atque eodem facto totius Hibermiae, uti speramus conservator atque
vindex.

Dat. Martii 2o. 1689.
What a grand Cheat is this Walker, and what a great number of inconsiderable
Things are here, King and Queen, Privy Council and House of Commons, Edinburgh,
Glasgow, London, Cambridge and Oxford so easily imposed on! I could dwell much
longer on this Subject, but to those who have a Will to understand the truth,
this is sufficient, to those who have not, it is too much.

APPENDIX.
AFter the conveighing of these Papers to the Press, the following Certificate
relating to that worthy Gentleman, Captain James Hamilton, came to my Hands, a
Person who through the sole series of his Life, has manifested his Zeal to the
Protestant Interest, and to whose excellent Management of Affairs that
importaut place of Londonderry owes its preservation in a great Measure.

Mr. Mackenzy's Sincerity and impartial way of handling the Subject he treats
of is very obvious, by his setting forth every particular Passage in its true
and native light; and as he relates nothing but Matters of Fact, so what he
says of them he proves by as plain Demonstration as that is capable of, and
better cannot reasonably be expected. Thus far Mr. Mackenzy speaks for himself
in his Preface; and after his having so substantially barricado'd the Credit of
his Book, it seems not to be attacqu'd with any reasonable Prospect of Success;
yet this boldly asserted impregnable Fortress has an unguardable Breach, and
to which he himself is a Guide in his Index: I mean the Papers referred to in
his Narrative. It is true, most Readers that peruse such Pamphlets as his, will
not trouble themselves with running over so long (and little diverting) a
Postscript, as those Papers make, but will be contented with the Abstract he
gives of them, in the series of his Relation; not thinking it possible, a man
who professes himself the Champion of injured Truth, can have the Confidence to
defy the World to Answer what he Writes, and at the same time to refer the
Reader to Papers at the end of his Book that detect his Malice, and confute him
of wresting (even to Forgery) some authentic Testimonies to palliate or rather
to support his slanderous Insinuations; yet after this indirect manner he has
bespattered Capt. James Hamilton, a Gentleman who in the critical Juncture of
the late Happy Revolution, manifested his Zeal to the Protestant Interest, by
his early and indefatigable Solicitations to have Relief sent to the
Protestants then in Arms in the North of Ireland: And by his working through
the many It would have been too tedious to have inserted here what those
obstructions and difficultys were Capt. Hamilton met with, the Curious are
therefore referred to what was taken in Writing relating thereto, from Capt.
Hamilton's own mouth, and that before a Committee of the last House of Commons,
where Capt. Hamilton gave an Account of where he was from day to day, and how
he employed himself toward the dischargeing himself of the trust reposed in
him, from the very day he received his Instructions, to the day of his Arrival
with his Charge at Londonderry.
Obstructions and Difficulties he met with from several, who in the then
Infancy of the present Government slighted the Orders he obtained for his
Dispatch, as to that supply of Arms, Ammunition, and Money, his Majesty
entrusted him with to that effect, according to the Purport of the Instructions
given him the said James Hamilton, a Copy whereof is inserted in the 54 th.
Page of Mr. Mackenzy's Narrative; and how little the said Instructions agree in
the very essential Point, with what he says they were in his 19 th Page, is
evident to whosoever will take the trouble of comparing them. The Instructions
which Capt. Hamilton had, (Page the 19 th. he tells you) were to summon the
Mayor and all other Officers, Civil and Military, on Board him, and there
before them all to give the Oaths of Fidelity to Coll. Lundy, before he should
give him any Arms, etc. But Page 54. you will really find that Capt. Hamilton
was only empowered to summon the Mayor or chief Civil Magistrate to be a
Witness to his Administering the said Oaths to Coll. Lundy, without so much as
mentioning all Officers Civil and Military. This howsoever may seem but a
trivial Variation, if the Consequences are not considered, which are deducted
from thence with an Innuendo, but Mr. Mackenzy did not Prevaricate here to no
purpose; for he proceeds Page the 19 th. in these words; But instead thereof
(that is of Swearing Coll. Lundy before all Officers Military and Civil) most
of the Gentlemen on Board were desired to withdraw, on pretense of private
Business; so that if Lundy was Sworn, it was very privately. Now if Capt.
Hamilton's Instructions had been to Swear Coll. Lundy before them all, and he
had notwithstanding on pretense of private Business desired them to withdraw,
he had certainly deserved to be called to an Account, and severely Punished for
so doing; but it is apparent, his Instructions were not such: And though it is
purposely left as dubious, who desired the Company to withdraw, yet it is
notorious, Capt. Hamilton, whom the King was pleased to Entrust, must have been
a Madman, if after his having so publicly devoted himself to King William's
Service, he should have been so whimsically scrupulous, as to be fond of
Swearing Coll. Lundy in private, (if at all) as is insinuated; but that Capt.
Hamilton did Administer the said Oaths of Fidelity to Coll. Lundy is Testified
by the following Certificate, which is Attested by two Gentlemen of Good
Estates in the North of Ireland, and of unquestionable Reputation; and they are
the only Persons now in London that were present when Coll. Lundy was Sworn.

The CERTIFICATE.
WE whose Names are underwritten, do hereby Certify, that we were present when
Capt. James Hamilton Administered to Coll. Lundy both the Oaths of Fidelity
mentioned in his Instructions: And do likewise Testify that he Administered
them to him before he delivered up to the said Coll. Lundy any part of his
Trust. In Witness to the Truth whereof, we have hereunto set ouy Hands, this
One and Twentieth Day of April, 1690.

Hen. Mervyn. James Corry.


But it may be Objected, why was not the Mayor or chief Civil Magistate
present? The Reason was, because the said Mayor was one Cormock Oneal, who was
then actually a Colonel in the late King's Irish Army, and one of his Privy
Council, and whose Deputation to Mr. Buchanan, a suspected Person, was
consequently also void, and indeed the entire Management of all Affairs was by
Election devolved to Coll. Lundy; so that if Capt. Hamilton, without
considering the Intention of what he was sent about, had followed the Letter of
his Instructions to a Tittle in the particular Objected; he must according to a
Clause in them (notwithstanding the Enemy happened to be upon (as then) an
uninterrupted March to Londonderry) have returned to England with the designed
Relief he brought? which if he had done, I do not know how well it would have
pleased this Caviller. But I appeal to Men of Reason, if since Capt. Hamilton
was under an impossibility of Swearing Coll. Lundy, as he was ordered in his
Instructions, before the Mayor or chief Civil Magistrate, he did not answer the
drift of them in Administering the Oaths of Fidelity to Coll. Lundy before
Persons of Quality and Substance, and considerable Interest in that Country;
and if it was not the best expedient could be found in that juncture, which
would admit of no delay; to enable Capt. Hamilton to deliver up his Trust,
which was absolutely necessary should be done, Londonderry not being able,
without the succor Capt. Hamilton brought, to make the least Defense. Now it
is not probable that Mr. Mackenzy could be Ignorant of all this; for he who
searched so Critically after all could be turned to his Ends, must needs have
heard that what has been here recited relating to Capt. James Hamilton's
Swearing of Coll. Lundy, and acquitting himself of his Commission, was made
appear before a Committee of the last House of Commons; and that so clearly,
that several of the Members, were pleased thereupon to express in obligeing
Terms, the sense they had of Capt. James Hamilton's Behavior.

I shall now subjoyn the following Letter from a worthy and serious Gentleman,
to whom I communicated these Papers: I pray God it may have its desired Effect,
which is in laying aside our Animosities, and Uniting us all against the common
Adversary.

April 22. 1690. SIR,
I Return your Papers, in Answer to Mr. Mackenzy, and am sorry there is as you
say, a necessity of publishing them. It is strange the World should be so
imposed upon, to believe Dr. Walker Governor of Londonderry, if he were not,
or that any should now so soon deny it, if he were; but it is more strange, that
they who allowed and asserted it, and then celebrated him as the Hero of the
Age, should now so soon disparage him as the greatest Villain and Impostor; but
I remember, it was then also reported, with as much confidence, that he was a
Dissenting Minister; but the Scene is changed, they that would have him once
what he never was, will not allow him to be what they affirmed him; but they
that were then mistaken in one of his Characters, may now be so in what they
say of his other; and that they are so, these Certificates will possibly prove
so full a Conviction, that we may no more hear any thing upon this Subject; but
if Mr. M. should reply, it will be a Justice to the public to let him have the
last word. The Action was great, and allows every Instrument in it a proportion
of the Glory, without arrogating it entirely to any Party, if not so great as
to deprive them all of any; for the more it is considered the more does a
miraculous Providence shine in it. It seems, the^^ were not so united (even in
their danger) as I thought they were; but (...) weakly argued, that Dr. Walker
was not Governor, because some would have had the Government out of his hands:
Every discontented Party in a Kingdom does not unthrone the King, nor every
Mutiny in a Garrison deprive the Governor of his Authority, and all Attempts
of that kind rather add to them derogate from the Prudence and Steddiness of
his Conduct: And Dr. Walker maintained his Authority against the Wills of some,
even for theirs, as well as the common good of all. But as they will not allow
him ever to have been more than Governor, or rather Imbezeller of the Stores,
so neither will they his being Author of his Narrative of the Siege, which some
would persuade the World was written by the A. B. of T. to whom they are very
kind, in making the thing pass for a Lie, and him for the Author of it. I have
often heard him say, he could safely be Deposed be never read half of it before
it was Printed, nor the whole since, nor ever altered one word of what he read,
and that if he had no other reason, their mistake in this would make him doubt
what they say of Dr. W. in other points.

Sir, I have nothing to add, but my Prayers, that God would give all of us meek
and humble Hearts, and rebuke that spirit of bitterness and evil speaking which
exposes us to the scorn of our common Adversary, and the contempt of all, but
especially to the just displeasure of Almighty God, who is calling us to Peace
by those Judgments under which our Country groans, and from which we cannot
hope for Deliverance, while we continue in this Unchristian Temper. I am,

SIR, Your Humble Servant.

FINIS.

