Mr. EDWARD HYDES SPEECH AT A Conference between both Houses, on Tewsday the
6th. of July, 1641.

At the Transmission of the several Impeachments against the Lord Chief
Barron Dampert, Mr. Barron Trevor, and Mr. Barron Weston.

Printed at London for Abel Roper, at the Black Spread-Eagle, against St.
Dunstans Church in (...)

Mr. HYDES SPEECH the 6th of July 1641.
My Lords,
THERE cannot be a greater instance of a sick and languishing Commonwealth,
then the business of this day; good God, how have the guilty these late years
been punished, when the Judges themselves have been such Delinquents. It Is no
marvel that an irregular, extravagant, arbitrary power, like a Torrent, has
broke in upon us, when our banks, and our Bulworks, the Laws, were in the
Custody of such persons. Men who had lost their Innocence could not preserve
their courage, nor could we look that they who had so visibly undone us,
themselves should have the virtue or credit to rescue us from the oppression of
other men, 'twas once said by one, who always spoke excellently, that the
twelve Judges were like the 12. Lions under the Throne of Solomen; under the
Throne in obedience, but yet Lions: your Lordships shall this day hear of six,
who be they what they will be else) were no Lions: who upon vulgar fears
delivered up the precious Forts they were trusted with, almost without assault,
and in a tame, easy, trance of flattery and servitude, lost and forfeited
(shamefully forfeited) that reputation, awe and reverence, which the Wisdom,
Courage, and Gravity of their Venerable Predecessors, had contracted and
fastened to the places they now hold, and even rendered that study and
Profession, which in all Ages has been, and I hope now shall be of an
Honorable estimation, so contemptible and vile, that had not this blessed day
come, all men would have had that quarrel to the Law it self, which Marius
had to the Greek tongue, who thought it a mockery to learn that Language, the
Masters whereof lived in bondage under others: And I appeal to these unhappie
Gentlemen themselves, with what a strange negligence, skorne and indignation,
the faces of all men, even of the meanest have been directed toward them,
since to call it no worse) that fatal declension of their understandings in
those Judgments, of which they stand here charged before your Lordships: But
(my Lords) the work of this day is the greatest instance of a growing; and
thriving Commonwealth too: and is as the dawning of a fair and lasting day of
happiness to this Kingdom, it is in your Lordships power, (and I am sure it is
in your Lordships will) to restore the dejected broken people of this Island,
to their former joy and security, the successors of these men to their old
privilege and veneration, and sepultas prope leges revocare.

My Lords, the Iniquity of Judges is infectious, and their craftiest
combination to leave as few innocent as may be, your Lordships have heard of
the justice of two of the greatest Courts of Westminster, and that you may know
how little advantage the other of his Majesty's Revenue, the Court of
Exchequer, has of its fellows in the administration of right. I am commanded
by the House of Commons to present to your Lordships three several charges,
against three Judges of that Court, my Lord chief Baron Damport, Mr. Barron
Trevor, and Mr. Barron Weston, your Lordships will please to hear them read.

Your Lord ships observe, that the great resolution in Ship Money, was a Crime
of so prodigious a nature, that it could not be easily swallowed, and digested
by the Consciences, even of these men, but as they who are to wrestle or run a
race, by degrees prepare themselves by diet, and lesser assayes for the maine
exercise, so these Judges enter themselves and harden their hearts by more
particular trespasses upon the Law: by impositions and taxes upon the Merchant
in Trade, by burdens and pressures upon the Gentry in Knighthood, before they
could arrive at that universal destruction, of the Kingdom by Ship Money;
which promised reward and security for all their former services, by doing the
work of a Parliament to his Majesty in supplies, and seemed to delude justice,
in leaving none to judge them, by making the whole Kingdom party to their
oppression.

My. Lords, of this Crime these three Judges seem to be at least equally
guilty, for however one of them my Lord Chief Barron, is not charged with that
Judgment, in the ExchequerChamber against Mr. Hampden, and how he failed in
making his conclusion from his own premises, he only can inform you. Your
Lordships see how quickly he repented, that that mischief was done without him
there, by his overtaking his Brethren in his circuit, and as he said of the
vilest kind of flatterers, Crudelissimo servitutis genere, quod intra se
abominabantur, palam laudabant: he made all possible have to redeem himself
from that imputation of Justice, and declared publicly in the face of the
Country, that it was adjudged by all the Judges of England, that Ship money was
due to the King, though I believe he will be now glad to be thought none of
those Judges, and what others did he well knew, And thereupon imprisoned a
poor man for doing that, which if Ship Money had been due to his Majesty by
Magna Charta, had been lawful for him to have done; of the Resolutions and
judgment it self I am not to speak, your Lord-ships have passed your noble
Judgment.

My Lords, the first charge in order is, that presumptuous Decree against Mr.
Rolls and others, and in truth whatsoever gloss they put upon it, is no other
then a plain grant of the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage to his Majesty upon
all Merchandise; after their goods seized for nonpayment of that pretended
duty, the Proprietors brought Replevins (which is the natural and genuine
remedy, appointed by Law in case of Property, and grounded upon property) the
Court-awards an injunction to stay these Replevins, the goods were in the Kings
possession, and no Replevin would lie against the King: truly (my Lords) the
Injustice here is not so scandalous, as the fraud; we all know a Replevin (as
no other suite) lies against the King, if the goods be in his own hands, in
his Bedchamber, but to call a seizure by the Farmours (of whose interest this
Court will not deny the notice, and if his Majesty had any right, they well
knew he had transferred it to these men) or the Warehouses of the Customers,
the Kings possession, to defeat the Subject of his proper remedy, was the
boldest piece of Sophistry we have met with in a Court of Law: Pardon me if I
am transported: The Civilians say, Tutor Domini loco habetur cum re^
administra^, non cum pupillum spoliat: The Office of Judges is to preserve and
give remedy for right, here they found a right, a known and questionable
right, yet instead of assisting took away the remedy, to preserve that right,
what shall we call these Judges? my Lords, in this Argument I am not willing to
say much; it is enough that your Lord-ships know Tunnage and Poundage is not a
duty to the Crown; but a Subsidy, and so granted in Subsidium, sometimes pro
una vice tantum, sometimes for years, and then ceased when the time did
expire, that when it was first granted for life, it was with this clause: Ita
quod non trahatur in exemplum futuris Regibus, but it is abundantly enough that
his sacred Majesty cannot be tainted with the advices and judgments of these
men, but looks on this duty singly as the mere affection and bounty of his
Subjects, the which no doubt he shall never want.

My Lords, the next charge is concerning Impositions, Mr. Vassalls goods are
seized for not paying Impost, which he conceived to be against Law, he is
imprisoned, and judgment given against him, without suffering him to be
heard, upon the point of right, because that had been heretofore judged in
Bates's Case: And yet these very Judges have not thought themselves so bound up
by former judgments, but that since this time they have argued a case upon the
same point, which was adjudged in Hillary Term in the 15. Eliz. and contirmed
after by all the Judges of England in a Writ of Error, in the 21. year of
that Queens reign, it is Walsinghams Case, however the same modesty seized them
again in the case of a Noble Lord, not now present: Whether the King without
assent of Parliament, may set impositions upon the Wares, and goods of
Merchants, is no new question; it has been more then once debated in
Parliament, and indeed whilst it was a question, was fittest for a Parliament:
I will not trouble your Lordships long: it is now resolved, and nothing new can
be said in this Argument, though I may have leave to say, if the King can by
his Letters Parents create such a right to himself, and by a legal course
recover that right under such a Title, such Letters Patents are in no degree
inferior to an Act of Parliament: to reconcile such a power in the Prince, and
the property of the Subject, that the one must not be destructive to the other,
will require a much greater* a subtler understanding then I pretend to; but my
Lords I do not think the judgment in this point to be so great a crime in
these Judges, as that they presumed to judge at all; the matter had been long
debated in Parliament undetermined, and therefore not within the Conusance of
an inferior Court, had it not been true that Fortescue says in his 36.
Chapter of the Laws of England, Nequs Rex per se aut Ministors suos, tallagi^,
subsidia aut quaeris onera alia imponit etc. sin^ concessione vel assensu
^otius Regni sui in Parliamento suo expresso etc. If the Stature de Tallagio
no^ concedend^, if the 30th. Chapter of Magna Charta, and all the other
Statutes to that purpose, be not clear in the point, they might easily have
apprehended so much weight, so much difficulty in the question, (especially
since in all our Law books, not so much as the word imposition is found,
until the case in my Lord Dyer of 1. Eliz. (fol. 163.) that they might very
well have suspected themselves to be no competent Judges for that
determination, and I hope by the experience of this Parliament the Judges, will
recover that ancient modesty, to believe that some cases may fall out that may
not be properly within their jurisdiction in the 9. year of Eliz: (it is in the
Parliament Rolls) It being found by an office after the death of Gilbert de
Clare Earl of Gloucester, that his sisters were his Heirs, nist Comitissa
Glocestriae esset pregnans, the question was, whether the King might grant the
Heirs their Livery in preiudicium impregnaturae: This was conceived negotium
novum, and difficile, and the King having commanded the Chancellor and Judges
to deliver their opinions in writing, they returned, quod non audebant dictum
negotium definire, nec Domino Regi consulere sine assensu magnatum, propter
raritatem and difficultatem: whereupon day was given to the parties, adproximum
Parliamentum. And your Lordships well know the special care that is taken by
the Statute of 14. Ed. 3. cap. 5. that such matters as for the difficulty are
not fit for the Judges, or through eminent delay are not dispatched by the
Judges, shall be determined in Parliament. Not such matters as the parties
concerned, had rather venture upon your Lordships judgments, then upon the
Rules, and proceedings of the Law ( God knows what mischief and confusion may
fall out upon that admission) there must be such difficulty, such delay, before
that Statute meant your Lordships lustice should be concerned in the
resolution, I wish these Gentlemen had thought this business a matter of that
difficulty as had been fit for such a delay.

My Lords, we come next to the charge, concerning Knighthood. Mr. Maleverer
appears upon the process of that Court, pleads and submits to his fine, ponit
se in gratiam curiae: The Barons refuse to impose any fine, they had no power
to do that, he must treat with certain Commissioners appointed for that
purpose, and compound with them: your Lordships have not met in the same men
such contradictions of crimes, who would suspect the same men in one charge, to
have the mettle to usurp the power, and exercise the jurisdiction of the
highest Court, the Court of Parliament, and presently to want the Spirit to do
that which was so restrained, and peculiar to their places to have done, as
that none else could do it? they had no power to fine as if the sole business
of sworn Judges in a Court of Law, were to summon and call men thither, and
then to send them on errands to other Commisioners for Justice: it is true the
Commissioners of 1. Edw. 1. to Tiptosse and Berk, and since to others, were and
have been to compound with those, who desired to compound, not otherwise, they
had no power to compel any, to fine any; that trust by the Law, was and is
only in the Judges: so that if this duty were aright to his Majesty, and the
Persons liable refuse to compound, for ought these Judges can do, the King
must loose this duty, they can impose no fine, only they have found a trick,
which they call the course of the Court; to make his Majesty a saver: appear
while you will, plead what your will, submit to the mercy of the Court, Issues
shall go on still as if you did neither, till you have done somewhat that
Court will not order you to do, nor is bound to take notice of when you have
done: your Lordships will help us out of this Circle? And that you may see how
incapable they are of any excuse in this point, the very Mittimus out of the
Chancery gives them express command amongst other things, ut fines omnium
illorum qui iuxta proclamationem praedict, ordinem antepraedict, diem
sus^episse debuerunt, capiatis etc. It Is only worth your Lordships
observation, this misfortune commonly attends (and may it ever) those absolute,
disused rights, that be the thing in it self in a degree lawful, the
advisers, and Ministers of it so fail in the execution, that as it usually
proves as grievous to the Subject, so by some circumstances it proves as penal
to the Instruments, as if it were in the very nature of the thing against all
the Laws of government.

I have wearied your Lordships: you see in what a dress of injustice, subtilty
and oppression, I am very unwillingly compelled to present these Judges to you:
if they appear to your Lordships under any other character of known and
confessed learning in the whole course of their lives, how far that will
aggravate their fault your Lordships must only judge; if under the excuse of
ignorance, or not much knowledge in the duty of their places, your Lordships
will easily conclude, what infinite mischief, of which your Lordships have no
particular in formation, the Subjects of this Kingdom have suffered in their
lives, in their fortunes, under such ignorance, and such presumption: if under
the reputation of prudence and integrity in all cases, except these presented
to your Lordships; your Lordships will be at least of the same opinion that he
of Lacedemon was of the Athenians if they carried themselves well, when time
was, and now ill; they deserve a double punishment: because they are not good,
as they were; and because they are evil, as they were not.

My Lords, if the excellent, envied constitution of this Kingdom, has been
of late distempered, your Lordships see the causes: if the sweet harmony
between the Kings protection, and the Subjects obedience, has unluckily
suffered interruption, if the royal Justice, and Honor of the best of Kings
has been mistaken by his people, if the duty and affection of the most
faithful and loyal Nation, has been suspected by their gracious Sovereign,
if by these misrepresentations, and these misunderstandings, the King and
People have been robbed of the delight and comfort of each other, and the
blessed peace of this Island been shaken and frighted into Tumults, and
commotion, into the poverty, though not into the rage of War, as a people
prepared for destruction and desolation: these are the men actively or
passively, by doing or not doing, have brought this upon us: Misera servitus
falsa pax vocatur: ubi iudicia desinunt incipit bellum.

My Lords, I am commanded by the House of Commons, to desire your Lordships,
that these three Judges may be speedily required to make their answers to
these Impeachments: and that such further proceedings may be had against them,
as the course and Justice of Parliament will admit.

FINIS.

