THE TIME OF FINDING: Showing, When the Lord will be FOUND, and by whom; and
when there will be NO TIME of Finding: also the Persons are described, who
shall not find the Lord, though they seek him with tears.

Likewise, Some Reasons why the Lord has suffered his work, and GOOD OLD CAUSE
to be stopped, and how it shall certainly be REVIVED again.

Also, Something is here showed, about the manner how it shall be revived, and
the Time when.

By JOHN CAN.

Numb. 23.21, 23. Jehovah his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among
them.

According to this time it shall be said of Jacob, and of Israel, What has God
wrought?

London, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes head-Alley. 1658.

To the Faithful of the Land every where, Mourning and waiting for the
APPOINTED TIME OF FINDING; under the name of FIFTH-MONARCHY-MEN, and
COMMON-VVEALTHS-MEN.
PRECIOUS WITNESSES for your God and Country:
THe nearer I am still the Throne of Grace, the more is your present condition
upon my heart; and truly, this I can say, it has been very seldom since I
began this WORK, but poor Zion, Jer. 30.17.
(Whom no man seeks after) has been all along in my eye: It is Isa. 62.1.
for Zions sake, I cannot hold my peace; Isa. 60.1.
until the glory of the Lord be risen upon her. Now is the time, that Mal.
3.16.
they who fear the Lord, should speak often one to another, and strengthen the
hands which hang down, and feeble knees. I shall not say any thing of the THING
it self, (what is of God shall stand) only a few words, what has moved me to
send THIS (as a LOVE-TOKEN) to all the Friends of the Bridegroom.

First, I have observed of late, that the Interest of Christ and his People,
the GOOD OLD CAUSE, is not (methinks) so lively and HEARTY, upon some men's
spirits, as formerly it was; but either some disappointment of time, Mat. 25.5.
or the Bridegroom's tarrying long, has occasioned a little deadness and
faintness in some Choice Ones. Now that I may speak to the heart of these;
Wherefore should there be any CASTING DOWN? Isa. 40.2.
Is not your warfare accomplished, and the day of the Lamb come? Therefore (O
ye worthies, Psalm. 27.14.
Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your hearts;
wait (I say) on the Lord. If a traveller by reason of a long journey be almost
tired, yet when he coms near the place where he would be, and sees it hard by,
this will put new strength into him again. I have in this Treatise not only
expressed my opinion, that the Lord is REVIVING HIS WORK; but have given some
reasons for it: what encouragement and refreshing the Lords people shall have
by it, a little time will show: For I am very confident, as the Lord will
suddenly check and blast all ways of falsehood, and deceitful pretenders to his
Holy Secrets; so he will show a TOKEN OF GOOD to what is his own, and is given
forth by his Spirit, concerning the Kingdom and Time.

Secondly, As I know Prou. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, and Prove. 29.2.
When the Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoice: so my desire and
prayer to God is, that every yoke may be broken, the oppressed go free, and
violence be heard no more in our Land. Indeed we did expect before now, to have
seen better days, and were in a hopeful way to have had England Isa. 1.26.
called the City of Righteousness, the faithful City, by having Judges as at
the first, and Counselors as at the beginning. Now I do not doubt, but we
shall have our Civil Rights, Liberties and Privileges, more full, and free,
and better then ever any men had, since England was a Nation. Is any thing too
hard for God to do? cannot he raise up a Generation of faithful men, and Pro.
31.8.
open their mouths for the dumb, and in the cause of all such as are appointed
to destruction: that is, for him that has not ability to speak for himself by
reason of his simplicity, unfitness or impediment in his speech, or dare not
speak for fear of his Potent Adversary.

I find in our Chronicles, how a Cardinal told the Pope, Speed, Hen. 3. p. 624.
That England was to the Pope as BALAAMS ASS, which being so often wronged and
cudgel'd, it was no marvel if at length she opened her mouth to complain. What
though Here Gods judgment is a great deep, that England should be the Beast or
Ass on which must ride the Balaams, or Heads of both Apostasies.
England have been an ASS, and dumb a long while; yet who can tell, but after
so often wronged and cudgeld, she may speak and complain at last. But more
seriously, that England has been a while dumb, I do not take the cause to be
(at least principally) of any power or policy in men, or fearfulness which has
surpised the Nation; but in order to the fulfilling of some Decree and Counsel
of God, and Scripture-Prophesies, which were to be accomplished at this time;
the which time being expired, such multitudes will stand up for their freedom
and Civil-Rights, that were the Enemies ten times more and stronger then they
are, they would signify nothing. Hence take notice of the blindness and folly
of some men: for if the time of Englands deliverance be not come, there needs
not such gathering of horse and foot together: For I am confident, the Lovers
of ENGLANDS-LIBERTIE, will be no secret plotters, they scorn it, neither will
they move till the Lord by some signal Providence plainly shows that the time
is come: and when that is, vain will be the help of man to frustrate the good
purpose and work of God. That Doctrine then, which the Army used to preach to
the Long Parliament, will be often repeated by the people: To punish only
instruments, St. Albans Declarat. No. 16. 1648. p. 50.
and let the head (by whose power, and in whose interest all has been done)
not only go free, but stand in perpetual privilege and impunity, to head such
instruments again, as often as he can find opportunity, and get any to serve him;
is a way so far far from security, as it leads indeed to endless trouble and
hazard, or to perfect loss of all. Again, in point of Justice, with what
Conscience inferior ministers can be punished, and the principal set free, FOR
OUR PARTS, WE UNDERSTAND NOT, NEITHER DO WE KNOW ANY GROUND OR REASON TO
EXEMPT KINGS FROM HUMANE JUSTICE. It is a maxim in the Civil Law, Si quis ff.
quod quisque Juris, etc.
That of right every man should be judged by such Laws as himself has
practiced against others.

Thirdly, What I have spoken about Professors, I have plain enough expressed my
meaning. I only intend Backsliders* who by their Covenant Breaking, Hypocrisy,
and Falsehood, have made the Profession of Religion to stink among the Nations.
It pleased the Lord (through his Grace) to enable me to hold forth a public
Testimony against the Prelates, but never was the great Name of God, his Gospel
and Kingdom, so much concerned in that Controversy, I mean, between the
Non-conformists and Conformists, as it is at this day between the Lords
VVitnesses and the Second Apostasy. The higher a thing is lifted up, and then
hurled down, the more it is wronged and hurt thereby. The Bishops never lifted
^p the work of REFORMATION in Church or State; they were Professors that did
it: and to show their spite to it, and that they might wound it, and wrong it
the more, when they had raised up the Good Cause of God, and the interest of
the Nation, as high as they thought would serve their OWN TVRN, down they threw
it with both hands, hoping it should never rise again. It is but a little which
I have said, to that (I believe) will be said: for indeed the bottom of the
Apostasy will not be touched, till things be put more home, (as Nathan did to
David) THOU ART THE MAN; that is, particularly to name them, and to set down
their falsehood and treachery, and what wages and hire some have had for serving
the lusts of men.

It was a crime laid to Silicius, Victoria per avaritiam faedata, he
discredited his victory by his Covetousness: this needs little application.
Alas! what credit have they now by opposing the Prelates! do not the people
generally say (and not without cause) it was to have the Bishops power in their
own hands; and having gotten it, are as insolent and proud, and for
covetousness a thousand times worse then they? The sordid covetousness of these
men, caused one to deride them thus: Whitlock, Observe. p. 358, 359.
Our Protestant Jesuits care not for converting the Indians that have no gold;
they know how to interweave the pretense of Gods interest with their own, and
therewith to advance all their designs. Indeed these Jesuits carry not the
Gospel into any beggarly Region; spring a mine, and then if you will set up a
pulpit, and show them gold there, they will barter salvation: otherwise, no
penny, no paternoster. Again, Our Fishers angle for no fish, but such as have
money in their mouths; they will only fish for such as contribute to their
superfluities. Bad times (says he) when he that will not be a knave, must be a
fool.

Fourthly, When I consider what famous testimonies the LORDS-WORTHIES have left
behind them of their faithfulness and great zeal unto the glorious cause of
Christ, not only speaking against the corruptions and abuses of their times:
(For had they done no more, what had we known now of the Hypocrisy and
Apostasy of Professors then?) but have left behind them (in white and black,
as we say.) Living Monuments of their Love to God and his people. Truly this
takes very much with me, and exceedingly condemns the neglect and backwardness
of this age. I am thinking many times when, an AFTER-GENERATION shall hear of
this Second Apostasy, and how far it exceeds the former, in breaking Oaths,
Vows, and Engagements, and the name of God and Religion more dishonored by
Church Members, and Church Officers, and other Professors, then ever before in
any age; how strange it would be to them, and admired, if nothing should come
to their hands from us, as there does to our hands from the Witnesses before us.

Besides, I am now an old man, and expect every day to lay down this earthly
Tabernable; it will be therefore some comfort to me, whenever my changeing
coms, that I have left a PUBLIC TESTIMONY against this present Apostasy, as
formerly I did against the other: and howsoever I bless the Lord that has kept
my feet out of the SNARE of both, yet this I shall leave behind me under my
hand, i. e. The Free Grace, and Goodness of God, has more abundantly appeared
toward me, in preserving me a poor worm, from this Last Apostasy, then from
the former: not only because of the two, I take the Last to be the worst; but
because the later has in it much more of the depths of Satan then the former
had. As for their jeerings and reproachful speeches, I pass them by: such
things are not new with me; the Bishops and their Creatures used them: yet thus
much I must say for the Bishops, which I cannot say for them, so far they
showed us FAIR PLAY, not to imprison us, nor banish us, till they had told us
the cause, and heard what we could say for our selves; yea, and would seem to
be very pious and charitable in taking great pains with some of us, to bring
us out of our errors, (as they called it:) but I have found no such piety or
charity with these men, for I have been banished now almost two years, but
never to this day knew the cause of it, neither has there been any thing laid
to my charge. I shall not speak of the sad calamity which they have brought
since upon my Family, by the death of my dear wife and daughter. Again, for the
Bishops, this I may say further, for many of them (I think the most part (when
they banished any of us, or cast us into prison for Nonconformity) they
thought they did well, and did God good service in it. Thus they were like Saul
before his conversion, they did things ignorantly in unbelief: But for men to
persecute the people of God for no other cause, but because they reprove them
for their hypocrisy and falsehood, (and they know in their own consciences what
is spoken is very true) of such men we cannot have the charity which we had of
the Bishops. Indeed they are like Saul too, but it is another Saul, i. e. that
Saul which persecuted David, ONE who knew he did not well in it, but acted
against his light and conscience.

Fifthly, But one word more to you Mourners in Zion: I am very sensible that
many of the Lords people have other thoughts of the TIME then I have, and do
think I am mistaken concerning the period of the one thousand two hundred and
sixty years. Indeed to know what I do (in respect of so many good men
dissenting from me) would very much discourage me from engaging again in the
same thing; but that I have more encouragement TO HOLD FAST then I think meet
to express: I know whom I have believed, in him I trust, and will trust; and do
know I shall not be ashamed of my hope. What David prayed for, is a great
strengthening to me; Be surety for thy Servant for good: let not the proud
oppress me. Humbly be it spoken, I do believe he will answer for me, and defend
me. Psa. 91.14.
Because he has set his love upon, therefore will I deliver him.

Lastly, I desire in the Spirit of meekness to commend these few things to all
the faithful of the Land.

1. Howsoever I shall discourage none (but rather encourage them) to keep close
to all Christ's Appointments; yet to be watchful that their affections run not
out after any form or particular judgment; but that the great cause of Christ
and Zion may still (if possible) have most weight upon their hearts.

2. You that know what it is to watch, now double your watch, Hab. 2.1.
stand (with the prophet) upon the Tower, and go not off day nor night: If
there be any noise or stir in the night, who first has knowledge of it? not
such as are gone to bed, or fallen asleep, but are up, and waking, and watching
to hear what is doing. Methinks I hear the sound of a going in the tops of the
Mulberry-trees: 2 Samuel 5.24.
There is something already stirring, A sound of abundance of rain. 1 King.
18.41.
Now the Lord keep us watching one hour: the vision is speaking, and the wise
shall understand.

3. Where you se most of God, most plainness, truth, faithfulness, and endeared
love to the interest of Christ and his people, rather close there, then upon
the account of one-ness in some opinion or judgment. You will see shortly, that
some will be laid aside, notwithstanding their opinions, when others will be
chosen and taken, for the abundance of their integrity and singleness of heart.

4. Labor to experience the power and leading of the Spirit: it is very
dangerous to rest in any thing that comes from the Creature, till you have the
witness of the Spirit, which is not fleshly, heady, or empty, but powerful,
inward, and abides, and settles the soul: Psalm. 36.9.
In thy light shall we see light, and no where else, let them pretend never so
high Seize.

5. There is a path which no fowl knows, Job 28.7, 8.
and which the vultures eye has not seen. The Lions whelps have not trodden it,
nor the fierce Lion passed by it. Why may not this be the way of which the Lord
speaks, Isa. 42.16.
I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not: I will lead them in paths
that they have not known? Surely Gods leading his friends into his
COVNCEL-CAHMBER, where he shows them great and mighty things which they knew
not, Jer. 33.3,
is an untrodden path. A Soul may be in the Chamber of presence, yet not be in
the COVNCEL-CHAMBER. We may experience much divine love, and taste sweetly and
largely of Free Grace, and yet not be brought where his great secrets are
broken open. But I shall not speak of this, for it is too wonderful. But who
think ye are the persons whom Jehovah leads into his COVNCEL-CHAMBER? verily,
the poor and the maimed, and the halt and the blind; such as he gathers up in
the highways and hedges; a people lying at his foot stark naked: have no
parts, no abilities, no understanding or judgment; altogether and every way
helpless, so that if they have any light, it is from the Lord: for in
themselves they are sure is nothing but darkness. That which I aim at is, to
persuade Christ's Little Flock in all places to renounce their own reason,
judgment and understanding, and to be poor, blind and naked worms, in the high
ways and hedges: for such now will be taught of God, in things appertaining to
the Times and Kingdom. Mat. 16.17
Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven.

I shall say no more: But PRAY, PRAY for this poor worm, that I may finish my
course with joy: Indeed this I earnestly beg of all the Saints every where, who
am through grace preserved, to be

Your Brother and Companion in tears for Zion, believing the day of her
enlargement is BREAKING: JOHN CAN.

Reader,
THere are the more faults, because the Author saw very little of the Book
until it was printed: Besides others, thou art desired to correct these.

Page 22. l. 20. f^ theirs, read their answer. p. 58. l. 27. only, save out.
p. 65. l. 16. for say they, r. they say. p. 101. l. 4. for him, r. them. p.
143. l. 16. for his people, r. such people. p. 153. l. 13. for begone, r. begin.
p. 169. l. 26. for near, r. never. p. 175. for more, r. man. p. 195. l. 13. for
thumming, r. mumming. 244. marg for Truth with Time, r. Time of the End. p.
252. l. 23. for would, r. wilt. p. 294. for stokels, r. sicles, p. 296. l. 8.
strong, r. stranger.

The Time of Finding.
Psalm 32.6. For this shall every gracious Saint pray unto thee at the time of
finding.
CHAP. I. At what Time the Lord will be found of his Praying-Saints.
First. The Times of finding, 1. When Saints are prepared for mercy.
IT is a Time of finding, When the Lords people are prepared for mercy, that
is, thoroughly humbled, reformed, shaken off their dust, and have cleansed
themselves of all filthiness of the flesh and Spirit. The 1 Samuel 7.2.
Israelites were twenty years lamenting after the Lord. In this long time no
doubt, they prayed and fasted often, yet was not the Lord found: neither had
they found him afterward, had not Samuel took them off from a cold, formal,
halting, and half seeking of him, to a right humbling and reforming indeed. The
vessel must be very pure and clean, be-before we will pow^ precious liquor into
it: See Iam. 4.8, 9, 10. when had Manasseh a Time of finding? 2 Chronicles. 33.12,
13.
the Text says, when he humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers.
What is the reason that many pray, cry, weep, etc. and yet no time of finding?
the Lord sees they are not humbled enough, and so not fit enough for mercy.

And in truth it is a singular favor of God, not to give men the great things
they ask, before they are prepared for them; for should they have them before
they are truly humbled, and purely purged from all their dross and tin, they
would make very il improvement thereof. As suppose a father should put a great
estate into the hands of a little child, what pitiful work would he make in
the mispending of it? I have thought many times, what mercy it was, that in the
time of the Little Parliament, the Lord gave us not the things which we then
desired; for had we received them, they had been in our hands, before we were
meet for them; and so instead of honoring God, we should (as James Jam. 4.3.
says) have consumed them on our own lusts.

When I consider what Gods people are (at least many of them) and yet what they
would have, I cannot better liken them, then to a man that has a plaster or
salve at his side; because he feels it smart, and puts him to sore pain, he
entreats the Physician to take it off: but what says the Physician? my friend,
you must be patient, there is a great deal of corruption and rottenness
behind, which must be fetched out, before the plaster can be removed. What is
now our cry, and daily complaint? Oh that the Lord would take the plaster off,
remove the yoke from our necks, spoil the spoyers, and them that have dealt
treacherously, call forth his sanctified ones to execute the judgment written.
But what says the Lord? My dear children, be patient, quiet, contented; I am
wiser then you, and know best what is to be done; there is some corrupt matter,
some rottenness, which must be purged, before I can grant your desire: I must
first bring away your covetousness, spiritual-pride, censoriousness, passion,
etc. then will I arise for Zion, and restore comfort to her mourners.

The sins of the Amorites were full at the end of the 430. years, then came in
Genesis 15.16.
the fourth generation; yet it was forty years after, before they came into the
Promised Land. For howsoever the time (as I said) was expired, as to the
Iniquity of the Enemies, that is, they were Numb. 14.9.
ripe for judgment; yet the Lords people not being prepared for the promised
blessing, fell short of it many years: The like may be said of things now, the
time and times, and dividing of time, which (according to Dan. 7.25
Daniel) the Little Horn is to have, may be already expired, and his iniquity
full, and so ripe for cutting down; nevertheless the Saints of the Most High,
not being prepared to take away his Dominion, and possess the Kingdom, there
may be some years (after the three years and an half are expired) before he be
destroyed, and his body given to the burning flames: not but that Namely in
June la^
the time may be ended, ( viz. the three years and half) and the little Horn
ripe for judgment; but the Saints are not PREPARED for such a dispensation.

We read that in all Iehoshaphats reign, 2 Chronicles. 20.33.
the high places were not taken away; and the reason is given, for as yet the
people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers: as if he
should say, As other abuses and corruptions were removed, so had these high
places been also, but that the people were not enough humble, holy, sincere, to
receive such a mercy: the like may be said of the high places remaining with
us, as the carnal-ministry, Tithes, Tryers, the corrupt Law, etc. these
(Gillulim) filthy things, would soon be taken away, were Saints prepared to
meet their God in his judgments. See Psalm. 81.13, 14, 15, 16. It is with Christ
and a soul seeking him, as between the lodestone and iron: if there be any
dust or filth that sticks to the iron, the stone refuses to close with it, she
will not be touched, nor touch where there is foulness; but take off the filth,
and let the iron be clean, then they sweetly close together: so is the Lords
heart open, and his arms abroad, to take into his bosom such as are pure and
clean in heart, have no defilements upon them, are pure vessels, 2 Timothy 2.21.
meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work; here the Lord
will command the blessing, even the blessed TIME OF FINDING.

2. When the Saints have nothing left them for help but God.
Secondly, It is a Time of Finding, When the Faithful have nothing left them
for help, but the Lord only: MAN'S EXTREMITY IS GODS OPPORTVNITY. The Tide (you
know) turns, when the water is lowest; would ye know the time of the Lords
turning and returning to his Church and people? It is at low water, Deuteronomy. 32.36.
when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left:
Psalm. 107.27, 28. see also v. 3, ^, 5, 12, 13.
when their soul is melted because of trouble, and are at their wits end. Then
(crying unto the Lord) he brings them out of their distresses: he makes the
storm a calm, and brings them to their desired haven.

Among men, to plead poverty and want, experience shows it signifies very
little: should a poor man go to a merchant, and tell him nothing but of his
nakedness and misery, this would not prevail with him for clothing and other
relief; but with the Lord, no better argument to speed, then to spread miseries
and wants before him. Hence the Saints usually in their prayers have mentioned
their DISTRESS, as a great reason to move the Lord unto pity: thus did
Iehoshaphat, ( 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
O our God, will thou not judge them? FOR we have no might, neither know we
what to do. So David Psa. 6.2.
Have mercy upon me, O God, FOR I am weak: O Lord heal me, FOR my bones are
vexed. Again, Psa. 8^.2. and 109.22, 23.
Bow down thine ear O Lord, hear me, for I am poor and needy.

And for our encouragement herein, the Lord has promised that it shall be A
TIME OF FINDING, when Psa. 50.15.
in trouble we call upon him. Psa. 9.9.
He will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble: Psa.
102.17.
he will regard the prayer of the destitute, (or, naked shrub) and will not
despise their prayer. Isa. 41.7.
When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them. The poor woman that had the issue of blood twelve years, and in
that time Mark. 5.26, 27
had spent all that she had on physicians, when she came to Christ in that
extremity, was it not a time of finding? the Text says, Straightway the
fountain of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body, that she was
healed of that plague. And indeed her case is much like Ours; she came not to
Christ, till all was spent. As long as we had a Parliament, a Council of State,
an Army, a General, etc. we too much rested on them, as our Saviors and
Deliverers: it is therefore well for us, that Jehovah has broken these
Egyptian reeds, and that we have at present none in Heaven nor in Earth but
Jesus Christ to trust in; for now we may confidently expect A TIME OF FINDING.

When Christ saw that those who had continued three days with him in the
wilderness, Mat. 15.32.
had nothing left, he took compassion on them, and fed them by a miracle.
Again, when he was at Nazareth preaching in the Synagogue, he needed not to
have been led from thence Luke 4.29.
unto the brow or edg of the hill, he might have escaped long before; but he
would suffer the enemy to go so far, to show, that it is his time to work
deliverance for his people, when they seem to be in the greatest danger. Is
there nothing left? no Parliament, Council, Army, Navy, General? Have Lam. 1.2.
all Zions friends dealt treacherously with her, and become her Enemies? Is the
GOOD OLD CAUSE brought to the brow of the hill? Then lift up your heads ye
naked shrubs every where; now pray, pray, pray; you are come to the Finding
time, and the mount where God will be seen.

Thirdly, It is a Time of Finding, 3. When the Enemies of Zion are at the
highest.
When the enemies of Zion are at the highest, that is, Triumph and insult as if
all were theirs, and that they shall see sorrow no more: Psa. 10.3
the wicked boasts of his hearts desire: that is, perceiving his designs and
actions to prosper by hypocrisy, apostasy, falsehood, etc. he glories in it,
and thinks now, that neither God nor man can reach him: Psa. 119.119.
Thou put away (says David) all the wicked of the earth like dross: the
scum or dross when it is upmost and covers the liquor, then it is taken off and
thrown away; so when tyrants and persecutors have Saints under them, make
account to wear them out by cruel usage, and cry victory, victory; then coms
the revenging hand of God upon them, and treads them as dung under his feet.
Thus was the Lord found of good Hezekiah: note Isa. 36.13, 14, 15. and chap.
37.10.
the message which Rabshakeh brought to him from his master, and what was in
the letter which Sennacherib sent him, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest
deceive thee: has any of the gods of the Nations delivered his land out of the
hand of the King of Assyria? Oh the height of this filthy scum! but how did the
Lord meet with him? not only in giving a wonderful deliverance to his people,
but by destroying his Army, and the blasphemer also. Thus likewise it was with
Exodus 15.9, 10.
Pharaoh, Esth. 5.6.
Haman, Act. 12.
Herod, etc. and in our time with the King and Bishops; when they were highest
in pride, pomp, and insolent practices against the Lord, his cause and people,
he cut them off with a witness: and the like may we expect upon those, who
domineer, hold up their heads and look big, Exo. 5.2.
Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? Isa. 51.23.
Bow down, that we may go over. Dan. 3.
Whosoever falls not down and worshippeth the golden Image, shall the same hour
be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. But whereunto may I liken
such men, and others following their steps? to nothing fitter, then to a boil
or botch, when it is swollen big, and risen high, then it breaks; and what
follows? rottenness and stink. Are they swollen big, and risen high in power,
titles, places? etc. it is a sign they will break the sooner: and as the waves
of the sea after their lifting up, and roaring a while, leave behind them
nothing but mire and dirt; so when the Lord shall cut them off, what then will
remain? but the infamous memory of their former Apostasy, hypocrisy, and lies?
It is truly my opinion, were Gods people as fit for mercy, as their enemies are
for judgment; were they as low^ humiliation and Reformation, as the other are
high in pride, blasphemy, atheism, we should soon see a vial pow^ed out upon
them.

That place Jer. 12.1, 2, 3.
in the Prophet, me thinks notably agrees with our time They are all happy that
deal very treacherously. But how does he describ^ them? Thou art near in their
mouth, bu^ far from their reins. As the water-ma^ in his boat, rows one way,
and looks another; so these profess great things, and talk much of God and his
ways, but in their practices and actions, are most vile and wicked: what
follows? Prepare them for the day of slaughter. When the beast is fat and full
flesht, then the butcher knocks him down. We know now well enough, why the Lord
has suffered the Apostates to enjoy such fa^ pasture, viz. the very pastures
(or places) which fatted other beasts before them, it was (as Hos. 13.6
the Prophet says) that they might be filled, and their heart exalted, and so
made fat, and fit for slaughter. Psalm. 119.126.
It is time for thee O Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law. He does
not say, It is time, etc. because they speak against thy ^aw, slight it, and
regard it not; but, ^ave made it void: signifying, when ^en are grown to such a
height of wic^edness, as the Laws of Christ are de^troyed by them, his cause
and interest ^hrown down to raise themselves, righeousness and truth made void,
to set up oppression and falsehood; then indeed it is high time for the Lord to
work, yea, and then is the TIME in which he will be FOUND of his faithful ones,
hungring and thirsting after righteousness.

Fourthly, It is a Time of finding, 4. When Saints make Jesus Christ their all.
When SEEKERS make Jesus Christ their ALL: all their hope, stay, and trust, and
can truly say with the prophet, Ps. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee. If we discern such as will not trust in us, but love to stand
upon their own ground, we leave them to themselves, to shift as they can: as on
the contrary, the more we see our selves trusted to, the more we take care for
them. When the Lord sees a poor soul gives up ALL to him, leaves hi^ case wholly
with him, depends altogethe^ upon his power, goodness, faithfulness; as he
delights to see his children in such a frame, so they may be sure, he will take
care for them, and it shall go well with them. Psa. 18.6
In my distress (says David) I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he
heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him even into his ear.
But when did David cry, and found the Lord thus good to him? ver. 2.
after he had made him his rock and his fortress, his strength, his buckler,
the horn of his salvation, and his high tower. A man that stands upon a rock,
when he hears the sea roar, and the waves violently beating against the rock,
all this puts him not into any fear, for he knows where he is; to wit, out of
danger: so it is with every gracious Saint, he is beyond the reach of men and
Devils, no adversary power can hurt him. I do remember what I was once told by
a good old man, a Mr. Pateman dwelling at Mosley near Brimmingham.
Nonconformist-Minister dwelling nigh me: a neighbor of his being in prison for
witchcraft, he went to visit him: this wretched man confessed to him, that he
had hated him a long time, and fought to do him mischief; and for this end,
there was a compact between the Devil and him, to destroy him; the witch spoke
often to the devil for to hasten their design: now the devil told him, he had
several times attempted it, but could not effect any thing; and gave this for
the reason, because he found him still either in prayer and communion with God,
or had committed himself into the Lords hand. This I mention, because I had it
from the man's own mouth: and what may we learn from it? how safe and happy they
are, who make Christ their ALL: It is not Satan, nor any of his cursed imps and
instruments that can harm them: Romans 8.31.
If God be with us, who can be against us?

That people trusting in God, shall have A TIME OF FINDING, appears in the
example of the 1 Chronicles. 5.20.
Reubenites, 2 Chronicles. 14.11, 12.
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 20.12, 17.
Iehoshaphat, Jer. 39.17.
Ebed-melech; so Psa. 17.7 and 91.2, 3 12, 13, 14
David asserts it often. But what was the reason that the Lord would not be
found of Saul, 1 Samuel 28.6.
neither by Dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets? He had rejected the Lord, and
would not depend upon him, but would do what seemed right in his own eyes:
hence being left of God, he runs to a witch, to the Devil, to any thing. How
comes it to pass that some men make Soldiers their Saviors? their dependence is
on the arm of flesh; viz. Ahitophels, Machiavels, Cardinals, Atheists:
doubtless they see the Lord God has forsaken them, for their abominable
hypocrisy; and therefore being left of God, they are necessitated to make the
best shift they can. In a sore famine, when wholesome meat cannot be had, people
will eat dogs and cats, rats and mice, yea, and worse things too, rather then
starve: many at this time are under a great famine; the Lord they cannot find,
and therefore to keep themselves from starving, they will make use of any
unclean thing; steal, murder, swear falsely, and make lies of all sorts and
sizes their refuge.

David says Psalm. 73.28.
It is good for me to draw near to God: and he gives the reason: I have put my
trust in the Lord God; that is, I may be assured by seeking to find him, having
made him my hope and confidence alone: but says he, ver. 27.
Thou have destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee. What is it to go a
whoring from God? I answer, To cast off his work and cause, turn with the dog
to the vomit, and trust in lying vanities. I have read of a Tyrant, by his
cruelties had so displeased the people, as he would not trust himself with men,
but committed the guard of his body to dogs: some men by their SPIRITVAL
WICKEDNESS IN HIGH PLACES, do bring themselves into such a Case, God nor good
men they dare not trust, having so highly displeased both; but rather confide
in dogs, swine, foxes, wolves, as the Scripture terms wicked men. 5. When the
enemies of God are plotting mischief against Christ his interest and people.


Fifthly, It is a Time of Finding, When the enemies of God are plotting
mischief against Jesus Christ, his interest, and people. Thus the Israelites
found him, when Pharaoh said, Exodus 1.10. and 2 23, 24.
Come, let us deal wisely with them. So afterward when Haman took crafty
counsel against them, you know how the proud tyrant was taken in the pit he had
dig'd for others: so again, when Act. 12.1, 2, 3.
Herod had designed the taking away of Peter's life, the Lord so graciously
answered the prayers of the Church, as Peter is not only enlarged, but the
bloody wretch a little after miserably perishes under Divine wrath. According
to that saying, Prove. 11.8.
The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead.
As some fishes are taken whilst they are making snares, and in the very traps
and gins which they lay for others; so persecutors very often, as they are
plotting mischief, and at work, are trapt in their own wickedness.

Julian the Apostate had a design at his return from the Persian wars, to have
sacrificed the blood of Christians to his Idol gods. The like plot had the
Constable of France; after the taking of St. Quintin, he vowed to destroy
Geneva: now howsoever their designs took no effect, yet the Lord's did against
them, for he gave them their own blood to drink, and so saved his people. He
that moves the week of candle with his finger, mends the light, but burns and
blacks his fingers: certain it is, the crafty plots of Gods enemies, have very
much profited the Saints, though it have been to their own ruin.

And many of Christ's little flock can speak it by experience, since the Last
plotters came up, the Lord has been very good to them, and they have found him
more sweetly, and heart-feelingly then ever in their lives before. It was the
speech of an honest man, being pitied that he had so bad a wife; Oh, said he,
she is a good wife for me, she brings me often upon my knees, and to sighings
and mourning before the Lord. In such a sense may many of the Lords people say,
Whereas hypocrites reign, truly it is good for us; we should not be so often
with our God, and pour out tears day and night, nor have such times of finding,
did not these Psalm. 129.3.
plowers plow upon our back, and make long their furrows.

In great men's kitchins there are certain scullions, to rub spits, and make
clean the dishes; and howsoever they are black and foul themselves, yet they
are of necessary use, to have the vessels meet for service: what a great deal
of filth and dirt has the Lord lately removed from his little remnant, by his
kitchin-drudges? of a truth, they were not half so fair, pure and lovely, some
few years past, as they are now. Psa. 52.1
Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? This may serve to take
down the pride of Tyrants, and insulting hypocrites; for what are they? (though
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Protectors, etc.) if they persecute the witnesses of
Jesus, for speaking against their wicked ways, but as Christ's SKVLLIONS and
DISH-CLOVTS, to wipe off the dust and filth from the Saints, that they may be
meet for the Masters use.

When it was told David that Ahitophel was amongst the Conspirators with
Absalom, he knew then there would be deep and devilish plotting against him;
and therefore presently cries out, 2 Samuel 15.31.
O Lord I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahitophel into foolishness: and here
David had a time of finding. 2 Samuel 17 14, -- 32.
For Ahitophels design is not only frustrated, but the traitor himself, (as a
just reward for his villainy) for very shame hangs himself: from hence this may
be gathered, when we understand there are any wicked designs set on foot
against the Kingdom of Christ, (whereof David's Kingdom was a type) we must
pray earnestly to God for the confusion thereof, it being then a TIME OF
FINDING.

Sixthly, It is a time of Finding, 6. When Saints are importunate beggars, and
will take no nay at Gods hand.
When Saints are BOLD-BEGGARS, and will take no nay, or denial at the Lords
hand. Jam. 5.16.
The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man, avails much. A mother
sometimes refuses to give her breast to the child, though he ask it; but if
he beg it with tears, cries, shrieches, she cannot but grant it: such was
Jacobs seeking the blessing, Genesis 32.26.
I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. But how did he hold the Angel?
Hos. 12.4
He wept and made supplication unto him. As if he should say, I am resolved
never to cease weeping and crying, here will I abide in mourning and bitterness
of Soul, till I am blessed. Exodus 3 2.10. Deuteronomy. 9.14.
Let me alone, says God to Moses: In which words we have not only a
condescension of divine Grace unto the cries and tears of the Godly, as if the
Lords hands were to be disposed by their prayers; but Moses importunity, as if
he would not let go his hold, except his suit were granted. A man under a tree
may reach some fruit, but if he clime up, and get to the top, there he shall
have more fruit; and better fruit, riper, sweeter, larger. That prayer may
AVAIL MVCH, it must be more then common or ordinary, strong crying, and without
ceasing.

It is said of Elias, Jam. 5.17, 18.
By his praying, he did shut and open Heaven: But how prayed he? earnestly,
says our Translation; the (...).
Text has, He prayed a Prayer, or, in praying he prayed: so that there is
single-praying, and double-praying, and they have theirs accordingly. Isa. 64.7.
There is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take
hold on thee. These people are not blamed so much for not praying, as for not
putting forth themselves in prayer; they should (like Jacob and Moses) have
taken fast hold on God, and never have left off weeping and crying day and
night, until their supplications had been granted: as an Arrow falls short of
the mark, when the Bow is not well bent, the Arrow drawn up to the head, and
delivered with strength: So our prayers oft-times fall short of answer, because
we do not Psa. 63.8
press hard after God, Mat. 11.12.
take him by violence, follow him from place to place, and not let him go, till
he Psa. 10.17.
cause his ear to hear.

This our Savior in one of his Parables notably shows, Luke 11 ^
Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend, yet because of
his importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs. The word
rendered importunity, is properly (...)
impudence: and it has this meaning, Though among men it would be thought too
much boldness and impudence, for a man not to be said nay; yet the Lord is so
far from disliking it when it is his own case, as he would have his children to
force (as it were) a grant from him: the like we have in the importunate widow.
Luke 18.7 8
Shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though
he bear long with them, I tell you he will avenge them speedily. Methinks this
bearing long, and avenging speedily, will not well accord, unless we take the
sense thus: When the Lord shall raise up a poor destitute remnant, who (like
the widow) will never cease weeping and crying to him, then he will suddenly
come forth to pour out the vials upon the Little Horn, the last Apostasy,
Babylon, though formerly he kept silence a long time. I question whether that
in the Prophet be yet fulfilled: Isa. 62.6, 7.
I have set watchmen upon thy walls O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their
peace day nor night; ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence, and
give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the
earth. As things when they come near their Center, move more swiftly and
speedily then before; It seems to me, near or about the breaking forth of the
Great work in the last days, there will be a people so engaged for Zion, that
they will make it their whole work to mourn and weep before the Lord, never
ceasing till he break the Heavens and come down. Isa. 66.8
As Soon as Zion traveled, she brought forth her Children. I think indeed, when
the Lord shall put such Travels and Birthpangs upon the hearts of his people,
as that they will give him no rest, but mourn like Doves perpetually before
him, and make it their meat and drink day and night; we shall suddenly see the
Lord bringing the Rod of his strength out of Zion, and to work terrible things
in the Earth. A Blessed TIME OF FINDING. Rev. 22.20.
Amen: even so come Lord Jesus.

CHAP. II. When there is no Time of Finding, though the Lord be sought with
tears.
FIrst, When men (like Esau) for light things and vanities, When the Lord will
not be found. 1. When men give up great Privileges for vain things.
most profanely give up great Privileges. Of Esau it is said, Heb. 12.16, 17.
for one morsel of meat he sold his birthright: But what follows? Afterward
when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no
place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. There are three
things in the History, which aggravate Esau's profaneness, as to be sinful
above measure.

1. The great thing which he lightly parted with, it was no less then his
Birthright: now the dignity of the firstborn was very great, and many eminent
privileges it had. The firstborn Exodus 22.29.
were peculiarly consecrated and given to God. Genesis ^9.3
Next in honor to their prents. Deuteronomy. 21.17.
Had a double portion of the Fathers goods. 2 Chronicles. 21.3.
Succeeded them in the Government of the Family or Kingdom. Numb. 8.14, 17.
And likewise in the Administration of the Priesthood, and service of God: Yea,
more, Romans 8.29
It figured Christ, and Heb. 12.35.
all true Christians, heirs of the New Jerusalem. All this (as if it had been
nothing) he carelessly parted with.

But, Secondly, Not for the worth of it. The Text says Genesis 25.34.
Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of Lentils, which was a kind of pulse much
like to fetches or small pease, very course food: nevertheless so vile an
exchange made he of his Heavenly dignity. Naboth upon 1 King. 21.2, 3.
no terms would deliver up the inheritance of his father to Ahab: But this man
for one morsel of meat, sels that which was far better.

3. When he had done all this, Genesis 25.34.
He rose up and went his way, and despised his Birthright: that is, he showed
no remorse, sorrow or repentance, for selling so precious a thing for so poor a
price: he esteemed his Birthright very little before, but now he sets it
altogether at naught, as being glad he had met with such a BARGAIN, and sped so
well.

Verily, I think that blood is not more like blood, then Esau and the Revolters
of this age are like one another. Neither since Esau's time till now, have any
generation of men so MATCHED HIM in profaneness: and this I shall plainly
demonstrate by the Parallel.

First, Let it be considered what they have sold: such a Glorious Cause as
never was (I think) in the hands of men before. Not Civil-Rights and Liberties
alone, but the GREAT CAUSE of God, the Interest of Christ and of his Kingdom,
Laws, People. Psalm. 84.10.
David thought it was honor enough, if a man might sit at the threshold of Gods
house; that is, be in the lowest place^ and meanest service. In the late wars
he that was but a common-soldier to fight against Tyranny and Idolatry; truly,
his place and service was very honorable: then how much more a General,
Colonel, Capt. etc. besides, the Lord was pleased to honor them with the
Birthright, they were the firstborn: I say, the first to have brought the
King home, and to set the Crown upon his Head. What could have been done more
to men!

But, Secondly, What have they sold their Birthright for? Oh, It grieves my
soul to think of it, that ever such a thing should be told in Gath, and
published in the streets of Askelon, that it should be said among the Heathen,
EMINENT PROFESSORS OF RELIGION AND MEN PRETENDING GREAT THINGS FOR CHRIST AND
ZION, HAVE SOLD THE GOOD OLD CAUSE FOR A MORSEL OF BREAD. Jer. 2.10, 11.
Consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing: Has any Nation changed
their gods, which are yet no gods? But my people have changed their glory for
that which does not profit. We think those foolish in their trades, that should
lose many pieces of gold, to have a little bad coin. Let them look over their
Bargain, what have they sold, and what they have for it: Alas, their Courts,
Titles, Parks, Pleasures, etc. are all bad coin, Lentils, mere vanity and lies,
Pro. 11.4.
things that will not profit in the day of wrath. But the Cause and work of
God, which they unworthily have given up, had they been faithful to it, would
have been better to them then gold; yea, then fine gold, and all the things
that men desire, not to be compared to it. It is reported that those wicked
Spirits (commonly called Fairies) having stolen the true child out of the
cradle, do secretly convey and place in the stead thereof, some changeling of
their own: what truth i^ in it, I know not; but this I know t^ be true, the
Devil has dealt so wit^ Apostates, by a cunning slight, h^ has taken the
true Child from them that is, THE GOOD OLD CAUSE and has left in the room of
it a po^starv'd changeling, here the buyer m^^ well say, It is naught, it is
naught.

3. Are they sorry for what they have done? do they repent of it? Jer. 6.15
Nay they are not at all ashamed, neither can they blush: but rejoice, feast
and sing, having made such a Bargain. Judas after he had betrayed Christ, took
little pleasure in the money which he had for the Treason, Mat. 27.3, 45.
He brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the Chief Priests and Elders,
saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent blood. And he cast down
the pieces of silver into the Temple, and departed, etc. But these men have not
yet so much remorse on their conscience, for what they have done: but the
Courts, Castles, Titles, Power, etc. the Money they had for the Innocent Cause,
are the things they glory in, and brag of. I might have mentioned the
greediness of Esau's appetite to the dish; that red, that red there, Genesis
25.20. The doubling of the word is to show, his have and gluttonous desire: the
color and taste seemed so pleasing and entising unto him. Whether they have not
been ^ike a Lion greedy of his prey. Psalm. 17.12. Like greedy dogs which cannot
have enough: Isa. 56.11. let their own practice be witness.

But there is one thing wherein Esau is more to be excused (if there may be any
excuse made for him) then some now; he lay under some necessity: Genesis 25.32.
I am (says he) at the point of death, and what profit shall this Birthright
do to me? But these men could not plead Esau's necessity, they were not ready
to starve, but had enough; and therefore their sin was the more ( profaneness
it may be called) to sell such a Blessed Cause, not only for so LITTLE, but
having no need so to do.

The Conclusion is, If Esau for his profaneness were denied a Time of Finding,
others then following his steps, and being as profane (or more) may not expect
to find it better in their own case.

2. No time of finding for old Hypocrites, whose bones are full of the sins of
their youth.
Secondly, There will be no Time of Finding, for old Hypocrites, whose Job 20.11.
bones are full of the sins of their youth, and do continually seek to hide and
cover them under religious pretenses as fasting, praying, weeping, etc. A old
Hypocrite is like a child born crooked; no earthly medicines can make him right
and straight: or like to old cloth, which being rotten, will not bear the
needle and thread, and therefore not to be mended. Some men through their long
hypocrisy, are become as rotten as dirt; no hope of mending: for they have so
accustomed themselves to play the hypocrites, by weeping, praying, etc. as Jer.
13.23.
the Blackmore may sooner change his skin, and the Leopard his spots, then they
cease from dissembling, and mocking God in religious duties. They who from
their infancy are accustomed to take poison in small quantities, do enable
their stomachs to digest more, till by long custom and increasing the
quantity, it becomes so familiar to their stomachs, that instead of poisoning
of them, they are nourished by it. Thus it is with such men who from their
youth have used themselves to hypocrisy and falsehood, and risen by degrees; at
length (specially when they come to be old) their hearts are so hardened, and
con^ciences seared, as their hypocrisy is no poison, no trouble to them, but
it turns to their nourishment, it feeds them like meat and drink, and they
cannot live without it. It was a great sin in Judas to deliver his Master up
into the hands of his enemies, the Scribes and Pharisees: but the sin of Judas
had not been half so bad, if he had not so hypocritically betrayed Christ. Mat.
26.49.
He came to Jesus, and said, Hail Master, and kissed him. So for any man to
deliver up Christ in his truth and Cause, into the hands of his bloody enemies;
viz. Priests, Lawyers, Papists, etc. under a pretense of Religion, and the
honor of God; this comes near the sin Hebr. 10.26.
for which there is no sacrifice: But of all Hypocrites, beware of the WEEPING
HYPOCRITE, as the most dangerous. Such a one was Ishmael, Jer. 41.5, 6, 7.
who by his Religious weeping, deceived fourscore men, and murdered them all as
they were going with their offerings to the house of the Lord. This Weeping
Hypocrite is like the strumpet Phryne, for this cause named (...), as if you
would say, Weep-laugh, because commonly she did both together, havin^ in the
midst of laughter tears at command. As the silly fish swallows the hook,
because of the bait that hides it, so many ignorant people are caught and
snared by the Tears of Hypocrites: but howsoever by their weeping they may
deceive men, yet God they cannot, neither cares he for their Tears.

We read often in the Prophets, the reason why the Lord would not be found of
the Jews, when distresses and troubles were upon them; Jer. 7.16. Isa. 1.11, 12
it was, they had dissembled with him, been old Hypocrites, sought to hide
their falsehood, lying, Covenant Breaking, Oppression, etc. Mal. 2.13
By covering the Altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and crying out.

I cannot better resemble men accustomed to Hypocrisy, then to that old
Traitor Tyrone, his manner was to send pictures to Queen Elizabeth, in which he
would lie weeping at her foot; but still in rebellion against her: the Queen
hereat was extremely displeased, saying, We will have no more of his Pictures,
but the head of the Traitor. What may these men think of themselves, when they
lie weeping at the feet of God? If they continue rebels against him, do they
expect a Time of finding? How can that be? Does he not see their Hypocrisy?
surely yes, and will speedily take vengeance on them for it.

Thirdly, 3. When men are so obstinate in their sins, as nothing will reclaim
them.
There will be no Time of Finding, For such persons who are so obstinate in
their sins, as no admonition or reproof can reclaim them. As clay under the
shining Sun, grows harder and stiffer: so the more they are told of their
hypocrisy, pride, falsehood, oppression, etc. the worse they are: Thieves
whilst they have liberty, none are bolder, nor will they regard any thing that
is spoken against their wicked course of life; all good counsel is rejected and
scorned: but when trouble comes, when they are brought to the bar, then down
upon their knees, Good my Lord, pardon, pardon; but then no pardon is to be
had. And as it is thus with little Thieves, so it will be one day with the
Great Thieves and Great Murderers, Pro. 1.24, 25, etc.
Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded: But ye have set at naught my Counsel, and would none of my reproof; I
also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. Then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they
shall not FIND ME.

Again, Zech. 7.11, 12, 13.
They refused to hearken, and pulled away their shoulder, and stopped their
ears, that they should not hear; yea, they made their hearts as an
Adamant-stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord of
Hosts has sent in his Spirit by the former Prophets. Therefore came a great
wrath from the Lord of Hosts: therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried,
and they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of
Hosts, but I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the Nations whom they
knew not.

It may not be thought that all those of whom the Prophet here speaks were
Reprobates; for without doubt (as to life and glory) many of them were saved:
nevertheless he will not hear them, as to spare them from the common judgment.
In this respect (though Gods chosen ones) they shall have no more Time of
finding, then others: partakers in sin, partakers in punishment. A father
though he do not disinherit his child, and quite cast him off, yet he may (and
justly too) severely chastise him for some gross miscarriages, Pro. 19.18.
And not let his soul spare for his crying, as the wiseman has it. What means
the Lord in saying, Rev. 18.4
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues? the words are plain enough; those that abide in
Babylon, notwithstanding again and again called upon to come out, may suffer
Babylons plagues, that is, fall and perish with the wicked, as to their bodies
and estates, howsoever saved in the day of Christ.

1 Pet. 4.17.
Judgment must begin at the house of God: and Eze. 9.6.
at his Sanctuary. The Jer. 25.18, 29.
wine-cup of fury is to be given, first to Jerusalem and the Cities of Judah;
afterward all the Nations of the earth must have it. Hag. 2.6.
The Lord of hosts will shake the Heavens and the Earth. First, Heaven, then
Earth: therefore let Churches and Church Officers now look about them: Mic. 6.2.
The Lord has a controversy with HIS people, and he will plead with Israel:
and what follows? ver. 9.
Hear YE the rod, and who has appointed it. That the Lord will begin with
Churches, and with a professing people, there are many reasons for it.

1. Because the Hypocrisy, Pride, Self-seeking, deceit, unfaithfulness, etc.
of a Professing people, more dishonors God, and scandals the Gospel, then the
evils and sins of any other people. Romans 2.24.
The Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through YOU. As a servant in
the family by his ill carriage, more disgraceth the house, then hundreds or
thousands who are not of it. But to speak home, No people (I think) upon the
face of the earth, have brought more dishonor to God, and reproach to the
truth, then the back sliding-Churches, and professors of our time. For, 1. Who
had a hand in the late REBELLION, more then they, Neh. 9.17
To appoint a CAPTAIN to return to Bondage; whereby not only to build again
the things which they had destroyed, but to bring the sin and guilt of all the
blood shed in the three Nations, upon the interest of Christ and his people,
and so to justify and acquit the Cavaleers. 2. Who manageth and maintains the
oppressions and heavy burdens which lie upon the Souls and Bodies of good
people every where? (No King or Bishop,) but a Professing people; yea, Saints,
as they would be thought. 3. The gross Hypocrisy and Falsehood of some
PROFESSORS, has of late so clearly broken forth, as it has caused many to
become Atheists, at least to think in their heart there is no God. Neither may
this be thought strange: for what can lead men sooner unto Atheism, then to see
Professors often weep, fast, and pray before the Lord, and yet in their actions
not make conscience of any thing? 4. There has been such unheard of impiety
committed under a show of Religion, that it is now a common saying among
Cavileers, when they hear of any base thing done, I warrant you (say they) it
is some Professor has done it. As informer time, when any Libel came from
Rome, presently Parsons was thought to be the Author; and the more vile, the
more Parson-like. I mourn, because I cannot mourn enough; wherefore came I out
of the womb to such a day? Ah! That the enemies of the Gospel should have so
much cause given them, as to think, the worse the action is, the more likely to
to be done by Professing people. 5. Such an Apostasy is seized on Churches
(especially in the Officers) as none do more obstruct and hinder the Lords work
of the day, then some of them. In the time of the Prelates, if a good man out
of Conscience opposed the Priests, and held forth a public testimony against
their corrupt ways; he was presently rayl'd at, counted factious, and cast out
of their Synagogue. And is it not so now? I could give many instances, that the
old Priests hardly showed more bitterness against the Lords-witnesses, then
some Church Officers do at this day against honest men, for being faithful in
the work of their Generation. But to proceed.

2. A Professing people causing scandal by their evil walking, the Lord will
soon take a course with: when we see children rebellious and disobedient, we
are ready to say, It is a shame to their parents to suffer them so to do: what
say profane men now! Looking upon the actions of Professors? Oh, say they,
these call God Father, and they would have us think none are his children but
they: if he be rheir Father, how is it that he suffers such horrible lying,
falsehood, oath-breaking, and self-seeking in them? Ezekiel. 36.23.
I will sanctify my Name which was profaned among the Heathen, which YE have
profaned in the midst of them, and the Heathen shall know that I am the Lord,
says the Lord God. They were Professors of whom the Lord complains, Amos 2.13.
Behold I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves.
The sins of Non-Professors are a burden; but Professors sins are more then a
burden, and therefore not so long to be born: They were a backsliding people
(as ours are) of whom the Lord speaks, Isa. 1.13, 14.
That their Oblations, Solemn meetings, and their appointed feasts, were a
trouble to him, and he was weary to bear them. How can a man that is weary of a
burden, have ease, if he cast it not off? they are the Professors of the last
Times, which the Prophet mentions: Isa. 65.5.
These are a smoke in my nose: Smoke continues not long, it soon vanishes;
signifying, that the Back-sliders of this age are short lived.

3. That judgment does begin at the house of God, it will be for the silencing
of them that are without, when their day shall come. Jer. 25.29
Lo, I begin to bring evil on the City which is called by my Name, and should
ye be utterly unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished.

4. It is a Professing people which have made the Last Apostasy: the subject (I
conceive) of the first vial.

4. When men glory in their shame.
Fourthly, Such will have no Time of Finding, Who glory in their shame, and
think it their Grace, that they are graceless: As David said of Doeg, do Psa.
52.1
boast themselves in mischief: for having done as wickedly as they can, they
rejoice in and bless themselves in it. Dan. 4.30
Is not this great Babylon, that I have built, for the house of the Kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Is not this the wealth,
the power and greatness, which I have gotten by craft, deceit? etc. I have seen
children when they have purposely made their hands and fingers black and foul,
have held them up, and laughed to see what they had done: Is there not a
Generation of men, who have made themselves foul and black within and without,
no Leper more foul? nevertheless how do they glory in it, boast of it, and
laugh to see so much blackness upon their fingers. Among the Indians he is
taken for the gallantest fellow, that can make himself most ilfavored: and is
it not so among some Christians (so called?) Is not He the Nonesuch, who by
Hypocrisy and double-dealing can deform himself most, and of all men is the
VGLIEST to look on? Ezekiel. 30.2.
Woe worth the day.

Quest. But where is it proved, when men take delight in their sins, they shall
have no Time of finding?

Answ. In Gods Holy Book often. 1. The Prophet Ezekiel. 18.17, 18.
Ezekiel plainly tells us so: Have thou seen this, O son of man? is it a light
thing to the house of Judah, that they commit the abominations which they
commit here? for they have filled the Land with violence, and have RETVRNED to
provoke me to anger; and lo, they put the Branch to their nose. Therefore will
I also deal in fury, mine eyes shall not spare, neither will I have pity, and
though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them. It
was the manner of the Heathen (and probably practiced now by the Jews) to
carry Branches with them to their sacrifices, and to put them to the Idol, and
there to sprinkle them, either with the blood of their Idolatrous sacrifice, or
to sweeten them with some Idolatrous perfume; then to put them to their
nostrils and kiss them, showing thereby how greatly they approved what was don:
so that the meaning is, when men not only do base things, as break their
oaths and Covenants, set up Tyranny and Idolatry, persecute the Interest of
Christ and his people; but likewise take pleasure therein, and rejoice in the
wickedness they have done, such in the day of trouble shall have no TIME OF
FINDING.

Again, as we read in Isa. 3.9. Jer. 3.3. and 6.15. and 8.15. Eze. 24.7, 8.
the Prophets, of men that had Whores-foreheads, refused to be ashamed, and
could not blush, would discover their sins like Sodom, and hide them not, and
set their blood (meaning cruelties and oppression) upon the top of a rock, to
be seen of all the world: so we find in the same places, that the Lord would
not spare them, but cut them off, and not regard their cries in the day of
trouble. I have read it (somewhere) that in Cumena a wide mouth is in fashion;
and what is more in fashion now, then a WIDE MOUTH? He that has the Impudence
and Boldness to defend hypocrisy and falsehood, and to justify oppression and
Tyranny, has the Forehead to plead for wicked persons and things, he shall
have Balaams wages and promotion, and be Mic. 1.11
the Prophet of this people: and hence it is, that profaneness, Atheism, and
the great contempt of God and his ways, so woefully abounds every where;
namely, of the impudence and Bold-face of sinners, as being no whit ashamed of
their doings, but rather glorying, and priding themselves therein. As the
Heathen Youngman hearing of the Adulteries and other wickedness of the gods,
Do they so, (says he) and shall I their inferior stick at it? And indeed how
can it be otherwise, If the Leaders of the people (as Magistrates and
Ministers) live without Conscience, and commit sin without shame; But others of
lower Rank and condition will be encouraged to do as bad? Mat. 18.7
But woe to that man by whom the offense comes.

5. When men are Tyrants and oppressors, there will be no time of finding.
Fifthly, No Time of Finding, For Tyrants Oppressors and men of blood, who live
by thefts and murders, as ravenous beasts by prey. Jam. 2.13
Judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy. A man looking into a glass,
what his own countenance is there, the like he sees in the glass: if his own be
friendly, cheerful, pleasant, etc. so is the other; if stern and froward, he
sees the like: To know how the Lord will look upon us in time of trouble, we
need go no further then to observe with what Face we look upon other men:
Psalm. 18.25, 26.
With the merciful, he will show himself merciful; with the froward, he will
show himself froward. Mat. 7.1
With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure you
mete unto others, it shall be measured to you again: thus the Jer. 30.16. Isa.
33.1.
Devourer shall be devoured, and the spoyler spoiled. And so it was in the case
of Pharaoh, Ahab, Saul, Haman, Herod, etc. they took no pity on others, neither
would the Lord pity them when their day came. Rahab had Josh. 2.1. with chap.
6.22.
a Time of finding, so had Jer. 39.17, 18.
Ebed-melech the Ethiopian: but what were they? no Persecutors of Saints, no
Banishers and Imprisoners of the Lords people, (never showing any reason for
it) but on the contrary, were helpful to them in their afflictions.

Mic. 3.1, 2, 3.
Hear I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the House of Israel: is
it not for you to know judgment? who pluck their skin from off them, and their
flesh from off their bones. Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their
skin from off them, and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for
the pot, and as flesh within the cauldron? But some may say, what is all this?
we see as much as this done every day, what course will the Lord take with
these Tyrants? ver. 4.
Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them; he will even
hide his face from them, as they have behaved themselves ill in their doings.
As the fish greedy of the worm, swallows the hook with it, and feeling the
prick in her bowels, draws back, and seeks to get off, but cannot: so Tyrants
thirsting after the Blood and Treasure of the people, therewith swallow down
the CVRSE OF GOD; and perceiving afterward they are hookt and caught, Oh, what
struggling is there to be loose! one while by Job. 20.15.
vomiting all up again, otherwhile by fasting and prayer: if neither will do,
then Moses is sent for in have, Exodus 10 17.
To entreat the Lord his God, that he may take away from them this death only.
But, Isa. 22.14
This iniquity shall not be purged from them till they die. But the Lord has
something more against the Oppressing Rulers of Judah, why he will hide his
face from them in the day of trouble: v. 10.11.
They build up of Zion with Bloods, and Jerusalem with iniquity; the Heads
thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the
Prophets thereof divine for money, yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is
not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. Here are several things
worth the observing.

1. Between the Rulers and the Priests (it seems) there was a wicked
combination; viz. whatsoever oppression and cruelty was done by the Rulers, the
Priests were to justify it; and for this they were to have so much per ann.
(as their hire) either in money, or some other way. Thus Isa. 5.18.
They drew iniquity with a cart-rope. As many threads twisted together make a
strong cord; so the Rulers, Priests and false Prophets agreeing together, could
easily (as with a cart-rope) pluck from the people what they pleased, even,
their skin and flesh from their bones.

2. That both States, viz. Civil and Ecclesiastical, were now built and kept up
by the ruin of the people. As men using their beasts, think they are not bound
to give them a reason of the service they put them to: so these Tyrants did
what they listed, neither was it for the people (according to the Doctrine of
the Priests) to be otherwise then Beasts, in submitting to the will and lusts
of the Heads in every thing.

3. Yet they leaned upon the Lord: that is, howsoever they had cast off the
Power of Godliness; yet kept up still the the form: As a man that has gotten
scabs and ulcers upon his body, will not cast off his clothes, but rather put
on more and better, that his sores may not be seen.

4. Is not the Lord among us? This seems to be the saying of the Priests and
false Prophets, for their hire and money: We are under the best Government that
ever was, Our Heads will make us a happy people; we need not fear foreign
enemies, neither plague, famine, pestilence; for our Rulers are good men, love
the Temple, and give large maintenance to the Priests, 6. When engagements and
Covenants are broken, and the things built again which were destroyed.
so that no evil can come upon us.

Sixthly, Such will have no Time of finding, Who turn with the dog to the
vomit, by breaking vows and engagements, and building again what they had
destroyed. Pro. 14.14.
The Back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: But what are his
ways? (Lying, Treachery, Self-seeking, Hypocrisy: as the Prodigal had nothing
to fill his belly with, but the husks which the swine did eat; such will be the
portion of Revolters from God: instead of peace of conscience, joy in the
Holy Ghost, and sweet communion with God, They shall be filled with their own
ways: their Apostasy, Hypocrisy and Falsehood, shall be meat in their bowels;
with this, as the gall of Asps within them, they shall be filled: thus it was
with Mat. 27.3, 4, 5.
Judas.

The Lord by his Prophet tells Judah, Jer. 15.1.
Though Moses and Samuel stood before him, yet his mind could not be toward
them: this is much, that the Lord will not hear prayer; no, not the prayer of a
Moses and Samuel standing together before him: but what is the reason? ver. 4.
Because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah King of Judah, for that which he did
in Jerusalem: now that which aggravated Manassehs sin, and most provoked the
Lord to such wrath, it is expressed thus: 2 Kin. 21.3.
For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed;
intimating, had there not been such a great Reformation a little before, his
wickedness had not been so foul and great: but after so Read 2 Chro. 29, 30 31.
Chap.
much time, and labor and treasure spent, in rooting up Idolatry and Tyranny,
and to have the true worship of God, with other good things, settled in the
Commonwealth: that he should be so graceless and impudent, presently to make
things as bad (or rather worse then they were before) here the Lord will not
hearken to prayer, but his fury must break forth, and there is no remedy. In
one respect (and it is a great one too) some men have done far worse then
Manasseh; for Manasseh built not again the things which he himself had
destroyed; neither in doing what he did, was he a Covenant-breaker with the
people, that we read of: whereas they have built the high places which
themselves destroyed, and against vows and Oaths also.

And here we may understand what the Holy Ghost means, by saying, 2 Pet. 2.21.
It had been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, then
after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment; that is, in the
day of Gods wrath, when he is pouring out the Vials upon the Nations, it shall
be better with them, who have not known the Truth, nor made profession of
righteous things, then with enlightened professors, being led aside with the
error of the wicked, and fallen from their own stedfastness. When prisoners are
taken in war, if any RVN-AWAYES are found among them, such seldom are spared,
though the rest have quarter.

Jer. 11.10, 11.
They are turned back to the iniquities of their fathers, which refused to hear
my words, and they went after other gods to serve them: the house of Israel and
the house of Judah have broken the Covenant which I made with their fathers;
Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they
shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry unto me, I will not
hearken unto them. Again, ver. 14.
Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry or a prayer for
them, for I will not hear them in the time that they cry unto me for their
trouble. So that now it is neither their own praying, nor the Prophets praying
will avail.

Object. But what if with prayer, they had joined fasting, as the present
Back-sliders do?

Answ. For all this there had been no Time of finding, Jer. 14.12
When they fast I will not hear their cry, etc. But I will consume them by the
sword, and by famine, and by pestilence.

Neither is it strange that the Lord should be so severe against
Covenant-breakers and Back-sliders, for none more wound him in his honor and
cause, then they. Formerly in wars they used Elephants, which did much service;
but if they gave back, did more hurt then the enemy: so long as some men stood
fast and faithful in the Lord's Battles, they did the Lord and his people
singular service; but by GIVING BACK, they have more dishonored God, and
trampled the Good old Cause under foot, then the Common-Enemy ever did: it may
be said of a truth, that the Common-Enemy never gave so deep a wound to the
interest of Christ and his people, as some have done by GIVING BACK.

Object. But it will be said, the Prophet speaks of a Covenant made with God,
which to break is dangerous; but with men not so.

Answ. Oaths and Engagements made with men, are Divine things; called in
Scripture, Eccl. 8.2 1 Samuel 21.7
The Oaths of God. Therefore thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely mine
Oath that he has despised, and my Covenant which he has broken, even it will
I recompense upon his own head. Though it was made with Nebuchad-nezzar, an
Heathen King, an Idolater; yet the Lord owns it as made with himself, because
his sacred and dreadful Name was taken therein, and counts the violation and
breach thereof, as if it had been formally made with himself: so when Joshua
had made a league with the Gibeonites, and the Princes had sworn unto them;
though they were deceitfully brought thereunto by the Gibeonites craft, yet
they durst not violate the League made and sworn, and so put them to the sword,
as they did others: but said, Josh. 9.15 20.
We will let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the Oath. For such
therefore as slight the Promises and Covenants which they have made with men,
they shall one day know, as they have taken the great name of God in vain, so
he will not hold them guiltless, but will remember their great wickedness, and
not spare them, nor pity them in the day of his anger.

7. No finding time for the vile, when the Lord has separated the precious
from them.
Seventhly, When the Lord has separated the precious from the vile, there will
be no finding time for the rest. No sooner are the Israelites on dry land,
Exodus 14.
but Pharaoh and his host are covered with waters: if Genesis 7.16, 17.
Noah be in the Ark, then presently comes the Flood: no sooner is Genesis 19.
righteous Lot plucked out of Sodom, but fire and brimstone burns the place:
when Eze. 9.5, 6
the mourners are marked, then immediately the Angel is bid to smite, and spare
none: so when Isa. 26.20, 21.
the Lords people are in their chambers, Behold, the Lord comes out of his
place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. And this I
take to be one reason of the Lords great patience at this time; though Sodom
be ripe for judgment, yet the Angel will have Lot out before he execute it:
Genesis 19.22.
Haste thee, escape thither, for I cannot do any thing, till thou be come
thither. Why is not the vial poured out upon this Apostasy? surely Isa. 30.18.
the Lord waits to be gracious unto his elect among the Apostates. 2 Pet. 3.9
He is not slack, concerning his promise (as some men count slackness) but is
long suffering TO USWARD, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance: whereas therefore he defers his wrath, it is to have
his people out of Babylon, and from the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram: he
would have them remember from whence they are fallen, and repent, and do their
first works; and were this done, he would soon take vengeance on the rest.

If a father be spoken unto concerning a rebellious child, and counseled to
cast him off; what says he? Ah! I am his father, I cannot do it, I must yet
try some other means, and exercise longer patience toward him. Indeed we have
not (as the Lord has) Fatherly bowels toward Christ's sheep going astray: our
passion is such, we would sometimes have them cast off, and looked no more
after: but what says the Lord, I cannot do so, I am their Father, I must wait
yet, that I may be gracious to them. If there be but a little corn among a
great deal of chaff, the husbandman will have that forth before he burns the
chaff. For conclusion, Let us earnestly seek the Lord, that he will pluck all
Zions sons out of Babylon, and plant their feet in the pleasant paths of
Christ: this being done, I say, the wheat being separated, the tares
straightwayes will be cast into the lake of fire, where will be no Time of
finding.

CHAP. III. Certain grounds and reasons, wherefore there will be A TIME OF
FINDING. 1. In respect of God himself. 2. In respect of his people. 3. In
respect of the Cause, or, Things they seek him for.
Reasons why there will be a time of finding, both in respect of God, his
people and Cause. 1. In respect (...) himself: Because he is good, and his
tender mercies are f^^ever.
THe Lord will be found in respec^ of himself: First, Because he i^ good, and
his mercy endures for ever: Psa. 25.6
Remember O Lord (says David) thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses,
for they have been ever of old. You cannot touch a man so soft and easy upon
the apple of his eye, but he will feel it: What are the tears, groanings, and
sighings of Saints, but as the touch of a finger upon the apple of Gods eyes?
there is nothing we can do, whereof the Lord is more sensible and has more
feeling, then of Soul-travelling sobs and pangs. It is usual in the Prophets,
when they are exhorting people, to seek the Lord by fasting and prayer, for
their encouragement to mention how pitiful and full of bowels the Lord is:
Joel. 2.12, 13.
Turn ye unto me (says the Lord) with all your hearts, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning; and rent your hearts and not your garments,
and turn unto the Lord your God. Now observe the reason or motive to it: For he
is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents
him of the evil: As if he should say, 2 Samuel 24 14.
You fall not into the hand of man, but into the hands of the Lord, whose
mercies are exceeding great, and will Psalm. 103.13.
pity you as a father pitieth his children. So in another Prophet, Mic. 7.18 19.
Who is a God like unto thee? that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy: he will turn again, and have compassion
upon us, etc. Note one passage here, He delights in mercy: If it be a thing a
man well likes, and takes great pleasure in it, you need not press him very
much to it, he will be free and forward enough of himself to do it for you. It
is true, when the Lord is to afflict his people, here he seems to be Lam. 3.33
UNWILLING, it is not from his heart, (as the Hebrew reads) he delights not in
it; but it causes him to fetch a groan or sigh: Isa. 1.24
Ah! woe is me! Hos. 6.4. and 11.8.
How shall I give thee up? my heart is turned within me, etc. But to be found
of his children, and to heap blessings upon them, here is his delight, in this
his Soul is well pleased.

Psa. 12.5.
For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise, says the Lord. If you mark the word (NOW) it makes the sense thus: As
if the Lord should say, I cannot see my oppressed ones in tears any longer
before me; my bowels so yearn at their groanings, that I must forthwith arise
against their proud and cruel enemies. If men who are evil, having pity and
compassion in them, cannot but regard the sighs and cries of poor distressed
creatures, and their hearts will be drawn out to relieve them: Luke 18.7, 8.
And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him? I
tell you, that he will avenge them speedily.

It was a proverb among those of Genoa, when any was injured, to say unto him
that had done the wrong; If you will not right me, my Lord Marshal will: with
more certainty may Christ's persecuted members say to Tyrants, and proud
Hypocrites, Whereas we are imprisoned by you, and spoiled of our goods; our God
will right us (though you do not) to your confusion. If Benhadab had ground of
hope that Ahab would show him favor, because, 1 King. 20.31.
The Kings of the house of Israel were merciful Kings: with what full assurance
then may the present mourners in Zion expect a Time of finding? he being the
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, unto whom they make
supplications and prayers.

Secondly, The Lord will be found, because of his word and promise sake. Reas.
2. He will be found for his promise sake.
Among men there are some who will not break their promise for any thing: Ruth
having told her mother in law what Boaz had promised to do for her, what says
Naomi to it? Rut. 3.18
Sit still my daughter, until thou know how the matter will fall: for the man
will not be in rest, until he have finished the thing this day. Is there so
much heed and conscience in man (a poor worm) to be faithful to his engagement?
what may we think of God, Tit. 1.2.
That cannot lie: Jam. 1.17
with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning; but always speaks
in faithfulness and truth? Now we read in Holy Scripture, that the Lord
promises there shall be a TIME OF FINDING. ( Psa. 50.15
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Observe how he
speaks here like himself; like a God, as one that has all power in his hands,
and can do whatsoever he pleases: I WILL DELIVER THEE. If a poor man come to
us for relief, such may his case be, as we cannot promise to help him, but tell
him we will do our best, and help him if we can: But the Lord speaks not by
iffs and may be, but promises certain deliverance: Mat. 8.3.
I will, be thou clean.

The like in Isaiah Isa. 45.19
I said not to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain; I the Lord speak
righteousness, I declare things that are right. Suppose a beggar should have an
engagement under the hand of a King, wherein he promises to do so and so for
him; it were no presumption in this poor man, having access to the Prince, if
he should mention it, and show it to him, and humbly desire the performance of
it: neither would the other (though a King) be offended at it, but bid him rest
content, for he would not be worse then his word. Though the disproportion is
far greater between the Creator and the Creature, then between the greatest
Monarch of the world, and the poorest beggar on earth; yet have the Lords
people many times remembered him of his promise, and spread it before his face,
and besought him earnestly to look thereon, and not forget it: Thus did Moses:
Exodus 32 13.
(i) Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel thy servants, to whom thou swarest by
thine own self, etc. So David: Psalm. 119.49.
Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.
And Solomon likewise, 1 Kin. 8.25, 26.
Therefore now, O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my Father
that thou promisest him. Again, Let thy word I pray thee be verified, which
thou spakest unto thy servant David my Father. So Jeremie, Jer. 14.21.
Remember, break not thy Covenant.

Neither was the Lord offended with them, that they did put him thus in
remembrance; much less did he answer them as some men use to do, when they are
minded of their Oaths, Vows, and Solemn Appeals to God, that they would do such
and such things for Christ and his people, and the good of the Nations; Ho, say
they, Those Promises and engagements were but pro Tempore, that is, (as their
practice shows) they never meant to keep their word, but as it should make for
their own interest and advantage. But our God Psa. 5.6.
abhors such deceitful men, and all such execrable Hypocrisy. For Mal. 3.6.
He changes not: 2 Cor. 1.20
All his promises are yea, and Amen: Yea, so far is the Lord from breaking
Covenant, that he hears the cries and prayers of his people for his promise
sake. Exo. 2.24
And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his Covenant with Abraham,
with Isaak, and with Jacob. So a little after, Chap. 6.5.
I have heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep
in bondage, and I have remembered my Covenant. When Doves sigh and mourn in
clifts and secret holes, it does presage (say they) that destruction is nigh
the Birds of prey: not to speak of Pharaoh, Haman, Herod; a little before the
fall of the Bishops and the King, the Lord's hidden ones were in bitterness of
Soul, and poured out mournful complaints day and night against their
persecutors: but much more have they sighed and groaned before the Lord, since
this sad Revolt broke forth, in regard of the scandal and reproach brought to
the Gospel by it: And what does this signify? That the Lord will suddenly take
away this image of jealousy, and revive his work in the midst of the Nations.
But to proceed.

That the Lord forgets not what he promised, might be showed in many other
places: Psalm. 105.8.
He has remembered his Covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a
thousand Generations. And in the same Psalm, ver. 42.
He remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant: Again, Psa. 106 44, 45.
Nevertheless, he regarded their afflictions, when he heard their cry; and he
remembered for them his Covenant. See 2 Samuel 7.21. Here we may not omit how far
the Lords ways, and some men's ways are unlike; the Lord takes it well to be 1 Chronicles. 17.23.
remembered of his Covenant and promises, and would have his children to mention
them before him: whereas you cannot more grieve and vex certain NEW LORDS, then
to tell them of their engagements; should any but show them the Oaths and Vows
published under their hands, what they protested in such a year, at such a
place, for the interest of Christ and his people; their asseverations and
imprecations, the curses and judgments they wished to light upon themselves and
posterity, if they did not such things; add hereunto their frequent tears,
hands laid on their breasts, and eyes lifted up to Heaven, calling God to
witness, as to the plainness and singleness of their hearts: should this (I
say) be told them, what would they say? 2 Kin. 11 14.
Treason, Treason, 1 Kin. 22 27.
Put this fellow into prison, etc. In all the reign of Caligula, if a man did
but name a Goat, it was a crime (of Laesae Majestatis) against the Imperial
person; this was of his hairy body. A very strange thing, that a man could not
say Goat, but he must mean the Emperor. Can you say, Covenant-breaker,
self-seeker, deceiver of the people, but the Lawyer cries out, Luke 11.45.
Master, thus saying, thou reproachest us also?

Thirdly, It must needs be, That there will be A TIME OF FINDING, 3. Because
the Lord will be honored many ways by it.
because the Lord hereby will be honored and glorified many ways. There is
nothing that a man will sooner regard and hearken to, then when his own profit
and advantage is propounded. To speak soberly, and no more but what the
Scriptures hold forth; It is good for the Lord himself, That there be a time of
finding.

Quest. What Good has the Lord by it?

Answ. 1. By this means the Saints will bless him, and the high praises of God
will be in their mouth. Now By ha^ing the ^igh pray^^s of his people. Psa. 50.3.
whosoever offers praise, glorifies him. Was not the Lord glorified, when he
answered the groanings of his people in Egypt, plagued the Egyptians, and
destroyed Pharaoh, and his host in the Red Sea? Exodus 15.^, -- 11.
Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto Jehovah, etc. Who is
like unto thee O Jehovah among the gods? who is like thee, glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders! When Babylon shall lie under
wrath, Rev. 18.^ 1.
sunk like a great millstone cast into the Sea, and shall be found no more at
all; What immediatefollows? Rev. 19.1
I heard a great voice of much people in Heaven, saying, Hallelujah, Salvation,
and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God: ver. 3.
And again they said, HALLELVJAH: and a little after, another ver. 6.
great multitude, saying, HALLELUJAH, for the Lord God Omnipotent Reigns.

As when a judge has done some notable and eminent act of justice upon a
notorious offender, he is highly commended for it: so will the Lord have
unspeakable praise from his people every where, when he has judged the Great
Whore, destroyed the false Church, Ministry, Worship and Government, plucked
her up root and branch with all her props and Lovers, HALLELV-JAH, and again,
HALLELV-IAH. What does the Lord at present hear and see among the
Antichristians? But Blasphemy, railing, lying, murders, sorceries, etc.
nothing in truth, but what tends to the dishonor of his Great Name: but were
the whole Kingdom of the Beast destroyed, then would the Lord have glory and
praise, for being found of his people. What man would not have a filthy stink
removed, that a sweet persume might be in the place thereof? so long as
Hypocrites reign, and Tyrants rule the Nations, their sins like dung will stink
in the nostrils of the Lord; but when they are removed, he will smell a sweet
savor of praise and thanksgiving.

Besides, the Saints do often use it in prayer, as an argument for a time of
finding, namely, the praises he shall have of them: Psa. 9.13 4.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, consider my trouble, etc. That I may show forth
all thy praise in the gates of the daughters of Zion. Again, Psalm. 79.11, 12,
13.
Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee, etc. Preserve those that are
appointed to die, and render to our neighbors seven fold into their bosom, etc.
So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture, will give thee thanks for ever, we
will show forth thy praise to all Generations. So then, do any desire to know,
why the Lords little remnant at this day are so earnest in prayer against the
enemies of Gods glory? Why they would have the Isa. 33.14.
sinners in Zion afraid, and fearfulness to surprise the Hypocrites? That such
as Psa. 125.5.
are turned aside to their crooked ways, may have their faces filled with
shame, and confounded in all their counsels and designs? It is for this end,
that the Lord alone may have praise. It is reported of Nero, when he had
banished any good Commonwealths men, or put them to death, he would keep a day
of thanksgiving; that is, thank his gods for his great deliverance. It is true,
the faithful do abhor such kind of thanksgiving, and leave Nero's exsample to
be followed by corrupt men and such as he was. They dare not praise God,
because Hypocrites reign; but on the contrary, when they see the Lord does
punish them, for their wickedness, then they will praise him with their whole
heart.

But, 2. 2. Because of his great Name.
Should Saints forget their duty of thanksgiving, yet would the Lord be a
Gainer, that there is a time of finding, in respect of his great Name. Josh.
7.9.
What will thou do (says Joshua) unto thy great Name! So Moses Exodus 32.12.
Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them
out! That is, though thou have matter enough against this people, to consume
them as one man, and to withdraw thy presence from them, yet remember thine own
Concernments; to wit, how deeply thy Glory, Power and Faithfulness will suffer,
if thou appear not again for them. When Hanun the son of Nahash had most
unworthily 2 Samuel 10 4.
abused David's Messengers, it was David principally that was wronged; neither
could he in point of honor and justice put it up, without taking severe revenge
upon the enemy for it. It is Jesus Christ, who at this day is the greatest
sufferer, in his Cause, Name and Kingdom; and therefore should he not in
judgment come forth against the despiteful abusers of him, what would become of
his Glory? would not an evil and adulterous generation conclude, Eze. 8.12 and
9.9 Isa. 29.18.
The Lord sees them not, neither regards he good or evil?

When the Israelites were in great distress at the Red Sea, Exodus 14.15.
Moses cried unto the Lord: It is true, they had then a time of finding, but
why was it? Psa. 106.8
He saved them for his Name sake, that he might make his mighty power to be
known. There is much comfort in the words, if well considered. Many honest
hearts looking on their tears, sighs, and groans, are discouraged, to think
what poor and weak things they are; what is all our weeping (say they) and
mourning before the Lord? Shall we have a Time of finding for such low things?
Do you stick here (precious ones?) But consider, there is more in the Lords eye
(why he will be found of his people) then their cries and tears; he will hear
them, for his Name sake, that his Power, Justice, Mercy, Faithfulness, etc. may
be known. So then, though you should question whether the Lord, in regard of
your poor prayers and groanings, will arise against Evil doers; yet methinks it
is not possible you should doubt, but he will do it Neh. 9.31. 1 Kin. 8.41
Jer. 14.7, 21.
FOR HIS NAME SAKE.

Psa. 115.1
Not unto us Jehovah, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the glory; for thy
mercy, for thy truth. I cannot but think we are nigh THE TIME OF FINDING,
because Christ's little flock have Gods glory so much upon their hearts. As a
servant in the field sowing seed, he does it not to have the crop, but for his
masters profit: so the Saints up and down the Nation are Psa. 126.5
sowing in tears, and crying day and night to the Lord, that he will arise and
have mercy upon Zion, Dan. 2.44
Break in pieces and consume the fourth Monarchy, and render double vengeance
upon Babylon. But for whom is this sowing? Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us.
Psa. 83.17, 18.
Let thine enemies be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to
shame and perish: That men may know, that thou whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, art
the most high over all the Earth.

I know well enough what the faithful are charged with, for witnessing against
the unrighteousness of men; viz. That that they would have others down, to have
all power and greatness themselves, and that they allow of no Ministry or
Magistracy. For

Answ. 1. The Lord who seacheth the hearts knows all this to be false: Josh.
22.22.
If it be rebellion, or if in transgression against the Lord, save us not this
day. 2. The Accusers themselves, know it to be false. For would some men for
worldly Advantages, corrupt their consciences, they have had not a little
proffered them, of Esau's Pottage and Balaams Reward. But 3. This is true, we
pray against the Antichristian Ministry and Magistracy, that the Lord would
pluck them up, Root and Branch, and cast them, as unsavory Salt, to the
Dunghill. And this we do (not being against all Magistracy and Ministry, but)
to have Isa. 1.26.
Judges restored ^s at the first, Jer. 3.15.
and Pastors according ^o the Lords own heart, and so Christ ^he 1 Timothy 6.15.
ONLY POTENTATE. Lastly it is our Opinion, until the last Apostacy be
destroyed Psa. 67.2.
God's way will not be known upon earth, and his saving health among all
Nations: for it is THIS THAT LETS the ruin of Babylon, and the Gathering of
the Nations to Jesus Christ: viz. Jews and Gentiles.

We read in the History of the Waldenses, when these good people denied
Christ's humane Body to be in the Sacrament, the Priests would report they
denied God: So not allowing the Virgin Mary to be prayed to, that they had
blasphemed her. Just so are we slandred at this day: Because we are against an
unlawful Ministry and Magistracy, Ergo, says the Accuser of the Brethren, we
deny all, and will have none.

Thirdly, the Lord being Found of his People, 3. Because of Love many ways.
will have the more love from them many ways.

First, 1. Love to the Lord himself.
A TIME OF FINDING is an heart-enlarger of dear affections to Jesus Christ.
Psa. 116.1.
I love the Lord (says David) because he has heard my voice and my
suplications: So in Psa. 18.26.
another place. Did not David love the Lord before he had these deliverances?
yes, doubtless, and very much: Notwithstanding by this means he loved him a
great deal more. As a man by stretching out a Bag or Purse, it holds more then
it did before: So every Finding Time, is a reaching and stretching out the
heart; our love rises and grows by it exceedingly.

Secondly, more Love to his Truth, and holy Ways: 2. To his Truth and ways.
Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross, Therefore I love thy
Testimonies. Is not this harsh, that David should be encouraged to love the
Laws of God, of the dreadful Judgments he had seen executed upon Hypocrites,
Apostates and Tyrants? If it be a thing very rich and precious, yet so long as
it is wrapped up and foulded together, few regard it, neither know we what it is:
God's wrath powered out upon the Workers of Iniquity, is (as it were) the
opening of himself, of his Kingdom and Laws; and until he does so, he is not
known, nor his appointments. But Isa. 26 9.
When his ^udgements are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness. Psa. 6.16.
He is known by the judgment which be executes, and Rev. 15.4.
glorified by it. So ^ong as HYPOCRITES REIGN, and the LAST APOSTACY stands,
the Lords Testimonies will not be loved, but Mic. 6.16.
the Statutes of Omri kept: not the Lords Messengers hearkened unto, but the
deceitful workers of Antichrist. But when all Murderers of souls and bodies
shall be put away like dross; then will People every where love the Testimonies
and Laws of JEHOVAH.

Thirdly, 3. Provoking others to love.
If we have a TIME OF FINDING, we will provoke others to love the Lord: Psa.
31.23, 24.
Thou heardest the voice of my supplications when I cried unto thee: And what
follows? O love the Lord all ye his Saints; For the Lord preserves the
faithful, and plentifully rewards the PROUD DOER. If we have a friend that
does very much for us, we would have others (besides our selves) to love him
likewise. Of all men, those who do most experience the love of God toward
themselves, do especially provoke and stir up others to love him, and trust in
him. So David in another place, Pas. 34.5, 8.
I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears: O
taste and see that the Lord is good: Blessed is the man that trusts in him.
The Prophet here is like one that has experienced ^ thing, and found it very
good; persuades others to make use also of it.

4. Others will be provoked by it.
Fourthly, This TIME OF FINDING will cause many (hearing of it) to love, fear
and honor the Lord. Exo. 18.7, 8, 9.
When Jethro heard what the Lord had done unto Pharaoh, and unto the Egyptians,
for Isreal's sake, he rejoiced, saying, Blessed be the Lord, who has delivered
you, etc. Now I know the Lord is greater then all gods: For in the things
wherein he dealt proudly, he was above the^ We read in Esther that Est. 8.17.
many of the people of the Land became Jews; but when was it? after the Time of
Finding, when Haman and his sons were hanged; Then they cried, 2 Kin. 18.39.
The Lord he is God, the Lord he is God: but whilst Haman stood in power and
greatness, who more honored then he? So when the good news of the Rev. 11.13.
Great Earthquake shall be spread through the Nations, and the perishing of the
Last Apostacy, under the first Vial, Oh, what rejoicing will this be to the
Churches and Saints every where! how will they bless the Lord for it! Rev. 15.3.
Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints! ver. 4.
for thy judgments are made manifest.

Now they will clearly understand that all the pretenses and protestations
which some made against the Pope, and for THE PROTESTANT CHRISTIAN RELIGION,
were mere delusions and falsehoods. Neither was Babylon in her idolatry and
cruelty supported by any Power or State more then by them. And that they were
the chief obstructers of the Lord's work against the GREAT WHORE. If irons be
taken off from hand or foot, this sets the whole body free. The last Apostacy
is as a great chain upon the Lords work; howsoever it be broken but in one
Country, nevertheless the whole Body, all the members of Christ, will have
Spiritual Liberty by it. And therefore doubtless when they shall hear of this
Earthquake, they will (like Iethro) bless the Lord for it.

4. Of glorifying God by trusting in him.
Fourthly: Times of Finding give encouragement unto Saints Psa. 63.8.
to trust in the Lord at all times, and to pour out their hearts before him:
And this is Romans 4.20.
to give glory to God: Psa. 9.10
They that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee. But how is the Name of
God known? truly not in any thing more fruitfully and teachingly, then by Times
of Finding; here his glory passes before us; we behold him with open face;
here we have his power, goodness, faithfulness, etc. made known to us: Psa.
116.2.
Because he has inclined his ear to me, THEREFORE will I call upon him as long
as I live. A man knowing where the Fountain is, and being at it a thousand
times, and always satisfied, knows where to go when he wants water. Psa. 65.2.
O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. Had we not a
gracious answer of our cries and tears against the King and Prelates? He bowed
the Heavens, and came down; then the earth shook: He also thundered in the
Heavens: And what more? He gave us the neck of our Enemies, we beat them small
as the dust before the wind, and did cast them out as the dirt in the streets.

Quest. But what has the Lord gotten, by granting such A TIME OF FINDING?

Answ. The honor of trusting in him: Psa. 63.7
Because thou have been my help, (says David,) Therefore in the shadow of thy
wings will I rejoice. That the Lord heard us in the late wars, and was found
Genesis 22.14.
JEHOVAH-JIREH, a God seen in the mount; We can pray now against all the
Hypocritical enemies of his Cause and Kingdom more earnestly; Jam. 1.6.
In faith, nothing wavering: which is greatly to his Glory. The bramble would
have Judge. 9.15
all the trees put their trust in his shadow. Indeed Tyrants would be trusted,
though there be neither trust nor Truth in them. I have read the story, how
Dominique dreamt, the Church of Rome was falling, and that he upheld it with
his shoulders. Have we never heard the like fable? In what sore distress the
Church and State were, both ready to split, had not a Minion Idol been devised,
(like Dominique's shoulders) to keep them up. The Tryers (probably) will apply
this, because it is like that Shameful thing for all the world. But to proceed:
Did not David very much honor the Lord by trusting in him, when he went forth
against Goliath? But what caused David (by believing) to do so? he tells you: 1 Samuel 17.37.
The Lord that delivered me out of the Paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of
the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. I know there
were many complaints and heart-groans, poured out against the King and Bishops,
for their Tyranny and Idolatry; but this I can truly say, For twenty years and
more, (in which I suffered under them) the Lord did not draw out my heart to so
much mourning and sighings, as I have done within these three or four years,
against the GREAT BETRAYERS of the interest of Christ and his people. And this
I find (as a burning fire shut up in my bones) that I cannot hold my peace day
nor night.

Besides, Howsoever I am a poor worm, and the least in my Father's house; yet
herein I can give glory to God: I do believe the Lord that delivered his
afflicted people out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear,
(King and Bishops;) he will deliver them from all PROUD PHILISTIMS, that defy
the Israel of God; yea, and that speedily.

Fifthly, 5. Do him more work and better service.
Times of finding engage the Lords people, to do him more work, and better
service afterward. If Beasts, the larger allowance they have, will do their
master the more service: Surely then, the better Christ is to his children, the
more they will strive to do his will in every thing. Psa. 116.8, 9.
Thou have delivered my Soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling: I will walk on before the Lord in the land of the living: That is,
Seeing I have had a Time of finding, I will so improve this great mercy, as the
Lord shall have much glory and honor by it. Methinks, it is at this day with
some honest hearts, as it was with the Mat. 20.3, 4.
Laborers, which stood idle in the marketplace: Should they be asked, why they
are not at work? What would they say? We are calling upon the Lord for
employment, we would willingly be at work, for it grieves our very Souls to
stand thus idle. Now has not a master more profit that his servants are at
work, then standing still? When the Great TIME OF FINDING comes, then will
Zions children be at work indeed: for now they may be said, to be idle,
comparatively to their work THEN: Then some shall be the Rev. 14.6.
Angel, To preach the Everlasting Gospel: Others the Rev. 15.1
Angels, to pour out the seven last plagues. Some, Psa. 149.8.
to bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron. Others,
Rev. 18.5
to execute vengeance upon Babylon: Come Lord Jesus. When the Lord made use of
Moses and Aaron to pour out vials full of wrath, upon Pharaoh and Egypt; and of
Elias, to destroy the Prophets of Baal; and of Joshua, to cast out the
Canaanites: Was he not in those things very much glorified? If so, then much
more when he shall answer the prayers of his people, concerning his Son and
Zion, and the destruction of Babylon, and all Tyrants. Which is better, and
more for the honor of a King, that Thieves, Murderers and Rebels, do spoil and
destroy the good people; or to be taken and punished? What is it that Saints
pray for, and desire a Time of finding? Truly this, That Hypocrites and
Apostates, Psa. 104 35.
be consumed out of the earth, and bloody Tyrants be no more. That Rev. 11.15.
all the Kingdoms of the world may be Christ's, Eze. 21 27
whose right it is. And in order hereunto, they are to ready to follow the Lamb
(in his work) wheresoever he shall lead them.

But howsoever some men by Times of finding are the better, yet many are the
worse. Here Jesus Christ may say, Psa. 109.4.
For my Love they are my Adversaries. That is, for the Deliverances, Victories,
Preferments, which I gave them, I am the more wronged by them, in my Great
Name, Cause, and Kingdom. And truly I think, never a generation of men more
sinned against kindness, then some of this generation. Isa. 1.2.
Hear ye Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, for the Lord speaks, I have
nourished and brought up (or made great and exalted) children, but they have
revolted from me. It is a pitiful fight, to see a poor Bird killed, with the
feathers plucked from her. They are not only contented to feather their nest,
with the interest of Christ and his people, but with those feathers, i. e.
power, places, Offices, and preferment, which they have plucked from it, shoot
at her, and murder her most unworthily. Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is all forgotten?
What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? Psalm.
116.12.

CHAP. IIII. Reasons, Why there will be a Time of Finding, in respect of Gods
people.
Reasons in respect of mourners. 1. Of the revilings of the proud.
First, BEcause of the scornings and revilings of the proud, as reproaching the
Godly for their mourning and tears. Had not the Lord been found of Hezekiah, he
had not been able in a little while to have born Rabshakehs and Sennacheribs
blasphemies. That which caused Hannah to be in bitterness of Soul before the
Lord, (and no doubt moved the Lord to take pity on her) it was the extreme 1 Samuel 1.6.
provoking of her adversary, for to make her fret, because the Lord had shut up
her womb. Our Adversaries are fallen upon Rabshakehs work, and seek to provoke
us, by the like scornful reproaches. Where is the fruit (say they) of your
tears and cries? You may see the Lord cares not for your weeping, fasting, and
praying: did he regard them, he would have helped you ere now: Ah, ah, Do ye
think that sobs and groans will do it?

Of such Libertines and profane scoffers David speaks Psa. 14.6.
The Counsel of the poor afflicted, ye would make aba^hed, because Jehovah is
his hope: that is, Ye have derided the Godly, when ye heard them in affliction
to call upon the Lord, and would discourage them from making God their Hope by
faith and prayer. Indeed this strikes deep, when the Enemy reproacheth our
prayers: Job found it so, Job 12.4.
I am as one mocked of his neighbor, calling upon God. And David sadly
complains of it, Psa. 42.3.
My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say, Where is
thy God? Again, verse. 16.
As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me, while they daily say
unto me, Where is thy God? A man that has a weapon thrust to the bone, cannot
bear it long; he must have it forth, or dies. Though it be a grievous thing to
have our prayers reproached, yet this help we have by it; namely, it will force
us to be the more fervent and earnest with God, and not to rest day nor night,
till there be A TIME OF FINDING.

We find in Scripture, that the tryumphing of the wicked, has layn very much
upon the Spirits of Saints; and therefore have desired a Time of finding, that
the Enemy might not insult: Psa. 13.34.
Consider, and hear me, O Lord, lest mine enemy say, I have prevayled against
him, and those that trouble me, rejoice. Again, Psa. 140.8.
Grant not, O Lord, the desire of the wicked, further not his wicked device,
lest they exalt themselves. What is it that Apostates and other wicked men
would have? That Mourners in Zion might have no Time of finding. And what would
they do, should they have their desire? It is not to be uttered, the wickedness
they would commit. The Jews report of one presuming to enter into the Holy of
Holiest, and abusing the Treasure there, was by the hand of God immediately
smitten. The prayers and groanings of Saints are no other, then Choice things
in the most Holy place. And therefore when men begin to deride and reproach
these Holy things, surely judgment is not far off.

I remember Hezekiahs words: Isa. 37.3.
This is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children
are come to birth, and there is not strength to bring forth. What he speaks
there, is our present case: when the child is at the birth, the woman has her
sorest travel; then either death, or a speedy deliverance. That our Tears,
Prayers and Sighings are reproached, it has brought the Work to the Birth. Ah!
how Zion now travels, as having her last and sharpest pangs and throws upon
her. Methinks I hear her cry, Luke 8.24.
Master, Master, we perish. But fear not Zion, hear what thy God speaks, Isa.
66.9.
Shall I bring to birth, and not cause to bring forth? As the Lord by the
blasphemous reproaches and scornings of the Enemy, ( viz. Priests, Lawyers, and
Soldiers) has brought the work to the Birth, and put the sharpest pangs now
upon thee; so he will speedily work out thy salvation? Isa. 9.7.
The zeal of the Lord will perform this.

2. Because the Lord knows we are weaklings.
Secondly, Mourners shall have a Time of finding, Because the Lord Psa. 103.14.
knows their frame, and remembers they are dust. Things that are brittle and
tender, should they be roughly handled, would soon break to pieces. As the Lord
knows, we are weaklings, Babes, Bruised reeds and smoking flax; so Heb. 4.15.
He is touched with a feeling of our infirmities, and Isa. 57.17.
will not contend for ever, lest our spirits should fayl before him. If a
father should see his child at his foot gasping for life, would he not pity
him, and preserve him (if he could) from perishing? Jon. 2.7.
When my Soul fainted within me (said Jonah) I remembered the Lord, and my
prayers came unto thee, into thine Holy Temple.

And this also makes me think a time of finding is nigh, Because the Name of
God, and the Cause of Christ, lies with such weight upon the Spirits of
Mourners, as they are even fainting under it. Poor Hagar could not endure to
hear the death-groans of her child: for though she had heard him awhile weep
and cry for water, yet when she thought he was fainting away, Genesis 21.15, 16.
She leaves him, and goes a good way off, and lifts up her voice and wept. As
DEATH-GROANS are now upon traveling Zion; so the Lord sees it, and he will not
do as Hagar did, go off from her: (there is no need, for the water is not spent
in his bottle,) but out of his fullness, he will speedily supply her, by
granting her a blessed time of finding. If a man should hear lamentable
groanings and screeches at his gate, and looking out at his window, should
behold poor people ready to starve through cold and hunger, he could not
(having enough by him) suffer them to perish. It is thus with many of Gods
people at this day; they lie ready to starve before the Throne of Grace, either
FINDING or FAINTING. And will he suffer such to famish? Surely he will not, he
cannot; for his promise Pro. 10.3. Psalm. 107.5 6, 7.
is to do otherwise.

Suppose a Beast carry a burden so long, as through weakness it begins to sink,
what man would not pity it, (though it be a Beast) and ease him of it? The
BURDEN has been so long on the Lords Little ones, and the Dan. 7.25.
Horn so weared them out, as poor hearts, they seem almost tired. One cries,
Psa. 94.14.
My foot slippeth: another Eccles. 7.7.
Oppression makes him mad: others Ezekiel. 37.11.
Our bones are dried up, and our hope is lost, etc. others, Psa. 125.3.
The rod of the wicked has been so long upon them, as they are ready to put
forth their hands to iniquity. All this God knows to be true; and he knows
Mat. 26.41.
the flesh is weak, and Ephesians. 6.4. Col. 3.21.
Parents must not provoke there Children, lest they be discouraged. But what may
we gather from it? Our God will suddenly come, and not keep silence, to save
all the meek of the earth.

Better one man should die, then the whole Nation perish. Methinkes things are
come to that STRAIGHT, that if Christ's Enemies live, his faithful Friends die;
if their spirits fail not, the others will: If God do not suddenly arise for
his great Name, some Sobbing-hearts will break at his foot. But fear not thou
Worm-Iacob Isa. 43.3.
I will give men for thee (says the Lord) and people for thy life. He will
give the Little Horn to the burning flame; The Last Apostacy shall perish: THE
HYPOCRITE SHALL REIGN NO MORE, rather then thy Spirit shall fail, for not
having A Time of Finding.

Thirdly: 3. Because they are his friends and servants.
Because they are the Lords People, his Jewels, Servants, Children and Friends.
Psa. 119.125.
I am thy Servant (says holy David) give ME understanding. If another man's
Child or Servant should ask something of you, you might in all reason
(especially if Enemies) bid them go to their own Father and Master, why do they
come to you? It is very true, such as as are the servants of Antichrist, and do
serve the base lusts of Tyrants, yea, and are Tyrants themselves; The Lord may
justly say unto them, when they Call upon him, as the Prophet did to the King
of Israel: 2 Kin. 3.13.
What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the Prophets of thy Father, and to
the Prophets of thy Mother. So may the Lord say to REVOLTERS, Why come ye now
to me? have ye not rejected me, and cast me off, in my Son, Zion, Cause and
Kingdom; broken your Vows and Covenants with me? Therefore get ye unto the
Head of the Last Apostacy, and the Great Whore, the Head of the First
Apostacy, whom ye have honored more then me: And it seems to me, David in the
Spirit foretells this very thing Psa. 18.41.
They cried out, but there was none to save; unto JEHOVAH, but he answered them
not. A Prophecy to be fulfilled in the Last Days (as I take it) upon APOSTATE
PROFESSORS.

But howsoever the Lord will thus deal with his enemies for their Crooked ways,
yet with his Friends and faithful Servants, who Luke 22.28.
continued with him in his temptations; Suffered banishment, imprisonment,
spoiling of their goods, etc. rather then to forsake THE GOOD OLD CAUSE, These
Isa. 58.9.
shall call, and the Lord shall answer; They shall cry, and he shall say, Here
I am Isa. 49.15.
Can a Mother forget her sucking child? etc. If a child be crying in the
streets, and multitudes of people should pass by without taking notice of the
child; yet no sooner does the mother hear it cry, but runs to it, kisseth it,
and carries him home in her bosom. What though profane people, and proud
carnal professors that are at ease, regard not the Mourners in Zion, but
reproach their very sighings and groanings, laugh and deride their prayers? yet
they have a father that hears them, and Psa. 57.18.
puts all their tears into his bottle, and in due time Psalm. 30.11.
will put off their sackcloth, and gird them with gladness.

Fourthly, Because in seeking him, 4. Because in seeking him they seek only
his glory.
they seek only his Glory. As a shooter has one eye close, and with the other
sees nothing save the mark at which he shoots: thus it is now with the Little
Remnant; their eyes are shut from all Self-respects, they look not upon any
worldly advantage, neither ask any thing of God, but what may be to the glory
of his Great Name. If they ask health, Liberty, food, etc. it is, that God may
be glorified in the right improvement of them: if they pray against Apostates
and Covenant-breakers, it is, that Isa. 2.17.
the Lord alone may be exalted. Phil. 1.21.
To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain: that is, so Christ may be
glorified, I am willing to live; and if glorified, I am willing to die: it is
all one to me whether I live or die, so Jesus Christ by it may have glory.

Could a father see a child at his foot crying to him with tears, that he might
know his will, and upon no other account then to honor him in the doing of it:
I say, could a father see all this; and not be found? 1 Cor. 4.3.
For men's judgment, we pass it by, as a very small thing; the Lord knows it is
true, viz. That there is a Seed of God at this day in bitterness of Soul, to
know what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God; and for no
other end, then to serve the Lord: and not as Turn-coats and Revolters do, to
serve themselves upon him. The Lord was well pleased with Solomon, 1 Kin. 3.10,
11.
Because he asked not for himself long life, nor riches, nor the life of his
Enemies, but understanding to discern judgment; that is, he asked that thing,
whereby he might most honor God: and the Lord gave him his request, and more
too. Never had Saints more cause then now to believe a time of finding is nigh,
and that all their tears and sighings will be speedily answered, seeing they go
not unto the Lord (as Hypocrites do,) Hos. 7.14
For corn and wine, and rebel against him; but for this end, that Mat. 6.9.
the Lords name may be hallowed.

But this corrupt men cannot do. It is not Gods Counsel they desire to know,
nor his good Cause to carry on; but that their own wicked devises might
prosper, and that the Lord would give his glory to them. As the rainbow never
appears, but is in opposition to the Sun; so some men if they appear publicly
or privately, in fasting and prayer, they are never in that side of the world
where Gods Glory is, but quite in opposition to it. I have read of a certain
Soldier, having done great service for the State, was bid to ask some reward
for himself: to which he answered, For himself he would ask nothing, but had a
Petition for the Church and People of God. I hope there is such a frame of
Spirit among the Mourners every where, they have laid aside their own
concernments, and are seeking the things of Christ and Zion; if so, then hold
up your heads, The time of finding is come.

Fifthly, 5. Because Jesus Christ moves and intercedes for them.
Because the prayers of Saints are not only Rev. 8.3 4.
by Jesus Christ presented to the Father, and by him made a sweet sacrifice,
but likewise he himself moves and intercedes in their behalf. Thus Christ in
Heaven is as a Favorite at Court, takes our Petitions and speaks to them: So
says Paul, Romans 8.34.
He is at the right hand of God, making intercession for us: The Text carries
it, that he is in Heaven with his stripes, wounds, blood, death, setting them
before the eyes of his Father, and all for Zion. Some men after their
exaltation and preferment, forget their poor Brethren and old friends, (as
Pharaohs Butler forgot Joseph:) but Christ does not so, we are Son. 8.6.
as a seal set upon his heart, there he wears us, and keeps us, not only for an
ornament, and to show how precious he accounts us, but that we might be always
in his sight and remembrance.

The encouragement given us to come boldly to the Throne of Grace, is, Heb. 4.5.
For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted, yet without sin. There is no man
will prosecute a business for another so fully, as he that is tenderly affected
with the case. The troubles and distresses which are now upon Gods people for
poor Zion, are upon the heart of Christ, yea, and much more upon his heart then
theirs; and therefore doubtless, he will press home their SUITS in Heaven.
Besides, that which Adonijah said to Bathsheba, is most true of Christ: 1 Kin.
2.17.
The Father will not say him nay. Psa. 2.8.
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. A man will be the more willing
to help another, if he see himself concerned in the thing, and that it is his
own good that is desired. For whom do the faithful sigh and groan? Is it not
for Christ? as the Prophet says, Psa. 72.15.
Prayer shall be made for him continually. When they pray against Babylon,
Tyrants, Tryers, Lawyers, Soldiers; Is not this to pray for Christ? viz. That
his enemies may be made his footstool, Heb. 10.13.
(as he expects) and Rev. 11.15.
all the Kingdoms of the world become his, Ezekiel. 21* 27.
whose right it is. And what may we learn hence? Surely Christ will look after
the tears and cries of Mourners, because they are poured forth for his own
righteous cause.

Lastly, That Believers should come unto God by Christ, the holy Ghost gives
this reason Heb. 7.25
Seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Zech. 1.5.
Your Fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they live for ever? How often
comes it to pass that there is not a Moses to stand in the breach? Ezekiel. 22.30.
not a man to he found. Is it not now our sad complaint? Psa. 74.9
We see not our Signs, there is no more any Prophet, neither is there among us
any that knows how long. Nevertheless Jesus Christ our great High Priest
LIVES FOR EVER, and cease not to plead Zions Cause, (or his own Cause
rather) before the Throne. Isa. 63.16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not. Thou O Lord art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from
everlasting.

And here it falls in our way to discover the great presumption of Christ's
Enemies, Luke 19.27.
which will not that he should reign over them; But instead of exalting him,
seek to exalt themselves. It is much they are not afraid to take Christ's Name
in their mouth. For unto whom may they be likened? To a company of Usurpers,
who keeping an honest man out of his lawful possession, will yet go to him and
entreat him to assist him against himself. Surely he cannot but think they mock
him most grossly. I leave the application to such as will not that Rev. 11.17.
Christ should take to him his great power and reign; yet say, Lord, Lord.

Sixthly. 6. Because they seek him with the groanings of the Spirit.
Because they seek the face of God, with the groanings of the Spirit; And this
is to Jude 20.
pray in the Holy Ghost: i. e. when the Spirit works all our sighings,
wrestlings and strong cries. As the Master holding the Child's hand, what is so
written, is done by him, and he cannot but like it, because it is his own Act:
Thus in our sincere Mournings before the Lord: they must needs be accepted,
because they are Isa. 26.12.
the work of his own Hand; not our sighings and prayers, but as David said, 1 Chronicles- 29.14.
Of thine own have we given thee. When the Heavens and the Earth were finished,
and all the hosts of them, it is said, Genesis 1.31.
And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good. It
could not but be lovely, fair and excellent, being his own work-manship. Are
our Mournings the work of the Spirit? Surely then, as God sees them, they are
very good.

And this is matter of singular comfort and encouragement unto all Mourners in
Zion: What though their sighs and cries (as looked on by Enemies) are slighted
and scorned? Neh. 4.1, 2, 3.
What do those feeble Jews (Fifth Monarchy-men) will they fortify themselves?
do they think by their weeping to build Zion? Will they revive the stones of
the heaps of the rubbish which are burnt? Ah, ah, say they (poor deceived
people; that which they build by their praying and fasting, if a fox go up, he
shall even break down their stone wall. It is true, thus are our tears and
cries to God mocked and despised; but let us not be discouraged for all this,
remember (what was said) they are not our groanings, but the Spirit's and in
that regard, Psalm. 65.5.
by terrible things in righteousness, will thou answer us, O God of our
salvation. Romans 8.26, 17.
The Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for,
as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groans
which cannot be uttered. And he that searches the heart, knows what is the
mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to
the will of God: That is, we being weak, and prayer a great work, the Spirit
helps us to carry the Burden with us, and for us; and supplies our want of
knowledge, by prompting (as it were) our lesson unto us, to ask such things,
and in that manner as God requires and allows. Parents many times hear their
children sob and groan; but not knowing the cause thereof, cannot help them.
But the Lord knows the mind of the Spirit. Though we do but Isa. 38.13.
Chatter like a Crane or swallow, and mourn as a Dove; 1 Samuel 1.13.
Speak only in our hearts (like Hannah) and no voice is heard: This before the
Lord Psa. 142.2.
is as incense, an acceptable and well-pleasing sacrifice.

Quest. But how may we know the Groanings of the Spirit, from our own?

Answ. 1. Nothing will quiet the Spirit (as to cease groaning) but satisfaction
in the thing groaned for. Though Elkanah spoke comfortably to his wife, when he
said, 1 Samuel 1 8,
Am not I better to thee then ten sons? yet that would not help: she was in
bitterness of Soul before the Lord for a child, and nothing but a child will
comfort her. As Rachel said, Genesis 30.1.
Give me children or else I die; Thus it is with Saints groaning in the Spirit
for Zion, and the Great Name of God, and against the abominable Falsehood and
Hypocrisy of men. Their Souls Psa. 77.2.
refuse to be comforted, until the Lord graciously answer them here. I have
seen children cry and roar after a piece of money, but no sooner has a counter
or babble been put into their hand, but they had done crying, and all is quiet
and well again. What great mourning was there some few years since in Churches
and among professors, after righteousness and judgment, and to have all heavy
yokes broken? but now the Abby-key being found, and the fish caught; that is,
great places, Offices, and preferment gotten, we hear no more crying out
against oppression, all is quiet now, and well again; now they can hold their
peace, though the time be worse then before, in respect of the interest of
Christ and his People, and the public good of the Nations.

But what may we gather hence? They were not the Lords Remembrancers. Their
tears and groans were their own, and for their own interest, not the Spirit's,
and for the things of Christ: for had the Spirit set them on work, had they
been the Spirit's sighs and sobs for Zion, Isa. 62.6, 7.
they would not have held their peace day nor night, nor given the Lord rest,
UNTIL he had made Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth. 1 John 2.19.
If they had been of us, they would no doubt, have continued with us.

2. If they are the Groanings of the Spirit, nothing will be asked, but what is,
Romans 8 27
according to the will of God. Luke 22 42.
Not my will (says Christ) but thine be done. So again, Act. 21.14.
The will of the Lord be done. As a man that is doing something for a friend,
will endeavor to do it so, as the party for whom he does it, may like it, and
have content: thus it is with us, when the Spirit helps us with groanings
which cannot be uttered: We are all for pleasing God; we would not speak, nor
have our hearts move or think of any thing, but what the Lord should take
pleasure and delight in. It is true, Hypocrites can groan, and like Esau, will
beg blessings with tears; but observe this, it is to serve themselves upon the
L^^d, and to have their will done, whethe^ it be Gods will or no: thus they
will have the Lord to bless their Counsels and designs, though they are against
Himself, his Son, and Zion: so when they have Isa. 28.15.
made a Covenant with death, and with hell are at an agreement, then must
Priests and People be called together, to fast and pray, that it may prosper.

3. Spirit-Groanings are like 2 King. 2.11.
Elias chariot and horses of fire, carry the Soul into Heaven. It is the Glory
of God, which now is only eyed. As the Mariners needle always trembles and
shakes, till her point be toward the Pole: so it is with right Mourners, they
are not satisfied in weeping and sobbing before the Lord, unless they have the
sight of his glory; then they are quiet, seeing the mark they look after. When
the sun is risen, we see not a star in the Firmament: Reader, note it. What is
it when thou art in bitterness of Soul, that vanishes? Is it SELF? See thou
no Honor, Credit, Preferment, Relations, nor any other worldly Respects? See
thou the great Name of God, dearer to thee then thy soul? And for afflicted
Lam. 1.16.
Zion, thou weepest, thine eye, thine eye runs down with Tears. Bl^^sed art
thou that thus mournest; Isa. 57.1 P.
the Lord shall restore comfort to thee.

4. A man never sees more emptiness, unworthiness and poverty in himself, then
when he is under the strongest groanings of the Spirit; neither is his heart at
any time more broken then at the woeful sight thereof. Isa. 6.5.
Woe is me, I am undon etc. For mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts:
The Spirit in our mournings is 2 Pet. 1.19.
as a light that shines in a dark place. We did not think to have found such
nakedness and baseness as we do: Again, the Spirit-Groanings are like fire in
the Soul: such may the fire be, as it melts down Iron, breaks Rocks and Stones
asunder. It is a good sign a man is under the Mournings of the Spirit, when
finds his corruptions and lusts (hard as flint) to melt and break in pieces,
and by the power of the Spirit, consumed and brought to nothing.

The groaning of Hypocrites, is like the drawing of a Curtain, whereby things
are hid and covered: The more they weep, fast, and pray, the less fight have
they of their sins: For what is the reason some men see not so much evil in
their ways, now as they did some years past? I answer, in their fasting, and
praying ever since, they have been drawing curtains over their filthy sores:
Not but that they are far worse then they were; but they see it not, because of
their hypocritical Tears.

5. The Spirits Groanings leave two things (especially) upon the Soul. 1.
Refreshment: as when a man has eaten well, he finds his spirits strengthened
and comforted: But this is not so with unsound hearts. It is reported of
Witches, when they have eaten and drunk of the best, and to their thinking
largely, they find themselves presently in a condition ready to starve. Should
some men speak their experiences, they could not but confess, when they have
been some hours in prayer, and sighed often, they have been afterward no other
then like Pharaoh's lean and ill-favored kine, not had any soul-strengthning
or feeling refreshing at all.

2. The Soul is left in a sweet and blessed frame; as Wax that is soft, is fit
to take any impression: so is a Saint wrought up wholly for God; his will,
affections, desires, run out with Paul, Act. 9.6.
Lord what will thou have me to do? That is, I am ready to receive any truth,
and to deny my self in every thing, so that I may follow thee, and serve my
Generation.

It is a common saying (and I have heard it often) when some men talk of
fasting and prayer Now (say they) beware, there is some Plot or other in hand.
And usually it is so: For after the Formality of the work is over, their doings
are worse then ever; so far from Isa. 58.3, 4, 5, 6.
loosing the bonds of wickedness, and letting the oppressed go free, and
breaking every yoke, etc. as on the contrary they smite with the fist of
wickedness their fellow servants, and cast out their Brethren more cruelly then
before. But what says Solomon? Pro. 1.3.
To do Justice and Judgment, is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice,
Hos. 6.6.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice.

Seventhly, Because the Lord is teaching Zions Mourners the ART OF SEEKING.
Because the Lord is teaching the art of seeking.
You know by long practice and use, a man becoms expert and skilful in a trade,
especially having a good master. This benefit (through Grace) some of the Lords
people have received, since the Apostasy, came up; namely, they have been
learning the Art of Prayer: for not only of late years, have they been more
frequent in the practice, but have gotten more experience of the thing then
ever they had before.

According to the Scriptures, men must pray Mar. 11.24.
in faith: Jam. 5.16.
with fervency and earnestness: Ephesians. 6.18.
watching thereunto with all perseverance: Luke 18.1.
and not faint. If thousands had thrown stones at Goliath, and bigger then
David's was, and hit him too; yet I question, whether he had fallen: but that
STONE which went out of David's sling, sunk 1 Samuel 17.49.
into his forehead, and he fell down dead upon the earth. The Lord has some (I
hope many) in the Nation, who are going (as so many DAVID'S) against the
Philistine (Babylon and all her Brats and Props.) And howsoever he is cursing
them by his gods, and laughs to see nothing in their hands, but a sling and
stone; only sighs and groanings: yet let this HEAVEN-DARING GIANT know, that
the Little Stone which he derides, (faith and prayer) shall within a little
while, sink into his forehead, and the MONSTER shall fall, and his flesh be
given to the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field; Verse 47.
That all the Earth may know that there is a God in Israel.

I well remember in the time of the Bishops, when there rose up any cruel
Persecutor, the good old Puritants would say one to another, Come let us pray
this enemy of our Lord Jesus Christ and his people to death. And I could give
some memorable instances, what a wonderful Return of prayer they had, i. e. how
the revenging hand of God smote the Enemies, sometimes dead immediately upon
the sighings and groanings of his people against them: a warning to all new
Persecutors to look about them: Sions children are crying day and night unto
God against them; and they have learnt now, the Art of praying, never to be
silent, till they have prayed them to death, that is, prevailed with the Lord
to execute upon them the judgment written.

CHAP. V. That there will be a Time of Finding, because of the good Things
prayed for.
A time of finding, because of the good things prayed for.
WHatsoever the Lord in his word promises to give, that we may ask, and shall
surely have it: so says the Apostle, 1 John 5.14, 15.
If we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. No child could
better love a mother, then Solomon loved Bathsheba; and there was no reasonable
thing, but she might have had it of him. Nevertheless when she came to speak
unto him 1 King 2.21, 22.
for Adonijah, (who had usurpt the Kingdom) he not only denied her, but gave
her a close reproof. Though they are the Lords own people, yet when they will
take that boldness, as to pray for Traitors and Covenant-breakers, and that
Hypocrites may reign, and that the Lord will bless their Councels, Armies,
Navies; I tell you, the Lord does not take it well at their hands, neither
shall they have a time of finding: Psa. 80.4.
But will be angry against the prayer of his people. 1 Cor. 14.15.
I will pray (says Paul) with the Spirit, and I will pray with understanding
also. So in another place: Psa. 14.2.
If there are any that understand and seek God: Intimating these must be joined
together, viz. an understanding-seeking of God. A man out of his way, the
faster he goes, the farther off he is from the place where he should be. So for
men to ask things altogether contrary to the express word of God; to wit, for
Babylon, the Little Horn, and bottomless Beast, and that Satan may not be bound
up, but reign and prevayl still in his wicked and murtherous instruments:
surely this must needs be out of Gods way, and not the way to find him, but
rather a great provocation.

Quest. But do any pray for Babylon, and that Satan may prevayl still in his
destroying instruments?

I answer: Most do so, but under another name: the Zion they pray for, is
indeed Babylon; the Ministry and Magistracy which they cry up, and call Lawful,
is Antichristian and sinful: thus Mal. 3.15
They call the proud happy, and they that work wickedness are set up. But how
set up? The Priests plead for them, and pray for them, and so make their
Building strong, (as the Hebr. reads) by Isa. 66.3.
blessing an Idol. If dung or trash should be presented to a Prince, yet so, as
under the name of rich Pearls and jewels, would he accept of it (knowing what
it is) because it is brought to him not as dung, but pearls of great Price?
Mal. 1.14.
I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and cursed be the deceiver. Isa.
5.20.
Woe to them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light,
etc. But indeed these deceitful workers cannot deceive God; men they do, and
their own souls likewise, as they will see ere long, to their bitterness and
shame.

The good things prayed for.
Quest. But what are the good things which the Lords people are asking
according to the will of God, and wait for a time of finding?

Answ. 1. That the Lord will remember his Great Name, and suffer it not any
longer to lie under reproach and blasphemy; but arise, and show forth his
Power, Faithfulness, Mercy and Judgment, in reviving his work in the midst of
us, Mat. 6.9. 1 Cor. 10.31. Exodus 32.12. Number. 14.13, 14. Josh. 7.9. Psalm
83.17, 18. Hab. 3.2.

2. That Jesus Christ (Heir of all things) may have his right and possession:
That is, that all corrupt powers on earth may be broken to pieces, His Enemies
made his Footstool, and he alone exalted, and the only Potentate, Psalm. 2.8.
and 72.8, 15. Dan. 2.34, 35. and 7.14. Luke 19.12. Obad. 21. Rev. 11.15, 17.
Isa. 2.11, 12. etc. Heb. 10.13. 1 Timothy 6.14, 15.

3. That Jehovah (the Judge of all the earth) would lift up himself, and in
some way or other make it publicly appear, who are faithful to him, and who
are the Apostates which have betrayed the interest of Christ and his people,
Psalm. 94.2. 1 King 18.36, 37, etc. 1 Samuel 14.12. Mal. 3.18. Psalm. 99.6.8. Number.
16.16, 17. and 17.5, 8, 9. Genesis 18.25.

4. That the Lord will speedily avenge the blood of his servants shed upon
Babylon, and take vengeance on all Civil Powers, for their oppression and
cruelty against the Lords servants, and bring in the great day of Deliverance
and Restoration to the whole Creation, Psalm. 74.2, 18, 22. Jer. 51.35. Deuteronomy.
32.35, 41, 43. Psalm. 94.1. Jer. 50.15. Isa. 34.4, 5. and 47, 34. Luke 18.7, 8.
Rev. 18.5. Act. 3.21. Romans 8.19, 20, 21.

5. That the Lord Ha^. 3.2.
in wrath will remember mercy, 1. In finding out and punishing ACHANS and
TROVBLERS, that none (innocent) may suffer for the rebellion and Apostacy of
others, Number. 16.22. Josh. 7.24, 25. Genesis 18.23, 24. Psalm. 125.4, 5. Isa. 3.10,
11. and 33.14, 15. etc. Psalm. 32.6, 7. 2. That the Lord will be merciful to his
people in BABYLON, as he was to Lot in SODOM, and bring them forth, that they
be not partakers of her plagues, Genesis 19.16. Rev. 18.4. Zach. 3.2. 2 Timothy 3.2,
3, 5. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.

6. That the fullness of the Gentiles may come in, and all Israel be saved,
Psalm. 67.2. Genesis 49.10. Hab. 2.14. Isa. 25.7. and 32.6. and 35.6. and 43.19.
Hos. 1.10, 11. and 3.5. Romans 11.25, 26.

7. Whereas men's rebellion against the Lord, and their opposing HIS WORK, WAYS,
KINGDOM and PEOPLE, is carried on under fair pretenses, whereby many in their
simplicity are led aside into great transgression against Jesus Christ, Their
prayer is, that all such liars, and dissembling Hypocrites may daily be more
discovered, and their designs broken, by some signal appearing of the Lord
against them, Number. 16.15. Psalm. 55.12, 15. Hos. 11.12. Ps. 140.8, 11. Isa.
27.3. 1 Samuel 15.17, 18. with Chap. 18.14.

8. As they cannot hold their peace for ZIONS SAKE, so the Lord is earnestly
called upon, 1. that he will REMEMBER HER TREACHEROVS AND FALSE FRIENDS, viz.
Church Members, Professors, Soldiers, Lawyers; all such as have basely
betrayed her to the ENEMY: Lam. 1.2. Psalm. 41.9. and 55.12, 15. 2 Samuel 15.31.
Jer. 18.20.

2. Not to forget the reproach and scandal which she suffers, by reason of
their abominable hypocrisy and falsehood: having rendered the very NAME OF
RELIGION odious to them that are without. Lam. 2.15. Romans 2.14. Isa. 52.5.
Ezekiel. 36.20, 26. Genesis 32.30. Eccl. 10.1. Amos 4.10. 3. That the temptations and
afflictions now upon her may thoroughly cleanse her, and make her meet for the
masters use, Isa. 1.25. Mal. 3.5. Dan. 11, 35. 2 Timothy 2.21. 4. That the Lord
will turn unto her a pure language, heal all breaches and divi^ions, that so
her Children may serve him with one consent. Zech. 3.9. 1 Cor. 1.10. Isa.
11.13. Psalm. 134.1. Act. 2.1. 5. That the Spirit from on High may be poured out
upon all her Sons and daughters, whereby their understanding may be opened to
know all things, Joel. 2.28, 29. Act. 1.4. Luke 24.49. Dan. 12.10. Amos 3.7.
Rev. 22.10. Ioh. 14.16, 26. 1 Ioh. 2.20.

6. That she may have her Judges restored as at the first, and Pastors after
GODS OWN HEART. Hence the Lord is daily called upon to pluck up by the roots all
false Offices, Ministries, Callings, Administrations and Maintenance, both new
and old, Isa. 1.26. Ier. 3.15. and 23.4. Ezekiel. 34.25. Mat. 15.13. Hos. 2.16,
17. Zech. 13.2. and 14.20, 21. Rev. 18.21. etc.

Lastly, seeing it will be a great and dreadful day, when the Lord shall answer
the prayers of his people, Even burn like an Oven; and who shall stand when God
does this? therefore is the Lord entreated to be so gracious unto his LITTLE
ONES, as they may not be offended in what way or manner soever his great work
comes forth, but may be prepared to meet the Lord, and counted worthy to follow
him, Mal. 4.1. Number. 24.23. Isa. 22.18, 19. and 25.9. 1 John 2.18. Luke 21.36.
Amos 4.12. These are the things which the faithful of the Land are praying for,
and the Apostates scoffing at. But it is not their derision can make the
promise of God of no effect, Luke 21.33.
Heaven and Earth (says Christ) shall pass away, but my words shall not, pass
away.

CHAP. VI. Reasons, Wherefore the Lord will not be found of some People, though
they call upon him in the Time of trouble.
Reasons why no time of finding. 1. Because in their prosperity they will not
know the Lord.
First, BEcause in their prosperous condition, when they Deuteronomy. 32.15.
are grown thick, and covered with fatness, they will not know the Lord. But
Psa. 75.5.
speak with a stiff-neck. Job. 21.14, 15.
What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we
have, if we pray unto him? we desire not the knowledge of his ways, etc. Some
people in seeking God are like a sort of Beggars, who standing at your door,
will tell you, they make not a trade of begging, neither do they come often,
and had it not been for necessity, they would not have troubled you at this
time. Are there not many (should they speak truth) must confess, this is their
very case; they make no trade of begging, unless they are in some want: Psalm.
10. ^.
God is not in all their thoughts; neither would they seek him in their
troubles at all, if they knew how to be helped without him. No doubt in the
days of Noah, when the waters came and took away the wicked people out of
their houses and beds; yea, fetched them off from the high hills and mountains,
where they fled for safety, there was bitter mourning and crying to the Lord,
but all in vain; as they would not know him in their prosperity, so now he will
not deliver them, when Job 27.9.
Fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon them. Job says, God will not hear
the hypocrite, when trouble comes upon him: that is, seeing he calls not upon
God (unless it be deceitfully and mockingly) but when great distress is upon
him, therefore he shall be left to the destroyer, and no eye shall pity him.
Hence it is, that the Scriptures speak of Isa 55.6.
Seeking the Lord while he may be found, and while he is near: and 2 Cor. 6.2.
of the time accepted: and Heb. 3.15.
while it is called to day: denoting, that men may forfeit their time, and come
after the Gate of Grace is shut. And if so, then no time of finding.

Besides, the Lord takes it as not sought unto, nor called upon, when men only
cry to him in time of trouble. It is said of Saul, 1 Chr. 10.14.
He enquired not of the Lord, therefore he slew him: yet in another place it
is, 1 Samuel 28.6.
When Saul enquired of the Lord, the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams,
nor Vrim, nor by Prophets: the meaning is, when Saul knew not what to do, but
saw the wrathful hand of God ready to cut him off by the Philistims, then (like
a malefactor going to execution,) He enquires of the Lord; but this the
Holy Ghost calls, not enquiring, because it was only for his own end; and till
great distress came upon him, he regarded not the Lord, but had cast him off,
and sought himself in every thing. The fox in a snare, looks wishly, hangs the
head, will sigh extremely, and you may see tears fall from his eyes; but all
this will not serve his turn, nor save him from being knocked on the head.
Reader, should thou live to see an OLD HYPOCRITE under Divine wrath, thou
would see him just like a fox in a trap, his countenance altered, groan and
sigh, as if his heart would break, and tears at command. I have sinned, I have
sinned, (will the OLD FOX say) in betraying that INNOCENT CAUSE. But the Lord
will neither trust him, nor believe him any more; his day is now come, in which
the Judge of all the earth will pay him home, for all his former craft and
falsehood. So let all thy enemies perish O God. Judge. 5.31.

Secondly, Because they Isa. 8.12.
say, Because of their sinful places and standings in Babylon and the last
Apostasy.
A Conspiracy; that is, mix themselves with the unhallowed lump, keep
unsanctified places and standings, in Babylon, and the last Apostasy, and so 2 Timothy 3.5.
not separated from the corruptions and evils of the time: 2 Cor. 6 -- 17, 18.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a father
unto you, etc. Plainly showing, unless we forbear to Exodus 23.2.
follow the multitude, or, Great men: Rev. 18.4.
Come out of Babylon: Ephesians. 5.11.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness: And Number. 16.27.
depart from the tents of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and all such wicked men,
the Lord will not be a Father to us, in answering our cries, when calamities
and troubles are upon us. What the Lord may do in respect of his unbounded
bowels, and free grace, Psalm. 131.2.
it is a thing too high for us. For he is many times better then his promise,
and above it. But this I say: So long as men wrap themselves in the sin and
guilt of others, plead for Baal, and endeavor to strengthen Tyrants in
oppression and blood, follow Balak (as Balaam did) for the wages of iniquity;
these cannot (thus doing) by any Scripture-promise, expect a time of finding: I
speak of a temporal deliverance, as to be Zeph. 2.1, 2, 3.
hid in the day of the Lords anger.

There is a twofold separation which the Lord requires of his people at this
time. 1. From things. 2. From persons. And the followers of the Lamb they do
both. Rev. 14.3.
They are redeemed from the earth; that is, from the carnal Church-Ministry,
worship, and Government; they will not communicate in any of their devised
service, forms, customs, administrations, nor contribute any thing to their
maintenance. Numb. 7.3, 5. Neh. 10.23, 39. Likewise, Ver. 4.
They are redeemed from among men: who these men are, the Apostle shows, viz.
the Apostates in the last days: MEN, that shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, proud, etc. from such turn aside. 2 Timothy 1.2, 5.

Charles 9. having a petition brought to him from the Admiral Chastillon, he
refused to receive it, saying, If he will forsake the Rebels (meaning the
Protestants) and come to us, we will hear him: but so long as he encourages
the enemy, we will receive none of his Petitions. I wish with my Soul, that
some eminent professors would lay things to heart: How can they think that the
Lord will receive any of their Petitions, if not only they abide with his
Enemies, and take their part openly against him, but seek to strengthen and
maintain (what they can) the greatest revolt that ever was made against Jesus
Christ? It is said, Genesis 6.8.
But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord: Why Noah more then others? why
was the Lord better to him then to a whole world? He was Genesis 7.1.
A SEPARATIST, and a strict one too; for he made conscience of his ways, and
wherein he saw others differed from truth and righteousness, therein he
differed from them.

Qu. But why are not many professors Separatists ( like Noah) now, so to have a
time of finding when the Flood comes?

Answ. To speak my thoughts, it is because of Self-love and Covetousness: These
2 Timothy 2.2, 3, etc.
two great leading sins (like two huge Beasts) open a wide Gap to the rest of
the sins in the last Apostacy, 1 Timothy 6.10.
For the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows. Howbeit in some ground there are ill Weeds of several sorts; yet
commonly there are one or two rifer and ranker then others. I am the more
confirmed to think the last Apostacy is come, not only because all the Weeds
appear foretold, but that Self-seeking and Covetousness, first named, are
higher and ranker then the rest.

The Story of the Usurer may fitly come in here: when he went abroad, people
pointed at him, and shook their heads; whereby he knew his way and trade was
generally disliked: this sorely vexed him, until he came home, and saw his
Bags; then he would laugh, and say to himself, Ha, ha, Now let them laugh at
me, here is that makes a mends for all: and thus his grief was over. I know, it
does many times extremely trouble some professors to hear and see what they do:
That is, how they are condemned by all faithful people, for serving the lusts
of men; and for countenancing Covenant-breakers, and such as have betrayed the
glorious Cause of Christ. This (I say) vexes them at the heart; and the more,
because their Consciences cannot but check them for building again the things
which they destroyed. Notwithstanding, when they come home, and see the BAG,
Act. 19.25
what WEALTH IS GOTTEN BY THIS CRAFT, so much honor and preferment at Court,
such a gainful place in the Army, so much per ann. in the College, such a fat
living or augmentation in the Country; besides the pride and gallantry of their
Wives and Children, all Ladies and Prince-like: Ha, ha, (say they) now let them
laugh: what care we for the FIFTH MONARCHY-MEN, or their witness against us?
they call us Time-servers, Turn-coates, Court-flatterers, and such as will
crouch for a morsel of bread. But these High Places, Offices and preferment,
make us amends sufficiently. Besides, what can their poor 1 Samuel 22.7.
son of Iesse do for us? But let them take this into the BAG too: As the
Partridge sits on eggs, Jer. 17.11.
and hatcheth them not, so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall
leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. Nurses
count them good Children which though they are ready to cry at every turn, yet
are easily quieted with some toy. The Devil is little troubled that men do weep
and cry now and then, and are sometimes prick's at the heart for their corrupt
walking; so that for a little honor, pleasure, profit, and such like toys,
their consciences are soon quieted. Again, I speak not this, as taking delight
to discover the nakedness of professors: the Lord knows, my desire is, That
Jer. 15.19.
the precious might be separated from the vile, and that none of Gods elect
among the Back-sliders might be partakers of their plagues. And therefore in
the Bowels of Jesus, I beseech them to Consider,

1. What a sad thing it is, that men not 2 John 8.
looking to themselves, should lose those things that they have wrought, and
not receive a full reward. I have thought sometimes of Ioabs case, after he had
fought many Battles; yea, the Lords Battles, ah, that his gray hairs should go
to the grave under so much scandal and dishonor: But more sad is their case,
who having opposed the Prelates, and fought valiantly for the truth; yea, (some
of them) left their Country for the Gospels sake, should now for looking back,
Eze. 13.9.
Not be in the Assembly of Gods people, neither written in the writing of the
House of Israel, neither enter into the Land of Israel, nor be mourned for as
the prophets were, Oh my Father, my Father, Jer. 22.18, 19.
ah his Glory.

But, 2. And this I wish that they would seriously lay to heart, viz. how the
dishonor of Gods great Name occasioned by this late Apostacy, lies
principally at their door. Our holy profession had never been rendered so odious
as it is, if Professors and Church Members had not been. Hence it is, when
some have been told of breaking their promises and e^gagements, and casting off
the Lords work, and setting up their own interest: to name such and such
professors and Church Officers who went along with them, as if they did
nothing without their counsel and encouragement. The old Non-conformists were
wont to say of the Conformable Ministers, that, The best were the worst;
meaning, those who subscribed to the Prelates, and used the Service and
Ceremonies of the Church, (though otherwise good men) did more hinder the work
of Reformation, and harden ignorant people in Error and Superstition then,
then all the ignorant and scandalous Priests of the Nation. And questionless it
was so. And what may we say of the present Conformists? The best are the worst.
For howsoever in many things they walk better then the rest, and we hope better
things of them as to their Soul-state; Yet considering how they have left the
Lords work, and are fallen in with a worldly interest, and what evil
Instruments they have been in obstructing the good old cause, in these respects
and such like, it may be fairly asserted, The best are the worst; I say, the
professor worse then the profane, and Church Officers worse then the ignorant
and scandalous Parish Priest; especially if it be minded, how many Simple
hearts in City and Country have been deceived by these men, and hindered from
being faithful to Jesus Christ in their Generation-work. I shall conclude in
Paul's words, 1 Cor. 3.13, 15.
Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it. Because
it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work of what
sort it is, etc. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he
himself shall be saved: yet so, as by fire. What this fire means, is worthy of
Consideration.

Thirdly, No time of finding, because Isa. 1.15. and 59.2.
their hands are full of Blood. 3. Because their hands are full of blood.
The Hebrew has Bloods, signifying how the Priests and False-prophets, by
their flatteries and lies, destroyed the Souls of the people; and the Rulers,
their bodies and estates, by oppression and cruelty. But the Allusion which the
prophet here uses, notably sets forth the impudent boldness of these men: It
is taken from a Murderer, who having washed his hands in innocent Blood, comes
and shows them to the Judge, as taking delight to have them seen in that Bloody
color. Much blood, precious blood was spilt in the late wars: the which some
men by their falsehood and breach of promise have not only contracted to
themselves, but bring their bloody hands to the Altar, lifting them up before
the Lord, Angels and men, as glorying (it seems) there lies the guilt of so
much blood upon them.

I cannot forget David's example: when they brought unto him the water of the
well of Bethlem, 2 Samuel 23.16, 17.
He would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the Lord, saying, Be it far
from me, O Lord, that I should do this: is not this the blood of the men that
went in jeopardie of their lives? therefore he would not drink of it. It were
well if some men's hearts would smite them as David's did. David's worthies only
jeoparded their lives; no blood was spilt: but many of the Lords worthies in
the late wars, did more then jeopard their lives, for they lost them in the
high places of the field. But has their Blood been poured out to the Lord, (as
David did the water?) I ask again, Has it? or rather, have not some men drunk
it themselves? And with this blood purchase Courts, Titles, Superiority; with
this blood clothe themselves and families (like the Glutton) Lu. 16.19.
in purple and fine linen, and fare sumptuously every day: Do they not with
this BLOOD persecute the very cause and interest of Christ for which it was
spilt? yea more, do they not with this BLOOD build again that cursed Ierico, by
which it was overthrown? Hab. 2.12
Woe to him that builds a Town with blood, and stablisheth a City by
iniquity. Nah. 3.1.
Woe to the bloody City, it is full of lies and robbery, and the prey departs
not.

As such men are unlike David, so like Nero and Julian the Apostate, for all
the world. The first having killed his own mother, persuaded the people (publica
fortuna extinctam) that she was put to death for the public good of the State.
The other, when he opened the temples of the Pagan gods, and repaired their
Altar, it was (securitas reipublicae) for the safety of the Commonwealth: have
there been none since, having murdered the Commonwealth, in her Laws,
Liberties, Privileges, etc. and re-established old Popish Idols, would make
the Simple believe all is done for the public good and safety of the people?
Psalm. 120.3.
What shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue?

But to return to our Prophet: howsoever both Priests and Princes have their
hands full of blood; yet they Isa. 1.18.
make many prayers: multiply prayer, says the margin. Hence observe, 1. No
people are Mica. 6.6, 7.
more forward in outward services, then Hypocrites and Apostates: for when they
have cast off the power of Godliness, they will be the more busy about the
form. 2. Whilst men's hands are full of blood, there is no Time of finding,
though they multiply prayer. This later is plain in David's case: Psalm. 32.2, 3.
etc.
All the while he kept silence, and acknowledged not his sin (which doubtless
was blood) his Psalm. 51.8.
Bones were broken, and waxed old, and his moisture was turned into the drought
of summer; that is, he could hear of no joy and gladness, but lay roaring under
pangs of conscience, having the strength of body and soul consumed, through
grief and mourning: if it were thus with David, for one man's blood, what may we
think of their case, who (by power and policy) shall wrap themselves in the
guilt and blood of many thousands; yea, more, Heb. 6.6.
Shall crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame;
that is, shall treacherously murder Jesus Christ in his righteous cause: and
which is more, shall deride and mock the Lords people, and persecute them, if
they speak against them for such things?

Fourthly, Because of men's allowing themselves in some known wickedness. 4
Because of men's allowing themselves in some know a wickedness.
Psalm. 66.18.
If I regard wickedness in my heart (says David) the Lord will not hear me.
Observe, 1. He does not say, If there be iniquity in my heart, but, if I regard
it; that is, delight in it, and allow it, and would have it abide there as a
friend and beloved. Hence we may see a difference between a sincere Christian,
and a corrupt heart. A sheep by occasion may fall into mire and dirt; but he
likes not to be there, he likes not the place; whereas a swine in dirt, is
where he would be: it is true, the choysest Christians are sometimes overtaken,
and yet through Grace, they can say, We know nothing by our selves; that is, no
evil which (knowingly) they approve of: but what God loves, they love, and what
he hates they hate, whatsoever they know to be a duty and truth, they will do,
and what is evil and sinful forsake. If you cast stones or gravel into a
fountain, the water becomes thick and muddie: but within a little while, it
purges it self again, and is clear and sweet as before. So a good man, by
reason of temptations, is sometimes troubled, and passions rise in him: but
through the power of Grace, he is soon restored to his former sweet and holy
walking. But with the wicked it is not so: his heart Isa. 56.20.
is like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest: always casting up mire and
dirt. Job 20.12, 13.
Wickedness is sweet to him: he keeps it within his mouth. As men to keep their
goods, have strong walls and doors about their houses; so have Reigning
Hypocrites about them: some to write for them, others to preach for them: some
to fight for them; and all is, that the Hypocrites GOODS may not be lost: to
wit, his pomp, pride, oppression, etc.

Quest. But how may it be known when a man regards iniquity in his heart?

Answ. 1. When he corrupts men Mat. 28.12, 13, 14.
by gifts and preferment, to defend his unrighteous doings.

2. Esth. 3.8, 9. etc.
When he fears not to commit the greatest sin, so he may satisfy his will and
lust.

3. When he will 1 Kin. 21.9.

Jer. 41.6.


fast, and pray, and weep, that he may the sooner effect his wicked designs.

4. When 1 Kin. 22.8.
he counts such his greatest enemies, who deal plainest with him about his foul
miscarriages.

5. Isa. 3.9.
When no thing will make him blush or ashamed.

But secondly, This regarding iniquity is in the heart. The Scibes and
Pharisees outwardly seemed to be good men, religious and devout, (like the
Hypocrites of our time) but Christ who knew their heart, showed what they were:
A brood of Vipers, painted sepulchers, their inward parts very rottenness. The
Wood-picker (a little Bird) when she is seeking a place to breed in, lights on
the side of a Tree, and with her Bill gives a knock; if she perceive the same
to be hollow, then to work she goes, and with her Bill makes a little hole in
the Tree, through which she creeps into the hollow part, and there builds her
Nest, lays her eggs, and hatcheth her young ones. The Devil is like this Bird:
when he comes to a professor, and by knocking him with preferment and profit,
finds he is hollow-hearted, there he falls to work, and in he goes; here he
has his Nest, eggs, and young ones. And in truth, never had he entered into so
many professors, (as of late he has done) but that after a little KNOCKING,
(all this will I give thee) he perceived they were hollow: I say,
HOLLOW-HEARTED, notwithstanding their oaths, vows and engagements: neither was
he deceived, (as we see by sad experience) for he has found room enough in
that hollow and rotten part, to build his Nest, and hatch his young ones. But
what says Christ of such people? Mat. 12.43, 44, 45.
The last state of them is worse then the first. There is little hope for men
to have a time of finding, so long as Satan has his Nest, eggs and birds in
them.

Fifthly, Should some men be spared, it would encourage them to go on in their
sinful ways; they would presume, 5. Because if spared, they would presume, g^ow
more confident and vile.
grow more confident and vile, if possible. Had not Pharaoh and his host
perished in the Red Sea, they would have been more inhumane and cruel then ever
before. Eccl. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the
heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil: that is, because the
judgment of God is so long put off, wicked men plead as it were a prescription
of impunity; and persuading themselves, that the execution of the sentence
(which is so long delayed) will never be laid on them, hence are hardened and
made worse in their sinful courses. In the Hebrew Text, their heart is full to
do evil: that is, full of evil purposes, full of wicked imaginations, cursed
plots and devises for the bringing forth the works of darkness; so full, that
there is no room for the fear of Gods wrath, no room for the consideration of
their own danger, no room for the apprehension of their falsehood, hypocrisy,
backsliding, whereby to restrain them in any measure; but they run with a full
stream into the practice of all kind of wickedness.

It is true, Psa. 7.11.
God is angry (or angerly threatens) with the wicked every day: the sentence
against every evil work, is already given: but because the execution is
deferred, because wickedness is not fo^thwith checked, blamed, punished, men
think they shall be longer licensed in sinning. As the Stars, though in
themselves very great, yet being seen a far off, seem to be little: So
Apostates, and other ungodly people, persuading themselves the day of vengeance
is a long time to come, they are little or nothing moved by it: if we bring
this home to the sinners of our time, we shall have ground to believe that
their judgment is nigh.

For, 1. The Lord having through infinite clemency, forborne them a while, and
not fallen presently upon them, they are become 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.
the Scoffers in Peter, and Jer. 5.12, 13.
have belied the Lord, and said, It is not he, neither shall evil come upon us,
neither shall we see sword or famine. And the Prophets shall become wind, and
the word is not in them; that is, mock at Gods menaces, and jest at his
judgments, as things that never shall come to pass and be effected. As Agag,
when he saw he was not cut off with the rest of the Amalekites, concludes, 1 Samuel 15.32.
Surely, the bitterness of death is past: So because they were not swept away
in such a month or such a year, what say they now? Eze. 12.22.
The days are prolonged, and every vision fails. Because they do not
immediately see the whole Prophesies accomplished, (concerning the Little Horn,
the Last Apostasy, and the Beast which ascends out of the bottomless pit)
they contemn them, and laugh at them, as though they should never be fulfilled;
and say, Jer. 7.10.
We are delivered to do all these abominations. Though we have done such things
(sworn falsely, and betrayed the interest of Christ and his people) and have
been grievously threatened for the same; yet we are delivered from their
THREATENING TESTIMONY, and are well, safe, and without fear or danger, and shall
go on, and prosper still; yea, (and which is more) they Amos 5.18.
Desire the day of the Lord; In a profane boldness provoke and dare the Lord to
bring that once to pass, which he has so long threatened. Where are his Jer.
51.20.
Battle-axes: the Rev 15.1.
vial-Angels: Isa. 27.1.
his sore great and strong sword: Isa. 8.19.
Let him make speed, and hasten his work that we may see it, and let the
Counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh, and come, that we may know it.

2. Judgment not being speedily executed, What is the evil that their heart is
full of? Luke 14.14.
We will not have this man to reign over us. The war now is (like that of the
Old Giants) against Heaven, against God and Christ, how to Psalm. 2.3.
Break their bonds asunder, and cast their cords from them. As Herod no sooner
heard Mat. 2.2, 13.
of one born King of the Jews, but immediately he sought the young Child's
life to destroy him. The very rumor of Christ's coming forth to reign, and to
break all corrupt powers, makes Tyrants mad, and it is their greatest care and
study how to prevent him.

But 3. And let it be heeded, when men are emboldned and made worse, because
judgment is delayed; this shows not only that Jer. 5.14, 15.
Divine wrath is very nigh at hand, but it shall rest and abide upon them, Isa.
5.25.
till they are consumed to ashes (as fire does wood) No time of finding, Amos
5.21. Jer. 7.16.
for their prayers, cries and tears the Lord hates and despises.

Sixthly, 6. God is many ways glorified when corrupt men have not a time of
finding.
It is much to the praise and Glory of God, when Apostates, Hypocrites, and
other corrupt people, have not a time of finding.

Quest. Wherein is the Lord honored, not being found of his people?

Answ. 1. In vindicating his Justice, Providence, and Great Name. 1. In
vindicating his providence and great Name.
When God is silent, and spares Hypocrites, Psa. 50.2 i.
They think him like themselves, altogether as they are. As the Tyrant having
a safe passage homeward, thought the gods well pleased with his robbery: Thus
do wicked men; if they prosper in unrighteous ways, or see others prosper
therein: Psa. 119.70.
Their heart is as fat as grease; and are ready to say, Zeph. 1.12.
The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil: nay, they begin to call in
question his Justice and Providence. Mat. 2.17.
Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights
in them; that is, accepts and approves of the wicked, justifies them; yea
more, takes pleasure in them. How many in these late years, by their
Atheistical conceits, and blasphemous speeches, have wearied and vexed the
Lord! and whence has it risen? Ibid.
Where is the God of Judgment? As if there were no Providence, no God that did
judge and govern things upon earth, because he does not presently punish the
workers of iniquity. As one not long since most blasphemously said, If he be a
God, why does he not show his judgment upon such a one? I could name both. Now
howsoever many reasons might be given for the prosperity of the wicked, and
their impunity, yet doubtless, the glory of God is exceedingly manifested in
his Government and Administration, when he breaks the power of the proud, and
makes them like ashes under the soles of his feet. Rev. 15.4.
Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? etc. for thy judgments
are made manifest. By that revenging stroke from Heaven which reached Julian
the Apostate, many who formerly had spoken wickedly of Christ, repented, and
acknowledged their blasphemy, and gave glory to him. In some such way (I am
persuaded) will the Lord vindicate his Providence and Justice; namely, by
making SOME MEN public Examples of his wrath: such I mean, who by their
false-swearing, and horrible hypocrisy (and prospering a while therein) have
occasioned many to have had hard thoughts of God: WHERE IS THE GOD OF JVDGMENT?

Memorable is that story of Amurath at the battle of Varna: when he saw the
slaughter of his men, and all things brought into extreme danger, he plucked
out of his bosom the writing wherein the late League was comprised; and holding
it up in his hand, with his eyes lift up to heaven, said, Behold thou crucified
Christ, this is the League thy Christians in thy name made with me; and they
have without cause violated: Now if thou be God, as they say thou art, and as
we dream, revenge the wrong now done unto thy Name and me, and show thy power
upon thy perjurious people, who in their deeds deny thee their God. Was a Turk
heard against Idolaters, for Covenant Breaking, And will not the Lord much more
bow his ear to the strong cries of his children, holding up in their hands the
Protestations, Vows, and solemn Engagements (not of Papists, but) of great
professors, which they publicly have broken with God and men; when they shall
say, (as still they do) Behold Lord, see here, these are the Oaths,
Attestations and promises, which thy great professors have made with thee, and
for the interest of thy Son and Zion; and without any cause (but to satisfy
their own lusts) they have violated: Now therefore, as thou art a jealous God,
and tender of thy great Name, Glory, Providence; so show thy great Power, upon
these false and dissembling people, who in their works deny thee their God?

2. By making himself known in his truth and cause.
Secondly, By making himself gloriously known in his truth and cause. That Saul
had no time of finding, but was left of God in the day of distress; this made
way for David's kingdom: So when Tyrants are broken in their power and
Government, it is in order to the exalting of Jesus Christ in his kingdom and
rights. Psalm. 9.16.
The Lord is known by the judgments which he executes: and till then, his Name
is not feared, his truth and cause denied, and his honor is laid in the dust.
But when the Lord, by destroying the enemies of his Glory, shall put a Crown
upon his GOOD OLD CAUSE: then it shall be said, Psa. 58.11.
Verily he is a God that judges in the earth. And Isa. 46.9.
there is none else. And Deuteronomy. 33.29.
the enemies (as Lawyers, Priests, Soldiers, and Apostate-professors) shall be
found liars. Eze. 6.14.
I will stretch out my hand upon them, and make the Land desolate; yea, more
desolate then the wilderness toward Diblath in all their habitations. But what
will the Lord get by this? And they shall know that I am the Lord. As if he
should say, Their loss shall be my gain; their fall, my rising: for whereas by
their Covenant Breaking, and horrible Apostacy, they have brought my Name and
Glory under reproach; I will recover all again upon their mine.

Was not the Lord eminently known in this Nation, when he executed judgment
upon the King and Prelates, and that party? To my knowledge, Esth. 8.17.
the fear of Gods people fell upon the Nations about us: and they confessed the
Lord had done great things for us, and began to enquire after our good cause,
and had honorable thoughts of it. But true it is, since this unblessed
Apostacy came up, (occasioned by professors) they judge otherwise both of us
and it. As for the English professors, they call them, A pack of dissemblers;
their profession, falsehood and craft; and the good old Cause (so signally owned
by the Lord) they spurn at it; nay more, (and truly I mourn as I wite it) by
reason of the gross miscarriages of some Professors, the very Name of Religion
is become so odious, that they have made Ballads and Songs against it, and they
are sung by base fellows up and down the Nation; and what is the Burden of
their Song? No Cheater like the Professor.

But though this be so, yet when the Lord shall execute judgment upon those men
who have brought such dishonor and reproach to him, and so build the old wast
places, and be called, The repairer of the breach, and restorer of paths to
dwell in: Then he will recover the glory of his great Name, and be more admired
of the Nations then before, When the Scribes and Pharisees had put Christ to
death, what ado they made to have kept him in the grave, and that he might not
rise again ^ but Psa. 2.1.
they imagined a vain thing. It was not the great stone which they rolled
before the door of the Sepulcher, nor their sealing it, nor setting Soldiers
to watch, that could do it: but he rose in the spite of them all, Romans 1.4.
and declared himself to be the Son of God. Since they crucified the Lords
Cause, what has been their work? but how to keep it from rising. Truly little
else has been thought of, or looked after: the help that is called for from
this party, and the other, it is only to strengthen the hands of the wicked.
Now as the Lord will not easily part with his glory, so (I think) it will not
be recovered without executing judgment upon the enemies of it, and reviving
his glorious work and cause again: but in what case then are Revolters? for if
God in this way be glorified, they must needs be ashamed. If the Lord do
magnify his great Name, by lifting up the interest of Christ and his people,
it must be to the shame and confusion of their faces, who have brought it under
foot. As those that have been whores to great men, being cast off, or their
masters dead, every body points at them and scorns them; there goes one that
was such a man's whore, fie upon her: no less detested will they be, who have
served the unclean interest of men. The time (I am persuaded) is nigh, that
they shall not show their heads abroad, but men, women, and children will point
at them, saying, LO, THERE WALKS ONE, A PROFESSOR, A CHURCHMEMBER, WHO FOR A
SALARY, A PLACE, AN OFFICE, A MONOPOLY, PROSTITUTED HIS HONESTY, FAITH,
CONSCIENCE, COUNTRY, TO THE LUST AND WILL OF MEN.

3. By being glorified of some, because others are punished.
Thirdly, The Lord not granting a time of finding unto some, but leaving them to
perish under wrath, is glorified of many by it. I have been thinking sometimes,
what might be the cause, that in pouring out the seven last plagues, we find
nor any Rev. 11.13.
to give glory to the God of Heaven, but when the seven thousand were slain in
the Earthquake. Now my opinion is, in the destruction of the Last Apostasy
(under the first vial) Gods Justice, Holiness, wisdom, etc. will occasion some
extraordinary glory to be given to him. For whereas he begins with a professing
people, and spares them not; this will be more to the praise of his Justice,
then when his wrath afterward falls upon Idolaters, and such as know not God.
And hence it is, that the Mourners in Zion, cry day and night with a loud voice
to him that sits on the Cloud, Rev. 14.15.
Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is come for thee to reap, for the
harvest of the Earth-Apostacy is ripe. Not that they fret at the prosperity of
evil doers, or are impatient under their oppressions, or delight in blood; but
because of the exceeding great glory (they know) Jesus Christ will have by it.
When weeds overtop the corn, briars and thorns are grown great and thick, high
above the vine, unless they are cut down, there will be no harvest, no vintage.
Isa. 26.9.
When thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness. When the thorns and briars, which are grown great and high among
us, are plucked up by the roots, then will this Nation learn righteousness: then
shall the Lord have a glorious harvest and vintage, even sweet and blessed
fruit; then there will be a generation of Professors sincere, single hearted,
faithful to God, and faithful with men: whereas now too many are 2 Timothy 3.2, 3,
4.
Lovers of themselves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, Vnthank-ful,
Unholy, Trucebreakers, Traitors, etc. Having a form of Godliness, but denying
the power thereof.

Howsoever it be true, Job. 21.30
That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction; yet this day and
destruction is, Pro. 16.4.
For God's own glory: but when they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath,
how is he then glorified? Truly in nothing more, then when others seeing the
vengeance: not only justify it, but are instructed, and kiss the Son, and
stand in awe, and sin not. Psa. 97.8
Zion hears and rejoices, and glad are the daughters of Judah, because of
thy judgments, Jehovah. Those people which are a while without the Sun, no
sooner have a sight thereof, but leap and clap their hands for joy, as having
now their light and life and comforts restored to them. So long as men are
under Tyranny and oppression (which will be till the vial-plagues be gone) what
have they, but night and darkness, sorrows and vexations continually? Now
Christ rising in judgment, removes these heavy yokes and burdens, and plants
peace and righteousness in the Earth. Hence not only will the righteous shout
for joy, but the Lord every where praised by all sorts of people, even the
whole Creation.

Fourthly, 4. I^ being at rest and satisfied when he has executed his
judgments upon Apostates.
As no people by their sins do so much press and burden the Lord, as
back-sliders, and lukewarm Professors; so he is not at rest and satisfied,
until he have thoroughly executed his judgment upon them. For this we have an
example in the old Apostate Israel, when they fell into the hands of their
enemies, were plundered and spoiled, had their children stoned, and tumbled in
blood, their City and Temple burnt to ashes, and all their power, glory and
greatness laid in the dust; then God caused his fury to rest, his jealousy to
depart; then was he quiet and still, and angry no more. The Lord seems to be
troubled and unquiet, before his judgment is executed; but when that is once
done (especially upon an Hypocritical Nation) then he is at rest, pacified and
comforted. Ezekiel. 5.13.
Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon
them, and I will be COMFORTED: and they shall know, that I the Lord have spoken
it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them. Again, Hos. 10.10.
It is my desire, that I should chastise them. As a man that longs for a thing,
is unsatisfied, and restless till he have it; so the Lord seeing them grown
desperately wicked, IsI. 1.24.
Will ease himself, with their just punishment.

Before Jonah had judgment past upon him, Jon. 1.4, 15.
There was a great wind, and a mighty tempest in the sea; the Lords displeasure
and anger was up, and let out: but when Jonah was cast into the sea, when
justice was done upon him, it is said, the sea ceased from her raging. God is
quiet first, then the waters. So when judgment was executed upon Achan, the
Text says, Josh. 7.2.6.
The Lord turned from the fierceness of his anger. Again, when judgment was
executed upon the bloody house of Saul; 2 Samuel 21.14.
After that, God was entreated for the Land. Till that was done, the Lord was
not at rest, his jealousy and wrath ceased not. The Lord threatens to bring
the Assyrian upon the Jews, who should take away their fair Jewels, strip them,
and leave them naked and bare, burn their houses, and thrust them through with
the sword; and what then? Ezekiel. 16.42.
So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart
from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry. Isa. 10.25.
The indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction: as if he
should say, when I have destroyed them, and laid all waste, then I shall have
ease, my anger and fury will cease. Esth. 7.10
They hanged Haman upon the gallows, and then was the Kings wrath pacified.

And as the Lord is not quiet and satisfied, till he have executed judgment
upon Apostates; neither is he at ease, until he have done the like upon
Lukewarm Professors. Rev. 3.16
Because thou art neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth. When
a man has something upon his stomach, which he cannot brook, but it is
loathsome to him, he has no ease or quiet, till he have cast it up. They that
are not hot, having not the power of Godliness; nor cold, having yet the form,
they are a burden and trouble to Jesus Christ, till he have (by some judgment)
quitted himself of them. For conclusion, I have a few things to propound, to
the earth-thriving Professors of this age, who are at ease in their fat places.

1. Whether the Lord be not more pressed and burdened with the sins of Revolters
and lukewarm professors, then with the sins of any other people?

2. Whether any people since the rise of the Beast, have made a greater revolt
from God, or have been more Lukewarm (all things considered) then the present
English Revolters.

3. Whether the latter Apostacy mentioned by Paul, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3. be not in
every particular (to the life) fulfilled in them.

4. Whether the Lord can be at rest, satisfied and comforted, till he have
thoroughly executed his judgment upon such enemies of his Glory, Cause and
Kingdom.

5. Seeing it is not the Dragon, but his Tail, that Rev. 12.4
drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them to the Earth;

I query, 1. Who is meant by the Tail of the Dragon.

2. Who are the fallen Stars?

3. Unto which of the Apostacies do they belong? for to one they must, if not
to both.

Seventhly, 7. Because men weep for the punishment of their sins, but not for
their sins causing the punishment.
Because men mourn and weep for the punishment of their sins, but not for their
sins which caused the punishment. As the Dog under the whip, howls and cries
for the pain, but not for the fault and cause of his beating. Thus did the old
Jews, when the Amorites came out against them, and chased them as Bees do, and
destroyed them in Seir, even unto Hormah, Deuteronomy. 1.44, 45.
They returned and wept before the Lord: but the Lord would not hearken unto
their voice. And why so? because they lamented the loss of their Brethren, but
not their sins (not their Apostacy, Rebellion, Unbelief,) which provoked the
Lord to smite them. When news came that the English were killed like so many
Flies in Hispaniola; so shamefully destroyed, as I think never the like
dishonor and shame befell the Nation before; (the Lord by the judgment signally
showing his displeasure against them) It is true, there was fasting and
mourning; but why? (as the old Jews did) Because their brethen were slain. But
was there any repenting of the Cause? was there any sincere acknowledgment of
the sins which had provoked the Lord so extremely against them? who like David
spoke then to the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 21.17.
and said, Is it not I that commanded the people to to be numbered? even I it is
that have sinned, and done evil indeed. But as for these sheep, what have they
done? Let thine hand, I pray thee, O Lord my God, be on me, and on my fathers
house; but not on thy people, that they should be plagued. David had a weeping
heart besides weeping eyes, and was no Hypocrite. But the Crocodile (as some
write) having devoured a man, weeps over the Skull, when nothing else is left;
not repenting of his Deed, but because on that bone there remains no flesh to
eat. The Hieroglyphick is applied to (...) and WEEPING-HYPOCRITES, who will
shed tears when they have murdered the people: yet so, as not repenting for
what they have done; but fearing lest they should not have enough of MAN'S BLOOD
to drink and swallow down.

Quest. But if men acknowledge their sins before the Lord, with fasting and
weeping; shall they have a time of finding, doing no more?

I answer, No, Jon 3.8, 10.
Except they turn from their evil way, and from the violence that is in their
hands. When Joshua, and the rest of the congregation, knew who was the
TROUBLER, had they only acknowledged that great wickedness, and mourned for
it. I say, done no more, there had been no time of finding: and so much the
Lord tells them, Josh. 7.12.
except you destroy the accursed thing from among you, I will not be with you
any more.

So when it was told David, that 2 Samuel 21 1, 2. etc.
The three years famine was for Saul and his bloody house, because he slew the
Gibeonites: Had there been no more (...) ^^nfessing the sin, and asking
forgiveness, the Lord would not have been entreated for the Land. So it may be
said of all others in the like case, should they confess their Apostasy,
Falsehood, Oppression, etc. I say, publicly acknowledge the same before God,
Angels, and men, appoint solemn days of fasts to weep and mourn for their sins;
Nevertheless except THE ACCURSED THING BE DESTROYED, the TROUBLER stoned, and
judgment executed upon the BLOODY HOUSE OF SAUL, there is no time of finding,
neither will the Lord regard such things: and this the Scripture makes good,
Pro. 28.13.
He that covers his sins, shall not prosper; whose confesses and FORSAKES
them, shall have mercy. If it be so, in what case then are such men, who are so
far from forsaking their sins, as they will not confess them; but call evil
good, etc. yea more, make account by keeping the Accursed thing, to prosper,
and to carry all before them, in spite (as it were) of God, and of his Son,
and Zion. But the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them. Prove. 11.3.

CHAP. VII. How Saints may know it is a Time of Finding.
First, WHen a man finds, How a time of finding may be known. 1. When all
fears are removed, and the spirit quiet.
that all distractions and unquietnesses are removed from him, and a sweet calm
breathes upon his Spirit. Psalm. 34.4, 6.
I sought the Lord (says David) and he heard me, and delivered me from all my
fears. Again, This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of
all his troubles. What his fears and troubles were, the title of the Psalm
shows: David for fear of Saul, goes to Achish King of Gath; and being there, he
is in more fear then before; Insomuch (to save his life) he uses 1 Samuel 21.10,
11, 12. etc.
strange gestures, indeed not beseeming a man, much less the Lords anointed:
But what does he else? Inwardly his soul is calling upon God; and finding that
all terrors and amazements were over, and his spirit quiet, he concludes, it
was a time of finding. You shall see in time of much rain, as the waters run
down the hills, they make a great noise, by reason of the rubs in their way; but
no sooner are they fallen in, and closed with the river, but the hissing is
ceased, and all is quiet and still. Oh! the unquietness sometimes of a poor
soul, by reason of the multitude of RVBS; what through troubles without, and
fears within, there is a strange noise, confused, like the noise of many
waters. Psa. 6.6.
I am weary with my groaning. Psa. 69.3.
My throat is dried, all the night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with
tears; mine eyes fayl, while I wait for my God. Notwithstanding all this, no
sooner is this poor trembling shrub fallen into the stream of love, and sweetly
closes with it, but all casting down and disquietness is over: Psa. 27.1
Jehovah is my light and my salvation, for whom should I fear? Jehovah is the
strength of my life, for whom should I dread?

We have the like example in David another time, when Absalom made that
unnatural rebellion against him: at first, he was Psa. 3.1.
much troubled; for 2 Samuel 15 12.
the conspiracy was great, and the people multiplied still with Absalom: but
when he poured out his Soul before the Lord, he had that given in to him, as he
neither feared the number which the Traitor had with him, nor the hellish
counsel which Ahitophel might give him. If a man should see a Lion or Bear
coming fiercely against him, this could not but at first amaze him;
notwithstanding, if he should perceive a place of safety by him, and run to it,
and see himself in it; now he would fear no more. The malice and wrath of
Persecutors, their threatenings, banishment, imprisonment, ruin of families,
and killing the body, does at first startle and affright a good man; but having
been with the Lord, and graciously found him, he fears not what any Tyrant can
do, cares not for his big words and stout looks; for he sees the Tyrant bound,
and knows the Lord will not unchaine him, neither suffer him to stir, otherwise
then it shall make for the glory of his great name, in Phil. 1.28
the salvation of the one, and perdition of the other.

It was an evident sign, that the Lord answered not Saul, seeing his terror and
trembling continued upon his heart. Is not that Scripture in part fulfilled at
this day, Isa. 33.14
The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites? Is
not Cains case, the condition of many? Genesis 4.15
they think every one that meets them will kill them. Pro. 14.13.
In the midst of laughter their hearts are full of sorrow. Jer. 20.3, 4.
Magor-Missabib, fear is round about them. Job 15.21
A dreadful sound is in their ear. They dream of danger when they sleep, and
where ever they come, Deuteronomy. 28.66.
Have no assurance of their lives. Oh! what fantastic and pannick fears, and
Satanical delusions, an unquiet guilty conscience causes. He that has a mind
to hurt others, fears it is in the mind of every one to hurt him. But what may
we think of such people? Truly I think, if the Lord had any regard to their
prayers, he would not leave them under such continual terror and dreadful
amazement. Psa. 112.7.
A good man shall not be afraid of any evil tidings. But these people, when
Jer. 49.23.
they have heard any evil tidings, they are faint-hearted. And though it be but
a Hearsay, and a Noise, and nothing in it; yet they tremble, as if they saw
Death, Hell, and Judgment, and all ready to take hold of them. When news was
brought unto Lewis, of the death of his Mother, perceiving by the countenance
of the messengers, that they were ready to tell him something that would
afflict his heart; Let me pray first (says he) and then speak what ye have to
say. A man may be sure it is a time of finding, when he can experience, not
only present fears removed, but his spirit brought up into such a gracious
frame, as he can quietly hear any thing without dishonouring God, through
murmuring and sinful passions, either in his thoughts, speech, or action.

Secondly, It is a time of finding, 2. It is a time of finding, when the Spirit
faints not, but is kept lively up in the duty of seeking.
when the Lords people faint not in their SEEKING, but are kept up, and have
life and power given them to persist and persevere to the end. As fresh Oil
poured often into the Lamp, preserves the light from going out; so their
groanings and cries cease not day nor night, through fresh supplies of the
Spirit. Isa. 40.29, 30, 31.
He gives power to the faint; and to them that have no might, he increases
strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary; and the young men shall
utterly fall: But they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength:
they shall mount up with wings as Eagles: they shall run, and not be weary; and
they shall walk, and not faint. The meaning is, whereas proud Hypocries, Psa.
20.8. and 33.16. and 52.7.
trusting to their own strength, power, parts, gifts, lose what they have, and
make Shipwreck of all; On the other side, such as are poor and 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
despised things of the world, 2 Cor. 12.9.
God makes his power to appear in their weakness. For though Joh. 15.5.
of themselves they can do nothing, yet he enables them Phil. 4.13.
to do any thing: And when they seem 2 Cor. 8 9
utterly spent, they have a new supply of strength to enable them to bear up,
and hold out; and thus Phil. 1.6.
he perfecteth the good work begun in them. And indeed this is a gracious
return of prayer: when the soul is not only strengthened and enabled to hold
out, but is sweetly raised and enlarged in the work. Though we have not the
thing we ask, yet if we can sigh more, and weep more for it then we did: Here
is a time of finding; yea, such a FINDING, as it is much better sometimes to be
kept up (by fresh supplies of the Spirit) in sighs and tears, then to have
presently what is asked. As the Husbandman, the more seed he sows, the larger
is his Crop at harvest. Does the Lord keep thee sowing in tears? does he supply
thee with precious seed? Oh, it is a blessing of blessings: thy reaping Gal.
6.9.10.
in due season shall be accordingly. I know Satan and Hypocrites are ready to
reproach us, with the little profit we have by our mournings: You have been
(say they) these three or four years in tears, and nothing but sighing and
crying out against Self-seekers, Oppressors, Covenant-breakers: but what
hearing-time have ye had? Mal. 3.14.
What profit is it that ye have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? To
this we answer, Whereas we have not fainted, but have been kept up in the work
all this time; yea, have had such fresh springs of encouragement and
enlargement, that our tears and sighing, the last to be more then the first:
Hence we are satisfied, that the ears of the Lord of Sabbath have been open to
our prayers. Many and great were the discouragements which Mat. 15.21, 22. etc.
the woman of Canaan met with, when she besought Christ for her daughter: 1.
Christ goes away from her, as if he would not hear her: when she had followed
him, and gotten a word from him, what was it? truly a hard saying, He is not
sent unto such as she. Well, she faints not, neither is weary, but continues
her cry, Lord, Lord, have mercy upon me. What follows next? that her request
was unseemly, unreasonable, viz. To cast Childrens bread to Dogs. A man would
think whilst Christ carried himself thus toward her, it was no time of
finding; whereas in truth she found him all the while: I say, all this time
that these discouragements and temptations lay upon her, it was A TIME OF
FINDING. But you will say, How? I answer, both in keeping up her soul, that she
fainted not; and in making way for the discovery of that great faith, which he
gave her. So that it was better for the woman that she was deferred a while and
strengthened in the work, then to have had her request sooner granted. To you
therefore my Brethren and Companions in Tribulation, and in the kingdom and
patience of Jesus Christ, this I would humbly send to you: whereas the Lord
has strengthened you in mourning and crying against the Abominations of the
last Apostacy; it is not only matter of comfort to assure you that there has
been a time of finding; but also (and note it well) there is a blessing in it,
and much divine love: Oh it is love indeed, unspeakable, when the Lord draws
from us abundance of tears and groans, and enables us to wait long before he
gives the blessing.

A word likewise to our DISSENTING-BRETHREN, whose mourning of late is turned
into laughter, and their heaviness to joy. Joseph's afflictions are no more
remembered, neither the oppression and cry of the poor and needy Eccl. 7.4.
Their heart is not now in the house of mourning, but in the house of mirth. As
if they were placed in the earth (as Leviathan in the Sea) only to take their
sport and pastime therein. Here lies the difference between you and your
Brethren; you laugh, and are more merry then you used to be, because of the
advantages you have by these corrupt times; whereas your poor Brethren are more
in tears and in bitterness of Soul (these 3. or 4. years) then they used to be,
for the great dishonor, scandal, and reproach which you have brought to the
name of God, and profession of Religion, by assisting and justifying of men's
INTEREST against the interest of Christ and his people: hear what the Lord
says to both; Luke 6.21.
Blessed are ye that weep NOW, for ye shall laugh, Ver. 25.
Woe unto you that laugh NOW, for ye shall mourn and weep.

3. A time of finding when Saints rest fully satisfied in the things they ask.
Thirdly, When Mourners have such a return of prayer, as they rest fully
satisfied therein. My meaning is, the Lord persuades their hearts, that he will
so answer the travel of their Souls, as all things shall work together to his
Glory, and their comfort and content: and thus had Paul a time of finding, when
the Lord told him, 2 Cor. 12.9.
My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness:
as if he should say, Though I will not remove suddenly this wicked Angel from
thee, yet I will so fortify thee with my grace against all his fiery darts,
that thou shall be more then a conqueror, and get the victory over him: and the
greater thy assaults and temptations are, and the weaker thou art by reason of
infirmities; the stronger my Grace shall be in supporting thee in all assaults
of temptations. As a loving mother, whilst the child cries, she takes him on
her lap, wipes off the tears from his eyes, and kisseth him often, and suffers
him not to go away, till he laughs again, of the content and satisfaction
which he has; In such a way deals our Heavenly Father with his Mourning
children; as their cheeks are running down with tears, he takes them in his
arms, and kisseth them with the kisses of his mouth, and speaks so comfortably
to the heart, as they go away with their Psa. 126.2.
mouths filled with laughter, and their tongues with singing.

And such a time of finding, David often had: we find him in the Psalms, to
make very sad complaints, by reason of the great afflictions and troubles which
lay upon him: nevertheless in the close, Psalm. 7.17. and 13.6. and 42.11.
rejoices, and gives thanks to God; signifying no doubt, he had received
Issachar's portion, Deuteronomy. 33.23.
satisfied with favor, and full with the blessing of the Lord. For howsoever he
was not certain of the time of his deliverance, neither how, and in what manner
he should be delivered; yet this he knew (and by the Spirit it was confirmed to
him) that it should go well with him; and what was best for him, he should have;
and every thing promised him, should be made good. That saying of Solomon may
have place here, Pro. 13.25.
The righteous eats to the satisfying of his Soul, but the belly of the
wicked shall want: these sentences are both true, applied to sincere Christians
and Hypocrites, in respect of Soul-satisfaction. The former are brought into
Song 2.
the banqueting house, and have Son. 7.6.
Loves for delights. Isa. 25.6.
fat things full of marrow, and wines on the lees, well refined: what can a man
have more at a feast then content, and satisfied in whatsoever he desires? such
a FILLING have those at the throne of Grace; it is a LOVE-FEAST where Christ
and the Soul banquet and rejoice together; yea, sometimes there is such an
overflowing-fulness, as they are constrained to say, It is enough Lord, it is
enough, I am satisfied with the fullness of joy and pleasures at thy right hand.
But the Hypocrites belly shall want; did he find no more satisfaction in his
falsehood and craft, then in fasting and praying, he would soon give up the
trade, or starve. If a man being extreme hungry, instead of wholesome meat,
should take some poisonous thing, his misery and pain would be greater then
before. That which Hypocrites and Apostates suck from duties, is (spider-like)
only poison; for their unbeleef and fears do rise, and they are afterward more
unquiet and restless then before: and hence it is, that after they have fasted
and prayed, they have usually in hand one pestilent design or other.

Quest. But do not Hypocrites and Apostates find Soul-satisfaction in
fasting, praying, and other Ordinances?

Answ. 1. Imaginary they may, but truly and really they do not; for here that
is made good, Mal. 2.2.
The Lord of Hosts curses their blessings. Besides, what Soul-satisfaction can
there be had in things which Isa. 1.14. Amos. 5.21
God hates and despises, and Pro. 15.8
are an abomination to him? As a man in his sleep dreams he eats and drinks
largely, but when he awakes, finds himself almost dead for hunger; or like
little children, sucking a stick or finger in their mouths are satisfied with
it, though they draw no sweetness out: So Hypocrites (as Jude 8.
filthy dreamers) fancy a feeding, and please themselves (like children) with
nothing; it being the will of God, that they should be hardened and ripened for
judgment in such a way.

But 2. There is a satisfaction which Hypocrites and Apostates have by fasting
and praying: for hereby they do deceive others, and the more easily carry on
their own designs. As I have heard of a GREAT HYPOCRITE, who having by his
weeping, prevailed with some honest men to think better of his actions, then
they did before; no sooner were their backs turned, but he laughed at them, and
called them fools, that they should believe any more, or trust him for his
tears. Thus they are like the Magician, which had the enchanted Egg; howsoever,
being broken, there was nothing but wind in it; yet many (bewitched by him)
thought it had a world of happiness.

A weeping Hypocrite knows well enough, were his prayers and tears discovered,
there is nothing but JVGLING in them: they are all wind, lies and falsehood;
nevertheless, by a kind of enchantment, the simple are made to believe there is
a world of truth and love to the good old cause, under the Egg-shell of a Mat.
8.16.
dis-figured (Jesuitical) face. But leaving Hypocrites to the great day of
discovery.

For those who walk uprightly, times of finding must needs be satisfactory of
the experience they have of Divine Love. If the Bride knows she is taken up in
the Heart-love of her Friend, though he should say nothing to her of what he
would do for her; yet she is sure he will look after her, and provide for her,
that she wants nothing. So a Saint taken into the bowels of Jesus, needs
nothing more: for here he sees all things, 1 Cor. 3.22.
Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are his. And so much he sweetly experienceth,
4. A time of finding, when Saints have the things granted and done for them
which they asked.
to a full content of his soul.

Fourthly, It is a time of finding when mourners in Zion have the things given
them, and done for them, which they asked. As the Fish is caught while the
Fisher is angling for her, so is the promise: Isa. 65.23.
While they are yet speaking, I will hear. Again, Isa. 58.9. and 30.19.
Thou shall call, and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry, and he shall say,
Here I am. Such a time of finding had Genesis 32.28.
Jacob, Number. 14.20.
Moses, 2 Chr. 20.11, 12.
Jehoshaphat, 2 Ki. 20.5.
Hezekiah, 1 Kin. 18.37, 38.
Elias, Dan. 9.20. and 10.12
Daniel, etc.

Neither has the Lords hand been shortened, or his ear heavy (in this very
thing) toward his present mourners: for many of the great things which they
have sought with tears, he has given them in according to their hearts desire:
so that their sowing in tears has not been without some precious fruit, as to
a harvest already.

Quest. Wherein has the Lord answered the prayers of his people, in giving
them already what they asked?

Answ. 1. Many have been the sighs and groans which they have poured forth
before the Lord, that he would discover all deceitful workers, take away their
vizard and sheeps-clothing, that so the foulness, and wolvishness of their ways
might be Pro. 9.10.
known, and 2 Timothy 3.9
their folly manifest unto all men. True it is, when the Apostasy first broke
forth, many good people 1 Cor. 13.7.
Believing all things, and hoping all things) had some hope, that the
Covenant-breakers, under their public miscarriages, had secretly some good
intent to promote, not their own interest, but Christ's and his people. Hence
for a while they were silent, judging the best: but as the Apes were known by
the nuts, though taken for men before, and admired for their dancing: So it was
not long after some had taken greatness and power upon them, but such ambition,
oppression, covetousness, and BASE-SELF appeared, as honest people every where
perceived, they were APES, Revolters, the very men characterized by 2 Timothy 3.1
Paul in Timothy, howsoever formerly deemed otherwise. That this time of
finding may the better appear, let us consider some particulars, wherein the
Lord has most graciously answered the prayers of his people in unmasking evil
men.

1. Their unthank fullness; this is 2 Timothy 3.2
one character of the Last Apostates: and I am persuaded, there is no History
(Divine or Humane) of men more monstrous, ungrateful and inhumane toward their
friends and Benefactors, then some of late have been. Toads leave their poison,
where they had shelter and refreshment, and the Eagle kills the Swan that
nourishes her. Are not good men just so served? those who have sheltred the
Backsliders, kept them alive, and raised them up, how are they rewarded for it,
but with poison and murder? for they study and watch, how to render evil for
good. Here we have the truth of that Proverb, Pro. 26.8
As he that binds a stone in a sling, so is he that gives honor to a fool.
If you fling a stone up into the air, and mount it above the clouds, there it
will not tarry, but presently falls down again, choosing rather a dunghill, or
some such filthy place to be in. When some men were first raised up, their
places were high, honorable and lawful; but they would not abide there, but be
on a dunghill rather, where they might wallow in luxury, pride, wantonness, and
have dirt enough to cast on the faces of their best friends.

2. Committing the same sins, which formerly they condemned in others. As one
said of the Trent-Fathers, They would pare other men's nayls, but let their own
grow: So the excess, riot, ambition, oppression, etc. of former Kings and
Bishops, these must be pared and cut off; though themselves in the mean time
more sinful in the same ways and courses. Who spoke more against covetousness
then Crassus, and yet who more covetous? who wrote more against the Title of
Universal Bishop then Gregory the Great? yet no man more liked it, and affected
it, then himself: so Sylla and Richard the third commanded other men to be
sober and honest, and yet none worse then themselves: who was he that would
have no Government by Kings, because of their wastful Courts, and putting the
Nation to unnecessary charges in maintaining the pride of their children? and
who is he that has been more lavish and expensive then any before him? What a
deal of good doctrine have some men in their sermons, and so in their books,
concerning humility, self-denial, contentment, and to mortify the members of
the body! Oh! what a noise have they made against the world, this
bewitching-world, and that men should not seek great things, honor, riches,
Court-Promotion! In their words and writings, here all is dung, and vanity of
vanities: But should a man come home to their practice, and observe what heaps
of this DVNG and vanities they have scraped together, and are like the
daughters of the horseleech, Pro. 30.15.
Crying, GIVE, GIVE, never satisfied, nor say, It is enough; He would almost
think, they walked in their steps of whom our Savior speaks, Mat. 23 3.
They say, and do not: when they are teaching others, we have this very soberly
from them; We would think him unwise, who has brought much sweet water into
his cistern, and largely gives it out to others, but himself drinks that which
is bitter and unwholesome: what profits it a steward to know the nature of
meats, and not to taste them; or to be able to dispute of the nature and use of
fire, and yet to die for cold? I shall leave the application to themselves; and
the rather, because they do not think to be saved by their book.

3. A base compliance for the wages of unrighteousness, with the corrupt
interest and lusts of men. As puppets are moved wholly at his direction and bent
that extends or slacks the strings whereon they dance; and the blind-bayard
rusheth into the battle, but which way he goes he sees not, he cares not, save
only his rider spurs him: such a discovery there has been of late, that
whatsoever some persons have commanded (though against Reason, Religion, Law,
Conscience, yea, their own former Vows and Oaths) the same has been
immediately put in execution. Pro. 9.12
If a Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. A wicked Ruler will
have none about him, but such as shall serve his turn and purposes. As a man
will not be at the cost of keeping beasts unless he think to have profit by it.
When Elisha had promised a child to the Shunamite, it was very much that she
should say unto him (especially knowing him, and confessing him to be a man of
God, 2 Kin. 4.16.
Do not lie unto thine handmaid; a very harsh expression: But what might be
the reason? He had talked to her before of the Court, and of his greatness
there, asking her, what he should ver. 13.
speak for her to the King, or to the Captain of the Host: upon this, the good
woman presently suspected that he spoke as a Courtier to her; and howsoever she
took him for a Prophet, yet perceiving he had such an interest with the King,
and his Courtiers, and his Soldiers (all Apostates) she much feared he had
learnt some of their principles, i. e. to complement, dissemble, flatter, lie:
etc. Amos. 7.12.
O thou Seer, go, flee thee away to the Land of Judah, and there eat bread, and
prophecy there: as if he should say, if thou meanest to be safe, and not to
starve, leave this place; for if thou meddle with the Apostacy, Hypocrisy and
baseness of the Court, thou will have neither peace nor livelihood: and
doubtless the thing is true: there is no bread, no STATE-DISHES in
Apostate-Courts, for any Seer that shall keep a good conscience, and deal
faithfully in the Lords Message: for should they declare the whole Counsel of
God, and come home, (as John did to Herod) and tell them particularly what is
not lawful, they would soon dismiss them, and tell them, it is the KINGS
CHAPEL; yea, and well if they can escape with their liberties and lives.

There are two things enough to discourage every honest man from being a
Servant to a wicked Ruler.

1. The suspicion and jealousy which all good people will have of him, if he
turn Courtier, as not to be the man he was before, viz. for truth, integrity
and plain dealing: but as a Candle turned the wrong way, and held downward, it
goes out; so out goes the light of simplicity, and singleness of heart, and up
rises the snuff and stink of flattering lips, and a double-tongue.

2. How basely their great Masters will cast them off: As a man that rides in
post, takes often fresh horses, and looks no more after the Beast he used
before: Thus do Tyrants, those that will not hold out and keep pace with them
in all their sinful ways, away they are turned, and up they get upon the back
of a fresh horse.

Fourthly, The horrible and unheardof wickedness, never the like seen or known
before, among a professing people: not by fits, and now and then committed; but
constantly, like a gutter which always runs with foul water. As low Meadows and
Marshes, when they come to be overflown, and the waters to stand in them, breed
nothing but Toads and Frogs that continually creep and annoy them: or as Knats
and Vermin in a dead karcase, by the clear sunshine of one day, are produced
and multiplied in multitudes. I would gladly know what the last Apostacy has
begotten and brought forth since it ascended out of the bottomless pit, unless
croaking Frogs and other Vermin, filling every corner of the Land. It is not
long since Priests and Lawyers had their waters so dried up, as they were
almost dead, and could hardly croak for drought: but now they increase again,
and grow fat, having power given them to devour every green thing.

Hazael would not believe that he should ever commit the villainy which the
prophet told him. Though some professors were suspected (of many) to be rotten
at the kore, long before their ROTTENNESS brake forth (like Gehazi's Leprosy)
on their Foreheads; yet I think no man thought they would have been half so
bad as they are: for if you mark it, their design is closely and by degrees to
suppress every good thing that stands in the way of their interest, and so to
have their will and lust alone exalted. Moles cannot see, but it is the better
for their working under ground. That some men's eyes are blinded, their hearts
hardened, and consciences seared, it is much to the advantage of their design:
for now like blind Moles, their work will go on the faster; whereas had they
eyes to see, hearts and consciences that would be smiting and checking them for
their deceit, falsehood, hypocrisy, etc. Oh this would be a great trouble, and
they could not work so fast under ground.

Fifthly, The Instruments employed by them to defend what they have done, and
how. 1. Zech. 13.4.
The prophets are ashamed every one of his own vision; they hold down the head,
and dare not speak any more, things being so intolerably out of order. Thus we
see fulfilled in our days, that marvelous work and wonder, of which the prophet
speaks, Isa. 29.14.
The wisdom of their wise men shall perish: and the understanding of their
prudent shall be hid. Neither is it strange they are all silent; for what can
the new Doctors, or Tryers, or any of the money-Prophets bring forth to
justify some States-mens doings, but Gardners argument against relying on the
merits of Christ? Allow that (said he) and ye open a Gap to the taking away of
the priests profits. It is sure enough, if Christ in his Kingdom, Laws,
Worship, etc. should reign: open that gate to the King of Glory, down goes the
wantonness, pride, riot, and gallantry of our new Princes and Prelates, and
their Dependants. 2. For those fools which Pro. 20.3.
which will be meddling and Pro. 10.8.
prating, what do they but Isa. 28.15.
make lies their refuge? Oh the wonderful victories, and prosperous successes
which they have had in the West Indies, and other parts against the Spaniard,
and what huge credit and glory the English Nation has gained of late among
Turks, and Jews, and Heathens, and where not! When I hear such gross untruths,
and consider for what end they are devised; that Beast comes into my mind
(called Bonosus) not being able to defend himself with his horns, poysoneth
the Dogs with his dung: seeing they can do nothing by their power, but the Lord
breaks their horns every where, they hope to help themselves with THEIR
EXCREMENTS, (men that shall write for the Turk or Devil, if he will hire him)
and therewith to poison the ears and understanding of the people.

But some may say, they are not believed, their news is taken for lies in all
places. Though this be true, yet their wickedness is not the less: viz. when
God is visibly against them, and curses their blessings, for them THEN to
boast of victory, prosperity, good success, etc. who unless Atheists would do
so?

3. Another way whereby their new Babel is under-propt, it is by raising
Calumniations and Slanders against the Lords people. What strange and monstrous
people are the Fifth Monarchy-men and Common-wealths-men reported to be? And
doubtless Prove. 14.15.
the simple who believe every word, think it is all true which Apostates say of
them. When the name of Hugonite came first up in France, much enquiry there was
what those people were: The priests (ever the forewardest in such a work) gave
out, they were MONSTERS, headed like Lions, footed like Bears, etc. and would
eat Children; and a great deal more to this purpose: whereupon the ignorant
people, believing the things to be true, (because their Priests said so) cried
out, Oh kill them, kill them, kill them. Just thus do the Backsliders deal with
their enemies, I mean such as hold forth a public Testimony against them: if
you ask them what are these Fifth Monarchy-men, and Common-wealths-men, that
are so talked of; they will tell you, they are Monsters, monstrous Monsters,
men that will have no Government, no Magistracy, no Ministry: men that will
have all things common, allowing no propriety; and whosoever are not of their
principles and opinion, they will either eat them, or make them vassals to
them. Now what say the poor ignorant people, hearing this, and not questioning
the truth of it, (for how should they, seeing Priests, Lawyers and Soldiers,
tell them so? John 19.^5.
Away with them, away with them, crucify them, we have no King but Caesar.

Take notice, Reader, this is an old stratagem of the Devil, and a lesson which
he has taught his children in all ages, that is, to be like a cunning thief,
who in the crowd, cries, Stop the thief, stop the thief; not caring who is
taken, so himself may escape, that has done the robbery. When Balak would have
Balaam come to him, to curse the Lord's people, he conceals the truth of
Isreal's case and carriage, makes no mention how the Lord had of old Genesis 15.18.
promised them the land of Canaan, nor how the Canaanites wickedness was grown
so great, that Lev. 18.24, 25.
the land should spue them out: neither speaks he of their sore oppression
and bondage in Egypt, and miraculous deliverance from thence; nor how Israel
being come out, had not harmed either Edom or Moab, but Deuteronomy. 2.4.8, 9, 13.
passed by them in peace, and warred only with the cursed Canaanites, devoted
to destruction: all these things Moab knew, as well as Number. 20.14, 15.
Edom; but here he is silent: and what he does report is most false: Number. 22.5.
Behold, there is a people come out from Egypt; behold, they cover the face of
the Earth, and they abide over against me: As if he should say, there is an
uncivil and barbarous people come up from Egypt, who they are, I know not, but
they plunder and destroy the Countries where they come, and they are now
waiting an opportunity to invade us, and turn us out of our lawful possessions.
Are not our enemies and Moab here alike? Do they not altogether conceal the
case and carriage of Christ's faithful witnesses? where do they fairly and
honestly report their principles and judgment? But Psa. 35.11.
lay to their charge, things they never knew. I have in part showed, what they
hold, and what they desire to have: This I shall add, as Prove. 15.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, (not craft, policy, power, or making an other
house) so they would have all oppressions and grievances taken away, no man to
be committed or detayn'd in prison at the will and pleasure of any man: they
would not have the blood and treasure of the Nation spilt and spent, to serve
any man's lust; they would have the theevish Lawyers suppressed; they would have
those righteous things done which the Army promised. And if Charles Stewart
justly suffered, (and his family too) for exercising an arbitrary and unlimited
power, they know no reason, why any man, if he govern worse then the King did,
should be suffered.

4. Another help is a Mercenary Army. But of these men I need not say much; for
the Nation knows them too well. A hedgehog seems to be a poor silly creature;
yet being full of bristles and prickles, a man may be shrewdly hurt by it. I
cannot for the present think of a comparison fitter or truer: It Is become a
HEDG-HOG indeed; a poor silly thing, it has no beauty, comeliness, credit,
honor, etc. only bristles and prickles to wound the interest of Christ and his
people.

5. But who, think thou (Reader) brings up the Rear? Even Wizards and
South-sayers: another of Satan's tricks to deceive poor people. There is to be
in our days, a certain Conqueror (an Emperor he must be, says another
parasite) descended from the Princely race of North Wales, who shall destroy
the Pope and the Turk, and most part of the world; bear the Imperial rule at
Sea, reform the Church, settle peace, and nothing shall stand in his way: and
that this is true, many Magicians, Sorcerers, and British Bards are reckoned
up, who above 1000. years ago spoke of it; and several Honorable Titles he is
to have (says a later Wizard) about July next. It grieves my Soul to see our
profession, Religion, and the Holy Name of God thus abused and profaned by the
vilest instruments the Devil has. But the Scripture must be fulfilled. 2 These.
11, 12.
And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who believe not the truth, but
have pleasure in unrighteousness. Psa. 1.17.
As he loved cursing, so let it come upon him; as he delighted not in the
blessing, so let it be far from him. It was a righteous thing with God, to give
up Ahab to his false Prophets, and by their lies to destroy him, having refused
to hearken to the Lords Servants: so when men will not follow the Counsel of
God, but cast his Word and Law behind their back, what more just then to leave
them to Wizards and Star-gazers, to be blinded and harnded by them, and
prepared for slaughter? I have read somewhere of one Athol a Scots man, being
told by a Sorceress, that he should be crowned in a great concourse of people;
believing the witch, and to make way for the crown, he killed James 1. Now there
was some truth in what the Witch had told him; for being brought upon a
Scaffold for this treason and Murder, a crown of red hot Iron was set upon his
head, and so he miserably perished, many thousands looking on. So may they be
crowned that seek it in such a way.

Much more might be said concerning the Lords answering the cries and sighing
of his people in the discovery of these men, viz. their devouring skin, bones
and all, by NEW TRICKS; so the Thief has the true man's purse, he cares not how
he gets it. Pro. 28.15.
As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor
people: that is, the right which he pleads, is nothing but might; the mercy
he shows is only where he cannot show more cruelty; and whatsoever he takes
away most unjustly from poor people, he says, It is his right, and he must and
will have it. Again, the Lawyers never tormented poor men more then now: the
old Superstitious Priests, how are they thumming over the English Mass again!
so in many parts of the Land, their Malignant Justices persecuting honest men
under the name of conventicles, putting in execution the bloody Laws of the
Beast enacted for the suppression of the truth: other things are too FOUL to be
named. Herod feared John for his piety and strict walking: so did Saul fear
David. But no man needs to fear this Generation of men for holiness, justice,
righteousness. Indeed for the contrary, there is cause enough; but howsoever,
in this Gods people may take comfort, for thus it is promised: Mic. 4.10
Thou shall go even to Babylon, THERE shall thou be delivered, THERE the Lord
shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies. I hope we shall never be
brought nearer Babylon then we are.

Secondly, They have prayed, that the Lord would not bless or prosper the
designs of the froward and crafty, who to set up their own interest, have
betrayed the cause of Christ; but that Psa. 83.13.
He would make them as a rolling thing, as chaff before the wind. How the Lord
has answered them, will appear first by some Queries.

1. Had Charles Stewart sent an Army to Hispaniola, and ten of the Spaniards had
killed an hundred of them, a hundred a thousand: Whether people would not have
said, God's curse was upon that action?

2. Had Charles Stewart (to satisfy his pride and lust) put the Nation to some
millions of expense, to keep a great Fleet about the Straits, and after some
years, a part had returned, bringing nothing back but shame and dishonor to the
nation: Whether people would not have said, This action likewise was Isa. 43.28.
given to the curse?

3. If Charles Stewart, for the business at the Isle of Ree, and violating some
Privileges of Parliament, etc. was fairly dealt with: Whether other men
(after him) should they do worse, might not be called to such an account?

4. If that Parliament, and High Court of Justice which arraigned Charles
Stewart, deserved much love and praise of the nation for it: What deserve they,
and are worthy to have, that shall betray their public Trust, by giving up to
one man, the Power, Laws, Rights and Privileges of People and Parliament?

5. If Charles Stewart in three or four years had unnecessarily wasted more then
4. Millions of the Treasure of the nation, and in that time had destroyed more
then forty thousand men's lives, and only for his own pleasure; and afterward
should have gotten a pack of his own creatures together, who in Parliament (as
he would call it) should justify and confirm what he had done: The question
is, Whether in this case there had been any way or means left to the people,
whereby they might lawfully and justly have called Charles Stewart and his
Juncto to an account for the same?

A Pro. 28.3.
poor man that oppresses the poor, is like a sweeping rain, which leaves no
food. Morsus macri pediculi pessimus, the biting of a LEAN LOVSE is worst of
all, says Lyra on the place. I have read of a great man being bitten of a
weasel, and understanding there was no hope of cure, nothing grieved him more
at the hour of his death, then to think it was a weasels biting; had it been
(said he) a LIONS BITING, it would not have troubled me half so much.

2. What is it that crafty men by their power and policy have lately effected?
(I say) since Gods people have prayed aginst them, what have they brought forth
save wind and vanity? Psa. 7.14.
Behold, he travelleth with painful iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and
brought forth a lie. As a woman after sore and hard travel is delivered of a
dead child; so has been the fruit of their painful travel. Their affairs and
transactions almost in all places and in all things, have been like a sword put
into the scabberd the wrong way; the more force, power, craft, the worse: And
no marvel, seeing they are going the wrong way, viz. against Christ, and the
cries of his people. What is become of that THING, which was like Queen Mary's
goodly Boy? Did not the Priests in their Pulpits describe it, and pray for it?
What is become of the Boys nurse? A nurse many times is more fond of the
child she sucks, then the mother that bare it.

3. It appears the Lord heard their groanings, by sending Judge. 9.23.
an evil spirit among the Plotters of iniquity to divide them, and that they
should seek 2 Chr. 20.23.
to destroy one another. When Amnon had his desire upon his sister, 2 Samuel
13.15.
he hated her the more: So Hypocrites commonly most abhor such men as do
prostrate themselves to their sinful designs, when they have served their lusts
upon them.

4. It showed Saul was in great extremity, having destroyed the witches, that
he should yet go to one of them, and make use of their devilish art. Oh! how
desperately straightened are those men, and know not what to do, having fought
against Malignants and Cavaleers, against Epispopal men and Presbyterians,
shall afterward run to them, court them, and crouch to them, as seeing no way
else to be helped Judge. 11.7.
Did ye not hate me, and expel me out of my fathers house? and why are ye come
unto me, now when ye are in distress?

Thirdly, Prayer has been made without ceasing, that Gods elect every where
might forsake all unsanctified places and standings; and that their feet might
be turned into the pleasant paths of truth and righteousness; and in this
likewise they have seen the travel of their souls.

For, 1. Very many of the most conscientious people every where, have given up
their commissions, places, offices, Salaries, etc. Heb. 11.25.
Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. If a man have a thing in his mouth, though he
like it well for the sweetness of it, yet he will not keep it there, but spit
it out when he knows it is naught and hurtful: so will good men do (specially
if their hearts be very soft and tender) forsake all places, offices,
employment, maintenance, etc. which they see they cannot hold without scandal
and offense, though much worldly sweetness does come in thereby. And this is
indeed that great lesson of Mat. 16.24.
Self-denial, and Mat. 18.8, 9.
Mortification, which Christ teaches us.

2. There are some, who wanting faith to trust God for a livelihood, lie under
sad affliction and trouble of spirit about their places and employments. 2 Kin.
5.18.
When my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans
on my hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon; the Lord pardon thy
servant in this thing: as if he should say, I do not like my place, that I
should be so nigh the King when he is in the Temple at his idolatrous worship;
I question the lawfulness of my presence there: but if I do it not, I must lose
my place, and then I shall not live in that credit, plenty, state, pomp, which
now I do. It seems, Naaman knew not the Scriptures, how Psa. 57.16.
a little, Eccl. 4.6.
a handful, Pro. 17.1.
a dry morsel, Pro. 15.17.
a dinner of herbs, well gotten, and with quietness, and peace of conscience,
and the fear of God, is better then great revenues without right, and with the
trouble of a tormented conscience. But Naaman knew not this; if he had,
probably he would not (as I doubt too many do) Prove. 28.21.
Transgressed for a piece of bread.

3. For many which keep their places and employment, though they seem satisfied
as to their standing, yet the query is, Are they satisfied as to their Masters
DOINGS? 1 Samuel 15 14.
What means then the bleating of the Sheep in mine ears? With whom can you
converse, (if they have not lost all former principles of honesty and liberty)
but you shall hear them bitterly exclaim against some persons, for their
falsehood, Covenant Breaking, seeking themselves, and opposing the work of God;
yea, now and then a discontented houshold-servant will be twitting his Master
publicly at his nose, for casting off the interest of Christ and his people,
and complying with the Malignant party. What said Nabals servants of him to
their Mistress? 1 Samuel 25 17.
He is such a son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him: (Belial signifies
one without yoke, or lawless) as if they should say, There is not a man alive
worse then our Master: he cares not what he says, nor what he does, nor who he
wrongs; his will is a Law; and ordinarily, they who have done him most good,
(as David for example) he is most spightful and malicious against; and if any
man do but speak to him of his covetousness, cruelty, unthankfulness, or seem
to cross him in his pride and wilfulness, he will stamp, and stare, and curse
like a madman, or devil, and do him what mischief he can: Therefore certainly
evil is determined against our Master, and against all his household. Reader,
take notice when thou hear some SERVANTS to call their Master a son of
Belial, that is, one that will be under no yoke, no Law or Government; one that
is an enemy to good people, and cares for none but such as will be servants to
his lusts and will; this is a great return of prayer: for howsoever some
servants have not the grace nor honesty to leave such a Nabal; nevertheless,
speaking so openly against his wickedness, as they condemn their own sinful
standing: so they justify all other servants which have cast off such a SON OF
BELIAL.

Lastly, There is another sort, who like their places as ill as their Masters,
and have not a good word for either; only the old Serpent has taught them a
trick to cozen their own souls, which is, to keep their places, in hope to
serve their Country the better, if a turn or change should come. Mock on: we
know well enough, did not these men love themselves a great deal better then
they do their Country, they would not support oppression (as they do) for their
base pay and hire. But an ill-favored face needs painting.

Fourthly, the Lord has been earnestly called upon, that howsoever the
Witnesses should be slain, Rev. 11.9 Rev. 12.17.
yet not suffered to be burnt, but that a remnant of the woman's seed might be
preserved to keep up the memory of the work and cause of Christ. Now truly, I
think the Father of Mercies has not in any one thing more clearly answered the
Soul-Groanings of his people then in this.

For, 1. Consider how grievously Gods people have been tried and tempted these
three or four years, not only by great poverty and outward wants, but by the
entisements and baits of worldly advantages; as riches, honor, promotion,
pleasure, Mat. 4.9.
all these things will I give thee, IF THOU WILL, etc. A man that should stand
before the mouth of a Cannon going off, or walk upon the ridge or pinnacle of a
Tower, or sail among most dangerous rocks and sands; it would be thought very
strange, if he should escape all danger. Some of Gods people lately have had a
more wonderful deliverance, if the snares be minded which the Lord has broken
for them: Psa. 107.8.
O let them confess to Jehovah his mercy and his marvelous works.

2. Howsoever the love of many is grown cold, and they are turned with Demas,
and with the Dog, to the world, and their vomit again; yet has the Lord
preserved a litte flock, Rev. 3.4.
a few names which have not defiled their garments by partaking with the last
Apostasy, but (through grace) Jam. 1.27
have kept themselves unspotted from the world. When Gideons Army of 32000 came
to be 300. then indeed it was excellent and glorious, Judge. 7.7.
and meet for the Lord to work Isreal's deliverance by it. Though the followers
of Christ are very few in number, to the worshippers of the Beast; yet this I
may say, as the prophet says of the Figs, they are Jer. 24.2
very good: the Lord having by their many temptations and trials, purified them
unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

CHAP. VIII.
Fifthly, It is A Time of Finding, when there is no staggering at the Promise:
But the things asked, are by Faith obtained. A Time of Finding, when the things
asked, are seen and received by Faith.
So certain, as if they were already in our own hands. Thus Sam. 1.18
Hannah was sure of the Child as if he had been in her arms. So Exodus 14 13,
14.
Moses at the Red Sea saw Pharaoh and his host drowned, before ever they went
into the water. In dividing the Land of Canaan, not only did Joshua and the
people by lot, lay out the Inheritance of every Tribe, in the Countries which
they had conquered: But likewise all other parts of the Land, which at present
they possessed not. And this they did, believing what was not yet in their
hands, it should be theirs so sure, as the parts and places already taken. No
less confident and certain are Saints now, i. e. as some of the Canaanites are
cast out: Moncks, Friars, Archbishops, Bishops. So Lev. 18.28.
the Land, ere long shall spue out the rest of Dan. 7.27
them: And it shall be given to the Saints of the most high. Though the
Israelites after they came out of Egypt, had a stop for forty years in the
wilderness; yet God gave them the peaceable possession of Canaan according to
his promise. So Jerusalem and the Temple were built. Howsoever thorough the
malice of the Enemy, there was some stop, put to the work awhile. True it is,
the work of God, THE GOOD OLD CAUSE, has met with A TROVBLER, an ACHAN, for
through the falsehood and hypocrisy of some men, it has been killed and layen
in the street, like the dead bodies of the Witnesses: howsoever not suffered to
be put in graves. But what of all this? so mercifully has the Lord answered
the Cries and Tears of this people, as by faith they see it risen, and like a
Conqueror standing on its feet, to the Terror, Shame and Ruin of the
Adversaries.

Quest. But wherefore has the Lord suffered his work to be stopped, and to lie
(as it were) under a death?

Ans. Howsoever neither men nor Devils could have stopped it, had he pleased
(not to have had it so) Yet he would have it stopped a while for these Reasons.

1. To dismiss from the work some Regiments of profane Esau's, and worldly
Demasses; who followed it not for love but loaves. Such Hypocrites and rotten
hearts, the Lord could not endure to see in his work, and therefore brought his
Army out of the Field, to disband them, and to Ps. 125.5.
lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. A good Riddance. A Dog that
follows two men, is not known to which of them he belongs till the way
part: Then indeed you shall see: Howsoever we knew not plain and honest hearts,
from dissemblers, so long as the Interest of Christ, and worldly profit kept
together. Yet the Lord by this STOP has made a mavelous discovery of both. A
good separation.

2. That the Scriptures might (...) fulfilled: For by this STOP came in the
perilous Times, of which Paul gave warning 2 Timothy 10.3.1
in Timothy, meaning the second Apostasy. How the Characters set down there by
the Apostle, parallel with the Backsliders of this age I have largely A Book
entitled Truth with Time.
elsewhere showed. In some Fenny Countries, where people are troubled with
GNATS; they use to hang dung in the midst of a room, as a bait for the Gnats to
fly to, and so catch them, as a snare provided for that purpose. Why would the
Lord have a STOP to the work, and by that STOP bring up the Apostasy? It is
plain enough, that it might be a Pit and a Snare (dung indeed) to catch all the
GNATS of the three Nations: For I verily believe there is not a worldly minded
Professor (whether Churchmember, or Church Officer, or otherwise) but he is
fallen into this Trap. Job 18.5.8, 9, 10
The light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his fire shall not
shine. For be is cast into a net by his own feet, and his own counsel shall
cast him down. The gin shall take him by the heel, and the rob^^^ shall prevail
against him. The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the
way. Rev. 15.3
Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God Almighty.

3. As the Lord made a Proof or Trial of Abraham's faith, love and obedience,
by his willingness to offer his son Isaac: So this STOP has been, viz. Cor.
11.19
that they which are approved may be made manifest. If a Maid, that she might
be such a man's Wise, should refuse a great Estate, and live very poorly with
him, would not this argue she married him for Love, and nothing else. There are
many since this Apostasy came up, for the love and affection which they bear
to the GOOD OLD CAUSE, have refused great places high promotion and honor, and
sufferd Banishment, Imprisonment, cruel mockings, and spoiling of their goods:
And what does this signify? Genesis 22.12.
Now I know (said the Angel to Abraham) that thou fear God, seeing thou
have not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. Surely a man shows
great affection and faithfulness unto Jesus Christ, when riches, preferments
and great men's favors are rejected, and his poor, despised, betrayed, and
crucified Cause is boldly owned of him.

4. That Romans 11.28.
the Lord may make a short work upon the earth, when his work shall be revived
again. As a man intending to show his skill by leaping far, goes backward
first a little: So the Lord intending more than an ordinary speed and quick
dispatch of the seven last plagues, seems first to go backwards. Rev. 11.^4.
Behold the third woe comes quickly. Thus it was with Israel in Egypt. After
Moses and Aaron had been with Pharaoh they had Exodus 5.9.
more work laid upon them, and their bondage greater than before. But when the
Lord revived that work, How fast went it forward then? In less than thirty days
all the ten plagues were poured out upon Egypt. So after the forty years, when
the Lords work came on again, the Land of Canaan is presently conquered, Josh.
12.24.
and one and thirty Kings put to death. How soon was the Lords House built when
the work was revived, in four years at most: And so I take it here, the Lord
means by this Stop, HAVE HAVE afterward.

5. To strike the greater dread and horror upon wicked men Rev. 11.
at the rising of the work: Herod thinking Christ to be John Baptist, he
thought likewise John being risen, he came with more strength and power than he
had before; and this tormented him: That the Cause and Interest of Christ,
thought to be dead and buried, should be raised again: No marvel the sinners in
Zion will be afraid, and fearfulness surprise the hypocrites; they know it
comes forth in Power, Glory and Majesty to take vengeance on them for their
falsehood and unrighteousness.

6. There is a STOP that ungodly men in this Time may fill up the measure of
their sins, and so be fatted for the slaughter. Jer. 51.13.
Thine end is come, and the measure of thy Covetousness; that is, when Babilons
Covetousness is full and ripe, then come the vials of wrath to be poured out
upon her. Among the Egyptians it was a custom, when any man was condemned for
some notorious crime, to feast him and fat him, that he might undergo the
greater Torment. I think no man will deny, but some men of late are fatted to
purpose: Ps. 119.70.
Their heart is as fat as grease. But it was not thus before the STOP: For
their Coveteousness, Pride, Lightness, Luxury, was nothing in measure and
height to what it is now. A sad stop: woeful places, offices, promotion,
maintenance, etc. that prepares men like Sheep for the day of slaughter!

7. For the praise of his great power: Christ was able to have kept Lazarus
from death and the grave; but he would not: and why? Joh. 11.4.
That the son of man might be gloried: And indeed (I think) there was no
miracle which our Savior wrought more to his glory than this. Not only is
Lazarus dead and buried, but supposed to stink, having been three days buried.
And for all this to raise him up, what a wonderful work is this? Though it be
true (as was said) the Lord could have prevented all STOPS; yet he would not:
But he will have his Cause slain and buried, and in the opinion of the Enemy,
to rot and stink: (no fear of rising again) And then will he Ps. 78.65.
awake as one out of sleep, break the heavens and come down, shake the
mountains and raise up his friend Lazarus, to the glory of his power, the joy
of his people, and the confusion of his Enemies. Amen, Amen.

Quest. But what reasons have you to believe that the good old Cause will be
revived again.

Answer 1. Because the honor of God is much concerned in it since the STOP.
What say the Scoffers Luke 14.30.
This man began to build, but was not able to finish it: As if some, by their
craft and policy had overreached Jesus Christ. As long as Pompey stood and
flourished, Cato stoutly maintained a Providence: But when he fled into Egypt,
and was slain of a base fellow, and lay upon the shore without any honor of
Burial; when Cato also was beset with Caesar's army. He fell from his former
doctrine, turning his tale, as if there were no providence at all: but every
thing went by hap. It is too probable by some late Turnings, many are turned
Atheists. And therefore questionless, God will revive his work again: For
otherwise how can the great reproach and dishonor be taken off from his
Providence and Government.

So 2. Is Religion and the true profession of the Gospel; which never will
have the Credit, Glory, Beauty, it had formerly, if the interest of Christ and
his People be not revived. Nothing better heals the sting of Vipers, than to
apply their own flesh to the disease: The dust of a Toad put to its venomous
biting takes away the poison. It is much upon my heart, by some such
APPLICATION the Lord will heal those fearful wounds and bitings, which are
upon the truth. Though men have not regarded the Credit and Honor of it, yet
Christ does and will recover it and revive it again; by destroying the fond
glosses, and covetuous practices of corrupt men, and raising up faithful ones
to preach the everlasting Gospel.

Eusebius writes of Peregrinus the Philosopher; having gotten a great estate,
by feigning himself a Christian, that he might consume it the more freely on
his lusts, revolted to Gentilisme. It is plain enough to see, why some men have
left the Lords work and this people; It was that they might be at liberty to
spend what they had gotten in excess, pride, riot, lasciviousness. They well
knew, should they have kept close to Christ and his interest, they could not
have fulfilled the desires of the flesh, and walked after their own lusts. And
therefore thought it better to turn Heathens again. For so doing they knew they
should have elbow-room enough, and might do whatsoever seemd good in their own
eyes. But what of all this, let such know the Lord will make That Holy
Profession of his Name, Gospel and Kingdom glorious and honorable again.
Though they have made it vile and contemptible in the eyes of the world. Ezekiel.
36.23.
I will sanctify my great Name, which was profaned among the Gentiles: which
ye have profaned in the midst of them.

3. Such were the wonderful actings and appearances of God, for and with this
Cause, as it is not possible it should come to nothing (vanish away like smoke)
which yet will be so, unless it be quickened and raised again. Judge. 13.23.
If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have showed us all these
things: Let no man think that he would so eminently have showed his power,
justice, and wrath against the late King for his Tyrany and Arbitrary
Government; So aagainst the Bishops for their pride and humane inventions, but
that he means to destroy the like wickedness in others, if afterward they
shall take it up. 1 Samuel 3.12.
When I begin I will also make an end. Though it be a judgment (and to be
executed upon his own people) yet he will perfect the work. And will he not do
so (and more Lam. 3.33
willingly) when it is to have mercy upon Zion.

4. In reviving this work he will Isa. 57.18
Restore Comfort to his Mourners Ps. 85.6.
would not thou revive us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee? That is,
when thou shall take that which lets out of the way; and bring us again upon
thy work: Our mourning will cease, and thy power, faithfulness, goodness,
justice, will be soul-refreshing unto us. I know some men can take pleasure in
beholding beastly and filthy things: So is oppression, falsehood and deceit, to
a time-server and turn-coat a most pleasant sight: As Hanibal, when he saw a
pit full of man's blood, O formosum spectaculum: and the Scots Queen seeing her
Subjects lie dead and stripped on the earth, cried out, The goodliest Tapestry
that ever she beheld. The cries and groans of the poor under their oppressions
and heavy burdens, what sweet music makes this in the ears of Self-seekers:
Now their pay comes in, their salary, and their so much per annum. But the joy
of good men rises otherwise Pro. 29.2.
When the wicked bears rule, they mourn: Pro. 11.10
and when wicked Rulers perish, they shout for joy. So that until this work be
revived, Saints may expect little joy as to outward and public Affairs.

5. This Cause will surely be revived, because it is not man's but the Lords:
For, 1. Are not Ps. 110.12
Christ's Enemies to be made his footstool, and Psalm. 2; 6.
he to sit upon the holy hill of Zion? 2. Is not all oppression to cease, and
Isa. 60.18
Violence to be heard no more in the Land: The first and second Apostasies both
to be destroyed? 3. Must not Ps. 85.11.
Truth spring out of the earth, and Righteousness look down from Heaven? And
Dan. 7.22
the Saints possess the Kingdom? But can these things be and not the work
revived, that is impossible. When it is night and dark, whence do ye expect to
have light again in this visible world: Is it not by the rising of the Sun? So
these great things which we are waiting for concerning Jesus Christ and his
Kingdom, the coming in and accomplishment of them will be, by the Lords
reviving his work and Cause again.

Quest. But is there not something for the Lords people to do, in order to the
reviving of the Work?

Ans. Yes surely. For, 1. Howsoever Achan was the TROVBLER and had caused the
STOP, yet Jos. 7.11.
Israel had sinned also. Jer. 5.55.
Your Iniquities (says the Prophet) have turned away these things, and your
sins have withholden good things from you. When the clouds are scattered which
hide the Sun from us, then we behold his shining face again: So the Lord, Ps.
85.1, 2
he forgives the iniquity of his people, Isa. 44.22
Blots out their transgressions and sins as a thick cloud, and then he will be
favorable to his land, and bring back the Captivity of Jacob. So that it is
the duty of every Saint (waiting for the great Promises of the Father) to be at
the foot of God, exceedingly bewailing his Own, and his Brethrens great
miscarriages: And as there is hope our Deliverance is nigh, so our hearts
should be the more broken and in bitterness, and our tears and sighings
increase; now we should rise at midnight and cry, I^el 2, 17.
Spare thy people, Hos. 14.2.
Lord take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the
calves of our lips. We must not so look upon Achans and Troublers abroad and
without, as not to see the Achans and Troublers at home, in our own hearts.
Though some have been Number. 3.3 55.
pricks in the eyes of the Lords work and the good old Cause, and Josh. 23.13.
Scourges and Thorns in the sides of his people; yet must we confess the
righteousness of Jehovah, and say, Ezra 9.14
he has punished us less than our iniquities deserve. In short, our sins are
as John 11.39, 41.
the Stone upon the grave which must be rolled away by confession and heart
sorrow, in order to the reviving of the work.

2. Though the Lord will revive his work, Ezekiel. 36.37.
yet for this, he will be sought unto by his people to do it for them. A man
may be willing to do his Friend a good Turn, yet he expects he should ask it of
him: Mat. 7.7.
Ask and have. Zac. 2.13
Be silent O all flesh before the Lord, for he is RAISED up out of his holy
habitation. Observe, it is not said he is risen, but he is raised. Well, Genesis
49.9
Who shall Rouse him up? Who has raised the Lord out of his holy habitation?
The Prophet will tell you. Psalm. 90.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
For the sighing of the needy now will I arise says the Lord. Thus the Church
in the Wilderness, to have the work up again, and to go forward, is earnest in
prayer; Return (O Lord) how long, and let it repent thee concerning thy
Servants. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be glad
all our days. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted
us, and the years wherein we have seen evil. Let thy work appear unto thy
Servants, and thy glory unto their Children. And let the beauty of the Lord our
God be upon us, and establish thou the work of our hands: Yea, the work of our
hands establish thou it.

3. That Council of our Savior is to be heeded, Luke 12.35, 36.
Let your loins be girded about, and your light shining: That when the Lord
comes and knocks, you may open unto him immediately. If a man have a promise of
some great office and preferment, should he not endeavor to fit himself for
it? How to be prepared for the Lords work, when it shall come forth again; is
showed us in the Rev. 14.1, 4, 5.
Characters of the Lambs followers: they have his Fathers name (not the Mark of
the Beast) written in their foreheads. These are they which are not defiled
with women, for they are Virgins: These are they which follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes, these were redeemed from among men, being the first
fruits unto God and the Lamb: And in their mouth was found no guile: for they
are without fault before the throne of God. What is the reason so many have
fallen under the Lords work, made shipwreck of it and themselves too? They took
it up, before they were meet for it. If a Fool or Mad man be at the Helm,
neeeds must that Vessel miscarry. If the Guide be blind, the Followers of him
will miss their way: Ec. 10.16
Woe to thee O Land, when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in the
morning; that is, one who out of inferior Condition is leapt into a Throne,
and gives himself (with his New Lords) to lust and pleasures, and make their
own Interests and Profits the chief thing that they look after, and prefer that
before the Public good. As we expect therefore not to be laid aside, and stand
ashamed when the work shall be revived: Let us not sleep as do others, but be
sober and watch, keep oil in our vessel, Heb. 10.23.
Hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, and verse 35.
not cast away our confidence which has great recompense of reward. When a man
is to begin a thing, and makes only a rough draught, any instrument will serve
the turn; but afterward when he comes to fine work, then he uses (and must
have) better tools. Though I do attribute to the work done as much as any man
rightly can, yet this I humbly conceive, it has hitherto been but a rough
draught (very low and mean) comparatively to what the work will be, when the
Lord shall give it a Resurrection. And therefore as the work will be much
finer, so he will use better instruments, or if he use any of the former
instruments, he will make them purer and better than ever: He will have Psalm.
102 18.
a Created people, Isa. 13.3.
Sanctified ones: Rev. 17.14
Called, and chosen, and faithful: Rev. 15.6.
Clothed in pure, and white linen, and having their breasts girded with
golden girdles.

Quest. But how and in what manner will the Lord revive his work: And when will
that blessed Time of finding come?

Ans. There are many signs which go before a storm, and ^any symptoms which
discover d^seases before men fall into them: So (I think) before the Lord will
appear again for the old Interest of Christ and his people against the enemies
thereof; there will be some signs and Symptoms going immediately before. The
husbandman that has the eye of experience will give a fair guess of the whole
day by the morning; I shall leave other men to their own conjectures: For my
part I do apprehend so far already a dawning of the work, as I dare adventure
(in the strength and power of my God) to give a sober guess of it.

Gods work in the womb of Providence is according to what the Prophet speaks of
Gods forming him in the womb of his mother; He begins with Psalm. 139.
his unformed substance, or Embrio, that is, the body in the womb before it
has perfect shape; then he speaks of being covered with skin and flesh:
Lastly, how curiously he was made, namely with sinews, veins, arteries, and
variety of limbs: As an Embroiderer joyneth many parcels, and wier-work of
various colors, very artificially and curiously together, until there comes
forth some goodly portraiture, or other dainty workmanship; and all this is
done in the lowest part of the earth; so he calls the womb, because of Gods
secret and unknown making of men there. In such a way is the work of God in the
womb of providence: Oh it is fearfully and marvelously made: It is at first (as
it were) unwrought, afterward it has flesh and bone; but curiously
embroidered, like a piece of needle work, before it comes visible forth: In
this womb of Providence are the seven last vials formed, and the Angels which
shall pour them out. So the little Stone which shall smite the Image, and the
weapons of war, which shall thrash Babylon, and all the mountains of the world.
That this work should be in the womb of Providence (yea, and so curiously
wrought, as ready to come forth) and yet not perceived it is no wonder. Ecc.
11.5.
As thou know not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones do grow
in the womb of her that is with Child: so thou know not the works of God who
makes all Job 28.23.
God understands the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof.

Quest. But can you demonstrate by any fair Arguments, that the work is no
Embrio, but curiously wrought, and coming forth out of the womb of Providence,
at the Romans 12.5.
Man-child to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron?

Ans. As this is a great Question, so I shall modestly speak to it, from that
light ^ have received. Indeed I cannot decline my former opinion: But do think
the work (as an unformed substance) begun about June: And that it is now
covered with skin and flesh; full wrought and coming forth. It seems so to me
for these reasons:

1. I do observe, that the Spirit of the Lord is so full and mighty with some
of his hidden ones, as they cannot cease from crying to him day and night. Rev.
14.15
Thrust in the sickle and reap, for the time is come for thee to reap: for the
harvest of the earth is ripe. Not now for a discovery of the Apostasy, for that
is apparent enough: Nor so much now for Separation, as to have the judgment
written, speedily executed. It is doubtless a truth, when the Lord shall spirit
a people (though very few) and bring them forth, as his Jobs, Samuels and
Daniels to stand before him, and withal gives them Mat. 17.20.
a grain of that faith of which Christ speaks. Whatsoever they ask in that
FAITH shall be given them. A little time will show, by whose LEADING and MOTION
I write thus: Namely, That the Lords work is reviving, and will suddenly appear
in the destroying of the last Apostasy, and this done by that Faith (which some
poor worms have received) to which all things are possible.

2. I think Providence is opening the womb, Because some men (like Jehu) drive
too furiously to hold out long. Blood-suckers when they are ready to burst,
draw strongest. Thus it was with Pharaoh, Absalom, Haman, when they begun to
pull hard they streightway perished: No otherwise than like Rats and Mise and
other Vermin, whilst they are pulling hard at the bait, down falls the Trap,
and so are taken: So Geese many times break their own neck, with biting and
pulling hard the root which they hold in their Bill. What the Bait is, and the
Root which some men are pulling at, most do know: But what is the Trap? Verily
Providence: And you shall see, when they come to their strongest Pulls, to pull
with BOTH HANDS, down falls the Snare, and the Vermins crushed to pieces.

3. Because the Controversy rises high between the Lords Witnesses, and the
Lords Enemies. When we see a woman big with Child, we conclude she has not
long to go. Can the controversy be higher? Is it not about the Title of the
Crown, Kingdom, Government; yea, and who shall Reign and be King? Whether
Jesus Christ in his Laws or proud flesh in his Lusts? Methinks by the
greatness and swelling of the womb, there is hope of a speedy birth: It was so
in the Case between Moses and the Magicians, Elias and the Priests of Baal: So
the Scots and the Prelates. When the difference and controversy grew high on
all sides; What immediately followed? Breaking work; Ps. 11.6.
Upon the wicked he rained snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible Tempest:
This was the portion of their Cup. When we shall see the contest at that
height, either men must move for their Lives, Laws, and Liberties; or be
absolute Slaves; Suffer their witnesses to be put in graves, or stand up for
their Rising; Then will the Lords work come forth in quickening and spiriting
a dead people, and Zach. 2.7
Zion shall deliver her self that dwelt with the daughter of Babylon.

4. Ecc. 3.11.
The Lord has made every thing beautiful in his season. That is, the work of
divine providence, is the more comely and excellent, in respect of the Season,
in which it comes forth: Thus it is in natural things. The Spring, Summer,
Autumn. VVinter, every thing in his season, oh how lovely and fair it is: So
in all the works of God about his Children: VVhither Ps. 111.3
it be the punishing of the wicked for their sakes: or their own deliverance.
He will make the work honorable and glorious in respect of Act. 1.7.
That Season and Time he brings it forth. Hence I am persuaded the Good old
Cause is reviving. Because methinks it is now, such a Season, as will put upon
it the Beauty of holiness.

5. When I consider Genesis 1.16.
the wheel in the midst of a wheel, Ezekiel. 10.12.
and the wheels full of eyes. And withal observe many late providence, this
likewise much confirms me: You may easily know which way a man means to shoot,
by his holding of his musket or Bow: Against whom of late has the Lord held
the mouth of his Canon: The Head of the Arrow of his Wrath, and the point of
his great and strong Sword. Truly he must be very ignorant in public affairs
that cannot point at them: And what may we gather hence? That he will discharge
his whole Cannons among them: make his Arrows drunk in their Blood, and they
shall not escape his drawn sword, and this suddenly too. In war usually there
are some light skirmishes before the main Bodies do Engage: So before a great
rain and storm, little dropping: The Lord has been skirmishing with them both
by land and sea: and shamefully beaten them everywhere; and terrible drops have
fallen upon them like haile-stones: So that now he is coming against them with
the Body of his Army: And Ps. 83.15.
to persecute them with his Tempest Ps. 50.22.
Now consider this ye that forget God 2 Pet. 2.15.
Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way of
Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness: Deuteronomy. 32.41,
42.
If I whet my glittering word, and mine hand take hold on judgment, I will
render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me. I will
make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh, and that
with the blood of the slain and of the Captains, from the beginning of the
revenges upon the enemy.

6. Judgment is at the birth against a professing people, when the Counsel of
the Lord in all his Servants is rejected: and they are harkening to flatterers,
liars, Wizards, who will humor them in their lusts, and encourage them in
every sinful Action. This is plain in the Cause of Joash 2 Chr. 24. from 16.
to 26.
After the death of Jehoiada came the Princes of Judah, and made obeisance to
the King: then the King hearkened unto them. These Princes were the old
malignant Courtiers in the reign of Jehoram, Ahaziah and Athaliah. The thing
that he hearkened to, was to destroy that good Reformation which himself had
made a little before: that is to set up again the Idolatry and Tyrany which he
had thrown down, and to cast out the just and righteous things which he
himself lately had established. The evil of this is told him again and again:
But no admonition will take place. For he grows so wicked that he causes the
Prophet (who reproved him) to be stond: even his son who had set him on the
Throne. But what followed? oh sad things (and that suddenly) first upon the
Land that was made the seat of war, spoyld and plunderd; afterward a sore
punishment upon himself, by the hand both of God and man.

The like befell Amaziah his son 2 Chr. 25.25, 26, 27.
I know (says the Prophet to him) God has determined to destroy thee, because
thou have done this, and have not hearkened to my Counsel. The which thing came
to pass soon after. Again it is said of Eli's children 1 Samuel 2.25.
They harkned not to the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay
them. That is he gave them not grace to repent, but did more and more forsake
them, and gave them in his justice over to a reprobate mind, to their own ruin
and destruction: Which also cap. 4.11.
came to pass. When Ahab hearkened to his false Prophets, and not to Michaiah;
Gods Judgment soon reached him. Was there ever a Generation of men that did cast
off the threatenings of God against their sins with more contempt and scorn
than some do now? For unless he be an Ahitophel, a Machiavel, a Subtle Serpent,
tush they care not for any man's Counsel a rush. But is not this some notable
sign of the Times? Yes surely (e) When it is evening ye say it will be fair
wether. Mat. 16.
For the sky is red And in the morning it willbe foul weather to day; For the
sky is red and and lowering. Such is my confidence in the Truth of the
Scripture, as from the Premises I can sooner believe, that there is some great
judgment very nigh the dispisers of good Counsel, than conclude fair or foul
weather from such signs in the face of the sky. That the work's upon reviving:
This also shows it: near in my apprehension did Time look so like midnight as
now. Night it has been some years together. But no Midnight till of late: If
sleep has not seized on the Virgins ( Wise as Foolish) yet truly a great
slumbering does; for there is not (methinkes) that activeness, that life and
soul to the great Cause of God, as some times there was: Several ways people
may fall a sleep: And children very often sing themselves asleep And are there
not some of the Lords sweet Babes, fallen now into some slumbering as to THE
DAY WORK, by their own pleasant Singing. I should be a great deal more
affected and dissatisfied with this late slumbring of the Virgins, but that I
consider the Scripture must be fulfilled Isa. 63.5.
I looked (says the Lord) and there was none to help Amos 7.2
By whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small: small indeed: For if the wise
Virgins fall asleep who then are left, Though this be so, yet herein am I
comforted: The Midnight-time being upon us: It declares that the womb of
providence is opening: and the Cry nigh Mat. 25.15.16
Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye out and meet him. Yea, and it is a mercy,
seeing the Midnight Time is upon us, that there is a Voice kept up to awaken
such as are asleep.

7. Reader, mark this: Such men as by engagement ought to join with the
Interest of Christ and his people, if they neglect their duty here, and join
with the Lords Enemies against him and his Cause, there is certainly some great
judgment nigh them. It was Midians duty Deuteronomy. 23.4.
to have met Israel with bread and with water in the way when they came forth
out of Egypt. That is, they should have refreshed and assisted their Brethren
in their travels toward Canaan; but in stead of doing so, Midian hired a
Wizard, a Witch to curse the Lords people: But what is his punishment for it?
He shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord for ever. Israel must
never seek his peace nor prosperity. Many Reasons there were, why Achitophel
should have stood faithful to David and his Righteous Cause: But (like an
unthankful wretch) he went with Absalom in that unnatural Rebellion: But how
sped he? 2 Samuel 17.23.
When he saw his counsel was not followed, he went home and hanged himself.
Again whose part should Judas have taken? (in point of Reason, Religion, and
Conscience) Doutless his Masters; but he falls in with the Scribes and
Pharisees to take away his Masters life. What his end was, and how he was
rewarded for it. (It is recorded) Ma.. 27.5
He went and hanged himself Act. 1.18
And falling headlong burst asunder in the midst, and his bowels gushed out.
Are there any such in our Time, who in respect of many Engagements, should
assist and help the Lords people, stand up with them, for Righteousness and
Truth: And do they (like Midian, Achitophel, Judas) side and take part with
Wizards, Rebels, Pharisees, (and marked Slaves of the Beast. I say, are there
such? If so, then I question not but Providence ere long will show some notable
work upon them. Psalm. 46.8
Come, and behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the
earth.

Lastly, And which is not the least that persuades me, the good old Cause is
ready to rise: I do observe that the Lords people every where are expecting it.
Now what means this (k) singing of the Birds, if the spring be not nigh. Is it
possible that it should lie (with so much weight) upon the Spirits of all the
little remnant; that the Lord is coming sorth to take vengeance on his
adversaries, and to comfort Zion: And nothing should be in it: I cannot think
so, neither is there any reason for it. Indeed, Pro. 4.19.
The way of the wicked is darkness they know not at what they stumble. v. 18.
But the way of the just is as a shining light, that shines more and more to
the perfect day.

Thus Reader thou see the Reasons why I think, the WORK is at the Birth. I
shall offer a little more to thee And no more (I hope,) then what is according
to Truth: and with supplications the Lord has led me.

From the Creation to the Flood (according to the best account that I have
seen) were 1657. years. And so many years we reckon past, since Jesus Christ
was born. In this year ( viz- 1657.) does period the 42. Months and 1260.
days in which the Beast was to reign, and the Saints to suffer. Mr. Tilling
have (of Precious memory) beginning at the Head of the account; i. e. at the
rise of the Beast, brings down the two Numbers to the year 1657. I have done
something by inquiring at the foot, to wit the last three years and an half of
the Account, and here we do agree as to the Time of the End: That is, whereas
the Woman must be Rev.: 12.6.
in the wilderness 1260 days: and Rev. 13.5
'Power was given to the Beast to continue 42. Months. Both these Numbers
(signifying indeed all one time) do end in the aforesaid year, 1657. This
humbly do I conceive:

I know what will be here objected. If this were so, we should see some change
as either to the rising of the witnesses, or fear among the enemies, or
something done upon Babylon: But things stand as they did before: The Dragon,
Beast, Little Horn both Apostacies as Rampant as ever, yea rather of late
grown greater, and are at the rising hand, than otherwise.

Ans. This being a hard knot. I trust the Lord will the more help me to unty
it, and so to take this Stumbling block out of the way of his people.

1. I would say (as the Lord said to Job Job. 28.22.28, 29.
Have thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or have thou seen the
treasures of the hail? Has the rain a father? or who has begotten the drops
of dew? out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoarie frost of Heaven? who
has gendered it? Has the Lord a Treasure for snow and hail, a Father to beget
the rain and drops of dew: and a womb wherein the ice and hoarie frost are
gendered? and afterward brings them forth, as he thinks good to use and spend
them? Then much more a Treasure, a Father, a Womb for higher things, and
greater works, wherein his name, glory, kingdom and people are especially
concernd. Is not this laid up in store with me, Deu. 32.34:
and sealed up among my treasures. Again though it may not be questioned But
Isa. 48.14.
The Lord will do all his pleasure upon Babylon: Nothing shall fail of his
threatenings, against the Dragon, Beast, Little Hornet Yet the ordering,
managing and governing thereof, that only and wholly belongs to him, both
when to begin, and how to do it. Hence I humbly conceive, if we should see
nothing done in the year, 1657. as to the rising of the Witnesses or ruin of
the Bottomless, Beast, and last Apostacy: It will not therefore follow that
the 1260. Years ended not in that year. No more reason: Then because the
Child is not Born, Ergo, not conceived in the womb.

2. Christ's words must be remembered Luke 17.20:
The Kingdom of God comes not with observation, that is, not in such manner
at first, that it can be taken notice of by things done. Observe, it is not
said, the kingdom shall have no Observation. But Comes not. Showing how at
first little will be seen to demonstrate that such a kingdom is come: But
afterward it shall be visible, and plain enough to be observed. And to this
purpose speaks the Prophet, Isa. 26.11
Lord though thy hand be lifted up, yet they see it not. But they shall see it.
This was the great Stumbling block, which lay in the way of the Jews, when
Christ came in the flesh. Because he came not as they exspected before hand (as
it is in the coming of worldly Princes) in great state and outward Pomp, they
would not believe in him nor receive him for the true Mesias. And why may not
the like be the Case of people now. Because they see not as they expected
WONDERS in 57. Some extraordinary power and presence of God with his people,
and great overturnings and breakings of Nations, hence conclude, it was not the
Time of the End. But let such know the Scripture favors no such Conclusion.

Question, But shall the forty two months ( given to the beast) end, without
observation.

Answ. Howsoever immediately upon the period of the 1260. years there will not
be I think actions of much Observation, either in respect of Zion or Babylon,
yet the Time of the End, comes not without Observation some other way.

For, 1. The serious Observation of the Prophesies and Visions of the holy
Scriptures relating to the last days, will lead a heart (if it has nothing in
it but truth and uprightness, and the glory of God) to the knowledge of the
Times. 2. There is the Observation of the Spirit: 1 John 2:20:
The unction from the holy one; and here we do observe how the Holy Ghost opens
our understanding, and not only so, but those great things which he reveals to
his Babes and Sucklings, he confirms them therein; whiles they are in tears and
weeping before the Throne. 3. The Observation of Providence, which has brought
^orth the Persons and Things which were (according to the Prophesies of the
Scripture) to finish and end the 1260. years.

But 3. Did not some men do, like one, who whiles he is striving to have a
great gripe, comes off with nothing in his hand. They might see that 57. has
not altogether been without OBSERVATION: For howsoever Psalm. 36.6
Gods judgments are a great deep, Romans 11.33.
and unsearchable. Rev. 15.3
Great and mavelous are his works, Ps. 77.19.
and his footsteps not known. I say, howsoever his Counsel, Government,
Administrations, and the manner of proceeding is beyond all searching into: yet
if matters soberly be considred by wisdoms Eye, Fifty seven has showed Ps.
86.17
"some token for good, and that Is. 63.3.
the day of the Lords redeemed is come, Isa. 34.8.
'and the year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion: For,

1. What may be meant by that Government which was set up December 16. 1653.
and laid aside again June 26. 1657. It stood Dan. 7.25
a Time and Times, and the dividing of Times, that is three years and an half,
almost to a day, Oh the depth of Gods ways! Ashur shall fulfill his decree and
counsel: Isa. 10.7:
Howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart think so.

2. What things have been done, and how managed, and what success has
followed in 57. it is so well known (to many men's cost) as I need not mention
it. But what may we gather hence: I mean from the Lords Acting and appearing
already against some men? That the National affairs in their hands is like the
Fig Tree under the curse Mat. 21:19.
Let no fruit grow on thee henceforth for ever.

3. When Agag thought Sam. 15.32.
the bitterness of death was past, then came sudden destruction upon him. Fifty
seven is not yet ended Prove. 27:1.
Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth. Though the man-child in June were but Job. 10.10
poured out as milk, and curdled like cheese, (to use the holy language) yet
who knows what in nine Months the womb of Providence may bring forth: Luke
12.19.20.
Whilst the FOOL is thinking of building his Barnes greater, death cease on
him; Act. 1 25.
That he might go to his own place.

4. When Caleb encouraged his brethren to fight the Canaanites: He told them
Number. 14.9.
Their defense is departed from them: That is, the Lord would protect them no
longer. But why is their shadow and Covert now gone? doubtless he has
respect to the time of the end. As if he should say the 430 years (given to ^he
Amorites) being expired, and so their iniquity full: the Lord will deliver them
into our hands, if we are fitted for the work: From which place, this I would
gather: That the reign of the Beast may expire in 1657. and the enemies of God
THEN ripe for judgment: yet the instruments not being prepared for execution:
In this respect little or nothing for the present may be done.

Quest. When the 430. years were expired, the Israelites came out of Egypt Exo.
12.40.42.
the same day. So from Baby^on as soon as the 70. years ended. Why then should
not the Witnesses rise: and the little-horn, and beast be slain immediately at
the ending of the 1260 days:

Answ. 1. Howsoever it be so concerning their coming out of Egypt and Babylon;
yet there was sometime before they came to Canaan and Jerusalem: So in order to
the rising of Witnesses. No sooner are the three years and a half ended, but
the work begins Rev. 11.11.
The spirit of life from God enters into it. The wheels of Providence are set
running; But there must be some time to have it perfected, as it was in the
case of the Israelites.

But 2* Isreal's case and this here, are not alike: For as they were people, i.
e. Men, women, children; So nothing could be done to their enlargement, but it
must needs be obvious and visible. But this about the Witnesses, etc, has much
in it which is spiritual and mystical: And therefore a work (as to the rising
and growing of it) not so plainly to be observed and discerned as was the
other, especially at first.

Neither 3. do I find the promises alike, for it seems to me, by promise they
were to be in Egypt, but 430 years: And in Babylon 70. and no longer. But it is
not said, the witnesses shall stand upon their feet as soon, as the three years
and half are ended. Indeed the Text says, Rev. 11.11
And after three days and an half, the spirit of life from God entered into
them; and they stood upon their feet: That is, such a time being expired, the
Lord will revive his work and good old cause again. But how long after, it is
not said: only this is in the promise: From that very time, it shall not lie
dead as before; but the Lord will be forming it (for its birth) in the womb of
providence.

4. The business of Egypt and Babylon was such, that until the people came
out, the first part of the promise was not performed. But here it is not so,
for the work may be begun, and go forward, and much done (according the
Scripture) and yet not seen or ^^lieved, scarce by any. As water ^ns a great
while under ground, be^^re it comes out at the Spring head: ^o after the 1260.
years are expired, before the work will openly appear, (...) setting the
Witnesses upon their feet, (...) taking the little horns Dominion from ^im, it
will be as water under ground Psalm. 139.15.
wrought in the lowest parts of the ^arth.

Quest. But how can the 1260 years ^e ended, seeing it is the opinion of many
^ood men, that the VVitnesses are not ^^ain, neither has the little-horn yet
^een; nor the second Beast risen out of the earth: besides many other things
not ^et fulfilled, which must be before the 42. months do expire?

Answ. Because there are many men (and some whom I know and honor) of this
judgment: I do intend by the good hand of God assisting me, to publish very
shortly a particular Answer to this Objection. And to give my Reasons and
grounds, why I think there is nothing foretold in Scripture, which should come
to pass in the 1260 years, but has had its due accomplishment.

Question, If the Work be so nigh r^viving? How, and in what manner wi^^ the
Lord by Providence bring it forth?

Answer, I hope the God of truth b^ his word and good spirit will so graciously
guide me here: That I shall not intrude into those things which I have not
seen. But give my judg^ment as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful. Tha^ I may be in this great point the better understood: howsoever I
think when the Lord shall bring this work on again in the Vials, it will be
Mat. 24.27.
as the lightning, which comes out of the east and shines even unto the
west. Namely with great swiftness, and brightness the whole world over,
Nevertheless at first it will break forth (as the dawning of the day) but in
one part or Country. And I think some what to this purpose.

1. Near or about the visible reviving of the work Rev. 14.2
A voice will be heard from heaven, as the voice of many waters and as the
voice of a great Thunder. Waters are from beneath, Thunder from above: So then
by the Voice of these Waters, I understand a terrible Appearance and standing
up of much people (or Commonwealths men) for ^ivil Rights: Crying JUSTICE
^VSTICE against oppressors and ^rong doers. Neither will they be fi^enced or
quieted (no more then wa^ers) till they have recovered their ^reedom and
Liberties.

2. Thunder (as I said) is from above. and here may be meant Fifth Monarchy ^en,
speaking very high, for the ^ights of Jesus Christ, his kingdom ^rown and
dignity: And howsoever ^t is but one Thunder, and the Waters many, yet it will
not only make a ^ouder sound, and be Farther heard, ^ut likewise be more
dreadful and ^errible wheresoever it comes Jer. 50.14
Put ^our selves in array against Babylon round about: all ye that bend the bow:
shoot at her, spare no arrows, down with her, down with her, in all her
Abominations: In her Tithes and Triers as the rest of her whordomes and
Fornications.

3. That the Waters are set before the Thunder. It may import, that the work
will begin (at least by most ownd) upon a Civil Account. As the lesser wedge
makes way for the greater: So in CLEAVING the kingdom^ of the Beast. The
controversy will b^ first about lesser things, as the Power Freedom, and
Privileges of the people, and so rise higher and highe^^ until the OLD BLOCK
Babylon b^ made Chips for the Fire.

4. There is Rev. 14.2
a Voice of Harper^ Harping with their Harpes. This may signify how lively,
cheerful and resolved they are to engage for the GOOD OLD CAUSE 2 King. 3.15.
And it came t^ pass when the Minstrel played, the han^ of the Lord came upon
him. Formerly there was a death upon them, a bas^ fear and Cowardliness; But
now the spirit of life from God is entered into them, and they stand upon their
feet. Now they look with Lion like faces, and quit themselves like men. Though
Peter shrunk and drew back Mat. 26.69.
at the speech of a poor wench, yet when he had received power from on high, He
feared no colors, he could then Act. 4.13.
look with Boldness any Tyrant in the face; So howsoever before, they had not
life and courage, yet when the Harpers Harp, such will be the hand of God,
upon them that they will not regard what their Enemies can do either by fraud
or force Zech. 12.4
He that is feeble among them, at that day, shall be as David, and the house of
David, shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them.

5. Rev. 11.11
And great fear fell upon them that saw them. Though there be nothing yet done,
but a more lively owning of the Lords cause than before, and declaring
publicly for it, yet this strikes a terrible astonishment and trembling among
the Adversaries; Act. 5.24:
As doubting whereunto this will grow. And their amazement is the more to hear
how the number daily increases in all parts, Saying Jer. 31.23
The Lord bless the^ habitation of Justice and mountain of holiness; We will
have Isa. 26.2.
the gates open, that the righteous Nation, which keeps the truth may enter
in. Besides they see no means or way how to keep the peoples Liberties and
rights any longer from them. Psa. 76.5
The stout hearted are spoiled, and none of the men of might, have found their
hands, that is, they are as if they had no hands, they are not able to make the
least resistance or defense.

6. Whiles the adversaries are thus in confusion and fear, a happy union and
accord will be made between the Waters and Thunder: So much I think is meant,
by the VVitnesses ascending up to heaven in a cloud. It is but one cloud that
has them both. Hence about this time, I do exspect a great uniting of the
Commonwealth men and fifth Monarchy men upon good and righteous Principles:
Unanimously agreeing to carry on the Lords work Zep. 39.
With one consent or Soulder, Isa. 11.13
Ephraim shall not envy Judah and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. But the Lord
will Eze. 37.17
join them one by another into one stick, and they shall become one in his
hand. This blessed agreement of the People, instrumentally will be made, by
some eminent and choice Christians, men that 1 Chr. 12.32.
Have understanding of the times: to know what Israel ought to do. And this I
take to be the Rev. 11.12.
great voice from Heaven, saying unto them come up higher.

7. Union being made and all in Heaven, here Isa. 13.4.
the Lord of Hosts mustereth the host of the battle, and Rev. 19.14
the armies of heaven; here he clothes the Vial Angels Rev. 15.6
in pure and white linen, having their breasts girded with a golden girdle.
This is Zion, Psa. 110.2
out of which the Lord will send the rod of his strength; and the Mount Zion
where Rev. 14.1
the hundred forty and four thousand stand with the Lamb. Here he fits his
people for the work, and appoints them their work: So that my opinion is, for
any people to go forth with the material Sword against Babylon, or the Kings of
the earth, or to set up the visible Kingdom of Christ, before the Lord has
brought them to this Heaven, into the Temple, to Zion, and Mount Zion, yea, and
to some good accord among themselves: They will not be upon the Lords work as
to the pouring out of any vial.

8. Howsoever the Lords Sanctified ones in heaven: are not smiting the Image:
yet its said Rev. 11, 12
Their enemies behold them. As how? Terrible as an army with Banners: Lifting
up an ensign to the Nations, and publishing war against Babylon. Isa. 52.12.
Ye shall not go out in have, nor go by flight: For the Lord will go before
you, and the God of Israel will be your rereward. i. e. Seeing God has taken
away all their Fears, and given them great faith, made them one in the work,
and fitted them for it, and withal experiencing the powerful presence of God
among them, and how he has left the enemy to fears, darkness, division,
destruction etc. The Dragon and the Beast shall behold what they do. They need
not fear these men for secret plots and treason, they scorn it, they need no
such shifts: What they do shall be in the sight of the Sun. Isa. 47.12
Stand now with thy enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries,
wherein thouhast labored from thy youth: if so be thou shall be able to
profit, if so be thou may prevail, So will these say to their Enemies,
bring forth the falsehood and lies ye trusted in. Now see if your hypocrisy
and craft will help you any more. Now run to your Soldiers, Lawyers, Priests,
etc. try what they can do for you.

9. The Lord having Isa. 13.3
called his mighty ones for his anger. Next he brings them forth Ps. 149.8, 9,
10.
With the high praises of God in their mouths, and a two edged sword in their
hands, to execute the judgment written. Rev. 11.13.
And the same hour was there a great earthquake. Here I understand, begins the
Vial work. And the earthquake to be the Rev. 16.2
pouring out of the first Vial upon the earth: The same with Rev. 14.16.17, 18.
the reaping of the harvest of the earth and Clusters: Only with this
distinction. The first Vial has two parts, or two effects (which you will) The
first in the earthquake. The other in the sickle. And the tenth part of the
City fell; The earthquake reaches but a tenth part, the other nine are
reserved for the Sickle.

As there are two Apostacies, and they have each a distinct Head. So they are
set forth in this book by two Cities, the one is called the Great City; And
always so when the first Apostasy is meant. The other has not the word Great
given to it: because the Latter City (or Apostasy) shall not be so large, big,
strong, and populous, neither of that antiquity and continuance as the former.
Understanding what this City is, i. e. The last Apostasy, It will be easier to
know the rest. And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand. The
Greek has 7000, Names of men. In Scripture, persons that are famous and
renowned for Power, Wealth, Wisdom etc. are called Genesis 6.4. Number. 18.2.
Men of Name. On the contrary, men without credit and respect in the Job 30.8.
world, Children without name: In this last Apostasy, who are Men of name, yea,
would be thought and counted the only men of name? If not Church Members and
Church Officers, those that are in the Congregational way, as they call it: As
for the Cavileer Church, that has no name, and the Presbyterian very little.
The Common wealths men and Fifth Kingdom men, al under hatches: Their crown is
fallen, they must go for a company of idiots, giddie heads and silly fellows:
In a word all without name that bear a faithful Testimony to the good old
cause. Hence I am persuaded (and in the fear of God I speak it) by the 7000.
Names of men, is meant, such members and officers of Congregationall churches,
and other Professors of Religion, as have greivously revolted from the Lords
work, and the Interest of Christ and his people.

The judgment follows: Were slain. As the Witnesses were not corporally
slain. So may this be understood of a spiritual death upon the Churches,
Officers, Worship, Government. Which is worse and more grievous than the other.
Neither is this without some appearance already; For,

1. Is there not an earthquake in their Churches: From whence else are all
those Rents, Divisions Distractions.

2. Is it not evident that the Lord of late has very much withdrawn his
presence from them: so that they have not the power, comfort, and sweetness of
his ordinances as formerly.

3. Do not the gifts and parts of their Officers sensibly abate, and wither.

4. For the Characters of the last Apostasy, viz. Self-seeking, Coveteousnes,
Pride, etc. do they not spread and appear like a Gangreen, every day more and
more?

But 5. What means this bitter complaining of late, among the new raised
Masters and Doctors: That the sons of Zerviah are too hard for them; not only
get away their places, but jeer and deride them. If half be true which
themselves report; the Lord has met with them already for their
unfaithfulness. Now howsoever these things are but a beginning, and little to
what (probably) will follow; yet enough to show, if the earthquake be not
come, there is a Type of it at least.

11. The other nine parts of the City (which I take to be the Civil power)
these are left to the stokels. Deu. 32.32, 33.
For their vine is worse than the Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah:
their grapes are of gall, their clusters are bitter: their wine is the poison
of dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes. A reason why they are Rev. 14.19 20.
cast into the great wine press of the wrath of God. Observe Reader, Reaping
is man's work, but to cause earthquakes is proper to God. This makes me think
that the judgment on Churches, and professors; will be by some immediate hand
of God, but the other which is to be executed upon the Civil state, will be by
the hands of men, Dan. 7.26
They shall take away his Dominion to consume and destroy it unto the end. So
then though the latter Apostasy be the subject of the first vial, yet it must
be understood as Church and State, and the judgments distinct.

12. No sooner are the effects seen of the first vial, but Rev. 11.18.
the Nations are angry, Ps. 99.1.
Jehovah reigns, the people are stirred: As Rev. 16.2.
men that have noisome and grievous sores upon them: are extremely impatient,
so profane men and Idolaters, when they shall see the kingdoms of this world,
are become the kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ (as they will soon do in
the effects of the first vial) oh how will they storm and ragel no torment like
it. But the children of the kingdom will do otherwise. Ps. 97.1.
The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, let the multitudes of Isles be glad
thereof.

I shall conclude with a short word: Though these things should come to pass,
yet they may be so mixed as not easily observed, when the Lord shall bring them
forth, without mavelous and serious Watchfullness. If to a little wine, as
much water be put: Though the wine remain in the vessel; yet not so well to be
known wine, as if no water had been mixed with it. It is my Opinion with much
Confidence when the witnesses shall stand on their feet, and ascend up to
heaven, and the first Angelis pouring out his vial: and the earthquake come:
Here the works, ways, judgments and appearances, of God, will be so manifold,
various and strong: That in this regard very few even of Gods own people (at
first) will discern or understand how the JVDGMENT WRITTEN is executed upon the
little Horn, Bottomless Beast, and last Apostasy. Luk: 21.38.
Watch therefore and pray always that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things which shall come to pass, and to stand before the son of man.

FINIS.

