Here is true MAGISTRACY DESCRIBED, And their way to Rule and Judge the people
set forth: And likewise, How the people ought to subject thereunto for
Conscience Sake toward God, and not for fear of Wrath only.

which is in answer to a Question that has been often put to the People
Commonly (with malice) called QUAKERS, etc.

For such Magistrates, and their Ruling, is by them owned, as according
hereafter is written, etc.

Prove. 29.12, 14. If Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked; but a
wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the Wheel over them.

Prove. 20.26. The King that faithfully judges the poor, his Throne shall be
established for ever.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign
of the Black-spread Eagle and Windmill in M^rti^s n^^r ALDERSGATE. 1660.

The Quest. is, What say ye concerning Magistracy, Or what Magistrates would
you have?
Answ. My answer is with Wisdom, who says of Magistrates on this wise:
THe Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, his Word is in my heart, and in my mouth;
2 Samuel 23.2, 3, 4.
and the God and Rock of Israel spoke unto me, and said, He that rules over
men must be just, ruling in the fear of God: He must be a wise understanding
man a man of truth and of a perfect heart, 1 Kin. 2.4. and 3.9, 10, 11, 12.
that he may discern between good and bad: He must be a righteous and an able
man, of a willing mind, a man of a good courage, hating covetousness, and
fearing God, and not the face of a man, etc. Exodus 18.21.


And then shall he be as the light of the morni^g, when the Sun rises; even as
a morning without Clouds, and as the tend^r grass springing up out of the earth
by the clear shining of the Sun after rain, and the Throne of that man shall be
established, etc.

First. Now Wisdom says, Isa. 30.1. 1 Samuel 23.2.4. Judge. 1.1.2. Mich. 6 8. 2
Kin. 20.3. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. 1 Kin. 2.3. Job. 29.14, 15, 16, 17. Psalm. 82.1,
2, 3, 4.
That the way of a Ruler to rule well, is, To take Counsel of God, and to
hearken to his Word and do it, that he may rule for God: Therefore he is to
humble himself, and to walk humbly with the Lord God; walking before him with a
perfect heart, doing all things, that is required of the Lord for him to do;
That is, to do justly, and to love mercy, and govern the People by the Law that
is Holy, Just, Pure, and good, as it came from God: He is to be a Father to the
Poor, and eyes to the Blind, and feet to the Lame: For this end he is to put
on righteousness as a Robe, and judgment as a Diadem; that he may rule the
People with Righteousness, and judge with Equity; and the Cause which he knows
not, he is to search it out: He is to break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck
(the spoil, viz:) the Righteous cut of their teeth speedily.

2. He that rules over men for God, is to be a Protection to them that do
well; viz: To such who walk not after the Flesh, 1 Pet 2, 14. Romans 13.3.4.
but after the Spirit of God: For they who walk after the Spirit of God are
taught by the Spirit (or grace of God) to d^ny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts; yea, even the lusts of the flesh, Tit. 2.11.1^.
the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life: And likewise the Spirit of God
teaches them, 1 Ioh. 2.16.
To live soberly, righteously, honestly, peaceably, and a godly Life and
Conversation in this present evil world; Gal. 5.22, 23.
and they who are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God, by whom the
fruits of the Spirit is brought forth and seen, which is Love; Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, etc. Such
are the Well doers that the Ruler is to be a Protection unto: 1 Timothy 1.9.
For against such there is no Law, For the Law is not made for a righteous man,
etc.

But as for the sons of Belial, They shall be all of them as Thorns thrust
away, 2 Samuel 23.6, 7.
because they cannot be touched with hands; for the man that touches them,
must be touched with Iron, and the staff of a Spear; and they shall be utterly
burnt in the same place, etc. Therefore,

3. That man that rules for God, must be a man of a perfect Heart, 1 Chro.
28.20. 1 Timothy 1.8, 9.10. Levit. 20.15, 16, 17.
and of a good Courage; for he must be a Terror to the Evildoers, and they
are such as are Lawless and disobedient to God; and those are Ungodly, Unholy,
Unruly, and Profane; Murderers, Man-slayers, Fighters, Quarrellers, Whores,
and Whore-mongers, Adulterers, Fornicators, Buggerers, Thieves, Robbers, Read
Deuteronomy. Chap. 4.
Swearers, Cursers, Drunkards, Liars, Cheaters, False-witnesses, and Perjured
persons; Idolaters, and Image-makers, Witches and the sons of Belial; Gal.
5.19.20, 21.
amongst whom is Hatred, Wrath, Srife, Variance, Emulations, Seditions,
Heresies, etc: and these are the Evildoers that the Magistrate is to be a
Terror to, and whatsoever else that is contrary to the Law that is Holy, Just,
Pure, and Good, and for such the Law is made, and not for a righteous man: and
that Ruler that does contrary hereunto, rules not for God, but bears his
sword in vain.

4. He that rules over men, must go in the way of God, to set up Judges and
other Officers under him, Eccles. 8.11.
to be a help unto him, for the well governing of the People, and also for the
speedy executing of justice upon the Evildoers, and likewise for the speedy
relief of the Afflicted and Oppressed, that there be no complaining of
Oppression or unjustice, or of taking of Bribes in the Land: Exodus 18.13, 14,
15, 16, 17.18.
Therefore he is to choose out from among the People Wise and understand^^g men,
men of Truth, hating Covetousness, who will judge for the Lord (at all seasons)
the people with equity, and withot respect of persons: And such Judges, Deuteronomy.
1.9, 10.
and other Officers are to be set up in every Fenced City, Town, 2 Chronicles. 19.51
6, 7.
Borough, etc. throughout the Land, by the Chief Ruler, thereof (that rules
for God, and for the good of the People:) whether he go under the Title of
Emperor, King, Prince, Duke, etc.

Now as concerning Judges and other Officers, who are to hear, judge, and
determine of all Causes and Controversies between man and man, Wisdom says on
this wise: Chron. 19.6. Exodus 18.22. Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17, and 16, 18, 19.29.
That the Judges are not to judge for man, but for the Lord, the people at all
seasons, with just judgment and equity, by the Law that is Holy, Just, Pure,
and Good; and not by the unrighteous Laws, Presidents, or Cases of men in
former or latter ages: Exodus 23.3, 6, 7, 8, 9. 2 Cron. 19.5, 6, 7.
He is not to wrest the Law; for if he wrest the Law, h^ wrests judgment, and
turns it backward, which he must not do: But he is to judge righteously between
every man and his Brother, and the stranger that is with him: He is to hear the
Cause of the poor, as well as the Cause of the rich; the small, as well as of
the great: For he is not to respect persons in judgment, Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19.
neither must he countenance a poor man in an evil Cause, because of his
poverty, neither countenance a rich man in an evil cause, because of his riches
and high Titles of honor; neither must he pervert the words of the righteous,
whether he be rich or poor; neither must he take Bribes, for they blind the
eyes, so that he cannot see to do true justice and judgment for the Lord
between man and man; neither must he judge for reward, but for the Lord. Mich.
3.9, 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 82.1, 2, 3, 4.
And again, the Judges and other Officers must not judge nor act unjustly, nor
accept the person of the wicked; but defend the poor and fatherless, and do
justice for the afflicted and needy; and deliver the poor and needy, and rid
them out of the hands of the wicked speedily: Therefore they must not be afraid
of the face of man, but to fear the Lord God, who stands in the Congregation
of the mighty, and judges among the Rulers of the earth; and him alone serve,
by doing true justice, and judgeing righteously. Therefore you that rule, Rule
with diligence; and be not slothful in that business, but be fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord; and follow altogether that which is just, Read Psalm.
2. to the end.
that so ye may live and inherit the Land which the Lord God has given you. Be
wise now therefore O ye Kings, and be Instructed ye Judges and Rulers of the
earth. Serve the Lord wi^h fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son,
least he be angry with you, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is
kindled but a little, etc.

And such Rulers or Magistrates (whether they go by the Titles of Emperors,
Kings, Princes, Dukes, Judges, Parliaments, States, Justices. etc.) that fear
God and rule for him, and do good for the People according as before written,
the Children of Wisdom own; rejoicing that the Righteous are in Authority, and
are glad to see and hear of their Prosperity; accounting such to be worthy of
honor in the Lord, not for fear of Wrath, but for Conscience Sake toward God.

Now the honor that is due unto Magistrates consists in these two Particulars:
1. Love. 2ly. Obedience.

First, He that is in the Well-doi^g himself, loves the Rulers that be set up
of God, who are just, and rule in the fear of God, and is a Terror to the
Evildoers: For when the righteous are in Authority, the children of Wisdom
rejoice; desiring of God that long they may live and prosper in the work of the
Lord; and Love thinks no evil, nor behaveth not it self unseemly toward the
Rulers, neither speaks any evil against him, neither does it revile the
Judges. And again, The Children of Wisdom who love Magistrates, curse not a^y
Ruler or Magistrate in their thoughts, nor Plot mischief against them, nor rise
up to destroy them (like the wicked;) but for the Lords sake that set them up,
love them: But as for the wicked and Evildoers, who continue living in all
manner of wickedness, as Drunkenness, Swearing, Cursing, Robbing, Stealing,
Fighting, Quarrelling, Murdering, Adultery, Chambering, and Wantonness, and
all m^nner of Wickedness; these, and such as these, neither love King, Ruler,
or other Magistrate; neither fear God nor man, whether King, Prince, Duke, etc.
For if they loved God and the King, they would keep the Commandments of God,
and the just Laws of the King who fears God: And again, If they feared God,
and honored the King, then they would depart from their iniquities and leave
all their abominable Practices, and live Honestly, Soberly, Peaceably, and in
love one with another; (...). 15.8, 9, ^.
and then their crying God save the King, would not be in vain: For, The
prayers of the wicked are abomination to the Lord, but the prayers of the
Upright, are his delight; and He hears the Prayers of the Righteous, but the
ways of the wicked are abomination to the Lord: So herein is the King or
Magistrate truly honored, when the Righteous, or godly people love him, and
the Wicked (to whom he is a Terror to because of their wickedness) stand in
fear of him.

S^condly, Honor due to the Magistrate, consists in Obedience; Either
A^tively, in doing, or Passively, by a willing, patient, and meek suffering
under them for the Lords sake.

1. Active Obedience, is in doing willingly all things, or in obeying all those
Laws that come from the Lord God by him for the people to do: Deuteronomy. 5.27, 28.
And herein the people of Israel showed their willingness to obey and do all
that God spoke to Moses their Ruler for them to do; and so likewise the Chief
of the Fathers, and the Princes of the Tribes of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 29.
and the Captains over Thousands, and Hundreds, and the Rulers over the Kings
Work, joined with David the King, Chap. 28.2, 3 4, 5, 6 Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6.
and offered willingly to the Lord, etc. gave for the service of the House of
God, etc. because the thing was of the Lord, according to what God had
commanded; who had said, Hear O Israel: Deuteronomy 5.1, and 6 1, 2, 3. and 10 12, 13.
What does the Lord require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk
in all his ways; and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and to keep the Commandments of the Lord, and
his Statutes, which (said the Lord) I command thee this day for thy good: So
that all things that comes from God, are for the peoples good; whether Laws,
Statutes, or Ordinances, are Holy, Just, Pure, and Good, Converting the Soul,
and making wise the Simple; and therefore not to be resisted, but obeyed,
according as the Magistrate requires it.

2. But if the King or Ruler should require the People to do any thing contrary
to the Command of God, and the Peoples good, which to do were to sin against
God; Therefore if the King and other Magistrates make Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances, for the People to obey, that be contrary to the Laws of God, the
People are not to be Obedient to the Magistrates therein Actively, but
Passively; that is, by a free, willing, patient, and meek suffering or
undergoing the Penalties of their unjust Laws (for the Lords sake who has
suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps) rather
than sin against God; Read Daniel Chap 3.
and herein Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego patiently submitted to the penalty
of the Kings Ordinance, which was to be cast into the fiery burning Furnace,
and thereto for the Lords sake to die, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, 17, 18.
rather than to transgress the Commandment of God, by Worshipping or bowing
down to the Kings Golden Image that he had set up: So likewise Daniel, rather
then he would obey the Kings Commandment, which was to forbear praying thirty
days, Read Daniel Chap. 6.
chose to suffer (the Penalty of the Kings Law, which was to be cast into the
Lions Den) for the Lords sake tearing to pieces, and devouring, rather than to
forbear praying to the only true and living God continually. Mark 16.15, ^0.
So Peter and John, who were commanded to go and preach the Gospel every where,
said to the Chief-Priests and the Ruler (who commanded them to preach no more
in the Name of Jesus, Acts 4.18, 19.
) We cannot but speak the things that we have both seen and heard: and also
said, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than
unto God, judge ye: And accordingly are we to fear God, and to keep his
Commandments, who has commanded all men to be subject to the higher Power,
and to submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. Whether it be to
King as Supreme, or unto Governors that are sent by him; for the punishment of
Evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well: And so let all see that
they hearken to the Word of the Lord, that is nigh them, and in their hearts,
and do it; and fear and dread the living and true God, For our God is a
consuming fire, and the Proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be but as the
Stubble before him, or as the Chaff before the wind; for the wicked, and all
that forget God, shall be turned into Hell. Therefore all People Remember your
Creator, and forget not the God that made all the Nations of men of one blood,
and gave them life and being upon the face of the earth.

To Thee, the only Wise, Immortal, Eternal, and Invisible GOD, be all Praise,
Glory, and Honor for evermore.

Written By HENRY CLARK.

