Imprimatur,

Jan. 7, 1686.

JO. BATTELY.

PAge 104. line 11. for the Jews r. their Persons. P. 119. line 9. for Cockles
r. Cocleus.

A VIEW OF THE Whole Controversy BETWEEN THE REPRESENTER AND THE ANSWERER, WITH
AN Answer to the Representer 's last Reply:

In which are laid open some of the Methods by which Protestants are
Misrepresented by Papists.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun, against St. Dunstan's Church
in Fleetstreet, MDCLXXXVII.

A VIEW Of the Whole CONTROVERSY BETWEEN THE Representer and the Answerer.
THE Representer was loath to part with his Answerer without asking him in
civility how he did: p. 1.
Now from so civil a person, I may, for ought I know, have the courtesy of a
turn or two, for asking; which if he will allow me, I shall at last desire a
word or two with him before we part, and that chiefly, in civility to ask him
How He does? I would entreat him to go back with me as far as to a Papist
Misrepresented and Represented, that we may see how matters have been carried
all along, since that Book gave occasion to this Controversy. How I shall speed
in this Request, Prot. etc. p. 125.
is hard to say, for it is a favor that his Second Adversary did not obtain,
who fairly led the way, when the Walk was not quite so long as it is grown
since. But with, or without his Company, this is the way I must needs go; and
because I will not do it, without giving the Representer a Reason, it is this: I
hope to satisfy those who will go along with me, That he has but jested all
this while; and (to make his words speak truth for once) has passed over all
his Adversaries Answers with a light touch (most of them with none at all) and
the most Artificial way of replying, p. 2.
with saying nothing to 'em, as can possibly be met with.

It was well done of him to tell the Reader in the Title Page of his last
Reply, That it was a Fourth Vindication of a Papist Misrepresented, etc. for if
he had not said so, really men could not have believed it. There were Thirty
seven double Characters of a Papist laid down with solemn order in the first
Book, to tell the World what he is by us falsely said to be, and what he is
truly in himself: And this later Character was fortified with such Arguments to
justify his Faith and Practice, as could be had. What now is become of all
this? What says the Fourth Vindication in defense of any one particular
Complaint, Representation, or Argument? Why not a word that I can find, unless
it be where he barely asks, P. 11.
What we think of Praying to Images, and of some few other things, and of more
than he would speak of, which stand charged upon the Character of a Papist
Misrepresented. He puts these Questions shortly and confidently, as if nothing
had been yet said to any of them. And his behavior would almost persuade a
man, that his double Characters were yet to be considered, and his Reasons yet
to be Answered. So one would think indeed by comparing his first and last Books
together, without observing what has come between them; or, at least, that the
Cause is dropped by one Side, or the other: And let him that thinks so, think so
still; for that is the plain Truth of the Case, which I shall make out by an
Argument that will do the business to the satisfaction of all men but the
Representer; and that is, That He has dropped it.

This I shall do in the First place, if it be but to try whether he will take
notice of it in the beginning of this Answer, tho he would not bestow a word
upon it, Prot, P. 125.
when he found it at the end of another.

And perhaps, now that the length of this Controversy, together with the
windings and turnings of the Representer, has made it something, uneasy to be
comprehended; it may not be ungrateful to those that have concerned themselves
in it, to have some general prospect of it, all at once before them; which I
shall make as short and as easy as I can, in going through the several Books
that have been written in this Cause, since the first.

The First Answer to the Representer.
THE first Book that called him to account, was The Doctrines and Practices of
the Church of Rome truly Represented; Representer's way of proceeding in his
double Characters, went on to examine his Characters Point by Point. Every
Question was particularly and exactly stated, and the sense of the Church of
Rome about it was shown, by the Decrees of the Trent-Council, or their Roman
Catechism, or their Public Offices, and their most approved Divines and
Casuists, as the matter required. This was done very distinctly throughout the
whole Answer, where he saw cause to correct the state of the Question; that the
Reader might see the grounds of every particular charge, that we and our
Fathers have laid against the Church of Rome. And thus, by the way, all the
false colors of the Representer were taken off, where he thought it for his
purpose to lay them on too Foul on his Misrepresenting, or too Fair on his
Representing side.

But this was not all; for whereas the Representer, not altogether trusting to
his Arts of Representation, thought fit sometimes to urge, never failed to
insinuate, Arguments in favor of his side of the Question; The Answerer,
without omitting any shadow of Reason offered by the Representer, took all his
Argumentations, and every pretense from Scripture, into particular examination:
I say, he took them one by one in their place and order, and made it appear,
that they were very faulty; as we at least thought, and as we may think still,
for any thing that we have heard to the contrary.

Nay, to give occasion to a more perfect understanding of these matters, He
took Popery as Represented by the Representer himself in one Colume, and gave
him Our Reasons against it, in another.

And because, to gain the greater opinion of sincerity, the Representer had
with Anathema's disclaimed several points, which, as he said, are imputed to
Papists by Protestants; the Answerer considered him here too, very
particularly, and seemed to discover insincerity in the Representer, even where
one would be most apt to believe him to be in good earnest.

To all which I must add, That this was done throughout with that Calmness and
Moderation, that his Adversary did not think fit to dissemble it. So that this
Book wanted nothing to make it deserve a fair and full Reply, or at least some
honorable sort of Concession, That the Subject would not bear it.

For surely no Method of Answering the Representer could be more Complete,
Honest, and Manly, than this was; nor serve better to put all those, for whose
sake Books are written, into a way of judging what Popery indeed is, and
whether we have rightly condemned it or no, if they were not already satisfied
in these things; especially because all was done with that plainness and
perspicuity, that if the Discourse was in any particular greatly defective, it
could not but be obvious to an Adversary, that was, it seems, thought a fit
Person by his Superiors, to Represent Popery to this Kingdom, and to defend it
against this Church.

The First Reply of the Representer.
TO this Answer the Representer published a Reply under the Title of
Reflections upon it. Now did he in these Reflections undertake to show from
Point to Point, That the Answerer had without cause corrected either the
Misrepresenting or the Representing Side, where he undertook to correct them?
Did he, as the Answerer has done before him, take the Questions in their Order,
to examine how they were stated, and where need was, did he pretend to state
them better? Nay, Did he bear up fairly to any one point of Representation that
his Adversary thought fit to alter, and try by the force of his Learning to
reduce it to what it was when he left it? No truly, his mind did not serve him,
for stating of Questions.

But did he not stand up in defense of his Anathema's which his Answerer
charged, not without giving Reasons for it, with Art and Sophistry? No, he did
not so much as offer at it.

What then was the business of his Reflections? Did they turn upon our Reasons
against Popery as Represented by the Representer? No sure; Nor was it likely
that he should be forward to answer our Arguments, that had no Fancy to defend
his own.

What? Did he not betake himself to make good his own particular Arguments in
behalf of Popery, against his Adversaries Answers? Nothing less, I assure you;
he did not take care so much as of one Argument belonging to any one point, but
fairly left them all to take their Fortune: Is it not enough for a man to bring
Arguments, but he must be troubled to defend them? Well; From this time
forward, the Representers business was not to Dispute, but to Represent. But
was it so from the beginning? The Representer indeed has ever since so
vehemently disclaimed Disputing, that perhaps he only Represented at first. Let
us therefore try that a little.

Were there not three Arguments for Veneration of Images, and for Praying to
Saints? Were not Moses, Job, Stephen, the Romans, the Corinthians, the
Ephesians, and almost every sick Person that desires the Prayers of the
Congregation, engaged one way or other? Did he not argue for Transubstantiation
from our Saviors Words, from the Power of God, from the incompetency of Sense
and Reason to judge in this, no less than in some other cases? I think this is
Disputing. There were three Texts of Scripture to justify the Restraining of
Christian people from reading the Scripture. And if they are not vanished out
of the Book, there are about seven Reasons for Communion in one Kind: The 12th
Chapter of the 2d Book of Maccab. was once thought one good Authority for the
Doctrine of Purgatoy; and St. Matthew. 12.32, another; And a little pretense of
Antiquity there was beside, and three or four more Reasons for it; and in this
strain the Book went all along: Now this I say, Those Arguments were not made
by the Answerer, but they were answered by him, and so were all the rest, and
now they may go shift for themselves.

And yet this is the Gentleman, who with no small opinion of himself, takes his
Adversary to task for letting his Arguments drop, nay, for not saying one word
to all his own Reasons pressed against himself; p. 2, 3, 4, etc.
but letting the matter fall very cautiously, when it comes to his own turn of
Disputing and Defending his own Reasonings, and that too in a Case directly
appertaining to our main point of Representing, etc. Now this is a biting
Accusation, if it be a True one; and before we part, I hope we shall have a
word or two about that. But if it were as true, as I am well assured it is
false, the Representer, of all men living, should have made no words on it; and
that not only because himself is a most notorious example of forsaking his own
Arguments in their distress, but because his Adversary was so generous to wink
at him when he stole off from his Disputing post, upon the very first attack
that was made upon him. For I do not remember that he charges him with this, in
showing the progress of the Controversy; and indeed, considering all his other
Advantages, there was no need of it. So that if the Representer had been
content, this might have been forgotten still; but if a man ows himself a
shame, he does well to pay it.

Well, but what went the Reflections upon, all this while? By this time I think
a stranger may guess the Truth, and that is, that the Reflections were to
flutter up and down between the Answer to the Introduction, and the Answer to
the Book; and to settle no where. And now I shall give as short and faithful an
abstract of them, as I can. In the Answer to the Introduction, the Answerer
declared himself unsatisfied with the Representers method to clear his Party
from Misrepresentations; and particularly, that he should make his own
ignorant, childish, or wilful mistakes, the Protestant Representations of
Popery, as that the Papists are never permitted to hear Sermons which they are
able to understand, and the like. Now from hence the Representer desires leave
to assure his Friends, that the Protestant Representations of Popery are
ignorant, p. 4.
childish, or wilful mistakes. One would not have expected so mean a Cavil, so
soon after he had promised most material Points; p. 1.
But because I find in his Protesting Reply, that he is ashamed to own it, I
shall take no further notice of this, than to tell him, He ought to have been
more ashamed to deny it; it being so manifest, that what the Answerer said of
some of his Misrepresentations, he applied to all that himself calls
Misrepresentations, An. p. 10. Rep. p. 3, 4.
that his utmost Art will never be able to disguise it to any man that will
take so much fruitless pains, as to compare the places. But to proceed,

1. Whereas the Answerer justly exposed him for pretending to draw his
Misrepresentantions exactly according to his own Apprehensions, Page 2, 3.
when himself was a Protestant; he now affirms, that he can justify his
Protestant Characters of Papists, by Protestant Books, which he names, and out
of one of them [ Sutcliffs Survey) he produces some sharp sayings concerning
Popery. Nay, he thinks to defend his Complaints of Misrepresentation, by those
very words of the Answerer concerning that Popery which the Representer allows.
we can never yield to it without betraying the Truth, renouncing our Senses and
our Reason, wounding our Consciences, etc.

2. Whereas the Answerer excepted against his Representing Part, wherein he
pretends to keep to a Rule, That the Representer showed no Authority that he, a
private Man, had to interpret the Rule in his own Sense, against the Judgment
of Great Divines, as in the Question of the Popes Personal Infallibility; and
against the Determinations of Popes and Councils, as in the Question concerning
the Deposing Power. The Representer replies, That he followed the Council of
Trent, P. 5, 6.
which he does not interpret, but takes in the Sense of the Catechism: That he
also kept to Veron's Rule of Faith, and to the Bishop of Condom's Exposition,
so highly approved by Pope and Cardinals, etc. As to the Instances, having
first ran to the Book for two more, he comes back with them to the two that
were mentioned, and replies, 1. That whereas he limited the power of the Saints
to help us to their prayers, he followed the Council, and the Catechism, P. 7,
8.
2. and the Bishop of Condom. That he did not qualify the Doctrine of Merit,
without Authority, since it is so qualified by Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 26. 3. That
the Popes Personal Infallibility is not determined by a General Council. 4 That
the Deposing Power was never established under an Anathema, as a Doctrinal
Point; P. 9, 10.
and those two are therefore no Articles of Faith.

3. He makes these Reflections upon the Answerers proceeding in the Book, That
he either 1. owns part of the Representers Doctrine to be the established
Belief of the Church of England: P. 11.
Or, 2. Does without good Reason deny part of it to be the Doctrine of the
Roman Church, appealing from the Definitions of their Councils, and sense of
their Church, either to some Expressions found in old Mass-Books and Rituals,
etc. Or to some external Actions, in case of Respect shown to Images and
Saints, as Bowing, Kneeling, etc. Or finally, P. 12.
to private Authors. P. 13, 14.
Upon which follows a grievous Complaint of Misrepresenting upon the last
account.

4. From hence he goes back to the Answer to the Introduction, where he was
charged for saying, That the Popes Orders are to be obeyed, whether he be
infallible or not: P. 15, 16.
From whence it follows, That Papists are bound to Act, when the Pope shall
require it, according to the Deposing Power. He replies, That he gives no more
to the Pope, than to Civil Sovereigns, whose Authority is not so absolute and
unconfined, but to some of their Decrees, there may be just exception.

5. From hence he flings again into the middle of the Book, P. 16.
and blames the Answerer for scouting amongst the Schoolmen, till the Question
about Dispensations to Lie or Forswear, was lost; and that he offered no proof,
That the Dispensing Power was to be kept up as a Mystery, and not used, but
upon weighty Causes. Then he leaps into the Chapter of Purgatory, P. 17.
and affirms, That St. Perpetua's Vision is not the Foundation of Purgatory, P.
18.
but only used by him as a Marginal Citation amongst many others. Then a
Complaint of Misrepresentation again; and because Complaints are not likely to
convince us, Let us, says he, depend upon an Experience; P. 19.
Do but give your Assent to those Articles of Faith in the very Form and
Manner, as I have stated them in the Character of a Papist Represented, and if
you are not admitted into our Communion, I Will confess that I have abused the
World.

Thus far the Reflections: It is now time to compare Things, and to see how
much of the Cause is left standing.

I pass it by, that the Answer to the Introduction, See for this Answ. to Pap.
Protest. p. 128.
upon which the Representer spent his main Strength, is in many most material
Points untouched by the Reflections: But this is a small Matter: For,

1. He has dropped the defense of his Double Characters, his Representations and
Misrepresentations. For instead of going on with his Adversary in those Thirty
Seven Points, with which himself led the way, he does nothing but nibble about
Three or Four of them, and that without taking notice of the tenth part of what
was said by his Adversary to fix the true state of the Controversy even about
them: He has indeed thrown about four Loose, General Exceptions amongst the
Thirty Seven Chapters in which the Answerer Represented the several Doctrines
and Practices of the Church of Rome; but he has not with any one of these
Exceptions come up fairly to what the Answerer has said upon any one particular
Point; And therefore I add,

2. That for any thing our Representer has done to show the contrary, the
Answerer has truly Represented the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of
Rome. And then we have great Encouragement to turn Papists, since the
Representer tells us, That if the Answerer has truly Represented the Doctrines
of the Church of Rome; He, the Representer, would as soon be a Turk as a Papist.

3. He has absolutely dropped the defense of all his own Arguments, not so much
as pretending to show where the Answers went upon a wrong State of the
Question; no, nor trying to reinforce his Arguments, where the State of the
Controversy was agreed upon on both sides: So that for ought I can see, the
Representer fell sick of his Thirty Seven Chapters all at once, both as to
matter of Representation and Dispute: And this I think was pretty well for the
First Reply.

The Second Answer to the Representer, being a Reply to His Reflections.
BUT we are to thank the Reflections for one good Thing, and that is for the
Answer which they drew from another Learned Hand, under the Title of a Papist
not Misrepresented by Protestants: In which I shall make bold to leave out
several Material Points, which the Answerer offered too Consideration, and take
notice of no more, than what I think may serve to show with what Sincerity on
the One Side, and Insincerity on the Other, this Controversy has been managed.
Wherefore,

1. Whereas the Representer chose to justify his complaints of
Misrepresentation, not by taking the first Answerers Representations into
examination, but by referring us to other Books, and to Sutcliff's sharp
censures of Popery; The second Answerer considered that the Representer called
the Censures which Protestants puts upon the Avowed Doctrines and Practices of
the Church of Rome, Misrepresentations: which was in the first Book discernible
enough, and spoken of in the Answer to it; but was so grossly owned in his
second Book, that no man could now doubt of it: For he made his Answerer guilty
of Misrepresentation for saying, That we cannot yield to that Popery which the
Representer himself allows, without betraying the Truth, etc. A Papist not
Misrepr. p. 4.
This Answer therefore blames him for putting into the Protestant
Representations of Popery, those faults which we find, and those ill
consequences which we charge upon Popery, as if we would make the World
believe, that Papists think as ill of what themselves profess and practice, P.
5.
as we do: And much more for putting these consequences, as owned by Papists,
in the Front of the Protestant Characters of them, as if we pretended, they
were the First Principles of Popery. As for the Doctrines and Practices of the
Roman Church, which we charge them with, the Representer generally owned them;
but he disowned, as he easily might, the belief of those Consequences and
Interpretations which we charge upon them. And therefore his putting them into
the Protestant Characters of a Papist, was his own Artifice of laying the
fouler colors upon Popery on the one side, that it might look the fairer, when
he took them off, on the other. Now to prevent these Deceits for the future,
this Answer goes through the Thirty seven Articles again, P. 6. to p. 40.
to show under each Head, what we charge upon them as their Doctrines and
Practices; which is properly matter of Representation: And likewise, what we
charge upon such Doctrines and Practices, which is properly matter of Dispute:
By the confounding of which two things, the Representer had made a color for
his unjust complaints of Misrepresentation.

2. Whereas he pretended that he never delivered his own private sense and
opinion in Representing a Papist; P. 44, 45.
the Answerer replies, that he certainly does so, when he determines concerning
Questions which are disputed among themselves, whether they be Articles of
Faith, or not; and that the Catechism may be interpreted by a private spirit as
well as the Council. That Veron's Rule, had no more Authority than the
Representer's Characters. That Bellarmines Controversies had attestation from
the Pope, as well as the Bishop of Condom's Exposition; And that Canus himself,
who is referred to by the Representer, acknowledges that the Popes approbation
is not always to be accounted the judgment of the Apostolic See. As to the
Instances, The Answerer shows, P. 45, 46.
I. Of his limitting the Power of the Saints to their Prayers; That no such
limitation of their Aid and Assistance, is to be found in the Council; That the
Representer would take no notice of what his first Answerer had said, to show
that no such limitation was intended in the Council or the Catechism; And that
he did not find this limitation in the Bishop of Condom. P. 12, 13.
2. Of Merit; That the Twenty sixth Canon of the sixth Session, mentions
nothing of it; and that it is clear from Chap. 16. of that Session, That they
make Good works truly and properly meritorious of Eternal Life, tho they grant
the Grace of God, and the Merits of Christ, to be the cause of their own
Merits. Finally, That the Answerer did not Appeal to the Thirty second Canon to
oppose the Representer's Qualification of the Doctrine of Merit, P. 46. P. 47,
48.
and was therefore unconcerned in his defense of it. 3. As to the Pope's
Personal Infallibility; That he denies it to be of Faith, and makes it but a
School point; whilst there are as many who deny it to be a School point, and
make it a matter of their Faith. That the want of positive Determination by a
General Council, does not prove it to be no matter of Faith, because neither
the Infallibility of a General Council, nor of the Church, is positively
determined by a General Council. That if Infallibility must be somewhere
amongst them, they have the best Reason that place it in the Pope. 4. As to the
deposing Doctrine, P. 49.
the Answerer showed largely and clearly, That Articles of Faith may be, and
have been decreed without Anathema's; That the deposing Decree includes a
Doctrinal point; P. 54. P. 56.
That if it were merely a point of Discipline and Government, they must either
acknowledge it Lawful for the Church to depose Heretical Princes, or consent
that the Church is not secured from making wicked Decrees, in things that
concern the whole Christian World. That when the Representer says, That some
Decrees of Trent are not universally received, he does not tell us that the
Council had no Authority to make them, and to oblige Princes to receive them.
And lastly, That the Pope's letting so many asserters of the No-deposing Power
to pass without any censure of Heresy, P. 57.
does not argue a change of their Doctrine, but only of the Times.

3. To the Representer's Reflections upon the Answerer's way of proceeding, as
that 1. He owns in some part the Representer's Doctrine to be the established
Doctrine of the Church of England; The second Answerer charges him with foul
Misrepresentation upon this account, in as much as the first Answerer owned
nothing which is peculiar to the Faith of a Papist, as distinguished from thr
common Faith of Christians; and that the Representer might as well have said,
P. 59, 60, 61.
That because Protestants own that Christ is to be worshipped, therefore they
in part own the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, That Christ is to be worshipped
by Images. And this he showed to be the very case in every one of those six or
seven Points, which the Representer only named, but did not think fit to insist
upon, to show how his Reflection was applicable to them. 2. And that the first
Answerer appealed from the definitions of their Church, etc. 1. To some
Expositions found in old Mass-Books and Rituals. P. 62.
This Answerer says, that he could find but one Instance of this, relating to
the Worship of the Virgin Mary; viz. that scandalous Hymn, O Felix Puerpera,
etc. But that their Church is accountable for her old Missals, which were the
allowed and established Offices of Worship; That even this has never been
condemned; but that Monsieur Widenfelts Book was condemned at Rome, which was
writ to bring the people to a bare Ora pro Nobis, P. 63.
to the Blessed Virgin, 2. To some external Action as in case of respect shown
to Images and Saints. To this the Answerer says, That the Representer brings in
this Exception, without taking the least notice of what his first Adversary
said concerning external Adoration, P. 63, 64.
That it is a part of Divine Worship; and that the Council of Trent requires it
should be given to Images. He shows further, That since there is such a thing
as external and visible Idolatry; an Idolatrous action is nevertheless such, P.
65.
for the intention of him that is guilty of it, not to commit Idolatry; P. 66.
That the worship of the Invisible Inhabitants of the other World, tho with
such external acts as may be paid to creatures, has always been accounted
Religious Worship; That as the Degrees of Civil honor are distinguished by the
sight of the Object; So one certain distinction between Civil and Religious is,
P. 67.
that the worship of an Invisible Object is always Religious; and that to
Worship the Image of an Invisible Being, must therefore be Religious Worship
also; because it is referred to the Prototype. 3. To the sentiments of private
Authors. And here the present Answerer challenges him to give one instance
wherein the Judgment of private Authors was, as he pretended, set up against
the declared sense of their Councils and Church: And moreover shows what use
was made of private Authors, by particular Instances; P. 68, 69.
and that sometimes recourse is necessary to be had to them, and to the general
practice of their Church, to know the sense of their Church.

4. Whereas the Representer avoided the charge of their being obliged by his
Doctrine to obey the Pope, when he commands them to act in pursuance of the
Deposing Power; by pretending that the Decrees of Popes may be excepted against
no less than the commands of Civil Sovereigns, as the case may be. The Answerer
does acknowledge this Reply to be good, P. 58.
if the Representer be sincere in the Application, and will grant the Deposing
Decree to command a Sin; and that Bellarmin and Canus were mistaken in
asserting, That Popes and General Councils can make no sinful Decrees relating
to the whole Church.

5. To the complaint of discoursing upon Dispensations out of the Schoolmen,
and bearing the Reader into a belief, that the Dispensing Power was kept as a
Mystery, to be used upon weighty occasions, etc. the present Answer says, That
there was reason for the former, this being one of the Instances wherein the
whole sense of their Church is not to be had, but from the Practices of Popes,
and the Opinions of their Great men. To the latter, That their own Doctors had
declared it, as the Answerer had shown, before he said it himself. Then as to
St. Perpetua's Vision, That if he did not think it gave some credit to the
Doctrine of Purgatory, it was mentioned by him to no purpose. Finally, to the
Representer's Invitation of us to come over to their Church upon his Terms,
with promise of Acceptance; the Answerer returns, That he must like their Faith
better first. And certainly the Invitation was something unseasonable, before
the Representer had answered our Reasons against that Popery, which himself
allows. And this for the second Answer.

The Second Reply of the Representer, being an Answer, to a Papist not
Misrepresented by Protestants.
THE second Reply comes forth under the Title of Papists Protesting against
Protestant Popery. Pap. Prot. p.4.
In which the Representer beginning with a defense of himself as to his
construction of the wilful mistakes, (see before, p. 8.) which if he pleases
shall be forgotten from this time forward: falls a wondering that there should
be such a noise about exposing of their Doctrines to open view; declares, that
tho he discovered what he thought, and sometimes said briefly, why; yet he made
not disputing his business; and knows not how this should be taken as a piece
of controversy against the Church of England, which he had not charged with
Misrepresentation, nor any body else, but those only in general that are
guilty. He complains that his second Answerer makes that which they call
Misrepresentation, to be in all the material points, P. 6.
a Representation of the avowed Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome;
and protests, That if Popery be guilty of what he says, it cannot enter into
his thoughts there is any room for it in Heaven. For the very Title of his Book
is a condemnation of the Religion to all those horrid shapes it has been at any
time exposed in by the Members of the Reformation: P. 7.
And so is his pretense, that We charge Papists with nothing but what they
expressly profess to believe, and what they practice. But since they must not
learn what Papists believe from the Council and the Catechism, but from the
Writings and Sermons of Protestants; he is resolved to give us a taft of their
way of Representing Popery; and therefore,

1. He recites several passages wherein Popery is Misrepresented, as he will
have it, out of a Book of John, sometime Lord Archbishop of York, and a Book of
Dr. Beard, P. 9. to p. 17.
and Sutcliffs Survey, and the Book of Homilies. And in conclusion he tells us.
That this is the Protestant Popery, which since he protests against no less
than the Answerer, Protestants and Papists may now go shake hands; and What ^
possibility is there of farther divisions? But if this be intended for a true
Representation of Popery, Roman Catholics suffer under the greatest injustice
imaginable. And then follows a vehement expostulation against the iniquity of
such Misrepresentation. P. 18.
And whereas the Answerer blamed him for putting into the Protestant Character
of a Papist, those ill consequences we charge upon their Doctrines and
Practices, as if we pretended that they think of their own profession and
practice just as we do: P. 20.
He Replies, That this is a pretty speculative quarrel, and a quaint conceit,
but lost, sor coming in a wrong place. For the Representer's business was to
draw the Character of a Papist, as it lies in the Peopels Heads, who when they
hear one declaiming against Popery, do not distinguish between Antecedents and
Consequents, between the Doctrine of the Papists, and the fault we find with
it, but swallow down all in the lump; and whoever supposes otherwise, must
conclude them to be better at separating, than the Chemists, and that in subtle
Distinctions they are able to outdo Aristotle himself. P. 22.
This is in short, what he says with much circumstance, and no little
contentment, for four Pages together; and it is all that he thinks sit to return
to his Answerers careful distinction between matters of Representation and of
Dispute, through all the Particulars: For though he confesses it is Learnedly
done, yet the almost Forty Pages about it, might have been spared, because this
Distinction is not to be found in the Notion the people have of Popery. P. 23.


For the rest, about his denying the Belief of our Interpretations, and the two
other Particulars, p. 24. They are so little to the Purpose, that I can afford
them no room in this Abstract; and he that will not take my Word for it, may go
to the Answer to Pap. Prot. p. 20, 21. and there satisfy himself.

2. To his Adversaries Question, Whether the Catechism may not be expounded by
a private Spirit, as well as the Council? He says, Thus a Question or two is a
full Confutation of the Reflecter. To the Testimony of Canus, That that is not
to be accounted the Judgment of the Apostolic See, which is given only by the
Bishop of Rome, privately, maliciously, and inconsiderately, P. 25.
etc. He replies, That so Reverend an Authority, as that of the Bishop of
Condom, is not to be thus overthrown, since his Exposition was examined with
all due Deliberation, approved with all Solemnity, P. 26.
etc. and recommended by his Holiness to be read by all the Faithful: Upon
which occasion he puts himself into some Heat, That we who protest against
their Religion should pretend to understand it better than a Catholic Prelate
eminent in the Church, etc. and than those;e who depend upon it for their
Salvation. P. 27.
As to the Instances; and 1. Of the Invocation of Saints, he says; Their Aid
and Assistance is limited to their Prayers, by the Bishop of Condom, and cites
the place; but to what his Adversary said concerning the Intention of the
Council, and of the Catechism in this Matter, he says nothing. The Instance of
Merit he passes by: But 2dly, P. 28, 29.
and 3dly, As to the Popes Personal Infallibility, and the Deposing Power, he
^pleads the Authority of the Bishop of Condom, that they are no more than
matters of School-Debate: and, as if he had been in good earnest at first, he
does again promise we shall be admitted into his Church, without the belief of
these Articles: So that he has every way Represented the Faith of a Papist
aright; and now has found out something in his Adversary to be answered with a
smile, That a Protestant should understand the Faith of a Papist better than
the Papist himself does. P. 30.
And thus all being guarded by the Bishop of Condom's Authority, and his own
Proposal, it was his mere Civility to take any notice of his Adversaries
answers to his Argument about the Deposing Power, from the want of an Anathema
to the Decree. And so he replies, 1. That every thing is not an Article of
Faith, which is declared in a General Council, without an Anathema. 2. That to
decree what shall be done, P. 30, 31.
does not include a Virtual Definition of Doctrine, as he thinks his Adversary
himself showed under the next Particular, from the Council of the Apostles at
Jerusalem. 3. That the Deposing Decree does not relate to things necessary to
Salvation, P. 32.
nor concerns the whole Church. And whereas his Adversary imputes the Escape of
those that oppose this Decree, to a Change of Times, and the Popes want of
Power, he tells us, That Oracles are ceased nowadays.

3. As to Veneration of Images, he says, That although Acts of Honor expressed
to any Image that has Relation to some Invisible Being, be supposed a Religious
Honor, yet all religious Respect and Honor is not so a Divine Honor, P. 33.
as to make a God constructively of the thing to which it is paid: Otherwise
Bowing to the Altar, and to the Name of Jesus; cannot be excused, P. 34.
since these things relate to the Invisible Inhabitants of the other World;
nay, All religious Respect, besides to God, must then be constructive Idolatry:
P. 35.
Therefore as the different Kinds and Degrees of Civil Honor are distinguished
by the sight of the Objects, tho the External Acts are the same, so the
different Kinds and Degrees of Religious Honor are distinguished by the
Intention of the Givers, and by Circumstances. He says further, as to the
unalterableness of the Nature of Actions determined by a Law, P. 36.
That if this makes the Intention of doing no evil in Bowing or Kneeling to an
Image, unable to excuse those from sin, who do this forbidden thing; this
strikes as severely at Bowing to the Altar, and Kneeling to the Sacrament, as
at them, since the Actions forbidden, are the same part of Divine Worship in
both Cases. Finally, P. 36, 37.
That a Quaker may justify his Tea's and Nays, by his Adversaries Rule, That
no Intention can alter the Nature of Actions determined by a Divine Law, since
it is said, Matthew. 5.34. Swear not at all, but let your Communication, etc. And
now to give him his due, setting aside the frivolous Instance of the Quakers,
he has in this Particular come up fairly to his Adversary, and said what
deserves; to be considered. Then he concludes with two or three Requests, which
he hopes are not unreasonable; to which his Adversary gave such reasonable
Answers, that we have heard of them no more since that time, [See Ans. to Pap.
Prot. p. 124, 125.] and therefore we have no reason to be troubled with them
here. And so let us now come to a Reckoning.

1. He grants his Adversaries Distinction throughout, between matters of
Representation, and matters of Dispute; which Distinction, since himself did
not observe, he either wanted the Skill or the Honesty of a Representer.

2. The Defense of his Argument, That the Popes Personal Infallibility is not
of Faith, from no General Council's having determined it, is dropped.

3. He will not be brought to say, Whether the Council of Trent had, or had not
Authority to oblige Princes to receive those Decrees which are not universally
received; and so the Defense of his Argument, from some Decrees not being
received, is dropped.

4. His solemn Cavil, That the First Answerer owned some part of his (the
Representer's) Doctrine, to be the Established Doctrine of the Church of
England; and his Objection against him for appealing to old Mass-Books and
Rituals, and that other for appealing to private Authors, are all three dropped.

5. He will not say that the Deposing Decree commands a Sin; and to his Defense
of himself against his first Answerer's Charge, That by his Principles he is
bound upon the Pope's command, to act according to the Deposing Power, is dropped.

6. His complaints against his first Answerer's Representing the matter of
Dispensations; and his note upon St. Perpetua's Vision, are dropped: But his
Invitation of us to come over to the Church of Rome upon his Terms, is not
dropped; for we thank him, he has invited us again.

The Third Answer to the Representer, being An Answer to a Papist Protesting
against Protestant Popery.
To the Representer's wonder, That such ado should be made about his First
Book, the Answerer sales, P. 1.
That a Misrepresenter is so foul a character, that no man can wonder if we
think our selves concerned to wipe it off; which surely may be done without
offense to any, but those that meant us, in the general Accusation. To his
complaint that the Answerer makes, All that which they call Misrepresentation,
to be in all the material points a Representation of the avowed Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of Rome, he says, That he has done him all the service
he can in distinguishing between matters of Fact, wherein if we charge them
wrong, we do indeed Misrepresent them; and matters of Dispute, in which, if we
should charge them wrong, it is not Misrepresentation, but merely a wrong
Judgment upon what they profess and practice. P. 2.
And he had already shown, That all matters of Fact (excepting some few points)
in the Character of a Papist Misrepresented, are confessed and defended in the
Character of a Papist Represented. Now Representation or Misrepresentation is
properly about matters of Fact. But as for the Consequences we charge upon
their Doctrines and Practices, and which were put into the Misrepresenting
Side, to be taken off again in the Representing Side; they are not matters of
Representation, but of Dispute. To this purpose the Answerer argues, leaving
the Representer to apply these plain things to his Protestation against
Protestant Popery; which amounts to thus much, That it could never enter into
him, that there should be any room for Popery in Heaven; and that he would as
soon be a Turk as a Papist, if he thought as ill of the confessed Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome, as we do. Which would be a wise Speech no
doubt, tho we hope a true one. For the rest, P. 3.
he says, That his Title related only to his own Book; and the Book, to the
Character of a Papist Misrepresented; and therefore it is hard that he must be
drawn in to answer for more than he knows, even for all that any Protestant may
have said concerning Popery since the Reformation; and he thinks it strange,
that the Representer, instead of defending his own Characters, should hunt
about for new Misrepresentations for him to Answer. For since he has allowed
the Distinction between matters of Representation and Dispute, and can find no
fault with his Adversaries performance about it; it should seem we are agreed
upon the Representation of Popery now at last, P. 4.
and therefore unless he were ashamed of his own Popery, now we had clearly
found it, why should he divert from that, to new complaints of their being
Misrepresented by others?

The Answerer however was resolved to see what occasion there was for this
fresh complaint.

1. And he shows, P. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
That if what was transcribed out of the foresaid Archbishop of York 's Book,
be Misrepresentation, it is not a Protestant, but a Popish Misrepresentation:
For the Archbishop cites his Authors for what he says, tho the Representer
left them out; And this the Answerer thought good to show from point to point:
And concludes, That tho every Doctrine found in Popish Authors, ought not
presently to he accounted an Article of the Romish Faith; yet a Church so
watchful to purge, expunge, and censure in all Cases where her Interest is
concerned, is Responsible for those Doctrines, which have her Toleration and
License, and which any man among them is allowed to Teach, and to Believe. As
for Dr. Beard, and Mr. Sutcliff, he says, P. 10, 11, 12, 13.
Those Sayings do not concern Representing, but Disputing; and that the
Representer had unfaithfully concealed, either their Authorities or their
Reasons, which had made the thing plain; or curtailed their sayings, as he
shows by several Instances out of Mr. Sutcliff; but that when such
Consequences, are charged upon Popery, it is more to the purpose to Confute
them, than to complain of Misrepresentation. Finally, As to the Book of
Homilies, those things which he has taken out of it, as the Answerer tells
him, P. 14.
do no more than show the Judgment of our Church about the Worship of Saints
and Images in the Church of Rome; in which he cannot prove us to be
Misrepresenters, otherwise than by confuting our Arguments; which yet would but
show that we make a wrong Judgment in a matter of Dispute, not that we
Misrepresent a matter of Fact. Upon this, the Answerer shows, That Papists
protess and practice the same things that ever they did; and that all this
grievous cry of Misrepresenting, is grounded upon nothing else, but a
Protestation, That they do not believe those ill things of their own Doctrine
and Practice, which we do; P. 15, 16.
which although it be a new business yet, there was no Reason for it, since we
never said they did. In the mean time, the Cause is the same, that ever it was,
which is a sufficient Answer to all that he says of Protestants and Papists
shaking hands, etc. And whereas he makes the distinction between Representation
and Dispute, to be a speculation, above the Vulgar, and so was not to be
regarded by him who drew the Character of a Papist as it lay in the peoples
heads; The Answerer thinks, That he who undertakes to make Characters, is bound
to consider what belongs to it; and withal, P. 17, 18, 19.
That our people are not so silly as to think (for instance) that Papists
believe the Worship of Images to be Idolatry; or that Idolatry is lawful,
because they Worship Images; but that if he wrote his Characters for the
Information of such Vulgar Heads, P. 20.
as he fancies, he wrote to inform those that can neither write nor read.

2. As to his Representing, That he did it not by a private Spirit, since he
followed the Catechism; the Answerer had reason to ask, Whether the Catechism
may not be interpreted by a private Spirit, as well as the Council, since their
Divines differ in Interpretation of both; and as for the Popes Approbation, P.
21.
he said that Bellarmine's Controversies had it, as well as the Bishop of
Condom's Exposition; to which the Representer would say nothing; and he now
says, That by Canus his Rule, the said Bishops Exposition has not the Authority
of the Apostolic See, unless the Pope had given Judgment for it ex Cathedra,
P. 22.
which the Representer also would take no notice of: But what he says further
concerning the Nature and Design of the Approbations given to the Bishop of
Condom, I shall wholly pass over, since it is by this time somewhat plain, that
this Bishops Authority has enough to do to shift for it self, and is not in a
Condition to spare any help to his Friends. As to the limitation of the Aid of
the Saints to their Prayers, he acknowledges that it is to be found in the
Bishop of Condom, P. 118.
though he missed it, because it came not in in the right place. But whereas
the Representer justifies his renouncing the Popes Personal Infallibility, and
the Deposing Doctrine, by the Authority of the said Bishop; the Answerer
plainly shows the Bishops great Judgment, in having ordered Matters so, as to
save himself both with Protestants, and with the Pope. To the Representers
Second Invitation; he answers, by making this Proposal, Whether their Church
would refuse him admittance, P. 15.
if he should come in upon Bellarmine's terms in these Points, which contradict
the Representer's; though there be no reason for this Dispute, since as he said
before, P. 16.
he likes not the Roman Faith as the Representer has described it? Now to his
Replies in behalf of the Deposing Doctrine being no Article of Faith, the
Answerer says, 1. That whereas the Representer would prove it was not so,
because no Anathema was fixed to the Decree; it is something strange, that he
should now be content to say, Every thing is not an Article of Faith, which is
declared without an Anathema; for this is next to a downright Concession that
his Adversary had baffled his Argument; and shows manifestly that he would seem
to say something, when he knew he had nothing to say to the purpose. 2. He
shows that the Decree of the Council at Jerusalem did include a Virtual
Definition of Doctrine. And 3. That the Deposing Decree concerns the whole
Church; and if it be a wicked Decree, that it relates to a thing necessary to
Salvation, by commanding to do that which it is necessary to Salvation not to
do; and therefore he expects the Representers further Consideration of his
three Answers.

3. Concerning the Worship of Images, the Representer bids so fair for a
Dispute, that the Answerer took the occasion, and examined not only what the
Bishop of Condom has delivered upon it, but the several ways of stating it by
their Divines; showing that their Images are Representatives to receive Worship
in the Name and Stead of the Prototype; that in this Notion Image Worship is
condemned in the Scripture, and in what the evil of it consisted; a more
particular Abridgment of that just Discourse upon this Subject I cannot make,
without either wronging the Answerer, or detaining the Reader here too long;
and therefore I refer him also to the Book it self for an Answer to the Charge
upon Bowing toward the Altar, P. 83.
etc. P. 106, etc.
And to the Apology for Image Worship, from the Degree of the Honor that is
given to Images: And to the Representers Objections against that way of
distinguishing Religious from Civil Worship, by making that to be Religious, P.
37, 38,39, 40.
which is given to the Invisible Inhabitants of the other World; P. 123.
and likewise to the pretended Parity of Reason in the Quakers Case. And thus
much may serve for the Answer to Papists Protesting against Protestant-Popery.

The Third Reply of the Representer, in Return to the Foregoing Answer.
THE Representer finds as little Comfort in Protesting, as Disputing, and so
falls to Accommodate the Difference between the Representer and the Answerer;
and calls his, Work an Amicable Accommodation. For now he grants the
Protestants are not guilty of Misrepresentation in a strict and proper Sense,
P. 1. 2.
and is very sorry that he and his Answerer understood one another no better
before: He thinks indeed it was his Answerer's Fault, not to conceive him right
at first; and that if his Book had never been Answered, the Peace had never
been broke; but he is persuaded the Difference may be yet compounded; P. 3.
For the Case at first was no more than this, That he perceiving the
Unchristian Hatred which grew in the Vulgar, upon that false Notion of Popery,
P. 4.
which our Misconstructions, etc. had drawn in their Imaginations; He, I say,
Good Man! No less in Charity to Protestants, than in Justice to Papists, drew
his Double Characters, to show how Popery is Misrepresented. P. 5.
But then comes an Adversary and says, He has proved that the Character of a
Papist Mispresented contains nothing in it, which in a strict and proper Sense
can be called a Misrepresentation. Now really he never meant to Fight for a
Word; and had he but imagined, that his Adversary had contended for no more, P.
6.
he would have spared him the Charges and Sweat of laying down his Proofs the
second time.

Wherefore to end the strife, he solemnly declares, that the Title of the
Papist Misrepresented, is not to be taken in its strict and proper Sense, as
Misrepresenting signifies only downright Lying, or falsely charging matter of
Fact, the whole Character being not indeed of this Nature; but in its larger or
less proper Sense, as it comprehends both Lying, Calumniating, Misinterpreting,
Reproaching, Misconstruing, Misjudging, and whatever else of this kind.

But that we may know what a Lover of Peace he is, he must, assure the
Answerer, That this Condescension is purely out of good Nature; P. 7.
for betwixt Friends, he does not think the Answerer has advanced any thing
that has the Face of a proof, That there can be no Misrepresenting where there
is an Agreement about matter of Fact.

Representing, he says, P. 8
being nothing more than showing a thing as it is in it self; as many ways as a
thing can be shown, otherwise than it is in it self, so many ways may it be
properly Misrepresented; so that the Description must agree with the Thing, not
only in Matter of Fact, but likewise in Respect of Motive, Circumstance,
Intention, End, etc. But according to the Awswerers Rule, had the two Tribes
and an Half, P. 9.
been declared Guilty of setting up Altar against Altar; and Hannah been set
out amongst her Neighbors for a Drunken Gossip; here had been no
Misrepresentation, because of some Matter of Fact in the Case. The Elders too,
that offered Proof against Susanna, since they saw her in the Garden, etc. P.
11.
were no Misrepresenters: Nor the Jews against; our Savior; nor Infidels
against the Apostles and Christians; nor shall any be excluded from a share in
this Favor, but they that have Malice enough to Calumniate, but want Wit to
give a Reason for what they do, etc. So much was the Representer overcome with
pure good Nature, that for Peace sake he would yield to a Principle that can do
such things as these, if his Word may be taken for the Reason; but we have
another Reason in the Wind presently; For if this same Principle which he has
ordered to protect the lewdest Defamations and Perjuries, will but do its
Office upon the Church of England, he has had his Reward: And so he shows what
execution he can do in the Mouth of some Zealous Brother, whose Honor and
Interest engages him to set out the Church of England, as we Represent the
Church of Rome: To which Purpose he puts a Sermon into his Mouth, which whether
it be a Copy or an Original, the Dissenters may say when they please. But the
Heads of it are such as these,

After a solemn Preface of Exhortation to keep out of the Swing and the Sweep
of the Dragons Tail, he lays down his Doctrine, P. 13, 14.
That the Church of England Men's Marks are the Marks of the Beast, which he
proves by the large Revenues and State of their Prelates, P. 15.
who wear the Miter and the Crosier upon their Coaches while they Live, and
upon their Tombs when they are Dead: P. 16.
By the Weekly Bill of London, which shows that Mary has Nineteen Churches, and
Christ but Three; by the Pictures in their Bibles and Common-Prayer-Books; and
by many other Marks as good as these; P. 17, 18, etc.
which because they stick fast to us, as he thinks, for any thing the Answerer
has said, must come over again in another place, and therefore the less
Repetition shall serve now.

Sermon being done, he asks whether this be Misrepresenting in a strict and
proper Sense; and if not, P. 34.
he is contented that the Word Misrepresenting in his Book should not be taken
so, i. e. for downright Lying; but, as we heard before, for wry
Interpretations, weak Reasonings, etc. And here ends the Amicable Accommodation.

For his picking up New Misrepresentations, he says he did it to show that the
former were not his own childish Conceits: For leaving out the Authorities of
the Arch-Bish p of Y^rk; that this makes nothing against him, because the
Question is not, What some private Authors say; P. 35.
but, What the Church believes; P. 36.
whose Faith cannot be fairly Represented from their Books though published by
the Authority of Superiors: For producing what Sutcliff laid to their Charge,
without producing his Reasons; that his Reasons were none of the Representers
concern, P. 37.
because they nothing belong to Representing, nor has the Answerer put his
Approbation to them.

He charges the Answerer with leaving out propter Deum in a Citation out of the
Pontisical, and this because the Words were not for his purpose.

In Conclusion, he is resolved not Dispute, since the Answerer knows no Reason
for all this Dispute, p. 26. and he cares not whether the Answerer likes his
Religion or not; P. 38.
He will be no other than a Representer still; for We wise Converts do not love
to go out of our way, but upon very good Grounds: The Bishop of Condom has
undertaken his own Vindication; P. 39.
and if he does but come off as well as the Representer, and it is strange if he
should not, let Bellarmine and other Eminent Approved Authors say what they
can, he has no Concern in it, but his Representation, and the Bishops
Exposition, are the Authentic Rule for the Exposition of the Council of Trent;
for the embracing the Catholic Faith, as Expounded by one, and Proposed by the
other, is sufficient for a Person to be received into the Communion of their
Church. P. 40.


We are now coming to the Foot of the Account; for besides other Particulars of
less moment that are dropped,

1. Whereas his only Reply to the clear and, particular Distinctions of his
Answerer between Matters of Representation, and Matters of Dispute, was this,
That these Matters did not, and could not lie in Vulgar Heads, with that
Distinction; his Defense of that Reply, and consequently of his confused and
deceitful way of Representing, is wholly Dropped.

2. The Defense of his Arguments, That the Deposing Power is no Article of
Faith; is now at last wholly Dropped.

3. His Defense of the Worship of Images, against his Adversary's Discourse, is
Dropped; or to use his own Words, her took the Freedom gravely to turn over his
Answerers Occasional Pages about it. P. 39.


And now if the Reader will please to put all together, he will find by an
easy Computation, That this was the poor Remainder of a Controversy begun by
the Representer upon no less than Thirty Seven Articles: So that these Points
having had the hard Fate to be served by the Representer as their Fellows were
before, I reckon that he has Dropped and Dropped, till the whole Cause is Dropped at
last; but this is one of those Things in which he is not concerned; for though
the Papist Misrepresented and Represented, be in a very forsaken Condition, yet
himself, the Representer, was never more diverting, nor in better Humor all
his Life: And who can blame a Man for not being sorry for what can never be
helped? And therefore since he sped no better with his Grave Undertaking, it was
not amiss to call a merry Cause, upon Misrepresenting in a strict and proper
Sense, and to bring in a Phanatick Representing the Church of England in a
Ridiculous Sermon.

The Fourth Answer to the Representer, being An Answer to the Amicable
Accommodation.
THE Answerer has no Reason to be displeased, that the Representer now grants
we do not Misrepresent the Papists in a strict and proper sense, P. 4.
viz. by Imputing such Doctrines to them as they do not own. But he says that
the Design of the Representer in his First Book, was to persuade our people
that we were such Misrepresenters; but that failing in the performance, he
would now make good his Title of Misrepresenting in a less proper sense, P. 6.
inasmuch as he thinks we do unjustly condemn the Doctrines and Practices of
the Church of Rome. But why he should tax us for this at all, the Answerer
wonders, and that very justly, one would think, because the Representer has
sometime since disclaimed Disputing, without which it cannot be seen whether we
be Misrepresenters or not in this less, proper sense: And therefore he tells
him, That if he will vindicate the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of
Rome, he must quit his retreat of Character-making, P. 8.
and fall to Disputing as their Fathers did; in which, he is ready to join
issue with them: But that it was by no means civil to charge us with Lying, how
prudent soever it might be upon another account, since if he proceeds, in this
way, he may be secure, that no civil person will care to dispute with him. Now
whereas the Representer did in effect recall his grant, by attempting to prove
largely, That there may be a Misrepresentation where there is an Agreement
about the matter of Fact; because there may be Mispresentation upon other
accounts, viz. in respect of Motive, Circumstance, Intention, End, etc. Here
the Answerer shows that these things do indeed belong to true Representing; but
that they were too nicely distinguished by the Representer from matter of Fact;
for he had given him no occasion for the Distinction, since he had considered
these things in those matters which he charged upon the Church of Rome; For
Instance, That not only Worshipping of Images, but the Worshippers Intentions,
and all other circumstances, without which the Nature of the Fact cannot be
thoroughly understood, were taken into consideration. Then he shows through all
the Representer's Instances, That Misrepresentations were in Matters of Fact;
P. 12.
but wonders why he did not produce one Instance of the like nature out of his
Answers, if he thought there were any. For what could he gain by showing, That
in such and such cases others have been Misrepresenters, unless, he proved
withal, that we were Misrepresenters in like cases? His instances show, that
they who tell a piece of a Story, may Misrepresent; but not that they do so,
who faithfully relate the whole matter of Fact, with all its circumstances;
which is our case; and he has not produced one example to the contrary; tho so
to have done, had been more to his purpose, than all his other Instances. In
short, this matter was so fully Answered, that when we hear next of the
Representer, we do not find one word more about it.

To the Zealous Brothers Harangue, he says, tho it be granted that the
Dissenters Misrepresent our Church, yet this does not prove that we
Misrepresent the Church of Rome; and therefore this is nothing but a device to
get rid of us, P. 15.
by throwing us upon the Dissenters. But we are not for pursuing every New
Game, P. 16.
but will keep to our old scent. And yet he has made the Dissenter say such
silly things of us, as no Dissenter will own, unless he has heard them among
the Quakers. This the Answerer plainly showed through, almost all his Fifteen
particulars of the Charge against the Church of England, and by the way, where
it was any thing needful, he taxed the unreasonableness and folly of the
Charge, which yet was more than he was bound to, since if it came to the Trial,
we have some reason to think that there is not a zealous Brother in England, no
nor Friend neither, but would be ashamed to own it. So that this design of
Representing and Misrepresenting, to which I may add the Representer's yielding
in pure good Nature, that henceforth Misrepresenting shall be understood in its
less proper sense, ends only in Ridiculing the Church of England, with which we
are content, if they will permit us truly to Represent theirs.

To what the Representer offered, for seeking out new Misrepresentations, the
sum of what is Answered, is this, That it is in the main agreed what the
matters of Fact are with which the Papists may be charged; and since these only
are the proper Subject of Representation, the ill consequences which
Protestants have urged against their Doctrines and Practices, ought not to have
been put into the Character of a Papist Misrepresented, P. 24.
unless he could show, that we say that Papists do believe those Consequences:
And therefore the Representer vainly endeavors to excuse himself for putting
them into that Character, by hunting about for new pretended
Misrepresentations, to employ his Answerer withal. This I gather to be the
Answerer's sense, from his reference to what he had proved before.

As to the Archbishop of York; the Answerer says, he did not Misrepresent the
Church of Rome in saying that Stapleton said, P. 25.
We must simply believe the Church of Rome whether it Teach True or False. The
most that can be made of it, is, That according to one of their allowed
Doctors, Thus a Papist must believe. And therefore if it be a Misrepresentation
of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, Stapleton is to be thanked for it in the
first place, for saying so; and in the next, the Church of Rome for allowing
him to say so; and then the Archbishop for reporting what he said, tho he does
not say that one Doctor may make Doctrines for the Church of Rome.

The Case of Mr. Sutcliff, he says, is different; and he shows that he expressly
distinguishes between what the Papists teach, P. 26, 27.
and what himself concludes from such Doctrines; and therefore that he does not
Misrepresent the Papists. So that how little soever the Representer thought
himself concerned in Sutcliff's Reasonings, because Reasoning belonged not to a
Representer; yet surely it belonged to a Representer to distinguish beween the
Doctrines we charge upon the Papists on the one side, and the Arguments we
bring against these Doctrines on the other.

To the Charge of omitting to render propter Deum into English; He says, It was
omitted he knows not how or why; but very jus;tly blames the Representer for
insinuating that it was dishonestly omitted, since it was the whole Design of
that Discourse about the Worship of Images, P. 28.
to show that Image Worship is Evil, tho God was worshipped by it. I will upon
this occasion add, that the Answerer could not but know his own foul Dealing in
this Charge, which is so very manifest; that this Injustice, if there were
nothing else, does assure me, that he must make another Change, before we can
expect much sincerity from him.

With like honesty, he disingages himself from all Obligation to dispute
concerning the Worship of Images, etc. 1. Because the Answerer knows no Reason
for all this Dispute; which words did not at all relate to that Dispute, but to
the Question about the Bishop of Condom's Authority. 2. He was never concerned
whether the Answerer liked his Religion or not. But if he could have answered
that Discourse, all that the Answerer could have said would not have hindered
him. P. 29.


For the Rest; the Answerer says, that the Representer and the Bishop of
Condom, reasoned and argued at first, as well as Represented; and since their
Representation is offered as a Rule by which we may be taken into the Roman
Church, they were the more concerned to justify their own Reasonings; P. 30.
which since it is declined, our People will be apt to think why Papists
decline the Dispute, who are never known to avoid Disputing, when they think
they can get any thing by it. And thus the Answerer takes leave of the
Representer, believing that this Matter is driven as far as it will go.

The Fourth Reply of the Representer, in behalf of his Amicable Accommodation.
THis last Reply is made up;

1. Of insulting over the Answerer, for offering no more than he did in Answer
to the Zealous Brother's Sermon against the Church of England.

2. Of more and more outcries upon the Protestants for Misrepresenting the
Papists.

But the Particulars that come under these Heads, together with his Reflections
by the bye, will be best produced in the following Answer, where I shall
consider what Reason he has for this kind of proceeding.

The Fifth Answer to the Representer in Return to his last Reply.
IF the Seven and Thirty lost Points had been recovered, the Representer could
not have entered the Lists with more seeming satisfaction, in himself, than he
shows in his last Reply. But he has made a shift to forget them, and that is as
good. What the Answerer said, that the Matter was driven as far as it would go
(whatever the Representer imagines) I find still to be true. For with reference
to the chief matter of Dispute betwixt us, we are parted; and, I think, never
like to meet any more about it. Indeed as to the manifold Charge sun^^ed up
against the Church of England, that matter, as he truly observes, is not driven
as far as it will go: And it seems he intends to drive it farther and farther.
But why that should ever come to be a matter of Debate betwixt us, any one who
considers the Controversy from first to last, must needs wonder.

The Design of what has been said on behalf of the Church of England has been
to make evident these three Things.

1. That we do not charge the Papists with some things which the Representer
will have us to charge them with.

2. That some things which he faith we falsely charge them with, are maintained
and practiced by them.

3. That allowing them to maintain and practice only, what themselves
acknowledge that they do maintain and practice, yet there are sufficient Reasons
why we cannot comply with Popery, although refined after the newest Fashion.

This is the sum of what has been argued on our side. Now how comes his Zealous
Brother's Cant to be an Answer to all this? I know not I must confess how to
imagine any Dissenter to be so ridiculous as to object against us, what the
Representer makes him to Object: And without Flattery or Fawning, I may safely
affirm that there are not many who do it. But suppose there should; will such
their Objections prove against the First particular above mentioned, that we
charge Papists with what we deny we charge them with? Or against the Third,
That allowing them to maintain and practice, what themselves acknowledge that
they maintain and practice, we ought to comply with Popery. I think that no Man
in his Wits will assert this. And therefore we may justly ask what is to be
done with all that has been said upon these particulars? and whether there not
having been any ting that is material urged against them, does not imply that
there is nothing material to be urged; and consequently, if the Answerer had
not some Reason to say, that the matter was driven as far as it will go?

As to the second particular, viz. that several things which we are said falsely
to charge them, with are maintained and defended by them; This indeed the
Character which he made, little more than in Jest, for his Zealous Brother,
does seem more directly to oppose. And yet it might be easily answered, that
this Brother in his Zeal might urge what was False against Us, tho we urged
nothing but what was True against the Papists. Which with a great deal more the
Answerer offered to the consideration of the Representer; and he is now told
that he pssed over this same charge upon the Church of England, with a Light
Touch, etc. And much ado there is, because he was not for pursuing every new
Game, but for keeping to the old Scent. P. 3, 4.
For what could possibly come more cross to the Representer, than that after
all his Doubling and Shifting, he should start new Game for us, and yet we
should be for keeping to the old Scent? And therefore I do not wonder to hear
him complaining in this manner. And is it possible then that the Disputing
humor is so soon off? We have heard of nothing hitherto so much as of Disputes
-- and yet the Answerer is as unwilling to Dispute as the Representer -- Here Is
not a word now of Disputing -- And is it not strange that be should draw me out
to Dispute -- and when his own Turn comes of Disputing he should let the matter
Fall, because, forsooth, he will keep to his old Scent?

Now really this would almost persuade a Man to let him go for good and all; as
he might have done if he had observed but a little moderation. But he gives it
out, that in his Brother's Character of the Church of England, Almost every
Point urged with the same Proofs of Scripture and Reason, which Protestants
produce against the Papists: That there is scarce an Argument in the Character,
but is exactly parallel to what the Church of England uses in her Defense
against Popery; that the Grounds of the Arguments are the same, the manner of
urging them the same, the Maxims on which they stand the same, and then the
Reasons which press them home, are they not the very same which the Answerer
himself in his former Discourse urges against him? And he turns it upon his
Answerer, That a little prudence would serve him to say nothing in such a Cause
as will admit no better a Defense. This I must needs say, is a little too
tyrannical in a Representer under his Circumstances; and would tempt a Man
against his own Inclinations to follow him a little farther now, under his new
Shape.

I tell him therefore, in the first place, that a close Disputant would have
pressed him to show, that the Reasons upon which we proceed in our manifold
Charge against the Papists are false and unsatisfactory; and not have suffered
him to run out into an Inquiry, whether the Reasons upon which his Zealous
Brother proceeds against us, be the same with them, or no. Or, if this were to
be allowed him, we might be well excused from answering him in this matter;
since the particular Controversies which the Church of England has with the
Dissenters, have been managed on her behalf, not so long since that it should
be forgotten; and the difference of the Case between the Separation of
Protestants from the Church of Rome, and of Dissenters from the Church of
England, was shown after all, and that in very good earnest. For this being not
taken notice of by Representer, it might very well set off our Debt to him for
a Charge upon the Church of England, which himself meant little more than in
jest. Besides, although he glories in this Charge more than in all his other
Performances, yet since he frequently intimates that he intended no more by it,
than to Ridicule our Charge against the Church of Rome, it is all one, as if he
had given it under his hand, that his Cause is more safe by ridiculing what we
say, than bye replying to it like a Disputant. Now on the other hand, we think
our Charge must needs have been carefully laid, and well defended, if at last
it wlll admit of none but Ridiculing Replies: And so we might without much
danger, leave things as they are, and put it to the venture, whether the World
will not think so too. But because he boasts so very much, that this Discourse
which he has composed for the Brother, is not yet sufficiently answered, and as
some think, he may grow a little popular by it; I care not if I go on with him
in some part of his own way; and, in compliance with the Opinion of others,
inquire into the difference of those Objections upon which we proceed against
the Church of Rome, from those upon which his zealous Brother proceeds against
the Church of England.

1. I grant that our Prelates have Revenues, and I believe Coaches, Miters,
Crosiers and Copes. Now if there be any reason why his Brother calls these:
Popish, it is this, that these things were not in use in our Savior's, and in
the Apostles times. But when did we ever object against any thing that is
merely circumstantial amongst them (as these things are) that it was not used
in our Savior's, or in his Apostles Times? Have we not said it a thousand
times, that we like nothing the worse because the Papists, approve it, provided
it be useful; nay, if it be innocent and harmless? As for their Ornaments and
Ceremonies, where does any one find that in the Controversies now on foot
betwixt us, we do at all insist upon them? Tho we cannot but think many of them
to be neither grave nor decent, their Number too great, and too much Religion
placed in them by some People. So that, tho there is scarce an Argument in the
Character, but exactly parallel to what we use, and tho ALMOST EVERT Point is
urged with the same Proofs, etc. yet surely the First Point is none of them.
And therefore let us try the next.

2. It is objected against us, that we make Gods of dead Men, and this is
proved by the weekly Bills of Mortality, where our Churches are called by the
same Titles that they had in times of Popery. Now if by, making Gods of dead
Men, be meant making the Saints so many, Independent Deities, there is then a
great deal of difference between what the Zealous Brother objects against us,
and what We object against the Papists, as well as between the Reasons of our
Objections: For we never object this against them. But if by this Expression be
meant, giving that Worship to the Saints, which belongs only to God and our
Savior; we then allow our Objection to be the same, but do think that we have
much better Reasons to object this against the Papist, than that of a weekly
Bill of Mortality. For we appeal to the Public Addresses which are made to
Virgin Mary, and other Saints, with all the Circumstances of External
Adoration; to their Litanies and to the Hymns of their established Offices,
wherein they are often in voked after the same manner, as God himself is; to
their appropriating to particular Saints, distinct Powers of doing good to
their Worshippers; to their Acknowledgment, that the Saints are Mediators of
Intercession; to the Prayers that are made to them in all places, as if they
were omnipresent; to the Sense also of their Council of Trent, that they are to
be prayed unto with mental as well as vocal Prayer, as if they knew our Hearts.
All which I hope is something more than that in the weekly Bill of Mortality,
and in common Conversation, we call our Temples by the same Names they formerly
had. And yet the Representer asks, Wherein have I Ridiculed the Church of
England? I have done no more in my Character against her, then what they have
been doing these hundred and fifty Years against the Church of Rome? so that it
seems we have for these hundred and fifty Years charged them with Worshipping
the Saints upon no better grounds then their weekly Bills of Mortality. Only,
says he, what I have done in a kind of jest, and without endeavoring to
delude any body with such kind of Sophistry, they have been doing in the
greatest earnest, and by it making good their Cause. So that he confesses his
Charge upon our Church to be carried on with a kind of Sophistry: only what he
has done in a kind of jest, we have been doing against them in the greatest
earnest; i. e. we have in good earnest charged the Church of Rome with giving
that Worship to Saints which belongs to God only, upon nothing else but the
Titles of Churches, such as ours have in the Bills of Mortality. But surely his
greatest Sophistry of all lies in this, that he endeavors to delude People
into this Opinion, which yet if he could, he must delude them into another
Opinion too, that Bellarmin and all the famous Champions of old Popery, were a
company of Fools, to be at so much Sweat and Charges to maintain the Worship of
Saints, and to defend it, as they have done, when they could so easily have
denied it. For that nothing is easier than to make good our disowning it
against the ground upon which he charges us with it, I shall presently make
appear.

To let pass his Suggestion, that the London Churches were first built by the
Papists; his adding that we rebuilt them, with the same Titles, Invocations and
Dedications which they use, shows how little he is to be trusted in a Question
of Antiquity, who talks so carelessly of things that are notorious in our own
Days. Our Fathers indeed found the Titles convenient enough, and the Churches
themselves reasonable good Churches, and retained them both. But when we raised
them out of their Ashes, we dedicated them to no Saint, whatever has been done
in this kind formerly; nor have we since invocated any Saint in any one of
them, but we keep the Titles still. And does our new Representer expect that we
should Answer such Objections as these? At least I desire him not to think that
we will make a practice of it. Must our retaining these Titles, necessarily
infer a virtual Dedication of our Temples to those Saints, by whose Names they
are distinguished from one another? But what if we had called them by the Names
of those Streets only where they stand, had they then been dedicated to the
Honor of the Streets? We say that the Hundred Thirty and Two Churches here,
which are known by the Names dead Men and Women, are with us God's Houses, and
dedicated to his only Service, no less than the Five that are distinguished by
the Names of Christ and the Trinity. And me thinks so acute a Disputant as he
is grown, might have seen that the Title of one Church distinguishing it from
the rest, does not show who is served and worshipped there, when the same
Service and Worship is used in all of them. That which we blame them for is,
that they continue to worship Dead Men and Women in those Churches which bear
their Names, and in those which do not. For if in Christ's Church they call
upon the Blessed Virgin; tho the Church has its Title from Christ, yet it is a
House of Prayer to Her as well as to Him. And if in the Churches which are
known by her Name, we call upon God only, and worship him alone, they are his
Houses entirely, and none of Hers. But after all, where does the Answerer press
him with the Titles of their Churches? And yet the Reasons which press home the
Arguments, are they not the very same which the Answerer himself urges against
him the Representer?

3. I confess that I have seen Pictures in some English Bibles and
Common Prayer Books, and Moses and Aaron painted on each side of the
Commandments upon some of our Altar pieces; which things how they have crept in
amongst us I cannot tell, for they have no public Authority from our Church.
The Answerer made his guess, and perhaps it will not be easy to mend it. But
upon this great Occasion, the Representer has brought in his Rigid Brother
making us worse than the Papists themselves, forgetting that he undertook to
represent us not altogether so Bad, and therefore he should at least have
corrected himself in this manner; Indeed, Beloved, I told ye at first, that
these Church-of-England-Men are within the Swing of the Dragon's Tail; but I
had not lied to say that they are under the Feet and the Belly, more than the
Papists themselves are. For the Papists do no more toward the placing of
Image Worship in the Word of God, than by a cleanly conveyance of that
Commandment which forbids it, out of the way. But these Church-of- England-Men,
as they are called, have given that Abomination of Images themselves, a place
in every Leaf of their Bible, in the very Word of God; which is the greatest
Argument of Sovereign Honor. Nay, in some of their Bibles you shall find Moses
and Aaron stand in the very next Leaf to the Ten Commandments; which what is
it, Beloved, but a Defiance to the Second? Whereas the Papists being more
modest than to affront it, have put it away far from them. But this is not all,
my Brethren, for they pray to their Pictures; for if you but look over their
Shoulders, you will see their Pictures in the very heat of their Devotion, under
their very Eyes, in the Leaves of their Common Prayer Books; And therefore,
mark me now Beloved, if we must believe our own Senses, they pray to the
Pictures, and to the Leaves, and to the Idol Common Prayer Books and all.

This indeed had been something like, and would have pieced well with what
follows, that our Altars have their Images too, and that in a more profane way
than the Papists, etc.

Well; but let us suppose our Church bound to answer for these Pictures; and
for Moses and Aaron, etc. Are we enjoined to pay them any Worship, as they of
the Romish Communion are obliged to pay to their Images? The Council of Trent
has determined, That due Honor and Veneration must be given to Images, and
that the Honor which is given to them is referred to the Things which they
represent. Has the Church of England done any thing like this? We read of
several Prayers used at the Consecration of Images amongst them: But whoever
heard of any such thing practiced at the setting up of Moses; and Aaron? We
know that they walk many Miles in Pilgrimage to particular Images, and that
they think much more good is to be expected from some, than from others: But
who ever thought so among us, or imagined that the Pictures of Moses and Aaron
in Cornhill, were more to be honored than those in Woodstreet, or in any other
place? So that how silly soever the Zealous Brother may appear to be in
imputing to us, upon such frivolous grounds, the worship of Images; I am sure
that he who made the Harangue for him, is either much more so, or something
that is worse, in pretending that when we urge the same against the Papists,
the Reasons we go upon are no better than his.

But we do at least make Images and Pictures, which the second Commandment
expressly forbids, as he makes his Brother say. And now a Reason of the Answerer
is produced, that no Intention can alter the nature of Actions which are
determined by a Divine Law. I would therefore know of him, whether there be, or
be not good reason to make us certain, that the second Commandment does not
absolutely forbid the making of Images and Pictures, but only with reference to
worshipping them. If there be no good Reason for it, let him then tell me,
whether any Intention can justify the making of Images against an absolute Law
to the contrary. If there be, let him then but confess what he thinks of this
Objection that he has put into his Brother's Mouth; and there is one labor
saved.

I confess, it were not ill for him if some Intention might justify the
breaking of the ninth Commandment; for he pretends that the New
Common-Prayer-Books do not profess that hatred to Image Worship, which the Old
ones did: When in the Commination to which he refers, the very first instance
runs thus; Cursed is the Man that makes any carved or molten Image to worship
it. Does he think that his Dissenting Brother must answer for these things.

4. Neither is he more Just to us in making his Zealous Brother to object
against us that we worship Saints and Angels. For, to pass by the Argument
about erecting Temples to them, to which we have already spoken; Is our giving
Thanks to God upon set Days for such eminent Examples of Faith and Virtue, as
the first Propagators of the Gospel were? Is our commemorating their Patience,
and all their other Divine Graces, to excite one another to the Imitation of
them? Is our Praying to God that we may be Followers of them, who through Faith
and Patience inherit the Promises? Is this, I say, any thing like to what the
Council of Trent declares, That they think wickedly who deny that Saints are to
be Invoked? Is it of the same nature with owning them to be Mediators of
Intercession, the same with putting up them that sort of Petitions which are
fit to be offered to God only? Or does our Praying upon St. Michael's Day, that
by God's appointment his holy Angels may succor and defend us, come near even
so much as to one single Holy Michael Pray for us? which Form of Words, tho
much inferior to what is sometimes used in the Church of Rome, we never dare
to venture upon, because we cannot make Addresses either to him, or to any
other Angel or Saint, but by interpretation we must ascribe the Divine
Attribute of Omnipresence to them, and for many other Reasons, which yet we
have not been able to get an Answer to from these Men. But he says that we Pray
on St. Michael's Day, as if God were not able to defend us, and therefore we
seek shelter under the Angel's Wings: And this surely is to worship Angels. By
like reason if we pray for our Daily Bread, we pray as if God were not able to
preserve us without it: And this would be to worship Bread. The Representer
makes too bold with his Zealous Brother, and with us too, if he would have it
thought that we reason against them at this rate. But by this time I hope he
sees to how little purpose he applies that of the Answerer to this matter, viz.
that All worship of Invisible Beings is Religious Worship, etc. For as yet he
has not proved that we worship Saints or Angels; and if he has done his best
toward it here. I will be bold to say, that he knows he cannot prove it
against us; as we can against them, if there were any need of it: But there is
no need of it, because they confess it.

5. As for what is objected about our Idolatry in Receiving the Sacrament; if I
did not know the Prompter, I should be ashamed to find it amongst such
Instances as are said to be built upon the same Maxims, that our Objections
against the Papists are. For how far soever We and the Zealous Brother might in
other cases be said to agree in the Reasons of what we Object; I am sure it is
most unreasonable to say we agree in this. For do we, as the Papists, hold that
the Bread and Wine are changed into the natural Body and Blood of Christ? Do we
require any worship to be paid to the Elements after Consecration? Do we
elevate or carry them about, on purpose to have them adored by the People? Nay,
with reference to our receiving the same in the posture of Kneeling, is it not
as fully as can be declared, That what posture is meant for a signification of
our humble and grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ to all worthy
Receivers; That no Adoration is hereby intended, for that the Sacramental Bread
and Wine remain still in their very natural Substances, and the Natural Body
and Blood of our Savior are in Heaven and not here? Which Declaration is the
more significant, one would think, as being made by our Church in Opposition to
those who do Adore the Sacrament: Especially since it was not the posture of
Kneeling when the Sacrament is received, which of it self could make such a
Declaration needful, but the Scandal which they give to the World who Adore it.
Had this been considered by the Representer, his Brothers Zeal might well have
been spared in saying, They may say, they do not pay Religious Worship to the
Bread and Wine, and Honor the Sacrament as God: But what, must we not believe
our senses in so plain a Case? Or else his Zeal should not have stopped here, but
carried him a little farther, to appeal to his own Eyes that we honor the
Patin and Chalice as Gods too, by falling down to them on our Knees, for this
is as plain a Case as the other; and our Church has made no Declaration against
it in solemn and particular Terms neither, as it has against the Adoration of
the Bread and the Wine. But I guess that the Zealous Brother when he is once at
liberty to speak for himself, will confess that he sees neither the one nor the
other; and that it is no affront to his Eyes to acquit us of Adoring the
Sacrament, and to yield that when we receive it, we Adore God and him only, in
a posture which as we think, well becomes the thankful Receivers of such Holy
Mysteries.

However, tho we, it seems, must not be believed when we say that we do not
adore the Sacrament at all; yet we will not be so hard to the Church of Rome,
but believe her telling us that she does Adore the Sacrament, and that with
Divine Honor too. And when the Zealous Brother gets our Church at any
Advantage like this, or can find out any practices amongst us like those above
mentioned, we shall hear him, I doubt not, speaking to better purpose for
himself, than as his Brother here has taught him.

And now, I think, I have omitted nothing in the first Five of the Fifteen
Parallels, that required the least notice, but have rather ventured being
laughed at by the Representer for giving any serious Answers, where he meant
only to Ridicule. But by this he may see what little reason there was to Crow
over his Adversary as he does upon this occasion; which was all that I
intended. And therefore since it is needless to drive the Parallel any farther
with that circumstance which I have hitherto used; I must not do a needless
thing, which according to one of his weighty Observations, would be Sixpence a
piece more for the Curious: Especially since the Answerer has done Reason
enough to the remaining Particulars. For tho the Representer, to save himself
from any further Reply, comes off with telling him that he answered the whole
charge with, The Dissenters never charged us with this or that, etc. and
nothing else; yet the Reader will find more said than this comes to, if he will
consult the Answer it self, instead of taking the Representers word. But I hope
Five of his Particulars have been handled his own way: And now I offer him
this, either in full Satisfaction, or in part of Payment; let him choose, as he
likes, it is all one to his Humble Servant. And therefore if he will please to
call upon me for Arrears, I promise him that our calling upon the Birds, the
Beasts, and the Fishes, shall not be forgotten, nor our crying out to Dead Men,
in our most solemn Devotion, nor the Apochrypha in the Liturgy, nor the Rochet,
the Alb, and the Tunicle, nor any thing else which yet wants a Vindication, as
he says: But, to return him one of his familiar Phrases, I shall take occasion
of playing him the same Tune over again as distinctly upon the remaining Ten,
as he has had it already upon his first Five Particulars.

And now let us go on with his Reply; in which the next thing I observe, is,
that he will needs have the Answerer to bid fair for the good opinion of
Dissenters and to curry closely with the Dissenters, and to throw those
scandals upon his own Church in good earnest, Page 5.
which the Representer did little more than in jest. If the Representer could
have turned his Adversaries Pen against the Dissenters, there are some would
have had a better opportunity of currying closely with the Dissenters; and I
shall tell him who they are, before I have done with him. But, it seems, we are
not for doing every good thing, in the very nick when he would have it done.
And so to be revenged on us, we must be represented as currying with the
Dissenters; which yet we are as far from, when we own our Agreement with them
in those many things, which they no less than we, object against the Papists;
as from currying with the Papists, when we confess that we agree with them in
those fewer things that are to be objected against the Dissenters. And yet
currying with the Dissenters is not so great a Fault, but he could tell them
upon the Spot, how their Sufferings are at an end, now our Churches power has
been something checked, Page 5.
which he thinks they may Reflect upon. But if the Representer would win their
good opinion, he should of all things beware of putting them in mind to
Reflect; lest when they begin to Reflect upon those things of which he speaks,
they should chance to Reflect upon other things of which he speaks not.

Me thinks too, I may reasonably suspect a little currying of the Representer
in what comes next. For, whereas the Answerer thought the Dissenters too wise
and cautious to take Characters [of us] from [Their own] open and professed
Enemies; (for that was his plain meaning) the Representer understands him, as
if he had meant our, i.e. the Church of Englands professed Enemies: Page 6.
and then hopes that our People will henceforth be so wise, as not to take
Characters of Popery from us, who are, as he says, Enemies to Papists. But
whether he was resolved to make this mistake for the sake of the neat Turn, or
to save himself from saying whether he was Friend or Enemy to the Dissenters, I
leave him to resolve. But I hope he does not expect that I should take notice
of every such little Reflection, as he knows this to be.

And yet I must needs vindicate the Answerer from that Charge, that whereas the
Representer granted, that his Protestant Character of a Papist was not made up
wholly of downright Lies, the Answerer stretches this Courtesy with a witness,
Page 9. Page 10.
and concludes that we have the Representer's word for it now that we are
guilty of no Misrepresentation at all of matters of Fact, which he, the
Representer, never did, nor will allow. But in this the Answerer is wronged,
who very well remembered, that his Adversary did a little dispute his Churches
owning the Deposing Power, and two or three Points more, which he thought fit
to drop at last. Now therefore, as the Answerer had frequently said before,
that the matters of Fact were the same in both Characters, very few things
excepted; so in his last Answer, he was to be understood in course with the
same Exception, viz. that we now had our Adversaries Confession, that in the
Character of a Misrepresented Papist, there were no Protestant
Misrepresentations of Popery properly so called; and so, that a very few Points
excepted, we are agreed on both sides upon the matters of Fact. And this one
would think was plain enough in the last Answer, where the Answerer thus
interprets the Concession of his Adversary. Whatever he at first pretended, he
grants now, that we are not in a strict and proper sense Misrepresenters; and
thus farewell to Character-making, since Papists and Protestants that understand
these matters, p. 8, 9.
are in the main (not absolutely in every point, but in the main) agreed what
is the Character of a Papist, tho they differ in their Opinions about him, etc.

I know indeed the Representer would extend the downright Lies, from which he
does not absolutely acquit us, to more Instances than those excepted, by the
Answerer. For which he appeals to his own Character of a Papist misrepresented,
where he has represented the Protestants as Liars, in charging the Papists with
other things disowned by the Church of Rome: Which is one of the finest Fetches
that is possible. For tho in that Character, he has made the Protestant to
charge the Papist with all that we indeed charge him with; yet he has made him
do more, and therefore might safely appeal to his own Character, to prove that
we are Liars in some things; always supposing that he is the honestest Man in
the World, in representing the Protestant Representations of Popery. But how
often must he be told, that he has been a false Representer of us as to this
matter? That he sometimes brings in Protestants charging Papists, (1.) In
ambiguous Terms, which admit of different Interpretations; for instance, under
the Head of Praying to Images, which is the first Point he mentions. (2.) With
owning the dangerous Consequences of their Doctrines and Practices, as that
Papists do believe their Sins to be infalliby remitted upon Absolution, whether
they resolve upon Amendment or no: which is his second Instance, and there are
two or three more, to the same Tune. (3.) With some things that we do not
impute to 'em at all, either as Principles or Consequences; witness that
Instance which he has the forehead still to insist upon. For, says he, Are
their Sermons in Latin? Do they teach in unknown Tongues? as if we charged them
with this. I know not what every Protestant in the World may have said in his
heat against Papists: But I am apt to think that it will be as hard to find a
Protestant that has said this against them, as to find a Zealous Brother that
will own the Canting Sermon he has made against us. Upon one or other of these
three accounts he might well appeal to his own Characters to convict us of
Lyihg, and ask the Answerer what he thinks of this, or that which Protestants
charge upon Papists; supposing, as I said before, that he delivers Oracles
always, when the is setting us out to the World.

And now, I say, it is too late for the Representer to ask us, what we think of
these things; because, not to mention the second Answer, his first Answerer has
told him very particularly what we think of them, what we do charge them with,
and what not. And since he has said nothing to it, it is unreasonable to expect
that we should do the same thing over and over again, as often as he is pleased
to put the Question to us. As for firing the City, and killing Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey, etc. what have these things to do in the Character of Popery? I
suppose it is no Article of the Representer's Faith; that Papists did not these
things; I am sure it is none of mine, that they did.

Having upon no better grounds than these accused the Answerer of
Misrepresenting him, he runs out into general and passionate Expostulations
concerning the injustice of those who for their own Interest support the false
Notions which the People have of Popery, lest themselves should appear the
Deceivers. At length he asks, whether although the People must be preached into a
Dread of Popery, it be a Christian Method to make use of Artifices to increase
the Horror? Page 12.
Why should every thing the Papists do be stretched and strained, and forced to
make it ugly? -- It Is true, this is proper enough to win upon the Mobile, who
make no distinction between Real and Artificial Monsters; it is well enough,
where the Interest is best maintained by the madness of the People. But where is
the Christianity all the while, where is Truth and Charity? Why truly not so
much as there should be, where either these things are done on the one side, or
falsely said to be done on the order. Now it must not be quite forgotten that
the Representer wrote his Protestant Characters of Popery, as they lay in his
own and the Peoples Heads; and made all his Answerers work in distinguishing
between Representation and Dispute; between Principles that are owned, and
Consequences that are denied by the Papists, utterly useless; because things
did not and could not lie thus distinctly in the Peoples Heads. For Instance,
Because if a Preacher should say that though the Papists think it lawful to
worship Images, yet it is plainly forbidden in God's Word so to do, and that
too as an Idolatrous Action; the poor People presently conclude, that the
Papists believing it to be Idolatry, differ from us in no other thing, but that
we think Idolatry, and forbidden Worship, to be unlawful, and the Papists do
not think so. But if the Representer believed this of the People; Where was
Christianity, where was Truth and Charity, when he wrote his Representation of
Popery, under color of disabusing the People; and made one part of a Papist's
Character to be this, that he abhors Idolatry? for thus the People would he
betrayed into a belief, that he does not so much as worship Images; for
Consequents and Antecedents are so jumbled in the Peoples Heads, that nothing
can lie distinctly there. We indeed do not think so meanly of them, and
therefore might honestly urge Arguments and Consequences against that and other
Practices of the Roman Church. But he, it seems, believed they could not
distinguish between the one and the other; and then I am sure if they acquitted
Papists of the Consequence, it would go hard if they did not acquit them of the
Fact too; and therefore whether he put the Denying of the Consequence into the
Papist's Character with an honest Design, at least, whether he had any reason
to object against the distinct proceeding of the Answerer, I dare almost now
appeal to himself. But, as I observed before, the Answerer made him ashamed of
imputing this kind of madness to the People, and so we heard no more of it in
his next Reply. But yet the Interest we are said to have in the People must
still be imputed to their madness. And what madness is it now? Why they cannot
distinguish between Real and Artificial Monsters: Which is as much as to say,
that we have made the Papists Monsters, by telling notorious Lies of them; and
the People are so mad that they cannot find it out. But may not I take my turn
now to ask, Where Is Christianity all this while; where is Truth and Charity? Why
must we be branded with the Imputation of Falsehood and Calumny, and our
Christian Brethren treated in that manner, as if they were mere stupid
Creatures, and more fit to herd with Beasts; than to live amongst Men?

As for our selves being thus urged, we beg leave to appeal to All that know
us, whether this odious Character be any way suitable to our Conversation; and
then, whether we have deserved it for the management of this Controversy in
particular, we appeal to the World. We appeal to all Men of Sincerity and
Understanding, what color of Reason the Representer had here to ask, Why
praying to Images, leave to Sin for Money, Forgiveness without Repentance, etc.
should be urged against them to make them the Object of Hatred, and the Subject
of popular Fury? Have not his Answerers more than once published clearly and
distinctly what we do, and what we do not charge them with in every one of
these Respects? Has he convinced them of any Insincerity, nay, of any mistake
in the stating of these things? Has he taken notice of any thing they have said
about them? Why would he not be brought to confess the Justice of our charging
them so far as we have done, and our Justice to them in charging them no
farther, or at least to confute us by showing wherein we had done unjustly?
What other Construction now can Truth and Charity make of these Proceedings,
but that he would not confess that we do them no wrong, and yet could not prove
that we do? But then certainly he should at least have been silent, and not go
on as he does to declaim against us; as if he really believed we were those
odious Misrepresenters and Falsifiers, which he would have the World believe
that we are.

He says indeed, that the Answerer unhappily takes it to himself, as if He and
His were arraigned of Lying and Calumny, etc. whereas the Representer spoke
only in general, without so much as hinting upon any party or person in
particular. But surely when after the first Answer that was made in behalf of
the Church, of England, the Representer without telling us the particulars why,
could yet declare that he would be a Turk as soon as a Papist, if the Answerer
had rightly represented Popery; we must have as little understanding, as he
allows to the Mobile, not to find that we are principally intended in these
general Declamations. He thinks the Answerers over solicitude to prove his
Innocence, may in some breed a suspicion of his Guilt. But whether it be
Innocence or Guilt that makes us sollicitous to clear our selves, we may now
leave the World to judge. One thing, I take it, is easy to be discerned, that
tho our Adversary Rowls in Figures to heighten the injustice under which He and
His have suffered by Misrepresentations, yet he throws the Guilt so faintly
upon the Church of England, as if he were conscious of being unjust to us all
the while.

As for the People of our Communion, whom he complements under the Title of the
Mobile, we may say without vanity, that how scornfully soever the Representer
treats them, we shall never be ashamed to compare them with their Neighbors;
and that it would be a better World for the Representer, if they were as
ignorant and stupid as he would have them thought to be.

But no more of what he has said in this fit of Anger; for here is a sudden
change, and now behold him the gayest and merriest Man alive. He fancies the
Answerer left him to wonder who those We are that are not Misrepresenters in a
strict and proper notion of Misrepresenting, i.e. who do not belie the Papists.
For indeed he would gladly know who those We are, that he might return them his
thanks for this so kind Office -- Did he but know the Men, he would never
permit them to lie obscured under the general name of We. No, he would
particularize them to the World -- For why? are not such Men Prodigies of
Truth, Honesty, and Justice? -- Men that never misrepresented the Papists! Why
these are admirable Men indeed, and not to be heard of every day! Now really
this, with all that belongs to it, is allowed to be very well for the kind, and
so much the better, because it more and more appears, that tho he can be angry
without a cause, yet a small matter will please him again. For he is delighted
beyond measure with wondering who these We are, and wishes there be no mistake
in it, and makes it hard to imagine who they should be: But I Will warrant him,
he has 'em presently, as hard as it is. For in the very next place he tries
whether the Answerer by his We, should mean We Protestants. And that is a
pretty near guess for the First. But then alas! who can believe it, that We
Protestants should be no Misrepresenters? He, for his part, would willingly
give something for the sight of the Man that thinks so, who would be the
greatest Misrepresenter of All, in vouching for the Truth of All that has been
invented against the Papists these hundred and forty years. Why then, surely,
they are not We Protestants. But for all that, upon consideration, he thinks he
may take it for granted that they are We Protestants. For the Answerer
vindicates Protestants, and for himself, one may swear he is a stan^h True
Protestant, ^s never scrupling at any thing that is for running down the
Papists, tho it be currying favor with and colloguing the Fanatics. And thus
the Answerer coming cross in his way, his Fit takes him again; for he cannot
abide the Answerer, and so there is and end of his Mirth: And now in sober
sadness we must suppose that the Answerers We, are We Protestants. For which
reason the Representer begins the World again, and is resolved to prove out of
the Sermons and Books of Protestants, that We Protestants are Misrepresenters:
And so he falls to work about it in good earnest through the remaining part of
his Book. Now I am so far from being angry with him for this, that I rather
wish some merry Youth were to take him up here, to requite his Railery, and
keep up the good humor a little longer. And if it should come into any Bodies
Head hereafter, who is given that way, to lay the Pleasant and the Angry
Representer together, as it might be done: The Jest would go rarely forward,
and that to some Bodies cost too, that may be thinks little on it.

For, was it not the Representer that would be glad to know who these Men are
that do not misrepresent Papists, these Admirable Men that are not to be heard
of every day; these Men, that were he but assured of the Being of such Men, he
should begin to think Astrea was returned again! Did he not wish to know them,
that he might particularize them to the World, nay and have their Names
Blazoned in every Sheet upon Pillars erected to their Memory? Yes surely, this
was the Representer himself. Why then, Dear Sir, be happy and joyful, for many
such Admirable Men, as these, are in being I assure you, and to be heard of
every day; But because it will be too great a charge to erect Pillars for 'em
All, I shall at present recommend but two of 'em to your Acquaintance, who are
already particularized to the World, by the Names of the Firsst and Second
Answerers to A Papist Misrepresented and Represented. What pity is it that such
Friends should be obscured so long under the general Name of We, and be no
better known to one another? These, Sir, are the Men whom you desire to honor,
as if they were made on purpose for it. For why? Tho very honest, Gentlemen
they are, and their Words may go for as great a matter, yet they have a notable
Quality besides, never to think of Representing the Church of Rome, without
proving what they say. Why, Sir, they have been lately tried upon no less than
Thirty and Seven Points of Popery; and have born the Test of a severe,
watchful, double-dealing Adversary; and one as vehemently desirous to find
false Representers among Protestants, as you can be to know the true ones. Now,
Sir, judge if these two are not likely to prove Right and True Men: For the
Adversary is to this day roaming up and down amongst other Men's Books to get
Protestant Misrepresentations for them to Answer; a plain sign, you will say,
that he has found none of their own to call them to an Account for. And so
having found out your Admirable Men for you, I wish you much joy of one another.

Now this is too Blunt, I confess, to go for Railery; but it is True tho, and
that is almost as good: And the Representer may see by it how another would have
handled him upon this matter, if he had not by good fortune fallen in my way. It
is to me a most unaccountable thing, why the Representer should search for more
and more Misrepresentations, Misquotations, and such like faults in Protestant
Authors, and forsake the Defense of his own double Characters, if indeed he
thinks they may be defended: But if he does not think so, it were but an honest
Man's part to confess it, and then I think the Controversy were at an end.
Certainly the design of his first Book, which he still pretends to vindicate,
was to give us an account of the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome,
upon which score he took upon himself the Title of a Representer. It Is true he
pretended to dispute for them too; but that design fell to the ground upon the
first Attempt that was made upon him, and I believe he will hardly stoop to
take it up again. But then to illustrate the Representing part, he showed on
the other side how Protestants, as he says, have Misrepresented Papists. So
that here was a solemn Controversy begun upon so many several points, about
Representing and Misrepresenting; and it was, one would think, very fairly
carried on by the First Answerer, who we know went on with the Representer from
point to point, discovering, where need was, his Ambiguities and Fallacies on
both sides, mending his Characters, and giving a correct and plain account of
the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, in opposition to that lame
and deceitful account thereof. which the Representer had published. The sum of
the performance was to show how much and no more we absolutely charge upon the
Church of Rome, and in matters of charge not so clear as the rest, how far and
no farther we accuse them; every Particular being guarded with reasonable
Proofs and Testimonies. They second Answerer perceiving into what mistakes the
Representer was wandering, by confounding the proper Subject of Representation,
with Subjects of Dispute, went as particularly through all the points, and
plainly distinguished those things under every one. Now would not any Man of
common sense imagine, that, if the Dispute were pertinently carried on, the
Question must be this, Who gave the truest account of the Faith and Worship of
the Church Rome, the Representer, or the Answerer? And if it were pertinently
managed, that this Question must be driven through all the Thirty Seven Points,
as it has been done once and again on our behalf. And, therefore to what end
the Representer should trouble himself to find out new Representations in the
Books of other Protestants, a Man may well wonder for a while, tho at last he
will settle upon the true Reason, that the Representer was Sick of defending
his own.

If it be said, that one part of his business at least, goes forwards still,
which was to show, that some Protestants have been Misrepresenters; I desire it
may be considered too, whether this was not in order to the settling of a clear
and indisputable account between us, what are, and what are not the Doctrines
and Practices of the Church of Rome, as to the Thirty Seven Points. For
granting now, (and it is a good large Grant to be made at once) that the
Representer did sincerely give in his own former Protestant thoughts of Popery,
and (as far as he could understand them) those apprehensions what Popery is,
which lay in the Heads of the Vulgar; then so far as the Answerers confessed
this was not a true Representation, if Protestants did thus charge the Church
of Rome, so far I say they complied with the Representers design, which was to
correct such, if there were any such mistakes going amongst Protestants. But so
far as they owned the charge in the Protestant Character to be good against the
Church of Rome, if the Representer disowned it, he had in this case nothing to
do, but to confute their Testimonies, and to show that in those particulars as
well as in others, his Church was Misrepresented. And therefore if he had been
sincere, the Controversy had proceeded thus on his side; and nothing could have
diverted him from proceeding in this manner, if he had been able to make any
thing of it. But instead of this, he has for some time forsaken his Thirty and
Seven Chapters, and employed himself in turning over some Books of Protestants,
to find out such Sayings as he thinks there is any color to call
Misrepresentations; nay, he is fallen so low as to pick out what Misquotations
of Authors he can find amongst them, and to tax them here and there for
Historical Passages.

But did ever either of his Adversaries undertake to justify all that any
Protestant Divine, or Historian has at any time said in opposition to Popery?
Or, was it not possible to give a more honest account of Popery than he did, to
discover his fallacious way, of representing his own Church, and the true state
of the Questions that have been hitherto disputed, without such an undertaking?
Nay have not his Answerers effectually done it, without any such undertaking?
so effectually that he has forsaken the defense of his double Characters under
the Thirty Seven Points? Why then must they be bound to Answer for all that
every Protestant has said against the Church of Rome? Will he answer for all
the Popish Misrepresentations of Protestants, that I can bring before him? I
shall try him a little as to this before I have done: And I think with some
better Grace, than this Task has been put upon us withal. For if it be but a
mean way of carrying on the Controversy, as I confess it is, yet he has forced
us to it by insisting upon it so obstinately, that we have now no other way to
let him see the inconveniency of it, but by turning it upon himself. And, which
is something too, we have cleared our Hands of him as to the Original
Controversy, for he has dropped that quite away, and so having no Arrears to be
reproached with, we may handsomely enough talk with him upon this new Score; and
I will venture beforehand to say thus much, that he is likely to be as deep in
our Debt for this, as he is for his first dealings with us. Nor am I afraid
thus to speak may belief in this matter, tho he seems to have taken up a way of
writing now, that will not fail him in haste; for as long as he can but find
out any new severe Sayings of Protestants against Popery, it is but furnishing
out a new Book with 'em, and he may as well call it by the Title of a Fifth or
a Sixth Vindication of himself, as by any other Title whatsoever. Nay the
Vindication will go forward, if he can but find out a Vulgar Head without a
Name, to say that he believes the Popish Sermons are in a Unknown Tongue, or
any other thing as extravagant as that.

But tho it be no part of business to bring off every thing that has been said
or done by Protestants, yet I shall a little examine what our Representer has
charged those with, whom he has singled out to expose them to the World. For I
am much mistaken if even here, he has not exposed himself a great deal more
than any Body else: Since he does often take the liberty to fill up his
Tragical Declamations against Protestants, by spiteful Constructions, weak
Inferences, and now and then by false Accusations, which is never more
intolerable, than when a Man is in the same Breath exclaiming against the
Misrepresentations of others. For my own part, where his Accusations in whole
or in part fall justly, there shall they lie for me, nor will I make another
Man's Fault my own by going about to defend it. And if he had taken the same
care not to make himself Guilty, by accusing the Innocent, he had come off
better upon this Theme of Arraigning particular Men, as wild as it is.

He begins firsst with Sutcliffs Inference from Aquinas, which I confess is a
very silly one; tho I think it had been not only for Sutcliffs credit that this
matter had been let alone, but for Aquinas's too, whose Principle is no very
wise one. But I see no reason why the Answerer should have been ashamed to
print it over again, since he did it only to show that Sutcliff inferred his
Accusation by Consequence from what an Author of their own had said, but not to
justify the Inference. And for any thing the Answerer has said, the Representer
is at liberty to go on with his charge of Ignorance or Malice against him that
drew the Consequence, to call him a Fool in this business, if he believed the
Consequence to be Good, or a Knave if he did not.

But I would gladly know how the Representer can clear himself from gross.
Misrepresentation in the next Instance, where falling upon the Author of the
Representing Catechism for charging them with praying to Images, P. 19.
he makes it to be a Crime, which his first Answerer had cleared them from in
saying, that we do not charge them with praying to Images without any farther
Respect. For many not a Man pray to Images, and yet not pray to them without
any further Respect? This would make one believe that he writes only for the
Mobile, in whose Heads things cannot lie distinctly. But it is not so honest
tho, especially in a Man that complains of Misrepresentations. But by this
time, I hope, he is made sensible of his miscauriage here, by what the Author
of the Catechism has done to justify his charge. And so I pass over this
complaint, and come to the next.

Which is of a Sermon that charges them with praying to Relics too. Now
whether the Preacher had any particular Testimonies that there are some amongst
them who do not only Worship, P. 20.
but likewise call upon Martin's Boots, etc. I know not and therefore cannot at
present pass Sentence against him; especially since I am well assured that the
Council of Trent condemns those in general, Concerning the Construction of
Eorum opis impetrand^ causa. Sess.25. See Defense of Exp. of Doctr. of Chapter of
Engl. p. 24, 25.
who affirm that the Memories of the Saints are in vain frequented, for the
obtaining of help from their Relics, and other their sacred Monuments, or
Remains. Now if Martin's Boots and Joseph's Breeches, etc. are the Relics of
Saints, then they are not only to be venerated, as the Council affirms, but the
Memories where they are, must be frequented also, for obtaining help from them.
This, I think, is no Misrepresentation, no wry Intepretation, no Imputation
upon them from Ignorance or Malice in drawing the Consequence.

In the next place the Answerer of Catholics no Idolaters, is made a
Misrepresenter for saying, that the common Answer of Catholics, that their
Adoration of the Eucharist cannot be Idolatry, is because they believe the
Bread to be God, just as the Worshippers of the Sun, believed the Sun to be
God: P. 20.
whereas the Catholics do not believe the Bread to be God, etc. To which I
say, it is so notoriously known that Papists believe (as they tell us) the Bread
to be Transubstantiated, that if the Answerer's Words be as they are here fet
down, it is yet a mere Cavil to pretend that he would insinuate as if the
Papists believed that which they Adore to be Bread, as we believe it is no
more. And the Argument is good thus, if their mistake, who believed the Sun to
be God, did not excuse their worshipping the Sun from being Idolatry; neither
will their mistake, who believe what they worship to be Bread no longer, but
God, excuse them, if it be Bread still. But I suspect the Words are more clear
and full in the Answerer, at least, I make no doubt that they are sufficiently
secured from the Representer's Interpretation of them, by other Passages in
Connection. For the Representer has not referred us to the Page, where he has
picked up this Exception, which omission I believe was designed, because he has
neglected such reference in four or five Instances more. But tho I have upon
this disadvantage given him a particular Answer here, yet I do not intend to
use him to it. For the employment he has found out for us at present, is not of
that weight, that I should be obliged to turn over whole Books, and some of 'em
no small ones neither, to find out a single Passage that he thinks fit to carp
at. And therefore, at present; I will not be concerned with the Vindication of
those Deductive Absurdities, which Dr. St. would persuade to be Doctrines of
the Roman Church: For the Representer here refers to the general current of his
Discourse ^ and which is yet more unreasonable, Page 21.
has given me a whole Book written in confutation of the Doctor to answer. For
the like reason as he has referred the proof of a hundred and fifty Lies
(without giving one Instance) against John Fox's Acts and Monuments, to the
Examen of John Fox 's Calendar, p. 3. p. 412. so do I too. Thus also the
Archbishop of York misquoting St. Thomas and Bellarmine; P.22,23,24.
and old Dr. Willets proof out of St. Bernard, that the Pope is Antichrist; and
Bp. Taylor's misquotations and corruptions of Authors, which some Answerer of
his has made to appear, shall with all the rest of this kind, pass off together
without any further notice. For still I say it is too hard an Imposition, for
the Representer in a few Lines to oblige us to read over so many Books; and
which is by no means to be submitted to, unless the Fate of the cause depended
upon it, which I am not yet convinced it does. And therefore once again, I must
desire him to give in his particular Exceptions against our Authors in their
own Words, if he thinks fit to go on in this way, and to tell us the particular
Page or Section where such Passages are to be found; and then he shall have my
Judgment in the case: But if he leaves all upon his own and his Friends credit,
I shall be so civil as to do so too.

I come now to his charge upon Dr. Tillotson, for abusing Estius; but whether
Estius be not more obliged to Dr. Tillotson than to the Representer, I leave it
to others to judge, when I have given a particular account of this matter. I do
acknowledge that those Words cited by the Representer are in Estius; but tho I
cannot say whether the Dr. minded them or not, yet I believe it will either way
appear, that the Representer had but little reason to make this an Instance of
our endeavoring to prove some Folly upon the Papists, out of their own
Authors, and then bringing in Authors quite contrary to their own sense and
words. Estius concludes that the Fire which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 3.15.
is the Fire of the Day of Judgment, which shall prove every Man's work, and
purge that which is not already purged. And at length he comes to speak of the
Purgatory of Souls after this Life, which seems not only not to be supported,
but to be overthrown also by this place of the Apostle, since the whole
purgation is reserved to the last Judgment. To this he answers, that thus much
is manifest against the Sectaries, from his Interpretation of the place, that
in the World to come some Sins are to be forgiven, viz. theirs who shall be
purged and saved by Fire. Nor, says he, does it follow from the Purgatory Fire
of the last day, that no Purgatory of Souls is left before that day, any more
than it follows from the Purgatory of Souls, that there is no purging in this
Life; which, allowing for the principles of his Church, is with the rest that
follows to this purpose, a good and solid Answer to the foresaid Objection. And
this was the Doctor's Ground for saying, that Estius contends that it cannot be
concluded from hence that there is no Purgatory. But then he goes on, Besides,
we must know that as the Scripture often leaves a particular Judgment to be
understood, under a general Judgment, and from the last day in which all shall
be judged, will have the day of every ones Death to be understood in which each
Man is judged by himself; so from the Fire that is to go before the Face of
Christ at the general Judgment, and to purge whatsoever at that time remains to
be purged, it leaves a certain Fire to be understood, in which a particular
Judgment is exercised for the purging of Souls presently after this Life. Then
come in the words cited by the Representer. Wherefore by this way the
Punishment of Souls in Purgatory is well and solidly gathered. But how is it
well and solidly gathered this way? Does Estius say that the punishment of
Souls in Purgatory is implied in, or that it does any way follow from that
general Purging which is to be at the Day of Judgment? No, he says not a word
than looks this way; but only that one leaves the other to be understood, that
is to say, if a Man has a mind so to understand it, but not else. For it is a
shame to repeat that, because where the Scripture speaks of a general Judgment,
it supposes that we must dye first; therefore when it speaks of a general
Purgatory of Men, it leaves a Purgatory of Souls beforehand to be understood,
or well and solidly gathered. But the Representer will say, the Question is not
whether Estius's way of gathering Purgatory from this Text, be good and solid;
but whether Estius does contend for no more than that Purgatory cannot be
overthrown by it, as the Dean pretended. I grant this, to be the Question, and
it shall have an Answer, if it has not had it already. Whether the Dean made
the same observation that I have made upon this mysterious business, I cannot
certainly say, having never spoken with him about it: But I presume he did,
because it will clear him from any great matter of blame, in taking no notice
of the Passage cited by the Representer. The Case in short is this, Estius was
very clear in this Point, that St. Paul does not here speak of a Purgatory of
Souls, but of that Fire which is to prove the works of. All at the day of
Judgment. But then he must guard himself as well as he could from the charge of
interpreting this place, otherwise than the Latins had interpreted it at
Florence; which made it necessary for him to bring in his third Question, An
and quomodo probetur, whether and how it can be proved from this place, that
there is a Purgatory for Souls after this Life, in pursuance of which Question
he says what we have already cited. Now, although in his Interpretation of this
Text, he could own, as he did, with great; modesty and good reason, that he did
not follow Bellarmine, Lensaeus, Vicus; Bonaventure in all things; yet when the
Name of a Council lay cross to him, no other kind of modesty would serve but
some appearance at least of submission to it. And therefore observing that the
Latin Fathers thought that Purgatory was to be established upon this place, tho
the Greek Fathers dissented; he also thought it needful to gather it as well
and solidly as he could, from this place too. For by that time he had done his
best, proving was dwindled to gathering; and to such a way of gathering too,
that, the premises being considered. I leave it to all impartial Men to
consider, whether so Judicious a Man as Estius was, contended for the point; or
rather if the modest Estius, in the strait he was in, did not choose to talk
beneath himself, in compliance with the Latin Fathers at Florence. So that at
last we have here an Example of the Servitude of Ingenuous Minds in the Church
of Rome; but not of charging Folly upon the Papists out of their own Authors.
For this was that which the Dean declined the doing of; whereas if he had said,
Nay, All that Estius contends for from this place is, that it cannot be
concluded from hence that there is no Purgatory, although he makes a hard shift to
avoid falling foul with the Florentine Council; here had then been no color
for accusing him of Misquotation, it had also done his business as well; only
this had been to charge Folly upon Estius, and upon the Latin Fathers too,
which it seems the Dean had no mind to do.

I proceed next to his Charge upon the Author of The Devotions of the Church of
Rome. And first he accuses him of quoting Escobar for that which he does not
say in the place cited; nay, there is not one word of it to be found in him
there. Now to know whether this be so or not, it is but fair to take the whole
Passage of that Author, for which he refers us to Escobar, and not as it is
slily gelt by the Representer. The Passage is this: They tell us there is a
vast number of Sins in their own Nature Venial, which are so very
inconsiderable that an infinite Number of them altogether, will not deprive a
Man of the Grace and Favor of God, or make up one Mortal Sin; and for the
pardon of which there is no need or occasion for the Mercy of God. Now Escobar
in the place cited, Tract. 2. Exam. 1. Chap. 4. in answer to that Question, N.
15. Whether many Venial Sins of themselves, and formally speaking, can make up
one Mortal Sin? says thus, No, because innumerable Venial Sins do not deprive a
Man of the Grace of God. But the Representer will not allow, that there is one
word of that Passage, at least, to be found there, that for the pardon of such
Sins there is no need, or occasion, for the Mercy of God. But I am sure the
thing is to be found there; For he says N. 1. that a Venial Sin is that which
does not render a Man worthy of Eternal Punishment: And now if innumerable Sins
of this sort do not of themselves make up one Mortal Sin, I think it is plain
that take them altogether, and there is no occasion for God's Mercy in the
pardon of them, unless it be Mercy to pardon where there is no desert of
Punishment. It Is true, Escobar says that they are worthy of Temporal
Punishment: but our Author was not obliged to take any notice of that, because
that which he complained of was not, that these Doctrines brought Men's
Fortunes, in this World, into danger; but that by reason of 'em, Men are in
wonderful danger of being cheated in a matter of so great moment as their
Eternal Salvation. So that although the Representer professes that this Doctrine
is contrary to their Belief, yet, at least, he must confess that it was not
contrary to Escobar's; and therefore that he has wronged our Author in
charging him here with Misquotation.

The same Book says in another place, p. 56. That their saying the same thing
so often over, in their Jesus Psalter, is not contrived to help and assist
attention, etc. but out of pure Vanity and Ostentation, or as it were to
flatter our B. Savior, or the Saint they pray to. And this the Representer
calls throwing Dirt blindfold, Page 26.
etc. and such Misrepresenting, that if the State or Civil Government were
served so, there would be a -- at the end of it. By which, I guess, he would be
content that the Author were hanged. But one would be willing to know first
what he has done to deserve it. Why, says the Representer, This is the Reason
he gives of our Devotion. What? that all who use those Forms of Devotion which
the Author censures, have no other End or Intention, but pure Vanity and
Ostentation or Flattery? so indeed the Representer would insinuate: But, as I
shall make appear, the Author's meaning was that the Repetitions themselves
which he spoke of, were purely vain, and do not serve to any good and prudent
End: For which he chiefly blames the Contrivers of 'em, as the words plainly
enough show. But what reason he had to say this, was laid down just before in
these words. Their Manuals of Devotion are so full of Tautologies, and vain
Repetitions, then they must needs come under the censure of our B. Savior,
Matthew. 6. tho they use his holy Name. For so in the Jesus Psalter, at the end
of the Manual of Prayers and Litanies, printed at Paris, in English, An. 1682.
in a Litany of Fifteen Petitions, the Name Jesu is repeated over above 130
times: And in the same Book, in the Litany of the B. Virgin, they pray to her
by 40 several Names, being only so many distinct Praises of her. Now this the
Representer thought fit to suppress, which would have shown that he did not
make Vanity, etc. to be the Reason of the Peoples Devotion, but that he charged
their Forms of Prayer with vain Repetitions. And here the Representer should
have shown, if he were able, that the Repetitions mentioned do not fall under
our Savior's prohibition of vain Repetitions; that they could be contrived for
some good and prudent End; that they serve to any thing better than Ostentation
or Flattery: Here, I say, he should have employed his Skill, and told us what
are vain Repetitions, if these are not. But this was something a harder Task,
than to take a Passage by it self, without that Connection which would have
explained it, and to represent the Author by it as odiously as he could. For, I
say it again, he does not make Vanity, etc. the Reason of their Peoples
Devotion, even in using these vain Repetitions. But indeed he says plainly
enough, that they are so contrived for Vanity, and Ostentation or Flattery,
that they are not Helps, but Hindrances to Devotion. But however, does not
this Author make Vanity to be the End and Reason of their Contrivance, who
composed those Forms? No, not that neither; for tho that Expression out of pure
Vanity, etc. be, I confess, something obscure, and seems to look that way, yet
it was not his meaning, as any Body will say is plain beyond all Exception,
that consults the whole place. For thus begins that particular to which this
Passage belongs. Seventhly, Their Manuals and Books of Devetion, which they
give their People to read instead of the Scripture, which they forbid to be
used, tho they may DESIGN THEM AS HELPS, yet I must range them amongst the
Hindrances of Devotion. By which it is evident, that he meant not to charge
even the Contrivers of these Tautologies, with any design to lead the People to
Vanity, because he supposes that they might design them as Helps, and not
Hindrances. The Book which he carps at, is written with great Judgment, and no
less Modesty; as one may discern by this, that the Representer could not find a
more convenient Passage for his Anger to work upon, than that which we have
seen. But we must not forget that he is all this while making good his Title of
a Representer.

And now the Bishop of Kilmore is called to account for misrepresenting the
Papists, by putting them upon the same File with Infidels and Pagans. For, as
Delphos worshipped Apollo, etc. So, in Popery, England worshipped St. George,
Page 26.
etc. And as the Pagans had their Gods for the several Elements, for Cattle and
Fruit, for several Professions, and several Diseases, to pray to: So, in
Popery, they have one Saint for the Fire, etc. Now if this be misrepresenting
at all, it is misrepresenting with a witness, i. e. in the Answerer's Phrase
it is misrepresenting in a strict and proper sense, and in the Representer's
Phrase, downright Lying. For I do not find that the Bishop affirms any thing in
all this, but matter of Fact. But will the Representer say that Papists have
not Tutelar Saints for several Countries, and several Saints to pray to, for
their Cattle, and the Fruits of the Earth? Is it true or false that St. Roch is
prayed to in case of the Plague, St. Petronella under Agues, St. Apollonia
against the Toothache? I shall expect his Answer to this; and if he dares not
deny it, as I am persuaded his Modesty will not suffer him: I shall then ask
him where the misrepresenting lies? If it be said to lie in this, that the
Bishop puts them upon the same File with Pagans, let us see how far he does so.
He had laid down that Rule of God's Word a little before, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And then he proceeds to the
Comparison, in which indeed he must be supposed to tax the Papists with
contradicting that Rule, by their practice of worshipping their diversity of
Saints, no less than the Pagans by serving their several petty Gods. But he is
so far from saying, that in all respects they are as bad as Pagans, which one
would understand by putting them all upon the same File, that he does not enter
upon a Comparison of Aggravations, in respect to this very matter of Worship;
but only shows that Rule is violated this way, no less than that. Now if this
be a true Charge, I conceive it is no ill manners to speak the Truth in a Case
of such vast Concern. If it be False, the Representer had done more Service to
his Cause, and won more deserved Thanks from his own Communion, as well as
ours, by showing the difference between the one and the other, with respect to
that Commandment, than by declining, as he has done, not only the
Justification, but very craftily the Confession too of the Fact upon which the
Charge is grounded: Insomuch as they in whose Heads nothing lies distinctly,
would be almost persuaded, that the Representer accused the Bishop of
downright Lying, and that perhaps the Papists have not their Tutelar Saints,
and Saints proper for several Occasions to pray to, as the Bishop pretended.
But any thing in the World shall serve to swell the Charge, when Protestants
are to be set out for Misrepresenters.

As littie reason do I find for his severe charge upon the same Bishop, for
observing that some place their whole Worship of God in Bodily Exercise;
meaning, Page 26, 27.
as I have good reason to offer for it, not All, but Some Papists. For the
Bishop proceeded to lay the same charge upon the Dissenters (without any
currying I assure you), nay, to those of our Communion also, as any one may
fee, page 11. And what was said particularly of the Externals, in which those
Papists trust, whose Religion runs out into nothing but External Show, seems to
me to note no more, than the greater danger they of the Roman Communion are in
of falling into this kind of Hypocrisy, by reason of the vast number of
Ceremonies and Observations which they, above all other Christians in the
World, have brought into Religion. These are the Passages which Anger and
Ill Will have picked out of the whole Sermon, to expose the Bishop to His
Majesty's Displeasure; by which one may see what little cause the Representer
had to say, that he pretends to His Majesty's Word for abusing them. If the
Reader desires to know the motives he had for Preaching and Publishing this
Sermon, he will not take them, I suppose, as they are Ridiculed by the
Representer, but go for 'em to the Preface it self, which declares what they
were; and then he will find that the Representer has abused the Bishop.

Now whereas he found some Passages in the Book of Homilies of the same strain
with what he had noted in the foresaid Sermon; Page 2 ^.
the same Answer will therefore serve for both: And what he adds besides, in
contempt of those Divines that compiled the Homilies, is as easily answered
with Contempt. And so I come to that hearty Family Prayer, which, as he says,
has raised up from Turk and Pope, defend us Lord, a Note or two higher; in as
much as it runs thus. O Lord confound Satan, Antichrist, with all Hirelings and
Papists. This Prayer, he tell us, is added to the end of the Singing Psalms, in
a common Prayer Book, Printed at Oxford, in the Year 1683, in Twelves; by which
I guess he would bring that University too, as well as the foresaid Bishop,
under His Majesty's Displeasure. And therefore this Accusation is not to be
passed lightly over. Now Henry Hills could have given him abundant satisfaction
in this matter, if he had been consulted. For, upon the best Inquiry I can
make, I find that no Psalms, in Twelves, were Printed in Oxford before the the
Year 1684, and therefore no such Impression, as the Representer means, could be
there in 1683. But this is not all: for neither had those Printed in 1684, that
hearty Family Prayer, which he talks of. But the Truth of the Case is this,
Henry Hills, or he and his Partners, had Printed these very Psalms, in Twelves,
which the Representer mentions, and that to a vast number, as I am informed by
those who will make it out, if it be required. Now if Henry Hills bound up his
Psalms with the Oxford Common Prayer Books, the University is no more to answer
for that, than if he had bound up his own Life with one of them. It is such
another Suggestion the Representer offers at in a Marginal Note elsewhere, Page
30.
where he makes the Fire of London to be imputed to the Papists, in the Plates
of the Common Prayer Books Printed at Oxford, An. 1680. For no such Plates were
Printed there, however they came to be bound up with some Common Prayer Books
Printed that Year at the University. I am apt to think Henry Hills is able to
give as good an account of this too, as another. And I believe he can guess
very nearly, who did not only Print since 1678, but hes also very lately Sold,
a certain Confession of Faith, as hearty as the foresaid Family Prayer; for
there Idolaters and Heretics, Papists and Ana-baptists, are all put together,
as Limbs of Antichrist. But some Men take themselves to be privileged to do
these bold things themselves, and to accuse others of the like when they have
done. I am sure that either the Representer, or he, is not a little to blame
for these unhandsome Insinuations; my own suspicions in this case I do not care
to tell, and therefore I leave it betwixt them Two, to set the Saddle on the
right Horse, as the Representer speaks upon another occasion.

Another way of Mis-representing them which he complains of, is in laying on
the colors with so much craft on the Papists Tenets, that though they are the
very same, with what the most learned Protestants hold themselves, yet they
shall appear so foul and monstrous, as if nothing less than a certain Damnation
attended their Abetters. This, he says, is done in several instances; which
makes me wonder that he chose so unlucky an instance, as that of our rendering
them so Unchristian, for not allowing Salvation to any out of their own Church;
in a word, for damning Protestants. But do we Misrepresent them in this? mark
how the Representer makes it out, Dr. Tillotson in the forementioned Sermon,
inveighing against the Incharitableness of Papists -- at last in a rapture of
Charity concludes, I have so much Charity (and I desire always to have it) as
to hope that a great many among them who live piously, and have been almost
inevitably detained in that Church by the prejudice of Education and an
invincible Ignorance, will upon a general Repentance find mercy with God. Now
instead of this, the Representer expected from the Doctor some extraordinary
piece of Charity both for the Reformation and example of the Papists; and yet,
says he, after all the outcry and bussle, he wont allow one more grain of Mercy
to the Papists, then the Papists do to them, that is only to such who having
lived piously and truly repented of their Sins, have an invicible Ignorance to
atone for all other errors of the understanding, which is the very Doctrine
of the Papists, in respect of such who die out of the Communion of their
Church. So that we have Misrepresented Papists in pretending that they do not
allow as great hopes of Salvation to us continuing and dying Protestants, as we
allow to them continuing and dying Papists.

Now I confess I am under some temptation to show who is the Misrepresenter in
the Case; but this is so good a hearing, that I will not go about to clear our
selves from being Mis-representers upon this occasion, but take him at his
word, that here we are Misrepresenters: nay, more than that, I will thank him
for taking all opportunities to report us for such Mis-representers, to the
people of both Communions; for thus it may be hoped that we shall never more be
troubled with that Argument to persuade Ours, and to confirm His, in the
Communion of the Roman Church, that since we grant the Papists a possibility of
Salvation, and they utterly deny a possibility of it to us, the Communion of
the Roman Church must needs be the more safe, inasmuch as both parties agree in
a possibility of Salvation in that Church, but they do not both agree upon such
a possibility in ours. And since we are proclaimed Mis-representers upon this
account, I desire also that from this time foreward, the Trade of going up and
down with peremptory denouncing Damnation to all of our Communion, may be at an
end, and never heard of more: And that no advantages may be made of our
charitable hopes and concessions in behalf of some that dye in the Communion of
the Church of Rome, since it seems the Doctrine of the Papists is the very same
in respect of such who dye out of that Communion: Or at least, that no regard
be given to those of the Roman Church who shall hereafter positively denounce
Damnation against us, since the Representer will have it that we are as
positive against them, inafmuch as to say that Papists are guilty of sins
inconsistent with Salvation, is but to say, they are damned in another phrase.
The Representer I say, who takes upon him to correct all false notions of
Popery, and is therefore much to blame, if he be ignorant of the Doctrines of
Popery, has declared to the World, that whether in the way of Hoping, P. 28.
or of Censuring, Protestants and Papists say the same thing of each other: And
therefore I think the foresaid Requests are very reasonable ones; so that this
one matter is in a way of being fairly compounded, and if the Representer likes
it, I am sure both parties are well pleased.

For want of other complaints, he takes up one at length, which he had dropped
some time since, viz. That we rake together some odd and extravagant Opinions
of some Authors, P. 29.
to set them down for the received Doctrine of the Church. Which complaint he
supports by nothing else but supposing that the so often-mentioned Archbishop
of York is guilty of this in citing Bulgradus, etc. and that this is enough to
make any extravagancy pass for an Article of Faith. Now he does not so much as
make it appear that this Archbishop pretends the Extravagancies for which he
brings those Authorities, to be Articles of Faith in the Church of Rome. But
how far their Church is chargeable with the several Extravagancies of their
Authors, and what use we may and ought to make of their Divines and Casuists,
etc. in the Controversies now on foot, the Representer has been already told
very distinctly; Pap. not Mis. rep. by Prot p. 67, 68, 69.
and when he thinks fit to Reply, he shall not want an Prot. p. 9.
In the mean time, to convince us of the unwarrantableness of this method, and
what a wretched thing it is to charge private Doctrines upon a Church as
Articles of her Faith, he brings in a Popish Preacher inveighing against the
ill Manners, and especially the disloyalty of Protestants, upon one passage in
the Decay of Christian Piety, P. 30, 31, 32.
another in Sir R. Baker, and a third in Jovian. Now I say, let them who do
thus argue against the Church of Rome, as he makes his Popish Preacher to
inveigh against us, let them I say take the shame of it. But for any thing that
he has done hitherto, the men are yet to be found out: though I do not know but
upon very diligent search some one such or other may be taken amongst us; and
when that happens, he shall go for me, and keep company with that once
Protestant who believed the Sermons of the Papists were made in a language
unknown to the People. Now he confesses all this Harangue to be a piece of
Sophistry, which he has put into the mouth of a Popish Preacher: P. 33.
Which is enough for me, and I am not at all moved hy his pretending this was
done to make us ashamed of practicing it in good earnest, as he has seen and
heard that we do. For this is a reason I am now pretty well used to, it being
the very same wherewith he defends that ridiculous Sermon which he composed for
the Zealous Brother. And therefore I shall even pin this Harangue to the
remainder of that Brother's Sermon, that when one is called for, the other may
not be forgotten.

And so at last we come to Mis-representing, in relation to some matters of
Fact and History, and here he hopes the Reader will discover notable things.
The first Mis-representation of this Kind, in which he instances, was the
Misrepresenting of the Rich Hangings, the Massy Plate, and other things which
Adorned the Altars in the times, P. 33.
before the Reformation, the Candlesticks, Crucifixes, and Shrines; Three
Episcopal Houses, with Four or Five Churches, etc. For these were Represented
as Superstitious, or Superfluous, and forthwith were immediately blown up. Now
a man shall not presently find how this comes to be Mis-representing, the
Papists in relation to some matters of Fact and History. He names but one
Protestant, speaking of these things, viz. Dr. Heylin, and he too, is brought
in agreeing with the Representer in charging those doings upon Covetousness,
Ambition and Envy; nor is any other Cited as contradicting him. Was not the
Representer full of choler and bitterness, that he must needs ease himself
whether it be in fit place or not? I see the bottom of this business plainly
enough: If that Reformation of Doctrine and Worship which our Church made, be
not blackened enough already, he is resolved to charge upon it all the faults
of the great Men that made advantages by the Change. But must the Vices of the
Statesmen in those days necessarily affect the Reformation? Why then must not,
the Vices of Popes affect Popery? If he has a mind to it, let him represent the
former ten times worse then they were, and when he has done, I will show him as
many Popes Represented, by their own Historians as really bad, as he has made
those by Fiction, and this too by Historians of no less Credit amongst them,
then Dr. Heylin is with us. The Representer owes us a good Turn, and if he can
but bring in the word Misrepresenting. it is all the pertinence he cares for,
though it be Misrepresenting Plate and Hangings.

Again, P. 34.
because he fancies that King Henry the Eighth made way for Protestantism to
enter into the World (in which however, he is mistaken) he taxes him boldly of
Vile Extravagancies, the respect that is due to Crowned Heads, no nor the
consideration of that Line in which this Prince stood amongst them, being not
able to restrain him. But where is the Misrepresentation complained of?
Certainly the Popes Power here might be an Usurpation, though the motive upon
which Henry the Eighth threw it quite off, (as it had been curbed by his
Predecessors before) should not prove the best in the World: But let the
Representer here also use his liberty of rendering him as odious as he can,
remembering all the while that the Faults of that Prince reflect no less
dishonor upon the Church of Rome, then upon the Church of England, as it is now
Reformed: For it is certain, that in all other points he was a Papist, excepting
that only of the Supremacy; unless the Representer will say that the whole of
their Religion is in effect this, that the Pope should be all in all, in the
Dominions of every Christian Prince in the World.

Luther comes next upon the File for Marrying a Nun contrary to his Vow of
Chastity. P. 34.
By which he means a Vow of Caelibacy, as if the Marriage Vow, were not a vow
of Chastity too. But do not their own Divines say, that the vow of Continency
may be dissented with? And has not the Pope dispensed in greater matters? Had
Luther married with his Dispensation, he had it seems committed no fault at
all. And we are apt to think that if notwithstanding his Vow, he had good
reason to marry, he might do it safely enough without the Popes Dispensation.
But where is the Mis-representation now? Why, here is a Vow of Continency
Represented as a rash and inconsiderate Vow, and this is Mis-representing
Papists in relation to matters of Fact and History. And thus also honest Sir
William Misrepresented Chalices, P. 35.
Crosses, Images, nay, Guineas, etc. Into Popish Trinkets and Trumpery, and
made them fit for seizure. But I say neither was Sir William honest in doing
it, nor the Representer over wise in mentioning it here.

His next Fling is at Sir Richard Baker, who upon the Executions of several
great Men in Queen Mary's Reign, chanced to say according to his wonted
Eloquence: Now the Cataracts of severity will be opened, that will make it rain
Blood. Well, but to bring off honest Sir Richard for once, he does not say that
this severity was Tyrannical or Unjust, for if he had, certainly the
Representer had brought us all under the lash for it: But the ends of these
great People being Tragical, he thought good to set the matter off with a
Tragical, or, as the Representer calls it, a pat phrase, without any futher
design. And then as for the other Blood spilt in Queen Marys Reign, which he
seems to charge altogether upon Provocations, Tumults, Seditions, and
Rebellions; he is guilty of the same fault, which he accuses Protestants of,
viz. Of Representing things by halves. Were none put to death in those days but
for such causes? Were Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Tailor, and almost all the 300
spoken of, burnt for Heresy or not? Was not the Question concerning the
Sacrament of the Altar, the burning Question? For those that were guilty of the
Abuses he mentions, they might thank themselves, we defend them not. But what
color is there for Representing all as such? And why will the Representer put
us upon talking of these things, who had said nothing of them, if he had not
forced us to it in our own defense.

But to see now how much there goes in the telling a story: Queen Elizabeth put
to death, as he says, P. 36.
Two hundred Persons upon the score of Conscience, without any actual Crime or
Misdemeanour against the Ancient Statutes of the Land. Two hundred Persons!
Truly I do not know but in her long Reign of about 40 Years, so many might be
put to death. But I wish the Representer, since he pronounces in general with
so much confidence, had named One or Two that were put to death upon the score
of Conscience, and likewise what point of Conscience it was. However something
is necessary to be said in general Answer to that Charge which he plainly
intends, though he would not plainly speak it out. In short therefore, about
ten Years after the Queen came to the Crown, Pope Pius Quintus sends over his
Bull for the Excommunicating and Deposing her, upon which followed the Statute
against the Execution of it: Which yet did not hinder several Priests and
Jesuits from trying to have it Executed, in pursuance whereof the Queens Life
was more then once in danger. And therefore when no other Remedy would serve
the turn, all Popish Priests of the Queens Subjects, were banished under the
Penalty of Treason, and had forty days given them to prepare for departing.
This Law was made at least twelve years (I believe more) after the Popes Breves
were sent hither: And upon this Law some Priests that were afterward found
here, were Executed, and some were not, who though coming into England contrary
to the Law, yet withal, giving security for their dutiful Behavior to the
Queen, were, without changing their Religion, set at liberty: For, if we may,
believe one that knew these things better then the Representer seems to do,
though our Princes judged it necessary for their own safety, that this Law
should continue in force, yet to avoid the doing of any thing that looked like
putting men to death upon the score of conscience, they qualified the rigor of
it by their own Mercy, where a Treasonable design did not otherwise appear. For
when Goodman a Jesuit, was Reprieved by King Charles the 1st, An. 1640. Jan. 25.
and the King was Expostulated with by the Parliament about it, he signified
the cause to be this, that Goodman had been found guilty, merly as being a
Priest, which was the reason of the King's mercy, and that in this clemency he
did but follow the examples of his, Father, King James, and of Queen Elizabeth.
Now whether we should believe King Charles the Martyr, or our Representer, I
leave others to judge. This general account may serve for, his general charge;
and I do not think fit to run out into more particulars, unless the Representer
gives occasion; but I leave him to consider better of these things: And when he
has done it, he may perhaps feel a little shame for having said just before in
the Case of Queen Mary, Now one would think to be just to Crowned Heads, the
Blood should not be exposed alone to the People, but likewise the Occasions and
Provocations given: And in Queen Elizabeth's case I will add, And the mercy
also that was s;hewn, notwithstanding those Occasions and Provocations that
were given her.

But whereas he calls the Law we speak of a Law of her own contriving, a Law so
cruel that the like is scarce to be found among the Mahometans, who though they
have conquered many Christian Nations, yet never, as he has heard of, made it
Treason for their Natives to profess their own Religion, or maintain their
Pastors. To let pass the Misrepresentation he insinuates, of making it Treason
to profess their own Religion, it would almost tempt a man to search the
Records of old Time, to see if something has not passed in the World as cruel
as this Law, if it had been executed to the utmost rigor. For why? should
Queen Elizabeth, under whose Reign our Nation purchased some Glory abroad,
suffer now at home the imputation of being the most Tyrannical Prince that ever
was in the World; beyond the examples of Mahometans? and of Mahometans too in
their severity toward the Christian Nations which they have Conquered; why,
this is strange indeed, and not to be taken upon the Representers word: For
there are Annals that speak of a certain Law, not indeed for the Banishing of
people upon the score of Conscience, but the keeping of them at home to be
tormented for their Conscience. Had they been suffered to use the Liberty that
our Savior once gave, of Flying, into another Country, when they were
Persecuted in their own; it had been a favor in comparison to the restraint;
and Death had been a mercy to the Vexations they endured. The like to this
indeed is scarce to be found even amongst those whom the Representer speaks of:
And which made the case yet harder, this People had not deserved ill of the
State, they neither sided with Foreign Powers, nor with Domestic Rebels; nay,
they had behaved themselves so well, that there was nothing but their Virtue to
make them feared. But Histories say that those of them who escaped by miracles
of Providence, were well received everywhere, and especially by a Prince who
was not of their Religion, but yet to his immortal Glory gave them Refuge and
Relief in his own Countries.

As to the Powder Plot which he next mentions: His insinuation concerning my
Lord Cecil, has been so often exposed, and if it were true, is so unable to
lessen the guilt of those that were concerned in it, that I see no reason why I
must needs enter into that History: We do not charge all of that Communion with
it, but we have reason vehemently to suspect all that went about to excuse, and
positively to condemn all that thought fit to praise the Traitors. But if we
should have charged, as he pretends we do, the Church of Rome with this
Treason, yet I am confident the Rebellion of the West stands not altogether so
fair to be imputed to the Church of England: For surely there was, no Act of
this Church for the Excommunicating and Deposing of the King; but it was the
fight of the Pope's Brief to such a purpose as that, inspired one of the
Traitors, as himself confessed, with those thoughts that at last settled upon
the Powder Plot. And I think it was a Church of England Parliament, and a
Church of England Army that so loyally served his Majesty upon that occasion in
the West: But let the Representer show, if he can, that the Papists were as
serviceable in the prevention of the Powder Plot.

We are now drawing to an end of a tedious Complaint, which surely cannot last
much longer, when he is fain to spin it out, with a story of the long divilish
Knives which Papists were said to procure for cutting of the Protestants
Throats. P. 39.
For I am so perfect a stranger to the least report of this matter, till I met
with it here, that I can say nothing to it. As for the Fire of London, that I
confess I have heard of, and likewise that many charged it upon the Papists;
now for those that did so, I hope I may without offense offer that excuse for
their credulity, which I take a hint of from the Representer himself: It could
not be expected but that the grief of so undoing a Calamity in vast numbers of
suffering People, should discharge it self in accusing those as the Authors of
it, who, as they believed, were well pleased with it: As for the Representer,
what his thoughts are toward London, he has given us plainly to understand, in
calling it a Protestant Sodom, which Heaven consumed. Now I dare say this was
not meant for a lamentation over the sins and sufferings of the City: But if
men will go on to insult at this rate, they should however, be less clamorous
against those mistakes of which the greatest occasions are given by themselves.

Then as to that which he calls a Monsieur's Invention: They that gave credit
to it, have this to say for themselves, That Du Moulin's public offer to make
full proof of his story, when Authority should require it, stood many years,
even to the day of his death; which was no improbable argument that he was
provided with reasonable good testimony, though it was not thought fit to call
upon him for it. This may be said to show, that if there were never so many
that swallowed the story, yet this was no reason for the Representers furious
exclamations: For I am by no means satisfied that they who believed it, did so
in defiance to all their Senses; for though there were Actors and Contrivers of
the Murder of King Charles the First, as public as the noon-light, yet I do not
feel any such contradiction in supposing that some Contrivers there might be
who were not as public as the noon-light: And when the Representer thinks of it
better he will say so too, unless he will say, that because the Contrivers of
that dark Treason of the Powder Plot, were at last as public as the noon-light,
therefore that it was in all likelihood a Contrivance too, of the good Lord
Cecil, cannot be credited, but in defiance to all our Senses. And yet after
all, how does it appear that we have laid any such stress upon Du Moulin's
Relation, as the Representer intimates: For my own part in all the conversation
I have had amongst Protestants, I can remember nothing concerning it, but that
it has been sometimes a little wondered at, that he was never required to prove
his story. And therefore I doubt the Representer has here played the part of an
unwise man, in reviving a story to the disadvantage of the Papists, which died
with the first report of it, as we thought at least; for unless the Representer
thought we had some reason to believe it, why should he go about to complain
that we do believe it? I think we have been more Just to his Party, than he
has. For our sense as to this matter is, that since now the story is not
capable either of being proved, or disproved, it is to be let fall, and the
World is no more to be troubled about it; though whilst Du Moulin was alive, it
was not to be expected but that one or other would be harping upon it.

At last he comes to the Garagantua Mis-representation of them all, that is, P.
40.
the Divine Oats with his Popist Plot. And here, as from a Castle where he is
safe from all possbility of Assault, he bids defyance to us with all the
Rhetoric, that Anger and Scorn can inspire a man withal. But because he lets
fly at the Pulpits for this, and so makes the Clergy to have given what
Authority they could to Oats his lies from their Pulpits, I must needs change
a word or two with him about that in our own Defense, and tell him that neither
is himself of that Credit, nor the thing it self so likely, but that it stood
in great need of particular proofs. I know not but that amongst Ten thousand
Men, here and there one might deliver the news of the Pilgrims, and the Black
Bills from the Pulpit. But I never heard of any that did, and I almost think
that if the Representer had known a few Instances of this Kind, out they had
come, if it had been for nothing but to support the Credibility of his general
Accusation. And to go further with him, whereas he confidently says, that the
WHOLE Plot was received with that welcome and Credit, that what would have been
questioned in the very Scripture, was entertained without any scruple. I will
make bold to ask him, by whom it was entertained, did himself believe the whole
Plot, while he was a Protestant? If he did, undoubtedly we have not lost one of
the wisest of our Party, If he did not, neither did any body else; that ever I
could hear of, though perhaps many might believe more then was true. But for a
more particular account who believed much, who little, who nothing at all of
Oats his Discoveries, and the reasons of the several Opinions, he must excuse
me for that; I am resolved not to be drawn in. Nor have I lately spoken with
every Man in the Nation. And it is only for a Representer to talk of these
matters, and to pronounce generally without exception, though he does it also
without examination of the particulars before hand.

Thus far I have waited upon the Representer in examining the Reasons, upon
which he pretends that we use I know not how many Methods to Mis-represent
Papists, though it has been every step out of the way: For if all had been true
that he pretends, what is all this to the Defense of his Thirty Seven Chapters?
What is it to his Answerers, who had no more to do then to rid their hands of
those Thirty-Seven Chapters? And they have done it so effectually, that the
Representer has thought good to rid his hands of them too.

But I think by this time, it may appear that he has all this while given us
just cause to complain, that we are many ways Misrepresented by Papists,
though the Representer without just cause, was resolved to be before hand, in
the same Complaint against us.

For not to repeat those Mis-representations, False Constructions, and Wry
Interpretations of Protestant Authors, etc. which I have shown him to be guilty
of, in examining some of his Complaints; it were a very easy matter to convict
him of no less untrue then spiteful insinuations against all Protestants
without exception in this, and in his other pieces. I shall at present give but
one Instance, and that in this his last Reply, where he says, that the
Protestant Persuasion has its Name, Being, P. 17.
and support not from what it is in its self, but from what it is not, in
defying and protesting against their Neighbors. It Is easy to see what notion
of Protestants such Passages as these are intended to imprint upon the minds of
Men. But does the Representer in good earnest, believe that our Religion is a
mere Negative Religion, and that we should have none at all, if we had no
Neighbors to defy, and to protest against? Or does he believe that our
Religion so far as it is Negative, is supported by defying and protesting
against other Men; does he not know that we at least pretend to support it by
Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity? Nay, does he believe that there are no
Affirmative points of Religion which we maintain against them, and in respect
of which they do in reality protest against us, though it seems we have got the
Name of Protestants. If he does believe thus of us, much more if knowing the
contrary, he says so however, Where' s Truth, Charity, or Justice? If we take
the Religion, of Protestants, as it stands in opposition to the Errors of the
Church of Rome, it is in many Points Affirmative, and the Negative is on that
Churches side. For instance, that God only is to be Worshipped, is as
Affirmative a Conclusion, as that God is but One, and that Christian people are
bound to read the Scriptures is as Affirmative, as that they are bound to say
their Prayers, and that the Laiety have a Right to the Communion under both
Kinds; is surely as Affirmative, as that they have a Right to One only. Why
then does the Representer say, that the Protestant Profession has its Name,
Being, and Support; not from what it is in its self, but from what it is not?
But to let this pass, what although the Points held by us in opposition to the
Church of Rome, were only Negatives; yet, why must we be so bitterly
represented, as if our Persuasion were supported by nothing but pievishness and
a Spirit of Contradiction to our Neighbors? Why must we be brought in as
defying and protesting against our Neighbors? As if we opposed their Doctrines
and Practices, in despite to the Jews, and not rather blamed them for saying
and, doing thing which we at least think are not to be justified? There are
diverse things surely, which neither Christians nor Men ought to do; And so far
as our Religion stands in not doing such things, one would it is not the worse
for being Negative, nor our Practice to be blemished for having its Name from
what it is not. And therefore when Men come in with their Negatives in
Religion, and their protestations against false persuasions and evil practices,
they are not without more ado to be represented as Defying and Protesting
against their Neighbors. But least of all, should it be infinuated, as if our
whole Religion in effect, stood in this Defying and Protesting: For we do in
the first place Glory in this, that we are Christians, though we are not
ashamed to be called Protestants. In our Religious Assemblies, where we confess
our Faith before God and the World; we protess no other Articles of Faith, then
those in which the Church of Rome agrees with us. By this it is that we are
Christians, and it is this that makes them so. This Faith which we profess, and
into which we were baptized, is the Foundation of our assurance, that if we
live accordingly, we shall be saved, and of our hopes that those among them,
who are disposed to receive the Truth, and repent heartily of all known sins,
shall find Mercy with God, notwithstanding their Captivity to those Errors,
which if we should profess, we could not have the least hope for our selves. In
the mean time for our Negatives against that Church, we offer in our own
defense, that the Religion which the Scriptures teach, is such a Negative
Religion as ours, they not injoyning, and in some points forbidding what we do
not do; and that the truly Primitive Fathers neither professed those Doctrines,
nor did those things, which the Church of Rome would have us to profess and to
do; so that their Religion was not more positive, nor less Negative then ours.
But if it grieves good Men in the Roman Communion, that there should be amongst
Christians, any Protestation of one Party against what is done by another, it
is a grief also to us; only with this, difference, that we cannot help it, but
they can. For if they will Reform the Terms of their Communion by the
Scriptures, and Primitive Antiquity, they shall soon see an end of our
protesting, and that our Persuasion is not supported, as this Representer
faith, by defying and protesting against our Neighbors; then which he could
not have said a viler thing against us, no not if he had put us upon the same
File with Infidels and Pagans; since this is in effect to say, That we have no
Religion but in crosness to other, People.

But at this rate we have been used all along, though we have made no
complaints of it, only they force us to it now, whether we will or no: Thus
even in their Catechisms, where one would expect plainness and sincerity, we
find our selves Misrepresented in that manner, as if there was no such way of
making Novices fast to their Church, but by giving them false notions of ours:
For at present; to name no more then their famous Doway Catechism, there you
find shall find the Teacher giving this wise reason, Why Protestants are so so
divided, and damn one another for Mis-believers? Because, Abridgment of
Christian Doctr. p. 42. Doway 1655.
forsooth, it is the very groundwork of Protestancy that all men, even the
whole-Church of God, are fallible and subject to error. We say indeed that all
men are subject to error; but the very groundwork of Protestancy is not as
this Catechist pretends that the Church of Rome and every other Church is
subject to error, but that she has actually erred, and that grievously too.
And his Inference from hence is no less a Mis-representation then his
principle: So that, says he, they cannot pretend to Certainty or Infallibility
in any one point of their Belief. So that because he is pleased to put
Certainty and Infallibility together, he must needs teach his Scholar that we
have not so much as Certainty of our Faith, nay, not of one Point of it; and
which is still more false, that we cannot pretend to it. No wonder that we find
it so hard a matter to get a little Discourse about Religion with those whom
they have had the breeding of, when we see what an absurd pretense to Religion
they represent ours to be all at once; especially since they take care to let
them know, that 't is not well possible for any two Protestants or Sectaries to
be of one Religion, Id. p. 42.
every man expounding the Scriptures as he lifts, and no one having power to
control the others Exposition of it. Which if their Scholars believe, they
must needs conclude the Protestants must profess as many Religions almost, as
they are men and Women; since it is not well possible for any two of them to be
of one and the same Religion: And, I think, any body may see that this is
taught to discourge all who are educated in this persuasion of us, from hearing
what we have to say for our selves, since by harkening to one or two of us they
are never the nearer, but must talk perhaps with a million before they can
understand the Religion of Protestants, nay, and shall then be as much to seek
for it as they were at first. For what he says of every man's expounding the
Scripture as he lists, no one having power to control the others Exposition of
it: It is also an untrue suggestion, if by expounding the Scripture as we list,
he means arbitrary and groundless Expositions of Scripture. Which when the
Representer pleases, I can prove the Church of Rome to be more guilty of then
any Church that we know in the World besides: If any are guilty of it amongst
us, there is a power in our Church to control them, which has also been used
upon occasion, unless by power he means a Cudgel, and this we do not take to be
Church power. Again, he says that all Heretics pretend equally to the Scripture
for their Novelties and Heresies, Id. p. 44.
(which is not true neither) no one of them ever yielding to another: Which is
notoriously false; for many of those whom he calls Heretics, have yielded to
the reasonings of others out of the Scriptures, who are also Heretics with him:
And this plainly shows that some of these men care not what they say to
disgrace us, when they will so positively affirm a thing which it is impossible
for them to know but it may be false; nay, which it is not well possible for
them not to know that it is false.

It Is after the same way that our Doctrines and Practices are represented by
retail; of which I shall give you but one instance which I well remember, and
that is where the Catechist assuring his Scholar that their Laiety receive
whole Christ under one kind: Tells him also that this is incomparably more than
the pretended Reformers have under both, Id. p. 205.
who receive only a bit of Bakers Bread, with a poor sup of common Vintners
Wine. By which scandalous way of representing our Communion to a Novice, he
would be apt to believe that when we celebrate the Eucharist, out great
business is to send to the Baking-house for Bread, and to the Tavern for Wine;
and so we fall to eating and drinking without any more ado. If he would be
Steeling his Novice against us, he should at least have been so just to us, as
to let him know that we do not give the people common Bread and Wine, though we
do not pretend to give them the natural substance of Christ's Body and Blood.

For that way of Misrepresenting us by charging the particular opinions of some
Protestants upon all: They have the confidence to do it, even in those points
wherein neither Protestants nor Papists are of the same mind among themselves:
And though the Doway Catechism represents us so divided that it is not well
possible for any two of us to be of the same Religion, yet when again it is for
their turn to Represent us otherwise, there is not an odd opinion of any
Protestant, but forthwith it belongs to the Religion of all the rest. Thus we
have been charged for making God the Author of Sin; and that for nothing but
for the sake of those Opinions held by some Protestants, which are no less
vehemently defended by some Papists: In which kind of Representations no man, I
think, has out done the Reconciler of Religions (whoever he was) printed in the
year 1663. They teach, says he, profane, false, and ungodly Doctrines, as for
example: That God is the Author of Sin; that Christ despaired upon the Cross.
Which later Opinions, this man and Fevardentius, and diverse others, as I well
remember, fasten upon Calvin; and then talk as if it was the received Doctrine
of all Protestants. So says he, P. 14.
They say that Christ suffered the pains of Hell upon the Cross, and that this
was is his Descention into Hell. See Calvin here, Psalm. 15. Now I think Calvin
does say so: But it is so small a matter in Comparison, to charge what one says
upon All, that I shall lay no great stress upon it. But that which follows is
admirable: Neither, says he, are they miserably mad only, but also diabolically
malicious; for its of mere purpose they say and do thus, lest that by clear
places of Tradition and Scripture they should be constrained to confess that
there is a Purgatory. Are not these rare Men, thus at once to charge us with
what we do not say or do, and withal to pronounce concerning our Intentions in
so doing, and that in this Vile manner, that no honest Heathen ever used his
Neighbor so? Nay, if you will believe this Representer, Ibid.
They that hear Sectarian Ministers are not Believers, for they do not truly
believe in God the Father Almighty, nor in Jesus Christ his only Son. For he
knows their Hearts better then they do themselves: P. 15.
and let them be never so confident that they do, he will prove that they do
not believe in the Holy Ghost. And he peremptorily says that they do not
believe the Communion of Saints: And lastly, That neither do they believe
forgiveness of sins. For which he brings an excellent Reason, Because they say
say, The Priests cannot forgive Sins: Though we do not say that neither, but
only that they cannot forgive Sins Absolutely; which now they would perwade us
too, to be their own Doctrine. P. 16.
Thus he has made us Infidels almost throughout the Creed, only at last he
grants, that we believe the Resurrection of the Flesh, and the Life
Everlasting; which I wonder at, because it was as easy to invent a reason why
we believe not this neither, as for all the rest. But then even in this matter,
we are no better Believers then the Devil. For, says he, this they believe, and
so do the Devils.

No wonder therefore that he comes afterward, and puts us upon the same File
with Turks and Heathens. As the Turks are divided and subdivided among
themselves, so are the Protestants. The Turks wheresoever they come, demolish
Churches, destroy Crosses, and beat down and break Altars, P. 37.
and Images; so do the Protestants. The Turks cannot abide Praying to Saints;
no more can the Protestants. The Turks love not Beads nor Holy Water; no more
do the Protestants. The Turks above all things, hate the most Holy Sacrifce of
the Mass, and so do the Protestants; which alone is enough to show that in
their Religion or Belief, they are like Turks and Heathens. This I think may
serve at least, to set against the Bishop of Kilmor's Parallel: Though I ought
to ask the Bishops Pardon for making the Comparison. For as to that Parallel
between Protestants and Turks, it is not in every particular true, for
Protestants do not demolish Churches wheresoever they come, nor break, down
Altars, nor destroy Crosses, nor always Images. And as to the particulars that
agree to both, how much malice soever there may be, I am sure there is little
Wit in putting them and us together upon these Accounts. For certainly, we are
no more obliged to do any ill things, because the Turks themselves forbear
them, then we are obliged to forbear any useful or innocent Customs, merely
because the Papists use them. Had this Reconciler shown our Agreement with the
Turks in some Practices. that we could not but confess they are to blame for;
this indeed, had been a shrewd Instruction to us, to amend that in our selves,
which we cannot but condemn in People so grossly deceived as they are. Now this
it was, that the Bishop of Kilmore did in that Comparison of the Papists
Worshipping their Tutelar Saints, with the Heathens Worshipping their Petty
Gods. The Papists do with us, justly condemn these Practices of the Heathens.
The Bishop only desires them, being thus prepared, to look at home. But to
infer that in our Religion, we are like Turks and Heathens, because we forbear
those things, which the Turks are to be justified in not doing; is a
Mis-representation of us, upon so wry an Inference, that if there be not want
of Wit, to excuse it, it will be found equivalent to a downright
Mis-representation, which the Genius of this Author, as it appears, by the
particulars of this Book, makes me fear it is.

And of a great many particulars which I might note, there is one not to be let
pass, and that is, P. 16.
that he does in very good earnest, affirm that we adore the Sacrament, though
the Representer would be thought to charge us with it, little more then in
Jest. For says the Reconciler, Though they say thus of us, for Worshipping of
Images, yet they can dispense with themselves in Worshipping their Sacrament.
And if this be not jesting, it is something a great deal worse; for it is as
notorious, that we do not Worship the Sacrament, as it is that the Papists do.

But to go on with him a little farther. Their Preachers faith he, what are
they forsooth? Intruders, Thieves and Robbers; Hypocrites, Ravenous Wolves, and
Murderers; Sons of Belial, False Prophers, P. 51.
and Priests of Baal; which is their Heresy, Rebellion and Stubbornness against
the Church. -- And if the Preachers be so, What must the Hearers be? Why sure
enough, they shall both fall into the Ditch of Everlasting burning Brimstone
and Fire, etc. Unless they be Converted, do Penante, and live in the Church.
Now this way of Mis-representation by railing at, and damning us, is as crafty
a method, as any they have to imprint upon weak minds an incurable prejudice
against our Communion. For when we are confidently represented as damnable
Wretches, that shall certainly be Damned, if we continue Protestants;
especially by Men, that at other times talk demurely, and always look gravely
when they give us these good words, it cannot be expected, but that some or
other should believe there is more then ordinary Reason for it, though they are
not able to find it out. We may say what we will in our own Defense, let but
these Men go on to say still that we are Damned, and the very noise and din of
these words, and the like, shall make them deaf to all the Reasons we can
bring. And therefore every degree of this dealing, is to be condemned in any
party, wherever it is found, because it is a way to work upon the Passions and
Imaginations of People; and instead of directing, it does but confound their
Judgment. But I must needs say, we have suffered under this injustice by those
of the Church of Rome, beyond any examples that I have yet seen.

Of which, I will give the Representer one instance so remarkable, that it may
serve instead of a great many. Mr. Harding, who had to do with no less a Man
than Bishop Jewel, thought fit to use us in this Fashion, Confut. Fol. 202.
as follows: Ye are moved by the Instinct of Satan; the Devil has you fast
bound, and ye are the Children of the Devil: Ye are the limbs of Antichrist.
Our Church, he calls the Synagogue of Antichrist and Lucifer; and we are no
better with him, then Profane Hell Hounds, F. 195.
Wicked Cains brood, Turkish Huguenots worse then Infidels; nay, he says that
the Fiends of Hell begat Lutherans and Calvinists; and that we would say if we
durst, that Christ is the Abomination of Desolation, F. 194. F. 225.
and that Antichrist is the true God. And then I think he had reason to say,
That the Devil coming from Hell, has carried us away. Thus in his Rejoinder he
bids the Hell Hounds of Zuinglius and Luther 's, Litter, Rejoynd. p. 178, 207,
111.
bark until their bellies break; and calls the Defender one that is like a mad
Dog; and for all this, tells him that he will leave his Vile Eloquence to
himself, [the Defender.] He that has a mind to see more of this, may find two
Pages in Folio full of it, just before the Preface to the Bishops Defense of
his Apology. Now it is easy to Judge what effects this kind of Eloquence will
work upon weak minds, especially when he that uses it, has the Face to say as
Harding did in the Preface to his Confutation. The manner of writing, which I
have here used, in Comparison of the Adversaries is sober, soft, and gentle,
and in respect of their heat, bitterness, and railing, as many tell me,
over-cold sweet, and mild.

I do not say, that they never speak of us, but in this strain; for I do well
remember that the Apology for the Papists which came out about Six or Seven
Years after the Restoration, treats us after another manner, I mean Us of the
Church of England; for then it could call us Men, Brethren, and Fathers, and
would fain unite them and us together against the Fanatics: For why? then we
were somebody, and it was not amiss to curry with us: But there was a time
when we indeed were as nobody; and then the Dissenters were worth being
curried with; insomuch that Dr. Holden, who was always esteemed by us as a
person of the best temper and truest moderation among them, could not forbear
showing the difference he put between them and us, even where there was no
necessity at all so to do, but the mere necessity of currying: For to a
Discourse concerning Infallibility in Religion, Printed at Amsterdam 1652. Dr.
Holden gave his approbation in these words amongst others, That the Book
demonstrated the false Foundations of the Presbyterian Consistory; of the
Socinian Ratiocination; of the Independents Private Spirit; and of the
ERRONEOVS, OR RATHER NO GROUNDS OR PRINCIPLES OF THE LATE PARTICVLAR ENGLISH
PROTESTANT SCHISMATICAL STNAGOGVE. But why are the several Dissenters so softly
and gently touched? Presbyterian Consistory, what harm in a Consistory? or in
Ratiocination? Nor is much anger expressed in giving the Private Spirit to the
Independents. Why, surely these are all complemented in comparison to the
Church of England, which is the Particular English Protestant Schismatical
Synagogue of Erroneous, or rather of no Grounds or Principles at all. But why
this difference I say? Why, nothing is plainer, it was then THE LATE Church of
England: But when the Apology came forth, it was then the Present Church of
England again. Then was Then, and Now was Now. Thus we are used by some of the
very best of them.

But to return to our Reconciler, He wisely considered that we might take
sanctuary in the Bible against the hard words and reproaches they persecute us
with; and therefore to spoil that retreat, he will not allow that we have the
Word of God amongst us; for thus he faith, The Protestants, or Sectarian Bible
is defective, therefore evil, and consequently not the Word of God; for,
besides, what we have above said, almost every year they correct it and mend
it, chop it and change it, as do their Almanacks, adding thereunto what they
will, and subtracting what they please. This is such Mis-representing, that I
had rather the Representer should give the proper name to it, then do so my
self: Nay, if this man were to be believed, we make such material alterations
in the Version or Edition of our Bible every year, as infers a necessity of
altering our Religion upon it, the Bible being the ground of our Religion; for
says he, Neither do they change their Bible only, but also their Religion and
Fashion thereof grounded on it. If then every following years Bible be better
then the former, Recon. p. 38.
why may not the next years Bible be better then this year, and so to the end
of the World? and in the mean time the Sectarian Bible never be perfect, or
better then a yearly Almanac; not so good as an Almanac for Ever; as is Erra
Pater, or the Shepherd's Prognostication, or Seaman 's Calendar. Why then
should it be more the Word of God then Aesop 's Fables, or the Turkish Alcoran?
One would think now that he had done his worst against our Bible; but he
understood his trade better then so, and therefore because this calumny needed
it very much, he was resolved to help it with a good share of that confidence,
which I observed before, was peculiar to these men. For as if he had been yet
over cold, sweet, and mild, he mends the matter by saying, that our Bible is
worse then Aesop 's Fables; it is Diabolical Inventions, and Heretical labors,
and a Sacrilegious Instrument to deceive and damn all such poor Souls as
believe it, P. 41.
and therefore worthy to be burnt with Fire in the middle of the Market at
noon, and let all the people say Amen, so be it. This was a good hearty man I
warrant him, and would not willingly lose his business by doing it by halves.

I should now have done with him, but that I find him afterward imposing upon
his Reader with as shameful a Downright Mis-representation of us, as ever was
invented: P. 50.
For says he of our Clergy, All their Mission was either the inspiration of a
Spirit they know not what, or the Commission of a Child, or the Letters
Pattents of a Woman, or the illicit and invalid ordination or mission of or by
one Scory an Apostate Monk, who ordained the first Bishops at the Nagg's-head
in Cheapside, in Queen Elizabeth 's time. Now I would desire the Representer to
consider with himself how he would have set us forth to the World, if we had
invented the story of Pope Joan, as they have done this of the Naggs-head
Ordination: Why, surely he would have mustered up all his Figures to represent
us as the lewdest Varlets upon the face of the Earth? But though we have
received that story from their own Authors, and know what advantages to make of
it, if we needed them; yet we are very willing to hear what any learned man can
say to disprove it, and to allow all reasonable presumptions against it. Of our
Adversaries we beg none of this candor, and desire no more of them then not to
tell tales of us of their own invention. As to this Nagg's-head business, I ask
the Representer two things, one is, Whether himself believes it? the other,
Whether they have not commonly and boldly reported it up and down amongst us?
Let him then remember how he declaimed against us for creating in the people
such an aversion to Popery, which he did not wonder at, because he considered
that ten thousand Pulpits have been for many years declaiming against them, p.
43.
where every man has had a liberty of exposing them as he pleased, etc. Well,
but what must we have expected by this time, if the Ten thousand Pulpits had
been all this while at their Service, when they have not been afraid to publish
such scandalous untruths againsst us, even whilsst they had not all the liberty
of doing as they please, which he imagines we have taken: If they take this
freedom of telling of Tales, even here amongst us, without any color of proof,
and against the Testimony of unquestionable Recods; we may, I think, without
Uncharitableness guess that where they are under no restraint, they represent
our Doctrines, as they please, and charge them with what Consequence and
Interpretations they please, and expose our Practices as they please, etc. And
make Narratives of us as they please, and make us as guilty as they please, and
have made Truth and Gospel of any thing against us as they please. And when I
consider these things, I cannot wonder that in some parts of Spain (where the
Mis-representing Trade has gone rarely forward) they are made to believe that
we English, since we turned Heretics, are grown Satyrs, and have gotten Horns
and Tails.

I am now something weary of this unprofitable Labor, and shall therefore add
but one thing more, which is, That some of them are wont to Reproach their
Adversaries only by their Faults, when they pretend to give them their whole
Character, and to add what they have any Color for, out of their own Heads,
and sometimes without any Color at all; but especially when the manner and
circumstances of their dying are to be related, for here the Attention and
Passions of the Reader are commonly raised very high. Of all which Bolsec's
Life of Calvin, is a memorable Instance: Thus when he brings him to his
declining Age, he tells us the several Diseases which afflicted him for many
years to the last Gasp, Bolsec. Vit. Calv. c. 22.
were a certain and express Token and Testimony of God's anger against him; and
answers that Objection against it, from the Calamities that befell Job, by the
deliverance God sent him at last: Which kind of reasoning gives every man to
the Devil that dies of painful and tormenting Diseases. But not content to
argue from those Diseases by which Beza said that he ended his Life, viz.
Consumption, Cholic, Stone, etc. incident all of them to Old Age, and
especially to Men of a Sedentary Life: Bolsec adds one out of his own Brain,
With which, as he says, God's open Enemies by his just Judgment have been
punished, viz. That he had a most filthy and poisonous Ulcer about his lower
parts, which were corroded by Vermin. Thus, says he, Honorius the Second King
of the Vandals, Dyed, after he had persecuted the Orthodox Church eight years;
thus Maximianus, the most cruel Enemy of the Christians; and thus Antiochus;
and thus Herod, who Usurped the Honor of God; thus many more Hypocrites and
Enemies of God perished, who under pretense and color of Sanctity and Zeal,
had fought against the Truth, and after a miserable death in this World, have
been thrown headlong into the Everlassting Torments of Hell. And in this
manner, as he says, was Calvin marked out; nay, he affirms it to be most true,
that the Wretch not being able to bear his horrible Tortures, called upon the
Devil, and expired with Oaths, Curses, and Blasphemies. Well, but one would
expect now a very notable proof of so wonderful a matter as this was, and of
all the rest that he says upon this occasion: Why, says Bolsec, they have given
Testimony to this, who were about him in his Sickness to the last: And
therefore let Beza and others deny it as they please, the thing is sufficiently
plain. Was ever malicious Story supported by more feeble Testimony then this?
It seems we must take Bolsec's word, that Calvin's Friends and Servants
reported these things: But can any man be so silly as to think that if Bolsec
had come to the knowledge of this by any certain or probable means of
Intelligence, that he, I say, would have suffered us to go without it? But then
if he had pretended particular Proofs, he had laid himself open to be
particularly baffed: for which reason the safest way, was to say in general,
The Servants said so, and the thing is plain, and there is an end.

Thus also Cochles represents Luther's Death, viz. That he went to Bed merry
and drunk, and was next morning found deal in his Bed; his Body being black,
and his Tongue lolling out, as if he had been strangled, which some think was
done by the Devil, some by his Wife; and as they carried him to the Church to
bury him, his Body stank so that they were constrained to throw it into a
Ditch, and so they departed. Which is a very pleasant story, but that another
tells it so crosly, that it is impossible but one of them must be guilty of
Leesing. The truth is, they were so impatient, that these kind of Tales were
told and sent up and down before the Man himself was dead, as I shall further
acquaint the Representer when he desires it.

In the mean time I forbear, as he says, and wish there may be no occasion
given, to carry on the Controversy in this manner. This very little that I have
said of a great deal more that remains, being designed only to show them what
may be done, if the think fit to leave the Question, and to fall upon us for
Misrepresenting them, instead of maintaining their Doctrines like Scholars and
Disputants.

There remains now but one thing more to be considered, and that is, What
Reason the Representer had to tax the Author of the Exposition of our Doctrine,
with wishing for Moderation in the deepest Satyr, condemning the want of
Civility in others, with the most exasperating Reflections of his own, and a
great deal more to this purpose; which according to the most impartial Judgment
that I can make, is all said without Cause given. And the declamation of the
Representer here upon, shows only that if he had lighted upon a fit Subject,
the man does not want words to set it out to the Life. p. 45.
But what has that Author done? He charges them with their Art of Palliating,
with want of Fairness and Civility, with laying aside Moderation, and falling
into a vein of Lightness and Scurrility, forgetting that Religion is the
Subject, and Christians and Scholars their Antagenists, etc. These things I
confess he lays to their charge: But where is the Satyr? Where are the
Exasperating Expressions? The Pen steeped in Gall, and the Uncharitable
Exposing, for which he seems, to the Representer, but to make a serious Droll?
It Is true enough, that to accuse men of Palliating their Religion, of want of
Fairness, of falling into Lightness, of trivial Jestings, and accomodating
their writings to the Genius of Scepticks, who divert themselves at the expense
of all Religion. This I do acknowledge to be Satirical, and as the Persons may
be upon whom it falls, Exasperating. But then the Satyr and the Sharpness lies
not here in the Manner of saying, but in the Truth of what is said: And I hope
that Author does not deserve ill of these men, for speaking the plain Truth of
them in Expressions so soft and inoffensive, as if he had taken time to choose
the gentlest: If they do not now represent their Religion with that Sincerity
which one would expect from Christians, I know a great many sharper words
whereby one might justly express that Fault, but scarce one that has less
keenness, then that they Palliate. If they bring in a Zealous Brother
Ridiculing our Church, instead of Defending their own; could any thing be more
cool, then to complain of want of Fairness and Civility, then to resent their
Falling into a Vein of Lightness and Scurrility; and to put them in mind that
Religion is the Subject, and Christians and Scholars their Antagonists. If this
be turned into matter of Accusation too, we have an ill time of it, who must
have to do with men that can well enough endure to do all these things, but
cannot endure to hear of it again, though in the mildest way of Representing
it: Had that Author, whose Books the Representer may be ashamed to acknowledge
that he has read; had he, I say, written in the Representer's strain, had he
said any thing like making the King's Capital City a Protestant Sodom, and the
Fires of Southwark and the Temple, our Evangelical Proofs against the Papists;
and the Preachers Theme the alarm to keep the drowsy Flook from nodding; had
he set the Representer any example of such unhandsome levities as these are;
and which, to say no more, are hardly tolerable upon the stage, then indeed the
justice of his charge would not have born him out in his management of it: But
when that excellent man had charged them with no more then what he has terribly
proved, and that is Palliating, or with no more then what is flagrant in their
last pieces, viz. Want of Fairnese and Civility, etc. in a word, with no more
then what is true; and this without virulency or so much as levity of
expression, (for which I leave the World to judge by those very phrases which
the Representer has picked out of his last Book) and yet for this, his Pen must
be said to be steeped in Gall, and his Antagonists exposed under the most
odious character imaginable. I might well make more, but I cannot make less of
it, then that some men are very much exasperated by being shown to themselves.

And now, if I had a mind to take every occasion, he has given no small one by
bringing in that Parable in the Scripture, Of the Trees choosing a King; to
illustrate his own seriousness in the Drolling Sermon he composed for the
zealous Brother: But I forbear at present, because he pretends to forbearance
too.

For the advice that he has given the forementioned Author, I do acknowledge
that it were very good, but that it wants pertinence and occasion; and for that
reason looks more like an unjust Accusation, then a charitable Admonition. But
if he thinks good counsel is always to be received with thanks; I say to him
what he says to our Expositor, Let him turn to such of his own Communion who
have given bad examples in the business of Mis-representing. And let him too
that gives good advice take it also; which though it be not so easy, it will
yet be better for him: But above all things, Let him endeavor that their
Arguments and Methods for the defeating of Protestants, be not such as any Jew
may take to strike at Christianity, and every Athiest to make a sham of all
Religion. Which advice is so good, that it is pity it should be lost upon those
that need it not; and therefore I desire him to recommend it to the Author of
the Parallel between the Doctrine of the Trinity and the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. Let the Representer do his duty well upon this occasion;
and I can hereafter tell him of others wherein his interest will prevail more
then mine.

But because the Representer is sincerely of our Expositor's mind, That this
way of handling Controversies, does rather exasperate then heal our Divisions.
I will tell him an effectual way to prevent it, Let them Represent their
Religion like men that are not afraid to let the people know the bottom of it;
and when they offer to defend their Doctrines, let them not pretend to go on
with their first undertaking, when they leave it, and fall into Invectives
against their Adversaries: for if they would honestly confess that their
business is to make us look as odiously as they can, they should, for me, go on
in this way till they are weary, without any recrimination. If the Representer
desires also that these Controversies may have an end, let him persuade his
Friends not to produce testimonies out of the Fathers for Popery, without
taking notice of the Answers that have been so often made to them: Which
advice, if it had been given and taken, we had not seen the Consensus Veterum,
and the Nubes Testium. Let them not furnish out Books with Arguments that have
been often offered, and as often answered; but take the Controversy where it
was left by their Predecessors and ours, and then go on with it if they can;
which had been very good advice to Mr. Clenche. Let them not begin all over
again, to spin out the time, and to make our Disputes endless: Let them write
and do like men that hope to gain upon the World by Reason and Argument. As for
our parts we shall be careful to follow his last Advice, and to prove our
selves true Members of the Church of England, not only by maintaining the
Truth which She has taught us, but by practicing those Principles and that
Loyalty which we Preach; that as we are sensible to whom we owe the Liberty we
enjoy, so we may approve our selves not altogether unworthy of it, but be
always able to give some good account of our selves, with respect to these
Controversies, both to God and the King.

THE END.
THE D^ctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book entitled, a Papist Misrepresented and Represented, etc.
Quarto.

An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists Protesting against Protestant
Popery ^eing a Vidication of Papists not Misrepresented by Pr^^^^tants: and
containing a particular Examination of Mons(...) ^^aux, late Bishop of Condom,
his Exposition of (...) of the Church of Rome, in the Articles of ^^^ocation of
Saints, and the Worship of Images, occasioned by that Discourse. Quarto.

An ^nswer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Difference between the
Representer and the Answerer. Quarto.

Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons. Octavo.

Sermmons and Discourses, some of which never before printed, the third Volume.
By the Reverend Dr. Tillotson Dean of Canterbury.

A Manuel for a Christian Soldier. Written by Erasmus, and Translated into
English. Twelves.

Printed for W. Rogers.


