A LOOKING-GLASS FOR Religious Princes: OR, THE CHARACTER AND WORK of JOSIAH,
Delivered in a SERMON UPON 2 KINGS XXIII.XXV. The Substance whereof was
Preached April 5. 1691. at Pershore in Worcestershire.

Wherein They may see, That those Princes are only Eminent in the Sight of God,
who are truly Religious, and turn to the Lord with all their Heart. That there
is more required of such Princes, than their own Private Assent and Consent to
the True Religion. That Religious Princes cannot be capable of a greater Honor
in this World, than to be the Instruments of a Godly Reformation among their
Subjects. And, That the Word of God alone is the Rule, to which both they and
their People must attend in all Matters relating to Religion


By RICHARD CLARIDGE, M. A. and then Rector of Peopleton in the County of
Worcester.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by William Marshall at the
Bible in Newgate-street, 1691.

A LOOKING GLASS FOR Religious Princes, etc.
2 KINGS XXIII. 25. And like unto him was there no King before him, that turned
to the Lord with all his Heart, and with all his Soul, and with all his Might,
according to all the Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him.


OF all the Public Blessings that Almighty God is pleased to bestow upon
Nations as Nations, or Bodies Politic, there cannot be conceived a greater
than good and wholesome Laws, Agreed upon and Enacted for the benefit and
Emolument of the whole Society, and godly and upright Governors to put those
Laws in Execution. For, as it is natural for men to enter into Society, Man not
being Animal monasticum, sed politicum, a Monkish but sociable Creature; so it
is necessary to Agree upon Laws for the preservation of it. And forasmuch as
the main design of all Laws and Government should be Gloria Dei, and salus
Populi, the Glory of God, and the Weal and Safety of the State; those Laws are
ever best which have the directest tendency to those Ends: but seeing also that
the best Laws are useless, and insufficient for the attaining of those Ends,
unless executed according to the true intent and meaning of them, and this
cannot be done but by Governors entrusted with the Administration thereof; and
because it often happens that the Administration of Affairs falls into ill
hands, who offend either through Remissness, Rigor, or Arbitrariness; and
thereby Enervate or Debauch the People; or so Oppress them by Illegal
Exactions, Mic. 3.1, 2.
that like the Princes of Israel, they pluck their skin from off them, and
their flesh from off their bones: It is therefore a singular Instance of a
benign Providence to a People, when a skillful and religious Pilot is placed at
the Rudder of the Government; who will take care for the Enacting and Executing
of good Laws, always observing a due distance between the two Extremes,
Softness and Tyranny, into one of which most Princes both of later and former
days have fallen. It is the happiness of England, could she see her happiness,
that she is delivered from One who trampled upon all Laws, and by virtue of an
Omnipotent Dispensing Power did what he listed; and has a most Excellent Prince
placed at the Stern, whose Head the Lord cover in the day of Battle, and
appoint unto him Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks. Under his Conduct the Ship
of the Commonwealth is likely to sail securely, even among Rocks and Shelves:
such Princes are the Favorites of Heaven, God will take them and make them as
Signets, and put them as choice Shafts in the Quiver of his special Providence.
In their day the Government shall triumph, it shall bid defiance to Treachery
at Home, and Opposition from Abroad, for the Lord of Hosts is with them, the
God of Jacob is their Refuge.

When the Government is Administered by a Pious, Prudent and upright Prince, who
has nothing equal in his Prospect to the Honor of God, and the Common
Welfare; there the People are out of danger of Oppression and Invasion, and
shall dwell safely, every man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, 1 Kings
4.25.
as Judah and Israel did in the days of Solomon. Now of those two, the Honor
of God, and the Common Welfare, the preference must be always given to the
first; Mat. 22.37, 38. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
because this is the first and great Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. The
Precept reaches Princes as well as People, and it should be the chief care of
Governors to observe it: (...)
For though they are sometimes called Gods in Scripture, yet they are but earthly
ones, (...).
and by way of Similitude, as Agapetus told Justinian, and therefore should
ever remember themselves to be the Subjects of the Most High. There is all the
reason in the World that Gods Honor should be first regarded by Princes in
their Dominions, because the Most High rules in the Kingdom of men; Dan. 4.17.
and 5.21.2.21.
and appoints over it whomsoever he will; for he changes the times and the
seasons, he removes Kings, and sets up Kings: and because the Happiness of
a Nation depends upon its relation to the King of Kings.

It is the observation of Wise and Experienced Solomon, that Righteousness
exalts a Nation, Prove. 14 34.
but sin is a reproach to any people. I shall not here enquire whether (...),
Righteousness, is to be restrained to Moral Justice, or to be taken in a more
comprehensive sense for Religion and Virtue in general. Experience can attest,
that Piety and Morality have a Mighty Influence upon the Prosperity of a
Nation, and that Vice and Wickedness have been always fatal in their
Consequences to it.

Religion is the best Cement of Society, and binds men in the strictest
obligations to be Just, and True, and Honest to one another: For where Religion
is truly embraced, it has its Tie upon the Conscience, and that by a powerful
Energy checks and commands the whole Man: for Conscience, I mean, the
enlightened and sanctified Conscience, will be always doing its office, in
Accusing or Excusing; and he that has such a Monitor, must be prodigiously
inadvertent, if he do not perceive its Motions, and attend to them.

On the other hand, where Vice is grown predominant, and become the Epidemical
distemper of a People, there the Bond of Conscience is dissolved, because their
Union with God is broken. And when that Bond is dissolved, the People are under
no Tie, but that of Humane Laws; and how weak Humane Laws are of themselves to
make a Nation truly happy, is sadly apparent, from the many woeful distresses
the Nations are under at this day, by reason of their Apostasy from God.

It Is natural for men to lay the blame of all their Miseries upon mistaken
Causes, and to make those Persons and Things the Authors of their Calamities,
which really are not. Thus wicked Ahab charged the Prophet Elijah with being
the cause of the sore Famine in Samaria, Luke 4.25. 1 Kings 18.17.
when the Heaven was shut up three years and six months, saying, Art thou he
that troubles Israel? Thus the innocent Apostles were accused for being
Disturbers of the Public Peace, Acts 17.6.
and Turners of the World upside down. Paul was impleaded by Tertullus for a
pestilent fellow, Chapter 24.5.
and a mover of Sedition. And the Primitive Christians were traduced by the
Heathen Persecutors, Tertul. Apol. c. 37. p. 30.
as the Pests and Enemies of Mankind, and that they and their Doctrine procured
all the Evils that so frequently befell the Roman Empire. Hence arose that
general outcry against the Christians in those days, Cypr. Ep. ad Demetr. p.
197. Arnob. adv. genesis l. 1. p. 1.
when any misfortune happened, Christianos ad Leones, Away with the Christians
to the Lions. For 'twas the Common Objection upon every occasion, that they
were the Authors of all public Calamities.

But as then they who were born after the Flesh persecuted them who were born
after the Spirit, even so it has been of late among us, and would ('it is to be
feared) be so now, had some Men the Power they formerly had. Do not they object
the distresses of the present Age, to the Pious and Sober People of the Nation,
as if they were the Procurers of their Misfortunes, and the Troublers of their
Israel? How often do we hear it urged, That Dissenters are worse than Papists?
that 'twill never be well in England so long as the Act of Indulgence stands?
and that Liberty of Conscience is Omnium malorum Fons, the Fountain of all
Mischiefs?

But alas, poor Envious and mistaken Wretches! Whom do they reproach and
blaspheme? and against whom do they exalt their voice, and lift up their eyes
on high? Isa. 37.23.
even against the Holy One of Israel. In compassion to their Souls, I could
wish they knew what spirit they were of, and were convinced how contrary a
Persecuting Temper is to the Example and Precepts of our Savior and his
Apostles, and to the whole Genius, Scope and Design of the Gospel. Let them
read the Scripture, and show me where Persecution is taught in Terms or
Consequence, and I will believe it then to be lawful to Plunder and Imprison my
Neighbor, yea, to execute the Writ de Haeretico comburendo. But till it be
proved from Scripture, that I may lawfully persecute my Neighbor purely for
Religion, and because he judges of Spiritual things otherwise than I do; I will
always believe a Persecuting Spirit to be Antichristian, and as opposite to the
Gospel as Darkness is to Light, and Papal Cruelty to Apostolical Meekness.

To correct these Men's Mistakes, is to show them the true Cause of all their
Troubles, by resolving them into their proper Originals, their Sins and
Apostacies from God. Thus Elijah told Ahab, I have not troubled Israel, 1 Kings
18.18.
but thou and thy Fathers House, in that ye have forsaken the Commandments of
the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim. And the ancient Apologists,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Arnobius, and others, took this as the most successful
course to stop the slanderous mouths of their Adversaries. The Heathen charged
the Christians with their public Misfortunes; the Christians cleared
themselves from those Aspersions, and showed their Adversaries how to resolve
their Evils into their true Causes, such as Idolatry, Debauchery, and
Ingratitude, the crimes not only of the ancient Pagans, but of too many Modern
Professors of Christianity.

But some will ask perhaps, Is it not a contradiction to say, Christian
Idolaters? I answer, No, because there are a great many such in the World. The
Papists are gross Idolaters, for to worship God by, in, or through any Image or
Similitude of Saint or Angel, as they do, is gross Idolatry. A late Popish
Author endeavors to excuse this practice; A Papist misrepr. and Represented.
p. 2.
All the Veneration, says he, that the Papist expresses before Images, whether
by kneeling, praying, lifting up the eyes, burning Candles, Incense, etc. it is
not at all done for the Image, but is wholly reserved to the thing represented,
which he intends to honor by these actions. But this will not do, unless he
could persuade us, the Religious use of Images were enjoined in the Second
Commandment, and all his superstitious Customs allowed by it; which will never
be, so long as we have our Bibles, and see all Image Worship expressly forbidden
therein.

There is also another sort of Idolaters, who are more refined than the
bigoted Romanists, and yet are no less guilty in the sight of God than they.
Now the Idolatry of these men consists in Performing that unto the True God,
which has a Similitue, Show and Resemblance of his Service, but is not so
indeed; because he Deuteronomy. 12.32
requires it not at our hands, and therefore is but a Col. 2.23.
Will Worship, or voluntary Religion, a thing devised and done Hos. 13.2.
according to our own understanding. See Ainsworth's Arrow against Idolatry, c.
1. p. 3, 4.

It were well, if the Church of England could clear her self of this kind of
Idolatry; she knows the Dissenters charge has been often drawn up against her,
and proved by a Cloud of Witnesses. And if she can make no better defense than
hitherto she has made, it will be both her Wisdom and Honor to acknowledge
her Guilt, and return unto God by Repentance and Reformation.

The second Commandment, says the Arrow against Idol. c. 1. p. 4, 5. Joh.
4.20. -- 24.
excellent Ainsworth, Deu. 12.32. and 4.1, 2, 5, 6, etc.
binds to the true worship of the true God, which is only Psalm. 119.113. Isa.
29.13. Col 2.23. and 22.
as himself commands, and by the Means, Rites and Services that he ordains;
and it forbids 1. All Inventions of our own to worship God by, voluntary
Religion, Opinions and Doctrines of men. 2. All Imitations of Lev. 18.2, 3.
Deuteronomy. 12.30.31. Rev. 17.2.
Heathens or Antichristians in their God services, to do the like unto the Lord
our God. 3. All Imitation or Counterfeiting 1 Kings 12.28.32. Amos 4.4, 5. and
5.21.22, 23. Hos. 8.14.
of Gods own Ordinances and Institutions, as to make Temples like his Temple,
Feasts like his Feasts, Altars like his, Ministers like his, which was the Sin
of Israel. 4. All neglect of Gods Services, or of the Means and Instruments by
him ordained; all irreligious profaneness or hypocrisy; together with all
communion with such kind of Idolatry, all causes, occasions, and provocation
thereunto.


Now when a Nation is overrun with Idolatry and other sorts of Wickedness, to
the great Dishonor of God, and scandal of good Men; it is the Business of
Religious Princes to endeavor to retrieve the Honor of God, and satisfy
pious Minds, by a general Suppression of Idolatry and Vice, because as they
reign by him, so they should reign for him too. God puts the Crown upon their
Heads, and Scepter into their Hands, for other purposes, than to suffer 1 Kings
12 28. Micah 6.16.
Jeroboams Calves, Omri's Statutes, and the Works of the House of Ahab. He
exalts them to Sovereign Dignity for more excellent Ends: They should always
have his Glory in their Eye, and postpone all other Ends to that. Herein we
have an Example of a King the most illustrious Scripture History affords, and
who has left a Copy of Extraordinary Zeal for God to all succeeding Kings to
write after, it is Josiah King of Judah.

And like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with
all his heart, etc.

The Text contains the Character and Commendation of Josiah, with the Work and
Duty of his Day, and in him presents us with a Looking-Glass for Christian
Princes: Or it is a complete Idea, and exact Description of a truly Religious
King, He turned to the Lord with all his heart.

When Josiah came to the Crown, he found the Kingdom universally polluted with
Idolatry, both Priests and People were infected, and every Age and Sex (a
Remnant excepted) had corrupted their ways: His Great Grandfather Hezekiah was
a very good King, and had destroyed all public Idolatry in the Land; 2 Kings
18.4, 5.
He removed the high places, and brake the Images, and cut down the Groves, and
brake in pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses had made: (because it was abused
to Idolatry,) for unto those days the Children of Israel burnt Incense to it.
He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him was none like him,
among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him: But in the Reigns
of his Grandfather Manasseh, and Father Amon, whose History is set down 2 Kings
21. and 2 Chronicles. 33. Idolatry increased like Hydra's heads, and the worship of
Baalim, or Idols of the Sun, prevailed over the Worship of the True God. For 2
King. 21.3.
Manasseh built up again the High Places which his Father Hezekiah had
destroyed, and he reared up Altars for Baal, and made a Grove, as did Ahab, and
worshipped all the Host of Heaven, and served them. And if we look into the
Regnavit Annis 2.
short Reign of his Son Amon, we shall find he was no better than his Father,
but succeeded him in his Throne and Impieties together: For 2 Kings 21, 20.
he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as his Father Manasseh
did.

It Is true, Manasseh, as wicked a King as he had been, after his Repentance 2 Chronicles. 33.12, -- 16.6. v. 17.
did pretty considerably toward a Reformation; 2 Chronicles. 29.3.
Nevertheless the People did sacrifice still in the High Places. But in Amons
time the Reformation was utterly quasht, till the Reign of Josiah, in whose
time it was carried on with wonderful zeal and success. For like unto him was
there no King before him, neither after him arose any like him.

But how can this be, when the same Character is given of Hezekiah? For it is
said 2 Kings 18.5. After him was none like him, among all the Kings of Judah,
nor any that were before him.

For resolution of this Question, several things may be offered in Answer.

First, It must be understood with Exception of Hezekiah,

Secondly, The Phrase denotes them both to have

Thirdly, They had their particular Excellencies, Hezekiah showed his zeal for
the true Religion at his very Accession to the Throne: 2 Chronicles. 29 3.
In the first year of his Reign, in the first Month, he opened the doors of the
house of the Lord, and repaired them. For his Father Ahaz being distressed by
Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria, sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus, in
expectation of help from them, and shut up the doors of the Temple, 2 Chronicles.
28.22, 23, 24. Josiah being a Minor of eight years old when he came to the
Crown, had no sooner attained to the sixteenth year of his age, most commonly
the time of Sport and Dalliance to many other Princes; but while he was yet
(thus) young, he began to seek after the God of David his Father.

Vix eis, par, etc.
they scarcely have been, or shall be parall'd.

Josiah's Reformation was more extensive than Hezekiah's; for Josiah reformed
Non in suo solum, sed etiam in alieno regno. Sanctius sup. 2 Reg. 23.25.
not in the Kingdom of Judah only, but in Israel too. When therefore we read
that Hezekiah threw down the High places, and the Altars, not only out of all 2
Chr. 31.1
Judah and Benjamin, but in Ephraim also and Manasseh, which two Tribes were
part of the Kingdom of Israel: It is to be understood with restriction to that
Jun. sup. loc. Grot. ibid.
part of those Tribes, which was subject to the Kings of Judah, either by
Conquest, or a voluntary submission by reason of the present troubles of that
Kingdom. But Josiah's Reformation extended to the Altar at 2 Reg. 23.15.
Bethel, and all the v. 19.
houses also of the high Places that were in the Cities of Samaria, which the
Kings of Israel made to provoke the Lord to anger.

Josiah's Case, in regard of which the precedence may well be given him.

First, He was prophesied of above Post annos circiter trecentos, Jun. sup. 1
Reg. 13.2.
three hundred years, before he was born, and mentioned expressly by name,
(...), Josiah; and which is very remarkable, it was presently after Jeroboam
had devised his Calf worship in Dan and Bethel; for as he stood by his new
Altar in Bethel to burn Incense, behold there came a man of God out of Judah,
by the Word of the Lord, and cried against the Altar in the Word of the Lord,
and said, O Altar, Altar, thus says the Lord; Behold Heb Son.
[a Child] shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by Name, and upon thee
shall he offer the Priests of the High Places, that burn Incense upon thee, and
men's bones shall be burnt upon thee, 1 Kings 13.1, 2. Where Observe, that God's
jealoulousie of his own Honor, and Love to his own Worship is such, that he
cannot endure to be rivaled by Man; but immediately protests against False
Worship and False Worshippers by his Servants; and tho he bears with them both
for a Season, yet there is a Time, secret to us, but fixed in God's Eternal
Decree, wherein both shall be destroyed. Thus he dealt with Jeroboam's Altar,
and the Priests of the High Places, and the like dealing may all others dread,
who are involved in the like guilt.

To balance this Instance, it is urged, Isaiah Prophesied of Cyrus (an Heathen
Monarch) by Name, long before his Nativity; for according to Junius, from the
time of the Prophecy, to the fulfilling of it, were 170 Years, or after Grotius
210, and therefore the Prediction of Josiah is not singular.

I Answer, their Case was very different; Cyrus was foretold, as a Passive
Instrument, to bring about the design of God's Providence in the Restoration
of the Jews from their Babylonish Captivity, and giving them Liberty to
Re-edisie the Temple. Josiah, as an Active Instrument, to accomplish God's
Pleasure in the Extirpation of Idolatry in Judah and Israel. Cyrus did the Will
of God, but 'twas without any sincere Affection to, or Religious Knowledge of
God; for God says twice to him, Isa. 45.4, 5.
Thou have not known me. Josiah performed the Will of God, in Faith, Love and
Obedience to him; He turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his
soul, and with all his might.

Secondly, Another thing extraordinary in Josiah was his most exact Conformity
to the Divine Law, in purging his Kingdom of Idolatry. 2 Chronicles. 31.20, 21.
Hezekiah wrought that which was good, and right, and truth before the Lord his
God; and in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in
the Law, and in the Commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his
heart. This is an ample Character, but Josiah's is somewhat fuller, For he
turned to the Lord, with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his
might, according to all the Law of Moses. His Conversion was Universal, for he
did all according to all the Law of Moses. His Father and his Grandfather
turned from the Lord and his Law; but he made the Law of God his Counselor; He
sought to the God of David his Father, and declined neither to the right hand,
nor the left, 2 Chronicles. 34.2, 3. He Consulted not with a Carnal Priesthood, and
a sensual Sanhedrim; but he sent to Huldah the Prophetess for Direction.

Many Princes will Reform a Little, as Afa, Jehosaphat, Joash, Amaziah, who
were good Kings, so far as they did Reform; but the Blot that is upon their
Names, is, the High Places were not taken away, 1 Kings 15.14. and 22.43. 2
Kings 12.3. and 14.4. Now Josiah pulled down these High Places, he left not one
of them remaining. Indeed, notwithstanding all he did or could do; Idolatry was
so riveted in many of the Princes, Priests and People, that Baal had a remnant
among them, Jeph. 1.4.
for he had his Chemarims, his professed Priests, and he had others too, who
pretended to be Priests of the True God, but would be now and then tampering
with Baal's Idolatrous Rites. They durst not exercise their Idolatry publicly,
for sear of the King; but they Worshipped the Host of Heaven on the house tops,
and swore by the Lord and Malchom; V. 5.
they mingled true and false Worship together.

And because there is often mention in Scripture of these High Places, and the
pulling of them down is recorded as an High Act of Reformation, we will enquire
what they were; and this will not be loss of time, because the Heathen had
their High Places as well as the Jews. The High Places then Heb. (...), Sept.
(...), were Altars erected upon Hills, upon which they offered Sacrifices, the
Heathen to their Idols, and the Jews to the True God. For after the Tabernacle
and Ark were removed from Shiloh, which was in the days of Eli, when the Ark
was taken, and his two Sons, Hophni and Phinehas were slain by the Philistines,
1 Samuel 4.3, 4, 11. The Jews used the High Places as most proper and convenient
for their Worship; thus Samuel and the People sacrificed in the High Place, 1 Samuel 9.12.19. and so it continued 'till David brought the Ark to 2 Chronicles. 1.4.
Jerusalem, and then it became the People's Duty to Sacrifice where the Ark
was. And hence we read that Solomon, when the V. 3.
Tabernacle was at Gibeon, and the Ark at Jerusalem, sacrificing in the High
Places, and especially at the great High Place in Gibeon, where tho the Lord
appeared to him in a Dream by Night, yet has this Note of Irregularity put
upon him, Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the Statutes of David his Father:
only he sacrificed and burnt incense in the High Places. And the King went to
Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the Great High Place, 1 Kings 3.3, 4.
After the Temple was built, and the Ark placed in it, the People were to bring
their Sacrifices thither, according to that in Deuteronomy. 12.13, 14. Take heed to
thy self, that thou offer not thy burnt-offerings in every place that thou
see; but in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy Tribes, there
thou shall offer thy burnt-offerings, and there thou shall do all that I
command thee. It was the People's sin to Sacrifice any where else, but at
Jerusalem; tho they Sacrificed to the True God: His positive Command made that
to be Sin which was not sin before. When he had placed his Name at Jerusalem,
and pitched his Tabernacle there, thither the People were bound to bring all
their Offerings. But, alas! they soon forsook the Temple at Jerusalem, and
returned to their High Places; where not content to Worship the True God, tho
even that Worship performed there now was sinful, because uncommanded; they
fell to Worshipping of Baal or the Sun, and other Idols of the Nations, which
Worship, notwithstanding they pretended it was for the Honor of the True God,
is every where condemned for abominable Idolatry.

Men may not intermeddle in the Worship of God to institute or alter according
to their Fancies. I know they endeavor to excuse their Innovations, as Aaron
did his Golden Calf, who made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a Feast to
the Lord, Exodus 32.5. Not a Feast to the Calf; they think Religion too plain of
it self, and therefore they will set it out in a more pompous Garb of their own
devising; which is very apt to take with Carnal Worshippers: But is not
acceptable with God, because he approves of none, no not that which Men call
Divine Service, because but of Humane Contrivance, and neither in respect of
Matter, Manner, or End such as is prescribed in the Word. Jeroboam had invented
a notable Semblance of Divine Worship, and made it look as like that of God's
own appointing at Jerusalem as might be: But was God to be found in that
Calfish Worship? Surely No. And as he was not to be met with there, so may we
despair to find him in that Theatrical Worship, which he has not Ordained, and
wherewith the Ignorant World is cajoled at this day.

There is a natural Inclination in Men to be mixing something of their own with
the holy Appointments of God; it is a Vice as old as the Fall, and therefore
might plead Prescription, were Antiquity in this matter a good Argument.
Neither is there only a Natural Inclination, but some Persons are possessed
with such a mighty Fondness for Additions, which Custom or Inrerest has
decoyed them into, that they cannot think God well-Worshipt without the sinful
Pageantry of their Ceremonious Decency and Order; two Words of large Extent,
which when Witty and Designing Men have the Explication of, they will be sure
to expound to such a Latitude, as shall serve their Ends upon every occasion.

It Is not to be questioned, but that the Idolatrous Priests had a great deal to
say for their Idols and High Places; they had the Examples of several Kings,
the approbation of Princes and People, their Idols were only Symbols or
Medium's through which their Worship passed to the Supreme Being, and they
could tell the People they used them merely for Decency and Order, and their
High Places for greater Splendor of Devotion; for they looked upon both Idols
and High Places not as having any Divinity or Holiness in themselves, but as
things in their own Nature indifferent; and yet being enjoined, as not to be
omitted, because the Magistrate's Command changes the very Nature of things,
and makes that which antecedent to his Sanction was indifferent, become
immediately after to be Necessary, that is, Necessary because Commanded by the
Magistrate. This also is the Modern Plea, which has been enforced with all the
Wit and Power of Man, to defend his Innovations in the Worship of God. But all
his Attempts will not do, for weak sinful Man is not able to stand out against
the Omnipotent and most Holy God, who will maintain his Cause against all
Opposers, and make his Truth to triumph over Error, tho backed with the utmost
Skill and power of Men.

But to return to Josiah, that most eminent Reformer in his day; his Zeal for
God manifested it self in sundry particulars:

First, He took care about the Temple at Jerusalem, that 2 King. 22.3.4, 5.
and gave Hilkiah Orders to repair the Breaches thereof.

Secondly, As soon as the Book of the Law was found, and rent his Clothes; V.
11.
he considered himself as obnoxious to the Threatening as his People, and
therefore commanded Priests and Princes to go and enquire of the Lord for him
and his People, 12. 13.
and for all Judah, about it.

He sent and gathered together all the Elders of Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles.
34.29, 30.
and the Priests and the Levites, and all the People great and small, and went
up into the House of the Lord, and read the Book of the Covenant unto them:
that they might all be made sensible of the grievous sin of Idolatry, and the
Wrath of the Lord against it, and might be moved thereby to repent of it, and
renounce it.

Solemn Covenant before the Lord, 2 Kings 23.3.
to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments and his Testimonies, and
his Statutes, with all their heart, and all their Soul, to perform the words of
the Covenant, that were written in the Book of the Law. Herein, the King and
his Subjects proved themselves to be Religious indeed, for all True Religion is
an entering into Solemn League and Covenant with God, to be true to him and his
Appointments.

The terms, League, Covenant, Association, have a brand of Infamy put upon them
by some men, whose Ears are grated at the sound, and their Stomachs raised at
the mention of them; they are as great pretenders to Knowledge as any men we
discourse with, and yet as blind and ignorant as the Pharisees their
Forefathers: for as they boasted of their being the Seed of Abraham, Joh. 8.33.
-- 9.28.
and Disciples of Moses, but erred not knowing the Scriptures: So our Modern
Pharisees talk much of their being the True Sons of the Church, and Lovers of
the Common Prayer, when they are, many of them, as ignorant as the Pharisees of
old, in points of Real saving Knowledge, and understand no Covenanting with
God, but that Popish, Childish, perfunctory and unwarrantable one, of
Godfathers and Godmothers for them in their Infancy, which when they come to
Age, they are usually as careless altogether to perform, as their Substitutes
did at first negligently and superstitiously engage. But thus it happens among
all Ways of Religion (tho never so highly applauded by Traditionary Professors)
which are destitute of Divine Authority.

Fifthly, He and his People having taken the Covenant, etc. there was no delay,
no fear of precipitation, and waiting for a more convenient Season, which are
too often suggested to Religious Princes by carnal Counselors; but down went
the High places, Groves, Altars, 2 Chronicles. 34. and 2. Kings 23.
Priests of Baal immediately: And so universal was the Reformation, that not
one public Monument of Idolatry was spared throughout Judah and Israel.

Sixthly, He restored the Passover to its right Observation, in the Book of
the Covenant, 2 Kings 23.21 v. 22.
from which he turned not aside, by putting to, or taking from. Touching the
celebration of this Feast, it is recorded, Surely there was not holden such a
Passover, from the days of Samuel the Prophet, nor in all the days of the
Kings of Israel, nor of the Kings of Judah.

Seventhly, He took care that no Public Idolatry should be practiced in his
days, whatsoever some of the Priests and People did privately; for it is said, 2 Chronicles. 34 33.
he made them serve the Lord their God. And all his days they departed not from
following the Lord, the God of their Fathers.

Upon consideration now of the whole matter it might well be recorded of Josiah,

Like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the
Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him.

In the words these three things are presented to our Meditations:

First, Josiah's personal Eminency above all other Kings, Like unto him was
there no King before him, etc. Which is to be taken as in the Instances above
mentioned, and tho it includes his public and private Deportment, yet it seems
mostly to relate to his extraordinary Zeal for God in a public Reformation.

Secondly, The Subject matter of his matchless Glory, namely, his own
Conversion, and his Peoples Reformation; wherein his Love to God was very
conspicuous, whether we consider its Integrity or Extent; for it was not only
sincere, but universal also; he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with
all his soul, and with all his might. He was not almost, but altogether a
Convert; he had not a double Heart, one for God, and another for Baal, dividing
himself between true and Idolatrous Worship; No, he turned to the Lord with all
his heart.

Thirdly, The Rule he walked by in rooting out Idolatry, and restoring the pure
Worship of God, not the High Priests Decretalls, or the Canons of the Clergy,
or the Parliamentary Acts of the Sanhedrin; but the Law of Moses; according to
which he strictly acted in all his Proceedings about the Reformation.

The Doctrinal Observations from hence are these:

turn to the Lord with all their heart.







First, Those Princes are only Eminent in the sight of God, who are truly
Religious, and turn to the Lord with all their heart. For such are Vines of his
own planting, Kings set up by him to Rule in the fear of God, they are his
Darlings and Favorites: Not that they can do any thing of themselves, how
Great and Potent soever they be, to merit, or any way procure the Divine Favor
and Protection; their very Exaltation to their Thrones being an Act of pure
Beneficence. But they are eminent in his Estimation, upon the account of those
Graces, which spring from the Righteousness of Christ, and do manifest
themselves in an affectionate Zeal for God. As for those Princes who are
professed Enemies of God and Religion, they may be said to be set up by God
too, because All Power is of God: Romans 13.1.
But then we must remember what God himself says of such, He gives them to a
People in his Anger; Hos. 13.11.
and consider in what sense they are constituted by him, ut flagella Dei, as
the Scourge to punish the Rebellions of a Nation. So that the Powers that be in
the World, whether Good or Bad, are ordained of God; that is, Romans 13.1. (...).
Bad Princes are Gods Ordinance of Wrath and Permission, Good Princes of
special Love, Choice and Approbation. The first are given in his Displeasure,
the latter in his Good will to a People.

There is much Controversy among the Learned about the word (...), Power, Ham.
Annot. ^ loc. Chrystost. and Theophil. in lo^ Sherlocks Cas^ of Alleg. Baxters
Annot Clarks Annot^
and therefore must not pass without a little Examination. Some take it for the
person invested with the Power of Government; others for the Office of the
Prince, not his Person; some understand all manner of Power right or wrong, if
it gets the Possession, and have the Administration of Affairs. Others
understand Authority or Right to Govern, observing a Criticism between (...),
and (...), which some think will not bear the Test. And others comprehend both
lawful Authority, and the Persons exercising it: But whether we take it for
Legal Authority, or usurped, for the Person or the Office of the Prince, or for
both; the thing is much the same, for Authority it self is certainly Gods
Ordinance, (...).
and the persons exercising it, are placed so by his permissive or Effective
Providence.

How far the People are interested in placing or displacing of the Supreme
Magistrate, and whether he be not inferior to the whole Community, tho
superior to the Individuals, are improper Enquiries, when the Government is
settled in Excellent hands, and Liberty and Property secured. I shall only mind
you of Gods special Designation upon some Persons, and the turning of the
Peoples Hearts unto them, after a most wonderful manner, and his manifest
Abdication of others, as utterly unfit to Govern, sending a Blast upon all
their Attempts, while the others Enterprises are blessed with an unaccountable
Success; and again, that the people have sometimes a mighty stroke under
Providence in the Disposal of Crowns, and at other times they stand amazed to
behold their Unconcernedness in the Revolutions of the World.

There is an Objection to one part of this Discourse, that if all Power be of
God, and the Powers that be are of his Ordination, how does he then complain in
Hosea? They have set up Kings, chapter 8.4.
but not of me; they have made Princes, and I knew it not.

To which I answer, that All Power is of God notwithstanding, and Government is
his Ordinance, although the people set up Wicked Kings, and make Princes, such
as he knows not, that is, approves not. His permissive Providence tolerates,
what his Effective Providence allows not. We must therefore distinguish between
Sovereign Authority, and the manner of acquiring and administering of the same.
John 19.11.
Authority it self, or Power to Govern, is from God; but yet the Throne may be
ascended by unlawful steps, or being lawfully mounted, it may be filled with
Apostasy, Cruelty, and Violence; and so the Person sitting thereon may be
disowned by God, as a Tyrant or Usurper.

Or thus it may be answered, this place in Hosea respects the Israelites revolt
from Rehoboam to Jeroboam; Kings 14.7, 8.
and if we weigh the thing well, the Translation of the Kingdom was from God,
and so Jeroboam was a King of Gods setting up, and the People did their Duty in
transferring their Allegiance to him: But his falling away immediately after he
was made King from the true Worship of God, to that of the Golden Calves, Kings
12.28, ^, 30.14.9, 16.
which he had set up in Dan and Bethel, and causing the People to sin
therewith, was from the Devil, and so God renounces him.

But tho the Authority of Kings (generally speaking) be of God, and the Bad too
often make a greater Figure in the World than the Good; yet the Good are his
choice, his excellent Ones, who with Josiah are truly Religious, and turn to
the Lord with all their heart.

But how may poor revolted Mortals be said to turn to God, have they any Power
to turn themselves before they are turned?

I answer, No; they have not in their Natural, Unrenewed State any more Power
to turn themselves spiritually to God, than the Ethiopian has to change his
skin, Jer. 13.23.
or the Leopard his spots. God must first turn to them before they can turn to
him; yea, he must turn them, -- 31.18.
or they can never be turned, for no less Power than Omnipotence can convert a
Soul. But when the Soul is effectually converted, then it will turn to, and
clasp about God. The motions of converted Souls toward God, are like the
turnings of the Needle touched with a Lodestone to the North; for being
touched with the Magnet of his Love, they draw incessantly toward him. In such
Souls the Attraction of Free Grace is so strong, that nothing can possibly
prevent it. The Saints are sensible of great slackness and backwardness in
their Spiritual progress, of many stops and hindrances in their Christian
Race, but they are secured against total and final Apostasy, by Gods
everlasting Covenant of Free Grace, sealed and ratified in the Blood of Christ,
by many sweet and precious promises to keep them from falling away, by virtue
of their Mystical Union with Christ, and the Prayer and Intercession of Christ
for them: They meet with many Assaults from Sin, Satan, and the World; but Sin
cannot separate them from the Love of God in Christ, because that is pardoned
in the Blood of Christ; Satan cannot vanquish them, because Christ has subdued
him; and the World cannot overcome them, because Christ has overcome the
World. But tho the Saints are secured from all danger of final and total
Apostasy, yet this is no ground of carelessness and carnal Confidence to them;
the way of their Salvation is of Gods own ordering and appointing, and it is
this, Pet. 1.2.
They are Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus Christ. Mark this passage, Through Sanctification of the Spirit unto
Obedience; they are not Elected to Salvation without the Spirits Sanctification
unto Obedience, but they are Elected to attain Salvation by Sanctification as
the means to the End: and being sanctified by the Spirit of God, they are
thereby enabled to perform Obedience to the Gospel. God did not Elect them that
they should be careless, ^ph. 1.4.
but that they should be careful; for they are chosen of him in Christ before
the foundation of the World, that they should be holy, and without blame before
him in love. They are chosen to the Means, and the diligent use thereof, as
well as to the End: h. 2.10.
For they are Gods Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God has before ordained, that they should walk in them. This denotes their
Course, it is a walking in good works; they are Elected to live in the constant
exercise of all Graces infused into them, and of all Duties required of them.
They then most horridly abuse the precious Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance,
who call it a Doctrine of Looseness and Libertinism, and pretend it takes away
all Watchfulness and Diligence in Duty; whereas it requires all possible
strictness and exactness from the Saints. And certainly no persons in the World
can consider themselves under stronger ties to Obedience, than they who believe
that it is Gods method in their Salvation to bring them to it of Free Grace,
through Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience, and Sprinkling of the
Blood of Jesus Christ. For believing this to be Gods Way of Salvation, they
will endeavor to be found in it; and knowing that God has chosen them to
Salvation through Sanctification of the Spirit, These. 2.13, 15, 17.
and belief of the Truth; they will pray that they may stand fast, and have
their hearts comforted and established in every good word and work.

Upon this Score it is, namely, Election in Christ, and Sanctification of the
Spirit, that Princes become truly Religious, and so highly eminent in the sight
of God; and by virtue thereof their Dominions are founded in Grace, and have a
Spiritual superadded to their Political Right. I do not say, that the Godly or
Gracious only have a Political Right to Govern, but that Gracious Princes have
a double one; First, As Princes, and Secondly, much more (I am sure much
better) as being gracious Princes. By how much the Unction of the Spirit
excells that of the Body, by so much the Scepter polished with Grace outshines
its Native luster.

Impious Rulers are compared by Solomon to roaring Lions and ranging Bears, the
most savage Beasts of prey, Prove. 28.15.
to set forth their Violence, Cruelty and Oppression. Lions and Bears, the
Naturalists tell us, are naturally crueller than other Wild Creatures, but when
pinched with hunger, Sed cum fame premuntur seipsos crudelitate superant.
they exceed the cruelty of their Natures. In those Creatures we have a lively
portraicture of Arbitrary and Tyrannical Governors,, who as cruelly prey upon
the poor oppressed People, as they do upon the Beasts of the Field. (...) Tenui
populo Ar. Mont. Romans 13.3, 4.
With a little variation of the Apostles words, we may say of them, They are a
terror to good works, and Revengers to execute wrath upon them that do well.
They are Perverters of public peace and Order, and men have no Security,
notwithstanding Law, of Life or Property under them: For they care not what
ravage and spoil they make of their Counrrey, vainly fancying the people are
made for them, not they made for the People; contrary to what Seneca writes to
Nero, That the Commonwealth is not theirs to use as they list, Non Republicam
suam esse sed se Republicae. de Clem. l. 1. c. 19.
but they are the Commonwealth's. Which makes me stand amazed when I read or
hear what unsuitable Titles some Parazites give them, and how Jeroboam's,
Herod's, Maximines, Dioclesians, and Julians, Idolaters, Adulterers, bloody
Persecutors, and infamous Apostates, are complemented with the glorious
Appellations of the Lords Anointed, Sen. Epist. 5^. Q. Curt. l. ^.
and Ministers of God, as the Heathen Priests flattered Alexander, and
persuaded him to be Jupiters Son, tho King Philip was his Father.

But as Wicked Rulers are like roaring Lions, and ranging Bears; Isai. 49.23.
so Religious Kings and Queens are compared to Nursing Fathers and Nursing
Mothers. The Glory of God, and Welfare of their People sway more with such,
than their own self-Interest, or Personal Greatness. They always postpone their
private Advantages to the public Good, and make less reckoning of their own
than their Subjects safety. And this is notorious, from those many dangers they
voluntarily expose themselves to, which it is not imaginable they would ever do,
if they had not more regard to the Honor of God and the Subjects Weal, than to
their own Applause and Interests.

The Greek and Roman Histories inform us of some that sacrificed their Lives
upon their Countries score, as Codrus, Decius, and several others; but whence
sprang this adventurous Love? from natural Courage, Ambition, vain Glory,
Affectation of a Statue, superstitious observation of Oracles, or the like. But
truly Religious Princes act from Nobler Principles, and are moved by the mighty
impulse of him, who sits upon the Circle of the Earth, Isa. 40.22, 23.
and the Inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers; that brings Wicked Princes
to nothing, and makes the Judges of the Earth as Vanity.

Now who those Princes be that are truly Religious, because many pretenders are
in the World, is not very easy for us to know. The Heart falls not within our
Cognizance, for no man can sufficiently understand his own, and how then should
he know another Man's? we leave that therefore to his Judgment, who is the Maker
and Searcher of it.

The Text describes them to us by an universal Conformity to the Law of God, in
turning to him with all their heart, with all their Soul, and with all their
might: which shows the nature of true Conversion, it must be Universal. A
partial Change is an imperfect one; for half an Heart is such an Offering as
God will have no respect unto. He who made the whole, requires the whole; and
therefore he who gives him not the whole, but reserves a part for another, robs
God of his Right, and by that reservation desperately cheats himself too.

Our exactest Scrutinies cannot penetrate any further into the Heart of Man,
because it lies quite out of our sight, than it discovers it self by Overt
Acts. This we know, an Hypocrite may for a time appear to be a Saint, but his
Vizor will off at one time or other; for will he delight himself in the
Almighty? will he always call upon God? Job 27.10. But where there is true
Grace in the Heart, there will not be a Personating, but a real Acting of
Holiness in the Life: Can the Fountain be sweet, and yet send forth bitter
streams? Can the Tree be good, and not the Fruit? So it is impossible for a
Sanctified Heart not to show it self in a Reformed Life. In whomsoever the
principle of true Sanctification is rooted, it will spread and branch out it
self, and extend to others. Holiness is not only of a Diffusive, but also of an
Assimilating Nature, and would have all like it self. When men are thoroughly
converted, they will endeavor the Conversion of others. Having effectually
tasted of the immerited Love of God, they will be telling what he has done for
their Souls; and having their Hearts perfumed with the fragrancy of Free Grace,
they will always retain the Scent, and be ever admiring and commending it to
others.

We may then say, that truly Religious Princes will not put their Candle under
a Bushel, but set it in a Candlestick, that it may give light to their
Subjects; nor hide their precious Ointment, but break the Box of Spikenard,
that the Odor may perfume the People: For they are under an Obligation to
countenance and encourage the Gospel, and to endeavor the Reformation of those
under them. For,

Secondly, There is more required of such Princes, than his Son, in his private
Capacity; and then much more the Prince's, who is exalted to an higher station,
and placed in an Orb, wherein he may shine as the Sun before his people. It is
no part of my present work to speak of the power of Princes in matters Civil
and Political, the Laws and Constitutions of the Government must be the Rule
there: Defense of the Present Government.
We must have recourse to the wholesome Laws and Customs of our Country, for
our direction in Civil Proceedings. Neither our Savior, nor his Apostles
intermeddled with Civil Government, but left that as they found it. Christ's
Kingdom was not of this World, and therefore he and his Apostles meddled no
farther with the Kingdoms of the World, than to teach all their Duties in their
respective Stations, the Magistrates to Rule, and the people to Obey in the
fear of God. The Standard of our Civil Government is the Law of the Land; it is
superior to all Orders and Ranks of Men, and looks with an equal aspect upon
the Prince and People. The Author of Jovian says, that the King is a Sovereign
doubly limited, p. 212.
by the Laws of God, and the Civil Laws of his Kingdom. And (out of Bracton)
adds, Et sub Lege, ibid.
quia Lex facit Regem: He is under the Law, because the Law makes the King. And
Dr. Hammond upon the words, Pract. latech. l. 2. p. 160.
[He bears not the Sword in vain, he is God's Minister, an Avenger for wrath
to him that does ill] says, By this is intimated, that the Sword is, as far as
respects this Life, put into the hands of the lawful Magistrate, with
Commission to use it, as the Constitution of the Kingdom shall best direct.

I shall therefore limit my Discourse to things pertaining to Religion, and
enquire briefly how far the Civil Magistrate is interested therein; and this I
shall do with humble reverence to Almighty God, and a due respect to those whom
he has set over us in the Government of this Realm, by laying down a few
Theses or Positions.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ is the Supreme Head, Governor, Ephesians. 5.23. Col. 2.10.
and Legislator of his Church, and he has not delegated this his Headship,
Government, and Legislature, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Joh. 15.14. Jam. 4.12. Isai.
9.6, 7.
to any Person, or Persons upon Earth. He has left no Humane Vicar or Deputy
to preside over it; for neither Pope, nor general Councils, nor National
Synods, nor the Civil Magistrate singly, or with the Body Representative in
Parliament, have any Sovereign Authority in Church Affairs. In things purely
Divine they cannot make one Law to bind the Conscience to Obedience. They have
nothing to do to make Articles of Faith, to compose Forms of Prayer and
Worship, and impose them upon the people under Penalties, to make
Ecclesiastical Canons and Rubricks, and to decree Rites and Ceremonies. Christ
has strictly tied his Church to the observation of the Rules laid down by him
in his Word: Ye are my Friends if ye do whatsoever I command you, John 15.14. I
your sole Lord, Head, and Master, to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is
given, Mat. 28.18. And therefore the Churches of Christ own none other Head but
him; nay, they dare not own any other, because God has put all things under
his feet, and given him to be the Head over all things to the Church, Ephesians.
1.22. To admit of any other Head, whether Polilical or Ministerial, were to
deny his Headship. The Saints are the best friends to Caesar, they are, as
Elisha said of Elijah, The Chariot of Isrrel, and the Horsemen thereof, 2 Kings
2.12. But they are forbidden to give to Caesar the things that are Gods. With
respect to things Civil, they will, yea, they must own the Supreme Magistrate;
but with respect to Divine Worship, they must own no Master or Superior but
Christ.

The Argument that the Sticklers for Magistratical Authority in Religion draw
from the Jewish Kings, is of no force under the Dispensation of the Gospel,
could they prove what they are never able to do, that they were God was its
alone Head, the Government being a Theocracy. Jerubbaal. p. 312.
Heads of the Church: because, as the Learned Answerer of Mr. Tomb's Theodulia
says, Betwixt the Economy of the Law and Gospel, there is a vast
disproportion; many things were of old lawful, which now to practice were no
less than a denial of Christ come in the flesh. And a little after, the same
Worthy Author says, That neither the Rulers of the Jews, or any other Nations
had de Jure any such Dominion or Power over their Subjects, as to make Laws,
introduce Constitutions of their own framing, in Matters relating to Worship,
and compel them by force and Violence to be subject thereunto.

As little success they have had, who urge the Power assumed by the first
Christian Emperors; for if they took upon them the Headship of the Church,
they invaded Christ's Prerogative; and it is not what they did, but what they
had Warrant from the Word to do, that is Precedential to us.

Those Jewish Kings, David, Hezekiah, and Josiah, had Divine Warrant for what
they did; and Solomon in deposing Abiathar from the Priesthood, acted not as
Head of the Church, but as King of Israel: for as the Author before mentioned
truly distinguishes, Jerubbaal p. 314
Solomon deposed Abiathar not as High Pontifee, or Head of the Church, for Male
administration in Church Affairs, but as King of Israel, for treason against
the Commonwealth, in the business of Adonijah.

But though Christ has constituted no Heads, Vicars, or Deputies over his
Churches, yet he has not left them without a Power to act by in Church
Society: For, when people by the inward working of the Spirit, through the
outward Ministry of the Word, are effectually wrought upon, and have
voluntarily joined themselves into Church Fellowship, for the mutual
participation of all the Ordinances of Christ, they have then a power to Elect
such Persons as they shall judge fitted with Spiritual Gifts and Qualifications
for the Ministry and Exercise of the same Power, and therein they are to
proceed by a close adherence to the Rule of the Gospel.

To prevent all Mistakes touching the Power and Authority which Christ has
given to his Church, I do not assert any Sovereign, ^wen's true nature of a
Go^el Chapter c. 8. ^ 163.
Legislative or Lordly Power, but such as is Declarative or Ministerial, only
with respect to Christ's Authority, and the Churches Liberty, and in it is nature
is purely Spiritual; for whether we consider the Object, the Souls and
Consciences of Men; or the End, the Glory of God, in directing of them to live
unto God, and to come to the fruition of him; or the Rule, the Word and Command
of Christ himself alone; or the Acts and Exercise of it, in Binding and
Loosing, in Remitting and Retaining Sin, in opening and shutting the Kingdom of
Heaven; it is in every part merely and only spiritual: From whence the
Conclusion is plain, that all such Acts and Exercise of Rule or Government,
from any Interest in Church Affairs, which are Carnal, Political, Despotical,
of External Operation, or not entirely Spiritual, are utterly to be excluded,
as wholly Heterogeneous to Christ's Headship and Government.

2. The Churches of Christ are not National or Political Bodies, See Assembly
in their Jus Divinum, Rutherford in his Divine Right of Chapter Government.
as States and Commonwealths, but they are Congregational and Spiritual
Societies, and have Laws and Offices distinct from those of the Commonwealth.

(1.) They have Laws formally different from those of the Commonwealth, viz.
The Precepts of Christ himself alone: As,

1. About Church Officers, they must have a Divine Call and Mission, Mark
16.15. and John 20.21.

2. About Church Duties, as Prayer, Preaching, etc. which must all be performed
according to the Word.

3. About Church gathering and Discipline; Members are to be admitted, and
Offenders dealt with as the Rule, the Command of Christ directs.

(2.) The Churches of Christ have Officers distinct from those of the Civil
Magistrate, they are of his sending and appointment, Ephesians. 4.8.11. and 1 Cor.
12.28; they are elected and ordained by the Church, Acts 6.3, 4, and 14, 23. 1 Timothy 4.14. and Acts 13.1, 2, 3, 4; they act in Christ's Name, and by his
Authority, 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 5.20. Gal. 1.1. and Mat. 28.19, 20.

It is the saying of Optatus Milevitanus an African Bishop, Non enim Republica
est in Ecclesia; sed Ecclesia Republica. Lib. 3.
That the Commonwealth is not in the Church, but the Church is in the
Commonwealth. And it is a great Truth, for were it otherwise, the two Societies
would be confounded, which are essentially distinct from each other. If the
Commonwealth should be in the Church, then there could be no Church but there
must also be a Commonwealth, and wheresoever there is a Commonwealth, there
would be a Church. But this is so absurd, I will not spend time in the
confutation of it. We learn from the Word, that the Churches of Christ are
gathered out of the Kingdoms and Commonwealths of the World, by the preaching
of the Gospel, and united into Bodies by other Bonds and Confederations than
Civil Societies are; the Members of the one may be Members of the other
Society, but the Laws, Officers and manner of Administration are perfectly
distinct.

3. The Civil Magistrate has no Legislative or Coercive power in things of mere
Religion. It Is his duty to protect the Churches of Christ in the free Exercise
of Religious Worship, to punish Vice and Profaneness, and to minister Justice
to Evil doers. But he has no power to institute, alter, change or abolish any
thing in the Worship of God, or to punish the man for his Conscience.

4. The Civil Magistrate is to Rule his Subjects in the fear of God, and to be
a Nursing Father to the Churches of Christ. He ought to be a person as David
was, a man after Gods own Heart; a Man Exemplary for Holiness, Righteousness,
and all other Virtues, and to promote, as much as in him lies, by Precept,
Recommendation, and Example, true Piety and Religion in their Dominions.

Reformation among their Subjects. Some Princes have been bloody Murderers of
their Country, and cruel Persecutors of their people, and have made Laws for
the Justification of their Barbarities: Vide Aug. tom 4.
Thus Valerian enacted against the poor Christians, That unless they sacrificed
to the Heathen Gods, they should be exposed to diverse kinds of Punishments; and
Dioclesians Edict against them was, That no Man should sell, Beda in hymno Jul.
Mart.
or secretly give them any thing, except they would first burn Incense to the
Gods. These and all like them shall stink for ever in the infamy of their
Names, whiles the memories of good Princes shall be always precious. The
remembrance of the one shall rot, and the other shall be ever fresh and
flourishing. The remembrance of Josiah is like the perfume that is made by the
Art of the Apothecary; it is as sweet as Honey in all Mouths, and as Music at
a Banquet of Wine: He behaved himself uprightly in the Reformation of the
People, and took away all the abominations of Iniquity: He directed his Heart
unro the Lord, and in the time of the Ungodly he established Religion.
Jeroboam, Omri, Ahab, and other wicked and irreligious Kings, have left a Brand
of Ignominy upon their Names, that time will never wear out. The decree of
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.29. Dan. 6.26. Ezra 1.1, 2,
for speaking honorably of the God of Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego; of
Darius, for worshipping the God of Daniel; and of Cyrus, for building the
Temple at Jerusalem, more beautified their Diadem's, than all their Victories
and Empire over Nations.

Constantine the first Emperor that embraced the Christian Faith, was surnamed
the Great, more for his Piety than his Greatness. It Is the protecting,
favoring, and encouraging of Religion, that brings in the largest Revenues of
Glory to Princes. Such shall have the Divine Protection to watch over them, for
the eye of the Lord is over them that fear him, and put their hope in his
mercy, Psalm. 33.18. They shall constantly be remembered in the prayers of the
Lords People, and have a Name more honorable and lasting, than one cut in
Beams of Cedar, or Pillars of Brass.

English Church, will undertake an excellent Work undoubtedly, acceptable to
God, and desired by all good Men; and my earnest prayers shall be, that he may
never fail of success in so brave and Christian an Enterprise. The measures
that some Princes have observed, have been taken from wrong Standards, carnal
Ends, and worldly Counsels; and they themselves have been rather governed by
Schemes and platforms of designing Men, than the unerring Oracles of the Living
God, which doubtless has been one main Remora to a thorough Reformation. It was
this which stifled the English Reformation in the Birth, and if not removed,
will render all attempts of this kind abortive. For whiles men advise a
Reformation suitable to such Models as they themselves contrive, and refuse to
hearken to the Lord Christ commanding and directing in his Word? what ought to
be done, how can it be expected that ever a good End should be attained, when
the only adequate means are omitted? When the Affairs of Religion are as
carnally debated as Temporal matters, and the Church is no otherwise considered
than as a part of the State; nay, when things are so jumbled, that there is no
discerning Church from State, but persons are made Members of the former, as
soon as they are born Subjects of the latter, and so come to know hardly any
other Regeneration, than what they are told they received by Infant-Sprinkling:
in a word, when nothing will content some Men but a Draught of Reformation
forged in the Shop of their own Brains, or when they are so stubborn that they
will not submit to the Inclination of an Excellent Prince, or so blind, that
they cannot see the necessity of an Amendment; we may as soon hope to see Turk
and Pope turn Protestants, as some Vizarded Protestants set forward a
Reformation: For Reformation work is contrary to the sensual Lusts and
Interests of worldly men, and therefore will meet with constant opposition from
them; yet notwithstanding all their endeavors to obstruct it, nothing shall be
able to stand before him whom God has appointed to the Work. All difficulties
shall be removed, and hindrances immediately vanish in that day, that the Lord
shall say unto his Zerubbabel, Not by might, nor by power, Zech. 4.6, 7.
but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts: Who art thou, O great Mountain?
before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain, and he shall bring forth the
Head-stone thereof, with shoutings, crying Grace, Grace, unto it.

Wherefore, Be strong O Zerubbabel, Hag. 2.4. 1 Chronicles. 12.32. Hag. ibid.
and be strong all ye people, who have understanding of the times to know what
Israel ought to do, for I am with you says the Lord of Hosts.

As for those Dignitaries of the English Church, who pretend a willingness to
reform Errors and Abuses, by Humane Canons and Constitutions; I humbly desire
them to consider whether men's Traditions are a good Rule to reform by, because
they are erroneous; and whether the Word of God is not a sufficient Rule of it
self, without their sinful Additions? Let the Sacred Book therefore be opened,
and if upon examination the Building be Babel, let it be pulled down, and not
one stone left upon another, how goodly soever the Structure has been in the
Eyes of the long dazzled and deluded Spectators.

Consult no longer with the base Inclinations, and corrupt reasonings of Flesh
and Blood; but away to the Law and Testimony; Covenant with the Lord, as Josiah
and his People did, to keep his Commandments and his Testimonies with all your
heart, and with all your soul, 2 Chronicles. 34.31.

And whereas there are some others that would persuade the People, that no
Reformation is needful, I would entreat them seriously to answer me these
following Questions:

1. Was a Reformation necessary in Josiah's time, and did he well in restoring
the true Worship of God? Is the Case of England much different from that of
Judah's? Nay, is not our Apostasy as palpable as hers? and then are not we in
as much need of a Reformation?

2. Are the Cathedral and Parochial Churches (as they are vulgarly called) of
England, called and constituted according to the Rule and Order of the Gospel,
or are they not? if they are not, then they cannot but stand, in need of
Reformation: If they are, then these two things (among others) must be made
out: 1. That they have the right Matter, and 2. The right Form of a
Gospel Church.


1. If they have the right Matter of a Gospel Church, then the Persons or
Members thereof are Visible Saints: For by Matter, we understand the Persons
whereof a Church consists, with their Qualifications. Now that we may know
whether the Members constituting the Cathedral and Parochial Churches of
England, are Persons fitly qualified, and so right Matter of a Gospel Church,
we will see what the Scripture says in that point, for that must be our Rule
herein: And upon search we shall find the right Matter of a Gospel Church to be
Visible Saints; they are called New Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17. Heb. 3.1, 1. 1 Pet.
2.5, 9. Joh. 15, 18, 19. Ephesians. 1.14. 2 Cor. 6.18.
Holy Brethren, Partakers of the Heavenly Calling, Living stones, a chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, chosen out
of the World, Christ's purchased Possession, the Sons and Daughters of the Lord
God Almighty. Now if we can find such a choice, select, sanctified, and
separate People from the World, that is, from the sinful Doctrines, Courses,
Customs, and Society of the World, in the Cathedral and Parochial Assemblies,
then they have the right Matter of a Gospel Church; if not, but their Members
are as mix't as the Head, and the major number openly to be profane, carnal,
scandalous Livers, such as Swearers, Adulterers, Drunkards, Liars, Backbiters,
Persecutors, Revilers, or at best mere Formalists; have we any ground to call
these Visible Saints* and to reckon them fit Materials for the Spiritual
Building of a Gospel Church?

2. As right Matter, Visible Saints are one Constituent part of a Gospel
Church, so right Form is the next thing required to its Essence or Being. By
Form, I mean, the manner how any Persons come to be a Church, and that is, by a
free Consent and Agreement to unite in Fellowship, for the performing of all
the Duties, and observation of all the Appointments of Christ, and for the
exercise of that Power wherewith he has entrusted them, according to the Rule
of his Word. This is the Formal Cause or Constitutive Form of a particular
Church, namely, their Owen's True Nature of a Gosp. Church, p. 21.
Actual, express, voluntary Consent to Walk together for the Ends, and
according to the Rule aforementioned.

But you will ask me perhaps: What? is there nothing pre-required unto this
Conjunction of Visible Saints in a particular Church? Is no more to be done,
than for Believers immediately to enter into Church Fellowship?

I answer, They are first to be Baptized, before they are admitted to Church
Society. In which point the Scripture is so clear, that there is no place for
Hesitation about it. The Church at Jerusalem was the first Gospel Church, this
was not to depart from thence, but wait for the promise of the Father, Acts
1.4. The number of the Names was about an hundred and twenty. v. 15. These when
the day of Pentecost was fully come, were all with one accord in one place,
Acts 2.1. and were all filled with the Holy Ghost, v. 4. By the help whereof
Peter proved so convincingly to the Murderers of Christ, that God has made
the same Jesus whom they, the Jews, had crucified, both Lord and Christ, v. 36.
that they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of
the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? verse 37. Peter presently
directs them in this their great extremity: Repent, says he, and be baptized
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, ver. 38. Upon testification of their
Faith and Repentance, they were Baptized about three thousand Souls, and added
to the Church, v. 41. Here is a plain Account of the Apostles manner of
receiving persons into Church Fellowship, They that gladly received the Word,
were Baptized, and then Added.

If now upon Examination it prove, that such as are Visible Saints, and
Baptized into Jesus Christ, Romans 6.3. do make up the Cathedral and Parochial
Societies of England, then they are rightly constituted in respect of Matter;
and if Mighty Grace having bowed them to the feet of Jesus, they have freely
consented to give up themselves to the Lord, and to one another, to walk
together in Church Fellowship, in obedience to all Christ's Institutions, then
are they also rightly constituted in respect of Form: But if one or both of
these are wanting, as there is cause enough to believe so: Let them cry, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these; and Preach and Print
Apologies and Vindications in Defense of the Excellent Constitution, as they
call it, of the Church of England, on purpose to obstruct the searches of the
Inquisitive, and to retain the Ignorant in their Ignorance; this will not
justify them before God at the Great Day, tho now their false Pleas pass
undiscovered by the unthinking Crowd of poor deluded Wretches.

I heartily wish, that the Guides and Teachers who act by public Authority,
would not be led more by Interest than by Truth; that they would lay down their
Prejudices which they imbibed in their Education, and received by Tradition
from their Fathers, and would beg of God to direct them to enquire into Gospel
Verities: I am persuaded the Lord would either teach them to discern their
Mistakes, or to exercise more Moderation, and Charity toward those whose
Judgments are convinced of former Errors.

I conclude all with a little variation of the Apostles words in another case,
Romans 14.3, 4.
Let not him who is in an Error, judge him who is convinced, for God has
received him. Who art thou that censurest and condemnest another? to Christ he
stands in the Truth; yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him
stand.

THE END.

