Gesta Grayorum: OR, THE HISTORY Of the High and mighty PRINCE, HENRY Prince of
Purpoole, Archduke of (...) and (...) Duke of (...) and (...), Marquis of St.
(...) and (...) Count Palatine of (...) and (...) Great Lord of the Cantons of
(...) and (...) Knight of the most Heroical Order of the Helme^^ and Sovereign
of the (...) Who Reigned and Died, A.D. 1594. TOGETHER WITH A Masque as it was
presented (by (...) Command) for the Entertainment of (...) who, with the (...)
of both (...) was present thereat.

LONDON, Printed for (...) at this Shop in the (...) MDCLXXXVIII.

Price, one Shilling.

To the Most Honorable MATTHEW SMYTH, Esquire; COMPTROLLER OF THE Honorable
Society OF THE INNER TEMPLE.
SIR,
THE State of Purpoole (so long obscured in it self) could no otherwise express
its Grandeur, but by showing to Posterity what it was: This moved those
ingenious Gentlemen to leave to succeeding Times the Memory of those Actions,
which they themselves had done; not for the vain Air of Popularity, but
generously to give an Example, which others might desire to follow.

Accordingly they have, by this History, set forth their Actions, which seem to
be writ with the same Gallantry of Spirit as they were done.

The Language it self is all that Age could afford; which, allowing something
for the Modern Dress and Words in Fashion, is not beneath any we have now: It
was for that Reason thought necessary not to clip any thing; which, though it
may seem odd, yet naturally begets a Veneration, upon Account of its Antiquity.

What more could they have wished, than to have found a Patron worthy the
protecting the Memory of such a Prince? And what more can they require, than
the Safety of your Patronage.

It was Fortune, undoubtedly, that reserved it for this happy Opportunity of
coming forth under your Protection.

That strict Alliance which ever was betwixt your States seems to ask it of
you, as the only Person in whom are revived the ancient Honors of both Houses:
It was certainly a public Sense of the same personal Abilities (which made
that Prince so conspicuous) that gives us all a public View of those Virtues,
so much admired in private.

Sir, It Is for these Reasons humbly offerred to you, presuming upon a
favorable Acceptance of that which naturally falls under your Care.

May Time perfect the Character already so well begun, that Posterity may hear
you equal, if not greater than the Prince of Purpoole.

I am, SIR, Your HONOR'S Most Obedient Servant, W. C.

Gesta Grayorum: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE PRINCE OF PURPOOLE, Anno Domini, 1594.
THE great number of gallant Gentlemen that Gray's Inn afforded at ordinary
Revels, betwixt All-hollontide and Christmas, exceeding therein the rest of the
Houses of Court, gave occasion to some Well-willers of our Sports, and
Favorers of our Credit, to wish an Head answerable to so noble a Body, and a
Leader to so gallant a Company: Which Motion was more willingly hearkened unto,
in regard that such Pass-times had been intermitted by the space of three or
four Years, by reason of Sickness and Discontinuances.

After many Consultations had hereupon, by the Youths, and others that were
most forward herein, at length, about the 12th. of December, with the Consent
and Assistance of the Readers and Ancients, it was determined, that there
should be elected a Prince of Purpoole, to govern our State for the time; which
was intended to be for the Credit of Grays Inn, and rather to be performed by
witty Inventions, than chargeable Expenses.

Whereupon, presently they made choice of one Mr. Henry H^lmes, a
Norfolk-Gentleman, who was thought to be accomplished with all good Parts, fit
for so great a Dignity; and was also a very proper Man of Personage, and very
active in Dancing and Revelling.

Then was his Privy Council assigned him, to advise of State-Matters, and the
Government of his Dominions: His Lodging also was provided according to State;
as the Presence Chamber, and the Council Chamger: Also all Officers of State,
of the Law, and of the Household. There were also appointed
Gentlemen-Pensioners to attend on his Person, and a Guard, with their Captain,
for his Defense.

The next thing thought upon, as most necessary, was, Provision of Treasure,
for the Support of his State and Dignity. To this purpose, there was granted a
Benevolence by those that were then in his Court abiding; and for those that
were not in the House, there were Letters directed to them, in nature of Privy
Seals, to injoin them, not only to be present, and give their Attendance at his
Court; but also, that they should contribute to the defraying of so great a
Charge, as was guessed to be requisite for the performance of so great
Intendments.

The Form of the Privy Seals directed to the Foreigners, upon occasion as is
aforesaid.
YOur Friends of the Society of Gray's Inn, now residing there, have thought
good to elect a Prince, to govern the State of the Signiory, now by
Dis-continuance, much impaired in the ancient Honor wherein heretofore it has
excelled all other of like Dignity. These are therefore, in the Name of the
said Prince, to require you forthwith to resort to the Court there holden, to
assist the Proceedings with your Person; and withal, upon the Receipt hereof,
to make Contribution of such Benevolence as may express your good Affection to
the State, and be answerable to your Quality. We have appointed our well^
beloved Edward Jones our Foreign Collector, who shall attend you by himself, or
by his Deputy.

Your Loving Friend, Gray's Inn.
Dated at our Court of Graya, the 13th. of December, 1594.

If, upon the Receipt of these Letters, they returned Answer again, that they
would be present in Person at our Sports, as diverse did, not taking notice of
the further meaning therein expressed, they were served with an Alias, as
follows.

To our Trusty and Well Beloved, W. B. at L. give These.
WHereas upon our former Letters to you, which required your Personal
Appearance and Contribution, you have returned us Answer that you will be
present, without satisfying the residue of the Contents for the Benevolence,
These are therefore to will and require you, forthwith, upon the Receipt
hereof, to send, for your part, such Supply by this Bearer, as to you, for the
defraying so great a Charge, shall seem convenient: And herein you shall
perform a Duty to the House, and avoid that ill Opinion which some
Vngentlemanly Spirits have purchased by their uncivil Answers to our Letters
directed to them, whose Demeanor shall be laid to their C^arge when Time
serves; and in the mean time, Order shall be taken, that their Names and
Defaults shall be proclaimed in our public Assemblies, to their great
Dis-credit, etc.

Your Loving Friend, Gray's Inn.


By this means the Prince's Treasure was well increased; as also by the great
Bounty of diverse honorable Favorers of our State, that imparted their
Liberality, to the setting forward of our intended Pass-times. Amongst the
rest, the Right Honorable Sir William Cecill, Knight. Lord Treasurer of England,
being of our Society, deserved honoura^le Remembrance, for his liberal and
noble Mindfulness of us, and our State; who, undesired, sent to the Prince, as
a Token of his Lordship's Favor, 10 l. and a Purse of ^ine rich Needlework.

When all these things sorted so well to our Desires, and that there was good
hope of ^ffecting that that was taken in hand, there was dispatched from our
State a Messenger to our ancient allied Friend, the Inner Temple, that they
might be acquainted with our Proceedings, and also to be invited to participate
of our Honor; which to them was most acceptable, as by the Process of their
Letters and ours, mutually sent, may appear.

The Copies of the Letters that passed betwixt the two most flourishing Estates
of the Grayans and Templarians.
To the most Honorable and Prudent, the Governors, Assistants and Society of
the Inner Temple.
Most Grave and Noble,
WE have, upon good Consideration, made choice of a Prince, to be predominant
in our State of Purpoole, for some important Causes that require an Head, or
Leader: And as we have ever had great Cause, by the Warrant of Experience, to
assure our selves of your unfeigned Love and Amity, so we are, upon this
Occasion, and in the Name of our Prince Elect, to pray you, that it may be
continued; and in Demonstration thereof, that you will be pleased to assist us
with your Counsel, in the Person of an Ambassador, that may be Resident here
amongst us, and be a Minister of Correspondence between us, and to advise of
such Affairs, as the Effects whereof, we hope, shall sort to the Benefit of
both our Estates. And so, being ready to requite you with all good Offices, we
leave you to the Protection of the Almighty.

Your most Loving Friend and Ally Gray's Inn.
Dated at our Court of Graya, this 14th. of December, 1594.

To the most honorable State of the Grayans.
Right Honorable, and most firmly United,
IF our Deserts were any way answerable to the great Expectation of your good
Proceedings, we might with more Boldness accomplish the Request of your kind
Letters, whereby it pleases you to interest us in the Honor of your Actions;
which we cannot but acknowledge for a great Courtesy and Kindness (a thing
proper to you, in all your Courses and Endeavors) and repute it a great Honor
intended toward our selves: In respect whereof, we yield with all Good Will,
to that which your honorable Letters import; as your Kindness, and the Bond of
our ancient Amity and League requires and deserves.

Your assured Friend, The State of Templaria,
From Templaria, the 18th. of December, 1594.

The Order of the Prince of Purpoole's Proceedings, with his Officers and
Attendants at his honorable Inthronization; which was likewise obs^rved in all
his solemn Marches on grand Days, and like Occasions; which Place every Officer
did duly attend, during the Reign of His Highness's Government.
A Marshal. A Marshal. Trumpets. Trumpets. Pursuevant at Arms, Lanye. Townsmen
in the Prince's Livery, with Halberts. Yeomen of the Gua^d, three Couples.
Captain of the Guard, Grimes. Baron of the Grand Port, Dudley. Baron of the
Base Port, Grante. Gentlemen for Entertainment, three Couples. Binge, etc.
Baron of the Petty Port, Williams. Baron of the New Port, Lovel. Gentlemen for
Entertainment, three Couples. Wentworth. Zukenden. Forest.
Lieutenant of the Pensioners, Tonstal. Gentlemen-Pensioners, twelve Couples,
viz. Lawson. Devereux. Stapleton. Daniel. Rotts. Anderson. Glascott. Elken.
Davison, cum reliquis.
Chief Ranger, and Master of the Game, Forest. Master of the Revels, Lambert.
Master of the Revellers, Tevery. Captain of the Pensioners, Cook. Sewer,
Archer. Carver, Moseley. Another Sewer, Drewry. Cup Bearer, Painter.
Groom-porter, Bennet. Sheriff, Leach. Clerk of the Council, Jones. Clerk of the
Parliament, Clerk of the Crown, Downs. Orator, Heke. Recorder, Starkey.
Solicitor, Dunne. Sergeant, Goldsmith. Speaker of the Parliament, B^llen.
Commissary, Greenwood. Attorney, Holt. Sergeant, Hitchcombe. Master of the
Requests, Faldo. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Kitts. Master of the Wards and
Idiots, Ellis. Reader, Cobb. Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Briggs. Master
of the Rolls, Hetlen. Lord Chief Baron of the Common Pleas, Damporte. Lord
Chief Justice of the Prince's Bench, Crew. Master of the Ordnance,
Fitz-Williams. Lieutenant of the Tower, Lloyd. Master of the Jewel-house,
Darlen. Treasurer of the Household, Smith. Knight-Marshal, Bell. Master of the
Wardrobe, Conney. Comptroller of the Household, Bouthe. Bishod of St. Giles's
in the Fields, Dandye. Steward of the Household, Smith. Lord Warden of the
four Ports, Damporte. Secretary of State, Jones. Lord Admiral, Cecill
(Richard.) Lord Treasurer, Morrey. Lord Great Chamberlain, Southworth. Lord
High Constable, Lord Marshal, Knaplock. Lord Privy Seal, Lamphew. Lord
Chamberlain of the Household, Markham. Lord High Steward, Kempe. Lord
Chancellor, Johnson, Archbishop of St. Andrews in Holborn, Bush. Sergeant at
Arms, with the Mace, Flemming. Gentleman Usher, Chevett. The Shield of Pegasus,
for the Inner Temple, Scevington. Sergeant at Arms, with the Sword, Glascott.
Gentleman Usher, Paylor. The Shield of the Griffin, for Gray's Inn, Wickliffe.
The King at Arms, Perkinson. The great Shield of the Prince's Arms, Cobley. The
Prince of Purpoole, Helmes. A Page of Honor, Wandforde. Gentlemen of the Privy
Chamber, six Couples, A Page of Honor, Butler (Roger.) Vice-Chamberlain,
Butler (Thomas.) Master of the Horse, Fitzhugh. Yeomen of the Guard, three
Couples. Townsmen in Liveries. The Family, and Followers.
Upon the 20th. Day of December, being St. Thomas's Eve, the Prince, with all
his Train in Order, as above set down, marched from his Lodging, to the great
Hall; and there took his place in his Throne, under a rich Cloth of State: His
Counselors and great Lords were placed about him, and before him; below the
Half-pace, at a Table, sat his learned Council and Lawyers; the rest of the
Officers and Attendants took their proper Places, as belonged to their
Condition.

Then the Trumpets were commanded to sound thrice; which being done, the King
at Arms, in his rich Surcoat of Arms, stood forth before the Prince, and
proclaimed his Style as follows.

By the sacred Laws of Arms, and authorized Ceremonies of the same (maugre the
Conceit of any Malecontent) I do pronounce my Sovereign Liege Lord, Sir Henry,
rightfully to be the high and mighty Prince of Purpoole, Archduke of Stapulia
and Bernardia, Duke of the High and Nether Holborn, Marquis of St. Giles's and
Tottenham, Count Palatine of Bloomsbury and Clerkenwell, Great Lord of the
Cantons of Islington, etc. Knight of the most honorable Order of the Helmet,
and Sovereign of the same. After that the King at Arms had thus proclaimed his
Style, the Trumpets sounded again; and then entered the Prince's Champion, all
in complete Armor, on Horseback, and so came riding round about the Fire; and
in the midst of the Hall, stayed, and made his Challenge in these Words
following.

If there be any Man, of high Degree, or low, that will say that my Sovereign
is not rightly Prince of Purpoole, as by his King at Arms right-now has been
proclaimed, I am ready here to maintain, that he lies as a false Traitor; and
I do challenge, in Combat, to fight with him, either now, or at any time or
place appointed: And in token hereof, I gage my Gauntlet, us the Prince's true
Knight, and his Champion. When the Champion had thus made his Challenge, he
departed; then the Trumpets were commanded to sound, and the King at Arms
blazoned the Prince his Highness's Arms, as follows.

The most mighty Prince of Purpoole, etc. bears his Shield of the highest
Jupiter. In Point, a Sacred Imperial Diadem, safely guarded by the Helmet of
the great Goddess Pallas, from the Violence of Darts, Bullets and Bolts of
Saturn, Momus, and the Idiot; all environed with the Ribband of Loyalty, having
a Pendant of the most heroical Order of Knighthood of the Helmet; the Word
hereunto, Sic virtus honorem. For his Highness's Crest, the glorious Planet
Sol, coursing through the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, on a Celestial Globe,
moved upon the two Poles, Artick and Antartick; with this Motto, Dum totum
peragraverit orbem. All set upon a Chaphew: Mars turned up, Luna mantelled,
Sapphire doubted Pearl, supported by two anciently renowned and glorious
Griffyns, which have been always in League with the honorable Pegasus. The
Conceit hereof was to show, that the Prince, whose private Arms were three
Helmets, should defend his Honor by Virtue, from Reprehensions of
Malcontents, Carpers and Fools. The Ribband of Blue, with an Helmet Pendant,
in intimation of St. George. In his Crest, his Government for the twelve Days
of Christmas was resembled to the Sun's passing the twelve Signs, though the
Prince's Course had some odd degrees beyond that time: But he was wholly
supported by the Griffyns; for Grays-Inn-Gentlemen, and not the Treasure of the
House, was charged. The Words, Sic virtus honorem, that his Virtue should
defend his Honor, whilst he had run his whole Course of Dominion, without any
either Eclipse or Retrogradation.

After these things thus done, the Attorney stood up, and made a Speech of
Gratulation to the Prince; and therein showed what great Happiness was like to
ensue, by the Election of so noble and virtuous a Prince, as then reigned over
them; rightly extolling the Nobility, Virtue, Puissance, and the singular
Perfections of his Sovereign; whereby he took occasion also to move the
Subjects to be forward to perform all Obedience and Service to his Excellency;
as also to furnish his Wants, if so be that it were requisite; and, in a word,
persuaded the People, that they were happy in having such a Prince to rule over
them; and likewise, assured the Prince, that he also was most happy, in having
Rule over so dutiful and loving Subjects, that would not think any thing, were
it Lands, Goods, or Life, too dear to be at his Highness's Command and Service.

The Prince's Highness made again this Answer, That he did acknowledge himself
to be deeply bound to their Merits; and in that regard did promise, that he
would be a gracious and loving Prince to so well-deserving Subjects. And
concluded with good liking and Commendations of their Proceedings.

Then the Solicitor, having certain great old Books and Records lying before
him, made this Speech to his Honor, as follows.

Most Excellent Prince,

High Superiority and Dominion is illustrated and adorned by the humble
Services of noble and mighty Personages: And therefore, amidst the Garland of
your Royalties of your Crown, this is a principal Flower, That in your
Provinces and Territories, diverse mighty and puissant Potentates are your
Homagers and Vassals; and, although infinite are your Feodaries, which by their
Tenures do perform Royal Service to your Sacred Person, pay huge Sums into your
Treasury and Exchequer, and maintain whole Legions for the Defense of your
Country; yet some special Persons there are, charged by their Tenures, to do
special Service at this your glorious Inthronization; whose Tenures, for their
Strangeness, are admirable; for their Value, inestimable; and for their
Worthiness, incomparable: The Particulars whereof do here appear in your
Excellency's Records, in the Book of Doomsday, remaining in your Exchequer, in
the 50th. and 500th. Chest there.

The Names of such Homagers and Tributaries as hold any Signiories, Lordships,
Land^^ Privileges, or Liberties under his Honor, and the Tenures and Services
belonging to the same, as follows.
ALfonso de Stapulia, and Davillo de Bernardia, hold the Arch-Dukedoms of
Stapulia and Bernardia, of the Prince of Purpoole, by Grand Serjeantry, and
Castle-Guard of the Castles of Stapulia and Bernardia, and to right and relieve
all Wants and Wrongs of all Ladies, Matrons and Maids within the said
Arch-Dutchy; and rendering, on the Day of his Excellency's Coronation, a Coronet
of Gold, and yearly five hundred Millions, Sterling.

Marotto Marquarillo de Holborn holds the Manors of High and Nether Holborn
by Cornage in Capite, of the Prince of Purpoole; and rendering on the Day of his
Honor's Coronation, for every of the Prince's Pensioners, one Milk-white Do,
to be bestowed on them by the Prince, for a Favor, or New-years-night-gift;
and rendering yearly two hundred Millions, Sterling.

Lucy Negro, Abbess de Clerkenwell, holds the Nunnery of Clerkenwell, with
the Lands and Privileges ther^unto belonging, of the Prince of Purpoole by
Night-Service in Cauda, and to find a Choir of Nuns, with burning Lamps, to
chaunt Placebo to the Gentlemen of the Prince's Privy-Chamber, on the Day of
His Excellency's Coronation.

Ruffiano de St. Giles's holds the Town of St. Giles's by Cornage in Cauda,
of the Prince of Purpoole, and rendering on the Day of His Excellency's
Coronation, two ambling, easy paced Gennets, for the Prince's two Pages of
Honor; and rendering yearly two hundred Millions, Sterling.

Cornelius Combaldus, de Tottenham, holds the Grange of Tottenham of the
Prince of Purpoole, in free and common Soccage, by the twenty fourth part of a
Night's Fee, and by rendering to the Master of the Ward rope so much Cunny-Furr
as will serve to line his Nightcap, and face a pair of Mittins; and yielding
yearly four Quarters of Rye, and threescore double Ducats on the Feast of St.
Pancras.

Bartholomeus de Bloomsbury holds a thousand Hides in Bloomsbury, of the
Prince of Purpoole, by Escuage Uncertain, and rendering on the Day of His
Excellency's Coronation one Amazon, with a Ring to be run at by the Knight's of
the Prin^^ Band, and the Mark to be his Trophy that shall be adjudged the
bravest Courser; and rendering yearly fifty Millions, Sterling.

Amarillo de Paddington holds an hundred Ox-gangs of Land in Paddington, of
the Prince of Purpoole, by Petty-Serjeantry, that when the Prince makes a
Voyage Royal against the Amazons, to subdue and bring them under, he do find,
at his own Charges, a thousand Men, well furnished with long and strong
Morris-pikes, black Bills, or Halberts, with Morians on their Heads; and
rendering yearly four hundred Millions, Sterling.

Bawdwine de Islington holds the Town of Islington of the Prince of Purpoole,
by Grand-Serjeantry; and rendering, at the Coronation of his Honor, for every
Maid in Islington, continuing a Virgin after the Age of Fourteen Years, one
hundred thousand Millions, Sterling.

Iordano Surtano de Kentish-Town, holds the Canton of Kentish-Town of the
Prince of Purpoole, in Tail-general, at the Will of the said Prince, as of his
Manor of Deep-Inn, in his Province of Islington by the Veirge, according to
the Custom of the said Manor; That when any of the Prince's O^ficers or Family
do resort thither, for Change of Air, or else Variety of Diet, as weary of
Court-Li^e, and such Provision, he do provide for a Mess of the Yeomen of the
Guard, or any of the Black-Guard, or such l^ke inferior Officers so coming,
eight Loins of Mutton, which are sound, well fed, and not infectious; and for
every Gentleman-Pensioner, or other of good Quality, Coneys, Pigeons,
Chickens, or such dainty Morsels. But the said Iordano is not bound by his
Tenure, to boil, roast, or bake the same, or meddle further than the bare
Delivery of the said Cates, and so to leave them to the handling, dressing and
breaking up of themselves; and rendering for a Fine to the Prince one thousand
five hundred Marks.

Markasius Rusticanus, and Hieronymus Paludensis de Knights-bridge, do hold the
Village of Knights-bridge, with the Appurtenances in Knights-bridg^, o^ the
Prince of Purpoole, by Villenage in base Tenure, that they two shall jointly
find three hundred able and sufficient laboring Men, with Instruments and
Tools necessary for the making clean of all Channels, Sinks, Creeks and Gutters
within all the Cities of His Highness's Dominions; and also shall cleanse and
keep clean all, and all manner of Ponds, Puddles, Dams, Springs, Locks,
Runlets, Becks, Water-gates, Sluices, Passages, strait Entrances, and dangerous
Quagmires; and also shall repair and mend all common H^gh and Low-Ways, by
laying Stones in the Pits and naughty places thereof; and also that they do not
suffer the aforesaid places to go to decay through their de^ault, and lack of
looking unto, or neglect of doing their parts and duties therein.

The Tenures being thus read by the Soll^citor, then were called by their Names
those Homagers that were to perform their Services, according to their Tenures.

Upon the Summons given, Alfonso de Stapuli^, and Davillo de Bernardia came to
the Prince's Footstool, and off^^ed a Coronet, according to their Service, and
did Homage to His Highness in solemn manner, kneeling, according to the Order
in such Cases accustomed. The rest that appeared were deferred to better
leisure; and they that made default were fined at great Sums, and their
Defaults recorded.

There was a Parliament intended, and summoned; but by reason that some special
Officers that were by necessary Occasions, urged to be absent, without whose
Presence it could not be performed, it was dashed. And in that Point our
Purpose was frustrate, saving only in two Branches of it: The one was, a
Subsidy granted by the Commons of his Dominions, toward the Support of His
Highness's Port and Sports. The other was by his gracious, general and free
Pardon.

Henry Prince of Purpoole, Archduke of Stapulia and Bernardia, Duke of High
and Nether Holborn, Marquis of St. Giles's and Tottenham, Count Palatine of
Bloomsbury and Clerkenwell, Great Lord of the Canton of Islington,
Kentish-Town, Paddington and Knights-bridge, Knight of the most Heroical Order
of the Helmet, and Sovereign of the same, To all, and all manner of Persons to
whom these Presents shall appertain; Greeting.
IN tender regard, and gracious Consideration of the humble Affection of our
Loyal Lords and Subjects; and by understanding that by often violating of
laudable Customs, Prescriptions and Laws, diverse have incurred inevitable and
incurable Dangers of Lands, Goods, Life and Members, if it be not by our
Clemency redressed, respected and pardoned. We therefore, hoping for better
Obedience and Observation of our said Laws and Customs, do grant and publish
this our general and free Pardon of all Dangers, Pains, Penalties, Forfeitures,
or O^fences, whereunto and wherewith they are not charged, or chargeable, by
reason of Mis-government, Mis-demeanour, Mis-behaviour, or Fault, either of
Commission, or Omission, or otherwise howsoever or whatsoever.

It is therefore Our Will and Pleasure, that all and every public Person and
Persons, whether they be Strangers or Naturals, within Our Dominions be by
virtue hereof excused, suspended and discharged from all, and all manner of
Treasons, Contempts, Offenses, Trespasses, Forcible Entries, Intrusions,
Disseisins, Torts, Wrongs, Injuries, Over-throws, Over-thwartings,
Cross-bitings, Coney-catchings, Frauds, Conclusions, Fictions, Fractions,
Fashions, Fancies, or Ostentations: Also all, and all manner of Errors,
Misprisions, Mistakings, Overtakings, Double-dealings, Combinations,
Confederacies, Conjunctions, Oppositions, Interpositions, Suppositions and
Suppositaries: Also all, and all manner of Intermedlance, or Medlance,
Privy-searches, Routs and Riots, Incumberances, Pluralities, Formalities,
Deformalities, Disturbances, Duplicities, Jeofails in Insufficiencies or
Defects: Also all, and all manner of Sorceries, Enchantments, Conjurations,
Spells, or Charms: All Destructions, Obstructions and Constructions: All
Evasions, Invasions, Charges, Surcharges, Discharges, Commands^ Countermands,
Checks, Counter-checks and Counter-buffs: Also all, and all manner of
Inhibitions, Prohibitions, Insurrections, Corrections, Conspiracies,
Concavities, Coinings, Superfluities, Washings, Clippings and Shavings: All,
and all manner of Multiplications, Inanities, Installations, Destillations,
Constillations, Necromancies and Incantations: All, and all manner of
Mis-^easance, Non-feasance, or too much Feasance: All Attempts or Adventures,
Skirmages, Assaults, Grapplings, Closings, or Encounters: All Mis-prisonments,
or Res^raints of Body or Member: And all, and all manner of Pains and
Penalties, Personal or Pecuniary whatsoever, committed, made, or done against
Our Crown and Dignity, Peace, Prerogatives, Laws and Customs, which shall not
herein hereafter be in some sort expressed, mentioned, intended, or excepted.

Except, and always fore-prized out of this general and free Pardon, All and
every such Person and Persons as shall imagine, think, suppose, or speak and
utter a^y ^alse, seditious, ignominious, or slanderous Words, Reports, Rumors,
or Opinions, against the Dignity, or His Excellency's honorable Actions,
Counsels, Consultations, or State of the Prince, his Court, Counselors,
Nobles, Knights and Officers.

Except, All such Persons as now, or hereafter shall be advanced, admitted, or
induced to any corporal or personal Benefice, Administration, Charge, or Cure
of any mann^r of Personage, and shall not be personally resident, commorant, or
incumbent in, at, or upon the whole, or some part or parc^l of the said
Benefice, Administration, or Cure; but absent himself wilfully or negligently,
by the space of fourscore Days, Nights or Hours, and not having any special
substituted, instituted or inducted Vicar, incumbent or concumbent, daily, or
any other time, duly to express, enjoy and supply his Absence, Room, or
Vacation.

Except, All such Persons as have, or shall have any Charge, Occasion, Chance,
Opportunity, or possible Means to entertain, serve, recreate, delight, or
discourse with any virtuous or honorable Lady or Gentlewoman, Matron or Maid,
publicly, privately, or familiarly, and shall faint, fail, or be deemed to
faint or fail in Courage, or Countenance, Semblance, Gesture, Voice, Speech, or
Attempt, or in Act or Adventure, or in any other Matter, Thing, Manner,
Mystery, or Accomplishment, due, decent, or appertinent to her or their Honor,
Dignity, Desert, Expectation, Desire, Affection, Inclination, Allowance, or
Acceptance; to be daunted, dismayed, or to stand mute, idle, frivolous, or
defective, or otherwise dull, contrary, sullen, malcontent, melancholy, or
dif^erent from the Profession, Practice and Perfection of a complete and
consummate Gentleman or Courtier.

Except, All such Persons as by any Force, or Fraud and Dissimulation, shall
procure, be it by Letters, Promises, Messages, Contracts, and other
Inveaglings, any Lady or Gentlewoman, Woman or Maid, Sole or Covert, into his
Possession or Convoy, and shall convey her into any place where she is, or
shall be of ^ull power and opportunity to bargain, give, take, buy, sell, or
change; and shall suffer her to ^scape and return at large, without any such
Bargain, Sale, Gift, or Exchange performed and made, contrary to former
expected, expressed, employed Contract or Consent.

Except, All such Persons as by any Slander, Libel, Word, or Note, bewray,
betray, defame, or suffer to be defamed any Woman, Wife, Widow, or Ma^d, in
whose Affairs, Secrets, Suits, Services, Causes, Actions, or other Occupations,
he has been at any time conversant, employed, or trained in, or admitted unto,
contrary to his plighted Promise, Duty and Allegiance; and to the utter
Disparagement of others hereafter to be received, retained, em^raced, or liked
in like Services, Performances, or Advancements.

Except, All Intrusions and Forcible Entries, had, made, or done into or upon
any the Prince's Widows, or Wards Female, without special License; and all
Fines passed for the same.

Except, all concealed Fools, Idiots and Madmen, that have not to this present
sued forth any Livery of their Wits, nor Ouster le main of their Senses, until
the Prince have had Primer Seisin thereof.

Except, All such Persons as, for their Lucre and Gain of Living, do keep or
maintain, or else frequent and resort unto any common House, Alley, open or
privy place of unlawful Exercises; as of Vaulting, Bowling, or any forbidden
manner of Shooting; as at Pricks in common Highways, Ways of Sufferance or
Ease to Market Towns or Fairs, or at short Butts, not being of sufficient
length and distance, or at any roving or unconstant Mark, or that shoot any
Shafts, Arrows, or Bolts of unseasonable Wood or Substances, or without an
Head, or of too short and small a Size, contrary to the Customs, Laws and
Statutes, in such Cases made and provided.

Except, All such Persons as shall put or cast into any Waters, salt or fresh,
or any Brooks, Brinks, Chinks, Pits, Pools, or Ponds, any Snare, or other
Engine, to danger or destroy the Fry or Breed of any young Lampreys, Boads,
Loaches, Bull-heads, Cods, Whitings, Pikes, Ruffs, or Pearches, or any other
young Store of Spawns or Fries, in any Flood-gate, Sluice, Pipe, or Tail of a
Mill, or any other straight Stream, Brook, or River, salt or fresh; the same
Fish being then of insu^ficiency in Age and Quantity, or at that time not in
convenient Season to be used and taken.

Except, All such Persons as shall hunt in the Night, or pursue any Bucks or
Does; or with painted Faces, Vizards, or other disguisings, in the Daytime; or
any such as do wrongfully and unlawfully, without Consent or Leave given or
granted, by Day, or by Night, break or enter into any Park impailed, or other
several Close, Enclosure, Chase, or Purliew, enclosed or compassed with Wall,
Pale, Grove, Hedge, or Bushes, used still and occupied for the keeping,
breeding, or cherishing of young Deer, Prickets, or any other Game, fit to be
preserved and nourished; or such as do hunt, chase, or drive out any such Deer,
to the prejudice and decay of such Game and Pass-times within our Dominions.

Except, All such Persons as shall shoot in any Hand-Gun, Demy-Hag, or
Hag-butt, either Half-shot, or Bullet, at any Fowl, Bird, or Beast; either at
any Deer, Red or Fallow, or any other thing or things, except it be a Butt set,
laid, or raised in some convenient place, fit for the same purpose.

Except, All and every Artificer, Crafts-man, Labourer, Hous^holder, or
Servant, being a Layman, which has not Lands to the yearly Value of forty
Shillings; or any Clerk, not admitted or advanced to the Benefice of the value
of ten Pounds per Annum, that with any Greyhound, Mongrel, Mastiff, Spaniel,
or other Dogs, does hunt in other Men's Parks, Warrens and Coney-grees; or use
any Ferrets, Hare-pipes, Snarles, Ginns, or other Knacks or Devices to take or
destroy Does, Hares, or Coneys, or other Gentlemen's Game, contrary to the form
and meaning of a Statute in that Case provided.

Except, All Merchant-Adventurers, that ship or lade any Wares or Merchandise,
into any Port or Creek, in any Flemish, French, or Dutch, or other Outlandi^h
Hoy, Ship, or Bottom, whereof the Prince, nor some of his Subjects be not
Possessioners and Proprietaries; and the Masters and Mariners of the same
Vessels and Bottoms to be the Prince's Subjects; whereby our own Shipping is
many times unfraught, contrary unto diverse Statutes in that Case provided.

Except, All Owners, Masters and Pursers of our Ships, as for the
Transportation of Freight from one Port to another, have received and taken any
Sums o^ Money above the Statute-Allowance in that behalf, viz. For every dry
Fatt, 6 d. for every Bale, one Foot long, 1 s. for every Hogshead, Pipe, or
Tierce of Wine, 5 s.

Except, All decayed Houses of Husbandry, and Housewifery, and Enclosures, and
Severalties, converting of any Lands used and occupied to Tillage and Sowing,
into Pasture and Feeding; whereby Idleness increases, Husbandry and
Housewifery is decayed, and Towns are dis-peopled, contrary to the Statute in
that Case made and provided.

Except, All such Persons as shall maliciously and willingly burn or cut, or
cause to be burned or cut, any Conduit, or Trough, Pipe, or any other
Instrument used as means of Conveyance of any Liquor, Water, or other kind of
Moisture.

Except, All Commoners within any Forest, Chase, Moor, Marsh, Heath, or other
waste Ground, which has put to Pasture into, or upon the same, any stoned
Horses, not being of the Altitude and Height contained in the Statute, in that
Case made and provided for the good Breed of strong and large Horses, which is
much decayed, little stoned Horses, Nags and Hobbies being put to Pasture
there, and in such Commons.

Except, All Fugitives, Failers and Flinchers, that with Shame and Discredit
are fled and vanished out of the Prince's Dominions of Purpoole, and especially
from his Court at Graya, this time of Christmas, to withdraw themselves from
His Honor's Service and Attendance, contrary to their Duty and Allegiance, and
to their perpetual Ignominy, and incurable Loss of Credit and good Opinion,
which belongs to ingenious and well-minded Gentlemen.

Except, All Concealments, and wrongful Detainments of any Subsidies and
Revenues, Benevolences and Receipts upon Privy Seals, etc.

Except, All, and all manner of Offenses, Pains, Penalties, Mulcts, Fines,
Amerciaments and Punishments, Corporal and Pecuniary, whatsoever.

The Pardon being thus read by the Solicitor, the Prince made a short Speech
to his Subjects, wherein he gave them to understand, that although in Clemency
he pardoned all Offenses, to that present time; yet notwithstanding, his
me^ning thereby was not to give any the least occasion of Presumption in
breaking his Laws, and the Customs laudably used through his Dominions and
Government. Neither did he now so graciously forgive all Errors and
Misdemeanors as he would hereafter severely and strictly reform the same. His
Will was, that Justice should be administered to every Subject, without any
Partiality^ and that the Wronged should make their Causes known to himself, by
P^tition to the Master of the Requests: And further excused the Causes of the
great Taxes, and Sums of Money, that were levied, by reason that his
Predecessors had not left his Coffers full of Treasure, nor his Crown so
furnished, as became the Dignity of so great a Prince.

Then His Highness called for the Master of the Revels, and willed him to pass
the time in Dancing: So his Gentlemen-Pensioners and Attendants, very gallantly
appointed, in thirty Couples, danced the Old Measures, and their Galliards, and
other kind of Dances, revelling until it was very late; and so spent the rest
of their Performance in those Exercises, until it pleased His Honor to take
his way to his Lodging, with Sound of Trumpets, and his Attendants in order, as
is above set down.

There was the Conclusion of the first grand Night, the Performance whereof
increased the Expectation of those things that were to ensue; insomuch that the
common Report amongst all Strangers was so great, and the Expectation of our
Proceedings so extraordinary, that it urged us to take upon us a greater State
than was at the first intended: And therefore, besides all the stately and
sumptuous Service that was continually done the Prince, in very Princely
manner; and besides the daily Revels, and such like Sports, which were usual,
there was intended diverse grand Nights, for the Entertainment of Strangers to
our Pass-times and Sports.

The next grand Night was intended to be upon Innocents-Day at Night; at which
time there was a great Presence of Lords, Ladies, and worship^ul Personages,
that did expect some notable Performance at that time; which, indeed, had been
effected, if the multitude of Beholders had not been so exceeding great, that
thereby there was no convenient room for those that were Actors; by reason
whereof, very good Inventions and Conceits could not have opportunity to be
applauded, which otherwise would have been great Contentation to the Beholders.
Against which time, our Friend, the Inner Temple, determined to send their
Ambassador to our Prince of State, as sent from Frederick Templarius, their
Emperor, who was then busied in his Wars against the Turk. The Ambassador came
very gallantly appointed, and attended by a great number of brave Gentlemen,
which arrived at our Court about Nine of the Clock at Night. Upon their coming
thither, the King at Arms gave notice to the Prince, then sitting in his Chair
of State in the Hall, that there was come to his Court an Ambassador from his
ancient Friend the State of Templaria, which desired to have present Access
unto His Highness; and showed his Honor ^urther, that he seemed to be of very
good sort, because he was so well attended; and therefore desired that it would
please His Honor that some of his Nobles and Lords might condu^t him to His
Highness's Presence; which was done. So he was brought in very solemnly, with
Sound of Trumpets, the King at Arms and Lords of Purpoole making to his
Company, which marched before him in order. He was received very kindly of the
Prince, and placed in a Chair besides His Highness, to the end that he might be
Partaker of the Sports intended. But first, he made a Speech to the Prince,
wherein he declared how his excellent Renown and Fame was known throughout all
the whole World; and that the Report of his Greatness was not contained within
the Bounds of the Ocean, but had come to the Ears of his noble Sovereign,
Frederick Templarius, where he is now warring against the Turks, the known
Enemies to all Christendom; who having heard that His Excellency kept his Court
at Graya this Christmas, thought it to stand with his ancient League of Amity
and near Kindness, that so long has been continued and increased by their
noble Ancestors of famous Memory and Desert, to gratulate his Happiness, and
^lourishing Estate; and in that regard, had sent him his Ambassador, to be
residing at His Excellency's Court, in honor of his Greatness, and token of
his tender Love and Good Will he bears to His Highness; the Confirmation
whereof he especially requir^d, and by all means possible, would study to
increase and eternize: Which Function he was the more willing to accomplish,
because our State of Graya did grace Templaria with the Presence of an
Ambassador about thirty Years since, upon like occasion.

Our Prince made him this Answer, That he did acknowledge that the great
Kindness of his Lord, whereby he does invite to further degrees in firm and
Loyal Friendship, did deserve all honorable Commendations, and effectual
Accomplishment, that by any means might be devised; and that he accounted
himself happy, by having the sincere and sted^ast Love of so gracious and
renowned a Prince, as his Lord and Master deserved to be esteemed; and that
nothing in the World should hinder the due Observation of so inviolable a Band
as he esteemed his Favor and Good Will. Withal, he entered into Commendations
of his noble and cou^ageous Enterprises, in that he chooses out an Adversary
fit for his Greatness to encounter with, his Honor to be illustrated by, and
such an Enemy to all Christendom, as that the Glory of his Actions tend to the
Safety and Liberty of all Civility and Humanity; yet, notwithstanding that he
was thus employed, in this Action of honoring us, he showed both his
honorable Mindfulness of our Love and Friendship, and also his own Puissance,
that can afford so great a number of brave Gentlemen, and so gallantly
furnished and accomplished: And so concluded, with a Welcome both to the
Ambassador himself, and his Favorites, for their Lord and Master's sake, and
so for their own good Deserts and Condition.

When the Ambassador was placed, as aforesaid, and that there was something to
be performed for the Delight of the Beholders, there arose such a disordered
Tumult and Crowd upon the Stage, that there was no Opportunity to effect that
which was intended: There came so great a number of worshipful Personages upon
the Stage, that might not be displaced; and Gentlewomen, whose Sex did
privilege them from Violence, that when the Prince and his Officers had in
vain, a good while, expected and endeavored a Reformation, at length there was
no hope of Redress for that present. The Lord Ambassador and his Train thought
that they were not so kindly entertained, as was before expected, and thereupon
would not stay any longer at that time, but, in a sort, discontended and
displeased. After their Departure the Throngs and Tumults did somewhat cease,
although so much of them continued, as was able to disorder and confound any
good Inventions whatsoever. In regard whereof, as also for that the Sports
intended were especially for the gracing of the Templarians, it was thought
good not to offer any thing of Account, saving Dancing and Revelling with
Gentlewomen; and after such Sports, a Comedy of Errors (like to Plautus his
Menechmus) was played by the Players. So that Night was begun, and continued to
the end, in nothing but Confusion and Errors; whereupon, it was ever afterward
called, The Night of Errors.

This mischanceful Accident sorting so ill, to the great prejudice of the rest
of our Proceedings, was a great Discouragement and Disparagement to our whole
State; yet it gave occasion to the Lawyers of the Prince's Council, the next
Night, after Revels, to read a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, directed to
certain Noblemen and Lords of His Highness's Council, and others, that they
should enquire, or cause Enquiry to be made of some great Disorders and Abuses
lately done and committed within His Highness's Dominions of Purpoole,
especially by Sorceries and Enchantments; and namely, of a great Witchcraft
used the Night before, whereby there were great Disorders and Misdemeanors, by
Hurly-burlies, Crowds, Errors, Confusions, vain Representations and Shows, to
the utter Discred^t of our State and Policy.

The next Night upon this Occasion, we preferred Judgments thick and threefold,
which were read publicly by the Clerk of the Crown, being all against a
Sorcerer or Conjurer that was supposed to be the Cause of that confused
Inconvenience. Therein was contained, How he had caused the Stage to be built,
and Scaffolds to be reared to the top of the House, to increase Expectation.
Also how he had caused diverse Ladies and Gentlewomen, and others of good
Condition, to be invited to our Sports; also our dearest Friend, the State of
Templaria, to be disgraced, and disappointed of their kind Entertainment,
deserved and intended. Also that he caused Throngs and Tumults, Crowds and
Outrages, to disturb our whole Proceedings. And Lastly, that he had ^oisted a
Company of base and common Fellows, to make up our Disorders with a Play of
Errors and Confusions; and that that Night had gained to us Discredit, and it
self a Nickname of Errors. All which were against the Crown and Dignity of our
Sovereign Lord, the Prince of Purpoole.

Under Color of these Proceedings, were laid open to the View, all the Causes
of note that were committed by our chiefest Statesmen in the Government of our
Principality; and every Officer in any great Place, that had not performed his
Duty in that Service, was taxed hereby, from the highest to the lowest, not
sparing the Guard and Porters, that suffered so many disordered Persons to
enter in a^ the Court-Gates: Upon whose aforesaid Indictments, the Prisoner was
arra^gned at the Bar, being brought thither by the Lieutenant of the Tower (for
at that time the Stocks were graced with that Name;) and the Sheriff
impannelled a Jury of Twenty four Gentlemen, that were to give their Verdict
upon the Evidence given. The Prisoner appealed to the Prince his Excellency for
Justice, and humbly desired, that it would please His Highness to understand
the Truth of the Matter by his Supplication, which he had ready to be offered
to the Master of the Requests. The Prince gave leave to the Master of the
Requests, that he should read the Petition; wherein was a Disclosure of all the
Knavery and Juggling of the Attorney and Solicitor, which had brought all this
Law-stuff on purpose to blind the Eyes of his Excellency, and all the
honorable Court there, going about to make them think, that those things which
they all saw and preceived sensibly to be in very deed done, and actually
performed, were nothing else but vain Illusions, Fancies, Dreams and
Enchantments, and to be wrought and compass^d by the Means of a poor harmless
Wretch, that never had heard of such great Matters in all his Life: Whereas the
very Fault was in the Negligence of the Prince's Council, Lords and Officers of
his State, that had the Rule of the Roast, and by whose Advice the Commonwealth
was so soundly mis-governed. To prove these things to be true, he ^rought
diverse Instances of great Absurdities committed by the greatest; and made such
Allegations, as could not be denied. These were done by some that were touched
by the Attorn^y and Solicitor, in their former Proceedings, and they used the
Prisoners Names for means of Quittance with them in that behalf. But the Prince
and Statesmen (being pinched on both sides, by both the Parties) were not a
little offended at the great Liberty that they had taken, in censuring so far
of His Highness's Government; and thereupon the Prisoner was freed and
pardoned, the Attorney, Solicitor, Master of the Requests, and those that were
a^quainted with the Draught of the Petition, were all of them commanded to the
Tower; so the Lieutenant took charge of them. And this was the End of our
Law-sports, concerning the Night of Errors.

When we were wearied with mocking thus at our own Follies, at length there was
a great Consultation had for the Recovery of our lost Honor. It was then
concluded, that first the Prince's Council should be reformed, and some graver
Conceits should have their places, to advise upon those things that were
propounded to be done afterward. Therefore, upon better Consideration, there
were diverse Plots and Devices intended against the Friday after New-years-day,
being the 3 d. of January: And to prevent all unruly Tumults, and former
Inconveniences, there was provided a Watch of Armed Men, to ward at the four
Ports; and Whifflers, to make good Order under the four Barons; and the Lord
Warden to over-see them all, that none but those that were of good Condition
might be suffered to be let into the Court: And the like Officers were every
where appointed.

On the 3 d. of January at Night, there was a most honorable Presence of Great
and Noble Personages, that came as invited to our Prince; as namely, the Right
Honorable the Lord Keeper, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Cumberland,
Northumberland, Southampton and Essex, the Lords Buckhurst, Windsor, Mountjoy,
Sheffield, Compton, Rich, Burleygh, Mounteagle, and the Lord Thomas Howard; Sir
Thomas Henneage, Sir Robert Cecill; with a great number of Knights, Ladies and
very worshipful Personages: All which had convenient Places, and very good
Entertainment, to their good Liking and Contentment.

When they were all thus placed and settled in very good Order, the Prince came
into the Hall with his wonted State, and ascended his Throne at the high End of
the Hall, under His Highness's Arms; and after him came the Ambassador of
Templaria, with his Train likewise, and was placed by the Prince as he was
before; his Train also had Places reserved for them, and were provided for them
particularly. Then, after variety of Music, they were presented with this
Device.

At the side of the Hall, behind a Curtain, was erected an Altar to the Goddess
of Amity; her Arch-Flamen, ready to attend the Sacrifice and Incense that
should, by her Servants, be offered unto her: Round about the same sat Nymphs
and Fairies, with Instruments of Music, and made very pleasant Melody with
Viols and Voices, and sang Hymns and Praises to her Deity.

Then issued forth of another Room the first pair of Friends, which were
Theseus and Perithous; they came in Arm in Arm, and offered Incense upon the
Altar to their Goddess, which shined and burned very clear, without Blemish;
which being done, they departed.

Then likewise came Achilles and Patroclus; after them, Pilades and Orestes;
then Scipio and Lelius: And all these did, in all things, as the former, and so
departed.

Lastly, were presented Graius and Templarius; and they two came lovingly, Arm
in Arm, to the Altar, and offered their Incense as the rest, but the Goddess
did not accept of their Service; which appeared by the troubled Smoke, and dark
Vapor, that choked the Flame, and smothered the clear burning thereof.
Hereat, the Arch-Flamen, willing to pacify the angry Goddess, preferred
certain mystical Ceremonies and Invocations, and commanded the Nymphs to sing
some Hymns of Pacification to her Deity, and caused them to make proffer of
their Devotion again; which they did, and then the Flame burnt more clear than
at any time before, and continued longer in brightness and shining to them,
than to any of those Pairs of Friends that had gone before them; and so they
departed.

Then the Arch-Flamen did pronounce Grayus and Templarius to be as true and
perfect Friends, and so familiarly united and linked with the Bond and League
of sincere Friendship and Amity, as ever were Theseus and Perithous, Achilles
and Patroclus, Pilades and Orestes, or Scipio and Lelius; and therewithal did
further divine, that this Love should ^e perpetual. And Lastly, denounced an
heavy Curse on them that shall any way go about to break or weaken the same;
and an Happiness to them that study and labor to eternize it for ever. So with
sweet and pleasant Melody, the Curtain was drawn, as it was at the first.

Thus was this Show ended, which was devised to that End, that those that were
present might understand, that the Unkindness which was growing betwixt the
Templarians and us, by reason of the former Night of Errors, and the uncivil
Behavior wherewith they were entertained^ as before I have partly touched, was
now clean rooted out and forgotten, and that we now were more firm Friends, and
kind Lovers, than ever before we had been, contrary to the evil Reports that
some Enviers of our Happiness had sown abroad.

The Prince then spoke to the Ambassador, that the Show had contented him
exceedingly; the rather, that it appeared thereby, that their ancient Amity was
so fresh and flourishing, that no Friendship in the World has been compared to
the Love and Good Will of the Grayans and Templarians. And to the end that he
might show that the Conceit was pleasing unto him, His Highness offered the
Lord Ambassador, and some of his Retinue, with the Knighthood of the Helmet, an
Order of his own Institution.

To that end His Excellency called to him his King at Arms, and willed him to
place the Ambassador, and some of his Followers, and also some of his own
Court, that they might receive the Dignity at his hands; which being done, and
the Master of the Jewels attending with the Collar of the Order, the Prince
came down from his Chair of State, and took a Collar, and put it about the Lord
Ambassador's Neck, he kneeling down on his Left Knee, and said unto him, Sois
Chivaler; and so was done to the rest, to the number of Twenty four.

So the Prince and the Lord Ambassador took their Places again in their Chairs,
and the rest according to their Condition.

Then Helmet, His Highness's King at Arms, stood forth before the Prince, in
his Surcoat of Arms, and caused the Trumpets to sound, and made his Speech, as
does follow.

The most mighty and puissant Prince, Sir Henry, my gracious Lord and
Sovereign, Prince of Purpoole, Archduke of Stapulia and Bernardia, Duke of
High and Nether Holborn, Marquis of St. Giles's and Tottenham, Count Palatine
of Bloomsbury and Clerkenwell, great Lord of the Cantons of Islington,
Kentish-Town, Paddington and Knights-bridge, has heretofore, for the special
gracing of the Nobility of his Realm, and honoring the Deserts of Strangers,
his Favorites, instituted a most honorable Order of Knighthood of the Helmet,
whereof His Honor is Sovereign, in Memory of the Arms he bears, worthily
given to one of his noble Ancestors, many Years past, for saving the Life of
his then Sovereign; in regard that as the Helmet defends the chiefest part of
the Body, the Head; so did he guard and defend the sacred Person of the Prince,
the Head of the State. His Highness at this time had made choice of a Number of
virtuous and no^le Personages, to admit them into his honorable Society; whose
good Example may be a Spur and Encouragement to the young Nobility of his
Dominions, to cause them to aspire to the height of all honorable Deserts.

To the honorable Order are annexed strict Rules of Arms, and Civil
Government, religiously to be observed by all those that are admitted to this
Dignity. ^ou therefore, most noble Gentlemen, whom His Highness at this time so
greatly honors with his Royal Order, you must every one of you kiss your
Helmet, and thereby promise and vow to observe and practice, or otherwise, as
the Case shall require, shun and avoid all these Constitutions and Ordinances,
which, out of the Records of my Office of Arms, I shall read unto you.

Then the King at Arms took his Book, and turned to the Articles of the Orders,
and read them, as follows.

Imprimis, EVery Knight of this honorable Order, whether he be a Natural
Subject, or Stranger born, shall promise never to bear Arms against His
Highness's Sacred Person, nor his State; but to assist him in all his lawful
Wars, and maintain all his just Pretenses and Titles; especially, His
Highness's Title to the Land of the Amazons, and the Cape of Good Hope.

Item^ No Knight of this Order shall, in point of Honor, resort to any
Grammar-rules out of the Books De Dullo, or such like; but shall, out of his
own brave Mind, and natural Courage, deliver himself from Scorns, as to his own
Discretion shall seem convenient.

Item, No Knight of this Order shall be inquisitive toward any Lady or
Gentlewoman, whether her Beauty be English or Italian, or whether, with Care
taking, she have added half a Foot to her Stature; but shall ^ake all to the
best. Neither shall any Knight of the aforesaid Order presume to affirm, that
Faces were better twenty Years ago, than they are at this present time, except
such Knight have passed three Climacterical Years.

Item, Every Knight of this Order is bound to perform all requisite and Manly
Service, be it Night-service, or otherwise, as the Case requires, to all
Ladies and Gentlewomen, beautiful by Nature, or by Art; ever offering his Aid,
without any Demand thereof: And if in case he fail so to do, he shall be deemed
a Match of Disparagement to any His Highness's Widows, or Wards-Female; and His
Excellency shall in Justice forbear to make any Tender of him to any such Ward
or Widow.

Item, No Knight of this Order shall procure any Letters from His Highness, to
any Widow or Maid, for his Enablement and Commendation, to be advanced to
Marriage; but all Prerogative, Wooing set apart, shall for ever cease, as to
any of these Knights, and shall be left to the Common Laws of this Land,
declared by the Statute, Quia Electiones liberoe esse debent.

Item, No Knight of this honorable Order, in case he shall grow into decay,
shall procure from His Highness Relief and Sustentation, any Monopolies or
Privileges, except only these kinds following; that is to say, Upon every
Tabaco-pipe, not being one Foot wide. Upon every Lock that is worn, not being
seven Foot long. Upon every Health that is drank, not being of a Glass five
Foot deep. And upon every Maid in His Highness's Province of Islington,
continuing a Virgin after the Age of fourteen Years, contrary to the Use and
Custom in that place always had and observed.

Item, No Knight of this Order shall have any more than one Mistress, for whose
sake he shall be allowed to wear three Colors: But if he will have two
Mistresses, then must he wear six Colors; and so forward, after the rate of
three Colors to a Mistress.

Item, No Knight of this Order shall put out any Money upon strange Returns or
Performances to be made by his own Person; as, to hop up the stairs to the top
of St. Paul's, without intermission; or any other such like Agilities or
Endurances, except it may appear, that the same Performances or Practices do
enable him to some Service or Employment; as, if he do undertake to go a Journey
backward, the same shall be thought to enable him to be an Ambassador into
Turkey.

Item, No Knight of this Order, that has had any License to travel into
Foreign Countries, be it by M^p, Card, Sea, or Land, and has returned from
thence, shall presume, upon the Warrant of a Traveller, to report any
extraordinary Varieties; as, that he has ridden through Venice on Horseback
Post, or that in December he sailed by the Cape of Norway, or that he has
traveled over the most part of the Countries of Geneva, or such like
Hyp^rbolies, contrary to the Statute, Propterea quod qui diversos terrarum
ambitus errant and vagantur, etc.

Item, Every Knight of this Order shall do his Endeavor to be much in the
Books of the worshipful Citizens of the principal City, next adjoining to the
Territories of Purpoole; and none shall unlearnedly, or without looking, pay
ready Money for any Wares, or other things pertaining to the Gallantness of His
Honor's Court; to the ill Example of others, and utter Subversion of Credit
betwixt Man and Man.

Item, Every Knight of this Order shall apply himself to some or other virtuous
Quality or Ability of Learning, Honor and Arms; and shall not think it
sufficient to come into His Honor's Presence Chamber in good Apparel only, or
to be able to keep Company at Play and Gaming: For such it is already
determined, that they be put and taken for Implements of Household, and are
placed in His Honor's Inventory.

Item, Every Knight of this Order shall endeavor to add Conference and
Experience by Reading; and therefore shall not only read and peruse Guizo, the
French Aca^^^^, Galiat^o the Courtier, Plutarch, the Arcadia, and the
Neoterical Writers, from time to time; but also frequ^nt the Theater, and such
like places of Experience; and resort to the better sort of Ord'naries for
Conference, whereby they may not only become accomplished with Civil
Conversations, and able to govern a Table with Discourse; but also sufficient,
if n^ed be, to make Epigrams, Emblems, and other Devices appertaining to His
Honor's learned Revels.

Item, No Knight of this Order shall give out what gracious Words the Prince
has given him, nor leave Word at his Chamber, in case any come to speak with
him, that he is above with His Excellency; nor cause his Man, when he shall be
in any public Assembly, to call him suddenly to go to the Prince, nor cause
any Packet of Letters to be brought at Dinner or Supper-time, nor say that he
had the Re^usal of some great Office, nor satisfy Suitors, to say, His Honor
is not in any good Disposition, nor make any narrow Observation of His
Excellency's Nature and Fashions, as if he were inward privately with His
Honor; contrary to the late Inhibition of selling of Smoke.

Item, No Knight of this Order shall be armed, for the Safeguard of his
Countenance, with a Pike in his Mouth, in the nature of a Tooth-picker, or with
any Weapon in his Hand, be it Stick, Plume, Wand, or any such like: Neither
shall he draw out of his Pocket any Book or Paper, to read, for the same
intent; neither shall he retain any extraordinary Shrug, Nod, or other ^amiliar
Motion or Gesture, to the same end; for His Highness, of his gracious Clemency,
is disposed to lend his Countenance to all such Knights as are out of
Countenance.

Item, No Knight of this Order, that wears Fustian, Cloth, or such
Statute-Apparel, for Necessity, shall pretend to wear the same for the new
Fash^on's sake.

Item, No Knight of this Order, in walking the Streets, or other places of
Resort, shall bear his Hands in his Pockets of his great rolled Hose, with the
Spanish Wheel, if it be not either to defend his Hands from the Cold, or else
to guard forty Shillings Sterling, being in the same Pockets.

Item, No Knight of this Order shall lay to Pawn his Collar of Knighthood for
an hundred Pounds; and if he do, he shall be, ipso facto, discharged; and it
shall be lawful for any Man whatosever, that will retain the same Collar ^or
the Sum afor^said, forthwith to take upon him the said Knighthood, by reason of
a secret Virtue in the Collar; for in this Order, it is holden for a certain
Rule, that the Knighthood follows the Collar, and not the Collar the
Knighthood.

Item, that no Knight of this Order shall take upon him the Person of a
Malcontent, in going with a more private Retinue than appertains to his
Degree, and using but certain special, obscure Company, and commending none but
Men disgraced, and out of Office; and smiling at good News, as if he knew
something that were not true; and making odd Notes of His Highness's Reign, and
former Governments; or saying, that His Highness's Sports were well sorted with
a Play of Errors; and such like pretty Speeches of Jest, to the end that he may
more safely utter his Malice against His Excellency's Happiness; upon pain to
be present at all His Excellency's most glorious Triumphs.

Lastly, All the Knights of this honorable Order, and the renowned Sovereign
of the same, shall yield all Homage, Loyalty, unaffected Admiration, and all
humble Service, of what Name or Condition soever, to the incomparable Empress
of the Fortunate Island.

When the King at Arms had read all these Articles of the Order of the
Knighthood, and finished the Ceremonies belonging to the same, and that every
one had taken their Places as before, there was variety of Consort-Musick; and
in the mean while, the Knights of the Order, which were not Strangers, brought
into the Hall a Running Banquet in very good order, and gave it to the Prince,
and Lords, and other Strangers, in imitation of the Feast that belongs to all
such honorable Institutions.

This being done, there was a Table set in the midst of the Stage, before the
Prince's Seat; and there sat six of the Lords of his Privy Council, which at
that time were appointed to attend, in Council, the Prince's Leisure. Then the
Prince spoke to them in this manner.

My Lords,

WE have made choice of you, as Our most faithful and favored Counselors, to
advise with you, not any particular Action of Our State, but in general, of the
Scope and End whereunto you think it most for our Honor, and the Hap^iness of
Our State, that Our Government be rightly bent and directed: For We mean not to
do as many Princes use; which conclude of their Ends out of their own Honors,
and take Counsel only of the Means (abusing, for the most part, the Wisdom of
their Counselors) set them the right way to the wrong place. But We, desirous
to leave as little to Chance or Humor as may be, do now give you liberty and
warrant to set before Us, to what Port, as it were, the Ship of Our Government
should be bounden. And thi^ We require you to do, without either Respect to Our
Affections, or your own; neither g^essing what is most agreeable with Our
Disposition, wherein We may easily deceive you; for Princes Hearts are
inscrutable: Nor, on the other side, putting the Case by your selves, as if you
would present Us with a Robe, whereof Measure were taken by your selves. Thus
you perceive Our Mind, and We expect your Answer.

The First Counselor advising the Exercise of War.
Most Excellent Prince,
EXcept there be such amongst us, as I am fully persuaded there is none, that
regards more his own Greatness under you, than your Greatness over others, I
think there will be little difference in the choosing for you a Goal worthy your
Virtue and Power. For he that shall set before him your Magnanimity and Valor,
supported by the Youth and Disposition of your Body; your ^lourishing Court,
like the Horse of Troy, full of brave Commanders and Leaders; your populous and
Man-rife Provinces, over^lowing with Warlike People; your Co^fers, like the
Indian Mines, when that they are first opened; your Storehouses are as
Sea-walls, like to Vulcan's Cave; your Navy like to an huge floating City; the
Devotion of your Subjects to your Crown and Person, their good Agreement
amongst themselves, their Wealth and Provision; and then your Strength and
unrevocable Confederation with the noble and honorable Personages, and the
Fame and Reputation without of so rare a Concurrence, whereof all the former
Regards do grow: How can he think any Exercise worthy of your Means, but that
of Conquest? For, in few Words, What is your Strength, if you find it not? Your
Fortune, if you try it not? Your Virtue, if you show it not? Think, Excellent
Prince, what Sense of Content you found in your self, when you were first
invested in our State: For though I know Your Excellency is far from Vanity and
Lightness, yet it is the nature of all things to find Rest when they come to
due and proper places. But be assured of this, that this Delight will languish
and vanish; for Power will quench Appetite, and Satiety will endure
Tediousness. But if you embrace the Wars, your Trophies and Triumphs will be as
continual Coronations, that will not suffer your Glory and Contentment to fade
and wither. Then when you have enlarged your Territories, ennobled your
Country, distributed Fortunes, good or bad, at your pleasure, not only to
Particulars, but to Cities and Nations; marked the Computations of Times with
your Expeditions and Voyages, and the Memory of Places by your Exploits and
Victories, in your later Years you shall find a sweet Respect into the
Adventures of your Youth, you shall enjoy your Reputation, you shall record
your Travels, and after your own time, you shall eternize your Name, and leave
deep Footsteps of your Power in the World. To conclude, Excel^ent Prince, and
most worthy to have the Titles of Victories added to other your high and
deserved Titles; Remember, the D^vines find nothing more glorious to resemble
our State unto, than a Warfare. All things in earnest and jest do affect a kind
of Victory, and all other Victories are but Shadows to the Victories of the
Wars. Therefore embrace the Wars, for they disparage you not; and believe that
if any Prince do otherwise, it is either in the Weakness of his Mind or Means.

The Second Councellor advising the Study of Philosophy.
IT may seem, Most Excellent Prince, that my Lord, which now has spoken, did
never read the just Censures of the wisest Men, who compared great Conquerors
to great Rovers and Witches, whose Power is in Destruction, and not in
Preservation; else would he never have advised your Excellency to become as
some Comet, or Blazing Star, which should threaten and pretend nothing but
Death and Dearth, Combustions and Troubles of the World. And whereas the
governing Faculties of Men are two, Force and Reason; whereof the one is Bruit,
and the other Divine, he wishes you, for your principal Ornament and Regality,
the Talons of the Eagle to catch the Prey, and not the piercing Sight which
sees into the bottom of the Sea: But I, contrary-wise, will wish unto your
Highness the Exercise of the best and purest part of the Mind, and the most
innocent and meriting Request, being the Conquest of the Works of Nature;
making his Proportion, that you bend the Excellency of your Spirits to the
searching out, inventing and discovering of all whatsoever is hid in secret in
the World, that your Excellency be not as a Lamp that shines to others, and
yet s^eth not it self; but as the Eye of the World, that both carries and
uses Light. Antiquity, that presents unto us in dark Visions, the Wisdom of
former Times, infor^eth us, that the Kingdoms have always had an Affinity with
the Secrets and Mysteries of Learning. Amongst the Persians, the Kings were
attended on by the Magi; the Gymnasophists had all the Government under the
Princes of Asia; and generally, those Kingdoms were accounted most happy, that
had Rulers most addicted to Philosophy: The Ptolemies in Egypt may be for
instance; and Solomon was a Man so seen in the Universality of Nature, that he
wrote an Herbal of all that was green upon the Earth. No Conquest of Julius
Caesar m^de him so remembered as the Calendar. Alexander the Great wrote to
Aristotle, upon the publishing of the P^ysi^ks, that he esteemed more of
excellent Men in Knowledge, than in the Empire. And to this purpose I will
commend to your Highness four principal Works and Monuments of your self:
First, The collecting of a most perfect and general Library, wherein whatsoever
the Wit of Man has heretofore committed to Books of worth, be they ancient or
modern, printed or Manuscript, European or of the other Parts, of one or other
Language, may be made contributary to your Wisdom. Next, a spacious, wonderful
Garden, wherein whatsoever Plant, the Sun of diverse Climates, out of the Earth
of diverse Moulds, either wild, or by the Culture of Man, brought forth, may be,
with that Care that appertains to the good prospering thereof, set and
cherished. This Garden to be built about with Rooms, to stable in all rare
Beasts, and to cage in all rare Birds; with two Lakes adjoining, the one of
fresh Water, and the other of salt, for like variety of Fishes: And so you may
have, in a small Compass, a Model of Universal Nature made private. The third,
A goodly huge Cabinet, wherein whatsoever the Hand of Man, by exquisite Art or
Engine, has made rare in Stuff, Form, or Motion, whatsoever Singularity,
Chance and the Shuffle of things has produced, whatsoever Nature has wrought
in things that want Life, and may be kept, shall be sorted and included. The
fourth, Such a Still-house so furnished with Mills, Instruments, Furnaces and
Vessels, as may be a Palace fit for a Philosopher's Stone. Thus when your
Excellency shall have added depth of Knowledge to the fineness of Spirits, and
greatness of your Power, then indeed shall you lay a Trismegistus; and then,
when all other Miracles and Wonders shall cease, by reason that you shall have
discovered their natural Causes, your self shall be left the only Miracle and
Wonder of the World.

The Third Councellor advising Eternizement and Fame, by Buildings and
Foundations.
My Lords that have already spoken, Most Excellent Prince, h^v^ both used one
Fallacy, in taking that for certain and granted, which was most uncertain and
doubt^ul; for the one has neither drawn in question the Succes^ and F^rtune of
the Wars, nor the other, the Difficulties and Errors in the Conclusions of
Nature: But these immoderate Hopes and Promises do many times issue from those
of the Wars, into Tragedies of Calamities and Distress^s; and those of Mystical
Philosophy, into Comedies of ridiculous Frustrations and Disappointments of
such Conceits and Curiosities: But, on the other side, in one Point my Lords
have well agreed; That they both, according to their several Intentions,
counseled your Excellency to win Fame, and to eternize your Name; though the
one advises it in a Course of great Peril, and the other, of little Dignity
and Magnificence. But the plain and approved Way that is safe, and yet
proportionable to the Greatness of a Monarch, to present himself to Posterity,
is not Rumor and Hearsay; but the usual Memory of himself, is the
Magnificence of goodly and Royal Buildings and Foundations, and the new
Institutions of Orders, Ordinances and Societies; that is, that your Coin be
stamped with your own Image; so in every part of your State there may be
somewhat new; which, by Continuance, may make the Founder and Author remembered.
It was perceived at the first, when Men sought to cure Mortality by Fame, that
Buildings was the only way; and thereof proceeded the known holy Antiquity of
building the Tower of Babel; which, as it was a Sin in the immoderate Appetite
of Fame, so was it punished in the kind; for the Diversities of Languages have
imprisoned Fame ever since. As for the Pyramids, the Colosses, the number of
Temples, Colleges, Bridges, Aquaeducts, Castles, Theaters, Palaces, and the
like, they may show us, that Men ever mistrusted any other way to Fame than
this only, of Works and Monuments. Yea, even they which had the best Choice of
other Means. Alexander did not think his Fame so engraven in his Conquests, but
that he thought it further shined in the Buildings of Alexandria. Augustus
Caesar thought no Man had done greater things in Military Actions than himself,
yet that which, at his Death, ran most in his Mind, was his Building; when he
said, not as some mistake it, metaphorically, but literally, I found the City
of Brick, but I leave it of Marble. Constantine the Great was wont to call with
Envy the Emperor Trajan, Wall-flower, because his Name was upon so many
Buildings; which notwithstanding, he himself did embrace in the new founding of
Constantinople, and sundry other Buildings: And yet none greater Conquerors
than these two. And surely they had reas^n; for the Fame of great Actions is
like to a Land-flood, which has no certain Head or Spring; but the Memory and
Fame of Buildings and Foundations has, as it were, a Fountain in an Hill,
which continually seedeth and refreshes the other Waters. Neither do I,
Excellent Prince, restrain my Speeches to dead Buildings only, but intend it
also to other Foundations, Institutions and Creations; wherein I presume the
more to speak confidently, because I am warranted herein by your own Wisdom,
who have made the First Fruits of your Actions of State, to institute the
honorable Order of the Helmet: The less shall I need to say, leaving your
Excellency not so much to follow my Advice, as your own Example.

The Fourth Councellor, advising Absoluteness of State and Treasure.
LET it not seem Pusillanimity for your Excellency, Mighty Prince, to descend a
little from your high Thoughts to a necessary Consideration of your own Estate.
Neither do you deny, Honorable Lords, to acknowledge Safety, Profit and Power
to be of the Substance of Policy, and Fame and Honor rather to be as Flowers
of well ordered Actions, than as good Guides. Now if you examine the Courses
propounded according to these Respects, it must be confessed, that the course
of Wars may seem to increase Power, and the course of Contemplations and
Foundations not prejudice Safety; but if you look beyond the exterior, you
shall find that the first breeds Weakness, and the latter note Peril; for
certain it is during Wars, your Excellency will be enforced to your Soldiers,
and generally to your People, and become less Absolute and Monarchical than if
you reigned in Peace; and then if your Success be good, that you make new
Conquests, you shall be constrained to spend the strength of your ancient and
settled Provinces, to assure your new and doubtful, and become like a strong
man, that by taking a great Burden upon his Shoulders, makes himself weaker
than he was before. Again, if you think you may not end Contemplations with
Security, your Excellency will be deceived; for such Studies will make you
retired and disused with your Business; whence will follow admiration of your
Authority; as for the other Point, of exercising in every part of your State
something new, derived from your self, it will acquaint your Excellency with an
humor of Innovation and Alteration; which will make your Reign very turbulent
and unsettled, and many times your Change will be for worse; as in the Example
last touched, of Constantine, who by his new Translation of his Estate,
ruinated the Roman Empire. As for Profit, there appears a direct contrariety
betwixt that and all the three Courses; for nothing causes such dissipation of
Treasure as Wars, Curiosities and Buildings; and for all this to be recompensed
in a supposed Honor, a Matter apt to be much extolled in Words, but not
greatly to be praised in Conceit, I do think it a Losers Bargain. Besides that,
many politic Princes have received as much Commendation for their wise and
well ordered Government, as others have done for their Conquests and glorious
Affections. And more worthy, because the Praise of Wisdom and Judgment is less
communicated with Fortune. Therefore, Excellent Prince, be not transported with
Shows; follow the Order of Nature, first to make the most of that y^u possess,
before you seek to purchase more. To put the Case by a private Man (for I
cannot speak high) if a man were born to an hundred Pounds by the Year, and one
show him how with Charge to purchase an hundred Pounds more, and another should
show him how without Charge to raise that hundred Pounds unto five hundred
Pounds, I should think the latter Advice should be followed. The Proverb is a
Countrey-Proverb, but significative, Milk the Cow that stands still; why
follow you her that flies away? Do not think, Excellent Prince, that all the
Conquests you are to make be foreign; you are to conquer here at home the
overgrowing of your Grandees in Factions, and too great Liberties of your
People, the great Reverence and Formalities given to your Laws and Customs, in
derogation of your absolute Prerogatives; these and such like be Conquests of
State, though not of War. You want a Joseph, that should by Advice make you the
only Proprietor of all the Lands and Wealth of your Subjects. The Means how to
strain up your Sovereignty, and how to accumulate Treasure and Revenue, they
are the Secrets of your State: I will not enter into them at this place; I wish
your Excellency as ready to them, as I know the means ready to perform them.

The Fifth Councellor advising him Virtue, and a Gracious Government.
Most Excellent Prince,
I Have heard sundry Plats and Propositions offered unto you severally: One, to
make you a great Prince; another, to make you a strong Prince; and another, to
make you a memorable Prince; and a fourth, to make you an absolute Prince; but
I hear of no mention to make you a good and a virtuous Prince; which surely my
Lords have le^t out in discretion, as to arise o^ your own motion and choice;
and so I should have thought, had they not handled their own Propositions so
artificially and perswadingly, as does assure me their Speech was not formal.
But, most Worthy Prince, Fame is too light, and Pro^it and Surety are too low,
and Power is either such as you have, or ought not so to seek to have; it is
the meriting of your Subjects, the making of Golden Times, the becoming of a
Natural Parent to your State: These are the only and worthy Ends of your
Grace's virtuous Reign. My Lords have taught you to refer all things to your
self, your Greatness, Memory and Advantage; but whereunto shall your self be
referred? If you will be heavenly, you must have Influence; will you be as a
standing Pool, that spends and choaketh his Spring within its self, and has
no Streams nor Current to bless and make fruitful whole Tracts of Countries,
wher^^y it renews? Wherefore, first of all, m^st Ver^uous Prince, assure your
self of an inward Peace, that the Storms without do not d^^turb any of your
Repair^rs of State within; therein use and pra^tise all honorable Divers^ons;
that done, visit all the parts of your S^ate, and let the Balm d^st^l every
where from your Sovereign Hands to the medicining of any part that complains,
beginning with your Seat of State, take order that the Fault of your Greatne^s
do not reb^und upon your self; have care that your Intelligence, which is the
Light of your State, do not go out or burn dim or obscu^e; advan^e Men of
Virtue, and not of Mercenary Minds; repress all Faction, be it either malign or
violent. Then look into the State of your Laws and Justice of your Land; purge
out multiplicity of Laws, clear the incertainty of them, repeal those that are
snaring, and prize the execution of those that are wholesome and necessary;
define the Jurisdiction of your Courts, reprize all Suits and Vexations, all
causless Delays and fraudulent Shifts and Devices, and reform all such Abuses
of Right and Justice, assist the Ministers thereof, punish severely all
Extortions and Exactions of Officers, all Corruptions in Trials and Sentences
of Judgment. Yet when you have done all this, think not that the Bridle and
Spur will make the Horse to go alone without Time and Custom. Trust not to your
Laws for correcting the Times, but give all strength to good Education; see to
the Government of your Universities, and all Seminaries of Youth, and of the
private Order of Families, maintaining due Obedience of Children toward their
Parents, and Reverence of the younger sort toward the ancient. Then when you
have confirmed the Noble and Vital Parts of your Realm of State, proceed to
take care of the Blood and Flesh and good Habit of the Body. Remedy all decays
of Population, make provision for the Poor, remove all stops in Traffic, and
all Cancers and Causes of Consumption in Trades and Mysteries; redress all: But
whither do I run, exceeding the Bounds of that perhaps I am now demanded? But
pardon me, most Excellent Prince, for as if I should commend unto your
Excellency the Beauty of some excell^nt Lady, I could not so well express it
with Relation, as if I showed you her Picture; so I esteem the best way to
commend a virtuous Government, to describe and make appear what it is; but my
Pencil perhaps disgrac^th it: Therefore I leav^ it to your Excellency, to take
the Picture out of your wise Observation, and then to double it, and express it
in your Government.

The Sixth Councellor persuading Pass-times and Sports.
WHen I heard, Most Excellent Prince, the three first of my Lords so careful to
continue your Fame and Memory, methought it was as if a Man should come to some
young Prince, as your self is; and immediately after his Coronation, be in hand
with him to make himself a sumptuous and stately Tomb. And, to speak out of my
Soul, I muse how any of your Servants can once endure to think of you, as of a
Prince past. And for my other Lords, who would engage you so deeply in Matters
of State; the one persuading you to a more a^solute, the other to a more
gracious Government; I assure your Excellency, their Lessons were so
cumbersome, as if they would make you a King in a Play; who when one would
think he stands in great Majesty and Felicity, he is troubled to say his
part. What! Nothing but Tasks, nothing but Working-days? No Feasting, no
Music, no Dancing, no Triumphs, no Comedies, no Love, no Ladies? Let other
Men's Lives be as Pilgrimages, because they are tied to diverse Necessities and
Duties; but Princes Lives are as Progresses, dedicated only to Variety and
Solace. And if your Excellency should take your Barge in a Summer-Evening, or
your H^^se or Chariot, to take the Air; and if you should do any the honor to
visit hi^; yet your Pleasure is the principal, and that is but as it falls
out. S^ if any of these Matters which have been spoken of, fall out in the w^y
(...) your Pl^asure, it may be taken; but no otherwise. And therefore leave
your Wars to your Lieutenants, and your Works and Buildings to your Surveyors,
and your Books to your Universities, and your State-matters to your
Counselors, and attend you that in Person, which you cannot execute by Deputy:
Use the Advantage of your Youth, be not sullen to your Fortune; make your
Pleasure the Distinction of your Honors, the Studies of your Favorites, the
Talk of your People, and the Allurement of all Foreign Gallants to your Court.
And, in a word, Sweet Sovereign, dismiss your five Counselors, and only take
Council of your five Senses.

BUt if a Man should follow your five Senses ( said the Prince) I perceive he
might ^ollow your Lordship, now and then, into an Inconvenience. Your Lordship
is a Man of a very lively and pleasant Advice; which though one should not be
forward to follow, yet it fitteth the time, and what Our own Humor inclined
o^tentimes to, Delight and Merriment. For a Prince should be of a cheerful and
pleasant Spirit; not austere, hard-^ronted and sto^cal; but after serious
Affairs, admitting Recreation, and using Pleasures, as Sauces for Meats of
better Nourishment.

The Prince's Answer and Conclusion to the Speeches of the Counselors.
My Lords,

WE thank you for your good Opinions; which have been so well set forth, as We
should think Our Selves not capable of good Counsel, if, in so great variety of
persuading Reasons, we should suddenly resolve. Mean while, it shall not be
amiss to make choice of the last, and upon more Deliberation to determine of
the rest; and what Time we spend in long Consulting, in the end we will gain by
prompt and speedy Executing.

The Prince having ended his Speech, arose from his Seat, and took that
Occasion of Revelling: So he made choice of a Lady to dance withal; so likewise
did the Lord Ambassador, the Pensioners and Courtiers attending the Prince. The
rest of that Night was passed in those Pass-times. The Performance of which
Nights work being very carefully and orderly handled, did so delight and please
the Nobles, and the other Auditory, that thereby Gray's Inn did not only recover
their lost Credit, and quite take away all the Disgrace that the former Night
of Errors had incurred; but got instead thereof, so great Honor and Applause,
as either the good Reports of our honorable Friends that were present could
yield, or we our selves desire.

The next Day the Prince, accompanied with the Ambassador of Templaria, and
attended by both Trains, took his Progress from his Court of Graya, to the Lord
Mayor's House, called Cosby's Place, in Bishop's-gate-street; as being, before
that time, invited to dine with him. This Show was very stately and orderly
performed; the Prince being mounted upon a rich Foot-cloth, the Ambassador
likewise riding near him; the Gentlemen attending, with the Prince's Officers,
and the Ambassador's Favorites, before; and the other coming behind the
Prince; as he set it down in the general Marshalling, in the beginning. Every
one had his Feather in his Cap, to distinguish of whether State he was; the
Grayans using a white, and the Templarians using Ash-colored Feathers; to the
number of fourscore in all, very well appointed, and provided of great Horses
and Foot-cloths, according to their Places. Thus they rode very gallantly, from
Gray's Inn, through Chancery Lane, Fleet Street, so through Cheap Side,
Cornhill, and to Cosby's Place, in Bishop's-gate-street; where was a very
sumptuous and costly Dinner for the Prince, and all his Attendants, with
variety of Music, and all good Entertainment. Dinner being ended, the Prince
and his Company having revelled a while, returned again the same Way, and in
the same Order as he went thither, the Streets being thronged and filled with
People, to see the Gentlemen as they passed by; who thought there had been some
great Prince, in very deed, passing through the City. So this popular Show
through the Streets pleased the Lord Mayor and his Commonalty so well, as the
great Lords, and others of good Condition and Civility, were contented with our
former Proceedings.

Shortly after this Show, there came Letters to our State from Frederick
Templarius; wherein he desired, that his Ambassador might be dispatched with
Answer to those Things which he came to treat of. So he was very honorably
dismissed, and accompanied homeward with the Nobles of Purpoole: Which
Departure was before the next grand Day. The next grand Night was upon
Twelfth-day at Night; at which time the wonted honorable and worshipful
Company of Lords, Ladies and Knights were, as at other times, assembled; and
every one of them placed conveniently, according to their Condition. And when
the Prince was ascended his Chair of State, and the Trumpets sounded, there was
presently a Show which concerned His Highness's State and Government: The
Invention was taken out of the Prince's Arms, as they are blazoned in the
beginning of his Reign, by the King at Arms.

First, There came six Knights of the Helmet, with three that they led as
Prisoners, and were attired like Monsters and Miscreants. The Knights gave the
Prince to understand, that as they were returning from their Adventures out of
Russia, wherein they aided the Emperor of R^ssia, against the Tartars, they
surprised these three Persons, which were consp^^^^g against His Highness and
Dignity: and that being apprehended ^y them, they could not urge them to
disclose what they were: By w^^ch they res^ing very doubtful, there entered in
the two Goddesses ^^^e^y and Amity; and they said, that they would disclose to
the Pr^^^^ who these suspected Persons were; and thereupon showed, that they
were Envy, Malcontent and Folly: Which three had much mis-liked His
Highness's Proceedings, and had attempted many things against his State; and
but for them two, Virtue and United Friendship, all their Inventions had been
disappointed. Then willed they the Knights to depart, and to carry away the
Offenders; and that they themselves should come in more pleasing sort, and
better befitting the present. So the Knights departed, and Virtue and Amity
promised, that they two would support His Excellency against all his Foes
whatsoever, and then departed with most pleasant Music. After their Departure,
entered the six Knights in a very stately Mask, and danced a new devised
Measure; and after that, they took to them Ladies and Gentlewomen, and danced
with them their Galliards, and so departed with Music. Which being done^ the
Trumpets were commanded to sound, and then the King at Arms came in before the
Prince, and told His Honor, that there was arrived an Ambassador from the
mighty Emperor of Russia and Moscovy, that had some Matters of Weight to make
known to His Highness. So the Prince willed that he should be admitted into his
Presence; who came in Attire of Russia, accompanied with two of his own
Country, in like Habit. When they were come in presence of the Prince, the
Ambassador made his Obeisance, and took out Letters of Credence, and humbly
delivered them to the Prince, who gave them to the King at Arms, to be read
publicly, as follows.

To the most High and Mighty Henry, Prince of Purpoole.
THeodore Evanwhich, the great and mighty Emperor of all Russia, Valderomia,
Muscovia and Nevogordia; King of Rasan, and of Astrakan; Lord of Plescoe and
Sinelescoe; Prince of Tnaria, S^goria, Perma, Vachekey and Bolgaria; Lord and
great Duke of Valhadha, Norgordia in the Country of Cherenega; and also of
Rescod, Polotzkoe, Ogdor and Belesor; sole Prince of Lothekey, Rostow,
Geroslave, the white Lake Liselrund, Owdoria, Condencia and Fludoria; great
Ruler and Commander of Siberia, and of all the North-side; and Lord Governor of
many other Countries and Provinces: To the most mighty, and glorious renowned
Henry, Prince of Purpoole, Archduke of Stapulia and Bernardia, Duke of High
and Nether Holborn, Marquis of St. Giles's and Tottenham, Count Palatine of
Bloomsbury and Clerkenwell, great Lord of the Cantons of Islington,
Kentish-Town, Paddington and Knights-Bridge, Knight of the most Heroical Order
of the Helmet, and Sovereign of the same; All Health, and glorious Renown. We
have thought good, Most Invincible Prince, upon some Accidents of Importance
happened to our State, wherein the Worthiness of some of your Subjects
remaining here have increased your Fame, to dispatch to your Highness Our most
faithful Councellor, Faman Bega, to entreat with you, in Our Name, of certain
important Affairs: Which, though We must confess, do concern Us in Policy, to
have an effectual Regard unto; yet withal, they are such as may minister
Occasion to your Highness to add Beams of Honor to your Praise and Glory,
which has already, in a manner, equalled the Light of Heaven in Brightness,
which is seen throughout the whole World. We refer you herein for the
Particulars, to such Instructions as We have, under Our own Hand, delivered to
this our present Ambassador: Wherein, as also in any other Points, whereof he
shall treat with your Highness, in Our Name and Affairs, We pray your Sacred
Majesty to give Credit to him, as if Our self were present, and treated with
you in Pers^n. And so We wish to your Excellency all Happiness answerable to
your Peerless Virtue.

Dated at Our Imperial City of Mosco.

When the King at Arms had read this Letter, the Ambassador made this Speech to
the Prince.

Most Excell^nt Prince,

FAme seemed to the Emperor, my Sovereign, to do your Highness Right, by
filling the World with the Renown of your Princely Virtues, and Valor of your
brave Court; till of late, the gallant Behavior, and heroical Prowess of
diverse your Knights of the Helmet, whom the good Fortune of Russia, addressed
to your cold Climate, discovered that Fam^, to be either envious in suppressing
a great part of your Valor, or unable to set forth so admirable Virtues to
their full Merits: For by these five Knights (whose greatest Vaunts were, that
they were your Excellency's Servants) an exceeding number of Bigarian Tartars,
whose vagabond In-roads, and inhumane Fierceness insested his Borders,
captivated his People, burnt his Cities, and spoiled whole Provinces, was by a
most wonderful Victory, repulsed, and beaten back. And withal, by their brave
Conduct, they sur^^^zed another Army of Ne-gro-Tartars; whose wretched Devices
ceased not to work the Confusion and Combustion of our whole Country, and
diverted their barbarous Cruelty where it might do us most damage. These same
worthy Knights, before they could receive that Honor wherewith my Sovereign
intended to adorn their Virtues, did withdraw themselves, and are retired, as
His Majesty is informed, to your Court. Whereupon, he sent me, partly to
congratulate your Happiness, who deserve to command over such a number of
gallant Gentlemen; but especially, to conjure your Excellency (according to the
ancient League and Amity continued betwixt you) that you would send him these
six Knights, accompanied with an hundred other of the same Order; for he
doubts not, but by their Virtues, accompanied and attended with his own
Forces, who are, in largeness of Dominion, and number of People, and all other
Warlike Furniture and Provision, inferior to no Earthly Potentate, that these
Runagate Tartars shall be again confined to their Deserts, with their memorable
Slaughter, and your common Glory and Profit: Common indeed, both to your
Highness, and him; inasmuch as His Imperial Majesty, contented only with
Security and Assurance of his People and Borders, will permit all those large
Territories, and battable Grounds, which now serve those Vermin for Pasturage,
be sorted into several Governments, and strengthened with Forts and Castles by
your Direction, to be holden of your Excellency, as Commendations by the
Knights of special Virtue and Merit of your Order. So shall you, with
honorable Commodity, have a perpetual Exercise of your Virtues, become a
Bulwark of Christendom, and by raising continual Trophies of strengthened
Tartars, keep the Glory of your Virtue in everlasting Flourish. My Sovereign,
not doubting but that your Resolution will be conformable to your magnanimous
Virtue, and his honorable Demand, charged me only to solicit Expedition,
such as the Necessity of his People and Country does require. In the mean time,
he has sent your Exc^llency, for a Present, a Ship laden with diverse of the
best and fairest Fruits, and other richest Commodities of our Country: Not so
much, by Gifts to draw on your speedy Help, to which, he knows, the Truth and
Justice of the Case will be a Spur sufficient; or for Complement of an ordinary
and seldom omitted Companion of great Embassies; but rather for a Seal and
Testimony of the exceeding Honor that he bears to your matchless Virtue, and
the great Love he bears to your incomparable Person. The Present is at your
next Haven, ready to be offer^d to your Sacred Hands, at your convenient
leisure; together with some small Gifts sent to those valiant Knights, whose
highly deserving Virtues my Sovereign means, at their long expected Return to
his Court, to crown with a Garland more worthy his Greatness, and their Merits.

The Answer of the Prince to the former Speech.
Russia Lord,

THe Emperor, your Master, is happy in having so honorable a Gentleman, as
your self, to do him Service. He shall well perceive, that there is nothing in
the World more acceptable to Us, than the Friendship of a Prince so mighty and
illustrious. We account, amongst our greatest Happinesses, t^is honorable
Embassage. His Presents are so large and bountiful, as We have right good
Occasion to hold him the most free and magnificent Prince in the World. We joy
to hear of his hardy Adventures, that by Our Knights in those Parts have been
achieved. They may be glad that our worthy Brother invited them to so high an
Enterprise, wherein they may do themselves Honor, and His Greatness Service.
Rest and refresh your Lordship this present, for now We bid you welcome: Assure
your self, your Request is already granted, and that in far greater Measure
than you expec^^d or desired.

When the Prince had thus spoken, the Ambassador was placed in a Chair near the
Prince; and then was served up a Running Banquet, for the Prince, and the Lord
present, and the rest, with variety of Music.

Whilst th^se things were thus a doing, there came a Post-boy, with Letters of
Intelligence concerning the State, from diverse Parts of His Highness^s
Provinces, and delivered them to the Secretary; who made the Prince acquainted
therewith, and caused them to be read openly and publicly.

A Letter of Advertisement from Knights-bridge, to the Honorable Council.
I Beseech your Honors to advertise His Highness, that in His Excellency's
Canton of Knights-bridge, there do haunt certain Foreigners, that sieze upon
all Passengers, taking from them by force their Goods, under a pretense that
being Merchants Strangers, and using Traffic into His Highness's Territories
of Clerken-well, Islington, and elsewhere, they have robbed of their Goods,
spoiled of their Wares; whereby they were utterly undone: And that His Honor,
of his good Will, has been pleased to grant them Letters of Reprisal, to
recover their Loss of them that come next to their Hands: By color whereof,
they lay hold of all that pass by, without respect. Some of their Names, as I
understand, are Johannes Shagbag, Robertus Untruss, James Rapax, alias Capax.
There do reign likewise thereabouts another sort of dangerous People, under the
Name of poor Soldiers, that say they were mamed, and lost their Limbs in His
Honor's Service and Wars against the Amazons; and they pretend to have
Pass-ports from their Captains. Some of them say, they have served under Sir
Robert Kemp, and Sir William Cook; others, under William Knaplocks, Lord
Marshal, Sir Francis Marham, Captain Crimes, Captain Conny, Yelverton, Hugan,
Sir Francis Davison, and some other of good Place. Some say, that they were
mamed with Firelocks; others, in the Trenches; others, in going with their
Captains, to discover Ambuscadoes of the Enemy, and to view the Forts; others,
in standing Sentry, whilst the Captains were busied in entering the Breach;
others, in the very Approach at the first. But the number of them is great, and
the same inclined to do much Mischief. Another sort there is, that pretend that
they have Protections to beg, in regard of their Losses by Shipwreck upon
certain Rocks of Hazard, Barred Quarter-trays, High-men and Low-men, Bom-Cards,
the Sands of Bowle-Allies, the Shelf of New-Cut, the Gulf of Mine and Gill, and
such other like places of Peril. Some of them are called by the Names of Harry
Ordinary, Jack Moneyless, Will Cog-all, and Roger Spend-all. These aforesaid
People do gather together in great numbers, and His Excellency's Subjects
hereabouts stand in great fear of Outrages by them to be committed, except His
Highness do prevent the same, and that speedily, by sending some of the
Captains aforesaid to disperse them.

Your Honors at Command, Henry Brownbill.
From Knights-bridge Ian. 5. 1594.

Another Letter from Sea, directed to the Lord Admiral.
BY my Letters given at Pont-Holborn, the Last of December, I gave your Honor
to understand, that His Excellency's Merchants of Purpoole began to surcease
their Traffic to Clerkenwell, Newington and Bank-side, and such like Roads of
Charge and Discharge, because they feared lest certain Rovers, which lay
hovering about the Narrow Seas, should intercept them in their Voyages. Since
which time, may it please your Honor, I have discovered an huge Armado of
French Amazons, to the number of seven hundred Caracts, Galeasses, great
Galeasses, and tall Ships; besides Pinnaces, Frigots, Carvels, Shallops, and
such small Vessels innumerable; which being dispersed into sundry Creeks, work
daily much damage to all sorts of People, and Adventurers hold in durance; not
suffering one Man to escape, till he have turned French. Diverse Ensigns,
Standards, Pendants, Tilting-staves, short Trunchions for the principal
Officers, and such like Provision for His Excellency's Triumphs, they have cast
overboard; for no other Cause, save that his Subjects were bound inward from
Gelderland, a Nation that they have always hated: Besides that, they exact so
unreasonably of those that trade into Netherland, that they leave them neither
Lands, Goods, nor good Wares. Also they sink all those that use any Dealings
with the People of Cleive, without respect, whether he be Merchant, or Man of
War. To conclude, they burn all those Vessels that transport any dry Wares into
the Low Countries. Moreover, I am to advertise your Honor, that on the 9th.
Day of January, in the Straits of the Gulf of Clerkenwell, there was an hot
Skirmish between a Merchant of St. Giles's, called Amarpso, and the Admiral of
the Amazons, called the Rowse-flower; wherein the Merchant having gained the
Wind, came up with her in such close manner, that he brake his Bolt-sprite in
her hinder Quarter: Yet notwithstanding, the Fight continued fiercely, on
either part, two long Hours, and more; in which time, our Gunner, being a very
expert Soldier, shot her ^our or five times under Water: Then the Merchant
perceiving his Powder to be spent, was enforced to grapple; and so, with great
Resolution, laid her a-board on the Waste, which he found stoutly defended by
the French; yet, at length, being driven from their close Fight, they were
constrained to keep under Hatches, where one of the Soldiers entering, spied
Fire in the Gun-room; notwithstanding^ he descended very desperately. Then the
Admiral, seeing no hope to escape, fired her Powder, and burnt her self. The
Soldiers, and the Ship, which, as I after learned, was of an incomparable
Burden; insomuch that she had been known to have born nine hundred fighting
Men in her Poup. Her chief Lading was Cochenella, Musk, Guaiacum, Tabaco and Le
grand Vezolle. The chief of Account that were blown up, were Catharina Dardana,
Pecta de Lee, and Maria de Rotulis. The rich Carrick of Newington coming to
rescue their Admiral, were so close at fight when she was fired, that the Flame
of the Wildfire caught hold of t^eir Captain's inner Cabin; and had not one
Barbara de Chirurgia been ready with his Syringe, to have cast on Water, Milk,
Lotium, and such like cooling Liquors, and there quenched the Wildfire
betimes, they had been both, doubtless, consumed to Ashes: But by his Care and
Coming, they are both escaped alive, though shrewdly scorched, and are taken
Prisoners. The whole number of them that perished in this hot Conflict, is five
hundred fifty five; and Prisoners, ninety nine. Our Ship had no other hurt,
save that she sprang her Mainmast in such sort, as that she is not able to
bear any high Sa^l. Thus having advertised your Honor of every Particular
Accident which I could learn, I am humbly to desire your Lordship to acquaint
His Excellency and his Privy Council therewith; that such speedy Order may be
taken therein, as seems to their Wisdoms most conv^nient. And so, with all
Duty, I kiss your Hands.

Your Honor's Servant, John Puttanemico.
From the Harbor of Bride-well, the 10 th. of January, 1594.

There were also read like Letters from Stapulia and Bernardia, of
Intelligences, and also from Low-Holborn; wherein were set forth the Plots of
Rebellion and Insurrection, that those, His Excellency's Subjects, had devised
against His Highness and State, and of some other Occurrences in those Parts of
His Highness's Dominions. And when they were all read, the Prince made this
Speech following.

THese sudden Accidents (Lords) would make a Prince of little Spirit suspect
himself to be unfortunate. The Stapulian fallen away; the Bernardian holds out!
News of Tumults, Treasons, Conspiracies, Commotions, Treacheries,
Insurrections! Say our Lands were sacked, our Wealth spoiled, our Friends
slain, our Self forsaken, vanquished, captivated, and all the Evils that might
be, were fallen upon Us; yet could there be nothing so adverse, but that our
Fortitude and height of Courage were able to over-work. These Events are not
Matters of Moment, or of Substance of our Government: These are not
Misfortunes, but Fortune's Jests, that gives them she loves not, shows of good
Luck, that in the end she may do them greater Spite: But when she means
Good, she prepares Men with some little Bitterness, that her good Turns, when
they come, may seem more pleasant and delightful. These Events proceed of Error
in our former Government, who should not have put great Men, well loved, or
popular, into so great places of Sovereignty; nor one Man should possess so
great a Place, of so great Command; by too much Authority and Greatness, a
right good Mind is oftentimes corrupted: In this late, We rather allow a severe
Man, somewhat hated; for better were a little profitable Civil Dissension, than
a League and Love that were likely to prove dangerous. Lords, you shall find it
an harder matter to keep things once gotten, than at the first to obtain it.
Hitherto no Prince in this World has had better Success than our Self. Men
say, that Sovereignty is uncertain, and an ill Security; subject to Cares,
Troubles, Envy, Treacheries, Hate, Fear, Distrust: We have hitherto found none
of those. That a Prince has no sure Friend, no faithful Servant, no safe
Place, no quiet Hour, no secure Pleasure: All these have We, and more, in great
abundance; and these things, which to other Princes have been the occasions of
Mis-hap, have been to Us the very Instruments of Pleasure, and much Service.
What Prince ever found in his Subjects, in Matters of Weight, more Love, more
Loyalty, more Readiness, more Service? When We have been inclined to solace,
what Liveliness, what Alacrity, what ingenious Devices, Sports, Iollities, what
variety of Pleasure? How have We been honored with the Presents of diverse
Princes, Lords, and Men of great Worth; who, confident in our Love, without
Fear or Distrust, have come to visit Us; by whose honorable Kindness, We are
to them for ever devinct, and most firmly bounden? How has the favorable
Regard, and bright Eyes of brave Ladies shined upon Our Endeavors, which to
their Honors and Service have been ever intended? How have We been gratulated
with diverse Ambassadors from diverse Nations? What Concourse of all People has
been continually at Our Court, to behold Our Magnificence? Shall small Matters
therefore daunt Us? Shall a few tumultuary Disorders dismay Us? Shall
ill-guided Insurrections trouble Us, that are, like Mushrooms, sprung up in a
Night, and rotten before the Morning? We are loath to believe that there be
such Sparks of Dissension and Mischief; but if there be, We will make haste to
quench them, before they grow into violent Flames; for it is no longer
Consulting, where a Man cannot commend the Counsel, before he has seen the
Effect. Nor shall it require the Presence of a Prince to settle these small
Commotions: Lords, We send you to these Places where Need is; and as Occasion
serves, We will take Order that Garrisons be planted, Citadels erected, and
whatsoever else be performed, that shall be convenient to sub-act and bring
under these unsettled Provinces. Our Self, with Our chosen Knights, with an Army
Royal, will make toward our Brother of Russia, with my Lord here, his
Ambassador, presently to join with him against his Enemies, the Negarian
Tartars; more dreadful, the Barbarian Tartars: And if Fortune will not grace
Our good Attempt, as I am rightful Prince, and true Sovereign of the honorable
Order of the Helmet, and by all those Ladies whom, in Knightly Honor, I love
and serve, I will make the Name of a Grayan Knight more dreadful to the
Barbarian Tartars, than the Macedonian to the wearied Persians, the Roman to
the dispersed Britains, or the Cas^alian to the weakened Indians. Gentle Ladies,
be now benign and gracious to your Knights, that never pleased themselves, but
when their Service pleased you; that for your sakes shall undertake hard
Adventures, that will make your Names and Beauties most famous, even in Foreign
Regions; let your Favor kindle the Vigor of their Spirits, wherewith they
abound; for they are the Men, by whom your Fame, your Honor, your Virtue shall
be for ever advanced, protected and admired. When the Prince had concluded, for
his Farewell, he took a L^dy to dance withal, and so did the rest of the Knights
and Courtiers; and after some time spent in Revelling, the Prince took his way
to his Lodging, and so the Company dissolved, and made an end of this Night's
Work.

On the next Morning His Highness took his Journey toward Russia, with the
Ambassador, and there he remained until Candlemas; at which time, after his
glorious Conquests abroad, His Excellency returned home again; in which the
Purpose of the Gentlemen was much disappointed by the Readers and Ancients of
the House, by reason of the Term: So that very good Inventions, which were to
be performed in public at his Entertainment into the House again, and two
grand Nights which were intended at his Triumphal Return, wherewith his Reign
had been conceitedly determined, were by the aforesaid Readers and Governors
made frustrate, for the Want of Room in the Hall, the Scaffolds being taken
away, and forbidden to be built up again (as would have been necessary for the
good Discharge of such a Matter) thought convenient; but it showed rather what
was performed, than intended. Brie^ly, it was as follows.

Upon the 28^h. of January, the Hall being sat at Dinner, with Readers, and
all the rest of the House, suddenly sounded a Trumpet; which being thrice
done, there entered the King at Arms, and in the midst of them, said as
follows.

ON the b^half of my Sovereign Lord, Sir Henry, the Right Excellent, and
A^l-conquering Prince of Purpoole, Archduke of Stapulia and Bernardia, Duke o^
High and Net^er Holborn, Marquis of St. Giles's and Tottenham, Count P^l^tine
of Bloomsbury and Cl^r^^nwell, great Lord of the Can^ons of Islington,
Kentish-Town, Paddington and Knights-bridge, K^ight of the m^st Her^ic^l Order
of the Helmet, and S^vereign of the same; I, H^s Excellency's King at Arm^,
dispatched from his Royal N^v^, triumphantly returning from his glorious
Conquests of the Negarian Tartars, do, in His Highness^s N^me, command all his
Officers, Knights and Pensioners to give their Attendance on His Highness's
Person, at his Port of Black-wallia, on the 1st^ of February. And His Highness
has further commanded me to give notice to all his Servants within his
Dominions, of whatsoever Condition, that they be ready to perform all O^^ices
of O^edience and Subjection, as well becomes their Loyalty to so Gracious a
Sovereign^ When this News of the Prince's Return out of Russia was thus sent
abroad, and that it was known that His Highness was to come by Greenwich, where
the Court then lay, it was given the Gentlemen to understand, that Her Majesty
did expect, that in passing by, our Prince should land, and do his Homage; the
rather because, in Christmas, there was great Expectation of his coming
thither, to present Her Majesty with some Pass-time, and none performed.
Whereupon it was determined, that in passing by, there should be a Letter
directed to Sir Thomas Heneage, our honorable good Friend, that he should
excuse us for that time; which Letter hereafter is set down.

Upon the 1st. of February, the Prince and his Train were met at Black-wall;
from whence they came upon the River of Thames, in a very gallant Show. Being
come so near his own Country, he left his Navy of Ships, as not fit for so
short a Cut, and the matter not being very great or dangerous, and he and his
Retinue took to them fifteen Barges, bravely furnished with Standards,
Pendants, Flags and Streamers: There was also in every Barge, Music and
Trumpets; and in some, Ordnance and Shot. Being thus gallantly appointed, we
came on our Way by the Stairs at Greenwich, where the Ordnance was shot off,
and the whole Navy made a Sail round about; and the second time, when the
Admiral, in which the Prince was, came directly before the Court-Stairs, His
Highness dispatched two Gentlemen with Letters to the Right Honorable Sir
Thomas Heneage; the Copy whereof follows.

Henry Prince of Purpoole, to the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Heneage.
Most Honorable Knight,
I Have now accomplished a most tedious and hazardous Journey, though very
honorable, into Russia; and returning within the view of the Court of your
renowned Queen, my gracious Sovereign, to whom I acknowledge Homage and
Service, I thought good, in passing by, to kiss her sacred Hands, as a Tender
of the Zeal and Duty I owe unto Her Majesty; but in making the Offer, I found,
my Desire was greater than the Ability of my Body; which, by length of my
Journey, and my Sickness at Sea, is so weakened, as it were very dangerous for
me to adventure it. Therefore, most honorable Friend, let me entreat you to
make my humble Excuse to Her Majesty for this present: and to certify Her
Highness, that I do hope, by the Assistance of the Divine Providence, to
recover my former Strength about Shrovetide; at which time I intend to repair
to Her Majesty's Court (if it may stand with her gracious Pleasure) to offer my
Service, and relate the Success of my Journey. And ^o praying your Honor to
return me Her Majesty's Answer, I wish you all Honor and Happiness.

Dated from Shipboard, at our Ark of Vanity, the 1st. of February, 1594.

The Letter being delive^ed, and Her Majesty made acquainted with the Contents,
her gracious Answer was; That if the Letter had not excused his Passing by, he
should have done Homage before he had gone away, although he had been a greater
Prince than he was: Yet she said, she liked well his gallant Shows, that were
made at his Triumphant Return. And Her Highness added further, That if he would
come at Shrovetide, he and his Followers should have Entertainment according to
his Dignity. And the Messenger returned Answer.

The Prince and his Company continued their Course, until they came to the
Tower; where, by Her Majes^y's Commandment, he was welcomed with a Volley of
great Ordnance, by the Lieutenant of the Tower. At the Tower Hill there waited
for the Prince's L^nding, Men attending with Horses, very gallantly Appointed,
for all the Company, to the number of one hundred; the most of them being great
Horses, and the rest very choice Geldings; and all very bravely furnished with
all things necessary. So the Prince ^eing moanted, and his Company in Order, as
before s^t down, every Man according to his Office, with the Ensign thereof,
they rode very gallantly through Tower-street, Fen-church-street,
Grace-c^urc^-street, Cornhill, Cheap Side, and so through St. Paul's
Churchyard; where, at St Paul's School, His Highness was entertained with an
Oration, made ^y one of the Scholars of that School; the Copy wh^r^of follows.

Henrico, Illustrissimo and Potentissimo Purpoolae Principi, Archi-duci
Stapuliae and Bernardiae, Superioris and Inferioris Holborn Duci, Sancti
Aegidii and Tottenham Marchioni, de Clerkenwell and Bloomsbury Comiti Palatino,
Domino magno Cantonum de Islington, Kentish-Town, Paddington and
Knights-bridge, Heroici Ordinis Galcotae Equiti Aurato, and ejusdem Domino
Serenissimo.
IMportunum fortasse suerit ( Purpooliensis Princeps Serenissime) apud tantam
Majestatem t^am tam intempestivo tempore perorare. Vix enim sperare ausus sum,
velle te, qui tantam personam sustines, tuumque hunc comitatum vere Aulicum,
post victorias partas terra marique maximas, ad vocem puerilem in media
instructissimi triumphi solemnitate consistere. Verum per affibilitatem in
summis principibus semper laudatissimam, liceat mihi proetereunti celsitudini
tuae musarum nostrarum benevolentiam offerre, and gratulationem hanc meam
qualemcunque post tam illustrem tuum and triumphantem, ac per totum orbem
divulgatum e Russia reditum, kac mea oratione Generosis omnibus testatum
relinquere. Quamvis enim subito nobis excidat, and ad tantam Majestatem quasi
obstupescat oration, gratulatio tamen quae magis sit offerri, quaeque sit
officii and amoris erga virtutes Generosas plenior afferri certe quidem non
potest. Nonne vides civitatem ipsam quasi sedibus suis convulsam ad
congratulandum tanto Principi procedere? Quid existimas totum hunc concursum
cogitare? In cujus ora vultusque horum omnium oculos conjectos putas? Quem
sensum reddis amicorum nostrorum? Quid cupimus? Quid optamus? Quid agimus?
Nonne ut tam voluntates nostras testemur, quam victoriis gratulemur tuis? Quid
igitur mirum si schola, etiam nostra virtutum Generosarum emula, victoriis and
triumphis illustrissimis gratulari gestiat? Perge igitur, and optimis auspiciis
perge, Clarissime Princeps, ad Purpooliense palatium tuum redito, Grayorum
oraculum, quo tanquam Delphici Apollinis voce fatidica omnes controversiae
dirimuntur. De Hispano host omnium Principum communi invadendo, consulito.
Quam facile tuus jam sanguine madens Tartarorum gladius, praesertim si
Templarios tibi antiquo foedere conjunctos in belli novi societatem asciscas,
aliorum omnium and strictos gladios retundet, and clypeos excutiet? Hispani
invidia rumpantur ut Ilia Codro. Interim vero Musae nostrae and praeteritis
tuis applaudent victoriis, and Paladem suam exorabunt antiquam Grayorum, ut te
alterum jam Agamemnonem, qui multos habes Achilles and Ulysses Comites tuos,
galea sua induat, clypeo protegat, and hasta (hostibus tuis omnibus fusis
profligatisque) in perpetuum conservat.

The Oration being ended, the Prince rewarded the Boy very bounti^ully, and
thanked them for their good Wills, and Forwardness to show the same. Then we
marched on our Way, as before, by Ludg^te, and through Fleet Street; where, as
all the way else, the Streets were so thronged and filled with People, that
there was left but room for the Horsemen that were to pass. In this State the
Prince was conducted to Gray's Inn, where His Excellency was received by a Peal
of Ordnance, and Sound of Trumpets, and all the good Entertainment that all his
loving Subjects could make, to show their Love and Loyalty to His Highness.

The Prince being thus received, came, after Supper, into the Hall, and there
he danced and revelled among the Nobles, and others of his own Court; and in
like manner they spent the Day ^ollowing; but there was no other Performance,
by reason of want of the Stage and Scaffolds, till Shrovetide, that they went
to the Court: And the things that were then performed before Her Majesty, were
rather to discharge our own Promise, than to satisfy the Expectation of
others. In that regard, the Plot of those Sports were but small; the rather,
that Tediousness might be avoided, and confused Disorder, a thing which might
easily happen in a multitude of Actions; the Sports therefore consisted of a
Mask, and some Spe^^^es, that were as Introductions to it, as ^olloweth.

The Speakers.
An Esquire of the Princ^^ Company, attended by a Tartarian Page. Proteus, the
Sea-God, attended by two Tritons. Thamesis and Amphitrite, who likewise were
attended by their Sea-Nymphs.
These five were Musicians, which sung on the first Coming on the Stage.

At the first Coming on the Stage, the Nymphs and Tritons sung this Hymn
following, in praise of Neptune; which being ended, the Speakers made their
Speeches in order, as follows.

OF Neptune's Empire let us sing,
At whose Command the Waves obey,
To whom Rivers Tribute pay,
Down the high Mountains sliding:
To whom the Scaly Nation yields
Homage for their Crystal Fields,
Wherein they dwell.
And every Sea-God praise again,
Tearly out of his watery Cell,
To deck great Neptune's Diadem.
The Tritons dancing in a Ring,
Before his Palace-Gates, do make
The Waiters with their Trumpets quake,
Like the great Thunder sounding.
The Sea-Nymphs chaunt their Accents shrill,
And the Sirens taught to kill
With their sweet Voice,
Make every echoing Voice reply
Unto their gentle mourning Noise,
In praise of Neptune's Empery.
Esquire, PRoteus, it seems you lea^ a merry Life;
Your Music follows you where ere you go.
I thought you Sea-Gods, as in your Abode,
So in your Nature, had not been ^nlike
To Fishes; the which, as say Philosophers,
Have so small Sense of Musick's Delight,
As it is a Doubt not fully yet resolved,
Whether of Hearing they have Sense, or no.

Proteus, 'Twas great Discourse of Reason, to regard
The dreaming Guess of a Philosopher,
That never held his idle buzzing head
Under the Water half an Hour's space,
More than that famous old received History
Of good Arion, by a Dolphin saved.

Esquire, Well, let that pass, and to the purpose now:
I thought that you that are a Demy-God,
Would not have failed my Expectation thus.

Proteus, Why so, fair 'Squire? Is not my Promise kept,
And duly the appointed time observed?

Esquire, Yes; and it is that in which I rest deceived:
I rather deemed, and not without good Cause,
That those still floating Regions where you bide,
And the ever-changing Nature that you have,
Naught else but Breach of Promise, promised.

Proteus, 'Twere strange if that my Word, which Credit keeps,
In future things, and hidden Secrecies,
Should fondly fail in keeping Promise made:
Fondly indeed, when it is for my Avail.
Here are the Rocks; your Person, or your Prize.
But tell me, Squire; Where Is the appointed place,
In which we shall these vaunted Wonders see?

Esqui^e, Well may you Wonders term them, Proteus:
For these are Wonders that pass Humane Wit:
These shall surpass thy Wit, though half divine.
But for to put you out of further Doubt,
This is the place, where all those Promises,
Agreed upon betwixt the Prince and you,
Shall be performed; and shall be so performed,
So far beyond your doubting Expectation,
So far beyond his modest Declaration.
And you shall say, thrice happy Prot^us;
Whose Ears unblessed, were to bless mine Eyes.

Amphitrite, Your fair set Speeches make us two amazed.
But tell us, Squire, what be those Promises,
And those agreed Covenants? And whereon
Did they arise 'twixt Proteus and your Prince?

Esquire, Fair Amphitrite, I will tell you all.
After the Victory at Austrican
Had made an end of the Tartarian War,
And quite dispersed our vanquished Enemies
Unto their Hoards, and huge vast Wilderness;
Our noble Prince, and his courageous Knights,
Whose untried Valor, in the Battle fought,
Was rather warmed, than fully exercised,
Finding no Enterprise that did deserve
The Employment of their brave united Force,
After Assignment of a Day and Place,
Where both himself and all his Knights should meet,
Dispersed themselves into many sundry Quests,
To seek Adventures as they should befall.
The Prince himself, who only was attended
By me his Squire, had many strange Exploits;
Which since they shortly shall be put in Print,
Ioin'd with Prince Arthur's famous Chronicle,
I shall not now need to repeat at large.
Amongst the rest, when as the time approached,
That, as it was assigned, we should all meet,
It thus fell out: The Prince, one Sunshine Day,
Resting himself within a goodly Tuft
Of tall straight Firr-trees that adorned the Shore,
Reading a Letter, lately sent to him
From one of his brave Knights, that did import,
H^w he, in token of his dutious Love,
And for a Trophy of his Victories,
Had lately sent him a Commodity
Of Pigmies, taken in private Conquest,
Resting and residing: Suddenly he espied
Of Porpoises a great unusual Flock,
Playing and springing in the climbing Wave^.
Drawn with this sight near to the Shore,
Mounting a little Cliff, he soon discerned
A Cave, whose frame seemed more than natural;
And viewing near with wary heedful Eyes,
At length he spied this Fish hard there asleep;
Whom by his Head and Haviour he suspected
To be this Proteus; as it was indeed.
Our Prince straight, ready at his Fortune's Call,
With easy stealing Steps, drew near to him:
And being near, with great Agility,
Siezed suddenly upon this Demy-God.
He thus surprised, resorted presently
To his familiar Arts, and turning Tricks.
My Lord, like to a skilful Falconer,
Continued still to keep his fastened Hold.

Thamesis. The Story of those often transformed Shapes,
I long to hear from you that present were,
And an Eyewitness of that strange Conflict.

Esquire, All shall fair Thamesis know then, that Proteus
Viewing the gallant Shape, and budding Youth
Of my brave Lord, the Form that first he took,
Was of a goodly Lady, passing fair;
Hoping, belike, that whilst he used Respect
Due to her matchless Beauty, and her Sex,
Himself being now unloos'd, might slide away:
But finding him, that knew his wily Shifts,
Embrace him straiter in that feigned shape;
Next, unto a Serpent he transformed himself,
With fiery Eyes, and dreadful blackish Scales,
And three-fork'd hissing Tongue, that might affright
The undaunted Master of dread Cerberus;
Pressing with doubled Strength his scaled Crest;
Wherewith the Prince, rather enraged than feared,
Made him betake him to another Form;
Which was, a sumptuous Casket, richly wrought;
Whereout, when it opened, many Diadems,
And Rubies of inestimable worth,
Seemed by chance to drop into the Sea.
This working naught but Scorn, and high Disdain,
He lastly showed him a sad Spectacle,
Which was, the North-East of his valiant Knights,
And best beloved of my Lord, the Prince,
Mangled and pricked with many a grisly Wound,
Weltring their valiant Limbs in purple Goar,
Gasping, and closing their faint dying Eyes.
This with the Prince, now used to his Delusions,
Prevailed no more, than did the rest before.
When Proteus then had changed his changing Weed,
And fixed himself in his own wonted Shape,
Seeing no other Means could ought prevail,
He Ransom profer'd for his Liberty.
And first of all, he offered to aread
To him, and unto all his Knights, Fortune's Spell.
But when my Lord replied, that that was fit
For unresolved Cowards to obtain;
And how his Fortune's often changing Play,
Would lose the Pleasure of his chief Delight,
If the Catastrophe should be before known:
Then offered he huge Treasures, Ladies Loves,
Honor and Fame, and famous Victories.
My Lord made Answer, that he never would
Offer his Honor so great Wrong, to take,
By Gift or Magic, without Sweat or Pain,
Labor or Danger, Virtue's truest Prize,
That, which by mortal Hand might be achieved;
And therefore willed him, as Demy-God,
To offer somewhat that might be above
The lowly Compass of an Humane Power.
When Proteus saw the Prince could make his Match,
He told him then, that under the Artick Pole
The Adamantine Rock, the Sea's true Star
Was situate; which, by his Power Divine,
He, for his Ransom, would remove, and plant
Whereas he should appoint: Assuring him,
That the wild Empire of the Ocean
(If his foretelling Spirit failed him not)
Should follow that, where ever it should be set.
But then again, he added this Condition,
Which, as he thought, would no way be performed;
That first the Prince should bring him to a Power,
Which in attractive Virtue should surpass
The wondrous force of his Iron-drawing Rocks.
My Lord, that knew himself as well assured,
As Proteus thought his own Match surely made,
Easily yielded to his Covenant;
And promised further, on his Princely Word,
That he himself, and seven of his Knights,
Would enter Hostages into the Rock,
Which should be brought to the appointed place,
Till this great Covenant should be performed,
Which now rests to be done. Now, Proteus,
Since it is a Question of Comparison,
Blazon you forth the Virtue of your Rock.

Proteus, What needs Words, when great Effects proclaim
The attractive Virtue of the Adamantine Rocks,
Which forces Iron, which all things else commands.
Iron, of Metals Prince by ancient Right;
Though factious Men in vain conspire to seat
Rebellious Gold in his usurped Throne.
This, sundry Metals, of such strength and use
(Dis-join'd by distance of the whole Hemisphere)
Continually, with trembling Aspect,
True Subject-like, eyes his dread Sovereign.
Thus has this Lodestone, by his powerful Touch,
Made the Iron-Needle, Load-Star of the World,
A Mercury, to paint the gainest way
In watery Wilderness, and desert Sands;
In confidence whereof, the assured Mariner
Does not importune Jove, Sun, or Star.
By his attractive Force, was drawn to light,
From depth of Ignorance, that new found World,
Whose Golden Mines Iron found out and conquered.
These be the Virtues, and extend so far,
Which you do undertake to counterpraise.

Esquire, Proteus, The Seas have taught your Speech to swell,
Where Work of Mind does watery Castles make.
But calm a while your overweening Vaunts;
Prepare Belief, and do not use your Eyes.
Excellent Queen, true Adamant of Hearts;
Out of that sacred Garland ever grew
Garlands of Virtues, Beauties and Perfections,
That crowns your Crown, and dims your Fortune's Beams,
Vouchsafe some Branch, some precious ^lower, or Leaf,
Which, though it wither in my barren Verse,
May yet suffice to over-shade and drown
The Rocks admired of this Demy-God.
Proteus, stout Iron-Homager to your Rock,
In praise of Force, and Instruments of Wars,
Has Praise ended; yet place your Praises right;
For Force to Will, and Wars to Peace do yield.
But that I Will give you. This I would fain know,
What can your Iron do without Arms of Men?
And Arms of Men from Hearts of Men do move:
That Hearts of Men has it, their Motion springs.
Lo Proteus then, the attractive Rock of Hearts:
Hearts, which once truly touched with her Beams,
Inspiring purest Zeal and Reverence
As well unto the Person, as the Power,
Do straight put off all Temper that is false,
All hollow Fear, and schooled Flattery,
Turn Fortune's Wheel, they ever keep their Point,
And stand direct upon the Loyal Line.
Tour Rock claims Kindred of the Polar Star,
Because it draws the Needle to the North;
Yet even that Star gives place to Cynthia's Rays,
Whose drawing Virtues govern and direct
The Flots and Re-flots of the Ocean.
But Cynthia, praised be your watery Reign,
Your Influence in Spirits have no place.
This Cynthia high does rule those heavenly Tides,
Whose sovereign Grace, as it does wax or wain,
Affections so, and Fortunes ebb and flow:
Sometimes their Waves applauding on the Shore,
Sometimes retiring to their narrow Depths,
The holy Syrians draw Pilgrims from all Parts,
To pass the Mountains, Seas and desert Sands.
Unto this living Saint have Princes high
Of Foreign Lands, made vowed Pilgrimage.
What Excellencies are there in this frame,
Of all things, which her Virtue does not draw?
The Quintescence of Wits, the Fire of Loves,
The Art of Fame, Metals of Courages,
And by her Virtue long may fixed be
The Wheel of Fortune, and the Carr of Time.
In the Protection of this mighty Rock,
In Britain Land, whilst Tempests beat abroad,
The Lordly and the lowly Shepherd both,
In plenteous Peace have fed their happy Flocks.
Upon the force of this inviolate Rock,
The Giant-like Attempts of Power unjust
Have suffered Wreck. And, Proteus, for the Seas,
Whose Empire large your praised Rock assures:
Your Gift is void, it is already here;
As Russia, China, and Negellan's Strait
Can witness bear, well may your Presence be
Impressa apt thereof; but sure, not Cause.
Fisher divine, congratulate your self,
Your Eyes has won more than your State has lost;
Yield Victory, and Liberty, and Thanks.

Proteus. Against the Truth, that is Lands and Seas above,
It fits no Proteus make a vain Reply.
The Shallop may not with small Ships contend,
Nor windy Bubble with a Billow strive,
Nor Earthly things compare with greatest Queen^
That has and shall a Regal Scepter sway.
Blessed be that Prince that forced me see this Grace,
Which worldly Monarchies, and Sea-Powers adore.
Take Thanks of Gift, and Liberty of Due.

When these Speeches were thus delivered, Proteus, with his bident striking of
Adamant, which was mentioned in the Speeches, made Utterance for the Prince,
and his seven Knights, who had given themselves as Hostages for the performance
of the Covenants between the Prince and Proteus, as is declared in the
Speeches. Hereat Proteus, Amphitrite and Thamesis, with their Attendants, the
Nymphs and Tritons, went unto the Rock, and then the Prince and the seven
Knights issued forth of the Rock, in a very stately Mask, very richly attired,
and gallantly provided of all things meet for the performance of so great an
Enterprise. They come forth of the Rock in Couples, and before every Couple
came two Pigmies with Torches. At their first coming on the Stage, they danced
a new devised Measure, etc. After which, they took unto them Ladies; and with
them they danced their Galliards, Courants, etc. And they danced another new
Measure; after the end whereof, the Pigmies brought eight Escutcheons, with the
Maskers Devices thereupon, and delivered them to the Esquire, who offered them
to Her Majesty; which being done, they took their Order again, and with a new
Strain, went all into the Rock; at which time there was sung another new Hymn
within the Rock.

The second Hymn, which was sung at the Departure of the Maskers into the Rock.
Shadows before the shining Sun do vanish:
The Iron-forcing Adamant does resign
His Virtues, where the Diamond does shine.
Pure Holiness does all Enchantments blemish;
And Counselors of false Principality
Do fade in presence of true Majesty.
Shepherds sometimes in Lions Skins were clothed;
But when the Royal Lion does appear,
What wonder if the silly Swains, for fear,
Their Bravery, and Princely Pall have loathed?
The Lion's Skin, that graced our Vanity,
Falls down in presence of Her Majesty.
The Impresses which the Maskers used upon their Escutcheons, for their Devices.
H. Helmes, Prince, In the Bark of a Cedar-tree, the Character E engraven.
Crescetis. W. Cook. In a plain Shield, as it were Abrasa tabula. Quid ipsa
velis. Jarvis Tevery. A Tortois, with his Head out of the Shell. Obnoxia. Joh.
Lambert. A Torch by the Sun. Quis furor. Molineux. A River with many Turnings,
running into the Sea. Semper ad mare. Crimes. A Flag streaming in the Wind.
Famamque fovemus inanem. Paylor. A Sail and an Oar together. Fors and virtus
miscentur in unum. Campnies. A Flag of Fire wavering upwards. Tremet and ardet.

For the present Her Majesty graced every one; particularly, she thanked His
Highness for the good performance of all that was done; and wished that their
Sports had continued longer, for the Pleasure she took therein: Which may well
appear, by her Answer to the Courtiers who danced a Measure, immediately after
the Mask was ended; saying. What! Shall we have Bread and Cheese after a
Banquet? Her Majesty willed the Lord Chamberlain, that the Gentlemen should be
invited on the next Day, and that he should present them unto her: Which was
done, and Her Majesty gave them her Hand to kiss, with most gracious Words of
Commendations to them; pa^ticularly, and in general, of Gray's Inn, as an House
that she was much beholden unto, for that it did always study for some Sports
to present unto her.

The same Night there was fighting at Barriers; the Earl of Essex and others
Challengers, and the Earl of Cumberland and his Company Defendants: Into which
number, our Prince was taken, and behaved himself so valiantly and skilfully
therein, that he had the Prize adjudged due unto him, which it pleased Her
Majesty to deliver him with her own Hands; telling him, that it was not her
Gift; for if it had, it should have been better; but she gave it him, as that
Prize which was due to his Desert, and good Behavior in those Exercises; and
that hereafter he should be remembered with a better Reward from her self. The
Prize was, a Jewel, set with seventeen Diamonds, and four Rubies; in value,
accounted worth an hundred Marks.

Thus on Shrove-Tuesday, at the Court, were our Sports and Revels ended: So
that our Christmas would not leave us, till such time as Lent was ready to
entertain us, which has always been accounted a time most apt, and wholly
dedicated to Repentance. But now our Principality is determined; which,
although it shined very bright in ours, and others Darkness; yet, at the Royal
Presence of Her Majesty, it appeared as an obscured Shadow: In this, not unlike
unto the Morning Star, which looks very cheerfully in the World, so long as
the Sun looks not on it: Or, as the great Rivers, that triumph in the
Multitude of their Waters, until they come unto the Sea. Sic vinci, sic mori
pulchrum.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
There is now published, A Discovery of New Worlds: From the French; made
English by Mrs. A. Behn. Together with a Preface, by way of Essay upon
Translated Prose, wholly new.

As also, An Historical and Geographical Account of the Morea, Negropont, and
the Maritime Places, as far as Thessalonica: Illustrated with 42 Maps of the
Countries, Plains, and Draughts of the Cities, Towns and Fortifications.
Written in Italian by P. M. Coronelli, Geographer to the Republic of Venice.
Englished by R.W. Gent^ Both sold by W. Canning, at his Sho^ in the
Temple-Cloysters.


