Truth with Time: OR, CERTAIN REASONS PROVING, That none of the seven last
Plagues, or Vials, are yet poured out: neither will the time of their pouring
out begin, till after the rising of the Two Witnesses, and the forty two
months of the Beast's reign be expired.

LIKEWISE, An ANSWER to the said REASONS; With a REPLY.

FURTHER, The Author has here set down (in a brief Exposition) his opinion of
the FIRST VIAL.

By JOHN CAN, Minister of the Gospel.

Jer. 51.10. Come, let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God.

Dan. 12.10. But the wicked shall do wickedly; and none of the wicked shall
understand: But the wise shall understand.

London, Printed by J.C. for Livewe! Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley.
1656.

To all the Mourners in Zion, now waiting by faith and prayer, for the
fulfilling of the great promises of the last Times.
Precious Ones,
THe Lord says by his Prophet, Psalm. 50.5
Gather ye to me my gracious Saints, that have stricken my covenant with
sacrifice. Who are meant here, I shall not say: but this I say, The time draws
nigh, in which the sanctified and mighty ones of Jehovah shall be gathered
together to him; even the hundred forty and four thousand standing with the
Lamb on Mount Zion.

It is possible, this Work of mine at first sight may seem strange to you,
being contrary to what has been generally received; and withal, may occasion
some discouragement, as if the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of
recompenses for the controversy of Zion, were further off then you thought
before. For the first, I shall refer you to the Discourse it self: but for the
later, that is, taking None of the Vials yet begun, it will be for your
encouragement and advantage many ways.

1. Here you may see, what choice and singular Privileges the Lord has
reserved for YOU the Saints of the last times as, to be particularly THESE,
Rev. 14.1, 2, 3, etc. and the called, chosen, and faithful, Chap. 17.14. The
Angels to come out of the Temple, with seven golden Vials, full of the wrath of
God: Psalm. 149.7.8.
To do vengeance on the heathens, reproofs in the nations: To bind their Kings
in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron: To do on them the judgment
written; this comely honor is to all his gracious Saints. Hallelu-jah. It
never grieves a child, to know more then he did of the Portion which his
father left him. I have in this Treatise acquainted you with something more,
then what (probably) you knew before concerning your lot (how eminent it is)
being fallen in the last days.

2. If the Lord will thus honor you the Saints of the last times with high and
glorious employment, What manner of persons ought ye to be, in all holy
conversation and godliness? How should ye study 2 Timothy 2.21.
to be meet for the Masters use; workmen that need not to be ashamed? Surely
Levit. 16.21.
he will send by the hand of fit men. Were a man chosen to any great Office in
the Commonwealth, he would take pains to have insight in it, and to have all
meet qualifications for the discharge thereof. In former times, as Saints saw
that their work then was to suffer for the testimony of Jesus Christ; so they
went to God, by instant and earnest prayer, for faith, patience, courage,
constancy, etc. that they might not love their lives unto the death. We are
come, without doubt, near the time of the end, viz. the period of the Beast's
reign, and the Vials to begin. Hence we should mind what our Work is NOW, and
for THIS be calling upon God day and night, for spirits suitable to the Work.

3. I know nothing (if duly weighed) of more weight then this, to heal all
present Breaches amongst the faithful of the Land, and to gather them in (as
one) with and for the Lamb. Never was there a time more unseasonable then now,
for brethren to be at odds, whether about Forms, or the like; but rather
(bearing each with other in their Opinions) to join together in Fasting and
Prayer, that they may all know the Lord, as to the proper work of the day; and
therein (as all alike concerned) stand fast together in the defense thereof. I
have observed it a long while, that nothing more draws out the hearts of
Christians to peace and oneness, then the understanding of the Times. Men
walking in a dark room, are apt to stumble and fall one upon another. It is
want of Generation-light, that Ephraim envies Judah, and Judah vexes Ephraim.
Could Saints but see, that the day breaks, and the shadows are flying away;
those Forms and other things which men now are earnest for, God is shaking, and
making all things new: they would lay their hands upon their mouths, and say,
Once have I spoken, yea twice: but I will proceed no further. If a Master
should come and find his servants quarrelling about some small matter, and in
the mean time nothing done concerning things of more weight and importance;
though some might be less in fault then others, and so less blamed; yet they
would be all reproved, as having neglected the greater and more weighty
business. It is true, in these Controversies, as some have more Truth on their
side then others; so their fault is the less: nevertheless, not having served
their Generation, but contended only about things of lesser importance; for
this they may ALL stand ashamed before the Son of man at his coming.

4. If no Vial yet be poured out, and the Vial-Angels are to come out of the
Temple; this considered, should stir up the Churches of the Saints to hear what
the Spirit says unto the Churches. They have seen thy goings, O God; Rev. 2.7.
Psalm. 68.24
even the goings of my God, my King, in the Sanctuary. My opinion is, near the
time of the Vials, the Spirit of God will move among the Saints at their holy
Meetings, in some strong and extraordinary way; as to the shaking of the house,
as Act. 4.31. or as in Acts 13.2. And the Temple was filled with smoke from the
glory of God, and from his power. And therefore, Rev. 15.8.
as eminent and infallible confirmations and assurances are to be asked; so
God's Answers and Returns are to be heeded: for now Believers are to expect the
great promise of the Father, to be endued with power from on high; and to have
the Spirit of truth, Joh. 16.13.
to guide them into all truth, and to show them things to come. Again, as
wonderful and extraordinary things are to be attempted, things new, and in
former ages unheard of: so the wonderful appearances of God, as moving and
leading men thereto, are to be observed; which are no other then Gods call to
the Angels of the Vials in the Temple: Go your ways, and pour out the Vials of
the wrath of God upon the earth. Rev. 16.1.
Who is wise, and he shall understand these things; prudent, Hos. 14.9.
and he shall know them? For the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall
walk in them; but the transgressors shall fall therein.

5. To hold that some of the Vials are begun, it draws such a cloud and
darkness over men's eyes, as it cannot but disadvantage Saints many ways. For,
1. Those who now suffer upon the account of the Fifth Kingdom, and run not
after the error of Balaam for reward; what improvement can they make of their
Testimony? I say, how little (comparatively) does it tend to? If the
Sackcloth-Witnesses have poured out Vials upon the Earth, Sea, and Fountains of
waters; truly the house of Austria is a business far off, and the following
Vials yet further; and in my understanding, all yields very little comfort to
those whose present expectation is raised up after great and high things nearer
home.

Again, granting some Vials poured out; but how many, and when, where, and how;
here all uncertain: This must needs wrap a soul into a world of doubts; as,
what to pray for, and where we are, and what work to prepare for. Paul says
well, It is good to be zealously affected always, Gal. 4.18.
in a good thing. For my part, I sincerely speak it, taking the Vials begun,
the more I consider where we are, and what to pray for, and prepare for, (as to
present Generation-work) the less I am satisfied, as to have things bottomed
and well grounded.

But on the contrary, taking the Vials not begun, here methinks things are
easy and plain to him that has understanding, as to the knowledge both of our
Time and Work. Besides, for the Prisoners of hope, here is that will stay them
with flaggons, Eccl. 4.14.
and comfort them with apples. For out of prison he comes to reign. The risen
Witnesses are to begin the work upon the Earth-state Apostacy. After three
years and half, (which I take to be the whole time of the last State-Apostacie,
and the Witnesses lying so long slain) that in Job will be made good: Job 17.8.
The innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite.

6. Were this Doctrine concerning the Vials rightly understood, it would awaken
many carnal and corrupt Professors; as Formalists, Neuters, Time-servers, etc.
It is no marvel that this sort of men are so little affected or affrighted with
the seven last plagues: For if three of the Vials (as it is commonly held) are
poured out, and yet all things continue as they were from the beginning; Why
may not the later do as little as the former did? Whereas, did the Hypocrites
and Apostates of this Age know, that none of them are yet poured out; and
withal, were they informed who will be the subjects of each Vial, and what the
effects: this would be like thunder in their ears: Alas, who shall live when
God does this? Number. 24.23.
Now we should see the sinners in Sion afraid; fearfulness would surprise the
hypocrites.

Specially when they shall hear, that the first Vial, whose subject is the
Earth, is shortly to be poured forth upon an earthly and carnal Interest, to
wit, the Grand Apostates of the last times, described in 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4. For
the time is come, 1 Pet. 4.17
that judgment must begin at the house of God; according to his way of old;
and begin at my Sanctuary: Ezekiel. 9.6.
And in taking this course, all mouths will be stopped: Be silent, Zech. 2.13
O all flesh, before the Lord: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation.
What will Rome, Spain, France, Germany, etc. have to say, when it comes to be
their Turn to feel the weight and wrath of the Vials, when they shall hear how
the Lord began first at his Sanctuary; namely, with those had a Form of
godliness, but denied the power thereof?

7. Neither is the knowledge of this, altogether without some use to the
present Powers of the world, especially such, who say they believe that Christ
shall have a visible and glorious Kingdom; only they differ from their
Brethren in point of time. It was much, that Saul should tell David, I know
well (says he) that thou shall surely be king, 1 Samuel 24.20.
and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand. One would
think he spoke not as he thought; or at least, not as he would have it; when no
sooner were the words out of his mouth, but he sought by all the subtle ways he
could devise, how to take away David's life, that he might not be king.

But now, to remove jealousy from men in Authority, in relation to those who
already cry Hosanna to the Son of David, GOD SAVE KING JESUS, blessed be he
that comes in the Name of the Lord; and do assert him the only Potentate, and
that he shall break all other Potentates and Powers of the world, and alone be
exalted: This Apology I dare give forth to the whole world, in their behalf, I
speak of those who bear witness to the fifth Kingdom, That they do abhor all
secret Designs and Plots; neither is it in their hearts to act as men, nor for
men; no, nor to appear in the work of the Lord, till they shall see one of the
days of the Son of man, that is, the Lord eminently risen, in lifting up the
Standard for his People. So that as they cease from man, and from trusting in
Chariots and Horsemen; so it is below their Principles, to provide Pikes and
Muskets, or any such Ammunition: for they know, when their time and work comes,
if they shall need then any such Weapons, their Enemies will spare them enough,
as casting away all they have, that they may fly the faster to Rocks and
Mountains, whereby to be hid from the fierce wrath of the Lamb.

But whereas there is a great Rumor through the Nations, of wonderful Actions
and Changes at hand; Mat. 2.3.
(When Herod heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him:)
hence it is suggested, as if the Assertors of Christ's glorious and visible
Kingdom, had fixed a certain, definite and determinate Time when the Stone cut
out without hands, should begin to smite the Image upon his feet that were of
Iron and Clay, and break them in pieces. But this is not true. Yet this we
confess, (for we desire, as our hearts are known to God, so to have them naked
and opened unto the eyes of all men) we are of opinion, That the Lord will
arise, Psalm. 102.13.
and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favor her, yea the set-time is
come. The vision which was for an appointed time, Hab. 2.3.
is at an end, and will speak. The forty and two months, and one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, are near their periods; and there shall be time no
longer, either for the Beast, or other Tyrants, to bear rule over the Saints of
the most High. But what of this? Here is no ground for action: for until the
Lord himself make it clear and certain, by his own infallible appearance, that
the time is come; men's Conjectures are nothing, as to move any to such
undertakings.

And therefore I say further, Had these men who believe that Christ will
shortly destroy all worldly powers, as great advantages against any of them, as
David had against Saul when he fell into his hands, they would not (I speak as
I believe) stir, or act any thing, merely as having such an Advantage or
Opportunity: for they eye more then what men call Providence, (which Thieves of
all sorts may pretend to: Number. 23.21.
) The Lord God must be with them, and the shout of a King among them. And until
the Lord of hosts muster the host of the battle, Isa. 13.4.
those that rejoice in his HIGHNESS will remain in their Chambers, having their
doors shut about them.

I speak not this, as if there were the least unwillingness in the Assertors of
the Fifth Kingdom to suffer in the behalf thereof. For I am confident, they are
as willing as ever were Saints in any Generation, to hold forth (with their
lives in their hands) this Testimony of Jesus Christ, namely, 1 Timothy 6.15.
THAT CHRIST AS MAN SHALL BE THE ONLY POTENTATE, INSOMUCH AS ALL WORLDLY
DOMINION, Dan. 2.35.
RULE, GOVERNMENT, etc. SHALL BE BROKEN TO PIECES, AND BECOME AS THE CHAFF OF
THE SUMMER-THRESHING-FLOOR, AND NO PLACE FOUND MORE FOR IT: Dan. 7.14, 2.7.
BUT CHRIST WITH HIS SAINTS SHALL HAVE THE DOMINION, GLORY, AND GREATNESS,
UNDER THE WHOLE HEAVEN.

But what I write, is to wipe off the Scandal and Reproach which some seek to
fasten upon them, by matching them with Cavaliers and Malignants; and as if
great Plots (I know not what) were under Consultation amongst them: A thing
detested, as most unsuitable to the glorious Cause and Interest which they
profess. Besides, they know well enough, as Christ will take the Kingdoms of
the world into his own hands: so, when that time shall come, (as we hope it is
not far off) he will come with power enough: we need not to take any thought
about it: For the zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this. Isa. 9.^.


Having thus far endeavored to remove needless Fears, it were well
(notwithstanding) if the Great Ones of the world would take notice of what was
hinted before, That Jesus Christ is designing against them, (though we are not)
to root them out, and to pull them down, and to destroy and overthrow them.
Isai. 28.22.
Now therefore be not mockers, lest your bands be made strong. For I have heard
from the Lord God of hosts, a consumption even determined upon the whole earth.
Isai. 23.9.
He has purposed to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring to contempt all
the honorable of the earth. What greater folly in men, then to take care to
have the walls of their houses high and strong, but no covering to it, whereby
to keep off hurt and danger from above, and over head? That BLOW which the
Powers of the world may expect next, it is from above, even The finger of God:
and therefore if they have not made it well and strong over-head, (strong
enough to keep off the hand of God) what will their Soldiers and Guards about
them, stead them? Your Covenant with death shall be disannulled, Isai. 28.18.
and your agreement with hell shall not stand: when the overflowing scourge
shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it. Isa. 8.9, 10.
Also, associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces;
take counsel together, and it shall come to naught. When fire takes hold of
sticks bundled together, the one rather furthers then hinders the others
burning. When the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is
proud and lofty, Isai. 2.12.
the more they combine together by Power and Policy, the faster they will run,
and destroy one the other. No man (I think) could have done more (whether
Machiavilian or Atheist) then Herod did, to prevent the great Design of God,
when Jesus Christ came first into the world! Pro. 21.30.
But it would not do. For there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel,
against the Lord. So a while after, to hinder Christ's Resurrection, what could
the devil have suggested, (as a Plot more probably to take effect) then to make
the sepulcher sure, Mat. 27.66
sealing the stone, and setting a watch? But this would not do neither: for
Christ arose in the appointed time, notwithstanding all the depths of Satan in
the chief Priests and Pharisees; notable Types of the Rulers and Priests of the
last days. Whilst some, like the Wisemen, are asking, Where is he that is born
King of the Jews? and mourning with the Disciples, to see him crucified in his
Cause and Witnesses: others, with Herod and the Pharisees, are taking crafty
counsel how to hinder his Kingdom, Power, and Greatness: But this will not do:
Psalm. 2.6.
Yet have I set my Son upon my holy hill of Sion.

Neither will Christ stand to that Division and Share which these men have set
out to him, viz. Spiritualties: for so they have divided the Government of
Nations between Him and Themselves. As for all outward things, Crowns, Kingdom,
Compare Luke 4.6.
Power, Greatness, Glory, Riches, Laws, etc. this is their Share. Now there is
another thing, which they call Spiritual, or inward and invisible; this they
allow to Christ; and no marvel: for they know not how to get it out of his
hands. But the Prophet speaks of another Decree, which is, Psalm. 2.7.
That Jesus Christ shall have all; and their flesh (that is, their Revenues,
Riches, Rev. 19.17, 18.
Greatness, Power, Places, etc.) shall be given to the fowls that fly in the
midst of heaven.

But I shall say no more, as having little hope that such sayings as these,
will take with them. For the old subtle Serpent, who loves to be with them in
the Garden, tells them, (when such things come to their ear) YE SHALL NOT
SURELY DIE. Genesis 3.4.


8. And here I may not forget, what help and advantage Saints have, by the
knowledge of these things: as, to be kept and preserved from the Errors of the
last times. For, what is it that does occasion many poor souls so easily to be
led aside into that NOTHING of the Quakers, but their ignorance of the Visions
and Prophecies of the Scriptures not yet fulfilled? Hence (knowing little of
the visible and glorious Kingdom of Christ, as the Son of man) they turn all
things either into Allegories, or a Christ within them; and so make all the
great counsels and purposes of God of no effect. As for this sort of people,
truly I love them, and pity them: I love them, for many good things which I see
in them; as, their honest walking, and civil righteousness; and for that
Public Testimony which they hold forth against the scandalous practices of
corrupt men. And I pity them much, to see how, pretending to Perfection, and to
have the highest Light and Discoveries of Truth, there is nothing to be found
in their Writings, Speeches, Lives, but what is very low, and signifies
NOTHING, as to be a People raised up for the work of the last days. They tell
us of Christ and Antichrist, of Babylon and the New Jerusalem; of the Seals,
Trumpets, Vials; the Beast, false Prophet, and the Great Whore, etc. But alas,
poor hearts, nothing do they make of it, either as to the truth of the matter
in it self, or in their own way, as they apply it, and would be understood. And
therefore well may their Way be called NOTHING: for nothing is held forth by
them concerning the great things of Christ which Saints now wait for, according
to the promise of the Father.

But to return to you, who are hastening the day of the coming of Christ: Give
me leave in the Close to speak one word more. As the expectation of Saints
everywhere is exceeding high, after strange and wonderful things: so the
Prophecies of the Scriptures (such I mean as respect the last days) are the
more diligently to be searched, as the Grounds of our Faith and Hope. And
howsoever all of them are of excellent use, whereby to know what must shortly
come to pass, and how to be in readiness: Nevertheless, the matter of the Vials
(in my opinion) is a thing wherein Christians should labor to have special
light and knowledge, as containing the whole Work of God, till the sinners be
consumed out of the earth, and the wicked be no more.

Neither will there lie such Darkness on the Vials, if we once (through Christ)
have found the beginning. For as in reading Books, the last word of the Page
gives direction to what follows, and how to find it: so (I conceive) in every
Vial, there is a light of some direction, whereby to carry us over to the
knowledge of the next, and from it to what follows* and so of the rest: which
will occasion the humble searcher to say, O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! But here no common or ordinary frame is
sufficient: but we must labor for high and choice spirits, to be strengthened
with might by the Spirit in the inner man, and filled with all the fullness of
God.

Now that such a measure of the Spirit may be poured out upon all the Lords
Servants and Handmaids waiting everywhere for the same, is the daily prayer of
him who is

Yours In the love and service of the Truth, JOHN CAN.
From Hull, the beginning of this HOPEFUL YEAR 1656.
Time with Truth tried: OR, Certain Reasons to prove that none of the seven
last Plagues or Vials are yet poured out; neither will the time of their
pouring out begin, till after the rising of the Witnesses, and the one thousand
two hundred and sixty days, or forty and two months of the Beast's Reign be
expired.
I Am not ignorant, how much it does savor of affecting Singularity, to
publish a new Doctrine, as the Athenians said of Paul; Acts 18.19.
especially being a thing contrary to the common received opinion of good men.
But here I have not only my own Conscience to witness otherwise for me; but I
hope, amongst all such as are wise, and truly godly, I shall find better and
more charitable thoughts, when they have duly weighed the Grounds of this
supposed New Doctrine.

That none of the seven last Plagues are yet poured out, cand. it seems to be a
Truth, for these Reasons.

Tillinghast and others affirm, that by the hundred forty and four thousand,
But that I think Mr Till. opinion here is not questioned by waiting Saints,
otherwise I could give many Reasons, that the rising of the Witnesses, and the
144000, do contemporize.
Rev. 14.1. the Gentile-Saints are signified; and their standing on mount Sion
with the Lamb, is to be after the rising of the Witnesses; then I think there
will be very little reason to carry the beginning of the seven last Vials any
higher, For though it be the opinion of learned and godly men, that some of the
Vials are poured out; yet so, as they hold likewise, that the hundred forty
and four thousand have already stood with the Lamb on mount Sion. And indeed,
this has Reason and weight in it, That where we begin the time of the one
hundred forty and four thousand, there we should also take the beginning of
the Vials. And the order of the matter seems to make this clear. The holy Ghost
having, chap. 14. spoken of the Harvest and Vintage, that is, what sore plagues
the Lord will bring upon Babylon and the followers of the Beast; comes
presently, in chap. 15 and 16, to show how, and by what means, the earth shall
be reaped, the clusters gathered, and cast into the great wine press of Gods
wrath; namely, seven Angels shall come out of the Temple, having the seven last
plagues, etc. So then, to take the one hundred forty and four thousand to be
after the Witnesses are risen; and to begin the pouring out of the Vials before
the Witnesses are risen, in my understanding, it is very improper to the scope
and drift of the Prophecy, and crosses that excellent order which the Spirit
seems to observe.

Plagues, and Vials full of divine wrath, in any good sense, and according to
Scripture-use, may be applied to, and understood of the preaching of the glad
tidings of the Gospel. Truly I think, that the publishing of the sweet and most
precious soul-saving Truths of Jesus, all the time of the the Beasts reign,
even the forty and two months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty days, is
in another way, and by other words expressed; and not by Vials full of wrath:
See Rev. 10.9, 10, 11. And therefore by the seven last plagues filled up with
the wrath of God, Rev. 15.1. I understand real and proper plagues, and not the
preaching of the Gospel, either by Grosthead, Wickliff, Luther, Calvin, etc.
but rather such temporal plagues as shall be in the last days poured out upon
wicked men, for despising and persecuting the Truth: No doubt the Alleluiahs,
Revel. 19.1, 2, 3, etc. are for what was done under the first, second and third
Vials, as for the effects of the rest. Now how in the preaching of the Gospel
by Wickliff, Luther, etc. God avenged the blood of his servants on the great
Whore, I do not yet see.
In her was found the blood of the Prophets and Saints, Rev. 18.24.

It is true, Luther and others, in discovering the corruptions of persons and
things, and lifting up their voices like Trumpets, against the abominations of
their Masses, Crosses, Indulgences, Purgatory, Penance, Pilgrimage, etc. did
therein take the little book, and prophesied before many people, nations and
tongues. That they did this, we have the Word to believe it: but that in
preaching the Word of life, and opening the Gospel of the Kingdom, to the
ignorant and blind world, by which means multitudes were brought from darkness
to light, and from Idols to the serving of the living and true God: Observe, it
is not said, that the effects of the Vials shall be wrath, or turn to wrath;
but, In them is filled up the wrath of God.
That in this (I say) they poured out Vials filled up with the wrath of God, I
cannot so take it; neither have I seen Reasons and Grounds why it should be so
understood.

Vial of wrath poured out, (which to me sounds harshly) and that Wickliff,
Huss, Jerome of Prague, Luther, etc. were the Angels; The question then is, Who
before them poured out their Vials upon the earth: For it is said, These seven
Angels had the seven last plagues; signifying, that there were Plagues before;
although for time, persons, matter, and manner of proceeding, and other
circumstances, unlike.

Besides, I see no reason, why some will have the pouring out of the Vials to
begin at Luther; others, at Armachan the Irish Bishop; some, at Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln. To me their opinion seems fairer, (taking the
Vials for the preaching of the Gospel) who carry the thing higher, (as Mede and
others) even to Waldo: yea, and why not further, as to Arnulphus, Arnoldus
Brixianus, etc. who publicly witnessed against the Tyranny and Primacie of the
Pope, boldly reproved the wicked lives of the Priests; and many other faithful
Witnesses, both of Which was about the year 1134.
that time, and before? If we look into Histories and Records of Nations, for
ought I yet see, granting some of the Vials already poured out, viz. in
witnessing against the blasphemies and beastly vanities of Antichrist, Those
who assert, that some of the Vials are poured out, should do well to give some
Reasons why they take their beginning from such a man, or such a time; and why
not before or after?
there is more reason to take their beginning 6 or 700 years past, then to
pitch upon any person or persons of later times.

first and second Vials: some allow a hundred years, others two, From Armach.
the Irish Bishop, to the Sweden Wars in Germany, is near 300 years. Rob.
Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, was before him almost 100 years. Again, from Luther
to our Parliament, an. 1640. was about 120 years. To the rest of the Vials
there is not allowed half the time.
and some more; namely, from the pouring out of the first Vial, to the
beginning of the second; and to all the rest, not half the time. Truly I think
this is worth enquiry, Why from the first Vial, before the second begins,
longer time is allotted, then to the Six other Vials.

If those Vials, or last plagues, have an allusion to the plagues of Egypt, (as
it is generally held) then it is probable, when there is once a beginning, they
will be suddenly all poured out. Willet from Pererius collects, that within the
compass of 27 days, or about a month, all the plagues of Egypt were finished.
Comment. on Exodus 7. Quest. 29.
Some have observed from the History in Exodus, that within the space of thirty
days, the ten Egyptian plagues (from the first to the last) were executed. Now
if we reckon a day for a year, (as it is often in Prophetical Types) within
thirty years, the seven last plagues of the seven Angels will be finished.
Neither is it to be doubted, but a short work will the Lamb make upon the
earth, Romans 9.28. when those Vials begin to be poured out. Wherefore is
Babylons fall set forth under the sign of a great millstone cast into the sea
by a mighty Angel? Rev. 18.21. not only to denote her irrecoverable
desolation, but what speedy and quick dispatch the Lord will make, when he
calls his Angels out of the Temple: Therefore shall her plagues come in one
day, Rev. 18.8. in one hour, verse. 10, 17, 19. in a moment, suddenly, Isa.
47.9, 11.

I know, the destruction of Babylon, mentioned Rev. 18. is by many restrained
to the burning of the City of Rome: but, in my opinion, there is far better
Ground to take Babylon there, for the whole Kingdom and Dominion of the Beast
everywhere: And let him that has understanding read the Chapter, he shall
clearly see, that it must be understood of the universal Antichristian State,
even all that which is to be destroyed under the five first Vials. Neither do I
think that any of the Vials will be poured forth till the Angel there come down
from heaven, having great power, and the earth is lightened with his glory, Rev.
18.1. For it seems to me, as the pouring out of all the Vials will be the great
work of Saints, at the time of the end; so the Lord will make way wonderfully
for them: For they shall be enlightened and satisfied, as to the knowledge of
their work and time. So then, in short, I think it is a mistake, to apply (as
some do) the fall of Babylon to the burning of Rome; or (as others) to the I
desire this may be well observed, That the fall of Babylon, Rev. 18. is to be
referred to the five first Vials equally. Neither comes any of the 7 Angels out
of the Temple, til that mighty Angel descend from heaven, Rev. 18.1.
fifth Vial. For, as I said before, there are manifest proofs in the Chapter,
that the Kingdom and State of the Beast (everywhere) is to be understood; and
that the other four Vials going before, concern also the same thing.

Beast; yet I cannot conceive how any of the persons to whom the first, second
and third Angels are ordinarily applied, do fairly or fitly parallel and agree
with what the Scripture holds forth. Certain it is, none of the Angels come out
of the Temple, till John saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire, and
them that had gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his image, and over
his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having
the harps of God; and they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the
song of the Lamb, Rev. 15.2, 3. All this well agrees with the description of
the one hundred forty and four thousand, Rev. 14.1, 2, 3. But to carry these
things to Grostead, Armachan, Wickliff, Luther, etc. if need were, I could show
by many reasons the improbabilitie of it.

There is a great difference between not receiving the mark, or the name of the
Beast, or the number of his name; and getting the victory over the Beast, and
over his image, mark, name, etc. It is true, in the former sense, there were
many of Gods people which in the time of the Beasts reign received not his
mark, etc. but that any of them, during the forty and two months, got the
Victory over the Beast, or over his image, mark, name, etc. to this I cannot
assent.

Neither is their opinion well bottomed, (I speak as I think) who hold, that
this victory over the Beast, and singing the song of Moses, and the song of the
Lamb, to be before the rising of the Witnesses, even the time that they
prophesied in sackcloth, and whilst the woman was still in the wilderness.

Under favor, I think, that their opinion is better grounded, (I speak as to
consonancie of parallel Scriptures) who taking the Witnesses already risen, do
carry this victory over the Beast, and the song of Moses and of the Lamb, to
the time of their rising; and so begin the Vials. But to hold the Witnesses not
risen, nor the woman out of the wilderness, and yet to hold the victory over
the Beast past, (the song of Moses and of the Lamb, to be sung some hundred
years ago, and so to begin the Vials) this, to me, seems little less then
evident That the woman whilst she abode in the wilderness, and the Witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth should sing the song of Moses and the Lamb, it seems a
contradiction: yet I see not how such as hold some of the Vials poured out, and
yet the woman not out of the wilderness, nor the Witnesses risen, can avoid it.
contradiction.

seven last plagues or Vials are yet poured forth, nor will be, till after the
rising of the Witnesses, for this reason; namely, because none of the seven
Angels come forth with their golden Vials, until the Tabernacle of the
Testimony is opened in heaven, Mede perceiving the place to be so directly
against him and others who hold some of the Vials poured out, puts it off thus:
Truly (says he) that which is there said of the Temple, of the Tabernacle of
the Testimony in heaven, that appertains not to the beginning, but to the
event of the Vials. But by his leave, he takes more then the place allows him.
Rev. 15.5. But that part of the Tabernacle of the Testimony is to be shut all
the time of the Witnesses their prophesying in sackcloth, as may be gathered
from Rev. 11.1. with verse. 19. Hence this Argument might be framed: No Angel is
to come forth with his golden Vial, till the
Tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven be opened.
But the Tabernacle of the Testimony is not to be opened
till after the rising of the Witnesses:
Therefore, no Angel with his golden Vial is to come forth
till after the rising of the Witnesses.


The proof of the Argument, are the Scriptures before, viz. Rev. 15.5. with
Chap. 11. verse. 1, 19. Now if any do think that the four last Angels shall come
out from the Temple opened in heaven, and not the first three; such an opinion
is against the Text expressly, which says, that the seven Angels come out of
the Temple, verse. 6. Neither do I know any ground they have, who think that the
Angels pouring out the four last Vials, shall have more light, zeal, faith,
holiness, etc. then the former had. There is no such thing to be gathered from
the Text. But if we may use liberty of conjecture, I see no reason (supposing
pre-eminence) why the first should not have it; as he that fights the Enemy,
and engages first, shows himself the most valiant and best-deserving Soldier.

out,) make good what is said, Rev. 15.4. For thy judgments are made Manifest.
The place to me has much more in it, then what followed the Doctrines and
writings of Grostead, Wickliff, Huss, Luther, Melancthon, etc. or the Swethen
wars, or the Parliament in England. For Gods judgments, notwithstanding what
has been yet done, remain still dark, doubtful, disputeable, etc. especially
to the world, wherein his Judgments shall be Manifest in the effects of the
Vials.

As the Egyptians under their plagues, though hardened in sin, yet acknowledged
the finger of God upon them, Exo. 8.19. So the followers of the Beast, when the
Vials are poured out, notwithstanding their blaspheming God, and not repenting,
to give him glory, shall see the hand of God lifted up, and be ashamed for
their envy at his people, Isa. 26.11. So manifest at this time will his
judgments be, 2 Timothy 3.9. But hitherto the Should we in the particulars
consider, beginning either at Grostead, Armachan, Luther, etc. or where else,
and come down to our own times, very little can be said as to Gods Judgments
upon the Antichristians yet Manifested. Neither did the Swethen wars nor Ours,
signify much as to what should be Manifested in the effects of every Vial
being poured out.
providentiall appearances and Actings of God have been so dark and hidden,
his movings so forward and backward, I mean as to his judgments, that should
we begin at Grostead, Armachan, Luther, or anywhere else since the rise of the
Beast, and come down to this time, there has been very little of Gods
Judgments yet Manifested to his own people, much less to the Enemy: And
hence it is that Babylon says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow,
and shall see no sorrow, Rev. 18.7. Yea, hence it is that the Antichristians,
in their writings, and ordinary discourses, do stiffly maintain, that Gods
judgments have been as manifest, and still are, upon the witnesses, the woman
in the wilderness, and all parties opposing them, as they are in respect of
them. Now howsoever this may be denied, yet hitherto we have not had matter,
nor the cause so on our side, as by the judgments of God against them to put
them to silence. But confident I am, the effects of all the Vials shall be such
(the 1. 2. 3. as well as the rest) in the manifestation of Gods Judgments
against the great whore and all her helpers, that the righteous shall see it
and rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth, Psa. 107.42.

Rev. 11.3. I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall Prophecy
1260 days clothed in sackcloth; neither did they put off their sackcloth till
they had finished their Testimony, ver. 7. But these Angels which pour out the
last plagues (even all 7) have put off their sackcloth, and are clothed with
pure and white linen, Rev. 15.6. hence it must needs follow (if I have any
understanding of the glorious prophesies to be fulfilled in the last times)
that neither If any shall object, that Grostead, Armachan, Husse, Luther, etc.
in one respect wore sackcloth, and in another respect had fine linen; I answer,
In my opinion, this cannot be: for they never changed their condition, after
they were witnesses, but were always sufferers for the truth to their dying
day; yea some of them laid down their lives for it.
Waldo, Wickliff, Husse, Luther, etc. can be meant by any of the 7 Angels
clothed with white linen. For they never had their sackcloth taken off, but
wore it to their graves. What is meant by being clothed with white linen, the
Scriptures show, it was an ensign of honor, which great persons used to wear,
their condition and state being changed. Genesis 41.42. Esth. 8.15. Pro. 31.22.
Ezekiel. 16.10. Psa. 30.11.

The truth is, if we take not heed to distinguish between the sackcloth-time of
mourning Saints, and the time in which they are clothed with white linen, that
is, raised out of the dust, and set with Princes, even with the Princes of his
people, Psa. 113.7, 8. but confound these times (which ought to be kept
distinct and apart) we shall want an excellent light and help, to bring things
to their due and proper places. I cannot deny but many learned and godly men
do carry up the beginning of the Vials, to Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, and
some higher; but withal this they hold, that Luther, and so the rest, had put
off their sackcloth, the time of the 1260 days being expired, of the 2
witnesses prophesying in sackcloth. But to think, that any of the Vials should
be poured out, and the sackcloth-time not out, I say, the witnesses not having
finished their Testimony, to express my self humbly and soberly, I think here
is another contradiction: for there cannot be a wearing of sackcloth and fine
linen at one time, and by the same persons. Neither are the sackcloth-witnesses
against Babylon, the white-linen-Angels which must pour out the last plagues
upon her, until they have finished their Testimony, and after they have been
slain stand upon their feet through the Spirit of life from God, entering into
them.

Rev. 18.21. And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and
cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon
be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. If this place belong to the
Vials (as to me it seems most evident) surely then whatsoever is attributed to
Grostead, Armachan, Wickliff, Husse, Luther, etc. or to the Swethen wars, or to
the English Parliament, etc. is far from the works of the Angels which shall
pour out the 7 last plagues.

THVS shall Babylon, etc. The Comparison especially holds in two things: first,
a great millstone in the sea does not one while sink and another while swim; now
is falling, then rising again. Thus, that is, when any of the 7 Angels pour out
their Vials, the work shall so prosper in their hands, as it shall go still
visibly forward, and not be hindered or retarded, by any Adversary-power
whatsoever: It shall not be now (as hitherto it has been) one while the enemy
has been sinking, another while rising and swimming; but where the Vials
(whether First, Second, Third, etc.) do fall, the Beast and his party shall be
always falling and sinking down to the bottom under them.

Secondly: As Babylon shall be always sinking under the Vials; so where she is
once brought to the bottom, there she shall remain and abide, without
recovering her self any more at all. But these things we have not I desire the
Judicious reader seriously to consider whether he conceives any thing yet done
against the Kingdom of the Beast, which looks like a Vial. It is true Gods hand
has been against it many ways: But we are to distinguish between common
Judgments, and Vials filled up with the wrath of God: see Isa. 13.19. Jer.
50.40. the wrath is every Vial is no ordinary wrath, as I think.
seen, as the effects of the Vials supposed to be poured out. For neither has
her sinking been like a Millstone; nor has she kept at the bottom, being down.
But that I have intended at this time to be brief, otherwise I could easily
show, how Interpreters in their application of the effects of Each Vial, taking
the subjects of the Vials to be either this or that Country, do make very
little of the matter, to what the Spirit of God declares shall be the effects
of every Vial upon the Antichristian Kingdom.

Vials already poured out, to be as they are understood and applied. The
absurdity seems thus: When all the Vials are poured out, very little may be
signified or done by them, but Tyranny and Idolatry in persons and things,
over all nations, people and tongues, as before. To prove this, thus I reason.
If after the pouring out of three Vials (yea, as some reckon, 4, 5, 6.) what
tyranny and Idolatry was suppressed and put down (as the effects of the Vials)
did rise and spread it self again in the same places; Then may the effects of
the later Vials be so too: That is, what corruptions and abuses are for a while
suppressed (as the effects of the Vials) the same, whether Tyranny or Idolatry,
may be established again among the people where formerlie they were put down.
If so, then the conclusion will stand good, John de la March says the sixth
Vial was poured out upon Euphrates about the year 1632 and so forward. The
effect whereof ( viz. the drying up of it, appeared first in Scotland, An.
1639. in the sentence of Excommunication against the Hierarchy. Complaint of
the false Prophets, page 19. By such reckoning we shall have little don by the
Vials.
that after all the Vials are poured out, very little may be done or signified;
but the cause and interest of Christ, and the condition of Gods people, whether
Jews or Gentiles, no better then it was before.

If any shall object, that under the Vials not poured out (as the 4, 5, 6, 7,)
the German Empire, the Kingdom of the Beast, the Turkish power, etc. will be
broken; I answer, The Question is not what shall be the effects of the later
Vials; but being granted that 3 are poured out, and where they fell, what
Tyranny and Idolatry soever was for a time put down, (as the effects of such
Vials) in the same countries (which were the subjects of the Vials) the former
Tyranny and Idolatry were established again: The Question, I say, then is, why
the effects of the later Vials may not prove and be as the effects of the
former; That is, whatsoever Tyranny and Idolatry shall be suppressed (as the
effects of the last Vials) the same may be set up again in the Nations, as it
was before in the case of the former Vials; and so in Conclusion all may be
poured out, and the times immediately after as corrupt as before.

Vials are yet poured out, is taken from Rev. 15.8. where it is said, And the
Temple was filled with smoke, from the glory of God, and from his power; and
no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven plagues of the seven
Angels were fulfilled. How this can be fairly applied to the persons whom I
have often mentioned, viz. Grostead, Armachan, Wickliff, Luther, the King of
Swethen, or our Late Parliament; I see no reason at all for it.

For 1. If there has been no such Temple yet, filled with smoke from the glory
of God (as I believe there has not) then consequently none of the 7 Last
plagues have been poured out.

But 2. Suppose such a Temple 3 or 400 years past; Yet how will it appear,
that in all this time, notwithstanding the multitudes which have ever since
separated from the false Church, not one man of them was able to enter into the
Temple?

3. For the persons who are thought to be the Angels already gone out of the
Temple with Vials of wrath, give them their due and more too, yet I doubt, if
things be duly weighed, whether groundedly it can be proved, I speak as to any
of them, that the Temple was I am much unsatisfied that not any of the Vials
are yet poured out, in regard I see so little proportion and sutableness
between the persons who are said to be the Angels; and how the Spirit of God
describes the persons and work.
FILLED with smoke from the glory of God and from his power.

Lastly, I am something confirmed in my opinion, not only to observe, how
unsuteably the matter of the Vials is applied to things already done; I say,
the disproportion between the one and the other: But what contrarieties and
differences there are amongst good men about them. Of this opinion are good men.
Some think Three are poured out, So Mede.
others say Four; Thus holds Mayer.
some Five, So thinks John dela March.
others Six. Now truly my mind gives me, if such things were past, being of so
great concernment, Gods people would not be so divided and lost therein.

Besides, it is my opinion (and I shall ere long give reasons for it) when the
time comes, that these Vials shall begin to be poured out, the Lord will set it
I Question whether Wickcliff, Husse, Luther, etc. or the King of Sweth, or our
Parliament, either the one in preaching the Gospel, or the other in going forth
to war, had it put upon their hearts by the Spirit of God, that what they did
was in order to the fulfilling of this Prophecy, that is, they knew they were
called out of the Temple to pour out such and such of the last plagues upon
the Antichristian Kingdom. But I do not question, when the set-time is come
that the Vials indeed must be poured out, but such as shall be the instruments
and ministers thereof shall fully know that they are the Angels appointed for
that work.
home upon the hearts of the Saints, as their work; and not only shall they
be Spirited and fitted for it, but they shall know by some divine appearance
that the set-time is come; now, as his chosen, and called, and faithful, they
must follow the Lamb with golden Vials in their hands. Rev. 15.7. and 16.1. and
18. 1. Isa. 13.3. Psa. 50.4, 5. Dan. 12.10. Rev. 17.1.

Howsoever I have thus far declared my self, that none of the seven last
plagues are poured out, yet I must confess, considering how in this thing, I
dissent from what has been, and still is the common received opinion of most
pious and precious Saints; I desire to be very humble and sober in my thoughts:
and in this regard, I profess in the presence of God, and before the whole
Israel of God, that I shall be most willing and thankful (through the good
hand of Christ, assisting me) to receive better light, from the least of the
Flock, if I am mistaken about the time. And because the knowledge of the times,
to wit, when the Vials are to take their beginning, is a thing of special
concernment; for here if we mistake, we build upon a sandy foundation, and the
whole Fabric is marred by it: Besides, the matter of the Vials is the main
thing, which all waiting Saints at this time are diligently to enquire after,
as their GENERATION-WORKE. For these and other like considerations, it is my
humble request, that whosoever amongst the Little remnant of the woman, is not
satisfied with these reasons, but thinks he can produce stronger Arguments
(that some of the Vials are poured out,) then those which I have brought, that
in the spirit of meekness so much may be made known to the followers of the
Lamb.

And to the end the Answer may be the more full and satisfactory to the Saints
everywhere, I will here add a few Queries, the which being answered with the
Reasons, will give the more light to the point in controversy.

Angel pouring out the first Vial, either Waldo, Wickliff, Grostead, Armachan,
Luther, etc. be meant, who then is the one of the 4 Beasts which gave unto the
7 Angels the 7 golden vials? Rev. 15.7. By the four Beasts in the Revelation,
all Learned and godly Expositors do understand the Ministers and Preachers of
the Gospel. If so, how then can they who If the place be well weighed, I think
such will see their mistake who apply any of the Vials to the preaching of the
Gospel. It is one thing to stir up another to his work, and another thing to
take the work out of his hand.
deliver over the Vials to be poured out by others, be the doers thereof
themselves?

last plagues are to be poured forth by 7 Angels, The Question is, whether by
each Angel a single person be meant, or a number. If a number of persons, then
whether all godly, or some (suppose the greater number) shall be taken into the
work, which are visibly profane and wicked, even such as carry the Mark of
the Beast. It seems by the Scripture that none shall be called to the work of
the Vials, nor have a hand in the pouring of them out, but Rev. 15.6. and
17.14. and 14 1. Isa. 13.3. Psa. 102.18. Jer. 50.45. Rev. 18.6.
Saints by calling: If so, then how is the 2 or 3 Vial applyable to the Sweden
or English wars?

Song of Moses and of the Lamb, Rev. 15.34. I do not deny but the Lord has
done much for his Church and people in these later times; but it will not
therefore follow that he has given them such victories and deliverances as to
sing the song of Moses, etc.
be carried up to the times before the rising of the witnesses; and the new
song, Rev. 14.3. brought down many hundred years after? This seems to be, 1.
Against the order of the prophecy. 2. The matter of the song, if rightly
observed, is not suitable to any time in which the Beasts reigned. Neither,
lastly, can it be showed (in my opinion) that ever the Churches of the Saints,
since the rise of Antichrist to this day, have had occasion, through any
deliverance or Victory, to song the Song of Moses and of the Lamb.

Vials should be poured out in the preaching of the Gospel, by Wickliff, Husse,
Luther, etc. Others by Parliaments, Armies, Navies, etc. Though it be so taken,
yet I do not see any Reason for it: for their opinion to me seems better
grounded (I mean as to order) who apply all the seven last Plagues either to
the I would have this thing well considered why we should understand in
preaching of the gospel Vials and plagues to be poured out.
preaching of the Gospel only, or only to temporal Judgments executed by
Civil Powers: But to understand one Vial poured out in a Spiritual way,
another in a Civil way, here I desire proof, as being unsatisfied.

first Vial, whether by Grostead, Armachan, Wickliff, Luther, etc. poured out,
should no further extend, then to the discovering of some particulars of the
grosser sort of Idolatry, as Purgatory, Mass, Penance, Corporal Presence,
Praying to Saints, Pilgrimages, Indulgences, etc. with a Reformation of some
people from the practice of such Corruptions; Many gross Lies and Errors of the
Beast, neither discovered nor reproved at the same time by the persons before
named: This I question, because when any Vial is poured out, wheresoever it
falls, it shall That any of the vials should be like a net, which holds some of
the greater fish, and lets the lesser go through the holes, I am not of that
opinion, Isa. 13.9, 16 Ps. 137.9 neither do I think that any reformation which
has been formerly in Church or State is to be brought under any of the Vials.
break the Kingdom of Antichrist fully and wholly; I say, not some part of it,
but extirpate all his Idolatries and Blasphemies root and branch.

The like may be said concerning applying other Vialls, whether to the Wars of
Germany, or since here in England. The truth is, so much Idolatry and
Superstition is unshaken even to this day, where the Vials are said to fall (as
the subjects of them) as I have ground to think, that nothing yet has been
done suitable to the nature and effect of any Vial.

Rev. 15.8. And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and
from his power; and no man was able to enter into the Temple till the seven
plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled. First, If by smoke we understand
the wrath of God inflicted upon the Antichristians for their wicked Idolatry,
as some do; The question then is, How it can be said, that since the Vials
began to be poured out, their darkness and blindeness has been more and
greater then before.

But secondly, If by the Temple filled with smoke from the glory of God, etc.
the Spirit alludes to the history of the Tabernacle, which in the dedication
thereof, was wholly filled with a Cloud of the glory of the Lord, so as Moses
could not enter into it, Exo. 40.33, 34. And to the history of the Temple,
which likewise at the dedication, was filled with the Cloud of the glory of
God, so as the Priests could not stand to minister, so long as the glory of
Jehovah filled the house: I say, if the place be thus applied (as most do) and
that filling to be a testimony and sign of Gods glorious presence and
approbation: Then here is signified a pouring out of the Spirit upon the
Angels, before they go forth, as tarrying in the Temple (as the Disciples did
at Jerusalem) until they should be endued with power from on high, Luke 24.59.
Indeed this great promise of the Father, concerning the sending of the
Comforter to teach us all things, and to bring all things to our remembrance,
Joh. 14.26. is by Saints now prayed for, and waited for even day and night; but
as yet that Spirit is not It is my opinion that no Vial shall be poured out
until the saints have the spirit poured out upon them, which was promised to be
given in the last days: now if we have not that spirit yet, I may well conclude
Grostead; Armachan, Wickliff, Luther, etc. had it not in their days.
given forth from the glory of God, and from his power: Neither probably shall
we receive it, until the woman be out of the wilderness. Who is this that
comes out of the Wilderness, like pillars of smoke perfumed with myrrh and
frankincense, with all powders of the Merchant? Behold his bed, which is
Solomon's: threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel, etc.
Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the Crown
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of
the gladness of his heart, Song 3.6, 7, 11.

seventh Seal, the first Angel of the seven, which had the seven Trumpets,
sounded, Rev. 8.1, 7. The question is, Whether (observing order) the first
Vial of the seventh is to be poured out, till after the sounding of the first
Trumpet? If so, then we are not to begin the Vials until after the rising of
the Witnesses; as is manifest Rev. 11.12, 15. Such as think some Vials are
poured out, do likewise hold that the Brightman holds that the seventh trumpet
sounded in the year 1558.
seventh Trumpet has already sounded. But to grant that some Vials are past,
and the seventh Trumpet not yet sounded; here ought to be first good
consideration, if we will not be children in understanding. That the seventh
Trumpet has not yet sounded, I think it must be granted by all, who hold the
Witnesses not risen. But that any of the Vials are to be poured out, till after
the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, truly in my opinion, whosoever shall
humbly and soberly observe the Prophecy, shall find little ground to think
otherwise. In the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin
to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he has declared to his
servants the Prophets, Rev. 13.7. Now unless by finishing the mystery, here is
meant the pouring out the seven last Plagues, I know not what is to be
understood. It is said before, That there should be time no longer, ver. 6.
that is, upon the sounding of the last Trumpet, the seven Angels which had the
seven last Plagues, should (obeying the heavenly voice) go their ways and pour
out the Vials of the wrath of God upon the earth: and so no more time, viz. for
the Beast, and the false Prophet, or any other wicked ones to oppress the Lords
people, whether Jews or Gentiles.

seven last Plagues do not contemporize with the third Woe, Rev. 8.13. If so,
then no Vial is yet poured out: For the third Woe is not to be, until after the
rising of the Witnesses, Rev. 11.11, 14. Again it is said, Behold the third Woe
comes quickly; which is not meant (as I conceive) of shortness of time betwixt
this and the former Woe, but of a speedy and quick dispatch, as to the great
work of God at this time. As if he should say, When this Woe comes upon the
world (which I take to be no other then the pouring out of all the Vials) it
shall be (though sharp, yet short) not for space of time, any way in comparison
either to the first or second Woe.

And truly, as I have said before, howsoever some good men do give many hundred
years to the time of the Vials, yet for my part, I think otherwise; to wit,
that after there is a beginning, they shall be all poured out, and the work
finished in less then fifty years. Behold the third Woe comes quickly.

Reader, Thou may well perceive in framing these Questions, that I expect no
Answer from an Adversary, but (if any answer be made) from a friend or brother,
one that seeks with the like spirit after the understanding of the times, to
know what Israel ought to do. And should these Reasons upon examination, be
found not sufficient to prove the matter for which they are brought; yet I
shall have comfort in what I have done, considering what PUBLIC ADVANTAGE may
follow upon this occasion, as to have this Great Point the more diligently
searched into. I may well call it a GREAT POINT, for I know nothing more
necessary for Saints, who desire to follow, Christ fully, in the present work
of their Generation, then to have clear light and knowledge concerning the
Vials; that is, Whether any be past (as is the common received opinion) or none
of them yet poured out, according to that small portion which I have in the
knowledge of holy things.

That which I see not, teach thou me: If I have done iniquity, I will not
offend any more, Job 34.32. FINIS.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
AFter I had sent the former Reasons to the Press, there came this Answer to my
hands. It is true, I had a long time expected it, but hearing nothing from my
Friend about it, I thought good to publish that little by it self, as intending
(if I should see a providence in it) to set forth some thing larger upon the
Vials. Now to have the Reasons printed, and to keep the Answer by me in secret
(though I can truly say, I knew nothing of the Answer, till after the Reasons
were at the Press; yet) to conceal it, it might be judged not lovely, and of
good report: And therefore I have published the Answer (with a short Reply) as
it came to my hands: Thus.

I Shall bring out of my poor treasure (which I have received) in answer to
your precious lines, Reasons and Quaeres, which were very seasonable and
acceptable to me, and not at all offensive, troublesome or unprofitable to me;
although I cannot, as yet, concur with your Opinion therein.

Answer to the 1. Reason.
For 1. I see no ground for that opinion which makes the beginning of the
pouring out of the Vials to be at the same time with the Witnesses rising, and
the 144000 mustering upon Mount Sion: And although some godly men say so, that
the 144000 and Vials begin together, yet it is no more Argument to me, then
that the 1000 years, Rev. 20. are begun (and were begun with Constantine)
because some godly men say so. 2. Nor does the order of the matter (in my eye)
manage it. For the holy Ghost tells us, in Chap. 15.1. of another sign, viz.
seven Angels: so that it was another distinct from that in Chap. 14, etc.

Reply to the 1. Answ.
Rep. 1. The strength of the Reason lies not in what godly men do say, but in
the ground and proof they have for what they say: And here I find nothing in
the Answer why it should not be so.

2. Because two signs, therefore distinct as not to be applied to one time:
This will not follow; for in Rev. 12.1. the Primitive Church is represented
unto John by a wonder or sign in heaven; and in ver. 3. there appeared another
sign, behold, a great red Dragon, etc. the which later, is taken for the
Roman-heathen Emperors, persecuting the said Church at the same time. So
Pharaoh in his dreams had two signs, yet not another distinct, for both
signified one thing, Genesis 41.22, 32. But 2. it is called another sign, because
that in Chap. 14. respects persons more then things; the latter, things more
then persons: In the former we have the instruments by whom the Beasts dominion
shall be destroyed, in the latter the work it self; that is, how, and in what
manner the Judgment written shall be executed. But 3. why should these words
(viz. another sign) be understood distinct from that in Chap. 14. seeing in
that Chapter there is no mention made of any sign: More probably therefore
they should be carried back to Rev. 12.1. as another, or distinct from that
sign; there being no other that I know.

Answ. And as some say, I do think he brings there exegetically, with what
Chap. 11, and 12, and 13, and 14. mention but darkly and closely, of the
plagues which shall come upon the Beasts dominion gradually by the two
Witnesses: and so the order and place of Chap. 15 and 16 is at Rev. 11.6. where
the two Witnesses smite the earth with plagues, according to Chap. 16. 1, 2.
Pour out your Vials on the earth: and so Rev. 11.6. they turn waters into
blood; according to Chap. 16.3, 4. the rivers and fountains of waters become
blood; and this was before the Resurrection or Slaughter. So that both our
Grounds and Order seem good: for what can these plagues wherewith the two
Witnesses smite the Antichristian earth and waters, be, but Vials, and the last
plagues which are to fall upon the Beasts dominion?

Repl. First, I think the Prophecies of this Book are the more dark to us,
through our mis-placing of things, and carrying them disorderly forward and
backward, whereas the holy Ghost keeps a better Method. For thus in brief I
take it: The Witnesses being treated of, Chap. 11. and the wilderness-state of
the woman, Chap. 12. he proceeds to the Tyranny and Idolatry of the Beast,
Chap. 13. and so ends the whole History, or Acts, of the two Witnesses, Woman,
and Beast, viz. as to the 42 months or 1260 days. What follows from the
beginning of Chap. 14. they are things afterward to come to pass: that is, The
Witnesses being risen, and the Woman out of the wilderness, in the 144000
standing with the Lamb on mount Sion, Chap. 14. the Lord now will send forth
the Rod of his strength out of Sion, Chap. 15 and 16. But because the carrying
on of this great work cannot be without understanding the Prophecies of the
last time; hence, Chap. 17. one of the seven Angels which had the Vials, shows
unto John (representing the Church near the time of the end) the judgment of
the great Whore: signifying, that these mighty ones whom the Lord has called
for his anger, shall have it not only in their hearts to fulfill his will; but
what they do, shall be knowingly in order thereunto: see Rev. 21.9, 10. and
22.8. Then follows, Chap. 18. the total and final desolation of the Beasts
dominion, fuller and clearer than before: for which, Chap. 19. there is
Hallelujah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, given unto the Lord
our God. Thus it is a continued History, without breach of order: only
something concerning the last Vial, Chap. 14.19, 20. and the Armageddon-battel,
Chap. 16. is the same with Chap. 19.11, 12, 13, etc.

2. As I see no order in taking the sackcloth-Witnesses, Rev. 11. to be any of
the seven Angels, Chap. 15. so likewise, what you say for it, to me seems no
Ground at all; as, smiting the earth, turning waters into blood, etc. For the
Witnesses before their rising poured out no plagues upon the Earth, Sea,
Fountains, etc. what they did, was no other then did the Prophets of old, who
pronounced, indeed, several judgments against the Nations: The burden of the
Lord upon Babylon, Egypt, Damascus, Nineveh, etc. and in this sense were set
over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to
destroy, and to throw down, etc. Jer. 1.10. so, to take the wine-cup of fury
from the hand of the Lord, and to cause all Nations to drink it, Jer. 25. but
in this they were no Vial-Angels, as to the execution of any temporal and real
plagues. So the sack-cloth-Witnesses, in smiting the earth, what did they? they
prophesied against many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings: Rev.
10.9, 10, 11. In this way I confess they poured out Vials, smote the earth,
turned waters into blood, etc. but not otherwise.

I might add, how Jerusalem (her Walls, Temple, Sacrifices, People, etc.) was
smitten, and turned into blood as by Nebuchad-nezzar, so by the Prophets too.
Now we all know, this was not done neither at one time, nor alike: what the
later did, was by mouth, prophetically; what the other did, was by hand, as
making good the word of the Lord in the mouth of his Prophets. So Joash King of
Israel, at the Prophet's bidding, took arrows and smote on the ground, 2 Kings
13.17, 18. here was a smiting of the Syrians, and victory over them: yet so, as
differing far, from the Plagues and Vials afterward poured out. For
Application, thus: The Sackcloth-Witnesses smite the earth, and have power over
waters to turn them into blood: but observe the place; this is done in the days
of their prophecy, Rev. 11.6. evidently showing, that what they did was by
prophecy, expressed a little before, Chap. 10.11. that is, they foretold the
fall of Babylon, Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Tithes, Mass, and the rest
of her, Fornications: but here was no execution of the last plagues; that was
left for others to do afterward; viz. seven Angels come out of the Temple, etc.
Rev. 15.

But again, should I grant (which I do not) that the smiting of the earth, and
turning waters into blood, Rev. 11. is for the matter and manner alike with
Rev. 16.2, 3, 4. yet this would not prove the same to be all one, in reference
either of the Instruments or Time. They were Plagues and Vials which were
poured out upon the old world, Sodom, Egypt, etc. yet we all know, they are
things distinct and apart. But to come nearer, in Rev. 8.8. it is said, The
third part of the sea became blood: are the sackcloth-Witnesses here the
instruments? Howsoever I do not think there lies much weight merely in words
and phrases, yet it is much better (in my understanding) to refer the Acts of
the sackcloth-Witnesses, viz. turning (...) into blood, etc. as the effects of
the Trumpets, rather then of the Vials.

I have been the larger in this Point, because the main Ground which the
Answerer and others have, in holding the Sackcloth-Witnesses and Vial-Angel all
one; it is, for that in Rev. 11.6. mention is made of turning waters into
blood, and smiting the earth; and something like it (for it is but something,
and very little, as I shall show afterward) expressed, Chap. 16.2, 3, 4. Now
truly, in my apprehension, the Foundation is too weak to lay so much weight
upon it.

Lastly, that the earth is smitten, and waters turned into blood, by Waldo,
Grosted, Armachan, Wickliff, Huss, Luther, etc. preaching the Word of Truth,
and so pouring out a Vial; and other Vials are poured out by Civil Powers, in
their Armies, Navies, etc. this is more, I think, then is in the text. For if
the Vials are filled with the Gospel of the Kingdom, then I say there is no War
in them; if War, then no Gospel: to take them both ways, that cannot be.

Answ. 3. Besides, if so be (as you say) that Chap. 15. and 16. begin with the
full harvest and vintage mentioned Chap. 14. verse. 15, etc. then methinks you
do not make the Vials and the 144000 in verse. 1, 2. to contemporize (which is
your judgment) because the 144000 in the former part of the Chapter, are up
before the full harvest or vintage of the whole earth, mentioned in this later
part of the Chapter: and the first, second, and third Angels have work to do,
between the rise of the 144000 and the harvest of the earth ripe. But the Vials
are begun before the harvest of the whole earth: so that this Exposition cannot
be the order of the holy Ghost, in my judgment.

Repl. I confess, the Truth brings forth no Absurdity or Contradiction; neither
do I see how any such thing can be fairly concluded from the Reason.

For 1. I find not in the Reason, where it is said that the 144000 do
contemporize with the Harvest and Vintage. But 2. Let it be so; yet here will
follow no Contradiction: for though, in a sense, a man may be said to be before
his work, as making himself fit and ready for it; yet may he and his work be
together. That the 144000 may be risen before the harvest of the earth is ripe;
I say, suppose this, (though I hold it not) yet may the 144000 contemporize
with the harvest, as being the Reapers thereof.

2. That three Angels have work to do between the rise of the 144000 and the
harvest; to this I say, 1. The Angels are of the number of the 144000; for that
is a Type of the Lords whole host mustered against Babylon. 2. For the work
there, of the three Angels, it belongs to the Harvest (as part of it) now ready
to be reaped. Compare Rev. 18.4. Deuteronomy. 20.10, 11, 12.

3. The Scripture will warrant us to say, that the Harvest of the earth was
ripe at the rising of the Witnesses. When the four hundred years were expired,
which the Lord speaks of unto Abraham, Genesis 15.13. the iniquity of the Amorites
was then full: so the forty and two months being out, the Beasts dominion is
ripe. As a field of Corn is not cut down as soon as it is ripe, neither is it
cut down all together, but by degrees: so Babylon, though ripe at the rising of
the Witnesses, (the forty and two months of her reign being ended)
nevertheless, as the Beasts dominion shall not be destroyed all at one time, so
there will be some preparation to the work, (as Rev. 14.6, 7, 8, 9. and 18.1,
2, 3, 4.) as well as the execution of it. True it is, if we consider the times
of Waldo, Wickliff, Grostead, Armachan, etc. the harvest then was not ripe, and
therefore they could not be any of the seven Angels, Rev. 15. for the whole
dominion of the Beast must be ripe, before any of the seven last plagues will
be poured out.

Answ. 4. Moreover, if this your interpretation were the genuine sense, I
suppose every Vial would be an universal Vial, as on the whole earth: but it is
very apparent, that every Vial is not an universal Vial, nor any, until the
Armageddon-day. And therefore some think, (upon good grounds) this in Rev.
14.14. of the harvest of the whole earth, and that of the Armageddon, Rev. 19.
contemporize.

Repl. 1. If any such thing may be inferred from the Reason, it is otherwise
then I hold; for I hold the contrary. Indeed, this I have said, and am still of
the opinion: 1. Though no Vial be universal, yet wheresoever any falls,
(whether first, second, third, etc.) the effects thereof shall be such, on the
subject where it is poured, that whatsoever Idolatry and Tyranny is thereby
suppressed and put down, the same shall be there no more.

2. Though I think no Vial universal, yet this I think, that by earth, Rev.
16.2. is not meant the grosser parts of Popery, viz. Masses, Pilgrimages,
Indulgences, Transubstantiation, praying to Saints, etc. the word earth is
often used in this Book, and elsewhere; but never, to my knowledge, is it taken
in such a sense, viz. for half, or part of the whole. And therefore, as I said,
though no Vial be universal, (as extending everywhere and in all places) yet in
some sort universal, that is, wheresoever any Vial falls, not only there shall
the grosser and greater parts of Idolatry be destroyed, but the finer and
lesser, (as some call it) that is, all the fornications of the Whore, root and
branch. As for the present, I see nothing yet, that looks like a Vial. We may
take up our complaint in the Prophet's words: Like as a woman with child, that
draws near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and cries out in her pangs:
so have we been in thy sight, O Lord: we have been with child, we have been in
pain; we have as it were brought forth wind: we have not wrought any
deliverance in the earth, neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen.
Isai. 26.17, 18.

3. That some think the harvest of the whole earth, Rev. 14.14. and that of
Armageddon, Rev. 19. contemporize; it is true: but that it is (as you say) upon
good ground, this I question: For the holy Ghost there, makes a plain
distinction between the harvest and the vintage; and the former to be meant of
the Beasts dominion, which shall perish under the five first Vials; the later,
which begins at verse. 17. belongs to the Armageddon-battel, Rev. 19. and falls
under the seventh Vial, and part of the sixth.

Answ. 5. And lastly, I think there is a mistake in what you say in the margin,
that the 144000 are the Angels of the Vials, seeing the holy Ghost speaks of
them besides, as the remnant of the woman's seed, Rev. 12. ult. and the called,
faithful, and chosen, Rev. 17.15. (who I know shall go along with the
execution, and serve in it) but he speaks in the singular number of Angel to
every Vial, and never above two, as in the third Vial. So that I neither
incline to the two Witnesses, as I said before, with whom the remnant go along,
and to whom the power of the plagues is given as often as they will, Rev. 11.6.

Repl. First, (as I said even now) I take the 144000 to be an Universal Type,
representing the persons of all the Saints, who after the rising of the
Witnesses shall follow the Lamb in executing the vengeance of the Lord, and the
vengeance of his Temple upon Babylon, the people whom he shall create for his
praise, Psalm. 102.18. that is, the Angels, Chap. 14, and 15, and 16. So the
called, chosen and faithful, Chap. 17. 14. and the Angel, Chap. 18. 1, 2, etc.
it is the same number that were sealed, Chap. 6.4. and why not the like
significant Type?

2. If I do not mistake you, the remnant of the woman's seed, and the one
hundred forty and four thousand, you make to be all one: But to this I agree
not: for, 1. The War in Rev. 12. ult. is the Dragon's; this, the Lamb's. 2.
There, he first fights; but here, others begin with him. 3. That War seems to
be before the rising of the Witnesses: The Dragon not prevailing against the
woman in the wilderness, falls upon her seed, nearer home; a remnant, which did
not at all fly into the wilderness; the woman being weak, (and therefore
called the weaker vessel, 1 Pet. 3.7.) and unable to make resistance against
the Dragons wrath in the Beast, seeks by flight to save her self: But the
remnant of her seed, that is, a generation after, through providence have
opportunity and advantage to withstand him, without escaping in such a way. And
this war of the Dragon with the remnant of the woman's seed, Rev. 12. ult. may
probably have some reference to the Swethen wars in Germany; so unto ours, and
to the Civil wars in France, the Netherlands, etc.

But 3. I do not well know what you mean, by saying The holy Ghost speaks in
the singular number, of Angel, to every Vial, etc. Do you mean, that the 144000
cannot be the Angels, Chap. 16. because the number is too great? If you
understand (as I think you do) by the first Angel, all the Witnesses from Waldo
to Luther, it will exceed by far the number here. Besides, though I hold the
seven Angels to be a part of that company; yet I do not say the seven Angels
are the whole number, much less that every Angel takes in the one hundred
forty and four thousand.

Lastly, whereas you say, I rather incline to the two Witnesses, etc. for my
part, I think, if their persons, work, and time, be duly weighed by you, your
inclination will be some other way.

Answ. 1. The preaching of the Gospel is (as you say) very sweet; and yet, for
all that, very bitter, and full of plague, in the effects thereof, to the
enemies of Christ: for so was Christ's own preaching a great plague to the
Pharisees, Rulers, and Jews. Now we say, The effects thereof were plagues to
the Popish earthlings, in Grosted's, Wickliff's, Waldo's, Huss and Luther's
time, and made them rage, fret, storm, burn, and break out into filthy ulcers,
diseases and distempers; and so there fell upon them a real and proper plague
under this Vial: and God's wrath upon them, was so eminently seen, that
Bellarmine himself says, That ever since Luther, and those Men preached the
Pope to be Antichrist, their Church decreased, and many fell from it.

Repl. 1. It gives cause of suspicion, That a Text is wrested, when it is
alone, and has not another to help it: as I said before, by Earth, Rev. 16.2.
to understand the grosser part of Popery; I question, whether such an
Exposition can be confirmed by the mouth of two or three Witnesses. So here, if
this Text by Consequences and Effects prove the Cause, it stands alone, (by it
self) for ought I know. The Text says, And I saw another sign in heaven, great
and mavelous, seven Angels having the seven last plagues: for in them is
filled up the wrath of God, Rev. 15.1. Not one word here of Effects, but what
is in the Vials, to be wrath; full of the wrath of God. No Gospel so much as
named.

2. Howsoever I grant, (as being most true) it is possible for men in the
hearing of the Word, to be thereby more wicked and vile, than they were before;
yet the Word is no Vial of wrath, neither are the Publishers, Angels of Vials
of wrath: the Cause is not in the Word, nor in the Angels; but by accident: as
when purblinde people come forth into the Sun, their sight is hereby darker,
and more obscure, not that the Sun is the cause, but the cause and fault is in
themselves.

That the Pharisees, Rulers and Jews; so the Popish Earthlings in hearing the
Word, by accident, were blinded; it is true: but to conclude therefore, (as it
must be so, or it is nothing to the matter) That either Christ, Grosted,
Wickliff, Waldo, Luther, etc. were Angels of wrath, and it was the wrath of God
which they poured out of their Vials; Here I hope, men will be rather sober
than rash. True it is, Mr. Tilling. says, The matter of each Vial is pure
wrath; yea, full wrath, as Chap. 15. 1, 7. Chap. 16.1. Then I say, No Vial is
poured out in preaching the Doctrines of Christ: for the ^^tter of the Gospel
is not pure and full wrath.

3. That the Popish Earthlings through the preaching of Grosted, Wickliff,
Waldo, Luther, etc. did rage, fret, storm; broke out into filthy ulcers, etc.
it being nothing to the matter, I leave it. Howbeit, I could say much against
it, as it is applied: but let the effects of their preaching be as you say, yet
this proves no Vial; For 1. there was preaching and writing against the Popish
Earthlings, long before any of them, even from the first rise of the Beast,
with the like effects. Consequently then, the Vials must take their beginning
from the first rising of the Beast. 2. Such effects of preaching belongs not to
the Vials. If we bring Waldo, Grosted, Wickliff, Luther, etc. to the Trumpets,
here we shall find some sutableness and accord, as to the Time, Persons, Work
and Effects.

4. It was no wrath of a Vial, that Bellarmine either saw or spoke of: for when
the time comes, that these Vials shall be poured out, the Priests (whether in
Rome or England) will have little leisure or heart to write Books against the
Interest and Cause of Christ, (or ought else in that kind) but study rather
how to escape the consuming fire every way about them, Rev. 18.15, 16. Isa.
13.7, 8. Jer. 50.46.

Answ. 2. Secondly, we assent to you also, that those good men before
mentioned, did eat up the Book, and prophecy, as Rev. 10.8, 9, 10, 11. before
or against many Peoples, Kings and Nations. Now the eating of the Book and
prophesying, was the preparing of it; but when it was opened, then the Vials
come out, and so executed God's wrath upon that Generation; so that both these
will stand together, viz. the prophesying, and the plaguing them, as the
effects of their prophesying: for all the Angels of the Vials must eat the Book.

Rep. What is meant by their prophesying, I have showed before: Now there is
something here, which I do not well understand.

1. How eating the Book and prophesying, should be before the Book is open. I
think rather, the Book must be opened first, and prophesying follows after,
Act. 8.30, 31. Ephesians. 4.10, 11.

Neither 2. do I know the distinction between prophesying as preparing, then
opening the Book for the Vials to come out. As for Waldo, Wickliff, Luther,
etc. they had no Vials of wrath, nor did they prepare any such thing for the
Nations: they neither intended nor desired men's destruction, but rather their
peace, health, life and salvation in Jesus Christ. It is true, the Angels of
the 7 last plagues, will come out to execute God's wrath: this I say will be
their work, for to make way for the everlasting Gospel to be preached, unto
every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People; a work altogether different
from the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth.

3. If all the Angels of the Vials must eat the Book, it will hardly be proved,
whether some who are held to be the Angels, did ever eat that Book: for if the
Tree be known by the Fruit, they were so far from eating it, as that they were
visible and professed persecutors of such as in truth did eat the same.

Lastly, Howsoever I believe that all the Angels of the Vials shall be
wonderfully enlightened with the knowledge of the times, as to see their works
and movings plainly before them, far beyond what either Waldo, Wickliff,
Armachan, Huss, Luther, etc. had; yet that eating of the Book, Rev. 10.9, 10.
is another thing, then properly to be applied to any Angels of the Vials.

Answ. It is not preaching alone, or the ministerial witness only, that
plagued them; but the magistratical also; who joined with the ministerial in
every Generation: so that the 2 witnesses were together in their effects or
plagues that fell upon them. And therefore your second Reason in my Opinion is
somewhat uncertain, and upon a mistaken Ground or Principal.

Repl. 1. There is nothing in this Answer, (should it be all granted) to the
matter. For though Ministers and Magistrates join together against the power of
the Beast, it does not follow, therefore together they pour out any one of the
last plagues.

2. Should I follow you, and begin at Waldo, and so downward to our times, I
could show you (if need were) not in every Generation did the magistratical and
ministerial witnesses join together. For in several Ages the faithful Servants
of Christ had no aid or succor from the civil Powers at all, much less helped
them to plague the Whore.

3. For some of those Vials (which you apply) as poured out by the ministerial
and magistratical witnesses joined together, I think they were rather the
actions of the Antichristians themselves, one plaguing another, for worldly and
base respects.

Lastly, It is a great mistake (I think) to make worldly employment (as wars
and fighting the Enemy) a work of the sackcloth-witnesses; for their work is
prophesying, neither do they smite the Beast's Dominion any other way than
spiritually, though it do concern civil things. There are many ways to hold
forth a witness and Testimony for Jesus Christ: but for that place in Rev.
11.3, 6. it takes in no magistratical witness, if the thing be merely civil:
And this is plain in the very Text, They shall prophecy 1260 days. Again, In
the days of their prophecy, etc.

And here it will not be amiss to declare briefly my Opinion concerning the 2
witnesses, Rev. 11. The witnesses I take to be a Generation-Confession or
Testimony in the behalf of Christ, against the Idolatries and Blasphemies of
the Beast, and all his Helpers, during the time of the 42 months. I call it
first a Confession, to distinguish a Testimony from a Truth. A man may profess
and practice many excellent and eminent Truths, and yet not have the Testimony
of Jesus, Rev. 12.17. for this consists in declaring against the evils of
persons and things. Secondly, I call it a Generation-witness, because it must
be proper to a man's own time, viz. as to own what is of God, then opposed and
persecuted; and what is of the Dragon and Beast, countenanced, commanded,
authorized, then to testify against it: and if we do not this, we are no
Generation-Confessors, or Witnesses. I say, whatsoever Truth, otherwise, we
acknowledge, it is not to the matter, Rev. 11. Joh. 1.7, 8. Act. 1.8. and 4.19,
20. and 13.31. and 8.25. and 18.5. and 23.11. 1 Timothy 6.3. Rev. 1.2, 9. and 6.9.
As a Soldier, if he see the Enemy dead at his foot, will not stand cutting and
hacking of him; but leaving him, follows and fights the standing Enemy: so to
declare against Idolatry and Tyranny which is already put down (and nothing
else;) this is not Souldier-like, and as becomes a brave Champion of Christ: it
must be (to be a Witness indeed) the living and standing abominations of our
present time, which we must boldly and openly testify against.

Again, they are said to be two Witnesses, not in reference to Magistracy and
Ministry; but two, as to the things either witnessed for or against; that is,
as being comprised in two heads, (neither more nor less:) 1. Ecclesiastical, or
Spiritual: 2. Civil, or Secular.

Now whereas near or toward the end of the 1260 days, this twofold Witness
shall rise and speak out with more clearness, and in the Demonstration of the
Spirit, and of power, then before; suddenly and strangely it shall be slain:
which slaying I take to be no other way, then in the Testimony; that is,
Christ's witness, so high and eminent before, is knocked in the head. In some,
it is slain through Preferment, Honor, great Places: In others, through a Base
spirit, and Fear of sufferings: In others, through Bonds and Imprisonment: In
some, through Hypocrisy, Apostacy, and a fearful Departing from God. So that
the Witnesses relate not to the persons of men, (for the person may live,
though his Witness be slain) neither to any Office or Calling, (whether
Magistracy or Ministry) but meant of a Generation-testimony for Truth and
Righteousness, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men.

Answer to the third Reason. To your third Reason, the integral of which lies
in the marginal Question, What reason there is, to begin there, as you say, and
not after nor before; I answer, 1. Because, till then, the Beast was not
grownfull enough for the Vials: but then he was at a full growth, and all the
world wondered after him.
Repl. 1. Here again you are much mistaken, to think that the Beast was grown
full enough for the Vials, in the times of Waldo, Wickliff, Huss, Luther, etc.
For he comes not to his growth for the Vials, till the time of his reign be
expired, that is, the forty and two months. The sins of the Amorites, no
doubt, were many and great, in Abraham's time; yet not grown full enough for
the Vials, till the four hundred years were expired, Genesis 15.13, 16. To make
the iniquity either of a Person or State full, the time must run out which God
has appointed.

Hence then I might frame this Argument: Till the Beast be grown full for the
Vials, they are not to be poured out upon him. (So you.)

But till the forty and two months are expired, the Beast is not grown full
enough for the Vials. (So the Scripture.)

Therefore none of the Vials are to be poured out upon the Beast till the
forty and two months are expired.



But 2. had you said that the Beast in Waldo's or Luther's time, was grown full
enough, as to be discovered and known to be the Beast; therein I would agree
with you: but begin else where you will, (for it is all one) whether at Waldo
or Luther, or four hundred years before either of them, the Beast might be said
to be grown full enough for the Vials; the time only excepted, which is the
main thing.

Answ. 2. Because then (and not before or after) the gross earth of Papacy, in
all manner of filthy trash, etc. appeared in height eminently, and most
universally, as the adequate subject of the first Vial.

Repl. 1. I have once or twice touched this wrest-interpretation; and the
rather, lest we should fall into the fault of our forefathers, who, because
Errors for a while had passed current from hand to hand, at length believed
them, without any trial. That by earth, Rev. 16.2. should be meant the grosser
parts of Popery, truly in my opinion, it is as weakly gathered from that place,
as a thing can be. For among the several acceptations of the word (earth) in
Scripture, not one will be found to second such a sense. It is no good way, to
have the Scriptures follow things; but rather, let things follow the
Scriptures. Because we see, by the preaching of Waldo, Wickliff, Armachan,
Huss, Luther, etc. nothing fell, but a little of the grosser part of Popery:
therefore we must expound earth to be that grosser part of Popery: this is not
to give pre-eminence to the Scriptures: but, on the other hand, when the Word
has its latitude, fullness, perfection; to apply then what is suitable and
agreeable to that, this is to give honor to whom honor is due.

But 2. and to come nearer to the Answer: Then (say you) and not before or
after. Truly I think, this will not appear so, in either of your ways; though
by earth we should understand the grosser parts of Popery.

For 1. The grosser part of Popery appeared in height, eminently and
universally, some hundred years even before Waldo, (yea, and witnessed against)
as in his time, though not so publicly, boldly, and clearly opposed, as then.
2. Neither did the good men you mention, put down the grosser part of Popery;
it remained in most places in height, eminently and universally, as before. It
is, in my opinion, a strange sense, that by earth should be meant the grosser
part of Popery, as the adequate subject of the first Vial; and Waldo, Wickliff,
Armachan, Grosted, Huss, Luther, etc. the Angel of it; and yet the earth (the
adequate subject of the Vial) not touched in most places, as to the destroying
and rooting of it up. 3. To say, Nor after, I may say, What means then the
bleating of the sheep? etc. Is there not, in Rome, Italy, France, Spain,
Germany, Poland, etc. as much of this gross earth, as was in Waldo's or
Luther's time?

Answ. 3. Because then (and not before or after) were the effects of the first
Vial, viz. plague-sores, burning, broyling, raging ulcers, breaking out, and
begun to appear.

Repl. To let pass what is supposed, but not proved, viz. that the
Sackcloth-witnesses are Vial-angels; the plague-sores, burning, broyling, etc.
Rev. 16.2. the effects of Waldo's and Luther's preaching: I say, The Beast
raged, and had such sores and boils upon him, (as you speak of) many hundred
years before their times; occasioned by other Witnesses, who spoke boldly
against the Tyranny and Idolatry of the Sea of Rome. I could name many who
suffered for their faithful Testimony this way. 2. The Brownists, Anabaptists,
Non-conformists, etc. (as they are called) by their Doctrines and Practices,
smote the earth, (as you understand) more eminently and effectually then either
Waldo or Luther did; and yet these came forth after them. And, to speak the
truth, to begin the Vials at these men, it has more show of something like a
Vial, then the other. For, to bring in Grosted and Armachan, and such men, as
Angels clothed in pure and fine linen, and having their breasts girded with
golden girdles; the odds and disparity (in my opinion) is too great as once to
be named.

Answ. 4. Because till then, the seventh part of the sixth Trumpet, or the
plagues by the hands of the Turks, (Rev. 9.14, 15, 16, etc. the four Angels
loosed from the river Euphrates) were executing upon the Papists; so that these
last plagues began not before: and that they began not after, I suppose the
effects of Grostead, Armachan, Waldo, (whom we exclude not) Wickcliff 's, Husse
's, Luther 's preaching, easily prove. That is a mistake, to think we leave out
Waldo, or the Witnesses of his time, seeing we apply it not to persons, but to
Witnesses. And seeing the earth (the subject of this first Vial) was so
universal, viz. in all carnal Christendom, etc.

Repl. 1. In saying, that Waldo, Wickliff, Armachan, etc. began the Vials under
part of the sixth Trumpet, you quite lose the matter so much pleaded for;
because the Vials begin not till the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, as the
Trumpets begin not till the opening of the seventh Seal, Rev. 8.1, 2, 3. So
then, according to the time which you apply them to, they may be Angels (and
indeed, I think so they were) of the Trumpets, but not Angels of the seven last
plagues.

2. I do not see what Ground there is, in the least, to take the beginning of
the Vials from the Turks executing plagues upon the Papists: for the Papists
were plagued by them, both before Waldo's time, and long after. Besides, for
the four Angels loosed from the river Euphrates, though I consent with you,
that the Saracens and Turks are there meant; yet to what time the place should
be applied, it is doubtful. Brightman refers it to the rise of the Ottoman
Empire, about the year 1300: and gathers, that the power of the Turks shall
continue to the year 1696, and then finally be broken. Mede thinks the four
Angels signify so many Sultans or Kingdoms into which the Turks were divided,
when first having passed over Euphrates, they had spread themselves into the
neighboring Coasts of Asia and Syria, about the year 1080. Others ascend
higher, even to Mahumet himself, the first Author of the Eastern Impieties and
Blasphemies, about anno 620. So Bullinger, Illiricus, Pareus, Mayer, etc. And,
in my opinion, they have the better ground who take it thus: which was many
hundred years before Waldo's time.

Lastly, whereas you say, It is a mistake, to think we leave out Waldo, or the
Witnesses of his time, seeing we apply it not to Persons, but to Witnesses:
First, then, here you differ from Mr Tilling. who says expressly, The times of
Wickliff, Huss, the Waldenses and Albigenses, could not be any part of this
Vial; and therefore strictly begins at Luther. 2. Seeing the Witnesses were to
prophecy in Sackcloth 1260 days, (the whole time of the Beast's reign) I see
no reason (according to your opinion) why any of the Witnesses should be left
out; but to begin the Vials at the beginning of the 1260 days, with the first
Witnesses.

Answer to the fourth Reason. There is (I conceive) considerable reason to
allow more time to the first Vial then to the last, for their pouring out;
seeing first, every true motus est velocior in fine.
Repl. 1. This Answer is two ways defective. For, 1. The Question is not, Why
more time is allowed to the first; but, Why more to the first, then to the six
other Vials. 2. Neither is the Question simply about the time, but why four or
five hundred years are allowed to the first Vial, and not one hundred to all
the rest.

2. For the Rule which you bring from a Natural Cause, as it proves nothing in
things Spiritual and Divine, so it is not rationally true, as you apply it. For
suppose seven men shoot one after another, (or together) it will not follow,
that his Arrow which went out last, flies faster and swifter then the first. It
is true, as every Arrow comes nearer the Center, so the motion may be said to
be the speedier. These seven Angels are distinct; they have not one motion: and
therefore if any thing may be gathered from that Rule, it is applicable only
to each Vial, as a part and independent.

Answ. 2. Seeing the subject of the first Vial, viz. the earth, was so
universal, and took up so much ground at that day.

Repl. Not to repeat things over and over, how ungroundedly (in my opinion) the
first Vial is interpreted; I say, 1. By earth, Rev. 16.2. to understand it
universal, is against the Text. True it is, verse. 1. earth there is universal;
but as the subjects of the other Vials, viz. sea, fountains, sun, the Throne of
the Beast, Euphrates, are not universal, but limited: so earth, Rev. 16.2. is
not universal, but restrained to a particular subject. 2. Be it granted,
(though it is not so) that the earth is universal; yet I see no reason
therefore to conclude, that it must take up so much time, viz. three or four
hundred years more then the other Vials: especially considering, 1. That the
subject of the first Vial is only the grosser part of Popery, the lesser part,
and so the easier and sooner to be smitten. Then 2. The last Vials contain the
whole affairs of the Jews; a thing more universal, and for importance far
beyond the first, as it is applied.

Lastly, to take the earth for the grosser part of Popery, and universal;
seeing since the first Vial began to be poured forth, there are past four or
five hundred years, and this earth notwithstanding in most places yet
untouched; there may be allowed as much time more, ( viz. four or five hundred
years) before by the effects it may prove to be a Vial.

Answ. 3. Seeing the effects of the first Vial arose in a different manner from
the following, namely, ex se, as the Greek intimates, the ulcers arising out of
their own bodies, were the subjects of this first Vial; whereas the effects of
the following Vials, were from others; theirs from within, them from without.
Now the subsequent Vials must needs be with quicker dispatch then this Vial,
because a sore or ulcer is rising by degrees to a head or perfection, and so
takes up a long time; whereas the cutting off with the sword, and by other
hands, etc. makes a quicker work and end of it.

Repl. Not knowing where the strength of this Answer lies, it is possible I may
not hit it. Howsoever,

1. Though the holy Ghost, speaking of the effects of the first Vial,
mentions a noysom and grievous sore, (or, as the Greek reads, evil and
wicked) alluding to the sixth plague of Egypt, Exodus 9.10. yet I think this is
not to be taken in the letter, but metaphorically; and so the application
impertinent and improper. Some indeed expound the sores to be the Neapolitan
disease that came upon the Beasts warriors, Anno 1494. But the Answerer (I
know) does not take it so.

2. Should I grant the Comparison, viz. between a sore rising by degrees, etc.
and cutting off with the sword; yet I do not see, that therefore the subsequent
Vials must needs be with quicker dispatch then the first. For, 1. My opinion
is, that the effects of every Vial, will be cutting off by the sword; and so
all alike, as to the matter and kind of plagues; though as to persons and
things, more may be cut off under one Vial, then under another. 2. Neither is
the comparison always true: for a Plague Sore may as soon dispatch a man, as the
sword; and without taking up longer time.

Answ. 5. Another Reason is, the want of the measure of the spirit of life in
the first and second Vials, which is given to them that execute the last. Now
the more Spirit, the more speed. So that it must needs be, that more time is
allowed for the pouring out of the first, then of the last, according as the
Spirit from on high, in a more greater measure.

Repl. 1. It was a great fault, which is charged on some of the Spies, that
they brought up an evil report of the Land which they had searched, unto the
children of Israel, Number. 13.32. I think there is more here, then is meet,
imputed to the first Angels, as if the work in their hands would go the slower
and harder on, in not having that measure of the Spirit which shall be given
afterward to others. I am sure, the Scripture countenanceth no such thing; but
they are all alike gifted, spirited, and qualified for the work.

2. To say that it must needs be, etc. the Consequence follows not: for a man
may have the Spirit from on high in more and a greater measure then another,
and yet not finish his work as soon as he. The twelve Apostles (and Paul too)
after Christ's ascension, had as much of the Spirit (if not more) then the
Baptist had; yet more time was allowed them, then to John. There needs no
Application.

Answ. 6. And for that God will cut short his work in righteousness, Romans 9.28.
which is not meant at the beginning, but at the later end God will do it: so
that in the last Vials a shorter work is to be expected, according to Gods
promise, then in the first; and then it is, that for the elects sake, the days
shall be shortened. So that in my judgment, there is much reason to allow more
time to the first then to the last Vials.

Repl. 1. Under favor, it is more I think then can be proved, 1. To say
positively, By God's cutting short his work, is not meant at the beginning. 2.
For the Elects sake, that this must be applied to the last Vials, should a man
with the Prophet go into the Sanctuary of God, and humbly enquire in his
Temple, I believe he would be taught otherwise. As these are the seven last
plagues, so this cutting short is meant from the beginning, till the whole
mystery of God be finished: and so for the elects sake, Rev. 11.14. and 10.6,
7. Matthew. 24.22.

2. Touching your judgment, viz. that there is much reason to allow more time
to the first, etc. besides what is said, I add, 1. You have missed the
Question, which is (as I said before) Why more to the first, then to all the
rest? and why so much? 2. Should a man take the like liberty, he might, for
your six Reasons, give out as many more, to prove that more time ought to he
allowed to the last Vials then to the first, and as much weight and reason in
them as I find there.

Answ. Nor do I find much weight in your allusion to what Willet from Pererius
asserts of the 27 or 30 days-time, when the ten plagues fell upon Egypt,
intending a day for a year; seeing the holy Ghost made no mention of it there,
of the Vials in Scripture: and seeing from the 1290 (which I suppose periods,
as Mr Till. says, with the 1260 days, when you judge the Vials begin) to the
year 1335, is 45 years: and seeing it is grounded (in my poor opinion) upon
mere presumption and supposition.

1. It is true, I cited Willet: now whether the holy Ghost does intend any
thing in it, as to the time of the Vials, as I do not affirm it, so, for your
saying it is grounded upon mere presumption, etc. that signifies as little.
Howsoever, this further: Add to the thirty days, the days from the last plague
of Egypt, to their drowning in the Red Sea, (which might be a Type of the last
Vial) I think the number will amount to yours here, viz. 45.

2. It is true also, that Mr. Till. periods the 1290 with 1260: Not to gainsay
what he has said in the thing; here some Cautions might be minded: 1. Then the
1290 must not be carried to the sixth Vial; for the 1260 periods, before that
Vial begins to be poured out. 2. Neither must the coming in of the ten Tribes,
be understood of this Period, (whose return in special I think is meant) Rev.
16.12. by the kings of the east, coming from the Land of Sinim, Isai. 49.12.
(which we call China) the furthest Empire in all the East. 3. Seeing blindness
is to remain on the Jews, until the fullness of the Gentiles come in, Romans
11.25. I conceive the Beast's dominion must be destroyed, and the everlasting
Gospel preached, before any thing very considerable will appear amongst the
Jewish nation. So then, taking the 1290 to end with 1260, it must be some low
stirring among some few of that People, not appearing so eminent and glorious
as the risen Witnesses in their work.

But lastly, the Answer is short of the Reason: for alluding to the plagues of
Egypt, I said, It is probable, when the Vials begin, they will be suddenly all
poured out, as were the ten Egyptian plagues. And this is probable: for the
Scripture seems plainly to express as much, Rev. 18.8, 10, 17.9.21. Isa. 47.9,
11. But to allow three or four hundred years to the first plague upon the
Beasts dominion, before the second begins; I think it is not probable, but as
far from Scripture as from the Allusion.

Answer to the fifth Reason.
The characters given to the seven Angels, Rev. 15.2, 3. of victory over the
Beast, his Image, Mark, etc. all are to be found in all together; but not all
together (as I conceive) in one Angel or Generation.

Repl. 1. The Text allows no such distinction, but expresses the contrary.

2. Grant such a Supposition; then it may be supposed, that some of the Angels
had overcome, others had not: one had the Beasts mark, another had not: some
prophesied clothed in sackcloth, others not, etc. I forbear to mention what
strange things might be hence inferred.

Answ. But 2. In every generation, according to the controversy up against the
Beast, his Worship, Image, Mark, etc. the Angels of the Vials have the victory
over him and his matters.

Repl. 1. It does not appear from Waldo to Luther, (nor yet at this day) that
any of the Witnesses got victory over the Beast, whether we consider their
Persons or their Testimony, as Rev. 15.2, 3. It is true, in the dark times of
Popery, some (through grace) were kept from committing fornication with the
Whore, (at least, from much of her grossest blasphemies) but for victory they
had not, as may easily be seen, by comparing their times with that text.

But 2. Taking the word (overcome) in a sense, or large acceptance, so indeed
a Christian holding forth his Testimony against the errors and corruptions of
men, though imprisoned, banished, murdered, etc. may be said to overcome; but
this must be understood as to his witness, faithfulness, constancy, etc. Not
that the Enemy thereby was overcom'd, and put to silence, and the errors and
corruptions no more practiced, as Rev. 15.2, 3. intends. Mr. Tillingh. on the
place, has these words: The meaning is, (says he) as I conceive, that Saints
immediately before the Vials begin to be poured out, shall so far have gotten
the victory over the Beast, as concerns either the safety of their own persons,
or the doing of their work: Antichrist shall not have power over them, to make
them subject themselves to him, allow of his Image, Mark, the Number of his
Name, or else to persecute them, or kill them with the sword, as in former
times he has done: nor shall he have such a power, as to hinder them in the
work they are about, of pouring out the Vials.

I think, from this, a man may fairly conclude, that the Vials begun not with
Waldo, nor Luther, nor yet are begun. For Saints have not gotten victory over
the Beast, so far as concerns their safety either of body or soul. They have
been, from their days, hitherto all along, persecuted and killed; and the work
they were going about, stopped continually. The million of Martyrs since Waldo,
viz. in France, Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Bohemia, England, etc.
is proof enough: And therefore, in my understanding, there is very little
reason to begin there, the victory of the Saints over the Beast, where the
Beast begun his victory and triumph by slaughter over the Saints.

It is worthy of memory, that in the time of the Sackcloth-Witnesses, when the
people of God were under cruel persecution, they made use of that Prophecy,
(as then proper to them) Rev. 13.7. And it was given unto him to make war with
the Saints, and to overcome them: this they applied as an argument of comfort
and constancy. This being so, how that should be the time, wherein Saints had
gotten victory over the Beast, as to the safety of their own persons, etc. and
in regard of so great deliverance and enlargement, sung the song of Moses, etc.
even then when the Beast made war with them, and OVERCAME THEM: I say, How
these two things can stand together, viz. the Beasts victory over the Saints,
Rev. 13.7. and the Saints victory over the Beast, Rev. 15.2, 3. as to be in
respect of time and persons all one; truly this, or my understanding, is much
out of the way.

Thus far I agree with that holy man, That before the Vials begin to be poured
out, the Lord will so fit and spirit his Angels for the work, as they shall go
prosperously forward: Neither shall the Beast, or any of his Helpers, after
they begin to be poured out, prevail against the interest of Jesus Christ or
his people, in any Nation under the Sun.

Answ. So 3. Mr. Till. Waldo, Grosted, Luther, were qualified in their several
Ages and Generations, having victory over the Beast, and his Mark, and the
number of his Name, (then reigning, and resisting the truth and faith of
Christ) as over Popes, Cardinals, Prelates, Mass-Priests, Masses, Indulgences,
the Whores Cup, Pilgrimages, Transubstantiation, Ceremonies, Superstitions, and
a world of Popish trash, which were rife, and which they witnessed against in
their days: so that, according to the height and degree of the Testimony and
Controversy, they had the victory over the Beast, etc: and held the harps of
God in their hands: yea, they were (sor their Generation) the called, faithful,
and chosen, the upright hearts, followers of the Lamb, redeemed from men,
first fruits to God and the Lamb, that left all for him, denied themselves,
took up the cross, and followed him wherever he went, in the witness of their
days against the Beast, and overcome him; and so (as I humbly suppose) did
sweetly answer the Characters of the holy Ghost: besides, had light in their
preaching, and so (with others) poured out the Vial upon the Beast, viz. the
earth, or gross element.

Repl. This being no more (though more words) then what was said before, I
shall be the briefer.

1. Whatsoever was done by Waldo, Grosted, Luther, etc. against Popes,
Cardinals, Prelates, Priests, was no other victory then in the sense I named
before.

2. Neither did they find fault with the Places, Offices, and Callings of such
men, (though unlawful and Antichristian) but for some abuses and miscarriages
therein. It is well known, that Armachan, Grosted, and others, were Prelates,
Priests, Mass-Priests; and never renounced their Calling.

So 3. For many of the particulars here set down, they bare no Testimony
against them, but allowed and practiced a multitude of Ceremonies,
Superstitions, and Popish trash.

4. To say they had the harps of God in their hands; here again I am at a loss.
Whilst the Jews were in Babylon, they hanged their harps upon the willows,
Psalm. 137.2. Indeed, when the Lord turned again the Captivity of Sion, then was
their mouth filled with laughter, and their tongue with singing, Psalm. 126.1,
2. I had thought that the harps of God come not into the hands of Saints, till
after the rising of the Witnesses: But by this, it seems, whether before or
after, the times are all one, as to Victory, Triumph, Singing, etc. only in
measure and degree some odds. Poor encouragement and comfort for such who
expect to have all things new!

5. I think, what is said of Waldo, Grosted, Luther, and others, as to be the
called, chosen, and faithful, followers of Lamb, redeemed from men,
first fruits to God and to the Lamb, etc. it is more then their due, if
referred to Rev. 17.14. and Chap. 14.3, 4, 5. It is said of Job, that he was a
perfect man, upright, one that feared God, and eschewed evil, Job 1.1. Now
howsoever the like may be said of others, and truly too; yet it would be absurd
to say, that in that Text they are so described. Whatsoever these men were in
their Generation, (I say, to give them their due to the full) none of the
Characters in Rev. 14 and 15. belong to them, viz. the matter there, it relates
not to them. Besides, it is a great darkning of the holy Prophecies, and
destroys all Order, to apply to the last times, things passed many hundred
years before.

Answ. And yet 4. I do not find a perfection or full answer to these
Characters in every point, as having the full victory and triumph over the
Beast till the Armageddon-battel be over, or the seventh Vial. So that for
these and some other Reasons, I think your fifth is of no force.

Repl. 1. Seeing neither Waldo, Grosted, Luther, etc. had the Characters, and
so consequently were none of the seven Angels; it is nothing to our matter,
whether there shall be perfection and full victory, or not, till the
Armageddon-battel.

But 2. To give some light here, (according to the light I have received) That
which you call perfection or full victory, as to the Characters, is to be
considered two ways. 1. Particular; and thus the effects of every Vial shall be
perfect and full, according to the subject; not one Vial to carry on and
perfect, what was left by the other unfinished. 2. Universal, that is, when the
last Vial is poured out, all is done, as Rev. 16.17.

It has been thought, (but whence taken, I know not) the first and second
Vials not being full and perfect; the third and fourth falling on the subjects
of the former, are to finish what the other left undone: and this is one great
cause of men's mistake about the beginning of the Vials; which is neither so,
nor so.

Answer to the sixth Reason.
This seems somewhat considerable, and genuous; yea, at first sight, to have
much force: yet I must confess, I am not satisfied with it. For, 1. I think,
the Tabernacle of the Testimony is opened gradually, (as the Witness or
Testimony rise) out of which the Angels of the Vials go, Rev. 15. So that in
every generation, such a Tabernacle has been opened, with the Testimony
against the Beast, in proportion more or less, whence the Vials have issued:
and therefore I must deny the Assumption of your Argument, and say, The
Tabernacle of the Testimony was in a degree opened in Luther's time, in the
Brownists time, and is at this day against the Beast, in a proportionable
purity and spirituality of Worship, amongst the remnant of the woman's seed; and
so Wickliff, Huss, Luther, Zuinglius, the Puritans (so called) Independents,
and others, and now the holy and upright ones, called The Fifth Monarchy-men,
were in the Tabernacle of the Testimony worshipping, whence the Angels of the
Vials come out.

Repl. 1. If I understand any thing of this Answer, it implies 2 things: 1. The
Testimony of the Tabernacle in heaven, was never shut whilst the sackcloth
Witnesses prophesied the 1260 days: for if in every generation, such a
Tabernacle has been opened, with the Testimony against the Beast, in
proportion more or less, etc. admit it were gradually; The Conclusion cannot be
denied. 2. That the pouring out of the Vials, has been ever since the
sackcloth Witnesses began to prophecy, and so began with the 1260 days.
Neither is it strange, that such things should pass; for taking the Vials to
begin before the rising of the Witnesses, it cannot be avoided.

2. Now the Reason (I conceive) of this mistake, is, not observing (though the
Scripture is clear in it) the distinction which the Holy Ghost makes between
the Temple and the Tabernacle of the Testimony. It is true, the Witnesses, and
the Woman in the Wilderness, had a Temple to worship God in, and an Altar,
(which is Christ) by which to have access to the Father: See Rev. 11.1. which
seems to be the same, Chap. 12.6, 14. viz. the place prepared of God, for their
feeding and nourishment. But for the Tabernacle of the Testimony; that is, the
innermost part of the Tabernacle, called, the holy of holiest, and the most
holy place, where the 2 Tables were put in the Ark, Deuteronomy. 10.5. 1 King. 8.5.
and that Ark placed in the innermost part of the Tabernacle or Temple, 1 King.
8.6. Heb. 9.3, 4. that remained shut; neither could men see into it, out of the
Court or Temple.

But 3. and more plain, the Answerer is mistaken, in taking the Tabernacle of
the Testimony, for the Temple: for these are not only two, and distinct in
sound; but as much in sense and signification. What is said in the Answer of
Lutherans, Brownists, Independents, Puritans, etc. it is thus far true, That in
every Generation a Temple has been opened, that is, some good people (more or
less) seeing the abominable Idolatries and Blasphemies of the Beast, have
separated from the same, according to their present Light: and being thus far
out of Babylon, have joined together in a more holy Communion. And further, (as
the Answerer says very well) this has been gradually: for if we consider this
Temple, that is, either Church, Ministry, Worship or Government, we shall
find it has been gradual indeed, both in eschewing the Errors of Antichrist,
and practicing the Truths of the Gospel.

But now for the Tabernacle of the Testimony, this is another thing within the
Temple, and seldom seen, and by the High Priest alone; which I understand to be
the opening of the Prophesies of the last time, as Daniel and John's Visions,
such as these, Dan. 12.4, 9, 11, 12. Rev. 11.2. and 12.6, 14. and 13.13. and
22.10. Heb. 2.3. It is not for you (says Christ) to know the times or the
seasons, etc. Act. 1.7. Now it is not meant, as if the Question there
propounded by the Apostles, (namely, when the Kingdom should be restored again
to Israel) was a secret never to be revealed; but it was not then seasonable,
nor necessary or proper for them (as to their Generation) to have the knowledge
of it. So the Tabernacle of the Testimony is shut, whilst the Witnesses
prophecy in sackcloth, because the things therein belong not to their Work or
Age, yet to be opened near or about the time of the end, as being then (and not
till then) necessary and seasonable.

Neither does Mr. Tilling. in his 3 Proposition, page 42. differ from this,
speaking, That God's call to the Angels of the Vials is to be principally
looked for, out of the Temple. I understand (says he) not so much of the
general call, as a more particular and special Call, peculiar to this time of
the Vials. The general Call to Generation-Work is dispensation; but now at this
time, (besides the Call of God's Dispensations) the instruments God shall raise
up to ruin the Whore, shall have a more particular Call to this Work, to the
end they may neither flag nor draw back, namely, the loud and uncessant cry of
the Temple.

Hence two things may be gathered: I. The Vials are not began; for such a
particular and special Call, has not been yet out of the Temple. It is true,
God has raised up some men, and brought them forth against Babylon; as in
France, Germany, England, etc. But this has been no other than a General Call:
for 1. They have not moved nor acted like Angels which had golden girdles upon
their breasts. Neither 2. has God's presence and appearance with them held
forth such a thing. Besides, by the event it has been well enough seen, both
in the Work and Instruments, what the Call was. So that we need now no other
witness or proof, viz. That neither by the Swedes or English any Vials were
poured out, then the things themselves. II. That this particular and special
Call out of the Temple, cannot be until the Tabernacle of the Testimony be
opened, and the Ark seen: for what else is God's Call to the Angels of the
Vials to pour out their Vials, but Light and Life? that is, knowing the 42
months are expired, the witnesses risen; and that it is the day of the Lord's
vengeance, and the year of Recompenses for the controversy of Sion; Now as the
called of God, they come forth to pour out their golden Vials: not like Jehu,
to raise up themselves by other men's ruin, but to follow the Lord fully and
faithfully. And this is according to the Prophet, I have commanded my
sanctified ones; I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them
that rejoice in MY HIGHNESS, Isa. 13.3.

Answ. 2. I except against your proof, Rev. 11.19. for I do not take that for
the Tabernacle of the Testimony, as you assert; but for a full opening of the
Temple, in as primitive and purity of state, as the Church was in before the
Beast arose, or in the first 3 Centuries, which will not be at the rising of
the 2 Witnesses, nor before the Armageddon-battel: but the Tabernacle is opened
before the Temple, (as David 's Tabernacle was before Solomon 's Temple.) Now
it is the Tabernacle of the Testimony which is opened, and from whence the
Vials come; which Tabernacle grows up to the Temple, Ephesians. 2.21. by degrees: but
the Temple, when it is opened, is opened all at once, (I conceive) and
universally (not by degrees) and to all the faithful Saints; whereas the
Tabernacle, to the Generation-Saints that are faithful to the Testimony.

Repl. 1. It is no marvel, that taking one thing for another, you may go on
thus in mistakes: 1. To suppose that Rev. 11.19. is not one with Rev. 15.5.
there is no ground for it: why is it called, the Tabernacle of the Testimony,
Numb. 1.5. and 17.17. but in regard of the 2 Tables of Stone, whereon was
written (as I said before) the Law of God, the Testimony of his will, Exodus
34.28. and these Tables put into the Ark, and that Ark placed in the uttermost
part of the Temple? So that to say the Tabernacle of the Testimony was opened
and seen, and not the Ark, in my Opinion is no other, than to imagine, what is
within a Chest or Closet may be seen, and is open; but the Chest or Closet it
self, neither seen nor open. 2. Whereas you would have the Temple not open,
till the Armageddon-battel, but the Tabernacle open before: If things here be
duly weighed, the Temple was never shut, but only the Tabernacle of the
Testimony: and therefore what you speak of opening the Temple all at once
universally, and not by degrees; I find no Temple to apply such matter to.
Neither do I know any Tabernacle David had, otherwise than taking care to
provide a place for the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.17. Psalm. 132.

Answ. 3. This appears more plain from the time this Temple is opened, which
the Holy Ghost tells us in Rev. 11.19. is after the seventh Trumpet sounds, and
Proclamation of the Kingdoms of the World to be Christ's, verse. 15. or yet more
expressly under the 7 Vial, Rev. 16.17, 18, 21. under which we find the very
same voices, thunders, lightnings, Earthquakes, and hail, mentioned in the
aforesaid Rev. 11.19. But the Tabernacle of the Testimony must needs be opened
before that, as none will deny it.

Repl. 1. That Rev. 11.19. contemporizes with Chap. 15.5. it is clear to me;
neither do I see weight of Reason in what is here objected, namely, That Rev.
11.19. is after the 7 trumpet sounds, and proclamation of the Kingdoms, etc. If
a man have several things to speak, he must have time to deliver them one after
another; he cannot speak them all at once. Besides, it is an excellent order,
which the Spirit of God uses in setting down the Particulars. Having spoken of
the risen Witnesses, he shows first what shall be some present effect, verse.
13. then proceeds to the Concomitants, as the beginng of the third work, verse.
14. with the sounding of the 7 trumpet, verse. 15. afterward declares what joy
there shall be in the Churches of the Saints, that the Kingdoms of the world
are falling in to Christ, verse. 16, 17, 18. Lastly, that there might be no
doubt made of these things, he shows how the work shall be managed and carried
on. And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his
temple the ark of his testament, etc. verse. 19. agreeing to Rev. 15.5. meaning
a clear light which the 7 Angels shall have of their Work, and when to begin.

2. To bring Rev. 11.19. under the 7 Vial, I think there is no ground for it,
1. Because there is no mention made under that Vial, of the Ark of the
Testament opened in heaven: such a thing is not so much as expressed. 2. To
gather it from lightnings, voices, thunderings, etc. in both places; This will
not hold: for, 1. Such Expressions in this Book are frequent, Rev. 4.5. and
8.5. belonging neither to one time, nor signifying one thing. Moreover, for
these lightnings, thunders, voices, etc. they belong to every Vial. Hence in
Rev. 11.19. they are first mentioned, as then beginning; afterward, Rev. 16.17,
18, 21. as the end: signifying, That all the time the Vials are pouring out,
these things will be; as showing thereby both the nature and effect of every
Vial.

Lastly, If the 1000 years take their beginning, (as M. Till. says) from the
battle of Armageddon; how should the Temple be opened at that time, seeing John
speaking of the blessed new Jerusalem-State, says, and I saw no Temple
therein? Rev. 21.22.

Answ. 4. That is yet more amply expressed by the holy Ghost, that the Vials
are begun, before the Temple is opened, Rev. 11.19. because when the Witnesses
arise, the very same hour, verse. 13. is the earthquake, that overthrows the
tenth part of the Beasts dominion, and seven thousand men are slain. Now this
must needs be a Vial or Plague; but this is before the seventh Trumpet blows,
or the Temple he opened.

Repl. 1. How I take the order of things in Rev. 11. I showed before. But I
much marvel, why the Answerer should be so strict, as not to admit some things
to contemporize, because they stand three or four verses distant one from
another: he knows it is usual with the Interpreters of this Book, (and himself
does it too) to carry places back from Chap. 16. to Chap. 9. and 10, 11, 12,
etc. Why then so often it must needs be? as if that in v. 19. may not be joined
with the rising of the Witnesses; and so the third Woe, and sounding of the
seventh trumpet, fall in likewise with the same time.

2. I am of your opinion, that the earthquake, in which the tenth part of the
city fell, is indeed a Vial: and truly I think it is meant of the first Vial,

1. Because it is presently upon the rising of the Witnesses, and so no other
seems to be between it and their rising.

2. It is an earthquake, or shaking of the earth; that is, earth is the subject
of it, the same with Rev. 16.2. Now howsoever I never find the word earth to
be taken for the grosser part of Popery, yet often for worldly and earthly
persons, as Apostates, Hypocrites, men of corrupt minds, who make gain their
godliness, and carry on a self-interest, and base ends, under a form of
Religion. Genesis 6.11. Zeph. 3.8. Mal. 4.6. Joh. 3.31. Rev. 12.16. 1 Chronicles.
16.33. Psalm. 82.8. Isai. 11.3. Rev. 13. and 14, 15, 19. This is that earth (I
verily think) which Paul by the spirit of prophecy foretells: This know also,
that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. There are
two great Apostacies foretold in Scripture: the first, of things, 1 Timothy 4.1.
the later, of persons. Now this later I take to be the earth, the subject of
the first Vial, viz. THE GRAND APOSTATES OF THE LAST TIMES. And howsoever there
be not in this subject of the first Vial, as much sea, rivers, fountains of
waters, etc, as in the following; Nevertheless, what is wanting here in such
particulars, is made up in having the more earth. For indeed, it is nothing but
earth; an earthly and carnal interest.

3. My opinion is, where the Witnesses lie three days and a half unburied, that
place (as earth) shall be the subject of the first Vial. Now it is well
observed by judicious Mede, that (...) of the City (which in Rev. 11.8. is
translated street) cannot be understood of a Marketplace, or any street or
broader place within the walls of the city; but without the city, as no part of
the great city: and he gives many Reasons for it. So that it seems to me, the
place where the Witnesses lie slain being without the city, and so no part of
it, cannot be meant of Germany, Italy, Spain, France, etc. for these are either
buildings or streets within the walls, but this is without, as bordering upon
it; being an inlet or thorow-fare, whereby relief and provision is brought to
the great City, and a great helper and prop of the Beast's dominion.

4. I cannot but take notice, how it is said, Rev. 11.13. The tenth part of the
city fell: it is not said, The great city: Now I do not find in all that
Book, when the Beast's jurisdiction is mentioned by City, but it is always
(...), that great city: which makes me think, that the Tyranny and Idolatry of
the Beast, is not here so properly meant, as that earth-State-apostacie,
mentioned before. And in very deed, the word GREAT here, is not left out
without cause, as not worthy to have GREATNESS given to it, Because, 1. It will
be illegitimate, brought forth without law or conscience. 2. It will have
nothing of loveliness or beauty in it. 3. Not desired, but by a few temporizers
and turn-coats, such as were named before, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. 4. It will be
scandalous to the whole world, and cause that glorious and fearful Name,
Jehovah, thy God, everywhere to be blasphemed. 5. It will be upheld by cruelty,
injustice, arbitrary power, etc. 6. As it will have a sandy foundation, so it
shall soon fall; and great will be the fall thereof.

5. I think this earth-State-apostacie will be the subject of the first Vial,
because the Beast which ascends out of the bottomless pit, and by whom the
Testimony of Jesus in his servants is slain, is that same Apostacy in 2 Timothy
3.1, 2, etc. and so not the Beast nor his image, Rev. 13. but another,
distinct, and more proper to the later Apostasy. In the first Apostasy, viz.
under the Beast, Rev. 13. the Faithful shall suffer in their Persons, by
burning, hanging, drowning, etc. but under the later Apostasy or Beast, rather
the WITNESS it self, than the Persons: for through the depths of Satan, there
shall be at this time such an eminent, high, and glorious WITNESS slain, as the
like before had not been from the rise of the first Beast.

Besides, it seems to me, that this Earth-State-Apostacy, does contemporize
with the slaying of the Witnesses, and their lying unburied 3 days and an half:

1. Because that Apostasy is to be in the last days, 2 Timothy 3.1. Now without
doubt, the last days are the 3 days and an half, Rev. 11.8.11. for the Word of
God does not only distinguish between times and times, ( viz. as there is a
set time to every purpose under heaven) but shows that all Visions and
Prophesies shall have their due accomplishment in their appointments. Thus
there is a time for the Witnesses to prophecy in sackcloth, which time must be
expired before they are slain in their Testimony. Again, their WITNESS being
slain, they must lie so long unburied. To be brief, This later Apostasy cannot
be referred to the 2 Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth; for that was not the
last days, nor after their rising; for then this first Vial is to be poured
upon that Earth, as the Subject of it. Therefore of necessity (neither before
nor after) it must contemporize with the 3 days and an half: so that three
years and an half is the whole time of the later Apostasy, answerable to the
time of the slain WITNESS.

2. Whereas it is said, perilous times shall come, or hard, terrible,
grievous, or difficult: this must be understood of a State or Government, not
of single persons, who have no Rule or Authority in their hands. But as the
first Apostasy or Beast, was a State, Kingdom, Dominion; so is the other.

My Reasons are, 1. To apply the place to single and inconsiderable persons,
(though lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, etc.) this were no more than
what has been in all Ages before, and so to put something impertinent and
absurd upon the Holy Spirit. Neither 2. would the time be terrible; for what
hurt or damage could the WITNESS suffer by a few naked and unarmed persons, as
to the slaying of it?

It must therefore (to be terrible) be understood, as I said, of a
State-Apostacy; and so indeed it will be terrible and hard against the Witness,
slay it outright, and let it lie like a dead body in the street.

First, Because of a multitude of Sycophants and Parasites, who for their belly
will say any thing against the WITNESS, having such Earth to reward them for it.

Secondly, Terrible and hard, because of the cruel Edicts and Laws made against
the WITNESS; specially, that it may have no Resurrection.

Thirdly, this later Apostasy for subtilty and craft will exceed the former:
so, that there shall be neither trust nor truth in it. This will be found ( Sir
Henry Vane meditat. c. 23. p. 380.
says a late writer) by experience, a most certain truth, that Hypocrites and
Apostates, when once they come to wilful sinning, and with Saul to discern that
God has left them, and is departed from them (as to what divine presence and
fruits of it they had before been made sensible of) none will be more ready to
join avowedly with the Devil, and the worst of his Instruments to accomplish
their rage against the suffering Saints of Christ. Hence the Beast is said to
ascend out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 11.17. Therefore terrible to the
VVITNESS.

Lastly, The more perilous, because the grand Apostasy of the last times shall
be clothed over with a form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. Hence the Beast having
slain the VVITNESS, in Churches and Church Officers, by Promotion, Honor,
great Places, etc. he will make use of these Persons to slay It in others: I
say, By their Mouths, Pens, Examples, to murder It outright in all places.

6. To open the words a little further: And the tenth part of the city fell,
and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; and the remnant were
affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven, Rev. 11.13. There are four
effects of this Vial.

1. It reaches to the carnal Church, Ministry, Worship, and Government, as
being part of the Apostacy, and which joined with the Beast in slaying the
WITNESS. This is set down in the word TENTH, wherein the holy Ghost closely
intimates, how the rise of this earth-apostacy, so far as the Clergy are
concerned in it, and should be carried forth with madness (not zeal, like Paul
when he was a Persecutor) to slay the WITNESS, both in themselves and others,
It would be for the TENTH: for otherwise they would not nave made shipwreck of
Faith, and a good Conscience, in betraying so glorious a Cause, to set up THAT
SHAME.

And whereas it is said, The tenth fell; in Scripture very usual, falling is
taken for slain, so the Word signifies in Genesis 14.10. Josh. 8.24, 25. Judge.
8.10. and many other places: in Chron. 21.15. it is said there fell of Israel;
for which in 2 Samuel 24.15. it is written there died. And probable, as this
TENTH will be a main cause of slaying the VVITNESS: so when the Witnesses shall
stand upon their Feet, some eminent death will be executed upon it. We to him
that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, Hab. 2.9. Behold thine end is
come, and the measure of thy covetousness, Jer. 51.13.

2. It is said, in the Earthquake was slain names of men, seven thousand; that
is, Men of note, renown, famous, Genesis 6.4. contrary hereto, is, men without
name, Job. 30.8. It seems to allude to the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, with certain of the children of Israel, 250 Princes of the
Congregation, the called of the Assembly, men of Name, Numb. 16.2. Worthy
Ainsworth here notes, that these were Statesmen, famous and renowned; whereby
the Conspiracy was the stronger. But what became of these men of name? they
were slain by an Earthquake, Numb. 16.32, 33. Here may be meant Soldiers and
Lawyers, as Priests before.

3. And the Remnant were affrighted, etc. we do not find the like effect of
any Vial after: no giving glory to the God of Heaven; but blaspheming the God
of Heaven, Rev. 16.9, 11, 21. The Reason may be, because the Subject of this
Vial is Earth, that is, a mere Earthly and carnal Interest, and so no part of
the Beast's Dominion; I mean, not so properly and directly as are the Subjects
of the other Vials. Hence this Earth-Apostacy is not obeyed for Love and
Conscience, but either of fear, or for some worldly advantage: and therefore no
marvel there will be a Remnant (howsoever with it before) seeing it swallowed
up in the Earthquake, shall bless God for it, and say, Hallelujah, Salvation,
and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God.

The last Effect is in Rev. 16.2. And there fell a noisome and grievous sore
upon the men which had the Mark of the Beast, and upon them which worshipped
his Image. Here it is to be observed, that these have the Mark of the Beast,
and so distinct from the Remnant before. The Effects of this Vial extends
further then the Subject.

And therefore whereas it is said, The first Vial falls upon such as had the
Mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image; This is true, if we understand the
Effects; otherwise, the Subject is only Earth, viz. the grand Apostasy of the
last times.

As they that dwelt upon the Earth rejoiced, and made merry, when they saw the
VVITNESS stain, being afraid it would have reached them, (as doubtless it
would, had not that Apostasy been) so now they are much more tormented to hear
the same VVITNESS is risen again, and has poured a Vial upon that Earth or
Beast, by whom it was slain. The Canaanites, when they heard what the
Israelites had done unto the two Kings of the Amorites that were on the other
side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom they utterly destroyed; as soon as they had
heard these things, their hearts did melt: neither did there remain any more
courage in any man, because of Israel, Josh. 2.10, 11. Such will be the effect
of the first Vial: when Babylon shall hear by those posts, Jer. 51.31. what
the Lord by his risen VVitnesses has done upon THAT EARTH, the other side
Jordan; O what a noisome and grievous sore will be upon the Canaanites! their
hearts will die within them, as foreseeing their destruction, in seeing the
drawn Sword of Jehovah in the hands of his Mighty Ones.

Thus I have given a short Paraphrase of the first Vial (it is indeed but
short, to what might be said) only I have done it to show, that taking the
Vials not yet begun, but to begin at the rising of the Witnesses, there is (in
my Opion) more Scripture-Ground for it, than to begin at Waldo, Wickliff,
Armachan, etc. or by Earth to understand the grosser part of Popery. But this I
leave to the judicious and godly Reader.

Answ. 5. Lastly, Should I grant (which I do not) what you say, yet out of one
and the same Temple, all the Angels go. 3 although not so opened to the first,
as to the last. Now whereas you apprehend not a sufficient ground to say the
last Vials are more perfect, high, or accomplishing than the first; I suppose
there is, seeing the holy Ghost has given such a Character of perfection to
the last, Rev. 16.17, etc. (...), as he has not given to the first. And
besides, it must needs be, that as the spirit of life comes down from on high
more and more, the instruments will be purer and purer. And besides, he is not
always the best, that engages the first, for the engagement may be greatest
and the work hardest at last; and then the Lord reserves instruments of more
excellent principles, and proportionable Faith and courage, as I believe he
has for the Armageddon-battle, and to bring up the rear under the seventh
Vial. So far for your sixth Reason, which I have been the larger in, because I
did take it for one of the Weightiest.

Repl. 1. As the difference lies betwixt us, the matter is not much, whether
the Tabernacle of the Testimony be not opened to the first, as to the last;
seeing, till after the rising of the Witnesses, it is not opened at all, and so
no Vial poured out by any of the Angels. This was the thing which I asserted,
and find nothing in the whole Answer to the contrary.

2. For the Characters of perfection, etc. if there be any thing meant by the
holy Ghost, in the word ((...)) to prove it, You see more than I; for to me it
is no more, than if seven men, having done seven several things one after
another, the last, (knowing they have all done) says, They have done. How this
can prove the last to be a better instrument then the first, I know not.

I confess, some take the last Angel to be Christ: now in this sense it is
true, he is more perfect and high, etc. than the first; yea, than all the other
six, put them all together.

3. Although, (as I said before) we are here off from the matter, viz. that the
Instruments of the last Vials shall have more excellent principles, and
proportionable Faith, and courage, etc. yet for the thing it self I question:
It is easier to overcome a dismayed Enemy, and broken in his Forces, than when
he is in heart, and whole. The first Vial (I conceive) shall be poured out upon
the Earth, when Babylon shall say in her heart, I fit a Queen, and am no Widow,
and shall see no sorrow, Rev. 18.7. the following Vials upon her, as being full
of fear, terror and amazement; so that the work seem to be hardest at first.

Answer to the seventh Reason.
I shall not need to say much to this: for not only we have it out of Cardinals
and Papists mouths, as to the first Vial; and so as to the Swedes under the
second: but now as to the third Vial in the end wars in Britain (to which
indeed it properly appertains) the very Enemies, as well as Friends, have said,
True and righteous are thy judgments, O God, against the King, Prelates; yea,
the very Cavaliers and Malignants, acknowledging, That the hand of God* was
against them; and that it could be no other than the finger of the Lord: and in
time (as the plagues go out) it will appear without dispute, on whose side the
truth is, to such as will see.

Repl. 1. That the three first Vials are thus placed, I never yet saw ground
for it. To forbear the first, (having already spoken of it) why should the
second Vial be applied to the Swedes, and not rather to the Civil Wars in
France, or Bohemia, or to the long Wars of the Albigenses against the Papists?
Sure I am, there was as much of God (if not more) seen in these wars; and his
judgments a^ manifest, as in the Swedes. So for the third Vial, which properly
appertains (you say) to Britain: and why not to Scotland in their Mary's Reign?
or, to the Netherlands? seeing as much was done there in point of Reformation,
as here in England. Methinks to take in the Swedes, and leave out others more
considerable, significant, and Vial-like, (in your own way) is not well. But
some may say, There are not Vials enough to give such allowance.

2. For Cardinals, Prelates, Cavilliers, etc. we have had little yet out of
their mouths. It may be, some few, now and then (as it has been so, since
there were such men) have acknowledged Gods appearing against them in some
remarkable providence. But how? as a Vial of wrath? No; but as the Corrections
of a Father, making use of bad men (as Roundheads, Brownists, Anabaptists,
Sectaries, etc.) as his Rod or Instruments: hoping, for all this, to recover
their losses, and to have their former Places and Superstition restored. So
that Gods judgments have not been manifest, as to the conviction of enemies:
n^^ was there more acknowledged amongst them of God finger, under the two
supposed Vials, then what has been often at other times. And therefore from
such a Principle, I do not see but every Fight or Battle must be one of the
seven last Plagues; I mean, when a few amongst the Captives and Prisoners shall
acknowledge that the hand of the Lord was out against them.

3. And lastly, For the place, Rev. 15.4. For thy judgments are manifest; It
does not concern so much the Enemies of the Truth, what they confess, as how
manifest Gods judgments are in themselves. Howsoever therefore something was
manifested in the Swedes and in Britain against the Beast, (as at other times
as much) yet this does not prove that the second and third Vials were then
poured out. I deny that: for when such Plagues shall come forth, Gods
judgments then will be manifest indeed. Great and marvelous are thy works,
Lord God Almighty: just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

That the seven Vials allude to the plagues of Egypt, it is granted by all. Now
howsoever without doubt, whilst the Israelites abode in Egypt, God smote the
Egyptians with many plagues, yet none were so manifest, as the ten last. It is
my opinion, (and methinks the Scripture is clear for it) that there will be as
great difference between Gods judgments already executed upon the Beast, and
what shall be made manifest when the Vials begin to be poured out, as between
the twinkling of a Star, and the shining Sun at noonday. As that which lies
lowest at the bottom of the Cask, are the dregs: so the seven last plagues are
the deepest, greatest, and heaviest, all dregs, wrath without mixture, Rev.
18.8, 10, 15, etc. Isa. 13.9, 10, 15, 19, 20. and 14.19, 20. and 34.8, 9, 10.
and 63.1, 2, etc. Jer. 50.25, 26, etc. and 51. Psalm. 137.7, 8, 9. Psa. 75.8.
Rev. 14.8, 10.

Here were a fit occasion for me to deliver my sense concerning the second and
third Vials; which the Answerer confidently carries to the Swedes and English.
But because I desire first to know what satisfaction Gods people have, by this
which I have published in differing from the common received opinion, I shall
not treat thereof at this time.

Answer to the eighth Reason.
At the first glance, this out of Rev. 15.6. may go for very good, till it be
well weighed; and then we shall see, 1. That the Witnesses, during their
Sackcloth or suffering estate, have power to smite with plagues, Rev. 11.6. or
Vials, Chap. 15.1.

Repl. 1. I have (I think) said enough, in making it evident and clear, that
the Sackcloth-Witnesses, and Angel-Vials, are distinct both to their works and
times; and therefore I shall not reply still only to words. Herod holding the
opinion of Pythagoras, Plato, and other Heathen men, that the souls of the dead
come again in other bodies, could not but think, (believing that John Baptist
was risen) but that great wonders would be done by him now, though John in his
lifetime wrought no miracle. If the Witnesses, in their Sackcloth and
suffering estate were the Angels, Rev. 15. that is, had gotten the victory over
the Beast, had the harps of God, sung the song of Moses, had the Tabernacle of
the Testimony opened to them, poured out Vials, etc. I see very little what
their Resurrection-state will signify or amount to. The Nations need not (if
the case be so) to be frighted, (as Herod was) when they shall hear they are
standing upon their feet. See Rev. 11.11, 12, 13.

Answ. 2. By white, is not always meant a Change of raiment; but by white (I
conceive) is meant uprightness, innocence, truth, integrity: and so, Rev.
19.8. for the fine linen, is the righteousness of Saints, or the
Generation-righteousness, which is as the holy Ghost says, Rev. 15.6. the
seven Angels come out clothed with pure and white linen; by which I think may
be meant the Generation-righteousness, purity, and sanctity: and so the two
Witnesses may have the sackcloth for suffering, and white robes for
uprightness, innocence and truth too: what should hinder? And so the
Waldenses, Lollards, Hussites, Lutherans, etc. in their Generation, were
clothed in white.

Repl. 1. Were it true, (as you say) viz. by white is not always meant a change
of raiment, that is, of condition and State; yet it may be meant so, Rev. 15.6.
and I think both you and others, observing well the place, will not take it
otherwise.

But 2. Grant farther, by white sometimes is meant uprightness, innocence,
etc. why in the very same place may not change of State be meant likewise? I do
believe, let the Scriptures be searched, never is pure and white linen given to
Saints, but a change of State is always meant, whatever is meant besides.

3. For Rev. 19.8. it is to be understood of the Jews preparing as a Bride
adorned for her husband, which is by casting off her own righteousness which is
by the Law, and no other then filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. to put on the
righteousness of Christ, which is of God by faith. A most glorious change of
State.

4. For Generation-righteousness, innocence, etc. attributed to the Waldenses,
Lollards, etc. whatsoever they had of these graces; all Saints before them (and
since) have had the like. Considering therefore, that in Rev. 15. nothing is
set down, but things high, eminent, singular; I much marvel the place should be
brought so low; as if nothing were there meant, but what is ordinary and
common to every Christian.

Lastly, That the two Witnesses should have sackcloth for suffering, and white
robes for righteousness; here I think Mr. Tilling. says better, who understands
sincerity, uprightness and integrity to be meant by the golden girdles upon
their breasts; according to Paul, Having your loins girt about with truth, Ephesians.
6.14.

Answ. 3. The word here, Rev. 15.6. which is (...), is not the word that is
used for change of raiment, but signifies a plain, easy, soft,
cotton-whiteness; which may well be worn with sackcloth: but the change of
raiment is rather (...), a brave silken whiteness, or Princely Robe, Ezekiel.
16.13. and so in the places you name, as Genesis 41.42. Esth. 8.15. therefore it
is not here meant such a change of Robe as cannot be received till the
Sackcloth is put off.

Repl. It is true (as you say) the word is (...) but for the explanation and
application, I like neither of them. First, not the Explanation; as if the word
(...) should signify only some plain and course cloth: whereas rather, it is
fine flax, (as the Greek translateth, Isa. 19.9.) whereof in the East they made
their richest and choicest linen.

Nor 2. the Application: for the holy Ghost (who knew best his own meaning)
besides (...) has (...), which is not only bright and resplendent, but
gorgeous, Prince-like, such as was worn by Kings and Nobles. Hence Godwyn well
observes, that Purple, above other colors, was affected by the Emperors and
Nobility of Rome, and White by the Nobility of the Jews: whence the Hebrews
termed their Noblemen Chorim, albatos, men clad in white: On the contrary, men
of mean rank, Chaschucim, men clad with foul garment, Jam. 2.2. Pilat his
soldiers clad Christ in purple, Matthew. 27.28. and Herod the Tetrarch of
Galilee put on him ((...)) white garments, Luke 23.11. both therein applying
themselves to the customs of their own Countries, clothing him as King, though
in derision. Moses and Aaron, lib. 1. cap. 4.

Besides, in Jam. 2.2, 3. the word (...) is taken for apparel, quite differing
to a plain, easy, soft cotton, which may be worn with sackcloth, etc. So that
(I conceive) if any weight lie in the words, it is not in (...) the cloth, but
in (...), (the color or kind) which is gorgeous, Royal, Prince-like linen.

Answ. But 4. Were it meant of such a Robe, yet those (forementioned) brave
Champions of Christ, in their generation, might be said to be clothed therewith
by faith, whilst they trampled, and had the generation-victory over the Beast,
(as we said before) being above him, and beating him before them, by a most
noble and notable spirit of faith, courage, and undaunted resolution, that
would not yield an inch unto him; and so were (as it were) Princes, (in spirit)
and above sufferings. But so far for your eighth Reason, which I take for the
most considerable and serious.

Repl. 1. I have seen what is extant concerning the persons (specially
Grosthead and Armachan) so often mentioned; but am not of your opinion, that
they were such brave Champions, as trampling the Beast, and beating him before
them, etc. I do not judge their Generation-work amounted to so much.

Neither, 2. had they any victory over the Beast, as Rev. 15.2. For that place
intends more then Generation-victory, viz. by speaking or writing against the
errors and evils of men, or beating the adversary in such a kind: it is an
execution of temporal judgments; which they never did, and therefore could not
be the Angel of the first Vial.

But 3. Should it be granted they were such brave Champions, had
generation-victory, etc. all this might be, and yet not clothed in Prince-like
white, because Rev. 15.6. is to be understood of the time after the rising of
the Witnesses, whereas they were before.

Lastly, taking the Grounds and Principles of some men to be true, I do not
see, why the fourth and fifth Vials should not be poured out, as are the first,
second and third. For in my opinion, there has been as much of Vials poured
out upon the sun, and throne of the Beast, as upon the earth, sea, and
fountains of waters: I say, as much as can be said of the other three: And
therefore I see no reason why there is a stand at the third Vial; and why no
Vial poured out upon the house of Austria, or Germane Emperor; yea, and why not
upon Rome it self. If there be no more to make up the effects of a Vial, in
trampling and beating the Beast, and to have Generation-victory over him, then
a bare Testimony against his Idolatries and Blasphemies. Besides, more Reasons,
(I think) and better too, may be given, that in the Swethen and Britain Wars,
the Sun and throne of the Beast were smitten, then either Sea, or fountain of
waters.

That there is no Answer made to the ninth Reason, the Reason is, because that
Argument was not sent with the rest to my friend. Besides, there are some
passages added to the Reasons as they are printed, which were not in the Copy
sent to the Answerer.

Answer to the tenth Reason.
Nor can I see, as you suppose, an absurdity in asserting the Vials begun, and
the effects of them, (as we have said) seeing one Vial perfects another, as the
following does the foregoing.

Repl. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. For
my part, I had rather observe how things are expressed in the Scriptures, then
the liberty which men take in their Exposition. That one Vial shall perfect
another, etc. I am sure this is not in the text; neither to be gathered from
it, as I conceive. When the first Vial has been poured out upon the earth,
where is it said that the second, third, fourth, etc. shall follow, to perfect
the work upon that subject? or what Reason is there for such an inference?

Some, in opening these Vials, allude to waters; when one stream falls into
another, and these two into a third; here is no running backward: for though
the waters are increased, yet their course is still forward. It is true, the
first Vial having perfected its work, (as going forward) may fall in with the
second; and so these two, (the effects of the second being perfected) with the
third: but that the second or third shall run backward; as the similitude taken
from waters, is against humane reason, so this against divine Truth, in my
understanding. Now upon this mistake it is, that many good men ground their
opinion, that the Vials begun to be poured out by Waldo, Wickliff, Luther, etc.
as taking it for granted, that one Vial perfects another, as the following does
the foregoing: But the Word of God justifies no such opinion; neither shall the
earth, as the subject of the first Vial, have any other poured out upon it;
neither is it to be thought needful, no more then when persons or things are
once destroyed, to say they must be put down again by others after.

Mr. Tilling. his fifth Proposition is, That the effects of one Vial do
oft-times run into another Vial. I answer: The effects of each Vial, are the
evils or sufferings themselves which lie upon the enemies of God, and their
works, by reason of the wrath of God formerly poured out; as sores, blood,
scorching men with heat, darkness, etc. Now how such evils or sufferings do run
one into another, I understand not. He says, My meaning is, the immediate
following Vial, or the Vial following that, may sometimes be poured out, before
the effects of the foregoing Vial are wholly ceased. This I grant: As for
example, Before the effects of the first Vial (whose subject is the earth) are
ceased, the second Vial may begin to be poured out upon the sea: So the third
Vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters, before the effects of the second
are over. But hence it will not follow, That the second Vial, whose proper
subject is the sea, shall fall upon the earth; or the fourth, whose subject is
the sun, upon the third, viz. the rivers and fountains of waters, as one Vial
to perfect another: This is only supposed, and the holy Ghost seems to carry
it quite otherwise: for he distinguishes both the Angels, Subjects, and
effects; and puts them all a part. Whereas, to take it in the other way, viz.
one Vial perfecting another; here is mere confusion: Here earth is no more the
subject of the first Vial, then of the second; nor sea the subject of the
second Vial, more then of the third or fourth.

Answ. 2. Seeing the two Witnesses have power to smite with the plagues, Rev.
11.5. before their slaughter, yet have not power to end any of the Beasts
dominion in any one street, till after their rise, verse. 13. because till then,
the spirit of life which does so, comes not into them; and till then, the end
of the 42 months, or Beasts period, is not ended; and therefore it is, that
their plagues in the 42 months are more defective, and at the end of the 42
months more perfective: for until then, they could plague, but not period the
Beasts Government in any street; so that no wonder if the Beasts Tyranny be
still up in one kind or other, till the end comes.

Repl. Here are still suppositions one after another. 1. One Vial perfects
another. 2. The sackcloth-Witnesses are the Angels, Rev. 15.3. Before their
slaughter, defective; after, more perfective, etc. These being only
Conjectures, without proof, I shall say the less.

But 1. If Grosthead, Armachan, Huss, etc. were such brave Champions, and had
all those Characters, Rev. 15.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and Chap. 14.2, 3, 4. I cannot see
how they were without the spirit of life, Chap. 11.11. Neither so defective:
for, in my opinion, the spirit of life is no other, then what in Chap. 15 and
16 is expressed in particulars.

2. To say, The Witnesses could plague, but not period; it is as much as to
say, They were not the Angels, Rev. 15. For every Vial shall period; neither
does the last period more or further then its proper subject.

3. If you mean, by end, the last Vial, (as I perceive you do, by what follows)
therein I differ: for the Beast's dominion shall end with the fifth Vial. And
howsoever there shall be a party at the Armageddon-battel, gathered together
for the cause and interest of the Beast; yet as to his Kingdom and power that
was broken before, Rev. 18. We know whose House and Family is cast out of this
Nation, yet there are some (had they opportunity) would willingly engage to
raise it up again out of the ashes. So here.

I know the Beast and false Prophet, Rev. 16.13. and 19.20. is taken for one:
by Beast, the Civil power; by false Prophet, the Ecclesiastical. But I think,
in both places, by the false Prophet, is meant Mahumet, that is, the Turkish
dominion or State: 1. Because it is not probable, that so considerable a matter
should be left out; which must be, if it be not here. 2. In both places, where
the false Prophet is mentioned, the things properly belong to the Mahumetans,
and fall under the last Vials, viz. the great Army of Gog and Magog; God's
judgments upon them, and Israel's victory, Ezekiel. 38 and 39. 3. Neither does the
title, That false Prophet, belong so fitly to any, as to that monster Mahumet.
Hence, since his rising, he has been usually so called. 4. Whereas the working
of miracles in Rev. 19.20. is referred (not to the Beast, but) to the false
Prophet; this much strengthens (methinks) the sense. For at this time, Satan's
greatest workings will be among the Turks, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders. As a Tyrant, having lost several strong holds, he seeks to
maintain, by what supply he has, such other Forts and Castles as yet are in
his hands: so Satan, being driven out of his Western hold, and nothing left
him, in a manner, but the false Prophets dominion: here he will be working all
the Miracles and lying Wonders he can, to draw multitudes to him. And howsoever
Babylon be fallen, yet the Beast is said to be with the false Prophet, because
of a party joining then with the Turks, to raise up the ruins of the Great
city, or the Beasts dominion again.

Answ. 3. Sure it is from an absurdity, because the holy Ghost gives not that
note of perfection, till the last, Rev. 16.17. and then he says, It is
finished: and therefore the last must needs make perfect all the other, in all
streets and nations, and put a full period to all Tyranny and Idolatry: which
we cannot say of the first. Besides, the last Vial is the most universal and
through also. Now the Reason why the four last Vials make a more through work
then the three first, I gave before; because the end of the Beasts dominion is
now come, which was not in the former.

Repl. 1. I think the Absurdity (if any be) remains still, for any thing is
said to the contrary. It was objected, that when all the Vials are poured out,
nothing may be signified, etc. To which we have this Answer: The holy Ghost at
the last (and not before) says, It is finished. Now what is finished, but the
work and effect of each Angel and Vial? That is, as the first Angel, in
witnessing against Idolatry and Tyranny, poured out his Vial, and therein (as a
brave Champion) did his duty, howbeit Tyranny and Idolatry continued still: so
the rest, one after another: And having thus trampled upon the Beast, and beat
him before them, as the first did; a voice at last shall be heard, It is done.
And may not all this be, and yet earth, sea, sun, etc. remain still?

2. Methinks it is strangely gathered, Because the holy Ghost says, It is
finished; therefore the last must needs make perfect all the other, etc. One
Scholar may answer for the rest, that they have all done their Parts or
Exercises, and yet it is possible every one might perfect his own work.

3. In granting that the end of the Beasts dominion was not come in the three
first Vials, you must needs grant, (if I am not extremely mistaken) that no
Vials are yet poured out. For, as the end of the Beasts dominion is not till
after the forty and two months; so the last plagues begin not till then: he is
not grown full enough for the Vials, (to use your own words) till those months
be expired.

Answer to the eleventh Reason. I do not understand how you make it an argument
against the pouring out of any of the Vials to be now; 1. Because the Temple in
so full purity, is not opened till after all the Vials; although the Tabernacle
of the Testimony, Rev. 15.5. Now until it be opened, Rev. 11.19. no man is able
to enter into it, Rev. 15.8. till the seven plagues of the seven Angels be
fulfilled; which appears to be after the seven Vials, Rev. 16.17, 18. So that
it hinders not but that the Vials may be begun.
Repl. I have showed before, how I think the Answerer is in a double mistake
about Rev. 15.5. and 11.19. First, in taking them apart, as if the Tabernacle,
Chap. 15. should be opened before the Vials are poured out; the other, viz.
Chap. 11. not till afterward: whereas both places belong to one matter and
time. 2. He takes that for the Tabernacle, which I take to be the Temple, Rev.
11.1. Whilst the two Witnesses prophesied in sackcloth, they had a Temple: but
the Testimony of the Tabernacle is not to be opened till after their rising.
Besides, if Christ personally shall appear between the sixth and seventh Vial,
Rev. 16.15. and the thousand years take their beginning immediately upon the
Armageddon-battel; we must rise higher for light, then to take it from the
Temple or Tabernacle. And so much seems to be signified, by that Angel standing
in the sun, Rev. 19.17. wherein will be fulfilled that prophecy, Isa. 30.25,
26. And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every high hill,
rivers and streams of waters, in the day of the great slaughter, when the
towers fall. Moreover, the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, etc. Though a man where he stands
may see very much, yet being set up higher, as on a hill or mountain, (suppose
as high as the sun) he sees a great deal more then he did before. True it is,
no sooner are the Witnesses risen, but the earth is enlightened, Rev. 18.1. by
the Ark of the Testament, Rev. 11.19. and the Tabernacle of the Testimony
opened in heaven, Chap. 11.5. But when the Sun of righteousness shall arise
with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. Saints then shall be higher then Temple or
Tabernacle, Rev. 21.22. for their light shall be seven times more then before,
as being raised to a higher pitch and degree of light and knowledge, then
either the Prophets or Apostles had.

Answ. 2. He says, No man shall be able to enter in; but he does not say, No
man shall be able to go out. And in this he alludeth to Solomon's Temple,
wherein the Priests could not enter, 2 Chronicles. 7.2. they could not go in, but
those who were in could go out, 1 King. 7.10, 11. being so filled with the
presence and glory of the Lord, that they went out. So here, the Angels of the
Vials shall go out, being so filled with the presence, spirit, and glory of the
Lord, that they will not be able to abide in. Though none go in, yet he says
not, None go out. So that I cannot see how this hinders, but the Vials may be
begun.

Repl. I think you have laid down a very good Ground, by your distinction, to
prove that the Vials are not begun. For, 1. If those in the Temple must be
filled with such a presence, spirit, and glory of the Lord, before they go out;
I am strongly persuaded, that neither Waldo, Wickliff, Armachan, etc. were any
of the Angels; nor the Swedish or Britain Soldiers; nor yet is the Temple
filled with such a presence. It is one thing to be in the Temple, and another
thing to have it filled with this glory you speak of. For such a time will not
be, neither is it to be expected, till the Antichristian darkness be more
expelled.

Should a man now make enquiry amongst the choicest Saints concerning
Temple-presence, I know what they would say, (and not without cause) we have
not the understanding of men, clouds and darkness are about us, we want the
presence and spirit of God; there is a death, darkness and deadness spread over
all things, as, worship, ordinances, Scriptures, etc. Nevertheless, sure I am,
there is as much now of the presence and spirit of God with his people, as any
of those ever had, who are said to be the Angels of the first Vials. So then,
if there be no coming out, until the Temple is filled with the presence, spirit
and glory of the Lord; we may conclude, Either none are come out; or if any
are, they had not the presence and Spirit of God; which the holy Ghost
expresses, Rev. 15.8.

2. As none are to come out of the Temple, until filled with the Spirit; so not
until they are called, Rev. 16.1. The which Call, I do not take to be in
following Providence; but more then ordinary, as the Prophets and Apostles
were, by some immediate impulse of spirit; the Lord making them now clearly to
see, that their work and time is come: As I have said before, A particular and
special call, peculiar to this time of the Vials, as Mr. Tilling. says, which
hitherto no man had.

Answ. 3. Whereas he says, No man; we must observe the subject: he does not
say, No Angel; but, No man; which is a different dialect of the holy Ghost, and
doubtless means some other, and not them that execute the Vials; for they are
called Angels: and indeed, I think it refers to a more inferior subject; and
therefore cannot hinder, but that the Vials which are poured out by Angels (are
more glorious instruments then common men) may begin.

Repl. 1. You have given me occasion to declare my thoughts of the place. It is
true, (as you say) he says not No Angel, but No man; signifying thereby, when
the Vial-time begins, what a most glorious Reformation there will be both of
persons and things: For such shall be the light, judgment, zeal, and
conscience of Saints, as no man shall be admitted into the Temple: no carnal
and formal Professors, no corrupt Hypocrites; no such Apostates as 2 Timothy 3.2,
3, 4. Now that shall be verified: Holiness becomes thy house, Jehovah, to
length of days, Psalm. 93.5. Hitherto (especially since the great Apostacy) the
vile with the precious have been in the Temple: Whilst men slept, the enemy
came and sowed tares among the wheat, Matthew. 13.25. What through ignorance,
partiality, covetousness, self-love, MAN has entered into the Temple, most
unworthy persons have been taken into Church Fellowship: but now, no man is
able, etc. it is so filled with smoke from the glory of the Lord, and from his
power.

So then, the meaning is, upon the rising of the Witnesses, the Church draws to
primitive perfection both for light and life. As the Tabernacle of the
testimony shall be opened, that is, large discoveries of Gospel-mysteries: so
the Temple shall be shut, as no entrance for man: none but Angels shall go in
and out. And though I am not of your opinion, that this refers to the blessed
Jerusalem-estate of the thousand years; yet it is a forerunner, and carries
the character and likeness of that glorious time. Hence in part will be
fulfilled Isa. 35.8. and 48.2. Joel 3.17. Isai. 26.2. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Psalm.
15.1, 2. and 24.3, 4. Isai. 60.21. Rev. 21.27. and 22.15. Compare 1 Cor. 3.3.
Are ye not carnal, and walk (...); according to man?

Now whereas Mr. Tilling. opinion is, That Saints, before the Vials begin,
shall not attain to that purity the Church of Christ enjoyed before the
corruptions of Antichrist crept into it; I think otherwise; and the Scripture
which he quotes, viz. Rev. 4.6. in my opinion is against him. For then (says
he, speaking of the Primitive time) there was a sea of glass clear as crystal:
here is a sea of glass, but not yet so clear as crystal. There is more in Rev.
15.2. then a sea of glass: for it is added, mingled with fire. Now the reason
why these words, mingled with fire, are left out in Chap. 4.6. it is, because
of the purity which the Church then was in, (as to Doctrine and Discipline)
before the Apostacy of Antichrist; and so the sea of glass needed no mingling
with fire. But the impure and filthy dross of Antichrist being crept into the
Church, then indeed there was cause to have the sea of glass mingled with fire,
whereby to consume and burn up not only the grosser part of Popery, or the
lees and dregs of that Religion; but the whole, great and small: as the fire
leaves no dross or impurity in silver refined. So then, whereas the sea of
glass is said to be mingled with fire, it is not to denote (as I conceive) any
struggling of the Saints with the Beast, nor hot jars and contentions among
themselves; but, that all the corrupt and rotten devices of the Beast should be
(as dross in a furnace) utterly consumed.

Object. It is said, Till the seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled.
Then Man, afterward, is able to enter into the Temple.

I answer, The particular until is often taken for never, Genesis 8.7. and 28.15.
1 Samuel 15.3. 2 Samuel 6.23. Matthew. 1.25. So here.

2. For your sense of the place, (if I understand it) it makes a difference
between Saints, as some superior, others inferior. But I think all Saints,
(so judged and known) as Angels, shall enter, etc. Neither will there be any
such difference amongst the people of God after the Vials begin.

Answ. And 4. No man as then without the Temple: yet 5. I think it refers to
the blessed New-Jerusalem-state of 1000 years, Rev. 20, 21, and 22. which is
not begun till after the seven plagues; and therefore till then, none can enter
into it.

Repl. 1. Doubtless many who are without, when the Temple is first filled with
the glory of the Lord, shall yet enter in, before the Vials are poured out. For
the everlasting Gospel is to be preached, upon the rising of the Witnesses,
whereby many will be called out of Babylon, and other Gentiles from their idols
and vanities, to the faith and obedience of the Gospel.

2. For referring it to the New-Jerusalem-state, it seems to have no footing in
the text: for the holy Ghost speaks there of no New Temple or State; but
directly of that Temple in which the seven Angels then were.

Besides, in my opinion, so to take it, it is far below the style of the holy
Ghost. For, to say, The new-Jerusalem-state will not begin till after the seven
plagues; it is a truth indeed: but how? As if a traveller were told that his
journeyings must be finished, before he can be at home; or a Soldier, till the
enemy be subdued, he is not to have the glory and honor of the Victory.

Answ. 6. Should we concede to your Argument, the edge thereof would turn as
much against your own opinion and apprehension; seeing none could enter in, as
you grant, till the Temple were opened, Rev. 11.19. which is after the seventh
Trumpet has sounded. The Scripture you quote, Rev. 15.5. being meant of the
Tabernacle of the Testimony, whence the Vials go out indeed; but not out of
this Temple, which is not opened till after all the seven plagues of the seven
Angels be fulfilled, as that text expresses in terminis.

Repl. 1. How the Reason should be against my self, I see not. Indeed my
opinion is, that both places, (as I said before) relate to one time, and take
their beginning before the Vials: Neither is there any mention of a Tabernacle
or Temple opened in heaven, after the Vials are poured out; though you say that
text expresses it in terminis. For Rev. 16.17, 18. (which you often quote)
speaks no such thing, but that there came a great voice out of the Temple of
heaven: not said to be then opened, (as Rev. 11.19. and 15.5.) because it was
not opened at that time, but long before.

But 2. This is true, in Rev. 19.11. heaven is said to be opened; which I take
to be between the sixth and seventh Vials, signifying a most glorious success
of the everlasting Gospel; partly through the light which came from the Ark,
Rev. 11.19. and the Tabernacle of the Testimony, chap. 15.5. opened before; and
partly through the fall of the Western Babylon, Chap. 18.

Answ. So that neither by this, nor any of your former Reasons, is my faith in
the Vials begun, stirred or enervated; but rather ratified for the present,
without I see more then I do: and am of Mr. Tilling. opinion, that the Vials
are begun; and that for these Reasons.

Repl. I know it was Mr. Tilling. opinion: so Brightman's, Pareus, Mede, and
Burton, Cotton.
many others which I have seen: and it is (I think) the opinion of most men
still, whose learning and godliness I do willingly acknowledge, and do honor
the very name of some of them; yet neither do I think them so learned, but they
might err; nor so godly, as in all things to be followed. This reverence every
man stands bound to give to the graces of God in other men, That in his
difference from them, he be not suddenly or easily persuaded; but being jealous
of his own heart, he undertake the examination of things, and so proceed with
fear and trembling; and so having tried all things, hold fast that which is
good, 1 These. 5.21. so shall he neither wrong the graces of God in himself nor
in others. But on the other side, for a man so far to suffer his thoughts to be
conjured into the Circle of any mortal man, or man's judgment, as either to
fear to weigh what is offered to the contrary in the balance of the Sanctuary;
or finding it to bear weight, to fear to give sentence on the Lords side; yea,
though it be against the common opinion of good men: this is to honor man
above God, and to advance a throne above the throne of Christ, who is Lord and
King for ever.

I must confess, to the glory of God, and mine own shame, that one Reason why I
questioned not till of late, but that the Vials were begun, it was, because I
found such an unanimous accord amongst Expositors therein. Hence I made the
less search into the thing, there being no doubt made (among them) as to the
truth of it. Now it is possible, my case here may be the case of other men.

Answ. 1. Because the two Witnesses in their Sackcloth-condition, in the time
of the 42 months, before their slaughter or rise, pour out plagues, or smite
with plagues, Rev. 11.5, 6. But the Vials are such plagues, Rev. 15. Therefore,
they pour out Vials.

2. Because the very same subjects of the Witnesses smiting with plagues, Rev.
11.5, 6. are the subjects of the Angels Vials, Rev. 16.1, 2, 3. viz. earth,
waters turned into blood, and expressed by the holy Ghost in the very same
phrases.

Repl. We have answered this before: yet farther, thus: The places have no such
full agreement as is pretended. For, 1. in Rev. 11. waters there, are before
earth: but in Chap. 16. there earth is before the waters. Neither do I think,
but, according to the order set down, the Witnesses did so, viz. smote the
waters first in the days of their prophecy, prophetically.

2. The sea, which is the subject of the second Vial, Rev. 16.3. in Chap. 11.
is not so much as named; which is very strange, that the second Vial should be
thus left, and yet all one thing, and in the very same phrases.

3. How do they agree in phrases? When the one only smites the earth, the
other pours out a Vial on the earth. Doubtless, here lies a great difference,
not so much in words, as matter, if well considered.

4. In Chap. 16.4. the Angel poured out his Vial upon the waters, and they
became blood: but Chap. 11. the Witnesses have power over the waters, to turn
them into blood. It is not said they smote the waters, or that the waters were
turned into blood. What may be gathered, is one thing; but the phrases are not
alike.

5. If the places are so alike in phrases, why are they made so unlike in
exposition? The first Vial is applied to Waldo, Wickliff, Luther, as smiting
the Beast with their mouths and pens: the second and third, to Soldiers and
Armies, and so killing men with their swords and guns.

Answ. 3. Because the Egyptian plagues alluded to, were begun by the two
Witnesses Moses and Aaron, before the end of the Captivity or sojourning in
Egypt: and it is very evident, this has such an allusion, Rev. 11.8. because
the holy Ghost calls this forty and two months Egypt also.

Repl. If the Egyptian plagues by Moses and Aaron (the two Witnesses) were all
poured out before the end of the captivity; then following the Allusion, all
the Vials should be poured out whilst the Witnesses are in sackcloth. And to
says truth, to take it otherwise, it destroys the life and light of the
Argument. For if the Vials begun before the rising of the Witnesses, then must
they be all poured out before the end of the forty and two months, as the ten
plagues by the two Witnesses Moses and Aaron, were before the end of their
Captivity or sojourning in Egypt.

Thus you see, by dividing the Vials, as some to go before the rising, and some
after, is contrary to the Allusion. For if some were, then were all: but taking
it that none were, so there is (in my opinion) both reason and truth as to the
Allusion; viz. as Moses and Aaron the two risen Witnesses (not in sackcloth)
near or about the end of the four hundred and thirty years, plagued the
Egyptians: so the forty and two months of the Beasts tyranny being going out,
the Spirit of life from God shall enter into his Witnesses, for the pouring out
of the last plagues upon the Beasts dominion.

Answ. 4. For that the remnant (I humbly conceive) are to strike in, and not to
begin; to succeed and follow, not to direct and lead; to execute, not to
prepare: but your opinion makes 144000, or the remnant, to begin; and the two
Witnesses to fall in with them: which I see not.

Repl. Either you or I are here in some mistake, both to the Remnant and
Witnesses. For, 1. I do not take the Remnant (as you do) to be the one hundred
forty and four thousand; but (as I said before) part of the woman's seed, which
never fled into the wilderness; against whom the dragon makes war, Rev. 12.17.
and this, before the rising of the Witnesses; and so, in likelihood, refers to
the wars in France, Holland, Germany, Britain, etc. 2. I take the one hundred
forty and four thousand, and the risen Witnesses, to be all one. For, (as you
said well) it is a testimony or Witness (not persons) that is slain; the which
Testimony or Truth (that is, the glorious Cause and Interest of Christ) rises
and lives again, by a spirit of life from God entered into the one hundred
forty and four thousand.

Answ. 5. For that all the hitherto-plagues upon the Beasts dominion, do
signify nothing, if they were not the matter of the Vials.

Repl. 1. The conclusion will not follow. For whilst the Israelites were in
Egypt, no doubt the Lord plagued the Egyptians at several times; yet they were
none of the ten last plagues. To come nearer; when Abbeys and Monasteries were
put down in Hen. 8. his Reign, this was a plague upon the Beasts dominion, and
signified something. So has he been plagued in France, Scotland, Bohemia, the
Netherlands; yet reckoned no Vials. Besides, what did the Goths, Hunnes,
Vandals, etc. but pour out plagues upon the Beasts dominion?

2. That they are said to be the last plagues, it clearly shows, that there
were plagues upon the Beasts dominion before. For the distinction between
former and later, must be understood of the Beasts dominion as the subject:
that is, several plagues should be poured upon it, before the seven last
Plagues or Vials begin.

Answ. 6. And lastly, the subjects of the Vials, Rev. 16.2, 3, 4, 5, etc. of
the first, the second, and the third, as the holy Ghost in Scripture opens
them, have been under the very same wrath mentioned in the first, second, and
third Vials: so that I am much persuaded that they are begun, by a
Scripture-clearness.

Repl. That which first gave me occasion to question the beginning of the
Vials, it was, that I could not see neither the subjects nor the effects of the
Vials, as the holy Ghost opens them, Rev. 16. under the same wrath, as they are
interpreted; neither the first, second, nor third: there being nothing yet
done, in my opinion, that carries the character of VIAL-WORK upon it.

1. That the earth should be taken for the grosser part of Popery, where do we
find in Scripture a ground to raise such an Exposition? 2. That the subject
earth should be universal, and yet in many places this gross earth never moved,
but to this day remains as much and as bad as ever. 3. That Waldo, Wickliff,
Armachan, etc. should be Vial-Angels, a thing no way suitable to the description
of the holy Ghost, Rev. 15.

So again, for the second and third Vials, I am not satisfied, as they are
applied. First, why the second, to the Swedish war in Germany; the third, to
ours in Britain. Or, 2. (as others) why the second to the Romish discipline or
Hierarchy in England, Anno Dom. 1641. the third, to fall upon England, the
Low Countries, and France: I do not see Scripture-clearness for these things.
Nor 3. do I understand what difference there is between the earth and sea, as
they are expounded: for I think the Romish Hierarchy, viz. Popes, Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Monks, Friars, etc. with all that rabble, root and
branch, as gross earthly superstitions, as their Mass, their Crosses,
Purgatory, Penance, Pilgrimage, etc. And therefore, to make a distinction
between Romish doctrine, and Romish discipline, as two distinct subjects, I am
not of that opinion: but as they rose together, so they shall fall together,
inseparably, under one and the same Vial. I confess, in things to come, as they
are secret, so we cannot well judge whether men hit or miss (in their opinions)
till they come to pass: But in things that are past, and so visible, here we
can say a little more, whether men speak pertinently, and to purpose.

I thought to have forborne the Queries: but not knowing how it might be taken,
I have set down the Answers to them.

A few words to your Queries.
To the first, I answer: The one of the living creatures, (for I like not the
name of Beasts; nor is it (...), but (...), Rev. 15.7. and 4.6. Living
creatures, or Cherubims, as Ezekiel. 1.5.) Now this one I will not say, as some do
think, to signify the first ( which is the Lion) in this place; though in some
places it does, Dan. 10.13. Mar. 16.2. especially when we speak in order of
number, with others, as Rev. 6.1. But so it is not in Rev. 15.7. Wherefore here
I rather incline to the last; as Rev. 21.9. there came one of the seven Angels,
is meant the last of the seven: so here, one of the living creatures, I do
believe is meant the last of the four animals: and so the holy Ghost signifies,
by bringing up all with ONE, or the ONE, as the sum, or utmost, or concluding
number of all. Besides this, it agrees very well with the description: for the
last is the flying Eagle, Rev. 4.7. who gave (I conceive) the Vials to the
seven Angels, for these Reasons.

1. For that it is a bird of a most excellent spirit; and the meaning is, That
most excellent spirits must manage all those Vials; and the Angels under this
Eagle-administration from the Throne, will be full of sagacity, quick sent, and
apprehension, etc. See Job 39.27, 29.

Then 2. for that the Eagle is swift, and so the most suitable of all the four
living creatures, to give the Vials, for the swiftness of his dispensations in
the Vial-days, especially when the two Witnesses are up.

3. For that he is so full of courage, that he fears not to set upon the Great
Beast; and so will the executors of the Vials fall upon the Greatest of the
earth, yea the great Beast whom the earth has worshipped, feared and adored.

4. For that the way of the Eagle is a strong and unknown way, Prove. 30.19. and
so the most suitable to give out the Vials, which will be executed in strange
and unknown ways, or untrodden paths.

5. For that he will fly full to the sun, with eyes open; and goes out to his
prey at noonday: and so will the Vials be openly in the sight of the sun; and
those that pour them out, will be open-eyed, and move in the full light of the
work, with their faces to Jesus Christ, and eying the sun of righteousness,
Mal. 4.

6. He is called, the flying Eagle: for he has his nest on high in the rock;
and soaring so, he falls from on high right down upon his prey: And so will
this Vial-work fall from above, upon the heads of them under it, Hos. 8.1. and
there is no escaping it. The Eagle falls suddenly, in the twinkling of an eye,
(say some) upon his prey.

7. For that he is accounted the King of birds: and so the Vials are all the
wrath of God and the Lamb, or the King of Saints.

8. The Eagles prey is blood, or the carcases of them killed, Job 39.30. where
the slain are, there is she, Luke 17.37. And so he is the suitable administrator
from the throne, to give out the Vials, which turn waters into blood, and pour
slaughter upon the Beasts followers.

9. It appears to me, it is the Eagle too, by the contents of what judgments
he has to show, in Rev. 6.7, 8, 9. unto the end. All bring what the four
living creatures or Eagle says, Come and see, unto (viz.) the sword, famine,
death, hell, (all which will fall on the Beast by those Vials, Rev. 18.8. and
19.20.) and the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 16.16. and 17.14.

10. It appears yet further to me, in the order of the four living creatures,
and their several times and works, expressed by the holy Ghost, Rev. 6.1, 2.
the first said, Come and see, to his conquering with the Gospel in the Nations:
and this was in the primitive times of the ten persecutions, or before the
Beast rose: for the Saints were then under a most lion-like, noble, courageous,
Angel-like spirit. The second, v. 3, 4. said, Come and see, to the Red horse,
or Scarlet beast, Rev. 17.3. wherein the Riders had a great sword to slay us:
this was in the Beasts rise and crowning, by cruel persecutions, murders, and
massacres of the Saints; and so they were under the ministration of the second
living creature, (I conceive) like a Calf for Butchery and slaughter. 3. V. 5,
6. the third living creature said, Come and see, to him that had the balances
to weigh in time of great scarcity of God's own bread; only the oil and wine
(as the anointing) were preserved: and this I think was the ministration which
the two Witnesses were under in their Sackcloth-prophesying, who had the face
and grace of a man. But now 4. the Eagle is the ministrator under whom the
Angels of the Vials are: and so the two Witnesses, in that state or
predicament, are under the Eagle, who flies high, strong, clear, swift, etc.
which appears to me to be the flying Eagle that gives them out, for that they
are to reach over all Nations, and to fly over all; which the flying Angel
(who flies with the Gospel over every nation, kindred, tongue and people)
prepares, Rev. 14.6, 7, 12. And it seems to me the last living creature,
because the plagues are the last plagues which are in the Vials, Rev. 15.5. So
that for these Reasons, I have hinted my thoughts unto your first Querie.

Repl. I have no intent to meddle with things besides the Point in hand;
neither shall I speak much here.

But, 1. The Answerer (I think) misseth the Question: for it was not queried
which of the four Beasts (or living creatures, as he rather chooses) gives out
the Vials: But, if by the Angel pouring out the first Vial, Waldo, Wickcliff,
Grosthead, Armachan, or Luther, be meant; who then is the one of the living
creatures that delivers the Vial to them? that is, how are these men, in
publishing the Gospel, VIAL-ANGELS, and also the living creature or Eagle that
puts the Vial into their hands?

2. Concerning this large discourse of the flying Eagle, and
Eagle-administration, here is enough said (the premises granted) to show, that
no Vial is yet poured out.

For, 1. Must all the Vials be managed by most excellent spirits, men full of
sagacity, quick sent and apprehension? Such then have not been yet, since the
rise of the Beast: Though we see light and day at the dawning, yet is not the
same full and most excellent, till a while after. I grant, some of the persons
forementioned were good men; but yet had not most excellent spirits, were not
complete and full to manage any of the Vials.

2. For swiftness of dispersations in the Vial-days, what can be more evidently
against you then this; viz. that in eight or nine-hundred years, (for so long
it is since the Vials began, according to your Grounds) very little should be
done as to the destroying of the grosser part of Popery; methinks it rather
carries the likeness of a snail slowly creeping over the earth, then the
swiftness of an Eagle flying in the air.

3. For courage and boldness, this is no more then what the Antichristians had:
Sometimes the victory has gone on our side, otherwhile on theirs. But if the
Swethen King were a Vial-Angel, it is strange he should be slain in the War: for
my opinion is, that none of the seven Angels which have their breasts girded
with golden girdles, Rev. 15.6. shall fall by the hand of their enemy, or at
any time lose the Victory.

4. If the way of the Vials be strange and unknown, then were not the persons
so often named, the pourers of them out: for neither Waldo, Huss, Luther, King
of Sweth, etc. went in untrodden paths; but what they said or did, they had
Presidents and Examples before; and so were followers of others in known and
trodden paths.

5. Will those who pour out Vials be open-eyed, and move in the FULL LIGHT of
their work? how then can it be fairly applied to such men as sat in darkness,
saw little of the things of Christ, practiced most gross idolatry, and, for
some of them, had not their faces to Jesus Christ, eying the sun of
righteousness; but their own private advantages?

6. That the Eagle falls suddenly in the twinkling of an eye (as it were) upon
his prey; it is very true, and suitable to the Vial-ministration: for surely
when that Work begins, it shall go speedily and prosperously on, without
obstruction or let, and all done in a little time. Ergo, etc.

7. If the Vials are all wrath, even the wrath of God and the Lamb; then could
not Waldo or Luther pour any forth in preaching the doctrine of the Gospel. I
have showed before, that whatsoever the Sackcloth-witnesses did in smiting the
earth with plagues, it was only by reproof; as Psalm. 141.5. Prove. 19.25. It is
true, through unbelief and hardness of heart, the Lord afterward brought real
plagues upon the wicked world, and will bring many more (and greater) in the
Vials.

The Eighth is answered before, viz. in what sense the Sackcloth-Witnesses
turned waters into blood.

For the Ninth and Tenth Reasons, what is there applied to the Eagle, is more
against the Answerer then the rest. For if under the second living creature
like a Calf, be meant the cruel persecutions, murders, and massacres of the
Saints after the Beast rose; then cannot the Eagle-ministration be brought up
to the time of the Beasts reign: for who are the Saints then butchered, if not
the Sackcloth-Witnesses? Therefore, to say that at one time they should be
under the ministration of the second living creature, viz. like a Calf for
butchery; and under the administration of the fourth living creature, namely,
the flying Eagle, in smiting and killing their enemies; this cannot be: neither
is there any method, order, or reason kept (in my opinion) in this fourfold
ministration; unless the Eagle-time be understood after the rising of the
Witnesses.

Besides, the Answerer in his words following, grants as much, saying, It seems
to me, the last living creature, because the plagues are the last plagues which
are in the Vials. If the Witnesses, before their rising, did pour out the last
plagues; who before them poured out the first plagues upon the Beasts dominion?
Now here I see no reason why any should begin those last plagues, either at
Luther or Waldo, and leave out the Sackcloth-Witnesses before their times. I
shall here in brief set down what has been publicly witnessed against the
Beast many years before either of them.

In the year 1126 (which was forty years before Waldo) Peter Bruis, sometime a
Priest, was so zealously earnest against the grosser parts of Popery, as first
in the Diocese of Arles, of Ambrun, and of Gap; then after, throughout all
Auvergne, Languedoc, and Guien, he boldly and openly preached against
Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Masses, Suffrages, and Oblations
for the dead, Purgatory, Worshipping of Images, Invocation of Saints, Single
life of Priests, Pilgrimages, Superstitious Holy Days, Consecrations of Waters,
Oil, Frankincense, and other Romish trash. And withal, sharply inveighed
against the pride and excess of the Pope and his Prelates, whom he called
Princes of Sodom; and the Church of Rome he termed Babylon, and the mother of
Fornication and confusion. For which glorious Testimony, he was burnt to ashes.

About the same time, there was one Henry a disciple of his, who as publicly
declared against the Blasphemies of the Beast; for which they were so mad and
enraged, as being taken, he was bound in Chains, and sent by Albertus Cardinal
of Ostia into Italy, where it is thought he was secretly murdered: for he was
never seen nor heard of afterward.

So in the year 1125. one Arnulph, a zealous and devout man, for reproving the
Looseness, Covetousness, Pride, and other Vices of the Clergy, was at Rome, by
their wicked hands, cruelly murdered.

Again, Anno 855. (before Waldo three hundred years) Grontier Archbishop of
Collen, and Thietgaud of Trevers, with their Colleagues, gave forth this
Testimony to the world against the Pope, and sent it to him: Thou art (say
they) a Wolf unto the Sheep, a Murderer of the Living, and one which thrustest
men into hell: Thou bear the show of a Bishop, but art a very Tyrant: Thou
art in habit a Pastor, in heart a Wolf: Thy Title promises as a Father, but in
thy Deeds thou carriest as a God: (alluding to the place in 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.) Thou
call thy self, A servant of servants; and seek by all means to become a
Lord of lords: and consequently, according to the doctrine of our Savior, thou
art the least of all the Ministers of Gods Church, who yet in thy ambition
runnest headlong to perdition; thinking every thing lawful to be done, which
pleases thee. We care not for thy words; we fear not thy Bulls, nor yet thy
Thunders, etc.

Yea more, Anno 734. Albertus Gallus, and Clemens Scotus, and many other
learned men in France and Germany, withstood the Pope in Relics, Images,
Single life, Purgatory, Supremacy; and openly called the Pope the author of
Lies, the disturber of Peace and Piety, and the corrupter of Christian
Doctrine. So Claudius Bishop of Taurin, Anno 799.

I forbear to mention Bertram, Anno 812. and the Bishop of Florence, Anno 1114.
and many others, who long before Waldo, were condemned of Heresy, for teaching
and writing against the grosser parts of Popery, as Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, Images, Masses, Pilgrimages; and asserting the Pope to be
Antichrist, etc.

So then, if the first Vial be to be understood of the Sackcloth-Witnesses
speaking against the grosser part of Popery; the time cannot begin at Luther
nor Waldo, but with the Witnesses before. For (as I said) there is no reason
why such flying Eagles should be left out, who were as high, valiant, quick,
and public against the Beast, (eight or nine hundred years past) as were
Armachan, or Grosthead, or the like. In a word therefore, how these can be the
last plagues begun so long agone, to wit, when the Sackcloth-Witnesses begun
first to smite the earth, (which I think I can make it appear, was as soon as
the Beast did rise) I shall leave it to the READER'S judgment.

Answ. Your second Question is answered before. For I cannot see how any Angel
can be single persons, but the Witnesses principally, and the remnant of the
woman's seed as auxiliaries and assisting.

Repl. 1. Neither does the Answerer here come home to the Question. For the
Question is not so much, Whether a single person or a number be meant, as
concerning the condition of the persons (few or many) which are to pour out the
Vials. As for Example: If the Swethen Army poured out the second Vial, as the
Angel mentioned Rev. 16.3. then may the Vial-Angels or Instruments, which shall
pour out the last plagues, be visibly profane and wicked persons; which is
contrary to Rev. 15.3, 4, 5, 6. That no single person is meant by any Angel, I
agree with the Answerer. But mark then, in taking the Swethen Soldiers to be
the second Angel, it must follow, that each Angel may be made up (a part at
least) of Idolaters, Adulterers, Swearers, Drunkards, and most lewd wretches:
But I think not so. For though no Angel be a single person, yet my opinion is,
that all the persons which shall make up each Angel, shall be sanctified ones,
called, and chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17.18.

2. Either the Answerer or Replyer is much mistaken concerning the Vials: for I
do not think, that either the two Witnesses, or the Remnant of the woman's seed,
to be any of the seven Angels, Rev. 15.

Otherwise then, thus: The forty and two months of the Beasts reign being out,
one hundred forty and four thousand are upon their work. It is true, the
spirit of life from God enters into them: but this is to be understood distinct
from the remnant, Rev. 12.17. and after the rising of the Witnesses.

Answ. To the third Question: I confess, it is my judgment, that the song of
the Lamb, Rev. 15.3. and that song, Chap. 14.3. are one and the same; and that
Hallelujahs are the effects of the Vials: but with this caution, That the song
having several parts and degrees, is not sung all at once; but as the victory
arises, and grows higher and higher over the Beast, in every generation the
song goes on, as the effect of every Vial in its degree and proportion, for the
redeemed at that day to sing, i. e. redeemed from among men, Romans 14.4.

Repl. We are here so agreed, as I hope we shall no more differ about the
beginning of the Vials. You grant, it is one and the same Song. For the
Caution, I shall wave it, viz. about parts and degrees, as nothing material:
but for the Song, Rev. 14. it is doubtless after the Witnesses are risen. Now
you say, It is the same song, (which must be in respect of time and persons, or
it is not sense) then, I say, it must needs be after the rising of the
Witnesses. Behold how good and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell
even together! Psalm. 133.1.

Answ. The fourth Question has had a full Answer before.

Repl. Through mistake, this is the sixth Querie, p. 17. The Reader shall have
the Answer and Reply, page 52, 53, 54, 55, etc.

In the Copy which my friend had, the fifth Querie was thus: To mention but
one effect of the Vials supposed to be poured out, viz. the effect of the
second Vial on the sea, in which every living thing died: now the question is,
How this was fulfilled either by the Parliament in England, or the Germane war,
or any other way, as it is applied unto things past.

To which the Answer is thus: Under the second Vial, every living thing in that
sea (that was turned into blood) died a civil death, and stank like the dead
fishes, Exodus 7.18. Isai. 50.2. Psalm. 105.29. Every living soul in that sea,
that lived, moved, swimmed, and delighted in it, as well the Clergical as
Laical, were under the wrath of this Vial. As Beza says, Whatsoever living
creature, (...), which is taken for every kind; and so every one, whether
Martial, Civil, or Ecclesiastical, died a civil death, yea, and a spiritual
also; the sea being brought into a filthy savor to all living ones, or the
people of God, by this Vial. Now all that stayed in the sea, so died. Wherefore
I find it true, that every soul, i. e. referred to the subject matter of this
Vial, died. For, as Chemnitius says, such particulae universales non in
infinitum extendentur, sed ad materiam subjectam restringuntur.

Repl. I conceive the Answerer intends here the Swethen war; but he names none.
And it was better to forbear the name of persons, time, action, or Country: for
it may be as well applied to France, England, Holland, Bohemia, as Germany.

But 1. Though it be true, a number of Papists died in that War, yet for ought
I know, as many of the other party. Besides, things afterward came to that
pass, as the PROTESTANTS had more Loss then Advantage by that War.

2. I do not know what you mean by a spiritual death: if you mean, as to sin,
they were as dead before, and so not slain by the Vial. If you apply it to a
second death, it is beyond my line.

3. There was as filthy savor before that War, and since, as then: very little
was done that time, either to increase or abate the stink.

4. What fish soever died in that Sea, (turned into blood) it soon multiplied
again: it seems the Sea was not very bloody; for the fish increased and
multiplied as fast as before.

5. I think there is as little ground to carry the second Vial to the Swethen
war, as by earth to understand the grosser part of Popery.

Lastly, I cannot believe that the Swethen Army were ever in the Temple of God,
and from thence went forth clothed in pure and fine linen, etc. with golden
Vials.

Besides, to deliver my opinion freely, (and I think most men now are of my
opinion) for that Swethen War, more fitly may it be set forth under Kytes and
Ravens, then by the Eagle, as the Answerer has described that King of birds.

The sixth and last Question which my friend had (for the Book has more then
he saw) was this: Whereas some restrain the rising of the Witnesses to the
fourth Vial, others to the fifth, we question what Reasons and Grounds such
have; and why may not the rising of the Witnesses and first Vial contemporize?

To which the Answer is: Why the rising of the two Witnesses and the first Vial
may not contemporize, I have answered before: that I begun with your Queries.

Repl. The difference between us is stated here. I think, the rising of the
Witnesses, and the beginning of the Vials, contemporize. The Answerer is
otherwise minded, and refers his Reader to what he has written before. For my
part, I do the same, and have done for this time. Now if I hear that this which
is done be acceptable and useful to the Saints waiting for the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, for whose (...) I have published it, I shall (by the good
hand of God assisting me) according to that light which the Father of lights
has given in the Vials, speedily set forth an Exposition of them; it being
already prepared for that purpose.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
BY reason of the Author's far distance from the Press, more Faults have
escaped than either He or the Printer could have wished: some of the chief are
these: Viz.

ERRATA.
The Title over the Pages, should be only (as you find it toward the latter
end of the Book) Truth with Time. P. 14. in marg. at the letter a, read, Of
this opinion are many good men. P. 16. l. 31. read, to sing the song. P. 31. l.
18. for rather, r. neither. P. 32. l. 30. you must take that Answer to be the
answer to the second Reason. P. 50. l. 1. leave out Mr. T^ll.

Other Mistakes there are, which thou art desired to take notice of, and
correct thy self.


