A Brief And yet Exact, and Accurate DESCRIPTION Of the Present state of the
GREAT and MIGHTY EMPIRE OF GERMANY, Both touching the Forms of their CIVIL
GOVERNMENT, and profession in RELIGION.

Taken By a Diligent and Faithful Surveyor of it, who with much pains
traveled over that whole Country to inform himself and others of these things.

Now published by SA. CLARKE, sometime Pastor in St. Bennet Fink, London, for
the public good.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1665.

A Description of the GREAT EMPIRE OF GERMANY: Together with an Account of
their Government both Civil, and Religious, wherein many Memorable things are
contained.
GErmany is divided into ten Provinces, Ten Provinces of Germany.
which are called the Circuites, or Circles of the Empire; whereof the first
Circuit is of the four Electors besides the River of Rhine, viz. of the
Archbishops of Mentz, Collen, and Treere, and the Count Palatine. The second
is the Circuit of Franconia: The third of Bavaria: The fourth of Austria: The
fifth of Suevia: The sixth of the Rhine: The seventh of Westphalia: The eigth
of Saxonia Superior: The ninth of Saxonia Inferior: The Governors of ^he ten
Provinces elected.
and the tenth of Burgundia. All the which Circuits are Governed by ten
several Heads, that are chose out of the Nobility, and do use that Office
commonly during their lives, or according to the will of the Emperor, and the
States of the Empire, as hereafter in the end of this Book it shall appear,
where the division of the same Provinces shall more at large be set forth. And
as all these ten Circuits are but one Body; so do they consist in three
estates, viz. of Churchmen, The Empire consists of Churchmen, Temporal
Potentates and free-Cities.
Temporal Potentates, and Free Cities, the which all have one Head, that is
the Emperor: who at present has his residence at Vienna in Austria, to whom,
as for Homage, they pay yearly some little Tribute; and in cases needful for
the state of the Empire they contribute Men, Weapons, and Money extraordinary,
every one according to the assessement made in the division of the said ten
Circuits of the Empire. The which extraordinary contribution is given by the
consents of these three estates being lawfully called to some place certain,
The Diett. The first estate of the Empire. The heads of the Churchmen.
Archbishop of Mentz Chancellor of Germany. Archbishop of Collen, and Trier.
by the Emperor, unto a Parliament, which they term a Diett.

The Churchmen have three heads, which are Archbishops, and Electors: of the
which, the first is the Archbishop of Mentz, High Chancelour of Germany, with
whom remain all the Acts of the Diettes. And he has authority sede vacant to
call the rest of the Electors to a Diett for the choosing of an Emperor, which
is always done at Francford upon the River of Mean.

Next unto him is the Archbishop of Colen, High Chancelour of Italy; and after
him the Archbishop of Treer High Chancelour of France, the which two do take
their place in the Sessions alternis vicibus, by turns.

And here is to be noted, that these three Spiritual Electors have not their
Office of Electorship, nor their preferment of the Archbishopricks by
succession of Inheritance, but by election of the Cannons of their Cathedral
Churches, who commonly choose such to be their Archbishop as is a Gentleman of
a good House.

Further in this Ecclesiastical estate are comprehended all the other
Archbishops, and Bishops of Germany; Archbishop of Saltzburg.
as the Archbishop of Saltzburge, which is one of the Ancientest, and in
respect of his Mines of Salt, Silver, and Gold, is counted the Richest, whose
Revenue is yearly to the value commonly of one hundred and fifty thousand
guilderns.

The Archbishops of Magdeburge, Archbishop of Magdeburge.
who is called the Primate of the Empire, whose Revenue is likewise great, for
out of one City called Hall, he receives for the proffit of Salt that is
gotten, every Saturday at night, five hundred Dollars, all charges deducted.

The Archbishop of Bream, and Bisontz, Archbishop of Bream. Twenty five
bishops. The two estates of the Empire. Temporal Electors
with about twenty five Bishops that have great possessions, and in respect of
their Cities, Castles, and Provinces are called Princes of the Empire: Amongst
the which the Bishop of Munster in Weastphalia, who is also Bishop of
Esenburge, and Padeborn, is counted one of the chiefest.

Of the Temporal Lords there are counted likewise four chief, the which are
also called Princes Electors, and have each one a several Office which they
use in their Styles for any honor in the service of the Emperor, at his
coronation.

The Count Pallatine of the Rhine is the greatest amongst them, and is chief
Sewer to the Emperor, four. First Count Pallatine of the Rhine.
and Sede vacant, vicarius Imperij in Pallatinatu, whose chief Court is
commonly at Heydelberge upon the River of Neccar, his Liuetenant in the Office
of Sewership, is always one of the House of Nortenberge by Inheritance.

Next to him in all Sessions of Parliament, Second Duke of Saxon.
but before him in the Wars (the Emperor being personally in the Field*) is
the Duke of Saxon, whose principal House is at Dresden in Misuia, upon the
River Albis, who is High Marshall of the Empire, and bears in all Triumphs
the Sword before the Emperor. His Lieutenant in that Office of high
Marshalship, is always one of the House of Papenheim by Inheritance.

The third place of the Temporal Lords, and the sixth place of the Electors,
Third Marquis of Brandenburge.
has the Marquis of Brandenburge, who is high Chamberlain; whose Court is
chiefly at Birlyn in Marchia upon the River of Spre. His Liuetenant in the
Office of high Chamberlain, is always one of the House of Falkenstein by
Inheritance.

There is also a seventh Elector who is Cupbearer, and has no other Office,
Fourth King of Behemia.
nor authority in the Empire, but only in the Election, a voice, when the other
six are equally divided, and then on that side that he gives his voice, there
does the matter prevail. And the same is ever the King of Bohemia, which is
now Emperor himself. His Lieuetenant in the Office of Cupbearer is always one
of the House of Lymburge by Inhetance.

The seventh Elector was appointed long after the other six, viz. in Charles
the fourth his time, and the rest in the time of Otho Tertius.

All these four Temporal Electors, have their Authority by succession of
heritage, and the eldest of the House has always the place of Electorship;
they have power, and Authority after the death of the Emperor to choose a man,
The Electors may choose also a King of Romans.
whom they list, or during the Emperors Life to elect a King of the Romans,
who always does succeed the Emperor, as the Prince of Wales does in the
Kingdom of England, and the Dophin of France does the French King.

After the Lords Electors, are reckoned the Noblemen, and Princes of their
Houses, Duke of Bevaria. The common guildern or floren is worth 38. Starling.
as for example: The Duke of Bavire whose residence is at Monachum, or Munchen
in Bavaria, where his yearly revenue is said to be six hundred thousand
guildernes, with the rest of the Palsegraves, whose Feodaries are the
Ringraves, the Earls of Erbach, and Isenberg.

The Duks of Saxon, Duke of Saxon.
whose Feodaries are the Counties of Mansfelde; Swerzberge, and Stolberge.

The Marquesses of Brandenburge, whose Feodaries are the Earls of Reppein, and
Vyer Rotton, Marquess of Brandenburge.
(which Earldom now the Earl of Houlstine possesses) and the Barrons of
Potlas.

The Dukes of Brunswick (whose yearly revenue is two hundred thousand
guildernes) the eldest of that House, Duke of Brunswick. The Daller is worth 4s
4d sterling.
who is called Duke Julus of Wolfenbottel) receives every day through out the
year one, hundred Dollers out of one Silver Mine at Gloucester only, besides his
other mines of Lead, and Copper etc. his Vassales are the Contz of Regenstein,
and Barrons of Warberge.

The Dukes of Lumburge, and Harburge, Duke of Lumberge Hamberge.
who are of the House of Brunswicke.

The Dukes of Lawenburge, and Princes of Anhalt, Duke of Lawenburge: Princes of
Anhalt. Landgrave of Hessen.
which are of the ancientest House of Saxon.

The Landesgrave of Hessen, whose Country is very great, for they be also
Earls of Catzenelbogen, and have in Hessia seventy Cities, their Vassals are
the Earls of Rippan, of Hoyz, of Trefeld, of Lipe, of Sulmos, of Witstem, of
Nefsowz, and of Shaumborcke. Duke of Wirtemberge. Duke of Pomer and
Mechelberge. Marquess of Baden. Order of pre-eminence. 7. Electors. 4. Dukes.
4. Marquesses. 4 Landgraves.


The Duke of Wirtemberge (whose yearly revenue is two hundred thousand Florens,
or Guildernes.

The Dukes of Pomer and Mechelburge.

The Marquesses of Baden, with a number of other Princes, Marquesses, Earls,
and Barrons, of all the which, in all Conventions, and Dietts of the Empire,
next after the seven Electors, the four Dukes, which are of Suevia, Brunswick,
Bavaria and Lothering, do take their place. And after them, the four Marquesses
of Misnia, Marchia, Baden, and Brandenburge. And next unto them the four
Landgraves of Muring, Heses, Litchtenberge, and Elsotz. After them the four
Burgraves of Magdenburge, 4 Burgraves. 4. Earls. 4. Barons* 4 Knights.
Normberge, Renake, and Strumburge. And after them the four Earls of Savoye,
Cleve, Zilie, and Schwartzburge. And next to them the four Barons of Lymsperge,
Tasis, Westerburge, and Aldenwalde. And last of all, the four Knights of
Andelaw, Meldin, Stomeck, and Frawenberge.

The three estates of the Empire. Free Cities, the number. Their Tribute.
The third estate consists in the Free Cities, which are in number at present
(as some say) seventy two: and have been heretofore eighty five. All the which
do acknowledge no other head but the Emperor, to whom they pay a small
Tribute yearly, not amounting in all to the sum of fifty thousand Guildernes:
from the which payment also certain of these Cities are exempted, and pay
nothing but at the General contribution of all the states at the Diett, as
shall hereafter appear.

Touching the policy of these three estates of the Empire, Absolute power of
the three-estates.
it is to be understood, that every one has within their own Dominions an
absolute power to Coin Moneys (which serve not in any other Teritories, but in
their own, except Dollers, which according to their rate are current in all
places) to determine by Law, to execute Justice, to dispense and deal with
their Subjects according to right, and equity, as they list.

The Government and p^licy of the Count- Pallatine.
But forasmuch as it would be too tedious to speak of every Princes Government
apart, namely, seeing that in most things they have one order and form; I shall
therefore give an example of one, or two of the most principal, which may
serve for all the rest. And because among the temporal estates the Count
Pallatine (as was said) is the chiefest, I will begin with him.

At Heidelberge, where his Court is, he has a very fair House adjoining to his
Castle, His Court.
which is called his Chancery. In the which place are five principal Counsels,
or Courts.

1. His Counsel.
The first is his Privy Counsel, where he himself, with a few others, whereof
the chiefest be Doctors of the Civil Law, do daily sit to consult of matters
of Importance touching the state of his Country: The answering of foreign
Princes Ambassadors, dispatching of his Ambassadors to foreign Princes: the
bestowing of his Children in marriage, etc.

The second Counsel, whereof the Chancelour is chief, is of a few Civillians,
2. Counsel.
where all matters extrajudiciall (as they term it) are handeled and
compremitted, and in case they cannot by the arbitrators, be ended, then are
they, by the Chancelour, referred to the third Counsel, which is called the
Hossegerichte, which is of a great number both of Doctors, and Gentlemen. In
the which all Civil controversies and causes between his Subjects, and
Actions, both personal, 3. Counsel.
and real, are by Law decided, and in the which, the Subject, if he be injured
by his Prince, may have the Law against him, from the which Court, it is not
lawful to apeal to the Chamber of the Empire, except the cause does surmount
the some of six hundred guildernes.

The fourth Counsel is the Consistory Court and is of Civillians, and
Spiritual men, 4. Counsel.
wherein all Church matters, both for Doctrine, and Discipline are determined:
Testaments proved, and controversies in marriage decided.

This Prince has reformed this Court, and whereas before, it had no other
Counselors then Spiritual men, His reformation of the spitituall Court.
now he has joined together with them, certain honest discreet Ministers, some
of his wisest and best-learned Counselors.

The fifth Counsel (whereof the Camer Master, that is the Chamberlain or the
Treasurer is President) is of certain Doctors, and of household Officers, 5
Counsel.
in the which there is account taken of all his Revenues, how his debts are to
be paid, his Household ordered and served, his Lands set and let, his Customs
and Tolls examined.

This Prince maintains commonly in his Court of all sorts of People twenty
four Tables, Officers of his Court.
eight persons to every Table, the which do eat commonly in two several
places. In the one place, which is a fair large Chamber, sits himself, his
Wife and Children, at one Table standing alone in the upper end of the Chamber:
and his Gentlewomen, and Preachers at two other Tables, and about ten Tables
more adjoining to those, two Tables which stand in a row, on one side of the
said Chamber, whereat do sit his Gentlemen, who immediately after the Prince is
set down, do likewise sit and eat continually at one hour, which is at ten and
at five of the clock.

In the other place the rest of his Family; as his Guard (which are twenty four
Halberders) with others of his Yeomen, and Grooms, together with all the
Officers and Gentlemen Servants, who likewise eat together at one time, which is
at nine and four of the clock: before which hours they are continually warned
by the noise of eight Trumpets and two kettle Drums.

His Household Officers, be the Marshall, the Steward, the Treasurer, the
Secretary, and the Clarke of the Kitchen: The Marshall first places all men
and sees good order kept: the Steward sees all things provided for the House
and Household: The Treasurer disburseth the money: The Secretary takes the
account and writes the Letters* The Clarke of the Kitchen sees all things
ordered in the Kitchen, and everv one served according to their degrees, and of
all the Household expenses keeps a Book. The Prince is served in Silver with
four courses, besides fruit, and in every course nine covered Dishes, which
three Gentlemen with their Caps on their Heads, do always bring to the Carver,
having the Marshall to go before them with his staff, and when they have
delivered their Dishe, they sit likewise down at a Table appointed only for them
in the same Chamber. There waits ordinarily on the Prince at the Table, a
Sewer, a Carver, a Gentleman of his Chamber that waits on his Cup, and takes
the same, and two or three Pages that wait on his trencher which the Carver
always gives. The Carver gives every one to eat in like sort as it is at the
Lord Majors of London his Table. All the other Tables be served by the Princes
Guard. In the Princes Chamber, one of his Preachers does always say Grace,
both before and after meat, and in the common Hall the Clark of the Kitchen,
who is there in the Place of the Marshall, causes likewise thanks to be given
to God by one of the poor Scholars that the Prince keeps of purpose. The
meat that is left in both places is always forthwith given to the poor by the
Almner.

His Counselors have always allowed them every one according to his virtue
and quallity, a very good stipend both for his Fee and diet in their own Houses.

There is straight Discipline in his Court against swearing, Blasphemy, and
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Fighting and all other kinds of Vices, in which cases
notwithstanding, some more respect is had to the punishment of a Gentleman,
then of an other, and yet none spared.

Dancing also is forbidden in his Court, and throughout all his Land.

The charge of his Stable has the Master of his Horse, and every Gentleman
that by his commandment keeps any Horses, is allowed Oats sufficient, and
for every Horse tweny five Dollers the year, toward pay and stable room; and
every Yeoman twenty five Guildernes.

And because I have entered into some discourse of his Household matters, The
exercises of the Pallatine.
it shall not be impertinent to show this Princes order, and conversation, how
he spends his time: both because the example is notable and worthy of all
good Princes to be followed, as also because that hereby he wins great
favor of the peopele.

His order is to arise every morning at five of the clock, and at six he comes
to his Chapel, with his Wife, Children, and Family, where one of the three
Ministers (which he always keeps in his Court to say Grace, preach, and
administer the Sacrament) after a Psalm sung by Children, which are kept in his
Court for that purpose, does preach and pray until seven of the clock, and
then the Prince goes straight away into his Court Chancery, where he tarrieth
until ten, which is the hour to dine. At dinner he commonly sits two
hours, and after dinner one hour, talking with his Wife and Children. After he
rises up (which is about one of the clock) he goes straightwayes into his
Closet, where he tarrieth till five, in perusing and reading his Subjects
supplications, which are duly given to him as he goes and comes from the
Chancery: the which supplications, the next day he sends to every Court as
the matter requires, where immediately justice is administered. At five of the
clock he goes to supper, where he sits two hours, and afterward either
walks, or otherwise passes the time with his Wife, and Children until it be
nine, and then he calls both the Gentlemen, Grooms, and Pages of his Chamber
to his Privy Chamber door, where they hear him pray half an hour, and so he
goes to rest. This is the conversation commonly of this good Prince, the which
order he breaks not but upon some very great occasion.

Sometimes as he sits at his Table he hears his Musicians, whereof he has
five, playing excellently well on Shalmes that be made, the one like a Halberd,
the second like a Crossebow, the third like a Boarstaff, the fourth like a
Handgun, and the fifth like Javeline. The same Musicians have also Cornetts,
Violins, and Virginals, which they mingle one with an other, as it is the
Princes pleasure to hear them: Other pastimes he exercises not, except when he
has no supplications of his Subjects to read, which is very seldom. He then
hunteth the Stagge or Hind, according to the season of the year; or else sees
his Sons and Gentlemn ride his great Horses and run at the Ring, or else rides
about certain Villages, and converteth the Curates, to the understanding of the
true Doctrine of the Sacraments, wherein a number of his Country are not yet
well persuaded.

When this Prince has any War toward, His Parliament.
or otherwise upon some urgent cause for the Weal of his Country, and
conservation of his State, he calls (as the manner is of all other Princes in
Germany) a Parliament, which they term a Landstage, to the which all the
Nobility of his Country, and certain Burgesses of every City within his
Dominions do come. By whose common consent, either a Subsidy is granted to be
levied of all his Subjects or else new Statuts are made, or old revoked, or
reformed, according to the state and necessity of the time, the which Statuts
are called Quandtz ordnuce: and are always expounded by the rules of the Civil
Law, when their intent is not well otherwise to be understood.

This Princes Country lies, His Countries.
partly along both sides of the River Rhine from Argentine unto Collen, the
which he Governs himself, and partly in Bavaria superior, whereof the
principal City is Amberge, upon the River of Fills, where his eldest Son, Duke
Lewis does Govern under him, and has the same order in Administering Justice
(as near as the manner of the Country will permit) as his father has at
Heidelberge, from which place notwithstanding the Subjects may appeal to
Heidelberge, because that is the highest Court by reason that the Elector, who
is chief of that House, dwells there.

This Prince, although his Father was a great Papist, His Religion.
yet he being persuaded by one of his Sisters that was of the Religion, and
chiefly instructed by Eberhard, Earl of Eberbache, a godly and wise Gentleman,
and then Steward to Ottho Henrye, his predecessor in the Electorship, as soon
as he came to the same estate, which was in Anno 1558. he reformed the Religion
in his Country, as much as was possible for the obstinacy of the Lutherans. And
at this day throughout all his Dominions the Gospel is sincerely preached,
Images, and other superstitious Ceremonies which the Lutherans throughout all
Germany yet use) were abolished, and the Sacrament as well administered, as it
is at present in the Church of England, for the which his reformation he was
like to have suffered great trouble in the Diett at Augusta, in Anno. 1566. His
touble in the Diett at Augusta, for Religion.
Where the Emperor Maximilian that now is, with all the Electors, and States
of the Empire, his Eledest Son Duke Lewis, and his Sons in Law the Dukes John
Fredrick, and John William of Waymar in Saxon, and the Dukes of Swebrooke, and
Wirtemberge, were so earnestly bent against him for the same, that in case Duke
Augustus, the present Elector of Saxon, had not been, many supposed that he
should have been committed to Prison. and deprived of his Electorship. In the
which Convention he did so wisely, Godly and constantly defend his cause before
them and against them all (having only the Duke of Casimere his second Son that
stood always by him, with the Bible in one hand and the confession off Augusta
in the other, that he did convince them and put them all to silence, and during
his abode there, caused his Preachers openly to set forth the true Doctrine of
the Eucharist, in their Sermons in his House at Augusta, where they had a
wonderful audience, to the great grief and dispight of all the Lutherans.

But to knitt up the discourse of this good Princes Government, and Godly
conversation, I think it not superfluous to show what word he uses in all
purposes and events, and the which I heard him utter the eighth day of April
last in Anno 1569. when a great part of his estate at Heidelburge was suddenly
by casualty in the night set on fire, and the whole in great danger to be
utterly burnt and consumed notwithstanding the exceeding great watch that is
nightly there kept by four men, which at every quarter of an hour do blow
great base horns, and at every hours end do sound Trumpets in four quarters of
the said Castle: At that time, even in the extremity of the flame, he said with
his hands lift up to Heaven, not once but often, ( Herenach dine will) which is
to say, Fiat voluntas tua Domine. Thy will be done, O Lord.

Now like as before is showed of the Count Pallatines order of Justice, in like
sort may be said of the Duke of Saxon, now Elector, saving that his Counsels,
and Courts of Justice be not all at one place. For his Chancery where he
holds his Privy Counsel and Exchequer, are at Dresden, His chief Court.
which I declared before to be the chief place of his residence; unto the which
all the rest of his Courts do appeal, and from the which his Subjects do in
no case appeal to the Chamber of the Empire, as was said that the Paulsgraves
subjects may. And further his Court called Croffegricht, No appeal from him
where the differences between his Subjects are decided and whereunto himself,
if he do his Subjects wrong, may be sited, is kept always in the City of
Leiptzigke, in Misnia. And his Consistory Court, which is not so well reformed
as the Palsgraves Court, is holden in two places, the one at Misen in Misnia,
and the other at Witemberge in Saxony.

In all this Princes Provinces Adultery is punished with death, Punishment of
Adultery and Fornication.
and Fornication with whipping and bannishment.

This Elector, albeit he keeps not so many Tables in his Court as the Count
Pallatine does, yet he keeps a greater State, and gives ordinary
entertainment to more then the Palsgrave does. For besides his ordinary guard,
whereof there be fifty Holbardiers, and as many Harquibushers, to whom he
gives monthly, besides their Liveries, which are black cloaks, for their diet
and Fee five Guildernes, when they sit still, and six Guildernes when they
travel He has continully about him fourteen Rittmasters, that is Captains,
which are able to bring him on the sudden for all events, three hundred
Horses apiece, of the which every one keeps ordinarily twelve Horses, for the
which twelve Horses each of them has allowance of the Prince, yearly five
hundred French Crowns and for their yearly Fee of Captainship one hundred and
fifty French Crowns the piece, and these Captains are all Gentlemen that are
for the most part married, and keep Houses themselves at Dresden, where the
Court is. To the rest of his train, to whom he gives meat and drink in his
Court, he allows besides provender yearly for every Horse fifty dollers, and
some Gentlemen he allows six Horses, to some more to some less, according as
he favors them, and according to their quallity, and for every Horse he
allows them a Servant, who has his livery, meat, and drink at the Princes
charges in the Town.

Of all the Princes of Germany, the present Elector of Saxony, is the richest,
and of the greatest power, both of men and money: for his yearly Rent of Assise
is reckned to be above seven hundred thousand dollers, besides his Taxes,
Tolles and Impositions of Beer, and Wine, etc. which is accounted to amount
yearly to as much more.

The said Duke has one hundred and thirty four Seignories, and in the same
twenty Earldomes, and sixteen Barronies, he has of late gotten into his hands
by the consent of the Cannons (for the term, as he has promised, but of one
and twenty years, but as it is thought for ever) three Bishoprics of
Mersburge, Misen, and Nawimberge: and out of the last only he has yearly for
Impost of Beer about twenty four thousand dollers. His Mines of Silver, Copper,
Brass, Tin, Lead, etc. which he has at his Cities of Friberge, Anneberge,
Maryberge, Sueberge, and Swertzberge, etc. which be fair Towns, and maintained
only by the said Mines, do yield him yearly wonderful riches, whereof I could
learn no certain yearly sum, because the commodity is uncertain, some years
better, some years worse, according to the goodness of the veins, in the
which there are working, above ten thousand able men for the Wars, besides a
great number of poor impotent Men, Women and Children, which have there livings
only by the same. Of the which works their i sone at Friberge, wherein is a
singular art used in drawing of the Water out of a Well that is above one
hundred fathom deep, and in most places not a fathom broad, into the which I
went down with Mr. Henry Killegrew and Docter Christofer Chemius, the Count
Pallatines Ambassador, the twenty first Junij 1569, we all being apparrelled
with such garments as the workmen and Miners thereof do use, and as the manner
is for all such as will see their works: but when we were descended almost four
hundred stairs by very narrow ladders, they two were almost dead with the damp
and close air, so as they were constrained to cause the guides, who conducted
every of us with a Lamp, to return, by means whereof I could not see the
bottom of the Water work, whereof I did not greatly pass, because those
works, and the Engines used in them be exactly set forth by Georgius Agricola
of Remuitz in Saxon in two great Volumes Printed at Basil by Frobenius. But
among other commodities which grow out of these Mines, there are three sorts of
Stones, in a work in the Town of Swertzberge, whereof the one is named Magnes,
commonly called the Loadstone, which properly draws Iron to it, and the othet
Andromedes, which puts Iron away from it; the third is called Merga, which
being made into powder and drank in a little White Wind warmed, is approved to
be very good for a bruise.

By the benefit and great quantity of Iron and Copper which are gotten in those
Mines, the Prince has furnished such an Armory, at his City of Dresden, as by
report of them that have traveled far, the like is not to be found in any
other place in Europe, I shall describe the order thereof as I did see it the
twenty fourth of June, 1569.

First the House is builded four square of Free stone, the two lengths are each
one of them three hundred foot long, and the breadths each one of them one
hundred seventy five foot broad, every one of these lengths, and breadths has
three rooms or Stories. In the lowest rooms are the great Ordnance, being
about fifty six double Cannons that carry a shot, which waieth one hundred and
sixty pound, and three hundred and fifty Culvernis, half Cannons, Cannon
pieces, Sacres, Fawcons, Rabnets, and other small Field pieces, all of brass
ready mounted on very good carriages, and furnished with all things necessary,
as shot made with the Hammer to an infinite number, Chargers, Scowrers,
Horsetraines, Pioneers tools, etc. And every of those have three or four great
pieces hanging for them on the walls, eleven harquebushes, a crock. In the two
uppermost rooms or stories are Armor, as Corslets, black and parcel white,
very good and of the newest fashion, Calivers, long Curriours; Daggs, Pikes
armed and unarmed, Lances, Halberds, Partisons, Holy water sprinkles, two
handswordes and swords with basket hiltes, thirty six Ensigns, Drums, Fiffes,
and all other things necessary for the furniture of four Regiments, to every
Regiment ten Ensigns, and to every Ensign three hundred men, which is twelve
thousand Footmen, and Curaces for the proof for two thousand Horsemen, so that
of the sudden this Prince is able to furnish into the Field fourteen thousand
men with Armor in every point, which is only in his City of Dresden.

His Cities besides at Lipsia, Wittimberge, and Guicca, are said to have also
their several Armories, besides that every Subject in all his Dominions, to
his ability is bound to have his proper furniture both for himself and his
Servants, for as many as every man keeps, a Corselet, a Harquebush, a
Halberd, and a Pike, of the which (that are able to bear Armor) the Prince, if
need require, may well make into the Field eighty thousand men, whereof six
thousand shall be Horsemen, leaving his Country notwithstanding with sufficient
Guard. This Prince as he has not the perfect knowledge of God like unto the
Count Pallatine, even so is his conversation such as misliketh all men
universally; he is misliked for his inaffability, for ever since the Wars of
Gottha, he has kept himself so secret, as no man, except one or two of his
Privy Counsel, can either see him or speak with him, he keeps himself still
within his Privy Chamber, where he learneth to play on the Virginals, the which
exercise he does so earnestly apply, as almost he never cease but when he
must either eat or sleep. Not long since his mind was to learn the Latin Tongue
whereof he was utterly ignorant, and now he has so profited in a short time
therein, that he is able commonly to understand any thing that is either spoken
or written in Latin. The great delight that he has in hunting the Stagg, and
wild Boar, brings him some time abroad, but then he is so accompanied on
either side with all his Guard, and with at the least, four hundred Horsemen
that no man almost, for what cause so ever it be, is suffered to come to his
speech: he seldom gives any Princes Ambassadors audience in his own person,
but answers them by his Chancelour or chief Counselor. The Princes of
Germany do not love him, (although by reason of his great power and authority,
they flatter him) because of his extreme dealing with his kinsman, Duke John
Frederick, from whose Father Duke Maurice, this Electors Brother did take the
Electorship and the most part of this living besides (all which the said Duke
Maurice, dying without issue male, left unto Duke Augustus his Brother,
whereupon such displeasure grew between these Houses (as I shall hereafter
declare) that the eldest Son of John Frederick the old Elector, is spoiled both
of all his Land and Liberty.

Further this Duke Augustus is hated of his Nobility and Gentlemen, as well for
the cause last recited, as also for purchasing of late the Lands of one
Miltitz, a Gentleman in Misnia in a manner against his will, for the which he
paid one hundred and sixty thousand Guildrnes, and as it is said, the Woods
only on the same Lands, were worth as much. He offends his Nobility also for
his other cruelties, in tormenting of Men with such Deaths, and specially for
cutting in four pieces of late on Carolutius, a Gentleman of an ancient House
and one of his Household servitors, who albeit he had committed things worthy
of death, yet the manner of his execution seemed so strange, and was so odious
to the Gentlemen of his Court^, as they all went forth of the City that day
that he suffered death. The People of his Cities love him not for his
Covetousness, because there is no traffic nor handleing whereof there may
arise any commodity or gain, but he gets it into his own hands. As for
example, the gain that they were wont to have in buying and selling the Metal
that rises of his Mines, he has now taken into his own hands. Besides that he
makes Silk, dies Cloth, sells Malt, and handles every thing himself
whereof any proffit may grow. He has furthermore raised such taskes and
impositions upon his People, and has turned the Tenants out of certain Lands
that he lately purchased, whose Ancestors have held the same time out of mind:
and they know not now where to place themselves again, and has converted the
same to his own use, in such sort as throughout all his Country there is great
complaint of him. All these things are the more grievous, and specially marked,
by reason that the memory of the late Princes his predecessors, is fresh, who
albeit in some respects wanted not their faults, yet generally, for affability,
mercifulness, and liberallity, were very much commended; The cause why this
Elector was s^irred to deal so extremely with his Cozen John Frederick, I think
it not amiss to insert in this place, as well because it is not yet to my
knowledge set forth truly by any other, as also for that upon the grudg between
the Princes of this House, depends almost the Weal or ruin of all Germany,
by reason of the Alliances that either part has with the most Noblest Houses,
not only in Dutchland, but in other Kingdoms near about. The story as I have
heard it credibly reported is this, In Anno 1567, John Frederick of Wymar in
Saxony, Son unto John Frederick the late Elector of Saxony, kept within his
Jurisdiction one William Grombache, and certain other Rebels to the Empire, for
the which cause he was also declared by a public Decree, a Rebel to the same
State of the Empire. This Grombache was an Ancient Captain about threescore and
ten years old, born in Franconia, of a Noble and Ancient house, and from his
Youth was brought up in the exercise of War, and was of nature sediciously
disposed, always attempting new designs in his Country; for in the Wars that
Marquess Albert made against the Bishops and Churchmen, he took part with him,
and never left him so long as he kept the field. And although he was oftentimes
called home by the Bishop of Wertzburge, whose Vassal he was, under the pain
of Confiscation; yet he continued with the said Marquess until he was
overthrown: Whereupon the Bishop seized on his Goods and Lands. After the
overthrow of Marquess Albert he went into France to Henry the second, of whom
he received great sums of money to levy Soldiers to serve against the
Emperor Charles; but peace being concluded between them at Amienz in Anno 1558,
he returned into his Country, where, by secret means he had caused the Bishop
of Wietzburg to be slain, in Anno 1557, because he had confiscated his Lands.

Afterward in Anno 1564, he was commanded by the Duke of Guise to Levy certain
Soldiers for the service of the French King, whose Colonel he was, against
them of the Religion in France; but peace being then also concluded, he was not
there employed, whereupon he returned home, and with part of those Soldiers
whom he had taken up with the French Kings money, he marched against the other
Bishop of Wertzburg and Bamberg the which succeeded him that before he had
killed, where he not only by force recovered his goods taken away by the said
Bishop, but also spoiled and made havoc of both those Bishoppricks; for which
cause he procured to himself the Bann of the Empire and was Proclaimed a Rebel,
by reason whereof he was forced always to keep a good guard of soldiers about
him, for the safety of his Person. But in the last Dyett holden under the
Emperor Ferdinand, an Edict was published, that no man of what Degree soever he
were, should keep any man in Arms except it were by the public consent of the
States of the Empire. Notwithstanding Grombache did not only keep his old band
of men still together, but also Levied new, and practiced with some Personages
of Name and Authority to enteprise somewhat for the liberty of such as were
oppressed and sustained wrong in the Empire. Of the which enterprise the
forenamed John Frederick of Wymar was one of the chiefest favorers, being
persuaded by the same Grombache, that then the time served him to recover the
Electorship, the which was taken by force from his Father, and that the most
part of the Princes of Germany would aid him therein. Whereupon, in the Dyett
holden by Maximilian, the Emperor that now is, at Augusta, in Anno 1566, by
the common consent of all the States, the said Grombache was declared a Rebel
of the Empire, with all his adherents, and order taken to proceed against him
as against a sedicious man, and disturber of the Commonweal. This
notwithstanding, Grombache continuing his faction, was received by John
Frederick into his Castle of Gottha, the which was of such force, as they in
all respects thought themselves safe from their enemies.

But Augustus now Elector of Saxony, being in the aforesaid Dyett, appointed
the Emperors Lieutenant for the Wars, and having at the charges of the Emperor
six thousand horses, thirty Ensigns of Footmen, and forty pieces of great
Ordnance, besieged the Town of Gottha, and Castle of Grimsteteine, which thing
the Citizens and certain Captains there perceiving, and weighing with
themselves that the matter was taken in hand by all the Estates of the Empire,
were contented to yield, both Grimbache, the Town and the Castle to the said
Elector, who as soon as he was entered, took John Frederick, and sent him, with
a sufficient guard to the Emperor, with whom he remains still a prisoner in
the City of Presburge, in Hungary, above one hundred English miles beyond
Vienna, near Turkey, and executed above twenty of the chiefest Rebels, whereof
Grombache, and Dr Pontanz, Chancellor to Duke John Frederick, with certain
others, were quartered quick. This Victory was so joyful to the Elector
Augustus, that in memory thereof he caused Dollers to be coined with this
Inscription, Tandem bona Causa triumphat, A good cause at last prevails. After
he had sent Duke John Frederick away Prisoner, he caused his Castle, which was
one of the fairest houses, and strongest fortresses in all Germany, and the
principal Manor house of the old Elector John Frederick, to be utterly razed
and destroyed, so as there is not one stone left upon another. I heard as I
passed through the town of Gottha, that the razing only of that Castle
Grimsteteine and the Walls of Gottha, cost him seventy three thousand
Guilderns, which the States of the Empire (as I hear) do grudge to repay,
because, as they allege, repay they did not consent to the razing thereof.

Grombache, and diverse others that were executed with him and since, before
their death confessed, that their intent was to have killed Augustus, and to
have reduced the Electorship to John Fredicks house, whom notwithstanding,
Grombache in that respect did clear, as not privy to that enterprise for the
killing of Augustus, and protested that he was not culpable in any thing but in
defending him, to the which he said, by great persuasions he had also allured
him.

And moreover because his brother, Duke John William, would not agree to this
enterprise, but ever withstood the same, the said Grombache found means to set
dissension, betwixt him and his brother about the partition of their third
brothers part, who died a little before the same time; for the which cause Duke
John William was content to assist Augustus, the Elector, against his brother
in the siege of Gottha. By means whereof both his brothers parts were given
unto him, the which he at present enjoys. Notwithstanding there is now a
heart-burning betwixt the Elector Augustus and the said Duke John William, as
well for the cause of their Electorship, that moved his foresaid brother to the
former enterprise, as also for certain controversies in Religion that are
between their Preachers, whereof I shall speak further hereafter.

Now because I have not heretofore touched the manner and custom that the
Princes of Germany have in the devision of their Lands, I think it good in this
place to show what I have learned thereof. The manner commonly of all the
Noblemen, Princes, and Gentlemen in Germany is by their last Will to dispose to
every Child their Portion, both of Lands and Money. The Women, so long as there
lives any Male of the Name, do never inherit any Land. He that has many sons
and bears an affection to one more than to another, if he be a great Prince,
then he calls the Gentlemen and great States of his Country and Cities
together, and by their consent establishes in his life time the division of
his Childrens portions, and gives to some more to some less, according as he
favors, and as his Estates will agree, whose consent commonly depends upon
the Princes pleasure. But to disinherit any son, or to make too much an
unequal devision of Land, is very dangerous, as it appears by that which
John Seldom writes in the fourteenth book of his History, touching the
devisions of the Lands of the Dukes of Saxony, whereof sprang the first
quarrel betwixt them of that house, and was cause of a great Civil War in
Germany.

Such inequality in Partition is not therefore lightly seen, except it be for
certain such causes as are prescribed in the Civil Law; that is, in case the
Son conspireth his Fathers death, or does not his endeavor to redeem him out
of Prison if he be taken by their Enemies, etc. If the Father dies Intestate,
then do his Children divide his goods equally pro raeta Portione: Sons have
the Land, and the Daughters the Money; and in case there be no Money left, then
the Sons are bound every one out of his portion of Land, to pay a certain sum
of Money toward the Dowry of his Sisters. In the which cases there are certain
Ordinances whereby every one knows what to have, according to their quality.

The Subjects of all the Princes and Gentlemen in Germany, do hold their Lands,
either in Feodo, for paying a chief rent and acknowledging Homage, or in
Fee-Farm, paying a certain Rent, either in Money, Corn, or Wine, or in all. Or
else there are Tennants, at the will of the Lord for so many years, and for so
much Rent as is agreed between the Lord and the Tennant. There is almost no
Prince, Nobleman, nor Gentleman but has certain Vassals that of right do owe
them their labor, some to sow, some to mow, till, carry, ditch, hedge, etc.
by whose labor their Demesnes are for the most part Manured.

Thus I have as briefly as I could, set forth by the examples of the Count
Palatine and the Elector of Saxony, the form of Government in Political
matters of the two first Estates, that is to say, of the Spiritual and
Temporal Potentates, who both in their Household service, and Civil Affairs,
have also the most part the same Order and Form that the foresaid Electors have.

Touching the third estate, which I said was of the Free Cities, thus much is
to be understood; that of the same Free Cities, some are merely Subject to the
Empire, as Augusta, Acona, Argentina, Francfordia ad Menum, Lubeca, Hamburga,
Vlma, Colonia, Spira, Noriberge, etc. And other some, for that they were once
under another Lord, to whom every one yet acknowledges a certain duty, do
therefore yield no such contribution, as the Imperial Cities do: as for
Example: Magdeburge, Erford, Breme, Brunswicke, Luniburge, etc. have each of
them a several Lord, who is either the Bishop, or Duke of the name that every
one is called by, to whom they owe their Homage and a small Duty besides. But
they use notwithstanding their own proper Municipall Laws, which have their
ground on the Civil Laws, and their Ancient Customs, as the Imperial Cities
do, from the which their Laws, Ordinances, and Customs, it is lawful for the
Citizens in some cases to appeall to the Chamber of the Empire which is at
Spires. They are all Governed, either by Democriti's, that is by certain chosen
out of the multitude of the common people, or by the State of Olygarchy, that
is, by a few of the Wealthiest and most Principal of the People: Or else by
Aristocracy, that is, by a few of the best sort, not in respect of their
Wealth, but of their Virtue.

They got their liberties, either by purchase of money, or else by the favor
of the Emperor, or by force of Arms from that Prince that was their Sovereign,
and have by that means of liberty, such traffic, and handling, as they are
grown so rich that they have fortified their Cities, and Territories in such
sort as they fear not the force of the Enemy be they never so mighty. There are
four Cities which are called by an Ancient name, The four Cities of the Empire,
and are free, that is, Augusta, Metis, Acona, Lubeca: Whereof Metis is at
present under the French King, and is not free as the rest be. Also there are
four other Cities which are named the Dorffes, that is, the Towns of the
Empire, viz. Bamberga, Erlistadia, Haganoa, Ulma, whereof, Bamberga is now
under a Bishop, and Salistadium, under Archduke Ferdinando, the Emperors
brother that now is. There be also four other Cities which are termed The
Boores of the Empire, that is, the Villages, but yet are notwithstanding great
Cities, as Collen, Regensburge, Constantia, and Saltzburge: the which three
last are all Subjects to the Bishops of that name.

There be many other Cities of great fame, and force, as Magdeburge which
sustained the siege by the space of thirteen months together, of the Emperors
Lieutenant, Duke Maurice, Elector of Saxon, and others the mightiest Princes of
Germany. In the which siege they took Prisoner George Duke of Mechelburg, and
in the end compounded not with so unreasonable conditions as the other Cities
did, in the Wars of Smascald. For they would never agree to receive the Interim
no more than the Cities of Brunswiche, Hamburge, Lubecke, and the sons of John
Frederick, the Elector of Saxon did.

Breame standing upon the River of Wesar, is likewise famous for resisting Duke
Erike of Brunswicke, Lieutenant General to the Emperor Charles the fifth,
where he besieged the same in vain, and was in the end, by the help of the
Hamburgers conducted by Count Peninge, chased away from thence and forced to
leave his great Ordinance behind him.

Brunswicke, stands near the River of Owker, which taking in another little
River, called the Sconder above the Town of Zell, falls into the Weser, the
which City of Brunswick, has been at variance with their Dukes from the year
of 1536, until this present year 1569. Henricus Senior Duke of Brunswick,
besieged it a whole year in vain. Henricus Junior, the Father of Duke Julius
that now is, besieged it twice, once by the space of six weeks, and another
time eight weeks together, and prevailed not. The said Duke Julius is now
agreed with them, and enters the Town with seven hundred Horse, the third of
October next; but is not to remain there with any force. In this City is an
Ancient Monument of a monstrous Brazen Lion, the which beast Duke Henricus,
surnamed Leo, is said to have brought thither with him out of England. There is
also made in this City the best Harnis for the proof, and otherwise, and the
best Daggers, and Firelocks that be in all Europe. Lubeck, upon the River of
Trow, has as it were conserved the King of Denmark in his seat, against the
Swede, but is at this day greatly Impoverished because of the continual Wars
they have had with the King of Sweden, and stopping of a River between them and
the City of Hamburge called the Trow, with Jasper Bucolt, a Gentleman of that
Country, because they refused to pay a small towl unto him, has of malice
thrown a number of great trees and stones into it, so that they cannot
traffic too, and for Hamburge by water as they were wont to do. But are
driven to carry all their wares by land, which is greatly to their discommodity.

Hamburge standing at the mouth of the great River of Albis, about one hundred
English miles beneath, is famous for the number of Beer-brewers, whereof there
are dwelling there, householders seven hundred and twenty.

There is also Ausperge upon the River of Leche, in the which are the richest
Merchants in Europe, namely the Fowlkers, Peimels, Schorers, Bawingartners, etc.

Francford standing upon the River of Mean, is famous for the two great Marts
that are kept there yearly, and for the Election of the Emperor.

Regensburge (as was before said) is now under a Bishop, but once was merely
subject to the Empire, where Caesar Frederick the third, in Anno 1446, did hold
a Dyett, to the which Diet for certain respects, a strait commandment was given
by the Emperor, that no Earl should bring more servants than three, nor no
Knight nor Gentleman more than one. At the same time there was a Gentleman
named Babo, of Abenspurge, the which by two lawful Wives, had eight Daughters,
and thirty two sons all living at one time, and of good Age and Stature, and
hearing of this Dyett, brought his thirty two Sons thither, being all
apparelled in red, and thirty three Servants with them, all well mounted, his
Sons riding before him, and his Servants after him. And when the Emperout heard
that the said Babo was come to the Dyett with so many Horses, he sent for him
and asked wherefore he had broken his Commandment? To whom Babo answered, May
it please your Majesty, I have not transgressed your will, for I and my thirty
two Sons of my Body lawfully begotten, and therefore right Gentlemen, have but
thirty three Servants, which is for every Gentleman a Servant, according to
your Majesty's commandment. The Emperor marvelling at the blessing of God,
gave unto him at that present great possessions to maintain his Geneology with
all, and caused a Monument to be made in the City of Regensburg of him and his
Children, the which at this day remains there to be seen. But now there is
none alive of that House; for in the Wars that were between the Dukes Albert,
and Christopher of Bavaria, in Anno 1485, Nicholas of Abensperge, which only
remained of all that Stock, was slain by a servant of the said Duke
Christophers, and his Inheritance given away.

Exford upon the River of Vnstra, an old University founded in Anno 1392, in
the which Martyn Luther first studied and became a Friar in that City, and
there remains to this day for a Monument of him, the pulpit wherein he made
his first Sermon.

Noriberge upon the River of B^gnitz, notable as well for the good Government,
as also for resisting the force of Albert, Marquis of Brandenburge and for all
kind of Iron work which is there made excellently well.

Luneburge upon the Aller and Elmenawe, famous for the golden Table which is in
Saint Michaels Abbey, and is almost two yards long and a yard broad, set full of
old Rubies, etc. It was given by Duke Erneste of Stuplecorne, who was Elector
of Saxony, and Duke of Brunswick and Luneburge etc. who wan the same Table at
Dice of a Jew, as is reported. There is in the City of Luneburge, which is
distant above twenty eight English Miles from the main Sea, a Salt pit, out of
the which six men by a Pumpe do continually both night and day, changing every
five hours fresh Men, draw so much Salt Water as serves fifty four Houses in,
every of the which Houses there be four Leaden Pannes that boil in a day and a
night a Wagon load of Salt, which is sold for six Dollers one time with
another, which amounts yearly to above one hundred thousand pound Sterling.
The Spiritualty has the most part of the commodity thereof. There are in every
House three Laborers at the least, so as by the benefit thereof a number of
poor People are set on work.

Collen is an ancient University founded in Anno 1388, and a great City;
wherein is said to be for every day of the year, a Church. In it also are three
Idols of pure Gold, which the blind Papists believe to be the Images of the
Wise men that offered to our Savior Christ, and are thought to be brought
thither by the Bishop of that City from Millian in Lumbardie. In the same City
are also I cannot tell how many thousand Virgins skuls, which the doting
Antiquity believed to be slain in England for the Testimony of the Gospel
Vlma standing upon the River Danubius, a very great and Rich City.

Aquisgrave that once was the Seat of Carolus Magnus, and after the place of
his Sepulture, where the Emperor ought also to receive his first Crown as King
of the Romans. In the which City is kept for a relic, an old Linen cloth
which the gross Papist shame not to affirm to be the Virgin Mary's Smock,
like as not far off at Fere, they Dream also to have the Shirt of our Savior
Christ, by the which no small gain rises to the proud Prelates from the poor
simple People.

Argentine or Strasburge, standing upon the River of Brushe, is one of the
strongest pieces in Germany. In the which there are seven hundred and odd
gardners that are Houshoulders and are no small maintainers of that
Commonwealth.

Spire also, is the Chamber of the Empire, where all controversies in Law
between the Princes and the Free Cities of the Empire are decided. In the which
Court the Emperor presents the President, who is commonly either an Earl or
Baron, who has for his Fee yearly three thousand Guildernes, and two other
Barons Assessors, the which have fifteen hundred Guildernes apeice. And every
Elector has a Counselor there always resident, and every Circle of the
Empire has also one which are called Sessors Camere, who Solicit the Cause of
there Princes or Estate, and have for their Fee yearly five hundred Guildernes
a piece allowed them, out of the Chamber of the Empire. To this Court all the
other Courts, except before excepted, both of the Princes and Free Cities in
Germany do appeal, and receive by the Civil Law there a definitive sentence.

All these Free Cities for the most part do stand upon Rivers, whereof the
principal are Danubius, Rhenus, Albis, Menus, Mose, Mosella, Amisia, Visurgis,
Egra, Odera, Vestula, etc. Of the which Danubius falls into Mare Euxinum by
Constantinople, and the rest into the Ocean. And by the benefit of these Rivers
and other small Rivers that fall into these, the abovesaid Free Cities are
cheifely maintained, for by means thereof they have traffic with the most
part of other Nations. The Commodities that commonly are had in Germany, are,
Copper, Brass, Rhenish Wine, Rye, Firr-tree wood, Woll, Madder, Hopps, Wax,
Flax, Blew-sclate, Harnis, Harquebushes, Daggers, Locks, and all kind of Iron
work, Horses, Onyon seed, Paper, Furrs, Glasses for windows, and Drinking
Glasses, with such like, the which are transported from one City to an other,
and so to other Nations for other Commodities that they have need of.

There be also in Germany diverse great and rich Cities, that partly are fallen
away from the obedience of the Empire, and partly forced under the power of
other Princes or States adjacent, as Basilia, Geneva, Schaffhawsen, and
Milhawsen, the which at diverse times have been all won to the confederacy of
the Helvetians, or Switchers.

Dantzicke standing upon the River Vistula, near the Ocean, a great City and
chief Market of all the North part is become Subject, together with Eluma, and
a great part of Prusia, to the King of Polonia. In Anno 1525, Rostocke was
taken by the Duke of Mechleburge. Constance is under the King of the Romans,
Mettz, Thove, and Verdune are possessed by the French King. Vtrict, and
Cambrais King Phillip enjoys, with many others which now are not contributers
to the Empire as other Free Cities are.

The Free Cities, because they cannot otherwise be commanded, are called in all
necessary affairs of the Empire, as is aforesaid, by the Emperor to the Diet:
In the which Diet, as they be called three Estates, so they are three Counsels.
Into the first Counsel come only the seven Electors. Into the second the
Princes Spiritual, and Temporal, and for every Abbot of the Empire enter two
Parsons, and for every Count and Baron enter likewise two. And into the third
Counsel come those that are sent from the Free Cities.

Unto all those three several Counsels are propounded such matters as either
the Emperor, or the King of the Romans, or any other Prince of the Empire has
to entreat of. Upon the which every of them give their advise a part. An in
this Diet, the Free Cities give only their advise, but are allowed no sentence.

Thus much touching the political Government of these three Estates in Civil
affairs. Now it remains that I speak something of their Religion, whereof
in Germany there be three kinds especially used, viz. Popery, Calvenism (as
they term it) and Lutherism. They which abide in Popery are the three
Spiritual Electors, with all the rest of the Archbishops and Bishops, except
the Bishop of Magdeburg, who is the Elector of Brandenburgs eldest Son and
Heir, and the Archbishop of Bream, who is the second Son to Duke Francis of
Lawenburg, the which two have induced their Dioces from Popery to Lutheranism.
Of the three Archbishops Electors, the Archbishop of Treere, who is of a mean
Gentleman's House, is the most vehement in Popery, and the greatest enemy to the
other professions. The Archbishop of Mentz, who is also of another mean
Gentleman's House in Hessia, called Daniell Brendell, albeit he favoreth Popery
with all his heart, yet does he suffer every man to use the liberty of his
conscience throughout all his Country; And in many of his Cities the Lutherans
preach the Gospel. The like may be said of the Archbishop of Collen, who is
the only Heir male of the County of Isenburg, and is by reason thereof
Feodarie to the Count Pallatine, Elector, who wrote to him in December last in
Anno 1568. At which time the inheritance of the said County fell to the said
Archbishop, that according to the Laws and Customs in Germany, he should
within one year next following, being the only Heir male left in his House,
either take a Wife, or else he would, as by right he might, being chief Lord,
seize upon the said County: whereupon the Archbishop made answer, that he would
within the said time marry a Wife, which yet he has not done as I hear.

Of all the rest of the Ecclesiastical Princes, the Bishop of Munster is the
greatest enemy to the true Religion, and the greatest suporter of the contrary.
The Abbot of Fulda, who is the Emperesses Chancelour by Inheritance, has in
his Teritories all sorts of Religion, viz. Jesuits, Jews, Lutherans,
Anabaptists, etc. Of the Temporal Lords that dwell in Germany, the Duke of
Bavire only makes open profession of Popery, whose Country abides still in
the dregs thereof. As also the Country of Tirolis, and Alsatia do that are
under Archduke Ferdenando, and Stiria, and Carinthia, that are under Archduke
Charles, the Emperors Brethren.

Duke Francis of Lawenburg, and Duke John William of Saxony, albeit they
profess Lutherism, yet being provoked, partly by poverty and needinesse, and
partly by the sinister persuasion of their Preachers, who makes them believe
that the Calvenists be worse then the Papists, they have been contented to aid
the Papists aganist them of the Religion: the one with the Duke of Alva, in
whose hire he yet remains: and the other which is Duke John William in the
second Civell Wars in France, served the French King. The like also did of late
Philibert, Marquis of Baden, who was slain by the Admiral in the last
conflict of France.

There be also other Noble men of Germany, that this day live out of their
Country, partly for lack of living, and partly because their Country is against
their will reformed in Religion, as Duke Erick of Brunswick, and Peter Erneste
of Mansfeld, who have abandoned their Country and live at present under the
Duke of Alva. And the Counties of Ringrave, who serve the French King. But all
these that thus have, and do serve against the Religion, are with the most
part of the Nobility and states of their native Country the worse esteemed, and
have the less credit The Count Pallatine, and the Electors of Saxony, have
through all their Domiminions, and Circles of the Empire, commanded all their
Subjects of what estate or degree soever he be, by public Edict, which now are
in the service of any Papist, that they within a certain time, upon pain of
confiscation of their Lands, and Goods, shall return home, and have by the same
given commandment to all other their Subjects, that they, nor any of them,
upon like pain, shall hereafter go unto the service of the French King, the
Duke of Alva, or of any other forrigen Potentate, without their lycense and
consent.

Of the Free Cities that are not Subject to any other power then only to the
Empire, besides Munster, Aquisgrave, and Collen, I know not any that professes
altogether Popery, and yet in all these, any man may use his conscience without
constraint to live after their order: And in Collen a number of those which are
banished out of the Low Countries for their Religion, have liberty at this day
to remain; whereof the principal are the Prince of Oringe, the Countess of
Horn, and the Count of Killingbrooke etc.

The Cities of Colmar, Sledstat, Kaysersberge, etc. In Alsatia Superior, not
withstanding that they are after a sort Imperial, yet they be properly under
the Archduke Ferdinand, and therefore do maintain Popery still; the which
Religion the common people and most part of the Citizens there, do so little
regard, as, if they had means, they would reform it in like sort as their
Neighbors of Hagona, Turkeine, Mynster, etc. of late about three years past,
have done.

The second kind of Religion that is used in Germany, is that which they call
Calvenisme, of the which, amongst the Nobility, only the Count Palatine and
the Grave of Embden makes profession, and have accordingly Reformed their
Countries. And of the free Cities Breme only begins to incline that way, by
reason that the chiefest Burgomaster Danyell van Buren, and Millanus, the chief
Schoolmaster there, are earnest in that opinion, and labor all that they may
to reduce the State there to their mind.

All the rest both of the Princes and free Cities in Germany, except before
excepted, are Lutherans in profession of Doctrine, and Papists in Ceremonies:
for they have at this day in their Churches, Images, Lamps, Torches, Copes,
Vestments, Albes, Surplices, Crosses, Altars, and the very same Superstitious
Rites and Ceremonies, both in Administering the Communion (saving that they
deliver it in both kinds in their mother tongue without any elevation.) In
Baptism, Marriage, Auricular Confession, and burying, even as the Papists have.

There is at this day two sorts of the Lutherans in Germany, whereof the one
sort is called Truncistae, because they affirm that a man is born, Quasi
truncus in regeneratione, having no power of himself to do well, and that works
be not necessary to Salvation: And that the Church is too much burdened with
Ceremonies. This opinion did Matthias Flaccus Illericus as Argentine maintain
to be the Doctrine of Luther; whom, Wigandus of Gena, with all the rest of Duke
John William of Wimars Preachers, do follow.

The other sort are termed Sunergistae, because they say that God draws
Hominem volentem in regenerationem, and that good works are requisite to follow
faith in man's justification, and that Ceremonies be (...), things indifferent.
Of this sort is Georgius Major, who, with all the Divines in the Universities
both of Wittemberge, and Leyipzeigke, and withal the Princes of the Elector
Augustus, do maintain this to be the Doctrine of Philip Melancton. This
contention is gone so far between these Preachers and Divines of both sides,
that the Princes of each side are become parties therein, for the pacifying
thereof it was thought good by the wisest of either side to have the matter
openly disputed, the which was done at Aldenburge, a Town in Saxony, between
both the said Princes Dominions, in Feb* last 1569. The which Disputation is
set forth in Print. But the Faction notwithstanding continues, and to what end
that will come, the Lord in heaven only knows. But wise men doubt that these
are but the beginnings of a further mischief to come upon Germany, and the
Dutch Nation, who both for their security in Religon, dissolute living, and
horrible drunkenness, do exceedingly provoke the plague of God unto them.

To these three kinds of Religions used in Germany, there may be added a
fourth, which is of Newtrals, such as are the Duke of Cleive, and the Emperor.
And first touching the Duke of Cleive, albeit for his own part he professes
Lutheranisme, yet by means of his Wife, who is the Emperors sister, and of his
Chancellor, who is an earnest Papist, the Romish Religion is permitted
throughout all his Dominions, to as many as like the same, who are not a few.

On the other side, the Emperor, although he make public profession of Popery
in his Court; yet as well in his Country of Austria, which is a member of the
Empire, as also in all his other Dominions, for the most part the confession of
Augusta, is for certain respects, and after a sort, granted to such as are
desirous thereof; but the greatest number of his Subjects do dwell still in
Popery, The which Religion, the Emperor himself, as it is reported, does not
in Conscience like, although for some wordly respects he dare not but dissemble
the same; for there are, both some of his Privy Council, whom I know, that
profess openly the Reformed Religion, and Divines, both Learned, and Noblemen
in Germany, the which have had secret conference with him in that behalf, who
do affirm assuredly, that he knows the truth in Religion, and that for
policies sake he dissembleth the same: but howsoever the matter does stand,
and whatsoever he makes men to believe to the contrary, Sure I am, that in all
his actions, both public and private, he has showed himself an enemy to all
those of the Religion: And on the contrary part, has favored and supported
the Romish faction, for the which respect he has at this present so little
favor with the Princes, Protestants in Germany, as both his authority is with
them the less regarded, and their minds so alienated from him, as they are
purposed never in their time to establish the succession of the Empire in his
house, neither yet during his Reign, to come any more themselves in person to
any Dyett that he shall appoint for what cause soever it be. Wherefore
considering the premises, a man may gather hereof a State conjecture, and
conclude with the saying in the Gospel, that for as much as this Nation of
Germany is in so many respects divided in it self, that it shall in the end
suffer desolation.

The ten Provinces or Circuits of the Empire, and what Horsemen and Footmen,
every one is bound to Contribute in all necessary affairs for the State of the
Empire. Where is to be Noted that the Protestants in the same, do double their
Contribution.
2. Circulus quatuor Electorum ad Rhenum, whereof the Count Palatine is head.
Horsemen. Footmen. 120 Mentz. 554 120 Collen. 554 120 Trier. 554 120
Palatinatus. 554 2 Philip Count of Nasshaw, and Brelstem. 8 4 Count of
Newenard. 8 4 Lords of Rifferschird. 12 2 Lords of Reyneck. 6 6 Bayliffes of
Confluence. 26 6 Abbot of St Maximyn. 44 4 Prenost of Selz. 12 6 Town of
Geluhausen. 42 4 Gerloch Lord of Nether Isemburge. 16 Sum. 518. Sum. 2390.
The Circle of Franconia whereof George Ludovike of Zenzam is head.
72 Bamberge. 404 90 Wartzburge. 416 60 Aystat. 264 38 Duchemr. 110 2 Amburge
the Provost. 6 2 Abbey of St Giles. 26 90 Marquess of Brandenburge as Burgrave
of Noriburg. 416 18 Count Hennan of Hennyberge. 48 18 Count William of
Hennyberge. 48 2 Count of Castle. 8 12 Count of Wortheim. 20 4 Count of
Reyneck of Lar. 20 0 Count Albrecht of Horulor. 60 12 Count George of Horuloe.
0 0 Count Wolf of Horulor. 24 2 Regenspurge Bishop of Wurtzburge. 8 4 Heirs of
Schenckgotzen of Limpurge. 20 4 George, and William Cupbearers of Limpurge. 20
4 Ebererd and Valentine Pincernae Lords of Eberbache. 8 2 Heirs of Count John
of Schwarzberge. 6 18 The Town of Norinberge. 500 20 The Town of Rodtenburge.
180 10 Swinford. 72 8 Wynsheym. 72 8 Weysenburge. 36 Sum. 566. Sum. 2792.
3. The Circle of Bavaria whereof the Duke of Bavire is Head.
120 The Archbishop of Saltzburge. 554 36 The Bishop of Bassaw. 156 28 The
Bishop of Brisingen. 64 18 The Bishop of Regensburge. 62 12 Bishop of Rempsen.
48 4 Provost of Betchtadsgaden. 68 8 Abbot of Waldsachsen. 36 2 Abbot of Rode.
20 8 Abbot of Raysheime. 134 8 Abbot of Haymerachs. 90 8 Abbess of Nether
Mynster. 36 4 Abbess of Over Mynster. 20 120 Dukes William and Lodowicke
Palatines. 554 60 Ottho Henry Phillips Countes Palatines. 230 42 Landtgrave of
Lichtenberge. 28 8 Count of Haage. 36 4 Countes of Ortenberge. 12 6 Barons of
Stanssen of Erenselfe. 20 4 Lords of Degenberge. 18 4 Lords of Wolsteine and
Barons of Over Sultzberge. 8 40 Town of Regenspurg. 224 Sum. 514. Sum. 2524.
4. The Circle of Austria with the Countries and Estates apertaining, whereof
the Emperor is head.
240 Archduke of Austriche. 1200 28 Trent. 182 28 Brixen. 182 24 Gurke. 120 12
Sackaw. 48 10 Cavall. 38 6 Bayliffes of Ostriche. 26 16 Bayliffe of Etsche
within the mountain. 26 16 Count George of Schemburg in the County of Entz. 48
6 Barons of Wolchenstein. 48 6 Lords of Cassentrin. 26 4 Lords of Rogendorfe. 8
24 Count of Hardeche. 90 Sum. 420. Sum. 2042
5. The Circle of Suevia whereof in the place of Christopher late Duke of
Wertemberge, Charles Marquess of Radan is now head.
42 Bishop of Auspurge. 200 28 Bishop of Constans. 120 10 Bishop of Cur. 36 10
Abbot of Rempten. 36 2 Abbot of Rephenawe. 60 12 Abbot of St. Gallus. 36 10
Provost of Elwangen. 134 8 Salmenschweyler. 36 8 Wyngarten. 26 6 Schutter. 40 4
Weisenaw. 36 8 St Blasie. 20 2 St Petro in Silva Sereina. 44 10 Maulbrunen. 8
Schaffhausen. 36 0 Steyne upon the Rheyne. 20 0 Petershausen. 12 6 Emisedell.
44 2 Pfeffors. 8 2 Rrentzlingen. 8 2 Dissides. 20 2 St John in Turgaw. 8 4
Schaschrurent. 36 2 Rockenburck. 16 6 Ochsengaroson. 26 2 Koningsborn. 20 2
Marckthall. 8 6 Elchingen. 26 2 Psuye. 12 2 Munchrodt. 20 0 Owersperge. 20 0
Hursawe. 18 2 Gengenhache. 18 2 Abbess of Lindawe. 20 0 Abbess of
Rottencuaster. 18 4 Abbess of Bynhawe. 20 0 Abbess of Hickhache. 10 0 Abbess of
Guttstell. 10 0 Abbess of Bound. 10 6 Bayliffes in Alsatia and Burgundia. 26
120 Duke of Wirtenberge. 554 38 Marquess Phillip of Baden. 96 4 Count Vlrich of
Helsenstein. 0 16 Count of Werdenberge. 90 16 Count of Ottingham. 90 8 Count of
Rupsen. 36 16 Counts of Mimdford Wolsange. 90 16 Counts of Mimdford Johan. 90
16 Count Frederick of Furstanberge. 90 6 Count of Eberstem. 8 12 Solern Joachim
and Wegand Sons to Count Francis. 60 4 Randolfe Count of Sultz. 18 4 Lewis and
Frederick of Lewinstem. 18 2 Tubengen. 2 10 The Inhabatants in the County of
Kirkberge. 20 2 Brandis the Count Radalfe of Sultz. 12 4 Zimmern. 18 2 The
Inhibitants of the Signiorie of Islingen. 8 2 Christopher Count of Denngen. 0 4
Gandelfing Lord of Schwdukharte. 8 24 Dapiferi de Waldeburge and possessores
honor: de Sonnenburge. 134 2 Heirs of the Lord Leo of Stanffe. 18 2 Sigismond
Lord of Fawlkenstein. 6 4 John Lord of Roingsocke. 20 0 John Dennys Lord of
Konigs Ekerberge. 10 2 Gandalf and Walter Lord of Serotzecher. 6 2 Lord of
Hoenloe. 8 50 Augusta. 300 8 Rawssbewru. 136 50 Vlma. 134 20 Mynningen. 72 6
Rempten. 72 12 Bibrache. 110 4 Lutkirtche. 36 8 Pslyn. 44 4 Wangen. 46 8
Lyndawe. 144 8 Ravenspurge. 134 0 Buerchorn. 20 20 Vbereingen. 156 12
Constance. 144 6 Pfullendorfe. 80 0 St. Gallas. 114 14 Schafdansen. 90 12
Renthingen. 110 20 Esslingen. 134 10 Sunndt. 90 4 Weyl. 36 12 Helbron. 120 6
Wiwpfen. 26 20 Hall. 160 10 Drinkelspuell. 116 2 Dopffingen. 18 4 Gingen. 26 4
Alen. 36 20 Nortlingen. 160 8 Werdt. 72 0 Buchatt. 12 0 Offenburge. 90 0
Gengenbache. 72 0 Zell in Hamberspache. 44 6 Rotheoell. 244 Sum. 918. Sum.
6394.
The Circle of the Rhine whereof the Count of Sulmos is Head.
4 Bishops of Worms. 26 36 Bishop of Speire. 120 30 Bishop of Strasburge. 200
14 Bishop of Basil. 84 48 Bishop of Bysontz. 150 0 Bishop of Wallis. 450 6
Bishop of Geneva. 26 28 Bishop of Losanna. 120 48 Bishop of Metz* 200 18 Bishop
of Doll. 48 38 Bishop of Verdon. 86 28 Abbot of Fuldawe. 92 4 Abbot of
Hirchfell. 18 12 Abbot of Murbache. 38 8 Provost of Wisenburge. 36 28 Master of
the Jobaintes. 92 2 Provest of Odenhayme. 20 2 Abbot of St. Gregory's. 8 8
Abbot of Rfrin. 60 2 Abbess of Ranfinget. 20 120 Duke of Lorayne. 554 36 Duke
John Count of Spanheime. 150 120 Duke of Savoy. 554 16 Donest Marquis of Baden.
46 48 Duke Lewis Count of Veldent. 150 136 Landgrave of Hesen. 554 60 Prince of
Calyn. 188 4 John Lewis Count of Nasshawe of Barbruck. 24 6 Ringraves with the
Tutors of the Children of Phillip deceased. 24 4 Wolfgange Lord of
Leipoltzkirche. 26 4 Lord of Krirchingen. 8 2 Phillip of Buxing Lord of
Oberstein. 2 8 Raynard Count of Bitch his Children. 24 2 George of Recheshoven
Count of Bitsch. 6 4 Nicholas Count of Salyn. 18 8 Phillip Count of Hannaw,
Lord of Litchtenburge. 24 6 Emmieht and Englehardt, Brothers, Lords of
Leinnigen. 18 2 Werrich of Oberstein Count of Folkenstein. 8 8 John Jacob Lord
of Merspurg and Beffort. 40 8 Lord of Bavilstein. 90 4 The Inhabitants of high
Koningsperg, John of Sukingen to bring them to Eusisheim. 18 12 Of the Duke of
Lorrayne, as Possessor of the Signiory of Blankenburge. 50 6 Phillip of
Wysbaden Count of Nassaw. 26 8 Eberhard Count of Koningstein Lord of Ebstein.
26 12 John and Anthony of Buttingen Counts of Nether Isenburge. 60 8 William
Count of Sulmos. 40 6 Barnard Count of Sulmos. 32 4 Tutors of the goods of the
Count of Wayker of Leymengen to bring their Soldiers to the Lords of
Riepolkirch and of Oberstein of Rixingen. 18 24 Balthazar as Tutor to the
Children of Phillip Count of Hannow, Lord of Muntzburg late deceased. 60 4 Can
Count of Westerburge. 20 2 William Count of Wytenstein. 18 6 Phillip and Harry
Counts of Waldeck. 32 2 Lords of Bless. 0
Towns.
20 Bassil. 360 20 Mulhausen in Sim^kaw. 54 10 Colmar. 78 6 Kaysersberge. 36 2
Turkheim. 18 0 Munster in the valley of St. Gregory's. 54 86 Strasburge. 450 6
Obernesheim. 62 2 Rosheim. 18 14 Stridestade. 116 14 Haganawe. 116 4 Wysenburge
upon the Rhine. 44 4 Landaw. 44 6 Speire. 198 20 Worms. 158 40 Francford. 280 0
Fridburg. 44 0 Weislor. 62 80 Metz. 500 20 The order of the Knights of the
Castle of Frieberge. 90 8 The order of the Knights of the Castle of Gelhausen.
30 14 Doll. 122 20 Verdun. 90 4 Kansmans Sarbrucke. 18 14 Bisons. 116 Sum.
1468. Sum. 8008.
The Circle of Westphalia and of the Low Country, whereof the Duke of Cleve is
Head.
36 Padenborn. 68 120 Lutich. 380 100 Vtriche. 410 68 Munster. 338 44
Chamerick. 164 12 Osenbruck. 72 10 Pserden. 48 12 Mynden. 30 4 Werden. 26 4
Stabell. 44 8 St. Cornelius Minster. 90 4 Achternach. 36 4 Corfei. 18 0
Hawerden. 20 4 Essen. 26 90 Duke John of Burchenburge. 540 90 Duke John of
Cleve and Marcke. 540 16 Barnard Marquis of Baden of Lutzenburge. 46 20 William
of Dillinmarke Count of Nashaw. 90 6 John Count of Sam. 26 4 William Count of
Fuerberge. 20 12 Diotrick. Counts of Manderscheid. 54 8 John Counts of
Manderscheid. 26 2 James Counts of Manderscheid. 8 8 John Count of Wye, Lord of
Ruchen. 24 6 William Count de Morsch Lord of Rodenache. 24 12 Justus Lord of
Brimkurst. 54 4 Eberwein Count of Bewthen. 54 4 Arnold Count of Steinfeld. 18 2
The possessors of the goods of the Lords of Turmesex. 8 4 Counts of
Teckinberge. 18 8 John Count of Oldenburge. 60 8 Otto Lord of Rieperge. 54 4
Justus Count of Hoye. 16 2 Frederike Count of Tirfeild. 8 16 Schawenburge, and
Gemma. 68 6 Lord of Spitzenburge. 12 2 Lord of Wargenburge 0 8 Eberhard and
Rupreckt of the Marcke, Lords of Arenburge. 90 4 Limaw Count of Frunenburge for
the Inhabitants of the Signiory of Someraw^. 0 8 Simon Lord of Lyffie. 36 60
Collen. 644 40 Aquesgreve. 180 10 Nether-Wesell. 100 6 Dewer. 40 4 Camerich. 36
40 Dortumbt. 200 40 Sost. 240 4 Dusburge. 36 2 Herwarden. 26 14 Bracken. 116 6
Warburge. 44 0 Verdon. 30 80 Leinchawe. 44 Sum. 1104. Sum. 5490.
The Circle of Saxony Superior whereof Augustus the Elector is Head.
120 John Elector of Saxony. 554 120 Ihoachim Marquis of Brandenburge, Elector.
554 12 Bishop of Meissen. 12 12 Bishop of Mersperge. 12 12 Bishop of
Nawumburge. 12 10 Bishop of Brandenburge. 30 18 Bishop of Havelburg. 66 10
Bishop of Lebus. 30 18 Bishop of Camyn. 84 4 Abbot of Salfeld. 26 4 Abbot of
Rittershawsen. 20 4 Abbot of Walchenried. 12 2 Abbot of Luedelburge. 20 2
Abbess of Gerenrode. 20 90 George Duke of Saxony. 416 90 George Duke of Barvim.
540 18 All the Princes of Anhal^. 20 8 Gunter the Elder Countz of Scwartzburge.
28 4 Gunter the Younger Countz of Scwartzburge. 20 2 John Henry Countz of
Scwartzburge. 10 20 All the Countz of Manfelt. 90 6 Otto Count of Stolberge. 24
4 Bein Count of Hunstein. 0 4 Erneist Count of Hunstein. 16 6 Adam Count of
Benchlingen. 0 2 Countez of Rapm. 24 6 Countez of Baxby and Meulingen. 8 2 All
the Countez of Gleichem. 26 2 Countez of Lyswecke. 4 4 Contez of Wyldenselss. 4
2 Lords of Geracoe. 24 4 Renssen of Blat Lord of Gretz. 6 2 Barons of
Schoenberge. 8 2 Barons of Dantenberge Pincernae. 8 0 Lords of Branderstain and
Rentz. 8 0 Dantzik. 330 0 Ilburge. 164 Sum. 628. Sum. 3230
The Circle of Saxonia Inferior, whereof Adolf Duke of Holstein is Head.
120 Of the King of Denmark for those his Countries that belong to the Empire.
554 114 The Archbishop of Magdenburge. 524 72 The Archbishop of Bream. 300 28
Hyldechem and Bishops. 56 28 Lubeck Bishops. 56 4 Schwerin 26 24 Ratzenburge.
38 10 Seblswyke. 30 10 Magims Duke of Lawenburge. 30 30 Erick Dukes of
Brunswike. 224 35 Henry Dukes of Brunswike. 164 35 Ernest Dukes of Brunswike.
164 70 Philip Dukes of Brunswike. 328 24 Henry Dukes of Mechelburge. 6 40
Albert Dukes of Mechelburge. 67 40 Fredrick Duke of Holstein. 67 80 Countez of
Honstein. 134 2 Countez of Rhenstein. 8 4 Lubeck. 0 40 Hamberck. 354 40
Muthawsin in Thuringia. 240 6 Northansen. 156 0 Gosler. 260 0 Gottengen. 44
Sum. 822. Sum 3724.
The Circle of Burgundia, whereof King Phillip is Head.
246 Duke of Burgundia, for so much of his Country as pertains to the Empire.
1200 40 Nawssaw and Breda, 180 69 Lords of Weryn. 44 20 Lords of Egmond and
Iselstein. 90 20 Lords of Bergea and Walda. 134 8 Aswold Count of Bergin. 96
Sum. 334. Sum. 1684.
Sum. Total, Horsemen, 7292. Sum. Total, Footmen, 38478.
FINIS.
Courteous Reader* be pleased to take notice that these Books following, are
Printed for, and sold by William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North Door.
HIckes Revelation Revealed. Folio. Clark's Martyrology Complete, with the
Persecutions of England to the end of Queen Mary's Reign. Folio. -- Lives of
ten Eminent Divines, some being as follow; Bishop Usher, Dr Gouge, Dr Harris,
Mr Gataker, Mr Whittaker, etc. and some other famous Christians. 4o -- The
Lives and Deaths of such Wotthies who by their PRUDENCE, POLICY, and POWER have
Purchased and procure to themselves the Surnames of GREAT. 4o -- Life of
Christ. 4o -- Life of Herod the Great. 4o -- Life of Nebuchadnezzar, and Cyrus
the Great; the one, the first founder of the Babylonian Empire, the other, the
first founder of the Empire of the Medes and Persians. 4o -- Life of Alexander
the Great, the first founder of the Grecian Empire, As also of Charles the
Great, commonly called Charlemagne, the first founder of the French Empire, 4o
-- The Life and Death of Hannibal* the Great Captain of the Carthaginians, who
maintained Wars against all the power of Rome for eighteen years together in
Italy. As also the Life and Death of Epaminondas, the Great Captain of the
Thebans, who was famous both for his Virtues and Valor. 4o -- The Life and
Death of Pompey the Great, with all his Glorious Victories and Triumphs. As
also The Life and Death of Artaxerxes Mnemon, one of the great Persian
Emperors. 4o -- The Life and Death of Julius Caesar, the first founder of the
Roman Empire. As also the Life and Death of Augustus Caesar in whose Reign our
Blessed Lord and Savior Jasus Christ was born. 40 -- A Prospect of Hungary,
and Transylvania, together with an account of the qualities of the inhabitants,
the Commodities of the Countries, the Chiefest Cities, Towns, and Strongholds,
Rivers, and Mountains, with an Historycal Narration of the Wars amongst
themselves, and with the Turks, continued to this year 1664. As also a Brief
Description of Bohemia, Austria, Bavaria, Steirmark, Croatia, Dalmatia,
Moravia, and other Adjacent Countries, contained in a Map joined therewith, by
which Map you may know which Places are in the Power of the Turk, and which
Christians have, 4o. -- Ministers Dues. 4o Cradock's KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE;
Or, a Plain Discourse of the Chief Things necessary to be KNOWN, BELIEVED, and
PRACTICED in Order to SALVATION, 4o Ford of Baptism. 8o Vennour's Whole Armor
of God. 8o Cotton, on the Covenant of Grace, 8o Culverwell, of Assurance, 8o
Records Urinal of Physic, 8o Ravius Oriental Grammar, 12o Peacocks Visitation,
12o Dr Tuckney's Good Day well Improved, 12o -- Death Disarmed, 12o -- Balm of
Gilead, 12o Cleaveland Poems Characters and Letters. 12o Clamor Sanguinis, 12o
Aristippus or Balscat's Masterpiece. 12o King Charles's Works, 24o. Defense
and Vindication of Tithes, 4o Dr Mays Relation of a strange Monster, or Serpent
found in the left Ventricle of the heart of a Gentlemen, 4o Estwicks Christ's
Submission to his Fathers Will, 4o Ferriby Lawful Preacher, 4o.

