CHRIST'S Hundred Commandments: OR, THE PRECEPTS OF OUR LORD and SAVIOR Jesus
Christ. Collected out of the SCRIPTURES (VERBATIM) For General Good to all
People.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombardstreet,
Bookseller, MDCLXXXII.

READER,
THE Consideration of the many Books of Controversies daily increasing, and the
ill Effect it has upon men; filling their Heads with needless Disputes; and,
which is worse, with Heats and Animosities one against another, to the eating
out of that Love and Charity one to another, which Christ left amongst his as
the only Character of his Disciples, has caused some Serious Persons in Germany
to decline very much the reading such Treatises, and only to converse with the
Divine Scriptures, and such Books as direct to the inward Life, Spirit and
Power by which they were writ, can alone be understood, and put in practice.

And amongst these, one, to bring people back to the simplicity of Christ's
Commands, which are more plain and easy to be understood, without the help of
any man that makes a Trade and Merchandise of them, did collect out of the New
Testament One hundred passages, which he styled the hundred Commandments of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and committed the same to Print in the High
Dutch Tongue, which, being brought into England, and caused to be Translated
into English by my singular good friend Franciscus Mercunius Van Helmont, and
showed unto me, I have for the General Good, thought fit thus to publish, not
doubting but these will be acceptable and profitable to all serious Persons,
being free from all mixture of Error or Falsehood: use them well, and prosper;

Thine in True Love, B. C.

Christ's Hundred Commandments, etc.
I. Commandment. JEsus said unto him, it is written again, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.7. And Jesus Answering, said unto him, it is said,
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Luke 4.12.

II. Then says Jesus unto him, get thee hence Satan, for it is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Matthew. 4.10. And
Jesus answered and said unto him, get thee behind me Satan: for it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Luke 4.8.

III. And said unto them that sold Doves, Take these things hence; make not my
Fathers House a House of Merchandise, John 2.16.

IV. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Thou must be born again, John 3.7.

V. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship
the Father in Spirit and in Truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him,
John 4.23.

VI. And saying the time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand:
Repent ye, and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.15.

VII. Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said unto him, Behold,
thou art made whole: Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, John 5.14.

VIII. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and
they are they which testify of me, John 5.39.

IX. Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.16.

X. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his Brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment: and whosoever shall lay unto his
Brother Racha, shall be in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say, Thou
Fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire, Matthew. 5.22.

XI. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her,
has committed Adultery already with her in his Heart. And if thy right eye
offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee
that one of thy members should perish, and not thy whole body should be cast
into Hell. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from
thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not thy whole body should be cast into Hell, Matthew. 5.28, etc.

XII. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his Wife saving for the
cause of Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery: and whosoever shall Marry
her that is divorced, commits Adultery, Matthew. 5.32.

XIII. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by Heaven, for it is God's
Throne: nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it
is the City of the great King. Neither shall thou Swear by thy Head, because
thou can not make one hair black or white. But let your communication be,
Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay: for whatsoever is more than these comes of Evil,
Matthew. 5.34, etc.

XIV. But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite
thee on thy right Cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man Sue thee at
the Law, and take away thy Cloak, let him have thy Coat also. And whosoever
shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain, Matthew. 5.39. Luke 6.27, 29.

XV. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn
not thou away, Matthew. 5.42. Luke 6.30.

XVI. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good
to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and
persecute you, Mat. 5.44. etc. Luke 6.27, 35.

XVII. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is
perfect, Matthew. 5.48. Luke 6.35.

XVIII. Take heed that you do not your Alms before men, to be seen of them:
otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven. Therefore when
thou do thine alms, do not sound a Trumpet before thee, as the Hypocrites do
in the Synagogues, and in the Streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily,
I say unto you, they have their Reward. But when thou do Alms, let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand does, Mat. 6.1. etc.

XIX. And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are: for they
love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the Streets,
that they may be seen of men. Verily, I say unto you, they have their Reward.
But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut the
door, Pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in
secret, shall reward thee openly, Mat. 6, 5, 6.

XX. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do: for they
think they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like
unto them: for your Father knows what things ye have need of, before ye ask
him, Mat. 6.7, 8.

XXI. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in Heaven,
Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our Debts, as we
forgive our Debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil:
For thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen. Mat. 6.9,
etc.

XXII. Moreover when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad Countenance:
for they disfigure their faces that they may appear unto men to Fast. Verily, I
say unto you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy
Head, and wash thy Face, Mat. 6.16, etc.

XXIII. Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon Earth, where moth and rust
does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal. But lay up for your
selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where
Thieves do not break through and Steal, Mat. 6.19, 20.

XXIV. No man can serve two Masters: for either he will ate the one, and love
the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other Ye cannot
serve God and Mammon. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life,
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall
put on: is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? Mat. 6.24,
etc.

XXV. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6.33.

XXVI. Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow will take
thought for the things of it self: sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof,
Mat. 6.34.

XXVII. Be ye therefore merciful as your Father also is merciful, Luke 6.36.

XXVIII. Judge not, that ye be not Judged, Mat. 7.1. Luke. 6.37.

XXIX. For with what Judgment ye Judge, ye shrll be judged: and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7.2. Luke. 6.38.

XXX. And why beholdest thou the Mote that is in thy Brothers eye, but
considerest not the Beam that is in thine own eye? Or how will thou say to they
Brother, let me pull out the mote out of thine eye? and behold, a beam is in
thine own eye? Thou Hypocrite; first cast out the beam out of thine own eye;
and then shall thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy Brothers eye, Mat.
7.3, etc.

XXXI Give not that which is Holy unto Dogs, nither cast ye your Pearls before
Swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you,
Mat. 7.6.

XXXII. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it
shall beopened unto you, Mat. 7.7.

XXXIII. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7.12. Luke. 6.31.

XXXIV. Enter ye in at the strait Gate; for wide is the Gate, and broad is the
way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat: Because
strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto Life, and few
there be that find it, Mat. 7.13, 14.

XXXV. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps Cloathings, but
inwardly, they are Ravening Wolves. Ye shall know them by their Fruits: Do men
gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Mat. 7.15, etc. Luke 6.43, etc.

XXXVI. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Luke
6.46. Mat. 7.21.

XXXVII. Come unto Me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
Heart: and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls. For my Yoke is easy, and my
burden is light, Mat. 11.28, etc.

XXXVIII. Let both grow together until the Harvest; and in the time of Harvest
I will say unto the Reapers, Gather ye together first the Tears, and bind them
in bundles to burn them; but gather the Wheat into my Barn, Mat. 13.30.

XXXIX. But go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice: For I am not come to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance,
Mat. 9.13.

XL. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he will send for Laborers
into his Harvest, Mat. 9.38.

XLI. Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for that Meat which endures
unto everlasting Life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him has
God the Father Sealed. Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might
work the work of God? Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of
God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent, John 6.27, etc.

XLII. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no Life in you, John
6.53.

XLIII. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and Mother: and, he that
curses Father and Mother let him die the Death, Mat. 15.4. Mark 7.10.

XLIV. Let them alone: they be blind Leaders of the blind. And if the blind
lead the blind, both shall fall into the Ditch, Mat. 15.14.

XLV. Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed, and beware of the Leaven of the
Pharisees, and of the Saduces, Mat. 16.6. Mark 8.15.

XXVI. And when he had called the People unto him with his Disciples also, he
said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross, and follow me, Mark 8.34, etc. Luke 6.23, etc.

XLVII. And Jesus called a little Child unto him, and set him in the midst of
them, and said, Verily, I say unto you, except ye be Converted, and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 18.2,
etc. Mark 9.36, 37. Luke 9.47, 48.

XLVIII. Woe unto the World because of offenses: for it must needs be that
offense comes: but woe to that man by whom the Offense comes. Wherefore if thy
hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee: it is
better for thee to enter into Life halt and maimed, rather than having two
hands or two feet, to be cast into Everlasting Fire. And if thine Eye offend
thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: it is better for thee to enter into
life with one Eye, rather than having two Eyes to be cast into Hell fire, Mat.
18.7, 8, 9. Mark 9.43, etc.

XLIX. Salt is good: but if the Salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye
season it? Have Salt in your selves, and have Peace one with another, Mark 9.50.

L. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you,
that in Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
Heaven, Mat. 18.10.

LI. Moreover, if thy Brother shall Trespass against thee, go and tell him his
Fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses every word may be established. And
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to
hear the Church, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man, and a Publican, Mat.
18.15, etc

LII. Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how often shall my Brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I say
not unto thee, Until seven times: but, until Seventy times Seven, Mat. 18.21,
22.

LIII. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment,
John 7.24.

LIVE. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly
shall flow Rivers of living water, John 7.38.

LV. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, if ye continue in my
word, then are ye my Disciples indeed; And ye shall know the Truth, and the
Truth shall make you free, John 8.31, 32.

LVI. Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto
you: but rather rejoice that your Names be written in Heaven Luke 10.20.

LVII. What is written in the Law? how read thou? And he answering, said,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart and with all thy Saul, and
with all thy Strength, and with all thy Mind; and thy Neighbor as thy Self.
And he said unto him, Thou have answered right: this do, and thou shall live,
Luke 10.26, etc.

LVIII. Which now of these three, think thou, was Neighbor unto him that
fell among the Thieves? And he said, He that showed mercy on him. Then said
Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise, Luke 10.36, 37.

LIX. But rather give Alms of such things as you have: and behold, all things
are clean unto you, Luke 11.41.

LX. But woe unto you Pharisees: for ye Tithe Mint and Rue and all manner of
Herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God: these ought ye to have done,
and not to leave the other undone, Luke 11.42.

LXI. In the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable
multitude of People, insomuch that they trod one upon another, he began to say
unto his Disciples first of all, Beware ye of the Leaven of the Pharisees,
which is Hypocrisy. For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed;
Neither hid, that shall not be known, Luke 12.1, 2.

LXII. And I say unto you my Friends, be not afraid of them that Kill the body,
and after that, have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom you
shall fear: Fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell;
yea, I say unto you, Fear him, Luke 12.4, etc.

LXIII. And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of Coveteousness: for
man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses,
Luke 12.15.

LXIV. Fear not, Little Flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give
you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32.

LXV. Sell all that ye have, and give Alms: provide your selves Bags which wax
not old, a Treasure in the Heavens that fails not, where no Thief
approaches, neither moth corrupts, Luke 12.33.

LXVI. Let your loins be girded about, and your Lights burning; and ye your
selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the
Wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately,
Luke 12.35, 36.

LXVII. When thou art bidden of any man to a Wedding, sit not down in the
highest Room: lest a more Honorable man than thou be bidden of him; And he
that bade thee and him, come and say to thee, Give this man place; and thou
begin with shame to take the lowest Room. But when thou art bidden, go and sit
down in the lowest Room; that when he that bade thee comes, he may say unto
thee, Friend, go up higher: then shall thou have worship in the presence of
them that sit at meat with thee, Luke 14.8, etc.

LXVIII. Then said he also to him that bade him, When thou make a Dinner or a
Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren, neither thy Kinsmen, nor thy
Rich Neighbors; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee.
But when thou make a Feast, call the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame, the Blind,
Luke 14.12, 13.

LXIX. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife,
and Children, and Brethren, yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. And whoever does not bear his Cross, and come after me, cannot be my
Disciple, Luke 14.26, 27.

LXX. So likewise whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not All that he has,
he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.33.

LXXI. And I say unto you, Make to yourselves Friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
Habitations, Luke 16.9.

LXXII. Take heed to yourselves: if thy Brother Trespass against thee, rebuke
him: and if he repent, forgive him. And if he Trespass against thee seven times
a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I Repent, thou
shall forgive him, Luke 17.3, 4.

LXXIII. In that day, he which shall be upon the House top, and his Stuff in
the House, let him not come down to take him away: and he that is in the field,
let him likewise not return back, Lu. 17.31.

LXXIV. And he spoke a Parable to them, to this end, that men ought always to
pray, and not to faint, Luke 18.1.

LXXV. For this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave to
his Wife: and they twain shall be one flesh. Wherefore they are no more twain,
but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder,
Mat. 19.5, 6. Mark 10.8, 9.

LXXVI. But Jesus said, Suffer little Children, and forbid them not to come
unto me: for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.14. Mark 10.14, 15. Luke
18.16, 17.

LXXVII. And he said unto him, Why call thou me good? there is none good but
one, that is God: but if thou will enter into life, Keep the Commandments, Mat.
19.17.

LXXVIII. But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the Princes of
the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise
Authority upon them, but it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your Servant, Mat. 20.25, etc. Mark 10.43, etc.

LXXIX. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall
also my Servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father Honor, John 12.26.

LXXX. And Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the Light with you: walk
while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you: for he that walks in
darkness, knows not whither he goes. While ye have the Light, believe in the
Light, that ye may be the Children of Light. These things spoke Jesus and
departed, and did hide himself from them, John 12.35, 36.

LXXXI. And Jesus answering said unto them, Have Faith in God. For verily I say
unto you, that whosoever shall say to this Mountain, be thou removed, and be
thou cast into the Sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe
that those things which he says shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever
he says. Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire when ye pray,
believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11.22.

LXXXII. They say unto him, Caesar's. Then sath he unto them, Render therefore
unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's: and unto God, the things that are
Gods, Mat. 22.21. Mark 12.16, Luke 20.25.

LXXXIII. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and
great Commandment, Mat. 22.37, 38. Mark 12.30.

LXXXIV. And the Second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self, Matthew. 22.30. Mark 12.31.

LXXXV. Saying, the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Seat. All therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their
works: for they say, and do not, Mat. 23.37.

LXXXVI. And he said unto them in his Doctrine, beware of the Scribes, which
love to go in in long Clothing, and love Salutations in the Market place, Mat.
23.4, 5. Mark 12.34. Luke 20.46.

LXXXVII. But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master even Christ, and
all ye are Brethren. And call no man your Father upon the Earth: for one is
your Father which is in Heaven. Neither be ye called Master, for one is your
master even Christ.

LXXXVIII. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive
you: For many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive
many. And ye shall hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars: see that ye be not
troubled, for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet, Mat.
24.48, etc. Mark 13.28, etc. Luke 13.8, 9.

LXXXIX. But take heed to your selves, for they shall deliver you up to
Councils; and in the Synagogues ye shall be beaten; and ye shall be brought
before Rulers and Kings for my sake, for a Testimony against them. But when
they shall lead you and deliver you up, take no thought beforehand what ye
shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but whatsoever shall be given you in
that hour that speak ye: for it is not ye that speaks, but the Holy Ghost,
Mat. 24.10. Mark 13.9, 11. Luke 21.12, etc.

XC. In your patience possess ye your Souls, Luke 21.19.

XCI. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the Desert, go not
forth: behold, be is in the secret Chambers, believe it not, Mat. 24.26.

XCII. And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your Hearts be over
charged, with surfeiting and Drunkenness, and cares of this Life, and so that
day come upon you unawares, Luke 21.34.

XCIII. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man,
Luke 21.36.

XCIV. If (...) your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, ye also ought to
wash one another Feet. For I have given you an example that ye should do as I
have done to you, John 13.34; etc.

XCV. A Now Commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another, as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye
are my Disciples if ye love one another. Simon Peter said unto him, Lord
whither go thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go thou can not follow me
now, but thou shall follow me afterward, John 13.34, 35.

XCVI. If ye love me keep my Commandments, John 14.15.

XCVII. And as they were eating, Jesus took Bread and blessed it, and brake it
and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body, Mat. 26.26.
Mark 14.22. Luke. 22.19.

XCVIII. And he took the Cup and gave thanks and gave it to them, saying, Drink
ye all of it for this is my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for many
for the remission o^ sins, Mat. 26.27, 28. Mark 14 23, 24. Luke 22.20*

XCIX. Abide in me and I in you; as the branc^ cannot bear Fruit of it self,
except it abide in the Vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me John 15.4.

C. Go ye therefore and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and o^ the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teachin^ them to observe all
things whatsoever I have Commanded You: and lo I am with Yo^ to the End of the
World. Amen. Mat. 2^ 19, 20. Mark 16.15.

FINIS.

