THE Canonical States-man's GRAND ARGUMENT DISCUSSED.

In a Dialogue, etc.

LONDON, Printed for the Assigns of General Ludlow, for the Edification of the
Common-Wealths-Men at Dick's Coffee-House in Fleet Street, 1693.

THE PREFACE.
AS Ease and Idleness are the Fruitful Parents of more than Ordinary
Offsprings, 'twas some such generating Principles that gave Birth to a late
Pamphlet of most Famous Renown. The Author, a Canonical Boutefew, who has long
since shook Hands with his Original Vocation of Preaching and Praying, being
indeed, though but a Pulpit Drone, yet an absolute Jehu of a State-Driver,
touched belike with something more than an Altar-Coal; Prerogative and Crowned
Heads the sublimer Subject of his soaring Dreams, betwixt a Zeal Biggotted,
and a Crazed Perecranium has made hard Shift to steal some few Hours from his
Daily and Nightly Darlings, Whiff and Tipple, to lend this Celebrated Product
to the World, which has given it no little Titillation.

I confess, it is not his First Birth of that Kind; many more Minerva's of much
the same Stamp have formerly been hammered from his Fruitful Noddle, the good
hard Head of our Jovial Teemer; and many a Black Vulcan, and Sooty Cyclops,
called from their Forge and Fire, to lend their necessary aiding Midwifery. But
this last, being the most hugged and dandled Brat, we think fit to make the
Subject of our present Remarques, a Piece, let me tell you, undoubtedly
designed for the Basis of no little Monumental Glory; the Author most certainly
aspiring to his Name-Sake's Immortality, viz. by Eternizing his Fame by an [ Oh
Rare Sam!] like the others, [ Oh Rare Ben!]

The several united Forces that club'd for this Conception, (for no
Disparagement to the reputed Canonical Dad, an Offspring of this Strength
requires more Sinew and Nerve, then one Man can supply, and therefore is
generally Filius Populi;) have sufficiently blazoned themselves in so
audaciously impeaching one of the Prime Ministers of State of no less then the
Highest Treason and Infidelity, a Practice much used in the Ad-Republican Days,
and therefore not unreasonably revived by the same Kidney and Spirit, after the
laudable Custom of their Forefathers, the tickling the Prince on one side, and
wounding the Ministry on the other, being a known Experienced Edge-Tool of the
most Ingenious Anarchist's. However this Elaborate Pen-Work from so doughty a
Crown Champion as our Levitical Loyaltist, and so seemingly fair a Pillar of
the supported Monarchy, set up like Nebuchadnezzar's Image, with Psaltries and
Timbrels playing, and the Popular Knees all bending before it; it is worth our
while to enquire, both who are the Songsters, and what the Chorus; and
therefore, I hope, my Reader will not disaccept of this small Supplement, by
way of a necessary Illustration, to the profounder Depths of that prodigious
Master-Stroke.

GOOSILION. OF old ever half Time's Glass was run,
when Jove the Sire, and Mars the Son,
With all their jolly Kin above
The Heavenly Family of Love,
As Records tell in Heathen Letter
Were Gods of Rome for want of better;
'Twas then when Vandal and grim Goth,
With more than Hannibal's dire Oath,
Rome's Foe, well nigh, by Thunder hurled
Had tamed the Mistress of the World,
Pent in her almost total Fall
Within her narrow Capitol-Wall;
Short Bounds for her no Bar late found,
But elbow'd justled Empires round.
'Twas here, when her last All at Stake,
Her Foes had but one push to make;
And that so near the last dire stroke,
As if by all her Gods forsook,
Her own great Jove had took a Nap
So sound in some new Danae's Lap,
That all his Mortal Charge neglected,
Left his own Capitol unprotected:
When, lo, kind Chance, more tenderhearted
Than all her Guardian Powers, departed,
This Miracle of Safety started.
An humble Gosling's Nest, in Story
More famed than all her Eagles Glory;
Those Capitol Sentinels shrill Cackle
Retrieved lost Rome from foreign Shackle.
Thus rescued State from Chains got loose;
The Fame of Nation-saving Goose
Sounded so high, and rung so shrill,
That wondering Ages talk on it still.
But amongst the still fresh Trumps that sound
These long-neck'd Champions so renowned,
A certain Bard of British Nation
Paid Goose profoundest Veneration:
The Foes of Nations down to trample,
Set vigilant Goose his great Example;
Goose, Guardian, Patriot and Defender,
Style none too great, nor name too tender;
And when in England s equal danger,
To St. Jago plots no stranger,
He saw the Pilgrim-Troops advancing,
To Babylonian Tymbrels dancing;
Foresaw the dark Cabals designing,
With Rights and Liberties undermining,
Assaulting Popery, Capitol shaking;
Then like a popular Gosling waking,
With more than Emulation fired,
By transmigrating Goose inspired,
To break the Enemies toils and tackle,
Set up his Julian-Larum Cackle,
Renowned by this prodigious Piece,
(Though, troth, it cost his Back a Fleece)
Chuckled and tickled with Applause,
At every little starting Cause,
He cackles over and over again:
So nimble is a running Pen.
But this Canonical State-Faber,
His greatest Work and noblest Labor,
Was a late Pamphlet of Renown
As has filled every Tongue in Town;
The Author so admired, so courted,
Till elevated and transported
With more than strutting Peacock-pride,
With homely Houshold-drudge by 's side,
A Thing called Spouse, to join i'th'Quire,
One day by sooty sea-coal fire,
He thus began himself to admire.

Goosilion. Ah, Child, what secret Joys I find
To see the applauding World so kind.
Kind and applauding! Yes, it is true;
But what is that more than my just due.
How can they pay me over-measure,
In the return for such a Treasure!

Goosiliana. Nay, hold, my Dear, make no such haste
In praising the kind World too fast.
Kind! 'Pray, what Recompense has't made you,
When aerie Praise is all't has paid you?
Are empty sounds of so much value,
As can with all your Sufferings tally!

Goosilion. True, an ungrateful World we serve,
Where naked Virtue's doomed to starve.
I must confess I once was proffered,
Forsooth, in part of Payment offered,
Only Four hundred pound a year;
A paltry Sum.

Goosiliana. And could my Dear
Refuse Four hundred pound a Year?

Goosilion. Four hundred! Ay, at this good season,
A triffling sum quite out of reason.
Besides, think how refused, and what?
A drudging Benefice, God wot,
Encumbered with the Toil of Teaching;
And, Child, thou know I never loved preaching.
Besides, my Sufferings, Dear Chick,
Thou know deserve a Bishopric.
And think thou I have so poor a Spirit,
As to descend beneath my Merit?
What if the ungrateful World forget
How much they are in my Julian's Debt.
Nor is it my fault: How have I thresh'd
To keep their Memories refreshed:
Have writ, and writ, double and treble
Whole Volumes of Republic Scribble.
And if this last home-Stroke don't win 'em,
I must conclude the Devil's in 'em.
Had I writ half so much, and tried
My dint of Pen on the other side;
My Labors and my Pains rewarded,
I had been respected and regarded:
The good old Gentleman, I wis,
Had sent me a Cardinal's Cap ever this.
But thus to serve Ungrates! Alas,
Fool that I was; -- but let that pass.

Goosiliana. If thou have no Reward; for shame
Why would thou play a losing Game?
Nay, Time was, when, to thy undoing,
Thou run'steven desperate into Ruin:
Remember Julian, when no stranger
To all thy too apparent danger,
The certain Mischiefs would befall thee,
And Molock hands prepared to maul thee,
Inspired with move than Courage doughty,
How durst thou raise such storms about thee?
Expose thy self to all the Rage
Of such an Iron-Tory-Age!
The hardest heart of Stone must melt,
Even but to think what Pains thou 'st felt.

Goosilion. Fie, Chicken, how can talk so odly,
To put this Question to the Godly!
Pains, did st thou say! No, Lady mine,
Raptures and Ecstasy divine.
What Tongue, what Eloquence can paint
The Pleasures of a suffering Saint!
Through every Vein, ane every Arter'
The Titillations of a Martyr.
Think thou the Militants of old
At Fires, and Stakes, and VVracks so bold;
Could the hard Gauntlet run so often,
Were there not inward Sweets to soften?
When pain buys pleasure, who can traffic
Too high for Joys so much Seraphick,
To hazard Fortune, Life, and all,
Too poor the venture, price too small.
I tell thee, could this mortal Mould
Outlive the Patriarchs of old,
Out-number Hundreds with the Crow,
And even Methus'lem's Beard out-grow;
The dear remembrance, pleasing thought
Of al lmy Sufferings cheaply bought,
With their great Cause together joined;
Are Contemplations so refined,
As even my aged Snow should warm;
Not Mahomet's Heaven my equal Charm:
His thousand Years tumultuous Bliss,
In the Embrace of large-eyed Miss,
Nor half, not half my Paradise.
Thou can not think what heartning Cordial
Supports us Saints over fiery Ordeal;
Nor can thou guess what Charms invite us.
What say to our elder Brother Titus,
That Proto-Martyr, Heart of Oak,
The toughest Oracle ever spoke,
That great Original of Glory,
The famousest that ever swelled Story!
That bold, no flincher, constant still
To bloody Pilgrim and Black-bill.
Think thou his Flogging. Gaol, or Pillory,
Or all the battering Artillery
From Observator's backside Favor
Could damp that hardy Nation-saviour!
Fines, Prisons, Dungeons, or Strapado
E're cow that valiant Rhod'montado.
Think'ft thou sore shoulders, or Eggs rotten
Answer the Sweets o'th'Fame h*has gotten.

Goosiliana. No more, no more, I stand convinced:
No wonder now thou'st never winced.
Oh, Child, thou plead'st thy suffering Case
With so much Charm and such a Grace;
With that bewitching Face and Air,
Have painted Martyrdom so fair;
Thy Fame so great, thy Glory such,
My Dear, I envy thee so much,
Thy Nine-tail Cat and trolling Cart,
I vow I could even act thy Part;
But that thou know I have one Leg shorter,
A little failing in lower Quarter:
And t'hop and limp behind the Tumbler,
Would but perform it like a Fumbler;
Else, were it not for that Mischance,
I swear I could even lead thy Dance.
But (hanged) let us leave these sadder Stories,
Quit cloudy Scenes for smiling Glories:
Thanks Heaven those scorching Dog Days done,
Thou live beneath a gentler Sun.
Come, man, bear up, Rewards will come
And pay thee in a lumping Sum.
The Royal Cause so great Supporter,
Never fear you are cut out for a Courtier.

Goosillion. The Royal Cause! Poor Innocence;
Think thou we write for Crown's Defense?
Dimocks and Champions for Kings?
No, Chicken, we know better things.
It Is true, that Piece so gaudy dressed
Looks high that way; but there is the Jest.
As fair a Glance does that way roll,
Look through't, thou wilt find a deeper soul.
Though Royal Title only stated,
For Cause Republic calculated;
For in the same defensive stress
The strength and hold of Crowns we press;
Don't we without distinction strike
A full home blow, and plead alike
All Power whatever, o'th'up'most hand,
By Right and Heaven supported stand.
And so poor honest Massanello
Was three days Sovereign Hail-fellow.
Wat Tyler and Jack Straw, poor Vermin,
Had Fate but dressed in Roval Ermine,
Had born the Royal Stamp as fair
As dull Descent to the hundredth Heir.
If such poor Tools had naught to fear;
Oh, what a brave occasion's here!
Oh, what dear Harbor! what safe sleeping
For Plato Redivive to creep in?
For a new bold Titanian Race
To brave the tiresome Jove to his Face;
His Throne to seize, and Thunder grapple,
And hold by Tenure stout and staple;
Sceptre's to break, and Crowns to bow,
To set the old dear State-hands to plough.
The very Thought a Charm so soft,
As bears my ravished Soul aloft,
Till it throws off the sullen Cloud
Of forty years Monarchick Load,
And in our once, all bright display,
Looks back to England's Glorious Day.

Goosiliana. Nay, then it has a Soul indeed,
If for that mighty Work decreed.

Goosilion. Yes, Child, this Birth for vast Design
Was helped by greater Heads than mine,
State-mongers, Whisperers, Writers, Talkers,
From Coffe- Dicks to Lobby-walkers.
All Politics and Cabals resulted,
And every Oracle consulted.
All Hands to spur the work a-gallop
From poor T. D. to Counselor --
And if it fail the work Divine,
Heaven knows it is no Fault of mine.

Goosiliana. Oh, Child, I cannot but wondering sit
To think of th'reach of Humane Wit,
How high thy soaring Soul can climb,
A Grasp and Fathom so sublime!

Goosilion. Ay, my sweet Spouse, this Maxim learn,
Great Machines still great Weights must turn.
This studied Piece has yet more in it;
Consider, Child, the critic minute,
The hour when hatched, the day when printed,
Then guess for what high Service minted;
A politic State Shooing-horn
To gain a Point and serve a Turn:
Just in the nick, by manage nice,
Presented round no less than twice,
About to Senate-Members bandied.
When Abjuration-Oath was bandied.
Dear Abjuration, if turned Trump,
The best Republick-Card, since Rump;
A cutting Tool of edge more keen
Than even by'ts Founders ever foreseen.
An Embrio, which to Life but hatched,
Had all our glorious Work dispatched:
For when one kind enclosing Fold
Could Sheep and Goat united hold;
Both lulled and hushed together kept,
And under Royal Cedar slept;
This Scourge for Jacobite-shoulders plotted
With all its Thongs of Steel, so knotted,
The covered Embers had unraked,
And all the sleeping Dudgeon waked;
Fated for troubled State turmoiling,
And setting hot mad Blood a boiling;
In short, a Masterpiece of Art
To Job's old Tempter Second Part.
Touch em to th'quick in that soft place,
Thou Wilt find theyll curse thee to thy face.
Had that great Birth but got the day,
Then, then was our great Game to play.

Goosiliana. T'enlighten my poor Intellectual
Thou'st read a Lecture so effectual,
That give me leave to own my Pride
To sit by my Gamaliel's side.
And to reward thy burning Zeal,
And pushing* hand, for Commonweal:
What though no fair Prelatick Dawn
From Mitre, and a slieve of Lawn,
Thy radiant Lorded Brow entwine;
Yet still some Beams of Comfort shine.
The Brethren, Child, I understand
Are lending thee their helping Hand:
A Purse, my Dearest, a kind Lift,
Like trusty Roger's New Years Gift.

Goosilion. Yes, my dear Child, I hear a humming
Of Comfortable Guineas coming:
A kind Collection, Girl -- but mum!
In better Time it never could come:
For let me whisper in thy Ear,
Claret, divine, blessed Claret's dear;
Claret, that I may justly call
My Saint, my Mistress, Idol, All,
My Study, Learning, Aristotle;
And more than Bible, Pipe and Bottle.

FINIS.

