Two SERMONS Preached at CAMBRIDGE: The first at the Lent-Assizes 1654.

The other on the yearly Commemoration of Dr ANDREW PERN, 1655.

By J. CLERK Mr of Arts, and Fellow of Peterhouse.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by the Printers to the University. 1655.

And are to be sold by William Morden.

The MAGISTRATES MINISTRY, Briefly described in a Sermon preached at
CAMBRIDGE: At the Lent-Assizes. 1654.

By J. C.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by the Printers to the University. 1655.

To THE WORSHIPFUL EDWARD PALMER ESQUIRE, of STOAK-DOYLE in Northamptonshire.
SIR,
THe request of those that had power to command me, made it my duty to publish
first to the ear, and now to the eye these two short discourses. I humbly
offer them both to your acceptance and perusal, as an acknowledgement of your
right to all my endeavors, especially of this kind. The common places rather
touched then handled in them are Justice and Charity, the Jachin and Boaz, the
strengthening and establishing pillars of the whole Commonwealth of mankind:
especially where their foundation is laid in the firm and stable grounds of
Christianity. These arguments, having been your constant study and practice
must needs be so familiar to you, that my two mites can make no considerable
addition to your treasure of knowledge. Yet Sir, having out of my penury cast
in even all that I had, in a thankful sense of my particular engagements to
you, I hope for as fair a reception, as those Authors, that have cast in much
out of their abundance. My only presenting them to your hand, is to witness
my humble respects to your person, and my readiness to serve you in the work
of God to the utmost of my abilities: and that you will receive them under that
notion is the hope and desire of

SIR, Your faithful servant, J. C.

ROMANS 13.4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good.


The first Part.
THat the subject of this proposition is not a particular person, but an order
of men, is clear from the variation of the number in those many honorable
titles given him by the Apostle in this former part of the chapter. The power
and the higher powers, v. 1. the Ordinance of God, v. 2. and rulers or
governors, v. 3. the Minister of God in this verse, and the Ministers of God,
v. 6. or if we render it the Priests of God, according to the most frequent
acception of the word (...), that of Solomon will justify the Metaphor, To do
justice and judgment, is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice, Prove.
21.3. And that it is not the supreme Magistrate only (though some confine
these higher powers, v. 1. to this narrow sense, and so make the Apostles words
liable to this dangerous inference, that inferior Magistrates may lawfully be
resisted,) but that it is the Magistrate in general, whether supreme or
subordinate, is clear from the scope of this, and other parallel places of
Scripture, and the consent of the best expositours, for all Magistrates of what
degree soever, are in respect of the people living under their several
administrations, the higher powers. So that these words will prove of a fit
latitude for the present occasion. Every Minister of justice is more or less
concerned in them; whether he sit upon the bench, or stand below it; whether he
be the chief Supervisour, or an Assistant, or an Officer, or a Jurour, of what
rank and order soever he be, let him but do the duty, and he may claim the
privilege of this honorable description, He is the Minister of God to thee
for good.

It is a likely conjecture of Calvin's, that there were in the Apostles times,
as there have been ever since, some tumultuous and, (if I may so call them by a
Prolepsis) Anabaptistick spirits, Qui regnum Christi non been extolli credunt,
nisi aboleantur omn^s terrenae potestates, That thought the Kingdom of Christ
must presently be built upon the ruins of all secular powers, that for the
advancing of Religion they must either pull them down, or at least get above
them And this occasioned the Apostle so peremptorily to assert both the
lawfulness and the usefulness of the Civil Magistrate; He is the Minister of
God, therefore a lawful power: The Minister of God for good, therefore
useful, (...), says Chrysostom, in both regards truly honorable, (...),
because he is sent from God, and because he is sent upon so good an errand. He
is sent for the public good, for which thou should dispense with a private
inconvenience; publica privatis potiora is an ancient rule, rather then the
whole vessel should perish, thou should willingly suffer thine own goods to
be thrown overboard. But he is sent for thy particular good too, if thou art
as thou should be, if thou do that which is good, if thou do that
which Christian religion does most severely charge upon thee: He is the
Minister of God to thee for good. And thus I hope the text will concern the
rest of the congregation.

The words may be considered two ways: 1. Relatively, as an argument of what
goes before; Will thou not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same, For he is the Minist. etc. 2. Absolutely,
as a naked proposition, and so they are a description of the Civil power, 1.
From his office, The Minister of God. 2. From the end of his office, which is
twofold, Finis cui, and Finis cujus. 1. To whom he is the Minister of God,
(...), to thee that do that which is good, as it must be paraphraz'd out of
the former verse. 2. For what he is the Minister of God, (...), for good, a
more general word, but of the same signification with (...) in the former
verse, thou shall have praise, for he is the Minister of God for good. A few
words of the relative sense are necessary by way of premise to all that follows.

1. Rel. It is an argument ab actu primo, ad actum secundum, from the office of
the Magistrate to the discharge of his office, He is the Minister of God to
thee for good, therefore thou shall have praise of him. Gods Ordinance is not
in vain. For if the rain comes down and the snow from heaven; and returns
not thither, but waters the earth, surely then the word that goes out of the
mouth of God to ordain this his Minister, shall not return unto him void, but
it shall accomplish that which he pleases, and prosper in the thing whereto he
sent it: We may not think the Apostle here describes a Ruler in Vtopia, or in
Plato's Commonwealth, the mere notion and Idea of a Ruler, such a one as men
may fancy, but never hope actually to enjoy, but such a Ruler as the good
providence of God does generally bless the world withal; and his meaning is
clearly this, that the Magistrate is not only in duty, and in the nature and
intention of his office, but in the real experience of mankind, the Minister
of God for good; That every faithful Magistrate is so, I presume will be
granted without proof, and such God often raises up, (...), as Plutarch calls
them, men assigned by nature to authority, or rather men of another spirit, as
Caleb is called, or men of another heart, as Saul once was. Rather then such
shall be wanting, God sometimes searches in the crowd for them; he calls David
from his flock of sheep, Timoleon from his melancholy retirement, Quintius from
the plough, who was therefore called Dictator ab aratro But even corrupt
Magistrates are the Ministers of God for good too, generally speaking, and
(...), which is enough to make a general rule. Grotius approves that of
Tacitus spoken of Governors, Vitia erunt donec homines, sed neque haec
continua, and meliorum interventu pensantur. Magistrates are men, and therefore
subject to humane frailties, but yet their faults are not so great nor so
continual, at least in their public administrations, but that the good they
do is more advantageous, then the evil pernicious. And no wonder. For if it be
considered, that the hearts even of corrupt Governors are in the hands of God,
and turned by him as the rivers of waters, and by his superintendency over
them, carried ofttimes against their own inclinations; and if it be considered
again, that the laws of all nations whereby Magistrates are limited and
directed, are for the most part good, and as conform to the law of nature as
their wisdom could contrive them; and if it be considered again that justice
and equity are plausible in regard of those common notions of righteousness
that are written in the hearts of all men, and so may find acceptance with
corrupt Magistrates, if not for their conscience yet for their credit sake: and
if it be considered lastly, that it is the Magistrates interest to preserve his
people, Sint quibus imperes, his own good consists in theirs. If these things
be considered (and many more might be added of the like nature) the wonder will
cease that the worst sort of Magigistrates, if they have any remainder of
wisdom or humanity in them, are the Ministers of God for good. A tyrannical
Saul may sight the Lords battles, and defend Israel from his enemies. An
ambitious Jehu may restore Religion and root out Idolatry. A covetous Felix,
though but for hope of money, may use Paul kindly. The proud Pharisees may
preach good doctrine when they sit in Moses chair. But if for the punishment of
nations or some other special reasons, God has sometimes given them up to the
lust and tyran^ of Monsters, rather then Magistrates, that neither feared God
nor regarded man, such as Ahab that sold himself to work wickedness, such as
that Roman tyrant, Qui nullum non magnum bonum damnavit, Eusebius. Nero; That
hated goodness for its own sake: This will not conclude against the Magistracy
in general. It Is a certain truth, that rain is a great blessing to the earth,
though sometimes it cause wasting inundations; and That man is a reasonable
creature, though some men want the use of reason; and That the Apostles were
the light of the world, though one of them was a Devil, Neither can these
extraordinary and (blessed be God) rare examples prejudice the truth of this
general rule, that the Magistrate is the Minister of God for good. So much for
the words considered relatively.

2. Absol. We come now to consider them absolutely, as a naked proposition, and
1. Of the office of the Magistrate, The Minister of God, which presents him to
our view under a sixfold qualification. His Dignity, Authority, Strength,
Duty, dependence, Accountablenesse: of all which briefly.

1. His Dignity, The Minister of God, or servant of God; a title of honor
that the Apostles, the Angels, Jesus Christ himself glory in. The Minister of
God not only by natural subjection to his almighty command, so the winds are
his messengers, and the lightnings his Ministers: not only by necessary
subserviency to his providence; so Nebuchadnezzar is his servant, and the Medes
and Persians his sanctified ones: nor only by voluntary obedience to his laws,
so every Christian is his servant, but the Minister of God by special
commission, the Deputy of God assigned to that most noble work of his, the
government and preservation of the world. The very mention of a message of God
strikes Eglon with reverence, and makes the fat unweildy man rise from his
chair, though he knew not what the message was till he felt it to his cost.
This public Minister in the text comes to us with a message from God, not a
dagger to stab us, (as was Ehuds to Eglon) but a sword to defend us, and
therefore to be received with honor and reverence. The dignity that nature
gives the father above his son, must yield to this dignity: (Live.) when
young Fabius is Consul, his old father must dismount and do him homage. When
Solomon is King, his Mother Bathsheba must address her self to him as a
petitioner, not as a commander. Yea the dignity that Religion gives a
spiritual father over his son, must yield to this dignity, (...), etc.
says Chrysostom, whether Apostle, or Evangelist, or Prophet, or whatsoever
high place he has in the Church, he must yield subjection to the Civil power.
It seems Chrysostom when he wrote those words upon this place, did not know
that any Bishop was by divine right the Monarch of the world, not so much as in
ordine ad spiritualia, as the Jesuits mince the matter. That neat similitude
of Bellarmines, De Romans Pont. lib. 5. cap. 6. is of a later invention, That as
the spirit commands the body, keeps it under, enjoins it to fast, exposes it
to death, as it sees fit; so the Church may deal with the temporal power. A
similitude, that, if it would but hold together, would soon lay all the powers
of the earth, with Frederick under the Popes feet. Whether Ecclesiastical and
secular power be inconsistent one with another, whether the same person may not
be a Ruler in the Church, and a Ruler in the State, the Minister of God in both
senses, that is another question, which I meddle not with: but to claim
temporal power as an appendix to spiritual, is that which the true Ministers
of the Gospel dare not do. I pray God they may not fare the worse for their
modesty, that they may not be made footstools and vassals, because they will
not be thrones and dominions. But how ever they fare, they must claim no more
then their own, they must yield the Civil power to be in this world the
superior Minister of God.

2. His authority, (...), The Minister of God, that is, as he is called v. 2.
the Ordinance of God; and that in respect of the substance, and in respect of
the circumstances of his power. The substance of his power is from God, and God
only, for his is the Kingdom, power, and glory. The circumstances of his
power, as person, place, duration, degree, etc. are from God and man too in a
different sense; from man as an inferior agent, electing, deriving, procuring
or constituting the power in all respects, and therefore Peter calls it a
humane Ordinance; from God as the supreme agent, contriving all the motions of
man to the service of his providence, for the Lord he is the Judge, he set^eth
up one, and pulls down another, as the Psalmist speaks. The action of man
herein is ofttimes corrupt and indirect, but cannot stain the providence of
God, nor disanull his Ordinance. Jacob became superior to his elder brother by
Gods appointment, though by his own indirect and fraudulent procurement. If
either compassing of power by sinful and unwarrantable means, or abuse of it
by tyranny and injustice, could so far invalidate the Ordinance of God as to
disoblige private Christians from their obedience to his lawful commands,
surely the Apostles doctrine here was very unseasonable when Nero was in the
throne. And therefore if any impatient spirits being only private persons,
shall upon any surmise of their own, whether true or false, ask the power, as
the Pharisees did our Savior, by what authority do thou these things, and
who gave thee this authority? He may answer them with another question, not
much unlike that of our Saviors there; The doctrine of Paul was it from heaven
or of men? sure you will not say from men for fear of the people, for all men
esteem Paul an Apostle; if you shall say from God, why then do not you obey it;
and acknowledge the Magi^trate to be the Minister of God.

3. His strength: (...), the minister of God, supported by his hand. He is
established by the laws, countenanced by his superiors (if he have any)
guarded with arms, but all this but the arm of flesh, herein lies his chief
strength, he is backed with the power of God his Master, whose very weakness
is stronger then men. The only enemy he is to conflict with by his commission
are sins against God and man, and he has all advantages he can desire, he
has the advantage of the ground, he is the higher power; he has the advantage
of the weapon, he bears a sword; he has the advantage of outward strength, he
has the laws for so many nerves and sinews, but he has the advantage of the
cause which is greatest of all, he fights for God: and Bonae causae spem
adesse comitem, Grot. Praef. was an old proverb, a good cause teaches
confidence; He has the sword of man and the sword of the Spirit too, the
express word of God, to assure him that he judges for God, and that God is
with him in the judgment, 2. Chron. 19.6. Behold here are two swords, methinks
he should say it is enough; methinks if he know his own strength, he should not
weigh the big looks of the sons of Anak, he should make no difference either in
civil or criminal causes, betwixt the mighty hunters, that commit wickedness
with a high hand, and the cowardly lurchers that dare not show their faces: he
should make no more of a powerful oppressor, a valiant dueller, a gallant
highway man, or a mad ranter, then of a sneaking cutpurse. Once a sling and a
stone in the hand of David, and in the name of the Lord, triumphed over the
long sword and weighty spear of Goliath: and shall the Minister of God armed
with sword and spear, and coming forth in the name of the Lord too, be afraid
of unarmed, naked, guilty, and therefore cowardly malefactors: shall ^he sword
of justice be afraid of the fist of wickedness? Shall such a man as I flee?
says Nehemiah, Isa. 58.4. Shall the Ministers of God be afraid of the slaves
of Satan? Shall Gods be afraid of men? the worst of men? ^et the Magistrates
reverence themselves, as ^hey expect reverence from others, and do nothing
unworthy the Master they serve, and ^he titles they bear. Indeed if this
Minister of God leaves his Masters service, he leaves his ^wn safety; when
Samson leaves judging Is^ael, and instead of watching in the chair, ^eeps in
Delilahs lap, his strength soon de^rts from him; but whilst he is doing Gods
^ork, he is strong, and should be strong and (...) a good courage, for God is
with him.

4. His Duty, The Minister of God ordained for his service. To instruct the
Magistrate in the particularities of his duty, would be a bold and immodest
undertaking, especially in me, that know not what bounds are fixed him by the
laws, and the tenor of his commission. Mine is only the easier task to lay
down the general rule; but to make application of it to particular cases, is a
difficult work, and better becoming the wisdom and gravity of the Magistrate
himself. The general duty this title calls for is, that he mind Gods
business, that he execute judgment with all faithfulness; for the judgment
is Gods, Deuteronomy. 1.17. The Lord is Judge of all the world, his Assizes are
described by David, Psalm. 9.7, etc. He has prepared his throne for judgment,
and he shall judge the world in righteousness, he shall minister judgment to
the people in uprightness; The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a
refuge in times of trouble, verse. 12. When he makes inquisition for blood, he
remembers them, he forgets not the cry of the humble, or as Peter
describes him more briefly to Cornelius, He is no respecter of persons, but in
every nation he that works righteousness is accepted of him, Act. 10.34 This
is Gods work. Let the Minister of God go and do likewise, let him show himself
(...), and (...), as he is called a God upon earth, a living law. If he regard
only or chiefly his own honor, profit and advantage, as if that of Carneades
were true in the worst sense, Vtilitas justi prope matter and aequi, That Is
only just which is profitable, or as if he thought the people were intended
only for a beast for him to ride on: he may retain the name, but he neither
performs the duty, nor shall receive the reward of the Minister of God, but of
a wicked servant that has hid his Lords money, nay, that has embezel'd it,
that is worse.

5. His Dependence, The Minister of God, wholly subject to his dispose. God
has not so invested his Minister in power as to strip himself, but He stands
in the congregation of the mighty, he judges among the Gods. Psalm. 82.1. Upon
him the Magistrate depends in the rise of his power, By me Princes rule, and
nobles, even all the Judges of the earth, Prove. 8.15. Upon him he depends in
the use and exercise of his power, By me Princes decree justice. From me they
have understanding to discern, and a heart to follow, and a hand to execute
judgment and justice. Upon him he depends in the continuance of his power. God
puts him out of Commission and gives him a supersedeas when he pleases: Omne
sub regno graviore regnum est. Whatever these petty Gods do, He that is higher
then the highest observes, and there be higher then they, Eccles. 5.8. Quam
diu been se gesserint is the limit of their commission. He enquires strictly,
Do ye indeed speak, righteousness Oh congregation, do ye judge uprightly Oh ye
sons of men. He weighs these mountains in scales, and these hills in the
balance; and if they be found too light, he writes upon them Belshazzars fatal
Motto, Mean, tekel, peers, if he strip them not of their skins as the Emperor
served a corrupt Officer, he strips them of their robes. Thrones, Dominions,
principalities and powers, are levelled with the touch of his finger, and all
their honor laid in the dust. Xerxes must know, though he be at the head of an
army of many hundred thousand men, that God will suffer none to be great but
himself, as a wise Counselor of his told him. Hugo Grotius fitly compares
Magistrates to species intermedia in Logic, which though it be genus respectu
inferiorum, yet it is but species respectu superiorum, they are public persons
in respect of those that are under them, but private subjects to the great King
of heaven and earth; nay not so much subjects as servants, which speaks greater
dependence, the Ministers of God.

6. His Accountablenesse, The Minister of God, and therefore must expect one
day to hear his own name called, and answer that unavoidable summons, Come
give an account of thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward. Gods
providence even in this world, is not so blind and indifferent in its outward
dispensations, as we for want of due observation make our selves believe. But
in this life he generally shows his approbation or dislike of his Ministers, by
rewarding the faithful both with the blessings of his right hand, length of
days, and the blessings of his left hand, riches and honor: and by punishing
the unrighteous with all kinds of outward judgments; sometimes miraculously,
often remarkably, either in themselves, or in their next posterity, or in both.
We might instance in Jeroboam's withered hand, Ahab's ruined house, Pilat's
miserable end; all the Herod's, the Caesar's, and infinite more in the histories
of all ages, both sacred and profane. The house that is built by oppression and
unrighteousness, has the curse of God hidden secretly in every part of it,
which will cause the timber to rot, and the walls to moulder, and the
foundation to sink, except it be charmed out by repentance and reformation, yea
and satisfaction too, so far as is possible. But however the Minister of God
speed in this life, he must one day make his personal appearance before that
great tribunal, that knows no difference betwixt Prince and peasant, the
higher powers and the meanest vassals, the tallest Cedars in Lebanon, and the
lowest shrubs in the valley, but rewards to every man according to his deeds.
Then he must give an account of his acquisition of power, and of his exercise
of power, whether he received the sword at the hand of God, or snatched it out
of his hand, whether he used it or abused it. A good Hezekiah (such as I hope!
now speak to) when he hears this may comfortably reflect upon himself, and
say, Lord remember how I have walked before thee with an upright heart; Isai.
38.3. but let a covetous, vicious Felix (for so Josephus reports him) tremble
to hear of judgment to come; For as that wise Carthaginian told the Senate,
when their army under Hannibal had contrary to their league with the Romans
taken and sacked Saguntum, I fear that the walls of Saguntum will fall down upon
Carthage: so the unrighteous Minister of God may justly fear (for it will most
certainly come to pass) that the houses he has ruined by his perjury, false
pleading, partial verdict, or any other indirect means, will sooner or later
fall down upon his head, and crush him to pieces. I have done with the first
part of the description, the Magistrates office.

The second Part. The end of his Office.
THere remains the end of his office to be spoken to, and first of the Finis
cui, To whom he is the Minister of God for good. To thee that do that which
is good. If you ask what this good is, the Prophet Micah answers you, He has
showed thee oh man what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to
do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Mich. 6.8. To
thee therefore that walk humbly with thy God, and dealest justly and
mercifully with men: To thee that fear God and love thy neighbor, he is
the Minister of God for good.

1. To thee that walk humbly with thy God. If I were able to state that
great question, How far the Civil Magistrates power reaches in matters of
Religion, yet it would not be expected from me in these streights of time. But
if he consider that all oaths and promises receive their strength from
Religion; that without Religion, justice and equity are but empty names, and
as they say Epicurus taught, a mere humane compact without any foundation in
nature: that Religion is, (...), The very bond of all humane society, and the
foundation of laws: he must needs esteem the defense, encouragement, and
advancement of Religion, none of his least concernments, as he is a Magistrate:
besides that as he is a Christian, he is bound to improve all his talents, and
his authority among the rest, for the honor of the donour. The very profane
Historians could not but take notice how much the Religion of the ancient Jews
strengthened and enlarged the Commonwealth of Israel, Judaeorum justitia
Religione permixta, incredibile quantum coaluere, says Justin out of an
ancienter author. Religion and righteousness went hand in hand together, they
were the two roots that nourished that spreading vine. That part of Religion
which is natural, as that there is one infinite Deity* declared in the first
commandment; that he is invisible, and above all things visible, in the second,
that he observes orders, and judges all humane affairs, and knows their very
hearts, in the third; that he is the Creatou^ of the world, in the fourth; and
those practical conclusions, that spring from these, a^ that he is to be
loved, feared, honored, adored, his name reverenced, his Sabbaths sanctified,
and the like; methinks should challenge as much assistance from the civil
sword, as any other part of the law of nature whatsoever. And as for the
positive part of Christian Religion, though I will not undertake precisely to
say, Thus far the Magistrate must go and no further, yet sure there must
needs be a golden mean (God grant his Ministers may find it out) betwixt
propagating of it by fire and sword, and a careless indifference to the true
Religion and the false; betwixt wracking of tender consciences, and indulging
all that pretends to conscience: It concerns the Magistrate seriously to study
the extent of his duty herein: For surely to take care of Religion, and
religious persons is one and a chief end of this Ordinance of God in the Text.

2. To thee that dealest justly and mercifully with men, To thee that walk
uprightly, and workest righteousness, and speak the truth in thy heart,
that backbitest not with thy tongue, nor do evil to thy neighbor, etc. as
the 15. Psalm describes. It is easy to observe that the great Patrons of
Anarchy, and confusion, or of slack and sleepy g^^ernment (which is next to it)
have always been either seditious Corahs, that cannot brook subjection, or
bloody minded Esaus, that wait for their fathers death, that they may be
revenged on their brethren, or violent invaders of other men's properties, or
dissolute wasters of their own; whatever goodly pretenses they make. Peter
Martyn hits the true reason of their quarrel with the Magistrate, Vel quod sibi
conscii sint rerum male gestarum, vel quod mali sint cultores justitiae; Either
because they are guilty of some unrighteousness already, or because they
intend it hereafter. Their great grievance is, that of the young Roman
Gallants when their lawless liberty was bounded by a stricter form of
government brought in by Brutus, Legem rem surdam esse and inexorabilem,
periculosum esse in tot humanis erroribu^ sola innocentia vivere; They cannot
humor these deaf, churlish, hard-hearted laws, they cannot stand upon these
nice distinctions of meum and tuum, just and unjust, they cannot live in these
narrow enclosures; up with these hedges, down with these walls and mouns, and
level all into a wide unbounded champian. It is no wonder such as these speak
evi^ of dignities, for the power is to them (...), a revenger for wrath, but to
thee that love righteousness, he is (...) (...) the minister of God for good
That Is the first end of his office, Finis cui.

We come now to the second end. Finis cujus, for good, that is for thy benefit
and advantage, and that in five particulars, which I must but touch.

1. In doctrinam, he is the Minister of God to thee for thy instruction in the
ways of peace an^ righteousness: Peter Martyr reckons up this among the good
fruits of government, That whereas many innocent, and honest minded men are yet
to seek in the ways of justice and righteousness: Potestas civilis illis pro
Paedagogo est, The civil power tutours them in the art of living well.

2. In Pacem, for thy peace and quiet, that summum bonum in politics, the end
of all civil discipline, yea and military too, for Sapientes pacis causa bellu^
gerunt; Salust. The daughter of heaven, the mother of plenty, the nurse of
learning and religion, the fruitful womb of all outward blessings. This
precious oil descends from the head of Aaron to the skirts of his garments;
This pleasant dew flows from the top of Hermon and Sion to the lower valleys,
from the higher power to the people under their charge

3. In praemium, for thy reward, not only those general rewards of
privileges, immunities, liberties and the like, but riches, honors, and such
other special encouragements, as are measured out in due proportions to the
merits of well doers by the discreet hand of distributive justice.

4. In tutelam, for thy defense and safeguard; That the Common wealth of
mankind may not be like that of beasts and fishes, where the stronger devour
the weaker, and the worse, the better; where the savage lion and the greedy
wolf, and the subtle fox prey upon the innocent lamb: If once good men be left
like sheep without a shepherd, they will soon be spoil d of fleece and flesh, of
estates and lives too.

5. In vindictam, for thy revenge, that the injuries thou suffer may return
upon the head of their authors, and that is thy good too, though not merely as
another man's evil; for the laws of Christianity forbid us (in the Schoolmens
phrase) in malo cujusquam acquiescere, or alieno dolor qua dolor est satiari,
to take complacency merely in the misery of others; yet as it is a debt due to
justice, a satisfaction to the laws of God and man, a terror to other evil
doers, and by consequence a necessary means of safety and preservation to
mankind, so it is thy good and the public good too. And thus the latter part
of the verse is a reason of this first part; He is a revenger for wrath to him
that does evil, therefore the Minister of God to thee for good. I shall
conclude all with a short exhortation to each party in the text.

1. To the Minister of God. My Lords, and who ever etc. this title concerns:
You see your calling, an honorable, but a weighty calling, beautified with
many privileges, but burdened with as many talents; Take the Psalmists
counsel which is properly directed to you, Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord because you are his
Ministers, serve him with fear, because you are but his Ministers; Rejoice in
the dignity of your employments, but with trembling at the weight of it; Among
the motions of the heavens motus trepidationis is reckoned for one. Let the
Minister of God rejoice as a strong man to run his course, but to all his
motions let him add this trembling motion. The judgment is Gods, and we know
what a curse attends doing the work of the Lord negligently and unfaithfully. I
have not knowledge nor experience enough to judge of the truth or falsehood of
those many clamorous complaints (that are already public, or else I should not
name them) of the intricacie and obscurity of the laws themselves, of the
corruption and tediousness of Courts, of the mercinarines and double dealing
of pleaders; of the exaction and extortion of Officers, of the partiality and
insufficiency of Juries, and the frequent indirectnesse of all judicial
proceedings. It is likely they are groundless calumnies and misreports, at
least many of them. The world is apt enough to speak evil of every thing that
is called the Minister of God, yet it is your wisdom to consider with that
holy man, that the Lord has sent Shimei to curse David; it is your wisdom to
interpret the reproaches of men, the reproofs of God, the complaints of men, the
warnings and instructions of God. An enemy is fitly called (...), one that
teaches a man his duty for nothing. The lavish tongues of men thus understood
may do you much advantage: but if you will follow the work of the Lord as
becomes his faithful Ministers, they can do you no harm at all, they cannot
stain your honor, for your judgment shall be to you as a robe and Diadem, as
Job speaks, Job 29.14. they cannot shake your power; for the throne is
established by righteousness; Prove. 16.12. you have two seals from the hand of
God to bear you out: His broad seal, an outward visible impression of
authority, and his privy seal, the inward testimony of a good conscience.

2. To thee for whose good the Minister of God is ordained; the Apostles
counsel in the former verse is proper, Do that which is good; take heed of
forfeiting that peace, protection, reward and encouragement, which the
Providence of God, and the laws of men give thee a title to. To curse the Sun
and to shoot up arrows at him, is madness in those Indians that live under his
scorching heat, but it were worse in those that live in temperate Climates,
under his comfortable warmth and kindly influence. To quarrel with the
Ordinance of God, and to curse the Magistracy, is folly in guilty Malefactors
that live under the stroke of the civil sword, but it were far worse in them
that live safely under its guard. This were for the hands to mutiny against the
belly, as it is in Agrippa's parable. Your whole work as private men, is (in
these full words of the Apostle) to live soberly, righteously and godly in this
present world; and thus employed, you may in the ordinary course of providence,
promise your selves (for God has promised it) you shall have praise of the
power. But if the Magistrate should prove so unfaithful to God, and unnatural
to man (which I hope your eyes shall never see) as to turn his sword upon you
merely upon account of your righteousness and religion, and of your Guardian
become your destroyer. That which was the great support of the Primitive
Christians will be yours, that your only crime is Christianity. Bonum virum
Caium Seium, tantum quod Christianum, was proverbiall in Tertullians time, such
a one is an honest man, but only that he is a Christian. And if you suffer
from him as Christians for righteousness sake, happy are ye, as Peter
pronounces; whilst he adds to your burden of afflictions, he adds to your
weight of glory; and in this sense also though against his own intention, and
besides the intention of the Text too, he becomes the Minister of God to thee
for good. But God in mercy grant that no Minister of his may ever force the
words to this interpretation.

FINIS.
The Faithful Steward, Briefly described in a Sermon preached at CAMBRIDGE: On
the Commemoration of Dr ANDREW PERN. 1655.

By J. C.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by the Printers to the University. 1655.

LUKE 16.9. Make to your selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness.


THis clause is the key of the foregoing parable, and will serve to open to us
all its seeming difficulty and abstrusenesse. There we find an unjust steward,
that had feathered his nest with ill, gotten goods, yet commended by his
Master, yea and propounded by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ to our
Imitation.

There are two Commentatours that seldom happen to agree in the sense of
Scriptures, Calvin and Maldonat, who yet meet pretty friendly in the
application of this parable. To them I refer you for the full resolution of
these hard sayings: The text has difficulty enough of its own to employ what
time can be well spared from our intended practical discourse. I shall only
remind you of one general rule of good use both here and elsewhere in like
cases. That Scripture-parables, similitudes and allegories are not to be
stretched upon the tenter-hooks, nor forced to an exact compliance with our
over-nice and affected rules of rhetoric; a fault, that many learned men
besides Origin have been guilty of. The parts of a similitude are not like
perfect planes that touch one another in every point, but sometimes, especially
in Scripture more like a globe on a plane that touch but in one. And of this
kind is this comparison here betwixt the unjust Steward, and the faithful
Stewards of Jesus Christ. They are like the unjust Steward only in the
wisdom, not in the unrighteousness of his dispensation, in making themselves
friends, bu^ not with other men's goods. Shall we conceive the disciples of
Christ to be so man^ sons of Belial? Nay, shall we fancy Go^ himself, as the
poets their Jupiter, a partake^ of the filthy lucre and pleasures of wretche^
sinners? One that affects sacrificium ex rap^nis, and will be bribed to wink at
their u^righteousnesse for a share in their prey? an^ all this to make a
parable more elegant, (...) we conceit it, then was intended by the Author?
God forbid! our Savior compar^ himself to a thief elsewhere, and he compares
his disciples to thieves here, but no mo^ intended an exact and through
resemblanc^ in the latter, then in the former. His pla^ scope in short is this.
As the unjust Steward was wise in his generation, and made use of his Masters
goods, to provide himself a refuge against the time of his discharge: So be ye
also wise in your generation with an innocent and heavenly wisdom; and by such
noble, free, and generous acts of Christian love, as becomes your holy calling,
make to your selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness.

From the relation of these words to the parable foregoing, we might observe
with Grotius, Non tam proprietarios nos esse quam dispensatores. That our
outward possessions are not our own to spare or spend as we please, to lay up
for the feeding of our greedy eyes, or to lavish out for the satisfaction of
our brutish lusts; But there is a Lord over us, from whose mouth we must one
day, and that shortly too, receive that dreadful summons in the second verse,
Come give an ac^ount of thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward.

But to handle the words absolutely and a part from the context will be work
enough. And so they describe to us the office of a Christian Steward in three
particulars. 1. The ^harge of his office, The mammon of unrigh^eousnesse. 2.
The duty of his office, Make friends of it. 3. the benefit of his office, in
the manner of expression, (...) friends to your selves, your debtours will
become your friends, your best friends, that will receive you into everlasting
habitations, as is explained in the latter clause of the verse.

I. Particular. In the first we will consider, first, the substance, and secondly
the nature of the charge.

The substance is Mammon. Which is a Syriack word, and signifies money, gain,
riches, and all kind of worldly treasure, as those that have skill in that
language inform us; though some think, and not without probability, that it
might take its original from the corruption of the Hebrew word (...)
thesaurus. This mammon our Savior here supposes committed to the charge of
his disciples, as the goods of their great Lord and Master. Though it be a
gross suggestion of covetousness, for men to challenge all worldly
possessions to themselves, upon the right of Saintship or priesthood; (as we
know who do) yet to make the profession or dispensation of the Gospel
inconsistent with worldly possessions, is a mistake on the other hand, and as
gross as the former. God no where approves, much less enjoins the voluntary
poverty of sullen Philosophers, or superstitious Mendicants. Is it the mind of
God, think ye, that his Stewards should rid their hands of their charge, and
retire into a lazy solitude? Or is our Master so rigid and niggardly as to make
all the trees of his garden forbidden fruit? To spread a table before us, and
bind us up with those strict rules, touch not, taste not, handle not? No; the
kingdom of heaven is a miscellanie of rich and poor, noble and base, Princes
and peasants; There Is a poor Lazarus in the bosom of a rich Abraham; the great
nursing fathers and nursing mothers, with their little babes in their arms.
Though our Saviors outward condition was mean, and he was sometimes worse
provided then the birds and foxes: yet a great disciple of his, Joseph of
Arimathea was a rich and potent man. Religion forbids not to possess the
world, but to be possessed of it; not to have, but to serve mammon. Though that
of the Apostle be true, 1. Cor. 1.26. especially of the Primitive times, Not
many mighty, not many noble are called, yet some there have been in all times,
that have left glorious monuments of their Christian love; and have
demonstrated, that liberality and magnificence are Christian graces, as well
as moral virtues.

Secondly, Let us consider the nature of this charge. It is stamped by our
Savior (who knew best how to estimate it) with a double character: a good
character on the one side, make friends of mammon, it is improvable to a good
use: and an evil character on the other side, the mammon of unrighteousness.
It hangs here betwixt good and evil, the use and abuse of it, as being of an
indifferent nature, though rather inclining to evil through the general
corruption of our hearts. Let us first consider the evil character, the Mammon
of unrighteousness.

Some interpreters attending rather the inclination of the phrase, then the
exigency of the sense, render it, Riches unjustly gotten; and most certain it
is, that in this case according to the example of Zacheus, restoration ought
to be made to the persons injured, if possible, or else to the poor, who are
their lawful Attorneys by Gods appointment. But yet there are two reasons that
forbid this interpretation here First, We cannot think our Savior would here
suppose his disciples (for to them he speaks v. 1.) enabled by injury,
violence, and oppression to make themselves friends. Nor secondly, would he
honor ill gotten goods, and them only with these excellent properties of
making friends, and furthering in any sense their reception into everlasting
habitations. We may therefore safely conclude, that by mammon of
unrighteousness is meant riches indefinitely; not only that which is the
forbidden fruit of fraud and violence, but that also which is the lawful fruit
of our birthright, or our industry, or our interest in others. All worldly
riches whatsoever, abstracting from the manner of acquiring them, are truly
called the mammon of unrighteousness, and so Austin understands it, Mammona
iniquitatis divitiae sunt seculi omnes undocunque sint: and that in a double
sense.

The first and most received is a passive sense. The mammon of
unrighteousness, that is, the object and matter of all unrighteousness, of
injury and violence in the gathering, of pride and luxury in the spending. In
which sense our Savior calls them thorns, Matt. 13.22. and Paul calls them a
temptation and a snare, 1. Tim 6.9. Hierome applies that trite proverbiall
sentence to this place, Dives aut iniquus, aut iniqui haeres, as generally
true. With him agree many of the ancients, and most of our modern divines too.
Dominos suos iniquitate involvunt, says Calvin. Maxim inveniuntur apud
injustos, and ab injustis maximi fiunt, says Grotius. This mammon is that
golden apple that puts the whole world into disorder and confusion; and through
the general corruption of the sons of men, becomes both the root and the
fruit of their unrighteousness.

The second is an active sense. (...), that is, (...), or (...), false,
deceitful, unfaithful mammon, for (...) and (...), are observed to signify
the same in the Greek idiome. Though this interpretation at first view be not
so plausible as the former, yet there are two good arguments of probability
for it. 1. They observe, that the Hebrew phrase (...) divitiae mendacii, lying,
false riches, was much in use among the Hebrews in our Saviors time, and is
often met with in their comments upon the Bible, and thence conjecture that
this (...) is only an interpretation of that phrase. 2. The next verse but one
after the text seems to favor it. If therefore ye have not been faithful in
the unrighteous mammon (the same phrase) who will commit unto you the true
riches? where the opposition betwixt unrighteous mammon and the true riches
seems to argue that by unrighteous mammon is meant false deceitful riches:
riches that deal unjustly and unfaithfully with us; for whilst they tarry,
they are but as empty husks to our belly, and as the rotten sand to our feet,
and they will not tarry long neither; but in our greatest need they take to
themselves wings and fly away. But whether this or the other be our Saviors
meaning, most certainly his meaning is, to set a mark of ignominy and
dishonor upon that great idol Mammon, to destroy the magnificence of that
Diana whom all the world worshippeth, to cast her headlong out of his fathers
throne, and to debase her in the hearts and thoughts of his disciples.

Secondly, Let Us consider the good character of Mammon, Make friends, etc. as
bad as it is a good use may be made of it. There is a heavenly art of
spiritualizing our worldly enjoyments. There is a way to clip the wings of
riches, and to lay up even our earthly treasure in heaven. There is a divine
Chemistry, that can extract the purest spirits from the most gross and
feculent matter; that can advance flints and pebbles to a near resemblance of
precious stones. There is a lawful craft of coining your money over again, and
adding the image and superscription of God to that of Cesars. For to the pure
all things are pure. The beast upon the altar differs not in kind from the
beast in the slaughterhouse; and yet the one is holy, the other common. It is
the altar that sanctifies the gift. A holy, gracious heart sanctifies all that
belongs to it. And this seems to me the most proper account of that speech of
our Savior, which has met with so many different conjectures, Luke 11.41. But
rather give alms of all that you have, and all things are clean unto you. That
to sincere repenting souls, exercising works of Christian charity (which by a
Synecdoche there, are put for all the fruits worthy of repentance, as praying,
elsewhere) to such souls all things are clean, their very temporal enjoyments
are refined into spiritual blessings. But the way of improving this unrighteous
mammon will appear more fully in the second part of the text, which falls next
under consideration.

II. Particular. The duty of Christian Stewards, Make friends, that is, Engage
others by a prudent and faithful dispensation of the Mammon committed to your
charge. For we are to consider our selves under a double capacity; private and
public. As particular persons, and as members of the whole world; of the
universal Church, and of that particular Church, wherein our lot is fallen.
Now though our great Lord and Master allows our charity to begin at home, and
to appropriate to our private use such a proportion of his blessings, as may
enable us to the cheerful discharge of our duties: yet he expects our charity
should not end where it begins, but freely flow forth, in hearty desires to the
whole world, and in real expressions to such a part of it, as the measure of
our talents is able to reach. Those that have had no other rule of judgment
then the law of nature, and that in broken tables too, their own imperfect and
depraved understandings, have yet condemned a selfish narrow spirit as unworthy
a creature, especially of so high a rank as man is. They could take notice,
that their great Creator, though of a perfect selfsufficiency and
independance, yet out of a free desire of communicating his goodness, gave a
being to the whole creation, and continues a constant stream of Goodness unto
all his creatures, that can never make him any real return. They could observe
that the world it self was (...), the image and only begotten of God.
expressions pardonable in them (that knew none other of that name) and that it
bears a resemblance, as of his other perfections, so especially of his free and
diffusive goodness. That the Sun with unwearied bounty poures out his light,
heat and influence upon all he can reach, with tenderest care cherishes them
in his warm bosom; with admirable discretion performs his yearly circuit from
tropic to tropic, that all the parts of the earth may have their share of his
liberality. That the springs and fountains freely offer refreshment to all
that pass by. That all the elements, and their several mixtures, by a
natural self-denial, resist their own inclinations, and run the hazard of
their private ruin for the safety of the universe. That heavy bodies mount up
to heaven, and light bodies stoop to the lowest room, rather then Nature should
receive the least wound, yea or disfiguring scarre. These and the like
considerations made them confess Non nobis nati sumus, etc. That Man is not
made only for his own service, but must cast forth his virtue round about him.
(...), that he is born to do good to others; That there is no monster in nature
so great as (...), A Schismatic from mankind, a man that is separated from
other men. This noble principle, though perhaps too much stained with
superstition and affectation of glory, has prevailed with many of them to
spend their fortunes and lives for the safety of their country. The Grecian
and Roman nations yield us many renowned examples hereof. And other nations
have been inferior to them rather in their records, then examples of the like
kind. But we Christians, besides a clearer discovery of these natural arguments
then the light of nature can afford, have incomparably more obligations upon us
to enlargement of heart, then the heathens had, and therefore have the more to
answer for, if we less regard them. We know of a second birth, of the love of
God, greater to us then that of the creation, in sending his only begotten
Son into the world, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life. We see (as it were) before our eyes the Lord Jesus
Christ denying, emptying, empoverishing himself ((...)) pouring out his warmest
blood with unspeakable pain and shame, and all to make himself friends: Friends
to receive grace and kindness from him, but not to make him the least
requital, We have received the most pure and refined precepts of love, which
not only the Philosophers, but even the Jews themselves, and the greatest
Rabbis amongst them were generally strangers to. To deny our selves: To love
our enemies: To return good for evil: To bless them that curse us, and pray
for them that persecute us and despitefully use us: To esteem strangers our
neighbors. We have, or at least pretend unto the spirit of the Gospel, that
free spirit, that spirit of love, meekness and compassion, That spirit of
communion and fellowship. Under all these engagements shall we contract our
hearts, and harden our bowels? Shall we confine our love merely to our selves?
Let Us not be deceived, God will not be mocked. Whatsoever we sow that shall we
also reap. God is the true owner of all we possess; and whatsoever we assume
to our private use beyond the rules of sobriety and moderation, will be judged
embezelled, and without repentance exacted of us to the utmost farthing. To lay
down the several rules and fit circumstances of Christian bounty, would be a
work of time, and truly of no great necessity. I think it was scarce ever
known, that persons of enlarged hearts, and sincere purposes to do good, were
yet at a stand for want of prudence to direct them in the manner of
performance. I shall only point out the several channels wherein the bounty of
Christians uses to run; the several occasions they have laid hold of in all
times, to discharge their charity.

1. For the honor and service of Religion. Where ever Religion has had a
throne, she has always commanded an honorable maintenance for her household
and retinue. Though indeed rather autoritate suadentis, then potestate
jubentis, Tacit. as was said of the ancient Germane Princes, rather by a
winning persuasive, then a rigid compulsive power. And this is one reason
amongst many, why Religion is so much discountenanced by sensual worldly men.
They esteem not spiritual things worth exchanging for a part of their carnal
things; (with the Gadarens) they had rather part with Christ then their swine.
They are content to lose their religion to save charges. If religion will put
them to no cost nor pains, perhaps they can endure it; but if it require
either, they are as indifferent as that King of Denmark, Waldemar, who lying
under the Popes Interdict, sends him this blunt message, We received Our
religion from thy Predecessors, which if thou will not suffer us to enjoy
quietly, We send it thee back again, by these presents. There has been a time
when Devout Christians have been willing to lay down their estates at the
Apostles feet, to serve the Churches necessity. There has been a time when
superstitious Christians have contributed beyond the Churches necessities.
Insomuch that the Venetian state and others, have thought fit by severe laws to
check their liberality, least the Church should swallow up the revenue of the
Commonwealth. There is no fear of that extreme now amongst us, and we have
grounds to hope the good providence of God will prevent the contrary. Though it
be too manifest, The religious charity of Christians has been much abused,
yet surely the abuse of their gifts may be reformed without their utter
abolition. Drunkenness may be suppressed without cutting down the vines, as
that rigid lawgiver did. The house of God may be swept without a beesome of
destruction.

2. For the encouragement of learning, Religions handmaid, that has for the
most part flourished with her mistress, and next to her is the greatest honor
and accomplishment of a person or nation: The most beautiful ornament, the
most useful instrument, that God vouchsafes unto the sons of men. The only
remedy against barbarism and savagenesse. Yea tacitly commended by her very
professed enemies whilst they are proud of that little learning they pretend
to.

3. For the upholding of their families. The bonds of nature are neither broken
nor slackened, but exceedingly strengthened by Christianity. Our great Apostle
pronounces him that provides not for his family, worse then an infidel. And
though he bore a tender affection to all the sons of Adam, and became all
things to all men for their advantage, yet his love to his brethren and kinsmen
according to the flesh so far transports him, that he could even wish himself
accursed for their sakes, Romans 9.3.

4. For the relief of the poor. That great sacrifice of the Gospel, so
frequently and powerfully urged by the precept of our Savior and his Apostles;
so commended by the examples of all the Saints in all ages; so approved and
exalted by the general vote of the whole world; that the very naming it is
sufficient to prove it a principal stream of Christian charity.

5. For the public good of the community. The best Christians have always
been the best Commonwealths men. Indeed Religious persons both Jews and
Christians have been often accused for the troubles of Israel, That turn the
world upside down, that profess a religion inconsistent with peace and civil
government. But what scandals and groundless calumnies these have been, Their
very enemies, so many of them as have had the patience to search out the truth,
have acknowledged to the world; as might be proved by many instances, if it
were needful and seasonable.

6. For the maintenance of humane society. The Christian name has always been
renowned for offices of courtesy and humanity, as well as of compassion; and
is as clear from the imputation of sordidnesse, as of luxury and profuseness.
These, or some of these ways (according to their abilities and opportunities)
have the faithful Stewards of God laid out their earthly talents. Go you and
do likewise.

III. Particular is the profit or benefit of their office, from the manner of
expression. Make to your selves friends. And here the apology of a late
learned man in the like case is seasonable. Ipsa virtus vilis hoc seculo
ignoscere mihi debet, si, quand^ per se contemnitur, ex utilitatibus ipsi
pretium facio. If the beauty of this grace be not powerful enough of it self
to enamour you, yet let her dowry tempt you. You will hereby make friends to
your selves, mighty friends, that when ye fail, will receive you into
everlasting habitations, as it follows in the next words. Ambrose indeed would
have this latter clause understood of the Angels, and paraphraseth the words
thus. That when ye die, the Angels may receive you into everlasting
habitations. Others understand it indefinitely, and think it signifies no more
then this. That when ye fail, ye may be received etc. as elsewhere they shall
call his name Emmanuel, Matthew. 1. that is, his name shall be so called; and,
this night do they require thy soul, that is, thy soul is required, Luke 12.20.
But it best agrees with the parable foregoing, and with the contexture of the
whole verse, if we refer this (they) in the latter part to those friends in
the former part of the verse, and so make the latter an exegesis of the former.
Make to your selves friends of unrighteous mammon, that when ye die, those
friends may receive you into everlasting habitations. Not that all these
friends of yours will be willing to receive you into happiness, seeing many of
them may prove ungrateful and fall short of it themselves. Nor yet that any of
them are able in their own persons, and by their own power to receive you, for
it is God that gives both grace and glory, and disposes of all places in
heaven both at his right hand and at his left. Nor yet lastly that they shall
be your advocates and mediators, fee'd by your charitable gifts to speak a
good word for you, and by their interest to obtain your reception into heaven,
as some gross Romanists collect from this place. But they may be said thus to
befriend you two ways.

1. By being the objects and occasions of those pious and charitable works,
which are the way to those everlasting habitations. And it is a familiar scheme
of speech, to ascribe that to the object which properly belongs to the action.
As parents honored and obeyed may be said to prolong our days. And the stone
out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber, are said to cry out against
covetous persons; So the backs and bellies, and souls of poor distressed
creatures, which out of an humble obedience to the law of Christ, and a tender
compassion to your brethren; you have clothed, fed and refreshed, will plead
and that effectually upon the gracious promises of God, for your reception into
everlasting habitations.

2. They may be said thus to befriend you though not in their own persons, yet
by their sureties. God himself and his Son Jesus Christ, have engaged, and,
if I may so speak, entered bond with these poor debtors of yours, to see your
labor of love repaid with full interest: nay, to give you a recompense of
infinite value, for that i^ which ^n it self is worth nothing. God by his own
promise has made himself your debtor, according to that known saying of
Austin, Fidelis dominus qui fecit se nobis debitorem, non aliquid a nobis
accipiendo, sed omnia promittendo. You have it under the hand of the Holy Ghost
himself, that giving to the poor is lending to the Lord. That entertaining,
clothing, feeding, visiting the poor afflicted members of Christ, are so many
good offices done to Christ himself, and acknowledged by him as his own
personal debts and engagements. So that prove your friends here spoken of
never so dishonest or unable in their own persons, you need not fear the loss
of your adventure, where the Lord himself is your security, and will stand
your friend in their stead, to receive you into everlasting habitations.

This I conceive a true account of these expressions, But what ever mistake
these conjectures may be guilty of, the main scope and purpose of our Savior
in them is clear and out of question, and that is this. To declare this duty
of making friends by a wise improvement of our earthly talents, to be of an
absolute necessity and certain tendencie to everlasting happiness: and that,
in actual performance where there is ability, or however in willingness of
mind, which in want of ability, is the same in Gods acceptance, 2. Corinthians.
8.12. For though without Pharisaicall pride and arrogancy, we cannot be said
to merit salvation by our good works, especially as the Papists abuse that
phrase contrary to the harmless and well meaning use of it in some of the
fathers. Yet that salvation depends upon our good works, taken in their due
latitude, and in conjunction with their true principles of faith, and love, and
humility of spirit; surely none that pretend to the knowledge and belief of
the Scriptures, can nossibly deny with any color of reason. For the
Scriptures do with one voice proclaim that the exercises of these graces is
first, the way to salvation, that good old way, trodden by all that ever
traveled heavenward. And secondly, that it is the measure of salvation,
according to which every man shall receive his reward. And thirdly, that it is
the preparative for salvation, fitting the faithful servant to enter into his
Master^ joy. For grace makes way for glory, and happiness is nothing else but
the perfecting of that love which is begun here This I take it, is true
protestant doctrine. And therefore it is not our religions fault, but our own,
if the protestant name suffer under any deserved imputation of barrenness and
covetousness, and if it be, as some say, it is almost as infamous for one kind
of idolatry, as the Roman is for another. For our Religion most powerfully
urges upon us all manner of religious, pious and charitable works, and teaches
their necessity and certain tendencie to everlasting happiness, as being the
way to it, the measure of it, and preparation for it. I have not time to show
how the Scriptures abound in the proof of all these; or if I had, they are so
plain, I need not. I shall only add a few words of exhortation, first, to the
Stewards of God: and secondly to their friends made by their discharge of their
office. Neither are these always distinct persons, but sometimes diverse
respects of the same persons. For one man under diverse considerations, and in
several respects may be both a Steward and a friend, in the sense of the text.

1. You that are the Stewards of God, to whose charge the good things of this
world are committed; you see before you your way into your Masters joy. That
more excellent way the Apostle shows us, 1. Cor. 12. Lastly, more excellent
then the best gifts; then prophecy, speaking with tongues, understanding of
mysteries, faith of miracles, yea more excellent then all other graces; For now
remain faith hope and love, but the greatest of these is love. If you are not
yet arrived to that high and God-like degree of love, to do good and
communicate freely without any respect to the recompense of reward, yet
methinks, that sincere, though fainter degree of love, to God and man, that
warms the breast of every true Christian, being encouraged with a most
infallible assurance of an infinite and eternal recompense of reward, should
be strong enough in you to provoke you to the exercise of all pious and
charitable works, according to your abilities and opportunities. Neither let
the Stewards of God flatter themselves, that a negative faithfulness will
serve the turn. That they have made use of nothing but their own; that they
have not oppressed the poor, nor defrauded the hireling, nor devoured widows
houses, nor robbed the community, nor injured any. Such account as this,
though it be better then most men can make, yet it will not pass at that great
audit. For it proceeds upon a false supposition, that their possessions were
their own, and not their Masters, that they were Lords and not Stewards. The
unfaithful servant is condemned out of his own mouth, not for imbezelling, but
for not improving his Lords money. And there is a rich man in the next parable
following the text, that is tormented with intolerable flames, not for
oppression, fraud and violence, but for immoderate enjoying his good things,
and not commiserating the wants of a poor lame beggar; for being clothed with
purple and fine linen, and faring deliciously every day, and yet denying the
crumbs-that fell from his table to distressed Lazarus. And though he had dogs
to eat up his crumbs, dogs, that licked the poor man's sores, and had more
compassion in them then their master, yet this will not excuse his churlish
denial of a poor man's request. The right of dogs cease, when a poor man
becomes their competitour. Let this example be a caution to all the Stewards of
God, that their backs, and bellies, their lusts and pleasures, do not devour
all their good things, when the necessities of the Church, and the members of
it call for a share with them. That they be not like those sons of pleasure,
Amos 6.5.6. That lie upon beds of ivorie, and stretch themselves upon their
couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of
the stall, that chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves
instruments of music, that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief ointment, but they are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph.

2. You that by the bounty of others are engaged to be their friends, though
their reward depends not upon your personal love and friendship, yet it becomes
you to express your sense of your engagements, and to show your selves in
heart and affection their true friends. Neither does the Lord in taking the
debt upon himself, disoblige you from your duty of respect and thankfulness to
the instruments of his goodness. But your friendship ought to show forth it
self, at least in these four particulars.

1. In a careful and conscionable observance of their precepts, and and all
the conditions of their pious and charitable works, so far as consistent with
the laws of any higher power. God establishes the house of the Rechabites, for
observing the precepts of their father Jonadab, Jer. 35. and yet those precepts
were matters otherwise of an indifferent nature, as abstaining from wine, and
the like.

2. In a sober and moderate use of their gifts, according to their pious
intention. Pride and wantonness, as they are no where more odious, so they are
no where more conspicuous, then in those that lie upon other men's bounty. Nay,
the least appearance of vanity in them (we all know) raises such scandals, as
are not easily laid again. But by our Christian sobriety and moderation, we
shall either put them to silence, or at least bear them comfortably.

3. In following their examples according to the measure we have received.
(...). They that have made us friends, have made us Stewards too: And if we be
not rich to cast in much, yet our mites are expected. The meanest of our
condition cannot make us incapable of that glorious report the Apostle gives of
the Macedonians, 1. Cor. 1.8. that the depth of their poverty abounded to the
riches of their liberality. To speak freely, It would better become our
condition, if a little of our courtesy were turned into charity, and if
something were abated of our mutual friendly entertainments, to make to our
selves friends according to the mind of our Savior.

4. In paying to them their due honor: to their persons if alive; if dead, to
their memorialls. However their names may perhaps be stained with reproaches and
ill reports, by the loose and careless tongues of others, yet it becomes their
friends to speak as they find: and to perfume their memory with honorable
mention of their bounty and liberality. Whilst Cham impudently beholds and
reports his fathers nakedness, let Shem and Japhet go backward and cover it.
For though the honor done to the memory of those whom God has made
instrumental for our good, be no real addition to their reward, yet it is a
real expression of our thankfulness to God for them, and of our due valuation
of the benefit we receive from him by their means, and may happily provoke
others to the imitation of their worthy examples.

For which reasons, give me leave as the present occasion requires, to mention
the name of that noble and free-hearted Benefactour both to this whole
Universitie, and especially to this adjoining, College, (Peter-house) Dr
ANDREW PERN. His bounty to this College in adding a new foundation of two
fellowships and six schollerships; in building our Library, and furnishing it
with a plentiful variety of choice books, in establishing a Library-keepers
place, and in many other works of great advantage. His happy and renowned
endeavors for the honor and prosperity of the Universitie in general; for
the vindication, and enlargement of their privileges; his bequests of a yearly
pension to to the public Library Keeper, and a box of ancient coyns and
medalls of great value. But especially his wise and successful pains in
contriving and procuring that necessary Statute of the 18. of Queen Eliz. to
turn the third part of our ancient rents into cocumony. To which both the
Universities ow their comfortable subsistence ever since. His liberality to
those places in the country, whereto he had relation, making them provision
for a yearly Sermon, and distributions to their poor. These and many other
worthy deeds of his deserve of us, that his name should be had in honorable
remembrance. But especially they should put us in mind of that gracious hand of
God, that by this and many other the like instruments of his goodness, has
made such public provision for the encouragement of Religion and learning, and
has given us in particular a share in it. The Lord grant us such a sober use
and faithful improvement of these his mercies, that by the same good hand of
providence, they may continue and daily increase, both to the present, and to
succeeding generations.

FINIS.

